At the beginning of winter Prince Nicholas Bolkonski and his daughter moved to Moscow . 
At that time enthusiasm for the Emperor Alexander 's regime had weakened and a patriotic and anti-French tendency prevailed there , and this , together with his past and his intellect and his originality , at once made Prince Nicholas Bolkonski an object of particular respect to the Moscovites and the center of the Moscow opposition to the government . 
The prince had aged very much that year . 
He showed marked signs of senility by a tendency to fall asleep , forgetfulness of quite recent events , remembrance of remote ones , and the childish vanity with which he accepted the role of head of the Moscow opposition . 
In spite of this the old man inspired in all his visitors alike a feeling of respectful veneration -- especially of an evening when he came in to tea in his old-fashioned coat and powdered wig and , aroused by anyone , told his abrupt stories of the past , or uttered yet more abrupt and scathing criticisms of the present . 
For them all , that old-fashioned house with its gigantic mirrors , pre-Revolution furniture , powdered footmen , and the stern shrewd old man -LRB- himself a relic of the past century -RRB- with his gentle daughter and the pretty Frenchwoman who were reverently devoted to him presented a majestic and agreeable spectacle . 
But the visitors did not reflect that besides the couple of hours during which they saw their host , there were also twenty-two hours in the day during which the private and intimate life of the house continued . 
Latterly that private life had become very trying for Princess Mary . 
There in Moscow she was deprived of her greatest pleasures -- talks with the pilgrims and the solitude which refreshed her at Bald Hills -- and she had none of the advantages and pleasures of city life . 
She did not go out into society ; everyone knew that her father would not let her go anywhere without him , and his failing health prevented his going out himself , so that she was not invited to dinners and evening parties . 
