Vera 's remark was correct , as her remarks always were , but , like most of her observations , it made everyone feel uncomfortable , not only Sonya , Nicholas , and Natasha , but even the old countess , who - dreading this love affair which might hinder Nicholas from making a brilliant match -- blushed like a girl . 
Denisov , to Rostov 's surprise , appeared in the drawing room with pomaded hair , perfumed , and in a new uniform , looking just as smart as he made himself when going into battle , and he was more amiable to the ladies and gentlemen than Rostov had ever expected to see him . 
On his return to Moscow from the army , Nicholas Rostov was welcomed by his home circle as the best of sons , a hero , and their darling Nikolenka ; by his relations as a charming , attractive , and polite young man ; by his acquaintances as a handsome lieutenant of hussars , a good dancer , and one of the best matches in the city . 
The Rostovs knew everybody in Moscow . 
The old count had money enough that year , as all his estates had been remortgaged , and so Nicholas , acquiring a trotter of his own , very stylish riding breeches of the latest cut , such as no one else yet had in Moscow , and boots of the latest fashion , with extremely pointed toes and small silver spurs , passed his time very gaily . 
After a short period of adapting himself to the old conditions of life , Nicholas found it very pleasant to be at home again . 
He felt that he had grown up and matured very much . 
His despair at failing in a Scripture examination , his borrowing money from Gavril to pay a sleigh driver , his kissing Sonya on the sly -- he now recalled all this as childishness he had left immeasurably behind . 
Now he was a lieutenant of hussars , in a jacket laced with silver , and wearing the Cross of St. George , awarded to soldiers for bravery in action , and in the company of well-known , elderly , and respected racing men was training a trotter of his own for a race . 
He knew a lady on one of the boulevards whom he visited of an evening . 
