We are so accustomed to that idea and have become so used to it that the question : why did six hundred thousand men go to fight when Napoleon uttered certain words , seems to us senseless . 
He had the power and so what he ordered was done . 
This reply is quite satisfactory if we believe that the power was given him by God . 
But as soon as we do not admit that , it becomes essential to determine what is this power of one man over others . 
It can not be the direct physical power of a strong man over a weak one -- a domination based on the application or threat of physical force , like the power of Hercules ; nor can it be based on the effect of moral force , as in their simplicity some historians think who say that the leading figures in history are heroes , that is , men gifted with a special strength of soul and mind called genius . 
This power can not be based on the predominance of moral strength , for , not to mention heroes such as Napoleon about whose moral qualities opinions differ widely , history shows us that neither a Louis XI nor a Metternich , who ruled over millions of people , had any particular moral qualities , but on the contrary were generally morally weaker than any of the millions they ruled over . 
If the source of power lies neither in the physical nor in the moral qualities of him who possesses it , it must evidently be looked for elsewhere -- in the relation to the people of the man who wields the power . 
And that is how power is understood by the science of jurisprudence , that exchange bank of history which offers to exchange history 's understanding of power for true gold . 
Power is the collective will of the people transferred , by expressed or tacit consent , to their chosen rulers . 
In the domain of jurisprudence , which consists of discussions of how a state and power might be arranged were it possible for all that to be arranged , it is all very clear ; but when applied to history that definition of power needs explanation . 
