said the colonel triumphantly and gaily . 
`` And if he asks about the losses ? '' 
`` A trifle , '' said the colonel in his bass voice : `` two hussars wounded , and one knocked out , '' he added , unable to restrain a happy smile , and pronouncing the phrase `` knocked out '' with ringing distinctness . 
Pursued by the French army of a hundred thousand men under the command of Bonaparte , encountering a population that was unfriendly to it , losing confidence in its allies , suffering from shortness of supplies , and compelled to act under conditions of war unlike anything that had been foreseen , the Russian army of thirty-five thousand men commanded by Kutuzov was hurriedly retreating along the Danube , stopping where overtaken by the enemy and fighting rearguard actions only as far as necessary to enable it to retreat without losing its heavy equipment . 
There had been actions at Lambach , Amstetten , and Melk ; but despite the courage and endurance -- acknowledged even by the enemy -- with which the Russians fought , the only consequence of these actions was a yet more rapid retreat . 
Austrian troops that had escaped capture at Ulm and had joined Kutuzov at Braunau now separated from the Russian army , and Kutuzov was left with only his own weak and exhausted forces . 
The defense of Vienna was no longer to be thought of . 
Instead of an offensive , the plan of which , carefully prepared in accord with the modern science of strategics , had been handed to Kutuzov when he was in Vienna by the Austrian Hofkriegsrath , the sole and almost unattainable aim remaining for him was to effect a junction with the forces that were advancing from Russia , without losing his army as Mack had done at Ulm . 
On the twenty-eighth of October Kutuzov with his army crossed to the left bank of the Danube and took up a position for the first time with the river between himself and the main body of the French . 
On the thirtieth he attacked Mortier 's division , which was on the left bank , and broke it up . 
