He will not hinder anything useful nor allow anything harmful . 
He understands that there is something stronger and more important than his own will -- the inevitable course of events , and he can see them and grasp their significance , and seeing that significance can refrain from meddling and renounce his personal wish directed to something else . 
And above all , '' thought Prince Andrew , `` one believes in him because he 's Russian , despite the novel by Genlis and the French proverbs , and because his voice shook when he said : ` What they have brought us to ! ' 
and had a sob in it when he said he would ` make them eat horseflesh ! ' '' 
On such feelings , more or less dimly shared by all , the unanimity and general approval were founded with which , despite court influences , the popular choice of Kutuzov as commander in chief was received . 
After the Emperor had left Moscow , life flowed on there in its usual course , and its course was so very usual that it was difficult to remember the recent days of patriotic elation and ardor , hard to believe that Russia was really in danger and that the members of the English Club were also sons of the Fatherland ready to sacrifice everything for it . 
The one thing that recalled the patriotic fervor everyone had displayed during the Emperor 's stay was the call for contributions of men and money , a necessity that as soon as the promises had been made assumed a legal , official form and became unavoidable . 
With the enemy 's approach to Moscow , the Moscovites ' view of their situation did not grow more serious but on the contrary became even more frivolous , as always happens with people who see a great danger approaching . 
At the approach of danger there are always two voices that speak with equal power in the human soul : one very reasonably tells a man to consider the nature of the danger and the means of escaping it ; the other , still more reasonably , says that it is too depressing and painful to think of the danger , since it is not in man 's power to foresee everything and avert the general course of events , and it is therefore better to disregard what is painful till it comes , and to think about what is pleasant . 
In solitude a man generally listens to the first voice , but in society to the second . 
