And therefore to explain how from these relations of theirs the submission of millions of people resulted -- that is , how component forces equal to one A gave a resultant equal to a thousand times A -- the historian is again obliged to fall back on power -- the force he had denied -- and to recognize it as the resultant of the forces , that is , he has to admit an unexplained force acting on the resultant . 
And that is just what the universal historians do , and consequently they not only contradict the specialist historians but contradict themselves . 
Peasants having no clear idea of the cause of rain , say , according to whether they want rain or fine weather : `` The wind has blown the clouds away , '' or , `` The wind has brought up the clouds . '' 
And in the same way the universal historians sometimes , when it pleases them and fits in with their theory , say that power is the result of events , and sometimes , when they want to prove something else , say that power produces events . 
A third class of historians -- the so-called historians of culture - following the path laid down by the universal historians who sometimes accept writers and ladies as forces producing events -- again take that force to be something quite different . 
They see it in what is called culture -- in mental activity . 
The historians of culture are quite consistent in regard to their progenitors , the writers of universal histories , for if historical events may be explained by the fact that certain persons treated one another in such and such ways , why not explain them by the fact that such and such people wrote such and such books ? 
Of the immense number of indications accompanying every vital phenomenon , these historians select the indication of intellectual activity and say that this indication is the cause . 
But despite their endeavors to prove that the cause of events lies in intellectual activity , only by a great stretch can one admit that there is any connection between intellectual activity and the movement of peoples , and in no case can one admit that intellectual activity controls people 's actions , for that view is not confirmed by such facts as the very cruel murders of the French Revolution resulting from the doctrine of the equality of man , or the very cruel wars and executions resulting from the preaching of love . 
But even admitting as correct all the cunningly devised arguments with which these histories are filled -- admitting that nations are governed by some undefined force called an idea -- history 's essential question still remains unanswered , and to the former power of monarchs and to the influence of advisers and other people introduced by the universal historians , another , newer force -- the idea -- is added , the connection of which with the masses needs explanation . 
