We know that man has the faculty of becoming completely absorbed in a subject however trivial it may be , and that there is no subject so trivial that it will not grow to infinite proportions if one 's entire attention is devoted to it . 
The subject which wholly engrossed Natasha 's attention was her family : that is , her husband whom she had to keep so that he should belong entirely to her and to the home , and the children whom she had to bear , bring into the world , nurse , and bring up . 
And the deeper she penetrated , not with her mind only but with her whole soul , her whole being , into the subject that absorbed her , the larger did that subject grow and the weaker and more inadequate did her powers appear , so that she concentrated them wholly on that one thing and yet was unable to accomplish all that she considered necessary . 
There were then as now conversations and discussions about women 's rights , the relations of husband and wife and their freedom and rights , though these themes were not yet termed questions as they are now ; but these topics were not merely uninteresting to Natasha , she positively did not understand them . 
These questions , then as now , existed only for those who see nothing in marriage but the pleasure married people get from one another , that is , only the beginnings of marriage and not its whole significance , which lies in the family . 
Discussions and questions of that kind , which are like the question of how to get the greatest gratification from one 's dinner , did not then and do not now exist for those for whom the purpose of a dinner is the nourishment it affords ; and the purpose of marriage is the family . 
If the purpose of dinner is to nourish the body , a man who eats two dinners at once may perhaps get more enjoyment but will not attain his purpose , for his stomach will not digest the two dinners . 
If the purpose of marriage is the family , the person who wishes to have many wives or husbands may perhaps obtain much pleasure , but in that case will not have a family . 
If the purpose of food is nourishment and the purpose of marriage is the family , the whole question resolves itself into not eating more than one can digest , and not having more wives or husbands than are needed for the family -- that is , one wife or one husband . 
Natasha needed a husband . 
