Had Speranski sprung from the same class as himself and possessed the same breeding and traditions , Bolkonski would soon have discovered his weak , human , unheroic sides ; but as it was , Speranski 's strange and logical turn of mind inspired him with respect all the more because he did not quite understand him . 
Moreover , Speranski , either because he appreciated the other 's capacity or because he considered it necessary to win him to his side , showed off his dispassionate calm reasonableness before Prince Andrew and flattered him with that subtle flattery which goes hand in hand with self-assurance and consists in a tacit assumption that one 's companion is the only man besides oneself capable of understanding the folly of the rest of mankind and the reasonableness and profundity of one 's own ideas . 
During their long conversation on Wednesday evening , Speranski more than once remarked : `` We regard everything that is above the common level of rooted custom ... '' or , with a smile : `` But we want the wolves to be fed and the sheep to be safe ... '' or : `` They can not understand this ... '' and all in a way that seemed to say : `` We , you and I , understand what they are and who we are . '' 
This first long conversation with Speranski only strengthened in Prince Andrew the feeling he had experienced toward him at their first meeting . 
He saw in him a remarkable , clear-thinking man of vast intellect who by his energy and persistence had attained power , which he was using solely for the welfare of Russia . 
In Prince Andrew 's eyes Speranski was the man he would himself have wished to be -- one who explained all the facts of life reasonably , considered important only what was rational , and was capable of applying the standard of reason to everything . 
Everything seemed so simple and clear in Speranski 's exposition that Prince Andrew involuntarily agreed with him about everything . 
If he replied and argued , it was only because he wished to maintain his independence and not submit to Speranski 's opinions entirely . 
Everything was right and everything was as it should be : only one thing disconcerted Prince Andrew . 
This was Speranski 's cold , mirrorlike look , which did not allow one to penetrate to his soul , and his delicate white hands , which Prince Andrew involuntarily watched as one does watch the hands of those who possess power . 
