Of his former bachelor acquaintances many were no longer in Petersburg . 
The Guards had gone to the front ; Dolokhov had been reduced to the ranks ; Anatole was in the army somewhere in the provinces ; Prince Andrew was abroad ; so Pierre had not the opportunity to spend his nights as he used to like to spend them , or to open his mind by intimate talks with a friend older than himself and whom he respected . 
His whole time was taken up with dinners and balls and was spent chiefly at Prince Vasili 's house in the company of the stout princess , his wife , and his beautiful daughter Helene . 
Like the others , Anna Pavlovna Scherer showed Pierre the change of attitude toward him that had taken place in society . 
Formerly in Anna Pavlovna 's presence , Pierre had always felt that what he was saying was out of place , tactless and unsuitable , that remarks which seemed to him clever while they formed in his mind became foolish as soon as he uttered them , while on the contrary Hippolyte 's stupidest remarks came out clever and apt . 
Now everything Pierre said was charmant . 
Even if Anna Pavlovna did not say so , he could see that she wished to and only refrained out of regard for his modesty . 
In the beginning of the winter of 1805-6 Pierre received one of Anna Pavlovna 's usual pink notes with an invitation to which was added : `` You will find the beautiful Helene here , whom it is always delightful to see . '' 
When he read that sentence , Pierre felt for the first time that some link which other people recognized had grown up between himself and Helene , and that thought both alarmed him , as if some obligation were being imposed on him which he could not fulfill , and pleased him as an entertaining supposition . 
Anna Pavlovna 's `` At Home '' was like the former one , only the novelty she offered her guests this time was not Mortemart , but a diplomatist fresh from Berlin with the very latest details of the Emperor Alexander 's visit to Potsdam , and of how the two august friends had pledged themselves in an indissoluble alliance to uphold the cause of justice against the enemy of the human race . 
