You must n't trifle with it , you know , or it may turn to pneumonia , '' she would go on , deriving much comfort from the utterance of that foreign word , incomprehensible to others as well as to herself . 
What would Sonya have done without the glad consciousness that she had not undressed during the first three nights , in order to be ready to carry out all the doctor 's injunctions with precision , and that she still kept awake at night so as not to miss the proper time when the slightly harmful pills in the little gilt box had to be administered ? 
Even to Natasha herself it was pleasant to see that so many sacrifices were being made for her sake , and to know that she had to take medicine at certain hours , though she declared that no medicine would cure her and that it was all nonsense . 
And it was even pleasant to be able to show , by disregarding the orders , that she did not believe in medical treatment and did not value her life . 
The doctor came every day , felt her pulse , looked at her tongue , and regardless of her grief-stricken face joked with her . 
But when he had gone into another room , to which the countess hurriedly followed him , he assumed a grave air and thoughtfully shaking his head said that though there was danger , he had hopes of the effect of this last medicine and one must wait and see , that the malady was chiefly mental , but ... And the countess , trying to conceal the action from herself and from him , slipped a gold coin into his hand and always returned to the patient with a more tranquil mind . 
The symptoms of Natasha 's illness were that she ate little , slept little , coughed , and was always low-spirited . 
The doctors said that she could not get on without medical treatment , so they kept her in the stifling atmosphere of the town , and the Rostovs did not move to the country that summer of 1812 . 
In spite of the many pills she swallowed and the drops and powders out of the little bottles and boxes of which Madame Schoss who was fond of such things made a large collection , and in spite of being deprived of the country life to which she was accustomed , youth prevailed . 
Natasha 's grief began to be overlaid by the impressions of daily life , it ceased to press so painfully on her heart , it gradually faded into the past , and she began to recover physically . 
