In actual life each historic event , each human action , is very clearly and definitely understood without any sense of contradiction , although each event presents itself as partly free and partly compulsory . 
To solve the question of how freedom and necessity are combined and what constitutes the essence of these two conceptions , the philosophy of history can and should follow a path contrary to that taken by other sciences . 
Instead of first defining the conceptions of freedom and inevitability in themselves , and then ranging the phenomena of life under those definitions , history should deduce a definition of the conception of freedom and inevitability themselves from the immense quantity of phenomena of which it is cognizant and that always appear dependent on these two elements . 
Whatever presentation of the activity of many men or of an individual we may consider , we always regard it as the result partly of man 's free will and partly of the law of inevitability . 
Whether we speak of the migration of the peoples and the incursions of the barbarians , or of the decrees of Napoleon III , or of someone 's action an hour ago in choosing one direction out of several for his walk , we are unconscious of any contradiction . 
The degree of freedom and inevitability governing the actions of these people is clearly defined for us . 
Our conception of the degree of freedom often varies according to differences in the point of view from which we regard the event , but every human action appears to us as a certain combination of freedom and inevitability . 
In every action we examine we see a certain measure of freedom and a certain measure of inevitability . 
And always the more freedom we see in any action the less inevitability do we perceive , and the more inevitability the less freedom . 
The proportion of freedom to inevitability decreases and increases according to the point of view from which the action is regarded , but their relation is always one of inverse proportion . 
