But speaking of commands that are the expression of the will of men acting in time and in relation to one another , to explain the connection of commands with events we must restore : -LRB- 1 -RRB- the condition of all that takes place : the continuity of movement in time both of the events and of the person who commands , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- the inevitability of the connection between the person commanding and those who execute his command . 
Only the expression of the will of the Deity , not dependent on time , can relate to a whole series of events occurring over a period of years or centuries , and only the Deity , independent of everything , can by His sole will determine the direction of humanity 's movement ; but man acts in time and himself takes part in what occurs . 
Reinstating the first condition omitted , that of time , we see that no command can be executed without some preceding order having been given rendering the execution of the last command possible . 
No command ever appears spontaneously , or itself covers a whole series of occurrences ; but each command follows from another , and never refers to a whole series of events but always to one moment only of an event . 
When , for instance , we say that Napoleon ordered armies to go to war , we combine in one simultaneous expression a whole series of consecutive commands dependent one on another . 
Napoleon could not have commanded an invasion of Russia and never did so . 
Today he ordered such and such papers to be written to Vienna , to Berlin , and to Petersburg ; tomorrow such and such decrees and orders to the army , the fleet , the commissariat , and so on and so on -- millions of commands , which formed a whole series corresponding to a series of events which brought the French armies into Russia . 
If throughout his reign Napoleon gave commands concerning an invasion of England and expended on no other undertaking so much time and effort , and yet during his whole reign never once attempted to execute that design but undertook an expedition into Russia , with which country he considered it desirable to be in alliance -LRB- a conviction he repeatedly expressed -RRB- -- this came about because his commands did not correspond to the course of events in the first case , but did so correspond in the latter . 
For an order to be certainly executed , it is necessary that a man should order what can be executed . 
But to know what can and what can not be executed is impossible , not only in the case of Napoleon 's invasion of Russia in which millions participated , but even in the simplest event , for in either case millions of obstacles may arise to prevent its execution . 
