The third consideration is the degree to which we apprehend that endless chain of causation inevitably demanded by reason , in which each phenomenon comprehended , and therefore man 's every action , must have its definite place as a result of what has gone before and as a cause of what will follow . 
The better we are acquainted with the physiological , psychological , and historical laws deduced by observation and by which man is controlled , and the more correctly we perceive the physiological , psychological , and historical causes of the action , and the simpler the action we are observing and the less complex the character and mind of the man in question , the more subject to inevitability and the less free do our actions and those of others appear . 
When we do not at all understand the cause of an action , whether a crime , a good action , or even one that is simply nonmoral , we ascribe a greater amount of freedom to it . 
In the case of a crime we most urgently demand the punishment for such an act ; in the case of a virtuous act we rate its merit most highly . 
In an indifferent case we recognize in it more individuality , originality , and independence . 
But if even one of the innumerable causes of the act is known to us we recognize a certain element of necessity and are less insistent on punishment for the crime , or the acknowledgment of the merit of the virtuous act , or the freedom of the apparently original action . 
That a criminal was reared among male factors mitigates his fault in our eyes . 
The self-sacrifice of a father or mother , or self-sacrifice with the possibility of a reward , is more comprehensible than gratuitous self-sacrifice , and therefore seems less deserving of sympathy and less the result of free will . 
The founder of a sect or party , or an inventor , impresses us less when we know how or by what the way was prepared for his activity . 
If we have a large range of examples , if our observation is constantly directed to seeking the correlation of cause and effect in people 's actions , their actions appear to us more under compulsion and less free the more correctly we connect the effects with the causes . 
