It is possible to understand that Napoleon had power and so events occurred ; with some effort one may even conceive that Napoleon together with other influences was the cause of an event ; but how a book , Le Contrat social , had the effect of making Frenchmen begin to drown one another can not be understood without an explanation of the causal nexus of this new force with the event . 
Undoubtedly some relation exists between all who live contemporaneously , and so it is possible to find some connection between the intellectual activity of men and their historical movements , just as such a connection may be found between the movements of humanity and commerce , handicraft , gardening , or anything else you please . 
But why intellectual activity is considered by the historians of culture to be the cause or expression of the whole historical movement is hard to understand . 
Only the following considerations can have led the historians to such a conclusion : -LRB- 1 -RRB- that history is written by learned men , and so it is natural and agreeable for them to think that the activity of their class supplies the basis of the movement of all humanity , just as a similar belief is natural and agreeable to traders , agriculturists , and soldiers -LRB- if they do not express it , that is merely because traders and soldiers do not write history -RRB- , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- that spiritual activity , enlightenment , civilization , culture , ideas , are all indistinct , indefinite conceptions under whose banner it is very easy to use words having a still less definite meaning , and which can therefore be readily introduced into any theory . 
But not to speak of the intrinsic quality of histories of this kind -LRB- which may possibly even be of use to someone for something -RRB- the histories of culture , to which all general histories tend more and more to approximate , are significant from the fact that after seriously and minutely examining various religious , philosophic , and political doctrines as causes of events , as soon as they have to describe an actual historic event such as the campaign of 1812 for instance , they involuntarily describe it as resulting from an exercise of power -- and say plainly that that was the result of Napoleon 's will . 
Speaking so , the historians of culture involuntarily contradict themselves , and show that the new force they have devised does not account for what happens in history , and that history can only be explained by introducing a power which they apparently do not recognize . 
A locomotive is moving . 
Someone asks : `` What moves it ? '' 
A peasant says the devil moves it . 
Another man says the locomotive moves because its wheels go round . 
