We learn that Luther had a hot temper and said such and such things ; we learn that Rousseau was suspicious and wrote such and such books ; but we do not learn why after the Reformation the peoples massacred one another , nor why during the French Revolution they guillotined one another . 
If we unite both these kinds of history , as is done by the newest historians , we shall have the history of monarchs and writers , but not the history of the life of the peoples . 
The life of the nations is not contained in the lives of a few men , for the connection between those men and the nations has not been found . 
The theory that this connection is based on the transference of the collective will of a people to certain historical personages is an hypothesis unconfirmed by the experience of history . 
The theory of the transference of the collective will of the people to historic persons may perhaps explain much in the domain of jurisprudence and be essential for its purposes , but in its application to history , as soon as revolutions , conquests , or civil wars occur -- that is , as soon as history begins -- that theory explains nothing . 
The theory seems irrefutable just because the act of transference of the people 's will can not be verified , for it never occurred . 
Whatever happens and whoever may stand at the head of affairs , the theory can always say that such and such a person took the lead because the collective will was transferred to him . 
The replies this theory gives to historical questions are like the replies of a man who , watching the movements of a herd of cattle and paying no attention to the varying quality of the pasturage in different parts of the field , or to the driving of the herdsman , should attribute the direction the herd takes to what animal happens to be at its head . 
`` The herd goes in that direction because the animal in front leads it and the collective will of all the other animals is vested in that leader . '' 
This is what historians of the first class say -- those who assume the unconditional transference of the people 's will . 
