These dispositions , which are very obscure and confused if one allows oneself to regard the arrangements without religious awe of his genius , related to Napoleon 's orders to deal with four points -- four different orders . 
Not one of these was , or could be , carried out . 
In the disposition it is said first that the batteries placed on the spot chosen by Napoleon , with the guns of Pernetti and Fouche ; which were to come in line with them , 102 guns in all , were to open fire and shower shells on the Russian fleches and redoubts . 
This could not be done , as from the spots selected by Napoleon the projectiles did not carry to the Russian works , and those 102 guns shot into the air until the nearest commander , contrary to Napoleon 's instructions , moved them forward . 
The second order was that Poniatowski , moving to the village through the wood , should turn the Russian left flank . 
This could not be done and was not done , because Poniatowski , advancing on the village through the wood , met Tuchkov there barring his way , and could not and did not turn the Russian position . 
The third order was : General Campan will move through the wood to seize the first fortification . 
General Campan 's division did not seize the first fortification but was driven back , for on emerging from the wood it had to reform under grapeshot , of which Napoleon was unaware . 
The fourth order was : The vice-King will occupy the village -LRB- Borodino -RRB- and cross by its three bridges , advancing to the same heights as Morand 's and Gdrard 's divisions -LRB- for whose movements no directions are given -RRB- , which under his leadership will be directed against the redoubt and come into line with the rest of the forces . 
As far as one can make out , not so much from this unintelligible sentence as from the attempts the vice-King made to execute the orders given him , he was to advance from the left through Borodino to the redoubt while the divisions of Morand and Gerard were to advance simultaneously from the front . 
