The creditors who had so long been silent , restrained by a vague but powerful influence exerted on them while he lived by the count 's careless good nature , all proceeded to enforce their claims at once . 
As always happens in such cases rivalry sprang up as to which should get paid first , and those who like Mitenka held promissory notes given them as presents now became the most exacting of the creditors . 
Nicholas was allowed no respite and no peace , and those who had seemed to pity the old man -- the cause of their losses -LRB- if they were losses -RRB- -- now remorselessly pursued the young heir who had voluntarily undertaken the debts and was obviously not guilty of contracting them . 
Not one of the plans Nicholas tried succeeded ; the estate was sold by auction for half its value , and half the debts still remained unpaid . 
Nicholas accepted thirty thousand rubles offered him by his brother-in-law Bezukhov to pay off debts he regarded as genuinely due for value received . 
And to avoid being imprisoned for the remainder , as the creditors threatened , he re-entered the government service . 
He could not rejoin the army where he would have been made colonel at the next vacancy , for his mother now clung to him as her one hold on life ; and so despite his reluctance to remain in Moscow among people who had known him before , and despite his abhorrence of the civil service , he accepted a post in Moscow in that service , doffed the uniform of which he was so fond , and moved with his mother and Sonya to a small house on the Sivtsev Vrazhek . 
Natasha and Pierre were living in Petersburg at the time and had no clear idea of Nicholas ' circumstances . 
Having borrowed money from his brother-in-law , Nicholas tried to hide his wretched condition from him . 
His position was the more difficult because with his salary of twelve hundred rubles he had not only to keep himself , his mother , and Sonya , but had to shield his mother from knowledge of their poverty . 
