Then he recounted an episode in which the husband played the part of the lover , and he -- the lover -- assumed the role of the husband , as well as several droll incidents from his recollections of Germany , where `` shelter '' is called Unterkunft and where the husbands eat sauerkraut and the young girls are `` too blonde . '' 
Finally , the latest episode in Poland still fresh in the captain 's memory , and which he narrated with rapid gestures and glowing face , was of how he had saved the life of a Pole -LRB- in general , the saving of life continually occurred in the captain 's stories -RRB- and the Pole had entrusted to him his enchanting wife -LRB- parisienne de coeur -RRB- while himself entering the French service . 
The captain was happy , the enchanting Polish lady wished to elope with him , but , prompted by magnanimity , the captain restored the wife to the husband , saying as he did so : `` I have saved your life , and I save your honor ! '' 
Having repeated these words the captain wiped his eyes and gave himself a shake , as if driving away the weakness which assailed him at this touching recollection . 
Listening to the captain 's tales , Pierre -- as often happens late in the evening and under the influence of wine -- followed all that was told him , understood it all , and at the same time followed a train of personal memories which , he knew not why , suddenly arose in his mind . 
While listening to these love stories his own love for Natasha unexpectedly rose to his mind , and going over the pictures of that love in his imagination he mentally compared them with Ramballe 's tales . 
Listening to the story of the struggle between love and duty , Pierre saw before his eyes every minutest detail of his last meeting with the object of his love at the Sukharev water tower . 
At the time of that meeting it had not produced an effect upon him -- he had not even once recalled it . 
But now it seemed to him that that meeting had had in it something very important and poetic . 
`` Peter Kirilovich , come here ! 
