In spite of Rostopchin 's broadsheets , or because of them or independently of them , the strangest and most contradictory rumors were current in the town . 
Some said that no one was to be allowed to leave the city , others on the contrary said that all the icons had been taken out of the churches and everybody was to be ordered to leave . 
Some said there had been another battle after Borodino at which the French had been routed , while others on the contrary reported that the Russian army bad been destroyed . 
Some talked about the Moscow militia which , preceded by the clergy , would go to the Three Hills ; others whispered that Augustin had been forbidden to leave , that traitors had been seized , that the peasants were rioting and robbing people on their way from Moscow , and so on . 
But all this was only talk ; in reality -LRB- though the Council of Fili , at which it was decided to abandon Moscow , had not yet been held -RRB- both those who went away and those who remained behind felt , though they did not show it , that Moscow would certainly be abandoned , and that they ought to get away as quickly as possible and save their belongings . 
It was felt that everything would suddenly break up and change , but up to the first of September nothing had done so . 
As a criminal who is being led to execution knows that he must die immediately , but yet looks about him and straightens the cap that is awry on his head , so Moscow involuntarily continued its wonted life , though it knew that the time of its destruction was near when the conditions of life to which its people were accustomed to submit would be completely upset . 
During the three days preceding the occupation of Moscow the whole Rostov family was absorbed in various activities . 
The head of the family , Count Ilya Rostov , continually drove about the city collecting the current rumors from all sides and gave superficial and hasty orders at home about the preparations for their departure . 
The countess watched the things being packed , was dissatisfied with everything , was constantly in pursuit of Petya who was always running away from her , and was jealous of Natasha with whom he spent all his time . 
