In historical events -LRB- where the actions of men are the subject of observation -RRB- the first and most primitive approximation to present itself was the will of the gods and , after that , the will of those who stood in the most prominent position -- the heroes of history . 
But we need only penetrate to the essence of any historic event -- which lies in the activity of the general mass of men who take part in it -- to be convinced that the will of the historic hero does not control the actions of the mass but is itself continually controlled . 
It may seem to be a matter of indifference whether we understand the meaning of historical events this way or that ; yet there is the same difference between a man who says that the people of the West moved on the East because Napoleon wished it and a man who says that this happened because it had to happen , as there is between those who declared that the earth was stationary and that the planets moved round it and those who admitted that they did not know what upheld the earth , but knew there were laws directing its movement and that of the other planets . 
There is , and can be , no cause of an historical event except the one cause of all causes . 
But there are laws directing events , and some of these laws are known to us while we are conscious of others we can not comprehend . 
The discovery of these laws is only possible when we have quite abandoned the attempt to find the cause in the will of some one man , just as the discovery of the laws of the motion of the planets was possible only when men abandoned the conception of the fixity of the earth . 
The historians consider that , next to the battle of Borodino and the occupation of Moscow by the enemy and its destruction by fire , the most important episode of the war of 1812 was the movement of the Russian army from the Ryazana to the Kaluga road and to the Tarutino camp -- the so-called flank march across the Krasnaya Pakhra River . 
They ascribe the glory of that achievement of genius to different men and dispute as to whom the honor is due . 
Even foreign historians , including the French , acknowledge the genius of the Russian commanders when they speak of that flank march . 
But it is hard to understand why military writers , and following them others , consider this flank march to be the profound conception of some one man who saved Russia and destroyed Napoleon . 
