But while Nicholas was considering these questions and still could reach no clear solution of what puzzled him so , the wheel of fortune in the service , as often happens , turned in his favor . 
After the affair at Ostrovna he was brought into notice , received command of an hussar battalion , and when a brave officer was needed he was chosen . 
On receiving news of Natasha 's illness , the countess , though not quite well yet and still weak , went to Moscow with Petya and the rest of the household , and the whole family moved from Marya Dmitrievna 's house to their own and settled down in town . 
Natasha 's illness was so serious that , fortunately for her and for her parents , the consideration of all that had caused the illness , her conduct and the breaking off of her engagement , receded into the background . 
She was so ill that it was impossible for them to consider in how far she was to blame for what had happened . 
She could not eat or sleep , grew visibly thinner , coughed , and , as the doctors made them feel , was in danger . 
They could not think of anything but how to help her . 
Doctors came to see her singly and in consultation , talked much in French , German , and Latin , blamed one another , and prescribed a great variety of medicines for all the diseases known to them , but the simple idea never occurred to any of them that they could not know the disease Natasha was suffering from , as no disease suffered by a live man can be known , for every living person has his own peculiarities and always has his own peculiar , personal , novel , complicated disease , unknown to medicine -- not a disease of the lungs , liver , skin , heart , nerves , and so on mentioned in medical books , but a disease consisting of one of the innumerable combinations of the maladies of those organs . 
This simple thought could not occur to the doctors -LRB- as it can not occur to a wizard that he is unable to work his charms -RRB- because the business of their lives was to cure , and they received money for it and had spent the best years of their lives on that business . 
But , above all , that thought was kept out of their minds by the fact that they saw they were really useful , as in fact they were to the whole Rostov family . 
