The direct consequence of the battle of Borodino was Napoleon 's senseless flight from Moscow , his retreat along the old Smolensk road , the destruction of the invading army of five hundred thousand men , and the downfall of Napoleonic France , on which at Borodino for the first time the hand of an opponent of stronger spirit had been laid . 
Absolute continuity of motion is not comprehensible to the human mind . 
Laws of motion of any kind become comprehensible to man only when he examines arbitrarily selected elements of that motion ; but at the same time , a large proportion of human error comes from the arbitrary division of continuous motion into discontinuous elements . 
There is a well known , so-called sophism of the ancients consisting in this , that Achilles could never catch up with a tortoise he was following , in spite of the fact that he traveled ten times as fast as the tortoise . 
By the time Achilles has covered the distance that separated him from the tortoise , the tortoise has covered one tenth of that distance ahead of him : when Achilles has covered that tenth , the tortoise has covered another one hundredth , and so on forever . 
This problem seemed to the ancients insoluble . 
The absurd answer -LRB- that Achilles could never overtake the tortoise -RRB- resulted from this : that motion was arbitrarily divided into discontinuous elements , whereas the motion both of Achilles and of the tortoise was continuous . 
By adopting smaller and smaller elements of motion we only approach a solution of the problem , but never reach it . 
Only when we have admitted the conception of the infinitely small , and the resulting geometrical progression with a common ratio of one tenth , and have found the sum of this progression to infinity , do we reach a solution of the problem . 
A modern branch of mathematics having achieved the art of dealing with the infinitely small can now yield solutions in other more complex problems of motion which used to appear insoluble . 
