Princess Anna Mikhaylovna Drubetskaya , who as a member of the household was also seated in the drawing room , helped to receive and entertain the visitors . 
The young people were in one of the inner rooms , not considering it necessary to take part in receiving the visitors . 
The count met the guests and saw them off , inviting them all to dinner . 
`` I am very , very grateful to you , mon cher , '' or `` ma chere '' -- he called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his tone , `` my dear , '' whether they were above or below him in rank -- `` I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping . 
But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended , ma chere ! 
On behalf of the whole family I beg you to come , mon cher ! '' 
These words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation , and with the same expression on his full , cheerful , clean-shaven face , the same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick , repeated bows . 
As soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the drawing room , drew a chair toward him or her , and jauntily spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live , he swayed to and fro with dignity , offered surmises about the weather , or touched on questions of health , sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confident French ; then again , like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment of duty , he rose to see some visitors off and , stroking his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch , also asked them to dinner . 
Sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall , where tables were being set out for eighty people ; and looking at the footmen , who were bringing in silver and china , moving tables , and unfolding damask table linen , he would call Dmitri Vasilevich , a man of good family and the manager of all his affairs , and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table would say : `` Well , Dmitri , you 'll see that things are all as they should be ? 
That 's right ! 
