Their usefulness did not depend on making the patient swallow substances for the most part harmful -LRB- the harm was scarcely perceptible , as they were given in small doses -RRB- , but they were useful , necessary , and indispensable because they satisfied a mental need of the invalid and of those who loved her -- and that is why there are , and always will be , pseudo-healers , wise women , homeopaths , and allopaths . 
They satisfied that eternal human need for hope of relief , for sympathy , and that something should be done , which is felt by those who are suffering . 
They satisfied the need seen in its most elementary form in a child , when it wants to have a place rubbed that has been hurt . 
A child knocks itself and runs at once to the arms of its mother or nurse to have the aching spot rubbed or kissed , and it feels better when this is done . 
The child can not believe that the strongest and wisest of its people have no remedy for its pain , and the hope of relief and the expression of its mother 's sympathy while she rubs the bump comforts it . 
The doctors were of use to Natasha because they kissed and rubbed her bump , assuring her that it would soon pass if only the coachman went to the chemist 's in the Arbat and got a powder and some pills in a pretty box of a ruble and seventy kopeks , and if she took those powders in boiled water at intervals of precisely two hours , neither more nor less . 
What would Sonya and the count and countess have done , how would they have looked , if nothing had been done , if there had not been those pills to give by the clock , the warm drinks , the chicken cutlets , and all the other details of life ordered by the doctors , the carrying out of which supplied an occupation and consolation to the family circle ? 
How would the count have borne his dearly loved daughter 's illness had he not known that it was costing him a thousand rubles , and that he would not grudge thousands more to benefit her , or had he not known that if her illness continued he would not grudge yet other thousands and would take her abroad for consultations there , and had he not been able to explain the details of how Metivier and Feller had not understood the symptoms , but Frise had , and Mudrov had diagnosed them even better ? 
What would the countess have done had she not been able sometimes to scold the invalid for not strictly obeying the doctor 's orders ? 
`` You 'll never get well like that , '' she would say , forgetting her grief in her vexation , `` if you wo n't obey the doctor and take your medicine at the right time ! 
