Provincial life in 1812 went on very much as usual , but with this difference , that it was livelier in the towns in consequence of the arrival of many wealthy families from Moscow , and as in everything that went on in Russia at that time a special recklessness was noticeable , an `` in for a penny , in for a pound -- who cares ? '' 
spirit , and the inevitable small talk , instead of turning on the weather and mutual acquaintances , now turned on Moscow , the army , and Napoleon . 
The society gathered together at the governor 's was the best in Voronezh . 
There were a great many ladies and some of Nicholas ' Moscow acquaintances , but there were no men who could at all vie with the cavalier of St. George , the hussar remount officer , the good-natured and well-bred Count Rostov . 
Among the men was an Italian prisoner , an officer of the French army ; and Nicholas felt that the presence of that prisoner enhanced his own importance as a Russian hero . 
The Italian was , as it were , a war trophy . 
Nicholas felt this , it seemed to him that everyone regarded the Italian in the same light , and he treated him cordially though with dignity and restraint . 
As soon as Nicholas entered in his hussar uniform , diffusing around him a fragrance of perfume and wine , and had uttered the words `` better late than never '' and heard them repeated several times by others , people clustered around him ; all eyes turned on him , and he felt at once that he had entered into his proper position in the province -- that of a universal favorite : a very pleasant position , and intoxicatingly so after his long privations . 
At posting stations , at inns , and in the landowner 's snuggery , maidservants had been flattered by his notice , and here too at the governor 's party there were -LRB- as it seemed to Nicholas -RRB- an inexhaustible number of pretty young women , married and unmarried , impatiently awaiting his notice . 
The women and girls flirted with him and , from the first day , the people concerned themselves to get this fine young daredevil of an hussar married and settled down . 
