Another general stood in a martial pose , crossing himself by shaking his hand in front of his chest while looking about him . 
Standing among the crowd of peasants , Pierre recognized several acquaintances among these notables , but did not look at them -- his whole attention was absorbed in watching the serious expression on the faces of the crowd of soldiers and militiamen who were all gazing eagerly at the icon . 
As soon as the tired chanters , who were singing the service for the twentieth time that day , began lazily and mechanically to sing : `` Save from calamity Thy servants , O Mother of God , '' and the priest and deacon chimed in : `` For to Thee under God we all flee as to an inviolable bulwark and protection , '' there again kindled in all those faces the same expression of consciousness of the solemnity of the impending moment that Pierre had seen on the faces at the foot of the hill at Mozhaysk and momentarily on many and many faces he had met that morning ; and heads were bowed more frequently and hair tossed back , and sighs and the sound men made as they crossed themselves were heard . 
The crowd round the icon suddenly parted and pressed against Pierre . 
Someone , a very important personage judging by the haste with which way was made for him , was approaching the icon . 
It was Kutuzov , who had been riding round the position and on his way back to Tatarinova had stopped where the service was being held . 
Pierre recognized him at once by his peculiar figure , which distinguished him from everybody else . 
With a long overcoat on his his exceedingly stout , round-shouldered body , with uncovered white head and puffy face showing the white ball of the eye he had lost , Kutuzov walked with plunging , swaying gait into the crowd and stopped behind the priest . 
He crossed himself with an accustomed movement , bent till he touched the ground with his hand , and bowed his white head with a deep sigh . 
Behind Kutuzov was Bennigsen and the suite . 
