All this , like the other parts of the disposition , was not and could not be executed . 
After passing through Borodino the vice-King was driven back to the Kolocha and could get no farther ; while the divisions of Morand and Gerard did not take the redoubt but were driven back , and the redoubt was only taken at the end of the battle by the cavalry -LRB- a thing probably unforeseen and not heard of by Napoleon -RRB- . 
So not one of the orders in the disposition was , or could be , executed . 
But in the disposition it is said that , after the fight has commenced in this manner , orders will be given in accordance with the enemy 's movements , and so it might be supposed that all necessary arrangements would be made by Napoleon during the battle . 
But this was not and could not be done , for during the whole battle Napoleon was so far away that , as appeared later , he could not know the course of the battle and not one of his orders during the fight could be executed . 
Many historians say that the French did not win the battle of Borodino because Napoleon had a cold , and that if he had not had a cold the orders he gave before and during the battle would have been still more full of genius and Russia would have been lost and the face of the world have been changed . 
To historians who believe that Russia was shaped by the will of one man -- Peter the Great -- and that France from a republic became an empire and French armies went to Russia at the will of one man -- Napoleon -- to say that Russia remained a power because Napoleon had a bad cold on the twenty-fourth of August may seem logical and convincing . 
If it had depended on Napoleon 's will to fight or not to fight the battle of Borodino , and if this or that other arrangement depended on his will , then evidently a cold affecting the manifestation of his will might have saved Russia , and consequently the valet who omitted to bring Napoleon his waterproof boots on the twenty-fourth would have been the savior of Russia . 
Along that line of thought such a deduction is indubitable , as indubitable as the deduction Voltaire made in jest -LRB- without knowing what he was jesting at -RRB- when he saw that the Massacre of St. Bartholomew was due to Charles IX 's stomach being deranged . 
But to men who do not admit that Russia was formed by the will of one man , Peter I , or that the French Empire was formed and the war with Russia begun by the will of one man , Napoleon , that argument seems not merely untrue and irrational , but contrary to all human reality . 
