The Russians , they say , fortified this position in advance on the left of the highroad -LRB- from Moscow to Smolensk -RRB- and almost at a right angle to it , from Borodino to Utitsa , at the very place where the battle was fought . 
In front of this position , they say , a fortified outpost was set up on the Shevardino mound to observe the enemy . 
On the twenty-fourth , we are told , Napoleon attacked this advanced post and took it , and , on the twenty-sixth , attacked the whole Russian army , which was in position on the field of Borodino . 
So the histories say , and it is all quite wrong , as anyone who cares to look into the matter can easily convince himself . 
The Russians did not seek out the best position but , on the contrary , during the retreat passed many positions better than Borodino . 
They did not stop at any one of these positions because Kutuzov did not wish to occupy a position he had not himself chosen , because the popular demand for a battle had not yet expressed itself strongly enough , and because Miloradovich had not yet arrived with the militia , and for many other reasons . 
The fact is that other positions they had passed were stronger , and that the position at Borodino -LRB- the one where the battle was fought -RRB- , far from being strong , was no more a position than any other spot one might find in the Russian Empire by sticking a pin into the map at hazard . 
Not only did the Russians not fortify the position on the field of Borodino to the left of , and at a right angle to , the highroad -LRB- that is , the position on which the battle took place -RRB- , but never till the twenty-fifth of August , 1812 , did they think that a battle might be fought there . 
This was shown first by the fact that there were no entrenchments there by the twenty fifth and that those begun on the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth were not completed , and secondly , by the position of the Shevardino Redoubt . 
That redoubt was quite senseless in front of the position where the battle was accepted . 
