Modern history , in theory , rejects both these principles . 
It would seem that having rejected the belief of the ancients in man 's subjection to the Deity and in a predetermined aim toward which nations are led , modern history should study not the manifestations of power but the causes that produce it . 
But modern history has not done this . 
Having in theory rejected the view held by the ancients , it still follows them in practice . 
Instead of men endowed with divine authority and directly guided by the will of God , modern history has given us either heroes endowed with extraordinary , superhuman capacities , or simply men of very various kinds , from monarchs to journalists , who lead the masses . 
Instead of the former divinely appointed aims of the Jewish , Greek , or Roman nations , which ancient historians regarded as representing the progress of humanity , modern history has postulated its own aims - the welfare of the French , German , or English people , or , in its highest abstraction , the welfare and civilization of humanity in general , by which is usually meant that of the peoples occupying a small northwesterly portion of a large continent . 
Modern history has rejected the beliefs of the ancients without replacing them by a new conception , and the logic of the situation has obliged the historians , after they had apparently rejected the divine authority of the kings and the `` fate '' of the ancients , to reach the same conclusion by another road , that is , to recognize -LRB- 1 -RRB- nations guided by individual men , and -LRB- 2 -RRB- the existence of a known aim to which these nations and humanity at large are tending . 
At the basis of the works of all the modern historians from Gibbon to Buckle , despite their seeming disagreements and the apparent novelty of their outlooks , lie those two old , unavoidable assumptions . 
In the first place the historian describes the activity of individuals who in his opinion have directed humanity -LRB- one historian considers only monarchs , generals , and ministers as being such men , while another includes also orators , learned men , reformers , philosophers , and poets -RRB- . 
Secondly , it is assumed that the goal toward which humanity is being led is known to the historians : to one of them this goal is the greatness of the Roman , Spanish , or French realm ; to another it is liberty , equality , and a certain kind of civilization of a small corner of the world called Europe . 
