Napoleon , predestined by Providence for the gloomy role of executioner of the peoples , assured himself that the aim of his actions had been the peoples ' welfare and that he could control the fate of millions and by the employment of power confer benefactions . 
`` Of four hundred thousand who crossed the Vistula , '' he wrote further of the Russian war , `` half were Austrians , Prussians , Saxons , Poles , Bavarians , Wurttembergers , Mecklenburgers , Spaniards , Italians , and Neapolitans . 
The Imperial army , strictly speaking , was one third composed of Dutch , Belgians , men from the borders of the Rhine , Piedmontese , Swiss , Genevese , Tuscans , Romans , inhabitants of the Thirty-second Military Division , of Bremen , of Hamburg , and so on : it included scarcely a hundred and forty thousand who spoke French . 
The Russian expedition actually cost France less than fifty thousand men ; the Russian army in its retreat from Vilna to Moscow lost in the various battles four times more men than the French army ; the burning of Moscow cost the lives of a hundred thousand Russians who died of cold and want in the woods ; finally , in its march from Moscow to the Oder the Russian army also suffered from the severity of the season ; so that by the the time it reached Vilna it numbered only fifty thousand , and at Kalisch less than eighteen thousand . '' 
He imagined that the war with Russia came about by his will , and the horrors that occurred did not stagger his soul . 
He boldly took the whole responsibility for what happened , and his darkened mind found justification in the belief that among the hundreds of thousands who perished there were fewer Frenchmen than Hessians and Bavarians . 
Several tens of thousands of the slain lay in diverse postures and various uniforms on the fields and meadows belonging to the Davydov family and to the crown serfs -- those fields and meadows where for hundreds of years the peasants of Borodino , Gorki , Shevardino , and Semenovsk had reaped their harvests and pastured their cattle . 
At the dressing stations the grass and earth were soaked with blood for a space of some three acres around . 
Crowds of men of various arms , wounded and unwounded , with frightened faces , dragged themselves back to Mozhaysk from the one army and back to Valuevo from the other . 
Other crowds , exhausted and hungry , went forward led by their officers . 
