While waiting for the announcement of his appointment to the committee Prince Andrew looked up his former acquaintances , particularly those he knew to be in power and whose aid he might need . 
In Petersburg he now experienced the same feeling he had had on the eve of a battle , when troubled by anxious curiosity and irresistibly attracted to the ruling circles where the future , on which the fate of millions depended , was being shaped . 
From the irritation of the older men , the curiosity of the uninitiated , the reserve of the initiated , the hurry and preoccupation of everyone , and the innumerable committees and commissions of whose existence he learned every day , he felt that now , in 1809 , here in Petersburg a vast civil conflict was in preparation , the commander in chief of which was a mysterious person he did not know , but who was supposed to be a man of genius -- Speranski . 
And this movement of reconstruction of which Prince Andrew had a vague idea , and Speranski its chief promoter , began to interest him so keenly that the question of the army regulations quickly receded to a secondary place in his consciousness . 
Prince Andrew was most favorably placed to secure good reception in the highest and most diverse Petersburg circles of the day . 
The reforming party cordially welcomed and courted him , the first place because he was reputed to be clever and very well read , and secondly because by liberating his serfs he had obtained the reputation of being a liberal . 
The party of the old and dissatisfied , who censured the innovations , turned to him expecting his sympathy in their disapproval of the reforms , simply because he was the son of his father . 
The feminine society world welcomed him gladly , because he was rich , distinguished , a good match , and almost a newcomer , with a halo of romance on account of his supposed death and the tragic loss of his wife . 
Besides this the general opinion of all who had known him previously was that he had greatly improved during these last five years , having softened and grown more manly , lost his former affectation , pride , and contemptuous irony , and acquired the serenity that comes with years . 
People talked about him , were interested in him , and wanted to meet him . 
