He used to say that there are only two sources of human vice -- idleness and superstition , and only two virtues -- activity and intelligence . 
He himself undertook his daughter 's education , and to develop these two cardinal virtues in her gave her lessons in algebra and geometry till she was twenty , and arranged her life so that her whole time was occupied . 
He was himself always occupied : writing his memoirs , solving problems in higher mathematics , turning snuffboxes on a lathe , working in the garden , or superintending the building that was always going on at his estate . 
As regularity is a prime condition facilitating activity , regularity in his household was carried to the highest point of exactitude . 
He always came to table under precisely the same conditions , and not only at the same hour but at the same minute . 
With those about him , from his daughter to his serfs , the prince was sharp and invariably exacting , so that without being a hardhearted man he inspired such fear and respect as few hardhearted men would have aroused . 
Although he was in retirement and had now no influence in political affairs , every high official appointed to the province in which the prince 's estate lay considered it his duty to visit him and waited in the lofty antechamber ante chamber just as the architect , gardener , or Princess Mary did , till the prince appeared punctually to the appointed hour . 
Everyone sitting in this antechamber experienced the same feeling of respect and even fear when the enormously high study door opened and showed the figure of a rather small old man , with powdered wig , small withered hands , and bushy gray eyebrows which , when he frowned , sometimes hid the gleam of his shrewd , youthfully glittering eyes . 
On the morning of the day that the young couple were to arrive , Princess Mary entered the antechamber as usual at the time appointed for the morning greeting , crossing herself with trepidation and repeating a silent prayer . 
Every morning she came in like that , and every morning prayed that the daily interview might pass off well . 
