He alone said that the loss of Moscow is not the loss of Russia . 
In reply to Lauriston 's proposal of peace , he said : There can be no peace , for such is the people 's will . 
He alone during the retreat of the French said that all our maneuvers are useless , everything is being accomplished of itself better than we could desire ; that the enemy must be offered `` a golden bridge '' ; that neither the Tarutino , the Vyazma , nor the Krasnoe battles were necessary ; that we must keep some force to reach the frontier with , and that he would not sacrifice a single Russian for ten Frenchmen . 
And this courtier , as he is described to us , who lies to Arakcheev to please the Emperor , he alone -- incurring thereby the Emperor 's displeasure -- said in Vilna that to carry the war beyond the frontier is useless and harmful . 
Nor do words alone prove that only he understood the meaning of the events . 
His actions -- without the smallest deviation -- were all directed to one and the same threefold end : -LRB- 1 -RRB- to brace all his strength for conflict with the French , -LRB- 2 -RRB- to defeat them , and -LRB- 3 -RRB- to drive them out of Russia , minimizing as far as possible the sufferings of our people and of our army . 
This procrastinator Kutuzov , whose motto was `` Patience and Time , '' this enemy of decisive action , gave battle at Borodino , investing the preparations for it with unparalleled solemnity . 
This Kutuzov who before the battle of Austerlitz began said that it would be lost , he alone , in contradiction to everyone else , declared till his death that Borodino was a victory , despite the assurance of generals that the battle was lost and despite the fact that for an army to have to retire after winning a battle was unprecedented . 
He alone during the whole retreat insisted that battles , which were useless then , should not be fought , and that a new war should not be begun nor the frontiers of Russia crossed . 
It is easy now to understand the significance of these events -- if only we abstain from attributing to the activity of the mass aims that existed only in the heads of a dozen individuals -- for the events and results now lie before us . 
