Princess Mary had ceased taking lessons in mathematics from her father , and when the old prince was at home went to his study with the wet nurse and little Prince Nicholas -LRB- as his grandfather called him -RRB- . 
The baby Prince Nicholas lived with his wet nurse and nurse Savishna in the late princess ' rooms and Princess Mary spent most of the day in the nursery , taking a mother 's place to her little nephew as best she could . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , too , seemed passionately fond of the boy , and Princess Mary often deprived herself to give her friend the pleasure of dandling the little angel -- as she called her nephew -- and playing with him . 
Near the altar of the church at Bald Hills there was a chapel over the tomb of the little princess , and in this chapel was a marble monument brought from Italy , representing an angel with outspread wings ready to fly upwards . 
The angel 's upper lip was slightly raised as though about to smile , and once on coming out of the chapel Prince Andrew and Princess Mary admitted to one another that the angel 's face reminded them strangely of the little princess . 
But what was still stranger , though of this Prince Andrew said nothing to his sister , was that in the expression the sculptor had happened to give the angel 's face , Prince Andrew read the same mild reproach he had read on the face of his dead wife : `` Ah , why have you done this to me ? '' 
Soon after Prince Andrew 's return the old prince made over to him a large estate , Bogucharovo , about twenty-five miles from Bald Hills . 
Partly because of the depressing memories associated with Bald Hills , partly because Prince Andrew did not always feel equal to bearing with his father 's peculiarities , and partly because he needed solitude , Prince Andrew made use of Bogucharovo , began building and spent most of his time there . 
After the Austerlitz campaign Prince Andrew had firmly resolved not to continue his military service , and when the war recommenced and everybody had to serve , he took a post under his father in the recruitment so as to avoid active service . 
The old prince and his son seemed to have changed roles since the campaign of 1805 . 
