She provoked the jealousy of the elderly magnate and told him what she had told her other suitor ; that is , she put the matter so that the only way for him to obtain a right over her was to marry her . 
The elderly magnate was at first as much taken aback by this suggestion of marriage with a woman whose husband was alive , as the younger man had been , but Helene 's imperturbable conviction that it was as simple and natural as marrying a maiden had its effect on him too . 
Had Helene herself shown the least sign of hesitation , shame , or secrecy , her cause would certainly have been lost ; but not only did she show no signs of secrecy or shame , on the contrary , with good-natured naivete she told her intimate friends -LRB- and these were all Petersburg -RRB- that both the prince and the magnate had proposed to her and that she loved both and was afraid of grieving either . 
A rumor immediately spread in Petersburg , not that Helene wanted to be divorced from her husband -LRB- had such a report spread many would have opposed so illegal an intention -RRB- but simply that the unfortunate and interesting Helene was in doubt which of the two men she should marry . 
The question was no longer whether this was possible , but only which was the better match and how the matter would be regarded at court . 
There were , it is true , some rigid individuals unable to rise to the height of such a question , who saw in the project a desecration of the sacrament of marriage , but there were not many such and they remained silent , while the majority were interested in Helene 's good fortune and in the question which match would be the more advantageous . 
Whether it was right or wrong to remarry while one had a husband living they did not discuss , for that question had evidently been settled by people `` wiser than you or me , '' as they said , and to doubt the correctness of that decision would be to risk exposing one 's stupidity and incapacity to live in society . 
Only Marya Dmitrievna Akhrosimova , had come to Petersburg that summer to see one of her sons , allowed herself plainly to express an opinion contrary to the general one . 
Meeting Helene at a ball she stopped her in the middle of the room and , amid general silence , said in her gruff voice : `` So wives of living men have started marrying again ! 
Perhaps you think you have invented a novelty ? 
