He frowned before his looking glass , gesticulated , shrugged his shoulders , and finally , without saying a word to anyone , took his cap and left the house by the back door , trying to avoid notice . 
Petya decided to go straight to where the Emperor was and to explain frankly to some gentleman-in-waiting -LRB- he imagined the Emperor to be always surrounded by gentlemen-in-waiting -RRB- that he , Count Rostov , in spite of his youth wished to serve his country ; that youth could be no hindrance to loyalty , and that he was ready to ... While dressing , Petya had prepared many fine things he meant to say to the gentleman-in-waiting . 
It was on the very fact of being so young that Petya counted for success in reaching the Emperor -- he even thought how surprised everyone would be at his youthfulness -- and yet in the arrangement of his collar and hair and by his sedate deliberate walk he wished to appear a grown-up man . 
But the farther he went and the more his attention was diverted by the ever-increasing crowds moving toward the Kremlin , the less he remembered to walk with the sedateness and deliberation of a man . 
As he approached the Kremlin he even began to avoid being crushed and resolutely stuck out his elbows in a menacing way . 
But within the Trinity Gateway he was so pressed to the wall by people who probably were unaware of the patriotic intentions with which he had come that in spite of all his determination he had to give in , and stop while carriages passed in , rumbling beneath the archway . 
Beside Petya stood a peasant woman , a footman , two tradesmen , and a discharged soldier . 
After standing some time in the gateway , Petya tried to move forward in front of the others without waiting for all the carriages to pass , and he began resolutely working his way with his elbows , but the woman just in front of him , who was the first against whom he directed his efforts , angrily shouted at him : `` What are you shoving for , young lordling ? 
Do n't you see we 're all standing still ? 
Then why push ? '' 
