Miloradovich , who said he did not want to know anything about the commissariat affairs of his detachment , and could never be found when he was wanted -- that chevalier sans peur et sans reproche * as he styled himself -- who was fond of parleys with the French , sent envoys demanding their surrender , wasted time , and did not do what he was ordered to do . 
* Knight without fear and without reproach . 
`` I give you that column , lads , '' he said , riding up to the troops and pointing out the French to the cavalry . 
And the cavalry , with spurs and sabers urging on horses that could scarcely move , trotted with much effort to the column presented to them -- that is to say , to a crowd of Frenchmen stark with cold , frost-bitten , and starving -- and the column that had been presented to them threw down its arms and surrendered as it had long been anxious to do . 
At Krasnoe they took twenty-six thousand prisoners , several hundred cannon , and a stick called a `` marshal 's staff , '' and disputed as to who had distinguished himself and were pleased with their achievement -- though they much regretted not having taken Napoleon , or at least a marshal or a hero of some sort , and reproached one another and especially Kutuzov for having failed to do so . 
These men , carried away by their passions , were but blind tools of the most melancholy law of necessity , but considered themselves heroes and imagined that they were accomplishing a most noble and honorable deed . 
They blamed Kutuzov and said that from the very beginning of the campaign he had prevented their vanquishing Napoleon , that he thought nothing but satisfying his passions and would not advance from the Linen Factories because he was comfortable there , that at Krasnoe he checked the advance because on learning that Napoleon was there he had quite lost his head , and that it was probable that he had an understanding with Napoleon and had been bribed by him , and so on , and so on . 
Not only did his contemporaries , carried away by their passions , talk in this way , but posterity and history have acclaimed Napoleon as grand , while Kutuzov is described by foreigners as a crafty , dissolute , weak old courtier , and by Russians as something indefinite - a sort of puppet useful only because he had a Russian name . 
In 1812 and 1813 Kutuzov was openly accused of blundering . 
The Emperor was dissatisfied with him . 
