When Newton enunciated the law of gravity he did not say that the sun or the earth had a property of attraction ; he said that all bodies from the largest to the smallest have the property of attracting one another , that is , leaving aside the question of the cause of the movement of the bodies , he expressed the property common to all bodies from the infinitely large to the infinitely small . 
The same is done by the natural sciences : leaving aside the question of cause , they seek for laws . 
History stands on the same path . 
And if history has for its object the study of the movement of the nations and of humanity and not the narration of episodes in the lives of individuals , it too , setting aside the conception of cause , should seek the laws common to all the inseparably interconnected infinitesimal elements of free will . 
From the time the law of Copernicus was discovered and proved , the mere recognition of the fact that it was not the sun but the earth that moves sufficed to destroy the whole cosmography of the ancients . 
By disproving that law it might have been possible to retain the old conception of the movements of the bodies , but without disproving it , it would seem impossible to continue studying the Ptolemaic worlds . 
But even after the discovery of the law of Copernicus the Ptolemaic worlds were still studied for a long time . 
From the time the first person said and proved that the number of births or of crimes is subject to mathematical laws , and that this or that mode of government is determined by certain geographical and economic conditions , and that certain relations of population to soil produce migrations of peoples , the foundations on which history had been built were destroyed in their essence . 
By refuting these new laws the former view of history might have been retained ; but without refuting them it would seem impossible to continue studying historic events as the results of man 's free will . 
For if a certain mode of government was established or certain migrations of peoples took place in consequence of such and such geographic , ethnographic , or economic conditions , then the free will of those individuals who appear to us to have established that mode of government or occasioned the migrations can no longer be regarded as the cause . 
