It is natural that these and a countless and infinite quantity of other reasons , the number depending on the endless diversity of points of view , presented themselves to the men of that day ; but to us , to posterity who view the thing that happened in all its magnitude and perceive its plain and terrible meaning , these causes seem insufficient . 
To us it is incomprehensible that millions of Christian men killed and tortured each other either because Napoleon was ambitious or Alexander was firm , or because England 's policy was astute or the Duke of Oldenburg wronged . 
We can not grasp what connection such circumstances have with the actual fact of slaughter and violence : why because the Duke was wronged , thousands of men from the other side of Europe killed and ruined the people of Smolensk and Moscow and were killed by them . 
To us , their descendants , who are not historians and are not carried away by the process of research and can therefore regard the event with unclouded common sense , an incalculable number of causes present themselves . 
The deeper we delve in search of these causes the more of them we find ; and each separate cause or whole series of causes appears to us equally valid in itself and equally false by its insignificance compared to the magnitude of the events , and by its impotence -- apart from the cooperation of all the other coincident causes -- to occasion the event . 
To us , the wish or objection of this or that French corporal to serve a second term appears as much a cause as Napoleon 's refusal to withdraw his troops beyond the Vistula and to restore the duchy of Oldenburg ; for had he not wished to serve , and had a second , a third , and a thousandth corporal and private also refused , there would have been so many less men in Napoleon 's army and the war could not have occurred . 
Had Napoleon not taken offense at the demand that he should withdraw beyond the Vistula , and not ordered his troops to advance , there would have been no war ; but had all his sergeants objected to serving a second term then also there could have been no war . 
Nor could there have been a war had there been no English intrigues and no Duke of Oldenburg , and had Alexander not felt insulted , and had there not been an autocratic government in Russia , or a Revolution in France and a subsequent dictatorship and Empire , or all the things that produced the French Revolution , and so on . 
Without each of these causes nothing could have happened . 
So all these causes -- myriads of causes -- coincided to bring it about . 
