But perhaps all these comrades of mine struggled just like me and sought something new , a path in life of their own , and like me were brought by force of circumstances , society , and race -- by that elemental force against which man is powerless -- to the condition I am in , '' said he to himself in moments of humility ; and after living some time in Moscow he no longer despised , but began to grow fond of , to respect , and to pity his comrades in destiny , as he pitied himself . 
Pierre longer suffered moments of despair , hypochondria , and disgust with life , but the malady that had formerly found expression in such acute attacks was driven inwards and never left him for a moment . 
`` What for ? 
Why ? 
What is going on in the world ? '' 
he would ask himself in perplexity several times a day , involuntarily beginning to reflect anew on the meaning of the phenomena of life ; but knowing by experience that there were no answers to these questions he made haste to turn away from them , and took up a book , or hurried of to the Club or to Apollon Nikolaevich 's , to exchange the gossip of the town . 
`` Helene , who has never cared for anything but her own body and is one of the stupidest women in the world , '' thought Pierre , `` is regarded by people as the acme of intelligence and refinement , and they pay homage to her . 
Napoleon Bonaparte was despised by all as long as he was great , but now that he has become a wretched comedian the Emperor Francis wants to offer him his daughter in an illegal marriage . 
The Spaniards , through the Catholic clergy , offer praise to God for their victory over the French on the fourteenth of June , and the French , also through the Catholic clergy , offer praise because on that same fourteenth of June they defeated the Spaniards . 
My brother Masons swear by the blood that they are ready to sacrifice everything for their neighbor , but they do not give a ruble each to the collections for the poor , and they intrigue , the Astraea Lodge against the Manna Seekers , and fuss about an authentic Scotch carpet and a charter that nobody needs , and the meaning of which the very man who wrote it does not understand . 
