But even their orders , like Napoleon 's , were seldom carried out , and then but partially . 
For the most part things happened contrary to their orders . 
Soldiers ordered to advance ran back on meeting grapeshot ; soldiers ordered to remain where they were , suddenly , seeing Russians unexpectedly before them , sometimes rushed back and sometimes forward , and the cavalry dashed without orders in pursuit of the flying Russians . 
In this way two cavalry regiments galloped through the Semenovsk hollow and as soon as they reached the top of the incline turned round and galloped full speed back again . 
The infantry moved in the same way , sometimes running to quite other places than those they were ordered to go to . 
All orders as to where and when to move the guns , when to send infantry to shoot or horsemen to ride down the Russian infantry -- all such orders were given by the officers on the spot nearest to the units concerned , without asking either Ney , Davout , or Murat , much less Napoleon . 
They did not fear getting into trouble for not fulfilling orders or for acting on their own initiative , for in battle what is at stake is what is dearest to man -- his own life -- and it sometimes seems that safety lies in running back , sometimes in running forward ; and these men who were right in the heat of the battle acted according to the mood of the moment . 
In reality , however , all these movements forward and backward did not improve or alter the position of the troops . 
All their rushing and galloping at one another did little harm , the harm of disablement and death was caused by the balls and bullets that flew over the fields on which these men were floundering about . 
As soon as they left the place where the balls and bullets were flying about , their superiors , located in the background , re-formed them and brought them under discipline and under the influence of that discipline led them back to the zone of fire , where under the influence of fear of death they lost their discipline and rushed about according to the chance promptings of the throng . 
