But Pierre believed it without any mental reservation . 
The absence of suffering , the satisfaction of one 's needs and consequent freedom in the choice of one 's occupation , that is , of one 's way of life , now seemed to Pierre to be indubitably man 's highest happiness . 
Here and now for the first time he fully appreciated the enjoyment of eating when he wanted to eat , drinking when he wanted to drink , sleeping when he wanted to sleep , of warmth when he was cold , of talking to a fellow man when he wished to talk and to hear a human voice . 
The satisfaction of one 's needs -- good food , cleanliness , and freedom -- now that he was deprived of all this , seemed to Pierre to constitute perfect happiness ; and the choice of occupation , that is , of his way of life -- now that that was so restricted -- seemed to him such an easy matter that he forgot that a superfluity of the comforts of life destroys all joy in satisfying one 's needs , while great freedom in the choice of occupation -- such freedom as his wealth , his education , and his social position had given him in his own life -- is just what makes the choice of occupation insolubly difficult and destroys the desire and possibility of having an occupation . 
All Pierre 's daydreams now turned on the time when he would be free . 
Yet subsequently , and for the rest of his life , he thought and spoke with enthusiasm of that month of captivity , of those irrecoverable , strong , joyful sensations , and chiefly of the complete peace of mind and inner freedom which he experienced only during those weeks . 
When on the first day he got up early , went out of the shed at dawn , and saw the cupolas and crosses of the New Convent of the Virgin still dark at first , the hoarfrost on the dusty grass , the Sparrow Hills , and the wooded banks above the winding river vanishing in the purple distance , when he felt the contact of the fresh air and heard the noise of the crows flying from Moscow across the field , and when afterwards light gleamed from the east and the sun 's rim appeared solemnly from behind a cloud , and the cupolas and crosses , the hoarfrost , the distance and the river , all began to sparkle in the glad light -- Pierre felt a new joy and strength in life such as he had never before known . 
And this not only stayed with him during the whole of his imprisonment , but even grew in strength as the hardships of his position increased . 
That feeling of alertness and of readiness for anything was still further strengthened in him by the high opinion his fellow prisoners formed of him soon after his arrival at the shed . 
With his knowledge of languages , the respect shown him by the French , his simplicity , his readiness to give anything asked of him -LRB- he received the allowance of three rubles a week made to officers -RRB- ; with his strength , which he showed to the soldiers by pressing nails into the walls of the hut ; his gentleness to his companions , and his capacity for sitting still and thinking without doing anything -LRB- which seemed to them incomprehensible -RRB- , he appeared to them a rather mysterious and superior being . 
