All that struck the eye was a strong , handsome , and fertile woman . 
The old fire very rarely kindled in her face now . 
That happened only when , as was the case that day , her husband returned home , or a sick child was convalescent , or when she and Countess Mary spoke of Prince Andrew -LRB- she never mentioned him to her husband , who she imagined was jealous of Prince Andrew 's memory -RRB- , or on the rare occasions when something happened to induce her to sing , a practice she had quite abandoned since her marriage . 
At the rare moments when the old fire did kindle in her handsome , fully developed body she was even more attractive than in former days . 
Since their marriage Natasha and her husband had lived in Moscow , in Petersburg , on their estate near Moscow , or with her mother , that is to say , in Nicholas ' house . 
The young Countess Bezukhova was not often seen in society , and those who met her there were not pleased with her and found her neither attractive nor amiable . 
Not that Natasha liked solitude -- she did not know whether she liked it or not , she even thought that she did not -- but with her pregnancies , her confinements , the nursing of her children , and sharing every moment of her husband 's life , she had demands on her time which could be satisfied only by renouncing society . 
All who had known Natasha before her marriage wondered at the change in her as at something extraordinary . 
Only the old countess with her maternal instinct had realized that all Natasha 's outbursts had been due to her need of children and a husband -- as she herself had once exclaimed at Otradnoe not so much in fun as in earnest -- and her mother was now surprised at the surprise expressed by those who had never understood Natasha , and she kept saying that she had always known that Natasha would make an exemplary wife and mother . 
`` Only she lets her love of her husband and children overflow all bounds , '' said the countess , `` so that it even becomes absurd . '' 
