They say that historical personages have power only because they fulfill the will of the people which has been delegated to them . 
But in that case , if the force that moves nations lies not in the historic leaders but in the nations themselves , what significance have those leaders ? 
The leaders , these historians tell us , express the will of the people : the activity of the leaders represents the activity of the people . 
But in that case the question arises whether all the activity of the leaders serves as an expression of the people 's will or only some part of it . 
If the whole activity of the leaders serves as the expression of the people 's will , as some historians suppose , then all the details of the court scandals contained in the biographies of a Napoleon or a Catherine serve to express the life of the nation , which is evident nonsense ; but if it is only some particular side of the activity of an historical leader which serves to express the people 's life , as other so-called `` philosophical '' historians believe , then to determine which side of the activity of a leader expresses the nation 's life , we have first of all to know in what the nation 's life consists . 
Met by this difficulty historians of that class devise some most obscure , impalpable , and general abstraction which can cover all conceivable occurrences , and declare this abstraction to be the aim of humanity 's movement . 
The most usual generalizations adopted by almost all the historians are : freedom , equality , enlightenment , progress , civilization , and culture . 
Postulating some generalization as the goal of the movement of humanity , the historians study the men of whom the greatest number of monuments have remained : kings , ministers , generals , authors , reformers , popes , and journalists , to the extent to which in their opinion these persons have promoted or hindered that abstraction . 
But as it is in no way proved that the aim of humanity does consist in freedom , equality , enlightenment , or civilization , and as the connection of the people with the rulers and enlighteners of humanity is only based on the arbitrary assumption that the collective will of the people is always transferred to the men whom we have noticed , it happens that the activity of the millions who migrate , burn houses , abandon agriculture , and destroy one another never is expressed in the account of the activity of some dozen people who did not burn houses , practice agriculture , or slay their fellow creatures . 
History proves this at every turn . 
