This is what makes it evident that a drowning man is less free and more subject to necessity than one standing on dry ground , and that makes the actions of a man closely connected with others in a thickly populated district , or of one bound by family , official , or business duties , seem certainly less free and more subject to necessity than those of a man living in solitude and seclusion . 
If we consider a man alone , apart from his relation to everything around him , each action of his seems to us free . 
But if we see his relation to anything around him , if we see his connection with anything whatever -- with a man who speaks to him , a book he reads , the work on which he is engaged , even with the air he breathes or the light that falls on the things about him -- we see that each of these circumstances has an influence on him and controls at least some side of his activity . 
And the more we perceive of these influences the more our conception of his freedom diminishes and the more our conception of the necessity that weighs on him increases . 
The second consideration is the more or less evident time relation of the man to the world and the clearness of our perception of the place the man 's action occupies in time . 
That is the ground which makes the fall of the first man , resulting in the production of the human race , appear evidently less free than a man 's entry into marriage today . 
It is the reason why the life and activity of people who lived centuries ago and are connected with me in time can not seem to me as free as the life of a contemporary , the consequences of which are still unknown to me . 
The degree of our conception of freedom or inevitability depends in this respect on the greater or lesser lapse of time between the performance of the action and our judgment of it . 
If I examine an act I performed a moment ago in approximately the same circumstances as those I am in now , my action appears to me undoubtedly free . 
But if I examine an act performed a month ago , then being in different circumstances , I can not help recognizing that if that act had not been committed much that resulted from it - good , agreeable , and even essential -- would not have taken place . 
