Every order executed is always one of an immense number unexecuted . 
All the impossible orders inconsistent with the course of events remain unexecuted . 
Only the possible ones get linked up with a consecutive series of commands corresponding to a series of events , and are executed . 
Our false conception that an event is caused by a command which precedes it is due to the fact that when the event has taken place and out of thousands of others those few commands which were consistent with that event have been executed , we forget about the others that were not executed because they could not be . 
Apart from that , the chief source of our error in this matter is due to the fact that in the historical accounts a whole series of innumerable , diverse , and petty events , such for instance as all those which led the French armies to Russia , is generalized into one event in accord with the result produced by that series of events , and corresponding with this generalization the whole series of commands is also generalized into a single expression of will . 
We say that Napoleon wished to invade Russia and invaded it . 
In reality in all Napoleon 's activity we never find anything resembling an expression of that wish , but find a series of orders , or expressions of his will , very variously and indefinitely directed . 
Amid a long series of unexecuted orders of Napoleon 's one series , for the campaign of 1812 , was carried out -- not because those orders differed in any way from the other , unexecuted orders but because they coincided with the course of events that led the French army into Russia ; just as in stencil work this or that figure comes out not because the color was laid on from this side or in that way , but because it was laid on from all sides over the figure cut in the stencil . 
So that examining the relation in time of the commands to the events , we find that a command can never be the cause of the event , but that a certain definite dependence exists between the two . 
To understand in what this dependence consists it is necessary to reinstate another omitted condition of every command proceeding not from the Deity but from a man , which is , that the man who gives the command himself takes part in . 
