First she decided not to come to the drawing room when he called to see her aunt -- that it would not be proper for her , in her deep mourning , to receive visitors ; then she thought this would be rude after what he had done for her ; then it occurred to her that her aunt and the governor 's wife had intentions concerning herself and Rostov -- their looks and words at times seemed to confirm this supposition -- then she told herself that only she , with her sinful nature , could think this of them : they could not forget that situated as she was , while still wearing deep mourning , such matchmaking would be an insult to her and to her father 's memory . 
Assuming that she did go down to see him , Princess Mary imagined the words he would say to her and what she would say to him , and these words sometimes seemed undeservedly cold and then to mean too much . 
More than anything she feared lest the confusion she felt might overwhelm her and betray her as soon as she saw him . 
But when on Sunday after church the footman announced in the drawing room that Count Rostov had called , the princess showed no confusion , only a slight blush suffused her cheeks and her eyes lit up with a new and radiant light . 
`` You have met him , Aunt ? '' 
said she in a calm voice , unable herself to understand that she could be outwardly so calm and natural . 
When Rostov entered the room , the princess dropped her eyes for an instant , as if to give the visitor time to greet her aunt , and then just as Nicholas turned to her she raised her head and met his look with shining eyes . 
With a movement full of dignity and grace she half rose with a smile of pleasure , held out her slender , delicate hand to him , and began to speak in a voice in which for the first time new deep womanly notes vibrated . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , who was in the drawing room , looked at Princess Mary in bewildered surprise . 
Herself a consummate coquette , she could not have maneuvered better on meeting a man she wished to attract . 
