and imagined that he could not bear them . 
Yet he loved `` our Russian peasants '' and their way of life with his whole soul , and for that very reason had understood and assimilated the one way and manner of farming which produced good results . 
Countess Mary was jealous of this passion of her husband 's and regretted that she could not share it ; but she could not understand the joys and vexations he derived from that world , to her so remote and alien . 
She could not understand why he was so particularly animated and happy when , after getting up at daybreak and spending the whole morning in the fields or on the threshing floor , he returned from the sowing or mowing or reaping to have tea with her . 
She did not understand why he spoke with such admiration and delight of the farming of the thrifty and well-to-do peasant Matthew Ermishin , who with his family had carted corn all night ; or of the fact that his -LRB- Nicholas ' -RRB- sheaves were already stacked before anyone else had his harvest in . 
She did not understand why he stepped out from the window to the veranda and smiled under his mustache and winked so joyfully , when warm steady rain began to fall on the dry and thirsty shoots of the young oats , or why when the wind carried away a threatening cloud during the hay harvest he would return from the barn , flushed , sunburned , and perspiring , with a smell of wormwood and gentian in his hair and , gleefully rubbing his hands , would say : `` Well , one more day and my grain and the peasants ' will all be under cover . '' 
Still less did she understand why he , kindhearted and always ready to anticipate her wishes , should become almost desperate when she brought him a petition from some peasant men or women who had appealed to her to be excused some work ; why he , that kind Nicholas , should obstinately refuse her , angrily asking her not to interfere in what was not her business . 
She felt he had a world apart , which he loved passionately and which had laws she had not fathomed . 
Sometimes when , trying to understand him , she spoke of the good work he was doing for his serfs , he would be vexed and reply : `` Not in the least ; it never entered my head and I would n't do that for their good ! 
That 's all poetry and old wives ' talk -- all that doing good to one 's neighbor ! 
