Firmly convinced as he was of the truths revealed to him by his benefactor , and happy as he had been in perfecting his inner man , to which he had devoted himself with such ardor -- all the zest of such a life vanished after the engagement of Andrew and Natasha and the death of Joseph Alexeevich , the news of which reached him almost at the same time . 
Only the skeleton of life remained : his house , a brilliant wife who now enjoyed the favors of a very important personage , acquaintance with all Petersburg , and his court service with its dull formalities . 
And this life suddenly seemed to Pierre unexpectedly loathsome . 
He ceased keeping a diary , avoided the company of the Brothers , began going to the Club again , drank a great deal , and came once more in touch with the bachelor sets , leading such a life that the Countess Helene thought it necessary to speak severely to him about it . 
Pierre felt that she right , and to avoid compromising her went away to Moscow . 
In Moscow as soon as he entered his huge house in which the faded and fading princesses still lived , with its enormous retinue ; as soon as , driving through the town , he saw the Iberian shrine with innumerable tapers burning before the golden covers of the icons , the Kremlin Square with its snow undisturbed by vehicles , the sleigh drivers and hovels of the Sivtsev Vrazhok , those old Moscovites who desired nothing , hurried nowhere , and were ending their days leisurely ; when he saw those old Moscow ladies , the Moscow balls , and the English Club , he felt himself at home in a quiet haven . 
In Moscow he felt at peace , at home , warm and dirty as in an old dressing gown . 
Moscow society , from the old women down to the children , received Pierre like a long-expected guest whose place was always ready awaiting him . 
For Moscow society Pierre was the nicest , kindest , most intellectual , merriest , and most magnanimous of cranks , a heedless , genial nobleman of the old Russian type . 
His purse was always empty because it was open to everyone . 
