The faces of those who were not conferring together were pale and perturbed . 
They were not alarmed by the fact that Moscow had been abandoned by its inhabitants -LRB- grave as that fact seemed -RRB- , but by the question how to tell the Emperor -- without putting him in the terrible position of appearing ridiculous -- that he had been awaiting the boyars so long in vain : that there were drunken mobs left in Moscow but no one else . 
Some said that a deputation of some sort must be scraped together , others disputed that opinion and maintained that the Emperor should first be carefully and skillfully prepared , and then told the truth . 
`` He will have to be told , all the same , '' said some gentlemen of the suite . 
`` But , gentlemen ... '' The position was the more awkward because the Emperor , meditating upon his magnanimous plans , was pacing patiently up and down before the outspread map , occasionally glancing along the road to Moscow from under his lifted hand with a bright and proud smile . 
`` But it 's impossible ... '' declared the gentlemen of the suite , shrugging their shoulders but not venturing to utter the implied word - le ridicule ... At last the Emperor , tired of futile expectation , his actor 's instinct suggesting to him that the sublime moment having been too long drawn out was beginning to lose its sublimity , gave a sign with his hand . 
A single report of a signaling gun followed , and the troops , who were already spread out on different sides of Moscow , moved into the city through Tver , Kaluga , and Dorogomilov gates . 
Faster and faster , vying with one another , they moved at the double or at a trot , vanishing amid the clouds of dust they raised and making the air ring with a deafening roar of mingling shouts . 
Drawn on by the movement of his troops Napoleon rode with them as far as the Dorogomilov gate , but there again stopped and , dismounting from his horse , paced for a long time by the Kammer-Kollezski rampart , awaiting the deputation . 
Meanwhile Moscow was empty . 
