Amid the smoke , deafened by the incessant reports which always made him jump , Tushin not taking his pipe from his mouth ran from gun to gun , now aiming , now counting the charges , now giving orders about replacing dead or wounded horses and harnessing fresh ones , and shouting in his feeble voice , so high pitched and irresolute . 
His face grew more and more animated . 
Only when a man was killed or wounded did he frown and turn away from the sight , shouting angrily at the men who , as is always the case , hesitated about lifting the injured or dead . 
The soldiers , for the most part handsome fellows and , as is always the case in an artillery company , a head and shoulders taller and twice as broad as their officer -- all looked at their commander like children in an embarrassing situation , and the expression on his face was invariably reflected on theirs . 
Owing to the terrible uproar and the necessity for concentration and activity , Tushin did not experience the slightest unpleasant sense of fear , and the thought that he might be killed or badly wounded never occurred to him . 
On the contrary , he became more and more elated . 
It seemed to him that it was a very long time ago , almost a day , since he had first seen the enemy and fired the first shot , and that the corner of the field he stood on was well-known and familiar ground . 
Though he thought of everything , considered everything , and did everything the best of officers could do in his position , he was in a state akin to feverish delirium or drunkenness . 
From the deafening sounds of his own guns around him , the whistle and thud of the enemy 's cannon balls , from the flushed and perspiring faces of the crew bustling round the guns , from the sight of the blood of men and horses , from the little puffs of smoke on the enemy 's side -LRB- always followed by a ball flying past and striking the earth , a man , a gun , a horse -RRB- , from the sight of all these things a fantastic world of his own had taken possession of his brain and at that moment afforded him pleasure . 
The enemy 's guns were in his fancy not guns but pipes from which occasional puffs were blown by an invisible smoker . 
