Why was it more strongly fortified than any other post ? 
And why were all efforts exhausted and six thousand men sacrificed to defend it till late at night on the twenty-fourth ? 
A Cossack patrol would have sufficed to observe the enemy . 
Thirdly , as proof that the position on which the battle was fought had not been foreseen and that the Shevardino Redoubt was not an advanced post of that position , we have the fact that up to the twenty-fifth , Barclay de Tolly and Bagration were convinced that the Shevardino Redoubt was the left flank of the position , and that Kutuzov himself in his report , written in hot haste after the battle , speaks of the Shevardino Redoubt as the left flank of the position . 
It was much later , when reports on the battle of Borodino were written at leisure , that the incorrect and extraordinary statement was invented -LRB- probably to justify the mistakes of a commander in chief who had to be represented as infallible -RRB- that the Shevardino Redoubt was an advanced post -- whereas in reality it was simply a fortified point on the left flank -- and that the battle of Borodino was fought by us on an entrenched position previously selected , where as it was fought on a quite unexpected spot which was almost unentrenched . 
The case was evidently this : a position was selected along the river Kolocha -- which crosses the highroad not at a right angle but at an acute angle -- so that the left flank was at Shevardino , the right flank near the village of Novoe , and the center at Borodino at the confluence of the rivers Kolocha and Voyna . 
To anyone who looks at the field of Borodino without thinking of how the battle was actually fought , this position , protected by the river Kolocha , presents itself as obvious for an army whose object was to prevent an enemy from advancing along the Smolensk road to Moscow . 
Napoleon , riding to Valuevo on the twenty-fourth , did not see -LRB- as the history books say he did -RRB- the position of the Russians from Utitsa to Borodino -LRB- he could not have seen that position because it did not exist -RRB- , nor did he see an advanced post of the Russian army , but while pursuing the Russian rearguard he came upon the left flank of the Russian position -- at the Shevardino Redoubt -- and unexpectedly for the Russians moved his army across the Kolocha . 
And the Russians , not having time to begin a general engagement , withdrew their left wing from the position they had intended to occupy and took up a new position which had not been foreseen and was not fortified . 
By crossing to the other side of the Kolocha to the left of the highroad , Napoleon shifted the whole forthcoming battle from right to left -LRB- looking from the Russian side -RRB- and transferred it to the plain between Utitsa , Semenovsk , and Borodino -- a plain no more advantageous as a position than any other plain in Russia -- and there the whole battle of the twenty-sixth of August took place . 
