Having crossed over , by a forced march , to the Tula road beyond the Pakhra , the Russian commanders intended to remain at Podolsk and had no thought of the Tarutino position ; but innumerable circumstances and the reappearance of French troops who had for a time lost touch with the Russians , and projects of giving battle , and above all the abundance of provisions in Kaluga province , obliged our army to turn still more to the south and to cross from the Tula to the Kaluga road and go to Tarutino , which was between the roads along which those supplies lay . 
Just as it is impossible to say when it was decided to abandon Moscow , so it is impossible to say precisely when , or by whom , it was decided to move to Tarutino . 
Only when the army had got there , as the result of innumerable and varying forces , did people begin to assure themselves that they had desired this movement and long ago foreseen its result . 
The famous flank movement merely consisted in this : after the advance of the French had ceased , the Russian army , which had been continually retreating straight back from the invaders , deviated from that direct course and , not finding itself pursued , was naturally drawn toward the district where supplies were abundant . 
If instead of imagining to ourselves commanders of genius leading the Russian army , we picture that army without any leaders , it could not have done anything but make a return movement toward Moscow , describing an arc in the direction where most provisions were to be found and where the country was richest . 
That movement from the Nizhni to the Ryazan , Tula , and Kaluga roads was so natural that even the Russian marauders moved in that direction , and demands were sent from Petersburg for Kutuzov to take his army that way . 
At Tarutino Kutuzov received what was almost a reprimand from the Emperor for having moved his army along the Ryazan road , and the Emperor 's letter indicated to him the very position he had already occupied near Kaluga . 
Having rolled like a ball in the direction of the impetus given by the whole campaign and by the battle of Borodino , the Russian army - when the strength of that impetus was exhausted and no fresh push was received -- assumed the position natural to it . 
Kutuzov 's merit lay , not in any strategic maneuver of genius , as it is called , but in the fact that he alone understood the significance of what had happened . 
He alone then understood the meaning of the French army 's inactivity , he alone continued to assert that the battle of Borodino had been a victory , he alone -- who as commander in chief might have been expected to be eager to attack -- employed his whole strength to restrain the Russian army from useless engagements . 
