And so there was no one cause for that occurrence , but it had to occur because it had to . 
Millions of men , renouncing their human feelings and reason , had to go from west to east to slay their fellows , just as some centuries previously hordes of men had come from the east to the west , slaying their fellows . 
The actions of Napoleon and Alexander , on whose words the event seemed to hang , were as little voluntary as the actions of any soldier who was drawn into the campaign by lot or by conscription . 
This could not be otherwise , for in order that the will of Napoleon and Alexander -LRB- on whom the event seemed to depend -RRB- should be carried out , the concurrence of innumerable circumstances was needed without any one of which the event could not have taken place . 
It was necessary that millions of men in whose hands lay the real power - the soldiers who fired , or transported provisions and guns -- should consent to carry out the will of these weak individuals , and should have been induced to do so by an infinite number of diverse and complex causes . 
We are forced to fall back on fatalism as an explanation of irrational events -LRB- that is to say , events the reasonableness of which we do not understand -RRB- . 
The more we try to explain such events in history reasonably , the more unreasonable and incomprehensible do they become to us . 
Each man lives for himself , using his freedom to attain his personal aims , and feels with his whole being that he can now do or abstain from doing this or that action ; but as soon as he has done it , that action performed at a certain moment in time becomes irrevocable and belongs to history , in which it has not a free but a predestined significance . 
There are two sides to the life of every man , his individual life , which is the more free the more abstract its interests , and his elemental hive life in which he inevitably obeys laws laid down for him . 
Man lives consciously for himself , but is an unconscious instrument in the attainment of the historic , universal , aims of humanity . 
