The concentrated activity which had begun at the Emperor 's headquarters in the morning and had started the whole movement that followed was like the first movement of the main wheel of a large tower clock . 
One wheel slowly moved , another was set in motion , and a third , and wheels began to revolve faster and faster , levers and cogwheels to work , chimes to play , figures to pop out , and the hands to advance with regular motion as a result of all that activity . 
Just as in the mechanism of a clock , so in the mechanism of the military machine , an impulse once given leads to the final result ; and just as indifferently quiescent till the moment when motion is transmitted to them are the parts of the mechanism which the impulse has not yet reached . 
Wheels creak on their axles as the cogs engage one another and the revolving pulleys whirr with the rapidity of their movement , but a neighboring wheel is as quiet and motionless as though it were prepared to remain so for a hundred years ; but the moment comes when the lever catches it and obeying the impulse that wheel begins to creak and joins in the common motion the result and aim of which are beyond its ken . 
Just as in a clock , the result of the complicated motion of innumerable wheels and pulleys is merely a slow and regular movement of the hands which show the time , so the result of all the complicated human activities of 160,000 Russians and French -- all their passions , desires , remorse , humiliations , sufferings , outbursts of pride , fear , and enthusiasm -- was only the loss of the battle of Austerlitz , the so-called battle of the three Emperors -- that is to say , a slow movement of the hand on the dial of human history . 
Prince Andrew was on duty that day and in constant attendance on the commander in chief . 
At six in the evening , Kutuzov went to the Emperor 's headquarters and after staying but a short time with the Tsar went to see the grand marshal of the court , Count Tolstoy . 
Bolkonski took the opportunity to go in to get some details of the coming action from Dolgorukov . 
He felt that Kutuzov was upset and dissatisfied about something and that at headquarters they were dissatisfied with him , and also that at the Emperor 's headquarters everyone adopted toward him the tone of men who know something others do not know : he therefore wished to speak to Dolgorukov . 
`` Well , how d'you do , my dear fellow ? '' 
