Pierre still went into society , drank as much and led the same idle and dissipated life , because besides the hours he spent at the Rostovs ' there were other hours he had to spend somehow , and the habits and acquaintances he had made in Moscow formed a current that bore him along irresistibly . 
But latterly , when more and more disquieting reports came from the seat of war and Natasha 's health began to improve and she no longer aroused in him the former feeling of careful pity , an ever-increasing restlessness , which he could not explain , took possession of him . 
He felt that the condition he was in could not continue long , that a catastrophe was coming which would change his whole life , and he impatiently sought everywhere for signs of that approaching catastrophe . 
One of his brother Masons had revealed to Pierre the following prophecy concerning Napoleon , drawn from the Revelation of St. John . 
In chapter 13 , verse 18 , of the Apocalypse , it is said : Here is wisdom . 
Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast : for it is the number of a man ; and his number is Six hundred threescore and six . 
And in the fifth verse of the same chapter : And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things and blasphemies ; and power was given unto him to continue forty and two months . 
The French alphabet , written out with the same numerical values as the Hebrew , in which the first nine letters denote units and the others tens , will have the following significance : a b c d e f g h i k 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 l m n o p q r s 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 t u v w x y 100 110 120 130 140 150 z 160 Writing the words L'Empereur Napoleon in numbers , it appears that the sum of them is 666 , and that Napoleon therefore the beast foretold in the Apocalypse . 
Moreover , by applying the same system to the words quarante-deux , * which was the term allowed to the beast that `` spoke great things and blasphemies , '' the same number 666 was obtained ; from which it followed that the limit fixed for Napoleon 's power had come in the year 1812 when the French emperor was forty-two . 
This prophecy pleased Pierre very much and he often asked himself what would put an end to the power of the beast , that is , of Napoleon , and tried by the same system of using letters as numbers and adding them up , to find an answer to the question that engrossed him . 
