Murat again interrupted him , `` with all my heart I wish the Emperors may arrange the affair between them , and that the war begun by no wish of mine may finish as quickly as possible ! '' 
said he , in the tone of a servant who wants to remain good friends with another despite a quarrel between their masters . 
And he went on to inquiries about the Grand Duke and the state of his health , and to reminiscences of the gay and amusing times he had spent with him in Naples . 
Then suddenly , as if remembering his royal dignity , Murat solemnly drew himself up , assumed the pose in which he had stood at his coronation , and , waving his right arm , said : `` I wo n't detain you longer , General . 
I wish success to your mission , '' and with his embroidered red mantle , his flowing feathers , and his glittering ornaments , he rejoined his suite who were respectfully awaiting him . 
Balashev rode on , supposing from Murat 's words that he would very soon be brought before Napoleon himself . 
But instead of that , at the next village the sentinels of Davout 's infantry corps detained him as the pickets of the vanguard had done , and an adjutant of the corps commander , who was fetched , conducted him into the village to Marshal Davout . 
Davout was to Napoleon what Arakcheev was to Alexander -- though not a coward like Arakcheev , he was as precise , as cruel , and as unable to express his devotion to his monarch except by cruelty . 
In the organism of states such men are necessary , as wolves are necessary in the organism of nature , and they always exist , always appear and hold their own , however incongruous their presence and their proximity to the head of the government may be . 
This inevitability alone can explain how the cruel Arakcheev , who tore out a grenadier 's mustache with his own hands , whose weak nerves rendered him unable to face danger , and who was neither an educated man nor a courtier , was able to maintain his powerful position with Alexander , whose own character was chivalrous , noble , and gentle . 
