The right thing now was , if not to retire from the service , at any rate to go home on leave . 
Why he had to go he did not know ; but after his after-dinner nap he gave orders to saddle Mars , an extremely vicious gray stallion that had not been ridden for a long time , and when he returned with the horse all in a lather , he informed Lavrushka -LRB- Denisov 's servant who had remained with him -RRB- and his comrades who turned up in the evening that he was applying for leave and was going home . 
Difficult and strange as it was for him to reflect that he would go away without having heard from the staff -- and this interested him extremely -- whether he was promoted to a captaincy or would receive the Order of St. Anne for the last maneuvers ; strange as it was to think that he would go away without having sold his three roans to the Polish Count Golukhovski , who was bargaining for the horses Rostov had betted he would sell for two thousand rubles ; incomprehensible as it seemed that the ball the hussars were giving in honor of the Polish Mademoiselle Przazdziecka -LRB- out of rivalry to the Uhlans who had given one in honor of their Polish Mademoiselle Borzozowska -RRB- would take place without him -- he knew he must go away from this good , bright world to somewhere where everything was stupid and confused . 
A week later he obtained his leave . 
His hussar comrades -- not only those of his own regiment , but the whole brigade -- gave Rostov a dinner to which the subscription was fifteen rubles a head , and at which there were two bands and two choirs of singers . 
Rostov danced the Trepak with Major Basov ; the tipsy officers tossed , embraced , and dropped Rostov ; the soldiers of the third squadron tossed him too , and shouted `` hurrah ! '' 
and then they put him in his sleigh and escorted him as far as the first post station . 
During the first half of the journey -- from Kremenchug to Kiev -- all Rostov 's thoughts , as is usual in such cases , were behind him , with the squadron ; but when he had gone more than halfway he began to forget his three roans and Dozhoyveyko , his quartermaster , and to wonder anxiously how things would be at Otradnoe and what he would find there . 
Thoughts of home grew stronger the nearer he approached it -- far stronger , as though this feeling of his was subject to the law by which the force of attraction is in inverse proportion to the square of the distance . 
At the last post station before Otradnoe he gave the driver a three-ruble tip , and on arriving he ran breathlessly , like a boy , up the steps of his home . 
