A deed done is irrevocable , and its result coinciding in time with the actions of millions of other men assumes an historic significance . 
The higher a man stands on the social ladder , the more people he is connected with and the more power he has over others , the more evident is the predestination and inevitability of his every action . 
`` The king 's heart is in the hands of the Lord . '' 
A king is history 's slave . 
History , that is , the unconscious , general , hive life of mankind , uses every moment of the life of kings as a tool for its own purposes . 
Though Napoleon at that time , in 1812 , was more convinced than ever that it depended on him , verser -LRB- ou ne pas verser -RRB- le sang de ses peuples * -- as Alexander expressed it in the last letter he wrote him - he had never been so much in the grip of inevitable laws , which compelled him , while thinking that he was acting on his own volition , to perform for the hive life -- that is to say , for history - whatever had to be performed . 
* `` To shed -LRB- or not to shed -RRB- the blood of his peoples . '' 
The people of the west moved eastwards to slay their fellow men , and by the law of coincidence thousands of minute causes fitted in and co-ordinated to produce that movement and war : reproaches for the nonobservance of the Continental System , the Duke of Oldenburg 's wrongs , the movement of troops into Prussia -- undertaken -LRB- as it seemed to Napoleon -RRB- only for the purpose of securing an armed peace , the French Emperor 's love and habit of war coinciding with his people 's inclinations , allurement by the grandeur of the preparations , and the expenditure on those preparations and the need of obtaining advantages to compensate for that expenditure , the intoxicating honors he received in Dresden , the diplomatic negotiations which , in the opinion of contemporaries , were carried on with a sincere desire to attain peace , but which only wounded the self-love of both sides , and millions of other causes that adapted themselves to the event that was happening or coincided with it . 
When an apple has ripened and falls , why does it fall ? 
Because of its attraction to the earth , because its stalk withers , because it is dried by the sun , because it grows heavier , because the wind shakes it , or because the boy standing below wants to eat it ? 
