`` You are perfectly at liberty to treat me with respect or not , '' protested Balashev , `` but permit me to observe that I have the honor to be adjutant general to His Majesty ... '' Davout glanced at him silently and plainly derived pleasure from the signs of agitation and confusion which appeared on Balashev 's face . 
`` You will be treated as is fitting , '' said he and , putting the packet in his pocket , left the shed . 
A minute later the marshal 's adjutant , de Castres , came in and conducted Balashev to the quarters assigned him . 
That day he dined with the marshal , at the same board on the barrels . 
Next day Davout rode out early and , after asking Balashev to come to him , peremptorily requested him to remain there , to move on with the baggage train should orders come for it to move , and to talk to no one except Monsieur de Castres . 
After four days of solitude , ennui , and consciousness of his impotence and insignificance -- particularly acute by contrast with the sphere of power in which he had so lately moved -- and after several marches with the marshal 's baggage and the French army , which occupied the whole district , Balashev was brought to Vilna -- now occupied by the French -- through the very gate by which he had left it four days previously . 
Next day the imperial gentleman-in-waiting , the Comte de Turenne , came to Balashev and informed him of the Emperor Napoleon 's wish to honor him with an audience . 
Four days before , sentinels of the Preobrazhensk regiment had stood in front of the house to which Balashev was conducted , and now two French grenadiers stood there in blue uniforms unfastened in front and with shaggy caps on their heads , and an escort of hussars and Uhlans and a brilliant suite of aides-de-camp , pages , and generals , who were waiting for Napoleon to come out , were standing at the porch , round his saddle horse and his Mameluke , Rustan . 
Napoleon received Balashev in the very house in Vilna from which Alexander had dispatched him on his mission . 
Though Balashev was used to imperial pomp , he was amazed at the luxury and magnificence of Napoleon 's court . 
