As birds migrate to somewhere beyond the sea , so these men with their wives and children streamed to the southeast , to parts where none of them had ever been . 
They set off in caravans , bought their freedom one by one or ran away , and drove or walked toward the `` warm rivers . '' 
Many of them were punished , some sent to Siberia , many died of cold and hunger on the road , many returned of their own accord , and the movement died down of itself just as it had sprung up , without apparent reason . 
But such undercurrents still existed among the people and gathered new forces ready to manifest themselves just as strangely , unexpectedly , and at the same time simply , naturally , and forcibly . 
Now in 1812 , to anyone living in close touch with these people it was apparent that these undercurrents were acting strongly and nearing an eruption . 
Alpatych , who had reached Bogucharovo shortly before the old prince 's death , noticed an agitation among the peasants , and that contrary to what was happening in the Bald Hills district , where over a radius of forty miles all the peasants were moving away and leaving their villages to be devastated by the Cossacks , the peasants in the steppe region round Bogucharovo were , it was rumored , in touch with the French , received leaflets from them that passed from hand to hand , and did not migrate . 
He learned from domestic serfs loyal to him that the peasant Karp , who possessed great influence in the village commune and had recently been away driving a government transport , had returned with news that the Cossacks were destroying deserted villages , but that the French did not harm them . 
Alpatych also knew that on the previous day another peasant had even brought from the village of Visloukhovo , which was occupied by the French , a proclamation by a French general that no harm would be done to the inhabitants , and if they remained they would be paid for anything taken from them . 
As proof of this the peasant had brought from Visloukhovo a hundred rubles in notes -LRB- he did not know that they were false -RRB- paid to him in advance for hay . 
More important still , Alpatych learned that on the morning of the very day he gave the village Elder orders to collect carts to move the princess ' luggage from Bogucharovo , there had been a village meeting at which it had been decided not to move but to wait . 
