Napoleon silently shook his head in negation . 
Assuming the negation to refer only to the victory and not to the lunch , M. de Beausset ventured with respectful jocularity to remark that there is no reason for not having lunch when one can get it . 
`` Go away ... '' exclaimed Napoleon suddenly and morosely , and turned aside . 
A beatific smile of regret , repentance , and ecstasy beamed on M. de Beausset 's face and he glided away to the other generals . 
Napoleon was experiencing a feeling of depression like that of an ever-lucky gambler who , after recklessly flinging money about and always winning , suddenly just when he has calculated all the chances of the game , finds that the more he considers his play the more surely he loses . 
His troops were the same , his generals the same , the same preparations had been made , the same dispositions , and the same proclamation courte et energique , he himself was still the same : he knew that and knew that he was now even more experienced and skillful than before . 
Even the enemy was the same as at Austerlitz and Friedland -- yet the terrible stroke of his arm had supernaturally become impotent . 
All the old methods that had been unfailingly crowned with success : the concentration of batteries on one point , an attack by reserves to break the enemy 's line , and a cavalry attack by `` the men of iron , '' all these methods had already been employed , yet not only was there no victory , but from all sides came the same news of generals killed and wounded , of reinforcements needed , of the impossibility of driving back the Russians , and of disorganization among his own troops . 
Formerly , after he had given two or three orders and uttered a few phrases , marshals and adjutants had come galloping up with congratulations and happy faces , announcing the trophies taken , the corps of prisoners , bundles of enemy eagles and standards , cannon and stores , and Murat had only begged leave to loose the cavalry to gather in the baggage wagons . 
So it had been at Lodi , Marengo , Arcola , Jena , Austerlitz , Wagram , and so on . 
