Innocence , Monsieur , is its own crown . 
Innocence has no need to be a highness . 
It is as august in rags as in fleurs de lys . '' 
`` That is true , '' said the Bishop in a low voice . 
`` I persist , '' continued the conventionary G -- `` You have mentioned Louis XVII . 
to me . 
Let us come to an understanding . 
Shall we weep for all the innocent , all martyrs , all children , the lowly as well as the exalted ? 
I agree to that . 
But in that case , as I have told you , we must go back further than ' 93 , and our tears must begin before Louis XVII . 
I will weep with you over the children of kings , provided that you will weep with me over the children of the people . '' 
`` I weep for all , '' said the Bishop . 
`` Equally ! '' 
exclaimed conventionary G -- ; `` and if the balance must incline , let it be on the side of the people . 
They have been suffering longer . '' 
Another silence ensued . 
The conventionary was the first to break it . 
He raised himself on one elbow , took a bit of his cheek between his thumb and his forefinger , as one does mechanically when one interrogates and judges , and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces of the death agony . 
It was almost an explosion . 
`` Yes , sir , the people have been suffering a long while . 
And hold ! 
that is not all , either ; why have you just questioned me and talked to me about Louis XVII . ? 
I know you not . 
Ever since I have been in these parts I have dwelt in this enclosure alone , never setting foot outside , and seeing no one but that child who helps me . 
Your name has reached me in a confused manner , it is true , and very badly pronounced , I must admit ; but that signifies nothing : clever men have so many ways of imposing on that honest goodman , the people . 
By the way , I did not hear the sound of your carriage ; you have left it yonder , behind the coppice at the fork of the roads , no doubt . 
I do not know you , I tell you . 
You have told me that you are the Bishop ; but that affords me no information as to your moral personality . 
In short , I repeat my question . 
Who are you ? 
You are a bishop ; that is to say , a prince of the church , one of those gilded men with heraldic bearings and revenues , who have vast prebends , -- the bishopric of D -- fifteen thousand francs settled income , ten thousand in perquisites ; total , twenty-five thousand francs , -- who have kitchens , who have liveries , who make good cheer , who eat moor-hens on Friday , who strut about , a lackey before , a lackey behind , in a gala coach , and who have palaces , and who roll in their carriages in the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot ! 
You are a prelate , -- revenues , palace , horses , servants , good table , all the sensualities of life ; you have this like the rest , and like the rest , you enjoy it ; it is well ; but this says either too much or too little ; this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value of the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me . 
To whom do I speak ? 
Who are you ? '' 
The Bishop hung his head and replied , `` Vermis sum -- I am a worm . '' 
`` A worm of the earth in a carriage ? '' 
growled the conventionary . 
It was the conventionary 's turn to be arrogant , and the Bishop 's to be humble . 
The Bishop resumed mildly : -- `` So be it , sir . 
But explain to me how my carriage , which is a few paces off behind the trees yonder , how my good table and the moor-hens which I eat on Friday , how my twenty-five thousand francs income , how my palace and my lackeys prove that clemency is not a duty , and that '93 was not inexorable . '' 
The conventionary passed his hand across his brow , as though to sweep away a cloud . 
`` Before replying to you , '' he said , `` I beseech you to pardon me . 
I have just committed a wrong , sir . 
You are at my house , you are my guest , I owe you courtesy . 
You discuss my ideas , and it becomes me to confine myself to combating your arguments . 
Your riches and your pleasures are advantages which I hold over you in the debate ; but good taste dictates that I shall not make use of them . 
I promise you to make no use of them in the future . '' 
`` I thank you , '' said the Bishop . 
G -- resumed . 
`` Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me . 
Where were we ? 
What were you saying to me ? 
That '93 was inexorable ? '' 
`` Inexorable ; yes , '' said the Bishop . 
`` What think you of Marat clapping his hands at the guillotine ? '' 
`` What think you of Bossuet chanting the Te Deum over the dragonnades ? '' 
The retort was a harsh one , but it attained its mark with the directness of a point of steel . 
The Bishop quivered under it ; no reply occurred to him ; but he was offended by this mode of alluding to Bossuet . 
The best of minds will have their fetiches , and they sometimes feel vaguely wounded by the want of respect of logic . 
The conventionary began to pant ; the asthma of the agony which is mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice ; still , there was a perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes . 
He went on : -- `` Let me say a few words more in this and that direction ; I am willing . 
Apart from the Revolution , which , taken as a whole , is an immense human affirmation , '93 is , alas ! 
a rejoinder . 
You think it inexorable , sir ; but what of the whole monarchy , sir ? 
Carrier is a bandit ; but what name do you give to Montrevel ? 
Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal ; but what is your opinion as to Lamoignon-Baville ? 
Maillard is terrible ; but Saulx-Tavannes , if you please ? 
Duchene senior is ferocious ; but what epithet will you allow me for the elder Letellier ? 
Jourdan-Coupe-Tete is a monster ; but not so great a one as M. the Marquis de Louvois . 
Sir , sir , I am sorry for Marie Antoinette , archduchess and queen ; but I am also sorry for that poor Huguenot woman , who , in 1685 , under Louis the Great , sir , while with a nursing infant , was bound , naked to the waist , to a stake , and the child kept at a distance ; her breast swelled with milk and her heart with anguish ; the little one , hungry and pale , beheld that breast and cried and agonized ; the executioner said to the woman , a mother and a nurse , ` Abjure ! ' 
giving her her choice between the death of her infant and the death of her conscience . 
What say you to that torture of Tantalus as applied to a mother ? 
Bear this well in mind sir : the French Revolution had its reasons for existence ; its wrath will be absolved by the future ; its result is the world made better . 
From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the human race . 
I abridge , I stop , I have too much the advantage ; moreover , I am dying . '' 
And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop , the conventionary concluded his thoughts in these tranquil words : -- `` Yes , the brutalities of progress are called revolutions . 
When they are over , this fact is recognized , -- that the human race has been treated harshly , but that it has progressed . '' 
The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop . 
One remained , however , and from this intrenchment , the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu 's resistance , came forth this reply , wherein appeared nearly all the harshness of the beginning : -- `` Progress should believe in God . 
Good can not have an impious servitor . 
He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race . '' 
The former representative of the people made no reply . 
He was seized with a fit of trembling . 
He looked towards heaven , and in his glance a tear gathered slowly . 
When the eyelid was full , the tear trickled down his livid cheek , and he said , almost in a stammer , quite low , and to himself , while his eyes were plunged in the depths : -- `` O thou ! 
O ideal ! 
Thou alone existest ! '' 
The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock . 
After a pause , the old man raised a finger heavenward and said : -- `` The infinite is . 
He is there . 
If the infinite had no person , person would be without limit ; it would not be infinite ; in other words , it would not exist . 
There is , then , an I . 
That I of the infinite is God . '' 
The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice , and with the shiver of ecstasy , as though he beheld some one . 
When he had spoken , his eyes closed . 
The effort had exhausted him . 
It was evident that he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had been left to him . 
That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in death . 
The supreme moment was approaching . 
The Bishop understood this ; time pressed ; it was as a priest that he had come : from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme emotion ; he gazed at those closed eyes , he took that wrinkled , aged and ice-cold hand in his , and bent over the dying man . 
`` This hour is the hour of God . 
Do you not think that it would be regrettable if we had met in vain ? '' 
The conventionary opened his eyes again . 
A gravity mingled with gloom was imprinted on his countenance . 
`` Bishop , '' said he , with a slowness which probably arose more from his dignity of soul than from the failing of his strength , `` I have passed my life in meditation , study , and contemplation . 
I was sixty years of age when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with its affairs . 
I obeyed . 
Abuses existed , I combated them ; tyrannies existed , I destroyed them ; rights and principles existed , I proclaimed and confessed them . 
Our territory was invaded , I defended it ; France was menaced , I offered my breast . 
I was not rich ; I am poor . 
I have been one of the masters of the state ; the vaults of the treasury were encumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore up the walls , which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold and silver ; I dined in Dead Tree Street , at twenty-two sous . 
I have succored the oppressed , I have comforted the suffering . 
I tore the cloth from the altar , it is true ; but it was to bind up the wounds of my country . 
I have always upheld the march forward of the human race , forward towards the light , and I have sometimes resisted progress without pity . 
I have , when the occasion offered , protected my own adversaries , men of your profession . 
And there is at Peteghem , in Flanders , at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summer palace , a convent of Urbanists , the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu , which I saved in 1793 . 
I have done my duty according to my powers , and all the good that I was able . 
After which , I was hunted down , pursued , persecuted , blackened , jeered at , scorned , cursed , proscribed . 
For many years past , I with my white hair have been conscious that many people think they have the right to despise me ; to the poor ignorant masses I present the visage of one damned . 
And I accept this isolation of hatred , without hating any one myself . 
Now I am eighty-six years old ; I am on the point of death . 
What is it that you have come to ask of me ? '' 
`` Your blessing , '' said the Bishop . 
And he knelt down . 
When the Bishop raised his head again , the face of the conventionary had become august . 
He had just expired . 
The Bishop returned home , deeply absorbed in thoughts which can not be known to us . 
He passed the whole night in prayer . 
On the following morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about member of the Convention G -- ; he contented himself with pointing heavenward . 
From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling towards all children and sufferers . 
Any allusion to `` that old wretch of a G -- '' caused him to fall into a singular preoccupation . 
No one could say that the passage of that soul before his , and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his , did not count for something in his approach to perfection . 
This `` pastoral visit '' naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur of comment in all the little local coteries . 
`` Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a bishop ? 
There was evidently no conversion to be expected . 
All those revolutionists are backsliders . 
Then why go there ? 
What was there to be seen there ? 
He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried off by the devil . '' 
One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herself spiritual , addressed this sally to him , `` Monseigneur , people are inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap ! '' 
-- `` Oh ! 
oh ! 
that 's a coarse color , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` It is lucky that those who despise it in a cap revere it in a hat . '' 
We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves , were we to conclude from this that Monseigneur Welcome was `` a philosophical bishop , '' or a `` patriotic cure . '' 
His meeting , which may almost be designated as his union , with conventionary G -- , left behind it in his mind a sort of astonishment , which rendered him still more gentle . 
That is all . 
Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician , this is , perhaps , the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in the events of that epoch , supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever dreamed of having an attitude . 
Let us , then , go back a few years . 
Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate , the Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire , in company with many other bishops . 
The arrest of the Pope took place , as every one knows , on the night of the 5th to the 6th of July , 1809 ; on this occasion , M. Myriel was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and Italy convened at Paris . 
This synod was held at Notre-Dame , and assembled for the first time on the 15th of June , 1811 , under the presidency of Cardinal Fesch . 
M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five bishops who attended it . 
But he was present only at one sitting and at three or four private conferences . 
Bishop of a mountain diocese , living so very close to nature , in rusticity and deprivation , it appeared that he imported among these eminent personages , ideas which altered the temperature of the assembly . 
He very soon returned to D -- He was interrogated as to this speedy return , and he replied : `` I embarrassed them . 
The outside air penetrated to them through me . 
I produced on them the effect of an open door . '' 
On another occasion he said , `` What would you have ? 
Those gentlemen are princes . 
I am only a poor peasant bishop . '' 
The fact is that he displeased them . 
Among other strange things , it is said that he chanced to remark one evening , when he found himself at the house of one of his most notable colleagues : `` What beautiful clocks ! 
What beautiful carpets ! 
What beautiful liveries ! 
They must be a great trouble . 
I would not have all those superfluities , crying incessantly in my ears : ` There are people who are hungry ! 
There are people who are cold ! 
There are poor people ! 
There are poor people ! ' '' 
Let us remark , by the way , that the hatred of luxury is not an intelligent hatred . 
This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts . 
Nevertheless , in churchmen , luxury is wrong , except in connection with representations and ceremonies . 
It seems to reveal habits which have very little that is charitable about them . 
An opulent priest is a contradiction . 
The priest must keep close to the poor . 
Now , can one come in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress , all these misfortunes , and this poverty , without having about one 's own person a little of that misery , like the dust of labor ? 
Is it possible to imagine a man near a brazier who is not warm ? 
Can one imagine a workman who is working near a furnace , and who has neither a singed hair , nor blackened nails , nor a drop of sweat , nor a speck of ashes on his face ? 
The first proof of charity in the priest , in the bishop especially , is poverty . 
This is , no doubt , what the Bishop of D -- thought . 
It must not be supposed , however , that he shared what we call the `` ideas of the century '' on certain delicate points . 
He took very little part in the theological quarrels of the moment , and maintained silence on questions in which Church and State were implicated ; but if he had been strongly pressed , it seems that he would have been found to be an ultramontane rather than a gallican . 
Since we are making a portrait , and since we do not wish to conceal anything , we are forced to add that he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline . 
Beginning with 1813 , he gave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations . 
He refused to see him , as he passed through on his return from the island of Elba , and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperor in his diocese during the Hundred Days . 
Besides his sister , Mademoiselle Baptistine , he had two brothers , one a general , the other a prefect . 
He wrote to both with tolerable frequency . 
He was harsh for a time towards the former , because , holding a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes , the general had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one is desirous of allowing to escape . 
His correspondence with the other brother , the ex-prefect , a fine , worthy man who lived in retirement at Paris , Rue Cassette , remained more affectionate . 
Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit , his hour of bitterness , his cloud . 
The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things . 
Certainly , such a man would have done well not to entertain any political opinions . 
Let there be no mistake as to our meaning : we are not confounding what is called `` political opinions '' with the grand aspiration for progress , with the sublime faith , patriotic , democratic , humane , which in our day should be the very foundation of every generous intellect . 
Without going deeply into questions which are only indirectly connected with the subject of this book , we will simply say this : It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist , and if his glance had never been , for a single instant , turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctly discernible , above the fictions and the hatreds of this world , above the stormy vicissitudes of human things , the beaming of those three pure radiances , truth , justice , and charity . 
While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created Monseigneur Welcome , we should have understood and admired his protest in the name of right and liberty , his proud opposition , his just but perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon . 
But that which pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case of people who are falling . 
We only love the fray so long as there is danger , and in any case , the combatants of the first hour have alone the right to be the exterminators of the last . 
He who has not been a stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of ruin . 
The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall . 
As for us , when Providence intervenes and strikes , we let it work . 
1812 commenced to disarm us . 
In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence of that taciturn legislative body , emboldened by catastrophe , possessed only traits which aroused indignation . 
And it was a crime to applaud , in 1814 , in the presence of those marshals who betrayed ; in the presence of that senate which passed from one dunghill to another , insulting after having deified ; in the presence of that idolatry which was loosing its footing and spitting on its idol , -- it was a duty to turn aside the head . 
In 1815 , when the supreme disasters filled the air , when France was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach , when Waterloo could be dimly discerned opening before Napoleon , the mournful acclamation of the army and the people to the condemned of destiny had nothing laughable in it , and , after making all allowance for the despot , a heart like that of the Bishop of D -- , ought not perhaps to have failed to recognize the august and touching features presented by the embrace of a great nation and a great man on the brink of the abyss . 
With this exception , he was in all things just , true , equitable , intelligent , humble and dignified , beneficent and kindly , which is only another sort of benevolence . 
He was a priest , a sage , and a man . 
It must be admitted , that even in the political views with which we have just reproached him , and which we are disposed to judge almost with severity , he was tolerant and easy , more so , perhaps , than we who are speaking here . 
The porter of the town-hall had been placed there by the Emperor . 
He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old guard , a member of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz , as much of a Bonapartist as the eagle . 
This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate remarks , which the law then stigmatized as seditious speeches . 
After the imperial profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor , he never dressed himself in his regimentals , as he said , so that he should not be obliged to wear his cross . 
He had himself devoutly removed the imperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon had given him ; this made a hole , and he would not put anything in its place . 
`` I will die , '' he said , `` rather than wear the three frogs upon my heart ! '' 
He liked to scoff aloud at Louis XVIII . 
`` The gouty old creature in English gaiters ! '' 
he said ; `` let him take himself off to Prussia with that queue of his . '' 
He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the two things which he most detested , Prussia and England . 
He did it so often that he lost his place . 
There he was , turned out of the house , with his wife and children , and without bread . 
The Bishop sent for him , reproved him gently , and appointed him beadle in the cathedral . 
In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had , by dint of holy deeds and gentle manners , filled the town of D -- with a sort of tender and filial reverence . 
Even his conduct towards Napoleon had been accepted and tacitly pardoned , as it were , by the people , the good and weakly flock who adored their emperor , but loved their bishop . 
A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of little abbes , just as a general is by a covey of young officers . 
This is what that charming Saint Francois de Sales calls somewhere `` les pretres blancs-becs , '' callow priests . 
Every career has its aspirants , who form a train for those who have attained eminence in it . 
There is no power which has not its dependents . 
There is no fortune which has not its court . 
The seekers of the future eddy around the splendid present . 
Every metropolis has its staff of officials . 
Every bishop who possesses the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the seminary , which goes the round , and maintains good order in the episcopal palace , and mounts guard over monseigneur 's smile . 
To please a bishop is equivalent to getting one 's foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate . 
It is necessary to walk one 's path discreetly ; the apostleship does not disdain the canonship . 
Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere , there are big mitres in the Church . 
These are the bishops who stand well at Court , who are rich , well endowed , skilful , accepted by the world , who know how to pray , no doubt , but who know also how to beg , who feel little scruple at making a whole diocese dance attendance in their person , who are connecting links between the sacristy and diplomacy , who are abbes rather than priests , prelates rather than bishops . 
Happy those who approach them ! 
Being persons of influence , they create a shower about them , upon the assiduous and the favored , and upon all the young men who understand the art of pleasing , of large parishes , prebends , archidiaconates , chaplaincies , and cathedral posts , while awaiting episcopal honors . 
As they advance themselves , they cause their satellites to progress also ; it is a whole solar system on the march . 
Their radiance casts a gleam of purple over their suite . 
Their prosperity is crumbled up behind the scenes , into nice little promotions . 
The larger the diocese of the patron , the fatter the curacy for the favorite . 
And then , there is Rome . 
A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop , an archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal , carries you with him as conclavist ; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction , you receive the pallium , and behold ! 
you are an auditor , then a papal chamberlain , then monsignor , and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step , and between the Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot . 
Every skull-cap may dream of the tiara . 
The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a king in a regular manner ; and what a king ! 
the supreme king . 
Then what a nursery of aspirations is a seminary ! 
How many blushing choristers , how many youthful abbes bear on their heads Perrette 's pot of milk ! 
Who knows how easy it is for ambition to call itself vocation ? 
in good faith , perchance , and deceiving itself , devotee that it is . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu , poor , humble , retiring , was not accounted among the big mitres . 
This was plain from the complete absence of young priests about him . 
We have seen that he `` did not take '' in Paris . 
Not a single future dreamed of engrafting itself on this solitary old man . 
Not a single sprouting ambition committed the folly of putting forth its foliage in his shadow . 
His canons and grand-vicars were good old men , rather vulgar like himself , walled up like him in this diocese , without exit to a cardinalship , and who resembled their bishop , with this difference , that they were finished and he was completed . 
The impossibility of growing great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so well understood , that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the seminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix or of Auch , and went off in a great hurry . 
For , in short , we repeat it , men wish to be pushed . 
A saint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegation is a dangerous neighbor ; he might communicate to you , by contagion , an incurable poverty , an anchylosis of the joints , which are useful in advancement , and in short , more renunciation than you desire ; and this infectious virtue is avoided . 
Hence the isolation of Monseigneur Bienvenu . 
We live in the midst of a gloomy society . 
Success ; that is the lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption . 
Be it said in passing , that success is a very hideous thing . 
Its false resemblance to merit deceives men . 
For the masses , success has almost the same profile as supremacy . 
Success , that Menaechmus of talent , has one dupe , -- history . 
Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it . 
In our day , a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its service , wears the livery of success , and performs the service of its antechamber . 
Succeed : theory . 
Prosperity argues capacity . 
Win in the lottery , and behold ! 
you are a clever man . 
He who triumphs is venerated . 
Be born with a silver spoon in your mouth ! 
everything lies in that . 
Be lucky , and you will have all the rest ; be happy , and people will think you great . 
Outside of five or six immense exceptions , which compose the splendor of a century , contemporary admiration is nothing but short-sightedness . 
Gilding is gold . 
It does no harm to be the first arrival by pure chance , so long as you do arrive . 
The common herd is an old Narcissus who adores himself , and who applauds the vulgar herd . 
That enormous ability by virtue of which one is Moses , Aeschylus , Dante , Michael Angelo , or Napoleon , the multitude awards on the spot , and by acclamation , to whomsoever attains his object , in whatsoever it may consist . 
Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy : let a false Corneille compose Tiridate ; let a eunuch come to possess a harem ; let a military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch ; let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the Sambre-and-Meuse , and construct for himself , out of this cardboard , sold as leather , four hundred thousand francs of income ; let a pork-packer espouse usury , and cause it to bring forth seven or eight millions , of which he is the father and of which it is the mother ; let a preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl ; let the steward of a fine family be so rich on retiring from service that he is made minister of finances , -- and men call that Genius , just as they call the face of Mousqueton Beauty , and the mien of Claude Majesty . 
With the constellations of space they confound the stars of the abyss which are made in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks . 
We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D -- on the score of orthodoxy . 
In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood but respect . 
The conscience of the just man should be accepted on his word . 
Moreover , certain natures being given , we admit the possible development of all beauties of human virtue in a belief that differs from our own . 
What did he think of this dogma , or of that mystery ? 
These secrets of the inner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb , where souls enter naked . 
The point on which we are certain is , that the difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into hypocrisy in his case . 
No decay is possible to the diamond . 
He believed to the extent of his powers . 
`` Credo in Patrem , '' he often exclaimed . 
Moreover , he drew from good works that amount of satisfaction which suffices to the conscience , and which whispers to a man , `` Thou art with God ! '' 
The point which we consider it our duty to note is , that outside of and beyond his faith , as it were , the Bishop possessed an excess of love . 
In was in that quarter , quia multum amavit , -- because he loved much -- that he was regarded as vulnerable by `` serious men , '' `` grave persons '' and `` reasonable people '' ; favorite locutions of our sad world where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry . 
What was this excess of love ? 
It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men , as we have already pointed out , and which , on occasion , extended even to things . 
He lived without disdain . 
He was indulgent towards God 's creation . 
Every man , even the best , has within him a thoughtless harshness which he reserves for animals . 
The Bishop of D -- had none of that harshness , which is peculiar to many priests , nevertheless . 
He did not go as far as the Brahmin , but he seemed to have weighed this saying of Ecclesiastes : `` Who knoweth whither the soul of the animal goeth ? '' 
Hideousness of aspect , deformity of instinct , troubled him not , and did not arouse his indignation . 
He was touched , almost softened by them . 
It seemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond the bounds of life which is apparent , the cause , the explanation , or the excuse for them . 
He seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties . 
He examined without wrath , and with the eye of a linguist who is deciphering a palimpsest , that portion of chaos which still exists in nature . 
This revery sometimes caused him to utter odd sayings . 
One morning he was in his garden , and thought himself alone , but his sister was walking behind him , unseen by him : suddenly he paused and gazed at something on the ground ; it was a large , black , hairy , frightful spider . 
His sister heard him say : -- `` Poor beast ! 
It is not its fault ! '' 
Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness ? 
Puerile they may be ; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar to Saint Francis d'Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius . 
One day he sprained his ankle in his effort to avoid stepping on an ant . 
Thus lived this just man . 
Sometimes he fell asleep in his garden , and then there was nothing more venerable possible . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu had formerly been , if the stories anent his youth , and even in regard to his manhood , were to be believed , a passionate , and , possibly , a violent man . 
His universal suavity was less an instinct of nature than the result of a grand conviction which had filtered into his heart through the medium of life , and had trickled there slowly , thought by thought ; for , in a character , as in a rock , there may exist apertures made by drops of water . 
These hollows are uneffaceable ; these formations are indestructible . 
In 1815 , as we think we have already said , he reached his seventy-fifth birthday , but he did not appear to be more than sixty . 
He was not tall ; he was rather plump ; and , in order to combat this tendency , he was fond of taking long strolls on foot ; his step was firm , and his form was but slightly bent , a detail from which we do not pretend to draw any conclusion . 
Gregory XVI. , at the age of eighty , held himself erect and smiling , which did not prevent him from being a bad bishop . 
Monseigneur Welcome had what the people term a `` fine head , '' but so amiable was he that they forgot that it was fine . 
When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his charms , and of which we have already spoken , people felt at their ease with him , and joy seemed to radiate from his whole person . 
His fresh and ruddy complexion , his very white teeth , all of which he had preserved , and which were displayed by his smile , gave him that open and easy air which cause the remark to be made of a man , `` He 's a good fellow '' ; and of an old man , `` He is a fine man . '' 
That , it will be recalled , was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon . 
On the first encounter , and to one who saw him for the first time , he was nothing , in fact , but a fine man . 
But if one remained near him for a few hours , and beheld him in the least degree pensive , the fine man became gradually transfigured , and took on some imposing quality , I know not what ; his broad and serious brow , rendered august by his white locks , became august also by virtue of meditation ; majesty radiated from his goodness , though his goodness ceased not to be radiant ; one experienced something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smiling angel slowly unfold his wings , without ceasing to smile . 
Respect , an unutterable respect , penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your heart , and one felt that one had before him one of those strong , thoroughly tried , and indulgent souls where thought is so grand that it can no longer be anything but gentle . 
As we have seen , prayer , the celebration of the offices of religion , alms-giving , the consolation of the afflicted , the cultivation of a bit of land , fraternity , frugality , hospitality , renunciation , confidence , study , work , filled every day of his life . 
Filled is exactly the word ; certainly the Bishop 's day was quite full to the brim , of good words and good deeds . 
Nevertheless , it was not complete if cold or rainy weather prevented his passing an hour or two in his garden before going to bed , and after the two women had retired . 
It seemed to be a sort of rite with him , to prepare himself for slumber by meditation in the presence of the grand spectacles of the nocturnal heavens . 
Sometimes , if the two old women were not asleep , they heard him pacing slowly along the walks at a very advanced hour of the night . 
He was there alone , communing with himself , peaceful , adoring , comparing the serenity of his heart with the serenity of the ether , moved amid the darkness by the visible splendor of the constellations and the invisible splendor of God , opening his heart to the thoughts which fall from the Unknown . 
At such moments , while he offered his heart at the hour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume , illuminated like a lamp amid the starry night , as he poured himself out in ecstasy in the midst of the universal radiance of creation , he could not have told himself , probably , what was passing in his spirit ; he felt something take its flight from him , and something descend into him . 
Mysterious exchange of the abysses of the soul with the abysses of the universe ! 
He thought of the grandeur and presence of God ; of the future eternity , that strange mystery ; of the eternity past , a mystery still more strange ; of all the infinities , which pierced their way into all his senses , beneath his eyes ; and , without seeking to comprehend the incomprehensible , he gazed upon it . 
He did not study God ; he was dazzled by him . 
He considered those magnificent conjunctions of atoms , which communicate aspects to matter , reveal forces by verifying them , create individualities in unity , proportions in extent , the innumerable in the infinite , and , through light , produce beauty . 
These conjunctions are formed and dissolved incessantly ; hence life and death . 
He seated himself on a wooden bench , with his back against a decrepit vine ; he gazed at the stars , past the puny and stunted silhouettes of his fruit-trees . 
This quarter of an acre , so poorly planted , so encumbered with mean buildings and sheds , was dear to him , and satisfied his wants . 
What more was needed by this old man , who divided the leisure of his life , where there was so little leisure , between gardening in the daytime and contemplation at night ? 
Was not this narrow enclosure , with the heavens for a ceiling , sufficient to enable him to adore God in his most divine works , in turn ? 
Does not this comprehend all , in fact ? 
and what is there left to desire beyond it ? 
A little garden in which to walk , and immensity in which to dream . 
At one 's feet that which can be cultivated and plucked ; over head that which one can study and meditate upon : some flowers on earth , and all the stars in the sky . 
One last word . 
Since this sort of details might , particularly at the present moment , and to use an expression now in fashion , give to the Bishop of D -- a certain `` pantheistical '' physiognomy , and induce the belief , either to his credit or discredit , that he entertained one of those personal philosophies which are peculiar to our century , which sometimes spring up in solitary spirits , and there take on a form and grow until they usurp the place of religion , we insist upon it , that not one of those persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have thought himself authorized to think anything of the sort . 
That which enlightened this man was his heart . 
His wisdom was made of the light which comes from there . 
No systems ; many works . 
Abstruse speculations contain vertigo ; no , there is nothing to indicate that he risked his mind in apocalypses . 
The apostle may be daring , but the bishop must be timid . 
He would probably have felt a scruple at sounding too far in advance certain problems which are , in a manner , reserved for terrible great minds . 
There is a sacred horror beneath the porches of the enigma ; those gloomy openings stand yawning there , but something tells you , you , a passer-by in life , that you must not enter . 
Woe to him who penetrates thither ! 
Geniuses in the impenetrable depths of abstraction and pure speculation , situated , so to speak , above all dogmas , propose their ideas to God . 
Their prayer audaciously offers discussion . 
Their adoration interrogates . 
This is direct religion , which is full of anxiety and responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs . 
Human meditation has no limits . 
At his own risk and peril , it analyzes and digs deep into its own bedazzlement . 
One might almost say , that by a sort of splendid reaction , it with it dazzles nature ; the mysterious world which surrounds us renders back what it has received ; it is probable that the contemplators are contemplated . 
However that may be , there are on earth men who -- are they men ? 
-- perceive distinctly at the verge of the horizons of revery the heights of the absolute , and who have the terrible vision of the infinite mountain . 
Monseigneur Welcome was one of these men ; Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius . 
He would have feared those sublimities whence some very great men even , like Swedenborg and Pascal , have slipped into insanity . 
Certainly , these powerful reveries have their moral utility , and by these arduous paths one approaches to ideal perfection . 
As for him , he took the path which shortens , -- the Gospel 's . 
He did not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah 's mantle ; he projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell of events ; he did not see to condense in flame the light of things ; he had nothing of the prophet and nothing of the magician about him . 
This humble soul loved , and that was all . 
That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration is probable : but one can no more pray too much than one can love too much ; and if it is a heresy to pray beyond the texts , Saint Theresa and Saint Jerome would be heretics . 
He inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates . 
The universe appeared to him like an immense malady ; everywhere he felt fever , everywhere he heard the sound of suffering , and , without seeking to solve the enigma , he strove to dress the wound . 
The terrible spectacle of created things developed tenderness in him ; he was occupied only in finding for himself , and in inspiring others with the best way to compassionate and relieve . 
That which exists was for this good and rare priest a permanent subject of sadness which sought consolation . 
There are men who toil at extracting gold ; he toiled at the extraction of pity . 
Universal misery was his mine . 
The sadness which reigned everywhere was but an excuse for unfailing kindness . 
Love each other ; he declared this to be complete , desired nothing further , and that was the whole of his doctrine . 
One day , that man who believed himself to be a `` philosopher , '' the senator who has already been alluded to , said to the Bishop : `` Just survey the spectacle of the world : all war against all ; the strongest has the most wit . 
Your love each other is nonsense . '' 
-- `` Well , '' replied Monseigneur Welcome , without contesting the point , `` if it is nonsense , the soul should shut itself up in it , as the pearl in the oyster . '' 
Thus he shut himself up , he lived there , he was absolutely satisfied with it , leaving on one side the prodigious questions which attract and terrify , the fathomless perspectives of abstraction , the precipices of metaphysics -- all those profundities which converge , for the apostle in God , for the atheist in nothingness ; destiny , good and evil , the way of being against being , the conscience of man , the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal , the transformation in death , the recapitulation of existences which the tomb contains , the incomprehensible grafting of successive loves on the persistent I , the essence , the substance , the Nile , and the Ens , the soul , nature , liberty , necessity ; perpendicular problems , sinister obscurities , where lean the gigantic archangels of the human mind ; formidable abysses , which Lucretius , Manou , Saint Paul , Dante , contemplate with eyes flashing lightning , which seems by its steady gaze on the infinite to cause stars to blaze forth there . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu was simply a man who took note of the exterior of mysterious questions without scrutinizing them , and without troubling his own mind with them , and who cherished in his own soul a grave respect for darkness . 
Early in the month of October , 1815 , about an hour before sunset , a man who was travelling on foot entered the little town of D -- The few inhabitants who were at their windows or on their thresholds at the moment stared at this traveller with a sort of uneasiness . 
It was difficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance . 
He was a man of medium stature , thickset and robust , in the prime of life . 
He might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old . 
A cap with a drooping leather visor partly concealed his face , burned and tanned by sun and wind , and dripping with perspiration . 
His shirt of coarse yellow linen , fastened at the neck by a small silver anchor , permitted a view of his hairy breast : he had a cravat twisted into a string ; trousers of blue drilling , worn and threadbare , white on one knee and torn on the other ; an old gray , tattered blouse , patched on one of the elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine ; a tightly packed soldier knapsack , well buckled and perfectly new , on his back ; an enormous , knotty stick in his hand ; iron-shod shoes on his stockingless feet ; a shaved head and a long beard . 
The sweat , the heat , the journey on foot , the dust , added I know not what sordid quality to this dilapidated whole . 
His hair was closely cut , yet bristling , for it had begun to grow a little , and did not seem to have been cut for some time . 
No one knew him . 
He was evidently only a chance passer-by . 
Whence came he ? 
From the south ; from the seashore , perhaps , for he made his entrance into D -- by the same street which , seven months previously , had witnessed the passage of the Emperor Napoleon on his way from Cannes to Paris . 
This man must have been walking all day . 
He seemed very much fatigued . 
Some women of the ancient market town which is situated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees of the boulevard Gassendi , and drink at the fountain which stands at the end of the promenade . 
He must have been very thirsty : for the children who followed him saw him stop again for a drink , two hundred paces further on , at the fountain in the market-place . 
On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert , he turned to the left , and directed his steps toward the town-hall . 
He entered , then came out a quarter of an hour later . 
A gendarme was seated near the door , on the stone bench which General Drouot had mounted on the 4th of March to read to the frightened throng of the inhabitants of D -- the proclamation of the Gulf Juan . 
The man pulled off his cap and humbly saluted the gendarme . 
The gendarme , without replying to his salute , stared attentively at him , followed him for a while with his eyes , and then entered the town-hall . 
There then existed at D -- a fine inn at the sign of the Cross of Colbas . 
This inn had for a landlord a certain Jacquin Labarre , a man of consideration in the town on account of his relationship to another Labarre , who kept the inn of the Three Dauphins in Grenoble , and had served in the Guides . 
At the time of the Emperor 's landing , many rumors had circulated throughout the country with regard to this inn of the Three Dauphins . 
It was said that General Bertrand , disguised as a carter , had made frequent trips thither in the month of January , and that he had distributed crosses of honor to the soldiers and handfuls of gold to the citizens . 
The truth is , that when the Emperor entered Grenoble he had refused to install himself at the hotel of the prefecture ; he had thanked the mayor , saying , `` I am going to the house of a brave man of my acquaintance '' ; and he had betaken himself to the Three Dauphins . 
This glory of the Labarre of the Three Dauphins was reflected upon the Labarre of the Cross of Colbas , at a distance of five and twenty leagues . 
It was said of him in the town , `` That is the cousin of the man of Grenoble . '' 
The man bent his steps towards this inn , which was the best in the country-side . 
He entered the kitchen , which opened on a level with the street . 
All the stoves were lighted ; a huge fire blazed gayly in the fireplace . 
The host , who was also the chief cook , was going from one stew-pan to another , very busily superintending an excellent dinner designed for the wagoners , whose loud talking , conversation , and laughter were audible from an adjoining apartment . 
Any one who has travelled knows that there is no one who indulges in better cheer than wagoners . 
A fat marmot , flanked by white partridges and heather-cocks , was turning on a long spit before the fire ; on the stove , two huge carps from Lake Lauzet and a trout from Lake Alloz were cooking . 
The host , hearing the door open and seeing a newcomer enter , said , without raising his eyes from his stoves : -- `` What do you wish , sir ? '' 
`` Food and lodging , '' said the man . 
`` Nothing easier , '' replied the host . 
At that moment he turned his head , took in the traveller 's appearance with a single glance , and added , `` By paying for it . '' 
The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse , and answered , `` I have money . '' 
`` In that case , we are at your service , '' said the host . 
The man put his purse back in his pocket , removed his knapsack from his back , put it on the ground near the door , retained his stick in his hand , and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire . 
D -- is in the mountains . 
The evenings are cold there in October . 
But as the host went back and forth , he scrutinized the traveller . 
`` Will dinner be ready soon ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Immediately , '' replied the landlord . 
While the newcomer was warming himself before the fire , with his back turned , the worthy host , Jacquin Labarre , drew a pencil from his pocket , then tore off the corner of an old newspaper which was lying on a small table near the window . 
On the white margin he wrote a line or two , folded it without sealing , and then intrusted this scrap of paper to a child who seemed to serve him in the capacity both of scullion and lackey . 
The landlord whispered a word in the scullion 's ear , and the child set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall . 
The traveller saw nothing of all this . 
Once more he inquired , `` Will dinner be ready soon ? '' 
`` Immediately , '' responded the host . 
The child returned . 
He brought back the paper . 
The host unfolded it eagerly , like a person who is expecting a reply . 
He seemed to read it attentively , then tossed his head , and remained thoughtful for a moment . 
Then he took a step in the direction of the traveller , who appeared to be immersed in reflections which were not very serene . 
`` I can not receive you , sir , '' said he . 
The man half rose . 
`` What ! 
Are you afraid that I will not pay you ? 
Do you want me to pay you in advance ? 
I have money , I tell you . '' 
`` It is not that . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` You have money -- '' `` Yes , '' said the man . 
`` And I , '' said the host , `` have no room . '' 
The man resumed tranquilly , `` Put me in the stable . '' 
`` I can not . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` The horses take up all the space . '' 
`` Very well ! '' 
retorted the man ; `` a corner of the loft then , a truss of straw . 
We will see about that after dinner . '' 
`` I can not give you any dinner . '' 
This declaration , made in a measured but firm tone , struck the stranger as grave . 
He rose . 
`` Ah ! 
bah ! 
But I am dying of hunger . 
I have been walking since sunrise . 
I have travelled twelve leagues . 
I pay . 
I wish to eat . '' 
`` I have nothing , '' said the landlord . 
The man burst out laughing , and turned towards the fireplace and the stoves : `` Nothing ! 
and all that ? '' 
`` All that is engaged . '' 
`` By whom ? '' 
`` By messieurs the wagoners . '' 
`` How many are there of them ? '' 
`` Twelve . '' 
`` There is enough food there for twenty . '' 
`` They have engaged the whole of it and paid for it in advance . '' 
The man seated himself again , and said , without raising his voice , `` I am at an inn ; I am hungry , and I shall remain . '' 
Then the host bent down to his ear , and said in a tone which made him start , `` Go away ! '' 
At that moment the traveller was bending forward and thrusting some brands into the fire with the iron-shod tip of his staff ; he turned quickly round , and as he opened his mouth to reply , the host gazed steadily at him and added , still in a low voice : `` Stop ! 
there 's enough of that sort of talk . 
Do you want me to tell you your name ? 
Your name is Jean Valjean . 
Now do you want me to tell you who you are ? 
When I saw you come in I suspected something ; I sent to the town-hall , and this was the reply that was sent to me . 
Can you read ? '' 
So saying , he held out to the stranger , fully unfolded , the paper which had just travelled from the inn to the town-hall , and from the town-hall to the inn . 
The man cast a glance upon it . 
The landlord resumed after a pause . 
`` I am in the habit of being polite to every one . 
Go away ! '' 
The man dropped his head , picked up the knapsack which he had deposited on the ground , and took his departure . 
