He suddenly came to a halt . 
He was near the bed . 
He had arrived there sooner than he had thought for . 
Nature sometimes mingles her effects and her spectacles with our actions with sombre and intelligent appropriateness , as though she desired to make us reflect . 
For the last half-hour a large cloud had covered the heavens . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean paused in front of the bed , this cloud parted , as though on purpose , and a ray of light , traversing the long window , suddenly illuminated the Bishop 's pale face . 
He was sleeping peacefully . 
He lay in his bed almost completely dressed , on account of the cold of the Basses-Alps , in a garment of brown wool , which covered his arms to the wrists . 
His head was thrown back on the pillow , in the careless attitude of repose ; his hand , adorned with the pastoral ring , and whence had fallen so many good deeds and so many holy actions , was hanging over the edge of the bed . 
His whole face was illumined with a vague expression of satisfaction , of hope , and of felicity . 
It was more than a smile , and almost a radiance . 
He bore upon his brow the indescribable reflection of a light which was invisible . 
The soul of the just contemplates in sleep a mysterious heaven . 
A reflection of that heaven rested on the Bishop . 
It was , at the same time , a luminous transparency , for that heaven was within him . 
That heaven was his conscience . 
At the moment when the ray of moonlight superposed itself , so to speak , upon that inward radiance , the sleeping Bishop seemed as in a glory . 
It remained , however , gentle and veiled in an ineffable half-light . 
That moon in the sky , that slumbering nature , that garden without a quiver , that house which was so calm , the hour , the moment , the silence , added some solemn and unspeakable quality to the venerable repose of this man , and enveloped in a sort of serene and majestic aureole that white hair , those closed eyes , that face in which all was hope and all was confidence , that head of an old man , and that slumber of an infant . 
There was something almost divine in this man , who was thus august , without being himself aware of it . 
Jean Valjean was in the shadow , and stood motionless , with his iron candlestick in his hand , frightened by this luminous old man . 
Never had he beheld anything like this . 
This confidence terrified him . 
The moral world has no grander spectacle than this : a troubled and uneasy conscience , which has arrived on the brink of an evil action , contemplating the slumber of the just . 
That slumber in that isolation , and with a neighbor like himself , had about it something sublime , of which he was vaguely but imperiously conscious . 
No one could have told what was passing within him , not even himself . 
In order to attempt to form an idea of it , it is necessary to think of the most violent of things in the presence of the most gentle . 
Even on his visage it would have been impossible to distinguish anything with certainty . 
It was a sort of haggard astonishment . 
He gazed at it , and that was all . 
But what was his thought ? 
It would have been impossible to divine it . 
What was evident was , that he was touched and astounded . 
But what was the nature of this emotion ? 
His eye never quitted the old man . 
The only thing which was clearly to be inferred from his attitude and his physiognomy was a strange indecision . 
One would have said that he was hesitating between the two abysses , -- the one in which one loses one 's self and that in which one saves one 's self . 
He seemed prepared to crush that skull or to kiss that hand . 
At the expiration of a few minutes his left arm rose slowly towards his brow , and he took off his cap ; then his arm fell back with the same deliberation , and Jean Valjean fell to meditating once more , his cap in his left hand , his club in his right hand , his hair bristling all over his savage head . 
The Bishop continued to sleep in profound peace beneath that terrifying gaze . 
The gleam of the moon rendered confusedly visible the crucifix over the chimney-piece , which seemed to be extending its arms to both of them , with a benediction for one and pardon for the other . 
Suddenly Jean Valjean replaced his cap on his brow ; then stepped rapidly past the bed , without glancing at the Bishop , straight to the cupboard , which he saw near the head ; he raised his iron candlestick as though to force the lock ; the key was there ; he opened it ; the first thing which presented itself to him was the basket of silverware ; he seized it , traversed the chamber with long strides , without taking any precautions and without troubling himself about the noise , gained the door , re-entered the oratory , opened the window , seized his cudgel , bestrode the window-sill of the ground-floor , put the silver into his knapsack , threw away the basket , crossed the garden , leaped over the wall like a tiger , and fled . 
The next morning at sunrise Monseigneur Bienvenu was strolling in his garden . 
Madame Magloire ran up to him in utter consternation . 
`` Monseigneur , Monseigneur ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` does your Grace know where the basket of silver is ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` Jesus the Lord be blessed ! '' 
she resumed ; `` I did not know what had become of it . '' 
The Bishop had just picked up the basket in a flower-bed . 
He presented it to Madame Magloire . 
`` Here it is . '' 
`` Well ! '' 
said she . 
`` Nothing in it ! 
And the silver ? '' 
`` Ah , '' returned the Bishop , `` so it is the silver which troubles you ? 
I do n't know where it is . '' 
`` Great , good God ! 
It is stolen ! 
That man who was here last night has stolen it . '' 
In a twinkling , with all the vivacity of an alert old woman , Madame Magloire had rushed to the oratory , entered the alcove , and returned to the Bishop . 
The Bishop had just bent down , and was sighing as he examined a plant of cochlearia des Guillons , which the basket had broken as it fell across the bed . 
He rose up at Madame Magloire 's cry . 
`` Monseigneur , the man is gone ! 
The silver has been stolen ! '' 
As she uttered this exclamation , her eyes fell upon a corner of the garden , where traces of the wall having been scaled were visible . 
The coping of the wall had been torn away . 
`` Stay ! 
yonder is the way he went . 
He jumped over into Cochefilet Lane . 
Ah , the abomination ! 
He has stolen our silver ! '' 
The Bishop remained silent for a moment ; then he raised his grave eyes , and said gently to Madame Magloire : -- `` And , in the first place , was that silver ours ? '' 
Madame Magloire was speechless . 
Another silence ensued ; then the Bishop went on : -- `` Madame Magloire , I have for a long time detained that silver wrongfully . 
It belonged to the poor . 
Who was that man ? 
A poor man , evidently . '' 
`` Alas ! 
Jesus ! '' 
returned Madame Magloire . 
`` It is not for my sake , nor for Mademoiselle 's . 
It makes no difference to us . 
But it is for the sake of Monseigneur . 
What is Monseigneur to eat with now ? '' 
The Bishop gazed at her with an air of amazement . 
`` Ah , come ! 
Are there no such things as pewter forks and spoons ? '' 
Madame Magloire shrugged her shoulders . 
`` Pewter has an odor . '' 
`` Iron forks and spoons , then . '' 
Madame Magloire made an expressive grimace . 
`` Iron has a taste . '' 
`` Very well , '' said the Bishop ; `` wooden ones then . '' 
A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which Jean Valjean had sat on the previous evening . 
As he ate his breakfast , Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister , who said nothing , and to Madame Magloire , who was grumbling under her breath , that one really does not need either fork or spoon , even of wood , in order to dip a bit of bread in a cup of milk . 
`` A pretty idea , truly , '' said Madame Magloire to herself , as she went and came , `` to take in a man like that ! 
and to lodge him close to one 's self ! 
And how fortunate that he did nothing but steal ! 
Ah , mon Dieu ! 
it makes one shudder to think of it ! '' 
As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table , there came a knock at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said the Bishop . 
The door opened . 
A singular and violent group made its appearance on the threshold . 
Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar . 
The three men were gendarmes ; the other was Jean Valjean . 
A brigadier of gendarmes , who seemed to be in command of the group , was standing near the door . 
He entered and advanced to the Bishop , making a military salute . 
`` Monseigneur -- '' said he . 
At this word , Jean Valjean , who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed , raised his head with an air of stupefaction . 
`` Monseigneur ! '' 
he murmured . 
`` So he is not the cure ? '' 
`` Silence ! '' 
said the gendarme . 
`` He is Monseigneur the Bishop . '' 
In the meantime , Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly as his great age permitted . 
`` Ah ! 
here you are ! '' 
he exclaimed , looking at Jean Valjean . 
`` I am glad to see you . 
Well , but how is this ? 
I gave you the candlesticks too , which are of silver like the rest , and for which you can certainly get two hundred francs . 
Why did you not carry them away with your forks and spoons ? '' 
Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide , and stared at the venerable Bishop with an expression which no human tongue can render any account of . 
`` Monseigneur , '' said the brigadier of gendarmes , `` so what this man said is true , then ? 
We came across him . 
He was walking like a man who is running away . 
We stopped him to look into the matter . 
He had this silver -- '' `` And he told you , '' interposed the Bishop with a smile , `` that it had been given to him by a kind old fellow of a priest with whom he had passed the night ? 
I see how the matter stands . 
And you have brought him back here ? 
It is a mistake . '' 
`` In that case , '' replied the brigadier , `` we can let him go ? '' 
`` Certainly , '' replied the Bishop . 
The gendarmes released Jean Valjean , who recoiled . 
`` Is it true that I am to be released ? '' 
he said , in an almost inarticulate voice , and as though he were talking in his sleep . 
`` Yes , thou art released ; dost thou not understand ? '' 
said one of the gendarmes . 
`` My friend , '' resumed the Bishop , `` before you go , here are your candlesticks . 
Take them . '' 
He stepped to the chimney-piece , took the two silver candlesticks , and brought them to Jean Valjean . 
The two women looked on without uttering a word , without a gesture , without a look which could disconcert the Bishop . 
Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb . 
He took the two candlesticks mechanically , and with a bewildered air . 
`` Now , '' said the Bishop , `` go in peace . 
By the way , when you return , my friend , it is not necessary to pass through the garden . 
You can always enter and depart through the street door . 
It is never fastened with anything but a latch , either by day or by night . '' 
Then , turning to the gendarmes : -- `` You may retire , gentlemen . '' 
The gendarmes retired . 
Jean Valjean was like a man on the point of fainting . 
The Bishop drew near to him , and said in a low voice : -- `` Do not forget , never forget , that you have promised to use this money in becoming an honest man . '' 
Jean Valjean , who had no recollection of ever having promised anything , remained speechless . 
The Bishop had emphasized the words when he uttered them . 
He resumed with solemnity : -- `` Jean Valjean , my brother , you no longer belong to evil , but to good . 
It is your soul that I buy from you ; I withdraw it from black thoughts and the spirit of perdition , and I give it to God . '' 
Jean Valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it . 
He set out at a very hasty pace through the fields , taking whatever roads and paths presented themselves to him , without perceiving that he was incessantly retracing his steps . 
He wandered thus the whole morning , without having eaten anything and without feeling hungry . 
He was the prey of a throng of novel sensations . 
He was conscious of a sort of rage ; he did not know against whom it was directed . 
He could not have told whether he was touched or humiliated . 
There came over him at moments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed the hardness acquired during the last twenty years of his life . 
This state of mind fatigued him . 
He perceived with dismay that the sort of frightful calm which the injustice of his misfortune had conferred upon him was giving way within him . 
He asked himself what would replace this . 
At times he would have actually preferred to be in prison with the gendarmes , and that things should not have happened in this way ; it would have agitated him less . 
Although the season was tolerably far advanced , there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows here and there , whose odor as he passed through them in his march recalled to him memories of his childhood . 
These memories were almost intolerable to him , it was so long since they had recurred to him . 
Unutterable thoughts assembled within him in this manner all day long . 
As the sun declined to its setting , casting long shadows athwart the soil from every pebble , Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon a large ruddy plain , which was absolutely deserted . 
There was nothing on the horizon except the Alps . 
Not even the spire of a distant village . 
Jean Valjean might have been three leagues distant from D -- A path which intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush . 
In the middle of this meditation , which would have contributed not a little to render his rags terrifying to any one who might have encountered him , a joyous sound became audible . 
He turned his head and saw a little Savoyard , about ten years of age , coming up the path and singing , his hurdy-gurdy on his hip , and his marmot-box on his back , One of those gay and gentle children , who go from land to land affording a view of their knees through the holes in their trousers . 
Without stopping his song , the lad halted in his march from time to time , and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his hand -- his whole fortune , probably . 
Among this money there was one forty-sou piece . 
The child halted beside the bush , without perceiving Jean Valjean , and tossed up his handful of sous , which , up to that time , he had caught with a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand . 
This time the forty-sou piece escaped him , and went rolling towards the brushwood until it reached Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean set his foot upon it . 
In the meantime , the child had looked after his coin and had caught sight of him . 
He showed no astonishment , but walked straight up to the man . 
The spot was absolutely solitary . 
As far as the eye could see there was not a person on the plain or on the path . 
The only sound was the tiny , feeble cries of a flock of birds of passage , which was traversing the heavens at an immense height . 
The child was standing with his back to the sun , which cast threads of gold in his hair and empurpled with its blood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' said the little Savoyard , with that childish confidence which is composed of ignorance and innocence , `` my money . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Little Gervais , sir . '' 
`` Go away , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' resumed the child , `` give me back my money . '' 
Jean Valjean dropped his head , and made no reply . 
The child began again , `` My money , sir . '' 
Jean Valjean 's eyes remained fixed on the earth . 
`` My piece of money ! '' 
cried the child , `` my white piece ! 
my silver ! '' 
It seemed as though Jean Valjean did not hear him . 
The child grasped him by the collar of his blouse and shook him . 
At the same time he made an effort to displace the big iron-shod shoe which rested on his treasure . 
`` I want my piece of money ! 
my piece of forty sous ! '' 
The child wept . 
Jean Valjean raised his head . 
He still remained seated . 
His eyes were troubled . 
He gazed at the child , in a sort of amazement , then he stretched out his hand towards his cudgel and cried in a terrible voice , `` Who 's there ? '' 
`` I , sir , '' replied the child . 
`` Little Gervais ! 
I ! 
Give me back my forty sous , if you please ! 
Take your foot away , sir , if you please ! '' 
Then irritated , though he was so small , and becoming almost menacing : -- `` Come now , will you take your foot away ? 
Take your foot away , or we 'll see ! '' 
`` Ah ! 
It 's still you ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , and rising abruptly to his feet , his foot still resting on the silver piece , he added : -- `` Will you take yourself off ! '' 
The frightened child looked at him , then began to tremble from head to foot , and after a few moments of stupor he set out , running at the top of his speed , without daring to turn his neck or to utter a cry . 
Nevertheless , lack of breath forced him to halt after a certain distance , and Jean Valjean heard him sobbing , in the midst of his own revery . 
At the end of a few moments the child had disappeared . 
The sun had set . 
The shadows were descending around Jean Valjean . 
He had eaten nothing all day ; it is probable that he was feverish . 
He had remained standing and had not changed his attitude after the child 's flight . 
The breath heaved his chest at long and irregular intervals . 
His gaze , fixed ten or twelve paces in front of him , seemed to be scrutinizing with profound attention the shape of an ancient fragment of blue earthenware which had fallen in the grass . 
All at once he shivered ; he had just begun to feel the chill of evening . 
He settled his cap more firmly on his brow , sought mechanically to cross and button his blouse , advanced a step and stopped to pick up his cudgel . 
At that moment he caught sight of the forty-sou piece , which his foot had half ground into the earth , and which was shining among the pebbles . 
It was as though he had received a galvanic shock . 
`` What is this ? '' 
he muttered between his teeth . 
He recoiled three paces , then halted , without being able to detach his gaze from the spot which his foot had trodden but an instant before , as though the thing which lay glittering there in the gloom had been an open eye riveted upon him . 
At the expiration of a few moments he darted convulsively towards the silver coin , seized it , and straightened himself up again and began to gaze afar off over the plain , at the same time casting his eyes towards all points of the horizon , as he stood there erect and shivering , like a terrified wild animal which is seeking refuge . 
He saw nothing . 
Night was falling , the plain was cold and vague , great banks of violet haze were rising in the gleam of the twilight . 
He said , `` Ah ! '' 
and set out rapidly in the direction in which the child had disappeared . 
After about thirty paces he paused , looked about him and saw nothing . 
Then he shouted with all his might : -- `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
He paused and waited . 
There was no reply . 
The landscape was gloomy and deserted . 
He was encompassed by space . 
There was nothing around him but an obscurity in which his gaze was lost , and a silence which engulfed his voice . 
An icy north wind was blowing , and imparted to things around him a sort of lugubrious life . 
The bushes shook their thin little arms with incredible fury . 
One would have said that they were threatening and pursuing some one . 
He set out on his march again , then he began to run ; and from time to time he halted and shouted into that solitude , with a voice which was the most formidable and the most disconsolate that it was possible to hear , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
Assuredly , if the child had heard him , he would have been alarmed and would have taken good care not to show himself . 
But the child was no doubt already far away . 
He encountered a priest on horseback . 
He stepped up to him and said : -- `` Monsieur le Cure , have you seen a child pass ? '' 
`` No , '' said the priest . 
`` One named Little Gervais ? '' 
`` I have seen no one . '' 
He drew two five-franc pieces from his money-bag and handed them to the priest . 
`` Monsieur le Cure , this is for your poor people . 
Monsieur le Cure , he was a little lad , about ten years old , with a marmot , I think , and a hurdy-gurdy . 
One of those Savoyards , you know ? '' 
`` I have not seen him . '' 
`` Little Gervais ? 
There are no villages here ? 
Can you tell me ? '' 
`` If he is like what you say , my friend , he is a little stranger . 
Such persons pass through these parts . 
We know nothing of them . '' 
Jean Valjean seized two more coins of five francs each with violence , and gave them to the priest . 
`` For your poor , '' he said . 
Then he added , wildly : -- `` Monsieur l'Abbe , have me arrested . 
I am a thief . '' 
The priest put spurs to his horse and fled in haste , much alarmed . 
Jean Valjean set out on a run , in the direction which he had first taken . 
In this way he traversed a tolerably long distance , gazing , calling , shouting , but he met no one . 
Two or three times he ran across the plain towards something which conveyed to him the effect of a human being reclining or crouching down ; it turned out to be nothing but brushwood or rocks nearly on a level with the earth . 
At length , at a spot where three paths intersected each other , he stopped . 
The moon had risen . 
He sent his gaze into the distance and shouted for the last time , `` Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! 
Little Gervais ! '' 
His shout died away in the mist , without even awakening an echo . 
He murmured yet once more , `` Little Gervais ! '' 
but in a feeble and almost inarticulate voice . 
It was his last effort ; his legs gave way abruptly under him , as though an invisible power had suddenly overwhelmed him with the weight of his evil conscience ; he fell exhausted , on a large stone , his fists clenched in his hair and his face on his knees , and he cried , `` I am a wretch ! '' 
Then his heart burst , and he began to cry . 
It was the first time that he had wept in nineteen years . 
When Jean Valjean left the Bishop 's house , he was , as we have seen , quite thrown out of everything that had been his thought hitherto . 
He could not yield to the evidence of what was going on within him . 
He hardened himself against the angelic action and the gentle words of the old man . 
`` You have promised me to become an honest man . 
I buy your soul . 
I take it away from the spirit of perversity ; I give it to the good God . '' 
This recurred to his mind unceasingly . 
To this celestial kindness he opposed pride , which is the fortress of evil within us . 
He was indistinctly conscious that the pardon of this priest was the greatest assault and the most formidable attack which had moved him yet ; that his obduracy was finally settled if he resisted this clemency ; that if he yielded , he should be obliged to renounce that hatred with which the actions of other men had filled his soul through so many years , and which pleased him ; that this time it was necessary to conquer or to be conquered ; and that a struggle , a colossal and final struggle , had been begun between his viciousness and the goodness of that man . 
In the presence of these lights , he proceeded like a man who is intoxicated . 
As he walked thus with haggard eyes , did he have a distinct perception of what might result to him from his adventure at D -- ? 
Did he understand all those mysterious murmurs which warn or importune the spirit at certain moments of life ? 
Did a voice whisper in his ear that he had just passed the solemn hour of his destiny ; that there no longer remained a middle course for him ; that if he were not henceforth the best of men , he would be the worst ; that it behooved him now , so to speak , to mount higher than the Bishop , or fall lower than the convict ; that if he wished to become good be must become an angel ; that if he wished to remain evil , he must become a monster ? 
Here , again , some questions must be put , which we have already put to ourselves elsewhere : did he catch some shadow of all this in his thought , in a confused way ? 
Misfortune certainly , as we have said , does form the education of the intelligence ; nevertheless , it is doubtful whether Jean Valjean was in a condition to disentangle all that we have here indicated . 
If these ideas occurred to him , he but caught glimpses of , rather than saw them , and they only succeeded in throwing him into an unutterable and almost painful state of emotion . 
On emerging from that black and deformed thing which is called the galleys , the Bishop had hurt his soul , as too vivid a light would have hurt his eyes on emerging from the dark . 
The future life , the possible life which offered itself to him henceforth , all pure and radiant , filled him with tremors and anxiety . 
He no longer knew where he really was . 
Like an owl , who should suddenly see the sun rise , the convict had been dazzled and blinded , as it were , by virtue . 
That which was certain , that which he did not doubt , was that he was no longer the same man , that everything about him was changed , that it was no longer in his power to make it as though the Bishop had not spoken to him and had not touched him . 
In this state of mind he had encountered little Gervais , and had robbed him of his forty sous . 
Why ? 
He certainly could not have explained it ; was this the last effect and the supreme effort , as it were , of the evil thoughts which he had brought away from the galleys , -- a remnant of impulse , a result of what is called in statics , acquired force ? 
It was that , and it was also , perhaps , even less than that . 
Let us say it simply , it was not he who stole ; it was not the man ; it was the beast , who , by habit and instinct , had simply placed his foot upon that money , while the intelligence was struggling amid so many novel and hitherto unheard-of thoughts besetting it . 
When intelligence re-awakened and beheld that action of the brute , Jean Valjean recoiled with anguish and uttered a cry of terror . 
It was because , -- strange phenomenon , and one which was possible only in the situation in which he found himself , -- in stealing the money from that child , he had done a thing of which he was no longer capable . 
However that may be , this last evil action had a decisive effect on him ; it abruptly traversed that chaos which he bore in his mind , and dispersed it , placed on one side the thick obscurity , and on the other the light , and acted on his soul , in the state in which it then was , as certain chemical reagents act upon a troubled mixture by precipitating one element and clarifying the other . 
First of all , even before examining himself and reflecting , all bewildered , like one who seeks to save himself , he tried to find the child in order to return his money to him ; then , when he recognized the fact that this was impossible , he halted in despair . 
At the moment when he exclaimed `` I am a wretch ! '' 
he had just perceived what he was , and he was already separated from himself to such a degree , that he seemed to himself to be no longer anything more than a phantom , and as if he had , there before him , in flesh and blood , the hideous galley-convict , Jean Valjean , cudgel in hand , his blouse on his hips , his knapsack filled with stolen objects on his back , with his resolute and gloomy visage , with his thoughts filled with abominable projects . 
Excess of unhappiness had , as we have remarked , made him in some sort a visionary . 
This , then , was in the nature of a vision . 
He actually saw that Jean Valjean , that sinister face , before him . 
He had almost reached the point of asking himself who that man was , and he was horrified by him . 
His brain was going through one of those violent and yet perfectly calm moments in which revery is so profound that it absorbs reality . 
One no longer beholds the object which one has before one , and one sees , as though apart from one 's self , the figures which one has in one 's own mind . 
Thus he contemplated himself , so to speak , face to face , and at the same time , athwart this hallucination , he perceived in a mysterious depth a sort of light which he at first took for a torch . 
On scrutinizing this light which appeared to his conscience with more attention , he recognized the fact that it possessed a human form and that this torch was the Bishop . 
His conscience weighed in turn these two men thus placed before it , -- the Bishop and Jean Valjean . 
Nothing less than the first was required to soften the second . 
By one of those singular effects , which are peculiar to this sort of ecstasies , in proportion as his revery continued , as the Bishop grew great and resplendent in his eyes , so did Jean Valjean grow less and vanish . 
After a certain time he was no longer anything more than a shade . 
All at once he disappeared . 
The Bishop alone remained ; he filled the whole soul of this wretched man with a magnificent radiance . 
Jean Valjean wept for a long time . 
He wept burning tears , he sobbed with more weakness than a woman , with more fright than a child . 
As he wept , daylight penetrated more and more clearly into his soul ; an extraordinary light ; a light at once ravishing and terrible . 
His past life , his first fault , his long expiation , his external brutishness , his internal hardness , his dismissal to liberty , rejoicing in manifold plans of vengeance , what had happened to him at the Bishop 's , the last thing that he had done , that theft of forty sous from a child , a crime all the more cowardly , and all the more monstrous since it had come after the Bishop 's pardon , -- all this recurred to his mind and appeared clearly to him , but with a clearness which he had never hitherto witnessed . 
He examined his life , and it seemed horrible to him ; his soul , and it seemed frightful to him . 
In the meantime a gentle light rested over this life and this soul . 
It seemed to him that he beheld Satan by the light of Paradise . 
How many hours did he weep thus ? 
What did he do after he had wept ? 
Whither did he go ! 
No one ever knew . 
The only thing which seems to be authenticated is that that same night the carrier who served Grenoble at that epoch , and who arrived at D -- about three o'clock in the morning , saw , as he traversed the street in which the Bishop 's residence was situated , a man in the attitude of prayer , kneeling on the pavement in the shadow , in front of the door of Monseigneur Welcome . 
1817 is the year which Louis XVIII. , with a certain royal assurance which was not wanting in pride , entitled the twenty-second of his reign . 
It is the year in which M. Bruguiere de Sorsum was celebrated . 
All the hairdressers ' shops , hoping for powder and the return of the royal bird , were besmeared with azure and decked with fleurs-de-lys . 
It was the candid time at which Count Lynch sat every Sunday as church-warden in the church-warden 's pew of Saint-Germain-des-Pres , in his costume of a peer of France , with his red ribbon and his long nose and the majesty of profile peculiar to a man who has performed a brilliant action . 
The brilliant action performed by M. Lynch was this : being mayor of Bordeaux , on the 12th of March , 1814 , he had surrendered the city a little too promptly to M. the Duke d'Angouleme . 
Hence his peerage . 
In 1817 fashion swallowed up little boys of from four to six years of age in vast caps of morocco leather with ear-tabs resembling Esquimaux mitres . 
The French army was dressed in white , after the mode of the Austrian ; the regiments were called legions ; instead of numbers they bore the names of departments ; Napoleon was at St. Helena ; and since England refused him green cloth , he was having his old coats turned . 
In 1817 Pelligrini sang ; Mademoiselle Bigottini danced ; Potier reigned ; Odry did not yet exist . 
Madame Saqui had succeeded to Forioso . 
There were still Prussians in France . 
M. Delalot was a personage . 
Legitimacy had just asserted itself by cutting off the hand , then the head , of Pleignier , of Carbonneau , and of Tolleron . 
The Prince de Talleyrand , grand chamberlain , and the Abbe Louis , appointed minister of finance , laughed as they looked at each other , with the laugh of the two augurs ; both of them had celebrated , on the 14th of July , 1790 , the mass of federation in the Champ de Mars ; Talleyrand had said it as bishop , Louis had served it in the capacity of deacon . 
In 1817 , in the side-alleys of this same Champ de Mars , two great cylinders of wood might have been seen lying in the rain , rotting amid the grass , painted blue , with traces of eagles and bees , from which the gilding was falling . 
These were the columns which two years before had upheld the Emperor 's platform in the Champ de Mai . 
They were blackened here and there with the scorches of the bivouac of Austrians encamped near Gros-Caillou . 
Two or three of these columns had disappeared in these bivouac fires , and had warmed the large hands of the Imperial troops . 
The Field of May had this remarkable point : that it had been held in the month of June and in the Field of March -LRB- Mars -RRB- . 
In this year , 1817 , two things were popular : the Voltaire-Touquet and the snuff-box a la Charter . 
The most recent Parisian sensation was the crime of Dautun , who had thrown his brother 's head into the fountain of the Flower-Market . 
They had begun to feel anxious at the Naval Department , on account of the lack of news from that fatal frigate , The Medusa , which was destined to cover Chaumareix with infamy and Gericault with glory . 
Colonel Selves was going to Egypt to become Soliman-Pasha . 
The palace of Thermes , in the Rue de La Harpe , served as a shop for a cooper . 
On the platform of the octagonal tower of the Hotel de Cluny , the little shed of boards , which had served as an observatory to Messier , the naval astronomer under Louis XVI. , was still to be seen . 
The Duchesse de Duras read to three or four friends her unpublished Ourika , in her boudoir furnished by X. in sky-blue satin . 
The N 's were scratched off the Louvre . 
The bridge of Austerlitz had abdicated , and was entitled the bridge of the King 's Garden -LSB- du Jardin du Roi -RSB- , a double enigma , which disguised the bridge of Austerlitz and the Jardin des Plantes at one stroke . 
Louis XVIII. , much preoccupied while annotating Horace with the corner of his finger-nail , heroes who have become emperors , and makers of wooden shoes who have become dauphins , had two anxieties , -- Napoleon and Mathurin Bruneau . 
The French Academy had given for its prize subject , The Happiness procured through Study . 
M. Bellart was officially eloquent . 
In his shadow could be seen germinating that future advocate-general of Broe , dedicated to the sarcasms of Paul-Louis Courier . 
There was a false Chateaubriand , named Marchangy , in the interim , until there should be a false Marchangy , named d'Arlincourt . 
Claire d'Albe and Malek-Adel were masterpieces ; Madame Cottin was proclaimed the chief writer of the epoch . 
The Institute had the academician , Napoleon Bonaparte , stricken from its list of members . 
A royal ordinance erected Angouleme into a naval school ; for the Duc d'Angouleme , being lord high admiral , it was evident that the city of Angouleme had all the qualities of a seaport ; otherwise the monarchical principle would have received a wound . 
In the Council of Ministers the question was agitated whether vignettes representing slack-rope performances , which adorned Franconi 's advertising posters , and which attracted throngs of street urchins , should be tolerated . 
M. Paer , the author of Agnese , a good sort of fellow , with a square face and a wart on his cheek , directed the little private concerts of the Marquise de Sasenaye in the Rue Ville l'Eveque . 
All the young girls were singing the Hermit of Saint-Avelle , with words by Edmond Geraud . 
The Yellow Dwarf was transferred into Mirror . 
The Cafe Lemblin stood up for the Emperor , against the Cafe Valois , which upheld the Bourbons . 
The Duc de Berri , already surveyed from the shadow by Louvel , had just been married to a princess of Sicily . 
Madame de Stael had died a year previously . 
The body-guard hissed Mademoiselle Mars . 
The grand newspapers were all very small . 
Their form was restricted , but their liberty was great . 
The Constitutionnel was constitutional . 
La Minerve called Chateaubriand Chateaubriant . 
That t made the good middle-class people laugh heartily at the expense of the great writer . 
In journals which sold themselves , prostituted journalists , insulted the exiles of 1815 . 
David had no longer any talent , Arnault had no longer any wit , Carnot was no longer honest , Soult had won no battles ; it is true that Napoleon had no longer any genius . 
No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent to an exile by post very rarely reached him , as the police made it their religious duty to intercept them . 
This is no new fact ; Descartes complained of it in his exile . 
Now David , having , in a Belgian publication , shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which had been written to him , it struck the royalist journals as amusing ; and they derided the prescribed man well on this occasion . 
What separated two men more than an abyss was to say , the regicides , or to say the voters ; to say the enemies , or to say the allies ; to say Napoleon , or to say Buonaparte . 
All sensible people were agreed that the era of revolution had been closed forever by King Louis XVIII. , surnamed `` The Immortal Author of the Charter . '' 
On the platform of the Pont-Neuf , the word Redivivus was carved on the pedestal that awaited the statue of Henry IV . 
M. Piet , in the Rue Therese , No. 4 , was making the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate the monarchy . 
The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures , `` We must write to Bacot . '' 
MM . 
Canuel , O'Mahoney , and De Chappedelaine were preparing the sketch , to some extent with Monsieur 's approval , of what was to become later on `` The Conspiracy of the Bord de l'Eau '' -- of the waterside . 
L'Epingle Noire was already plotting in his own quarter . 
Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff . 
M. Decazes , who was liberal to a degree , reigned . 
Chateaubriand stood every morning at his window at No. 27 Rue Saint-Dominique , clad in footed trousers , and slippers , with a madras kerchief knotted over his gray hair , with his eyes fixed on a mirror , a complete set of dentist 's instruments spread out before him , cleaning his teeth , which were charming , while he dictated The Monarchy according to the Charter to M. Pilorge , his secretary . 
Criticism , assuming an authoritative tone , preferred Lafon to Talma . 
M. de Feletez signed himself A. ; M. Hoffmann signed himself Z. Charles Nodier wrote Therese Aubert . 
Divorce was abolished . 
Lyceums called themselves colleges . 
The collegians , decorated on the collar with a golden fleur-de-lys , fought each other apropos of the King of Rome . 
The counter-police of the chateau had denounced to her Royal Highness Madame , the portrait , everywhere exhibited , of M. the Duc d'Orleans , who made a better appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of hussars than M. the Duc de Berri , in his uniform of colonel-general of dragoons -- a serious inconvenience . 
The city of Paris was having the dome of the Invalides regilded at its own expense . 
Serious men asked themselves what M. de Trinquelague would do on such or such an occasion ; M. Clausel de Montals differed on divers points from M. Clausel de Coussergues ; M. de Salaberry was not satisfied . 
The comedian Picard , who belonged to the Academy , which the comedian Moliere had not been able to do , had The Two Philiberts played at the Odeon , upon whose pediment the removal of the letters still allowed THEATRE OF THE EMPRESS to be plainly read . 
People took part for or against Cugnet de Montarlot . 
Fabvier was factious ; Bavoux was revolutionary . 
The Liberal , Pelicier , published an edition of Voltaire , with the following title : Works of Voltaire , of the French Academy . 
`` That will attract purchasers , '' said the ingenious editor . 
The general opinion was that M. Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century ; envy was beginning to gnaw at him -- a sign of glory ; and this verse was composed on him : -- `` Even when Loyson steals , one feels that he has paws . '' 
As Cardinal Fesch refused to resign , M. de Pins , Archbishop of Amasie , administered the diocese of Lyons . 
The quarrel over the valley of Dappes was begun between Switzerland and France by a memoir from Captain , afterwards General Dufour . 
Saint-Simon , ignored , was erecting his sublime dream . 
There was a celebrated Fourier at the Academy of Science , whom posterity has forgotten ; and in some garret an obscure Fourier , whom the future will recall . 
Lord Byron was beginning to make his mark ; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to France in these terms : a certain Lord Baron . 
David d'Angers was trying to work in marble . 
The Abbe Caron was speaking , in terms of praise , to a private gathering of seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines , of an unknown priest , named Felicite-Robert , who , at a latter date , became Lamennais . 
A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine with the noise of a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of the Tuileries , from the Pont Royal to the Pont Louis XV. ; it was a piece of mechanism which was not good for much ; a sort of plaything , the idle dream of a dream-ridden inventor ; an utopia -- a steamboat . 
The Parisians stared indifferently at this useless thing . 
M. de Vaublanc , the reformer of the Institute by a coup d'etat , the distinguished author of numerous academicians , ordinances , and batches of members , after having created them , could not succeed in becoming one himself . 
The Faubourg Saint-Germain and the pavilion de Marsan wished to have M. Delaveau for prefect of police , on account of his piety . 
Dupuytren and Recamier entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre of the School of Medicine , and threatened each other with their fists on the subject of the divinity of Jesus Christ . 
Cuvier , with one eye on Genesis and the other on nature , tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils with texts and by making mastodons flatter Moses . 
M. Francois de Neufchateau , the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory of Parmentier , made a thousand efforts to have pomme de terre -LSB- potato -RSB- pronounced parmentiere , and succeeded therein not at all . 
The Abbe Gregoire , ex-bishop , ex-conventionary , ex-senator , had passed , in the royalist polemics , to the state of `` Infamous Gregoire . '' 
The locution of which we have made use -- passed to the state of -- has been condemned as a neologism by M. Royer Collard . 
Under the third arch of the Pont de Jena , the new stone with which , the two years previously , the mining aperture made by Blucher to blow up the bridge had been stopped up , was still recognizable on account of its whiteness . 
Justice summoned to its bar a man who , on seeing the Comte d'Artois enter Notre Dame , had said aloud : `` Sapristi ! 
I regret the time when I saw Bonaparte and Talma enter the Bel Sauvage , arm in arm . '' 
A seditious utterance . 
Six months in prison . 
Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned ; men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of battle made no secret of their recompense , and strutted immodestly in the light of day , in the cynicism of riches and dignities ; deserters from Ligny and Quatre-Bras , in the brazenness of their well-paid turpitude , exhibited their devotion to the monarchy in the most barefaced manner . 
This is what floats up confusedly , pell-mell , for the year 1817 , and is now forgotten . 
History neglects nearly all these particulars , and can not do otherwise ; the infinity would overwhelm it . 
Nevertheless , these details , which are wrongly called trivial , -- there are no trivial facts in humanity , nor little leaves in vegetation , -- are useful . 
It is of the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuries is composed . 
In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged `` a fine farce . '' 
These Parisians came , one from Toulouse , another from Limoges , the third from Cahors , and the fourth from Montauban ; but they were students ; and when one says student , one says Parisian : to study in Paris is to be born in Paris . 
These young men were insignificant ; every one has seen such faces ; four specimens of humanity taken at random ; neither good nor bad , neither wise nor ignorant , neither geniuses nor fools ; handsome , with that charming April which is called twenty years . 
They were four Oscars ; for , at that epoch , Arthurs did not yet exist . 
Burn for him the perfumes of Araby ! 
exclaimed romance . 
Oscar advances . 
Oscar , I shall behold him ! 
People had just emerged from Ossian ; elegance was Scandinavian and Caledonian ; the pure English style was only to prevail later , and the first of the Arthurs , Wellington , had but just won the battle of Waterloo . 
These Oscars bore the names , one of Felix Tholomyes , of Toulouse ; the second , Listolier , of Cahors ; the next , Fameuil , of Limoges ; the last , Blachevelle , of Montauban . 
Naturally , each of them had his mistress . 
Blachevelle loved Favourite , so named because she had been in England ; Listolier adored Dahlia , who had taken for her nickname the name of a flower ; Fameuil idolized Zephine , an abridgment of Josephine ; Tholomyes had Fantine , called the Blonde , because of her beautiful , sunny hair . 
Favourite , Dahlia , Zephine , and Fantine were four ravishing young women , perfumed and radiant , still a little like working-women , and not yet entirely divorced from their needles ; somewhat disturbed by intrigues , but still retaining on their faces something of the serenity of toil , and in their souls that flower of honesty which survives the first fall in woman . 
One of the four was called the young , because she was the youngest of them , and one was called the old ; the old one was twenty-three . 
Not to conceal anything , the three first were more experienced , more heedless , and more emancipated into the tumult of life than Fantine the Blonde , who was still in her first illusions . 
Dahlia , Zephine , and especially Favourite , could not have said as much . 
There had already been more than one episode in their romance , though hardly begun ; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in the first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second , and Gustave in the third . 
Poverty and coquetry are two fatal counsellors ; one scolds and the other flatters , and the beautiful daughters of the people have both of them whispering in their ear , each on its own side . 
These badly guarded souls listen . 
Hence the falls which they accomplish , and the stones which are thrown at them . 
They are overwhelmed with splendor of all that is immaculate and inaccessible . 
Alas ! 
what if the Jungfrau were hungry ? 
Favourite having been in England , was admired by Dahlia and Zephine . 
She had had an establishment of her own very early in life . 
Her father was an old unmarried professor of mathematics , a brutal man and a braggart , who went out to give lessons in spite of his age . 
This professor , when he was a young man , had one day seen a chambermaid 's gown catch on a fender ; he had fallen in love in consequence of this accident . 
The result had been Favourite . 
She met her father from time to time , and he bowed to her . 
One morning an old woman with the air of a devotee , had entered her apartments , and had said to her , `` You do not know me , Mamemoiselle ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I am your mother . '' 
Then the old woman opened the sideboard , and ate and drank , had a mattress which she owned brought in , and installed herself . 
This cross and pious old mother never spoke to Favourite , remained hours without uttering a word , breakfasted , dined , and supped for four , and went down to the porter 's quarters for company , where she spoke ill of her daughter . 
It was having rosy nails that were too pretty which had drawn Dahlia to Listolier , to others perhaps , to idleness . 
How could she make such nails work ? 
She who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on her hands . 
As for Zephine , she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and caressing little way of saying `` Yes , sir . '' 
The young men were comrades ; the young girls were friends . 
Such loves are always accompanied by such friendships . 
Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things ; the proof of this is that , after making all due allowances for these little irregular households , Favourite , Zephine , and Dahlia were philosophical young women , while Fantine was a good girl . 
Good ! 
some one will exclaim ; and Tholomyes ? 
