Solomon would reply that love forms a part of wisdom . 
We will confine ourselves to saying that the love of Fantine was a first love , a sole love , a faithful love . 
She alone , of all the four , was not called `` thou '' by a single one of them . 
Fantine was one of those beings who blossom , so to speak , from the dregs of the people . 
Though she had emerged from the most unfathomable depths of social shadow , she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymous and the unknown . 
She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents ? 
Who can say ? 
She had never known father or mother . 
She was called Fantine . 
Why Fantine ? 
She had never borne any other name . 
At the epoch of her birth the Directory still existed . 
She had no family name ; she had no family ; no baptismal name ; the Church no longer existed . 
She bore the name which pleased the first random passer-by , who had encountered her , when a very small child , running bare-legged in the street . 
She received the name as she received the water from the clouds upon her brow when it rained . 
She was called little Fantine . 
No one knew more than that . 
This human creature had entered life in just this way . 
At the age of ten , Fantine quitted the town and went to service with some farmers in the neighborhood . 
At fifteen she came to Paris `` to seek her fortune . '' 
Fantine was beautiful , and remained pure as long as she could . 
She was a lovely blonde , with fine teeth . 
She had gold and pearls for her dowry ; but her gold was on her head , and her pearls were in her mouth . 
She worked for her living ; then , still for the sake of her living , -- for the heart , also , has its hunger , -- she loved . 
She loved Tholomyes . 
An amour for him ; passion for her . 
The streets of the Latin quarter , filled with throngs of students and grisettes , saw the beginning of their dream . 
Fantine had long evaded Tholomyes in the mazes of the hill of the Pantheon , where so many adventurers twine and untwine , but in such a way as constantly to encounter him again . 
There is a way of avoiding which resembles seeking . 
In short , the eclogue took place . 
Blachevelle , Listolier , and Fameuil formed a sort of group of which Tholomyes was the head . 
It was he who possessed the wit . 
Tholomyes was the antique old student ; he was rich ; he had an income of four thousand francs ; four thousand francs ! 
a splendid scandal on Mount Sainte-Genevieve . 
Tholomyes was a fast man of thirty , and badly preserved . 
He was wrinkled and toothless , and he had the beginning of a bald spot , of which he himself said with sadness , the skull at thirty , the knee at forty . 
His digestion was mediocre , and he had been attacked by a watering in one eye . 
But in proportion as his youth disappeared , gayety was kindled ; he replaced his teeth with buffooneries , his hair with mirth , his health with irony , his weeping eye laughed incessantly . 
He was dilapidated but still in flower . 
His youth , which was packing up for departure long before its time , beat a retreat in good order , bursting with laughter , and no one saw anything but fire . 
He had had a piece rejected at the Vaudeville . 
He made a few verses now and then . 
In addition to this he doubted everything to the last degree , which is a vast force in the eyes of the weak . 
Being thus ironical and bald , he was the leader . 
Iron is an English word . 
Is it possible that irony is derived from it ? 
One day Tholomyes took the three others aside , with the gesture of an oracle , and said to them : -- `` Fantine , Dahlia , Zephine , and Favourite have been teasing us for nearly a year to give them a surprise . 
We have promised them solemnly that we would . 
They are forever talking about it to us , to me in particular , just as the old women in Naples cry to Saint Januarius , ` Faccia gialluta , fa o miracolo , Yellow face , perform thy miracle , ' so our beauties say to me incessantly , ` Tholomyes , when will you bring forth your surprise ? ' 
At the same time our parents keep writing to us . 
Pressure on both sides . 
The moment has arrived , it seems to me ; let us discuss the question . '' 
Thereupon , Tholomyes lowered his voice and articulated something so mirthful , that a vast and enthusiastic grin broke out upon the four mouths simultaneously , and Blachevelle exclaimed , `` That is an idea . '' 
A smoky tap-room presented itself ; they entered , and the remainder of their confidential colloquy was lost in shadow . 
The result of these shades was a dazzling pleasure party which took place on the following Sunday , the four young men inviting the four young girls . 
It is hard nowadays to picture to one 's self what a pleasure-trip of students and grisettes to the country was like , forty-five years ago . 
The suburbs of Paris are no longer the same ; the physiognomy of what may be called circumparisian life has changed completely in the last half-century ; where there was the cuckoo , there is the railway car ; where there was a tender-boat , there is now the steamboat ; people speak of Fecamp nowadays as they spoke of Saint-Cloud in those days . 
The Paris of 1862 is a city which has France for its outskirts . 
The four couples conscientiously went through with all the country follies possible at that time . 
The vacation was beginning , and it was a warm , bright , summer day . 
On the preceding day , Favourite , the only one who knew how to write , had written the following to Tholomyes in the name of the four : `` It is a good hour to emerge from happiness . '' 
That is why they rose at five o'clock in the morning . 
Then they went to Saint-Cloud by the coach , looked at the dry cascade and exclaimed , `` This must be very beautiful when there is water ! '' 
They breakfasted at the Tete-Noir , where Castaing had not yet been ; they treated themselves to a game of ring-throwing under the quincunx of trees of the grand fountain ; they ascended Diogenes ' lantern , they gambled for macaroons at the roulette establishment of the Pont de Sevres , picked bouquets at Pateaux , bought reed-pipes at Neuilly , ate apple tarts everywhere , and were perfectly happy . 
The young girls rustled and chatted like warblers escaped from their cage . 
It was a perfect delirium . 
From time to time they bestowed little taps on the young men . 
Matutinal intoxication of life ! 
adorable years ! 
the wings of the dragonfly quiver . 
Oh , whoever you may be , do you not remember ? 
Have you rambled through the brushwood , holding aside the branches , on account of the charming head which is coming on behind you ? 
Have you slid , laughing , down a slope all wet with rain , with a beloved woman holding your hand , and crying , `` Ah , my new boots ! 
what a state they are in ! '' 
Let us say at once that that merry obstacle , a shower , was lacking in the case of this good-humored party , although Favourite had said as they set out , with a magisterial and maternal tone , `` The slugs are crawling in the paths , -- a sign of rain , children . '' 
All four were madly pretty . 
A good old classic poet , then famous , a good fellow who had an Eleonore , M. le Chevalier de Labouisse , as he strolled that day beneath the chestnut-trees of Saint-Cloud , saw them pass about ten o'clock in the morning , and exclaimed , `` There is one too many of them , '' as he thought of the Graces . 
Favourite , Blachevelle 's friend , the one aged three and twenty , the old one , ran on in front under the great green boughs , jumped the ditches , stalked distractedly over bushes , and presided over this merry-making with the spirit of a young female faun . 
Zephine and Dahlia , whom chance had made beautiful in such a way that they set each off when they were together , and completed each other , never left each other , more from an instinct of coquetry than from friendship , and clinging to each other , they assumed English poses ; the first keepsakes had just made their appearance , melancholy was dawning for women , as later on , Byronism dawned for men ; and the hair of the tender sex began to droop dolefully . 
Zephine and Dahlia had their hair dressed in rolls . 
Listolier and Fameuil , who were engaged in discussing their professors , explained to Fantine the difference that existed between M. Delvincourt and M. Blondeau . 
Blachevelle seemed to have been created expressly to carry Favourite 's single-bordered , imitation India shawl of Ternaux 's manufacture , on his arm on Sundays . 
Tholomyes followed , dominating the group . 
He was very gay , but one felt the force of government in him ; there was dictation in his joviality ; his principal ornament was a pair of trousers of elephant-leg pattern of nankeen , with straps of braided copper wire ; he carried a stout rattan worth two hundred francs in his hand , and , as he treated himself to everything , a strange thing called a cigar in his mouth . 
Nothing was sacred to him ; he smoked . 
`` That Tholomyes is astounding ! '' 
said the others , with veneration . 
`` What trousers ! 
What energy ! '' 
As for Fantine , she was a joy to behold . 
Her splendid teeth had evidently received an office from God , -- laughter . 
She preferred to carry her little hat of sewed straw , with its long white strings , in her hand rather than on her head . 
Her thick blond hair , which was inclined to wave , and which easily uncoiled , and which it was necessary to fasten up incessantly , seemed made for the flight of Galatea under the willows . 
Her rosy lips babbled enchantingly . 
The corners of her mouth voluptuously turned up , as in the antique masks of Erigone , had an air of encouraging the audacious ; but her long , shadowy lashes drooped discreetly over the jollity of the lower part of the face as though to call a halt . 
There was something indescribably harmonious and striking about her entire dress . 
She wore a gown of mauve barege , little reddish brown buskins , whose ribbons traced an X on her fine , white , open-worked stockings , and that sort of muslin spencer , a Marseilles invention , whose name , canezou , a corruption of the words quinze aout , pronounced after the fashion of the Canebiere , signifies fine weather , heat , and midday . 
The three others , less timid , as we have already said , wore low-necked dresses without disguise , which in summer , beneath flower-adorned hats , are very graceful and enticing ; but by the side of these audacious outfits , blond Fantine 's canezou , with its transparencies , its indiscretion , and its reticence , concealing and displaying at one and the same time , seemed an alluring godsend of decency , and the famous Court of Love , presided over by the Vicomtesse de Cette , with the sea-green eyes , would , perhaps , have awarded the prize for coquetry to this canezou , in the contest for the prize of modesty . 
The most ingenious is , at times , the wisest . 
This does happen . 
Brilliant of face , delicate of profile , with eyes of a deep blue , heavy lids , feet arched and small , wrists and ankles admirably formed , a white skin which , here and there allowed the azure branching of the veins to be seen , joy , a cheek that was young and fresh , the robust throat of the Juno of AEgina , a strong and supple nape of the neck , shoulders modelled as though by Coustou , with a voluptuous dimple in the middle , visible through the muslin ; a gayety cooled by dreaminess ; sculptural and exquisite -- such was Fantine ; and beneath these feminine adornments and these ribbons one could divine a statue , and in that statue a soul . 
Fantine was beautiful , without being too conscious of it . 
Those rare dreamers , mysterious priests of the beautiful who silently confront everything with perfection , would have caught a glimpse in this little working-woman , through the transparency of her Parisian grace , of the ancient sacred euphony . 
This daughter of the shadows was thoroughbred . 
She was beautiful in the two ways -- style and rhythm . 
Style is the form of the ideal ; rhythm is its movement . 
We have said that Fantine was joy ; she was also modesty . 
To an observer who studied her attentively , that which breathed from her athwart all the intoxication of her age , the season , and her love affair , was an invincible expression of reserve and modesty . 
She remained a little astonished . 
This chaste astonishment is the shade of difference which separates Psyche from Venus . 
Fantine had the long , white , fine fingers of the vestal virgin who stirs the ashes of the sacred fire with a golden pin . 
Although she would have refused nothing to Tholomyes , as we shall have more than ample opportunity to see , her face in repose was supremely virginal ; a sort of serious and almost austere dignity suddenly overwhelmed her at certain times , and there was nothing more singular and disturbing than to see gayety become so suddenly extinct there , and meditation succeed to cheerfulness without any transition state . 
This sudden and sometimes severely accentuated gravity resembled the disdain of a goddess . 
Her brow , her nose , her chin , presented that equilibrium of outline which is quite distinct from equilibrium of proportion , and from which harmony of countenance results ; in the very characteristic interval which separates the base of the nose from the upper lip , she had that imperceptible and charming fold , a mysterious sign of chastity , which makes Barberousse fall in love with a Diana found in the treasures of Iconia . 
Love is a fault ; so be it . 
Fantine was innocence floating high over fault . 
That day was composed of dawn , from one end to the other . 
All nature seemed to be having a holiday , and to be laughing . 
The flower-beds of Saint-Cloud perfumed the air ; the breath of the Seine rustled the leaves vaguely ; the branches gesticulated in the wind , bees pillaged the jasmines ; a whole bohemia of butterflies swooped down upon the yarrow , the clover , and the sterile oats ; in the august park of the King of France there was a pack of vagabonds , the birds . 
The four merry couples , mingled with the sun , the fields , the flowers , the trees , were resplendent . 
And in this community of Paradise , talking , singing , running , dancing , chasing butterflies , plucking convolvulus , wetting their pink , open-work stockings in the tall grass , fresh , wild , without malice , all received , to some extent , the kisses of all , with the exception of Fantine , who was hedged about with that vague resistance of hers composed of dreaminess and wildness , and who was in love . 
`` You always have a queer look about you , '' said Favourite to her . 
Such things are joys . 
These passages of happy couples are a profound appeal to life and nature , and make a caress and light spring forth from everything . 
There was once a fairy who created the fields and forests expressly for those in love , -- in that eternal hedge-school of lovers , which is forever beginning anew , and which will last as long as there are hedges and scholars . 
Hence the popularity of spring among thinkers . 
The patrician and the knife-grinder , the duke and the peer , the limb of the law , the courtiers and townspeople , as they used to say in olden times , all are subjects of this fairy . 
They laugh and hunt , and there is in the air the brilliance of an apotheosis -- what a transfiguration effected by love ! 
Notaries ' clerks are gods . 
And the little cries , the pursuits through the grass , the waists embraced on the fly , those jargons which are melodies , those adorations which burst forth in the manner of pronouncing a syllable , those cherries torn from one mouth by another , -- all this blazes forth and takes its place among the celestial glories . 
Beautiful women waste themselves sweetly . 
They think that this will never come to an end . 
Philosophers , poets , painters , observe these ecstasies and know not what to make of it , so greatly are they dazzled by it . 
The departure for Cythera ! 
exclaims Watteau ; Lancret , the painter of plebeians , contemplates his bourgeois , who have flitted away into the azure sky ; Diderot stretches out his arms to all these love idyls , and d'Urfe mingles druids with them . 
After breakfast the four couples went to what was then called the King 's Square to see a newly arrived plant from India , whose name escapes our memory at this moment , and which , at that epoch , was attracting all Paris to Saint-Cloud . 
It was an odd and charming shrub with a long stem , whose numerous branches , bristling and leafless and as fine as threads , were covered with a million tiny white rosettes ; this gave the shrub the air of a head of hair studded with flowers . 
There was always an admiring crowd about it . 
After viewing the shrub , Tholomyes exclaimed , `` I offer you asses ! '' 
and having agreed upon a price with the owner of the asses , they returned by way of Vanvres and Issy . 
At Issy an incident occurred . 
The truly national park , at that time owned by Bourguin the contractor , happened to be wide open . 
They passed the gates , visited the manikin anchorite in his grotto , tried the mysterious little effects of the famous cabinet of mirrors , the wanton trap worthy of a satyr become a millionaire or of Turcaret metamorphosed into a Priapus . 
They had stoutly shaken the swing attached to the two chestnut-trees celebrated by the Abbe de Bernis . 
As he swung these beauties , one after the other , producing folds in the fluttering skirts which Greuze would have found to his taste , amid peals of laughter , the Toulousan Tholomyes , who was somewhat of a Spaniard , Toulouse being the cousin of Tolosa , sang , to a melancholy chant , the old ballad gallega , probably inspired by some lovely maid dashing in full flight upon a rope between two trees : -- `` Soy de Badajoz , `` Badajoz is my home , Amor me llama , And Love is my name ; Toda mi alma , To my eyes in flame , Es en mi ojos , All my soul doth come ; Porque ensenas , For instruction meet A tuas piernas . 
I receive at thy feet '' Fantine alone refused to swing . 
`` I do n't like to have people put on airs like that , '' muttered Favourite , with a good deal of acrimony . 
After leaving the asses there was a fresh delight ; they crossed the Seine in a boat , and proceeding from Passy on foot they reached the barrier of l'Etoile . 
They had been up since five o'clock that morning , as the reader will remember ; but bah ! 
there is no such thing as fatigue on Sunday , said Favourite ; on Sunday fatigue does not work . 
About three o'clock the four couples , frightened at their happiness , were sliding down the Russian mountains , a singular edifice which then occupied the heights of Beaujon , and whose undulating line was visible above the trees of the Champs Elysees . 
From time to time Favourite exclaimed : -- `` And the surprise ? 
I claim the surprise . '' 
`` Patience , '' replied Tholomyes . 
The Russian mountains having been exhausted , they began to think about dinner ; and the radiant party of eight , somewhat weary at last , became stranded in Bombarda 's public house , a branch establishment which had been set up in the Champs-Elysees by that famous restaurant-keeper , Bombarda , whose sign could then be seen in the Rue de Rivoli , near Delorme Alley . 
A large but ugly room , with an alcove and a bed at the end -LRB- they had been obliged to put up with this accommodation in view of the Sunday crowd -RRB- ; two windows whence they could survey beyond the elms , the quay and the river ; a magnificent August sunlight lightly touching the panes ; two tables ; upon one of them a triumphant mountain of bouquets , mingled with the hats of men and women ; at the other the four couples seated round a merry confusion of platters , dishes , glasses , and bottles ; jugs of beer mingled with flasks of wine ; very little order on the table , some disorder beneath it ; `` They made beneath the table A noise , a clatter of the feet that was abominable , '' says Moliere . 
This was the state which the shepherd idyl , begun at five o'clock in the morning , had reached at half-past four in the afternoon . 
The sun was setting ; their appetites were satisfied . 
The Champs-Elysees , filled with sunshine and with people , were nothing but light and dust , the two things of which glory is composed . 
The horses of Marly , those neighing marbles , were prancing in a cloud of gold . 
Carriages were going and coming . 
A squadron of magnificent body-guards , with their clarions at their head , were descending the Avenue de Neuilly ; the white flag , showing faintly rosy in the setting sun , floated over the dome of the Tuileries . 
The Place de la Concorde , which had become the Place Louis XV . 
once more , was choked with happy promenaders . 
Many wore the silver fleur-de-lys suspended from the white-watered ribbon , which had not yet wholly disappeared from button-holes in the year 1817 . 
Here and there choruses of little girls threw to the winds , amid the passersby , who formed into circles and applauded , the then celebrated Bourbon air , which was destined to strike the Hundred Days with lightning , and which had for its refrain : -- `` Rendez-nous notre pere de Gand , Rendez-nous notre pere . '' 
`` Give us back our father from Ghent , Give us back our father . '' 
Groups of dwellers in the suburbs , in Sunday array , sometimes even decorated with the fleur-de-lys , like the bourgeois , scattered over the large square and the Marigny square , were playing at rings and revolving on the wooden horses ; others were engaged in drinking ; some journeyman printers had on paper caps ; their laughter was audible . 
Every thing was radiant . 
It was a time of undisputed peace and profound royalist security ; it was the epoch when a special and private report of Chief of Police Angeles to the King , on the subject of the suburbs of Paris , terminated with these lines : -- `` Taking all things into consideration , Sire , there is nothing to be feared from these people . 
They are as heedless and as indolent as cats . 
The populace is restless in the provinces ; it is not in Paris . 
These are very pretty men , Sire . 
It would take all of two of them to make one of your grenadiers . 
There is nothing to be feared on the part of the populace of Paris the capital . 
It is remarkable that the stature of this population should have diminished in the last fifty years ; and the populace of the suburbs is still more puny than at the time of the Revolution . 
It is not dangerous . 
In short , it is an amiable rabble . '' 
Prefects of the police do not deem it possible that a cat can transform itself into a lion ; that does happen , however , and in that lies the miracle wrought by the populace of Paris . 
Moreover , the cat so despised by Count Angles possessed the esteem of the republics of old . 
In their eyes it was liberty incarnate ; and as though to serve as pendant to the Minerva Aptera of the Piraeus , there stood on the public square in Corinth the colossal bronze figure of a cat . 
The ingenuous police of the Restoration beheld the populace of Paris in too `` rose-colored '' a light ; it is not so much of `` an amiable rabble '' as it is thought . 
The Parisian is to the Frenchman what the Athenian was to the Greek : no one sleeps more soundly than he , no one is more frankly frivolous and lazy than he , no one can better assume the air of forgetfulness ; let him not be trusted nevertheless ; he is ready for any sort of cool deed ; but when there is glory at the end of it , he is worthy of admiration in every sort of fury . 
Give him a pike , he will produce the 10th of August ; give him a gun , you will have Austerlitz . 
He is Napoleon 's stay and Danton 's resource . 
Is it a question of country , he enlists ; is it a question of liberty , he tears up the pavements . 
Beware ! 
his hair filled with wrath , is epic ; his blouse drapes itself like the folds of a chlamys . 
Take care ! 
he will make of the first Rue Grenetat which comes to hand Caudine Forks . 
When the hour strikes , this man of the faubourgs will grow in stature ; this little man will arise , and his gaze will be terrible , and his breath will become a tempest , and there will issue forth from that slender chest enough wind to disarrange the folds of the Alps . 
It is , thanks to the suburban man of Paris , that the Revolution , mixed with arms , conquers Europe . 
He sings ; it is his delight . 
Proportion his song to his nature , and you will see ! 
As long as he has for refrain nothing but la Carmagnole , he only overthrows Louis XVI. ; make him sing the Marseillaise , and he will free the world . 
This note jotted down on the margin of Angles ' report , we will return to our four couples . 
The dinner , as we have said , was drawing to its close . 
Chat at table , the chat of love ; it is as impossible to reproduce one as the other ; the chat of love is a cloud ; the chat at table is smoke . 
Fameuil and Dahlia were humming . 
Tholomyes was drinking . 
Zephine was laughing , Fantine smiling , Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he had purchased at Saint-Cloud . 
Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said : -- `` Blachevelle , I adore you . '' 
This called forth a question from Blachevelle : -- `` What would you do , Favourite , if I were to cease to love you ? '' 
`` I ! '' 
cried Favourite . 
`` Ah ! 
Do not say that even in jest ! 
If you were to cease to love me , I would spring after you , I would scratch you , I should rend you , I would throw you into the water , I would have you arrested . '' 
Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is tickled in his self-love . 
Favourite resumed : -- `` Yes , I would scream to the police ! 
Ah ! 
I should not restrain myself , not at all ! 
Rabble ! '' 
Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair , in an ecstasy , and closed both eyes proudly . 
Dahlia , as she ate , said in a low voice to Favourite , amid the uproar : -- `` So you really idolize him deeply , that Blachevelle of yours ? '' 
`` I ? 
I detest him , '' replied Favourite in the same tone , seizing her fork again . 
`` He is avaricious . 
I love the little fellow opposite me in my house . 
He is very nice , that young man ; do you know him ? 
One can see that he is an actor by profession . 
I love actors . 
As soon as he comes in , his mother says to him : ` Ah ! 
mon Dieu ! 
my peace of mind is gone . 
There he goes with his shouting . 
But , my dear , you are splitting my head ! ' 
So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets , to black holes , as high as he can mount , and there he sets to singing , declaiming , how do I know what ? 
so that he can be heard down stairs ! 
He earns twenty sous a day at an attorney 's by penning quibbles . 
He is the son of a former precentor of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
He idolizes me so , that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes , he said to me : ` Mamselle , make your gloves into fritters , and I will eat them . ' 
It is only artists who can say such things as that . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow . 
Never mind ; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him -- how I lie ! 
Hey ! 
How I do lie ! '' 
Favourite paused , and then went on : -- `` I am sad , you see , Dahlia . 
It has done nothing but rain all summer ; the wind irritates me ; the wind does not abate . 
Blachevelle is very stingy ; there are hardly any green peas in the market ; one does not know what to eat . 
I have the spleen , as the English say , butter is so dear ! 
and then you see it is horrible , here we are dining in a room with a bed in it , and that disgusts me with life . '' 
In the meantime , while some sang , the rest talked together tumultuously all at once ; it was no longer anything but noise . 
Tholomyes intervened . 
`` Let us not talk at random nor too fast , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Let us reflect , if we wish to be brilliant . 
Too much improvisation empties the mind in a stupid way . 
Running beer gathers no froth . 
No haste , gentlemen . 
Let us mingle majesty with the feast . 
Let us eat with meditation ; let us make haste slowly . 
Let us not hurry . 
Consider the springtime ; if it makes haste , it is done for ; that is to say , it gets frozen . 
Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees . 
Excess of zeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners . 
No zeal , gentlemen ! 
Grimod de la Reyniere agrees with Talleyrand . '' 
A hollow sound of rebellion rumbled through the group . 
`` Leave us in peace , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` Down with the tyrant ! '' 
said Fameuil . 
`` Bombarda , Bombance , and Bambochel ! '' 
cried Listolier . 
`` Sunday exists , '' resumed Fameuil . 
`` We are sober , '' added Listolier . 
`` Tholomyes , '' remarked Blachevelle , `` contemplate my calmness -LSB- mon calme -RSB- . '' 
`` You are the Marquis of that , '' retorted Tholomyes . 
This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool . 
The Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist . 
All the frogs held their peace . 
`` Friends , '' cried Tholomyes , with the accent of a man who had recovered his empire , `` Come to yourselves . 
This pun which has fallen from the skies must not be received with too much stupor . 
Everything which falls in that way is not necessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect . 
The pun is the dung of the mind which soars . 
The jest falls , no matter where ; and the mind after producing a piece of stupidity plunges into the azure depths . 
A whitish speck flattened against the rock does not prevent the condor from soaring aloft . 
Far be it from me to insult the pun ! 
I honor it in proportion to its merits ; nothing more . 
All the most august , the most sublime , the most charming of humanity , and perhaps outside of humanity , have made puns . 
Jesus Christ made a pun on St. Peter , Moses on Isaac , AEschylus on Polynices , Cleopatra on Octavius . 
And observe that Cleopatra 's pun preceded the battle of Actium , and that had it not been for it , no one would have remembered the city of Toryne , a Greek name which signifies a ladle . 
That once conceded , I return to my exhortation . 
I repeat , brothers , I repeat , no zeal , no hubbub , no excess ; even in witticisms , gayety , jollities , or plays on words . 
Listen to me . 
I have the prudence of Amphiaraus and the baldness of Caesar . 
There must be a limit , even to rebuses . 
Est modus in rebus . 
`` There must be a limit , even to dinners . 
You are fond of apple turnovers , ladies ; do not indulge in them to excess . 
Even in the matter of turnovers , good sense and art are requisite . 
Gluttony chastises the glutton , Gula punit Gulax . 
Indigestion is charged by the good God with preaching morality to stomachs . 
And remember this : each one of our passions , even love , has a stomach which must not be filled too full . 
In all things the word finis must be written in good season ; self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent ; the bolt must be drawn on appetite ; one must set one 's own fantasy to the violin , and carry one 's self to the post . 
The sage is the man who knows how , at a given moment , to effect his own arrest . 
Have some confidence in me , for I have succeeded to some extent in my study of the law , according to the verdict of my examinations , for I know the difference between the question put and the question pending , for I have sustained a thesis in Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered at Rome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was quaestor of the Parricide ; because I am going to be a doctor , apparently it does not follow that it is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile . 
I recommend you to moderation in your desires . 
It is true that my name is Felix Tholomyes ; I speak well . 
Happy is he who , when the hour strikes , takes a heroic resolve , and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes . '' 
Favourite listened with profound attention . 
`` Felix , '' said she , `` what a pretty word ! 
I love that name . 
It is Latin ; it means prosper . '' 
Tholomyes went on : -- `` Quirites , gentlemen , caballeros , my friends . 
Do you wish never to feel the prick , to do without the nuptial bed , and to brave love ? 
Nothing more simple . 
Here is the receipt : lemonade , excessive exercise , hard labor ; work yourself to death , drag blocks , sleep not , hold vigil , gorge yourself with nitrous beverages , and potions of nymphaeas ; drink emulsions of poppies and agnus castus ; season this with a strict diet , starve yourself , and add thereto cold baths , girdles of herbs , the application of a plate of lead , lotions made with the subacetate of lead , and fomentations of oxycrat . '' 
`` I prefer a woman , '' said Listolier . 
`` Woman , '' resumed Tholomyes ; `` distrust her . 
Woe to him who yields himself to the unstable heart of woman ! 
Woman is perfidious and disingenuous . 
She detests the serpent from professional jealousy . 
The serpent is the shop over the way . '' 
`` Tholomyes ! '' 
cried Blachevelle , `` you are drunk ! '' 
`` Pardieu , '' said Tholomyes . 
`` Then be gay , '' resumed Blachevelle . 
`` I agree to that , '' responded Tholomyes . 
And , refilling his glass , he rose . 
`` Glory to wine ! 
Nunc te , Bacche , canam ! 
Pardon me ladies ; that is Spanish . 
And the proof of it , senoras , is this : like people , like cask . 
The arrobe of Castile contains sixteen litres ; the cantaro of Alicante , twelve ; the almude of the Canaries , twenty-five ; the cuartin of the Balearic Isles , twenty-six ; the boot of Tzar Peter , thirty . 
Long live that Tzar who was great , and long live his boot , which was still greater ! 
Ladies , take the advice of a friend ; make a mistake in your neighbor if you see fit . 
The property of love is to err . 
A love affair is not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an English serving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing . 
It is not made for that ; it errs gayly , our gentle love . 
It has been said , error is human ; I say , error is love . 
Ladies , I idolize you all . 
O Zephine , O Josephine , face more than irregular , you would be charming were you not all askew . 
You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one has sat down by mistake . 
As for Favourite , O nymphs and muses ! 
one day when Blachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guerin-Boisseau , he espied a beautiful girl with white stockings well drawn up , which displayed her legs . 
This prologue pleased him , and Blachevelle fell in love . 
The one he loved was Favourite . 
O Favourite , thou hast Ionian lips . 
There was a Greek painter named Euphorion , who was surnamed the painter of the lips . 
That Greek alone would have been worthy to paint thy mouth . 
Listen ! 
before thee , there was never a creature worthy of the name . 
Thou wert made to receive the apple like Venus , or to eat it like Eve ; beauty begins with thee . 
I have just referred to Eve ; it is thou who hast created her . 
Thou deservest the letters-patent of the beautiful woman . 
O Favourite , I cease to address you as ` thou , ' because I pass from poetry to prose . 
You were speaking of my name a little while ago . 
That touched me ; but let us , whoever we may be , distrust names . 
They may delude us . 
I am called Felix , and I am not happy . 
Words are liars . 
Let us not blindly accept the indications which they afford us . 
It would be a mistake to write to Liege -LSB- 2 -RSB- for corks , and to Pau for gloves . 
Miss Dahlia , were I in your place , I would call myself Rosa . 
A flower should smell sweet , and woman should have wit . 
I say nothing of Fantine ; she is a dreamer , a musing , thoughtful , pensive person ; she is a phantom possessed of the form of a nymph and the modesty of a nun , who has strayed into the life of a grisette , but who takes refuge in illusions , and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure without very well knowing what she sees or what she is doing , and who , with her eyes fixed on heaven , wanders in a garden where there are more birds than are in existence . 
O Fantine , know this : I , Tholomyes , I am all illusion ; but she does not even hear me , that blond maid of Chimeras ! 
as for the rest , everything about her is freshness , suavity , youth , sweet morning light . 
O Fantine , maid worthy of being called Marguerite or Pearl , you are a woman from the beauteous Orient . 
Ladies , a second piece of advice : do not marry ; marriage is a graft ; it takes well or ill ; avoid that risk . 
But bah ! 
what am I saying ? 
I am wasting my words . 
Girls are incurable on the subject of marriage , and all that we wise men can say will not prevent the waistcoat-makers and the shoe-stitchers from dreaming of husbands studded with diamonds . 
Well , so be it ; but , my beauties , remember this , you eat too much sugar . 
You have but one fault , O woman , and that is nibbling sugar . 
O nibbling sex , your pretty little white teeth adore sugar . 
Now , heed me well , sugar is a salt . 
All salts are withering . 
Sugar is the most desiccating of all salts ; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins ; hence the coagulation , and then the solidification of the blood ; hence tubercles in the lungs , hence death . 
That is why diabetes borders on consumption . 
Then , do not crunch sugar , and you will live . 
I turn to the men : gentlemen , make conquest , rob each other of your well-beloved without remorse . 
Chassez across . 
In love there are no friends . 
Everywhere where there is a pretty woman hostility is open . 
No quarter , war to the death ! 
a pretty woman is a casus belli ; a pretty woman is flagrant misdemeanor . 
All the invasions of history have been determined by petticoats . 
Woman is man 's right . 
Romulus carried off the Sabines ; William carried off the Saxon women ; Caesar carried off the Roman women . 
The man who is not loved soars like a vulture over the mistresses of other men ; and for my own part , to all those unfortunate men who are widowers , I throw the sublime proclamation of Bonaparte to the army of Italy : `` Soldiers , you are in need of everything ; the enemy has it . '' 
-LSB- 2 -RSB- Liege : a cork-tree . 
Pau : a jest on peau , skin . 
Tholomyes paused . 
`` Take breath , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
At the same moment Blachevelle , supported by Listolier and Fameuil , struck up to a plaintive air , one of those studio songs composed of the first words which come to hand , rhymed richly and not at all , as destitute of sense as the gesture of the tree and the sound of the wind , which have their birth in the vapor of pipes , and are dissipated and take their flight with them . 
This is the couplet by which the group replied to Tholomyes ' harangue : -- `` The father turkey-cocks so grave Some money to an agent gave , That master good Clermont-Tonnerre Might be made pope on Saint Johns ' day fair . 
But this good Clermont could not be Made pope , because no priest was he ; And then their agent , whose wrath burned , With all their money back returned . '' 
This was not calculated to calm Tholomyes ' improvisation ; he emptied his glass , filled , refilled it , and began again : -- `` Down with wisdom ! 
Forget all that I have said . 
Let us be neither prudes nor prudent men nor prudhommes . 
I propose a toast to mirth ; be merry . 
Let us complete our course of law by folly and eating ! 
Indigestion and the digest . 
Let Justinian be the male , and Feasting , the female ! 
Joy in the depths ! 
Live , O creation ! 
The world is a great diamond . 
I am happy . 
The birds are astonishing . 
What a festival everywhere ! 
The nightingale is a gratuitous Elleviou . 
Summer , I salute thee ! 
O Luxembourg ! 
O Georgics of the Rue Madame , and of the Allee de l'Observatoire ! 
O pensive infantry soldiers ! 
O all those charming nurses who , while they guard the children , amuse themselves ! 
The pampas of America would please me if I had not the arcades of the Odeon . 
My soul flits away into the virgin forests and to the savannas . 
All is beautiful . 
The flies buzz in the sun . 
The sun has sneezed out the humming bird . 
Embrace me , Fantine ! '' 
He made a mistake and embraced Favourite . 
`` The dinners are better at Edon 's than at Bombarda 's , '' exclaimed Zephine . 
`` I prefer Bombarda to Edon , '' declared Blachevelle . 
`` There is more luxury . 
It is more Asiatic . 
Look at the room downstairs ; there are mirrors -LSB- glaces -RSB- on the walls . '' 
`` I prefer them -LSB- glaces , ices -RSB- on my plate , '' said Favourite . 
Blachevelle persisted : -- `` Look at the knives . 
The handles are of silver at Bombarda 's and of bone at Edon 's . 
Now , silver is more valuable than bone . '' 
`` Except for those who have a silver chin , '' observed Tholomyes . 
He was looking at the dome of the Invalides , which was visible from Bombarda 's windows . 
A pause ensued . 
`` Tholomyes , '' exclaimed Fameuil , `` Listolier and I were having a discussion just now . '' 
`` A discussion is a good thing , '' replied Tholomyes ; `` a quarrel is better . '' 
`` We were disputing about philosophy . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Which do you prefer , Descartes or Spinoza ? '' 
`` Desaugiers , '' said Tholomyes . 
This decree pronounced , he took a drink , and went on : -- `` I consent to live . 
All is not at an end on earth since we can still talk nonsense . 
For that I return thanks to the immortal gods . 
We lie . 
One lies , but one laughs . 
One affirms , but one doubts . 
The unexpected bursts forth from the syllogism . 
That is fine . 
There are still human beings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box of the paradox merrily . 
This , ladies , which you are drinking with so tranquil an air is Madeira wine , you must know , from the vineyard of Coural das Freiras , which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms above the level of the sea . 
Attention while you drink ! 
three hundred and seventeen fathoms ! 
and Monsieur Bombarda , the magnificent eating-house keeper , gives you those three hundred and seventeen fathoms for four francs and fifty centimes . '' 
Again Fameuil interrupted him : -- `` Tholomyes , your opinions fix the law . 
Who is your favorite author ? '' 
`` Ber -- '' `` Quin ? '' 
`` No ; Choux . '' 
And Tholomyes continued : -- `` Honor to Bombarda ! 
He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he could but get me an Indian dancing-girl , and Thygelion of Chaeronea if he could bring me a Greek courtesan ; for , oh , ladies ! 
there were Bombardas in Greece and in Egypt . 
Apuleius tells us of them . 
Alas ! 
always the same , and nothing new ; nothing more unpublished by the creator in creation ! 
Nil sub sole novum , says Solomon ; amor omnibus idem , says Virgil ; and Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark at Saint-Cloud , as Aspasia embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos . 
One last word . 
Do you know what Aspasia was , ladies ? 
Although she lived at an epoch when women had , as yet , no soul , she was a soul ; a soul of a rosy and purple hue , more ardent hued than fire , fresher than the dawn . 
Aspasia was a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met ; she was the goddess prostitute ; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut . 
Aspasia was created in case a mistress should be needed for Prometheus . '' 
Tholomyes , once started , would have found some difficulty in stopping , had not a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment . 
The shock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt . 
It was a Beauceron mare , old and thin , and one fit for the knacker , which was dragging a very heavy cart . 
On arriving in front of Bombarda 's , the worn-out , exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further . 
This incident attracted a crowd . 
Hardly had the cursing and indignant carter had time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word , Matin -LRB- the jade -RRB- , backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip , when the jade fell , never to rise again . 
On hearing the hubbub made by the passersby , Tholomyes ' merry auditors turned their heads , and Tholomyes took advantage of the opportunity to bring his allocution to a close with this melancholy strophe : -- `` Elle etait de ce monde ou coucous et carrosses -LSB- 3 -RSB- Ont le meme destin ; Et , rosse , elle a vecu ce que vivant les rosses , L'espace d'un matin ! '' 
-LSB- 3 -RSB- She belonged to that circle where cuckoos and carriages share the same fate ; and a jade herself , she lived , as jades live , for the space of a morning -LRB- or jade -RRB- . 
`` Poor horse ! '' 
sighed Fantine . 
And Dahlia exclaimed : -- `` There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses . 
How can one be such a pitiful fool as that ! '' 
At that moment Favourite , folding her arms and throwing her head back , looked resolutely at Tholomyes and said : -- `` Come , now ! 
the surprise ? '' 
`` Exactly . 
The moment has arrived , '' replied Tholomyes . 
`` Gentlemen , the hour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck . 
Wait for us a moment , ladies . '' 
`` It begins with a kiss , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` On the brow , '' added Tholomyes . 
Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress 's brow ; then all four filed out through the door , with their fingers on their lips . 
Favourite clapped her hands on their departure . 
`` It is beginning to be amusing already , '' said she . 
`` Do n't be too long , '' murmured Fantine ; `` we are waiting for you . '' 
When the young girls were left alone , they leaned two by two on the window-sills , chatting , craning out their heads , and talking from one window to the other . 
They saw the young men emerge from the Cafe Bombarda arm in arm . 
The latter turned round , made signs to them , smiled , and disappeared in that dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into the Champs-Elysees . 
`` Do n't be long ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
`` What are they going to bring us ? '' 
said Zephine . 
`` It will certainly be something pretty , '' said Dahlia . 
`` For my part , '' said Favourite , `` I want it to be of gold . '' 
Their attention was soon distracted by the movements on the shore of the lake , which they could see through the branches of the large trees , and which diverted them greatly . 
