Excuse me . 
Good-day , doctor , '' -LRB- for the chemist much enjoyed pronouncing the word `` doctor , '' as if addressing another by it reflected on himself some of the grandeur that he found in it -RRB- . 
`` Now , take care not to upset the mortars ! 
You 'd better fetch some chairs from the little room ; you know very well that the arm-chairs are not to be taken out of the drawing-room . '' 
And to put his arm-chair back in its place he was darting away from the counter , when Binet asked him for half an ounce of sugar acid . 
`` Sugar acid ! '' 
said the chemist contemptuously , `` do n't know it ; I 'm ignorant of it ! 
But perhaps you want oxalic acid . 
It is oxalic acid , is n't it ? '' 
Binet explained that he wanted a corrosive to make himself some copperwater with which to remove rust from his hunting things . 
Emma shuddered . 
The chemist began saying -- `` Indeed the weather is not propitious on account of the damp . '' 
`` Nevertheless , '' replied the tax-collector , with a sly look , `` there are people who like it . '' 
She was stifling . 
`` And give me -- '' `` Will he never go ? '' 
thought she . 
`` Half an ounce of resin and turpentine , four ounces of yellow wax , and three half ounces of animal charcoal , if you please , to clean the varnished leather of my togs . '' 
The druggist was beginning to cut the wax when Madame Homais appeared , Irma in her arms , Napoleon by her side , and Athalie following . 
She sat down on the velvet seat by the window , and the lad squatted down on a footstool , while his eldest sister hovered round the jujube box near her papa . 
The latter was filling funnels and corking phials , sticking on labels , making up parcels . 
Around him all were silent ; only from time to time , were heard the weights jingling in the balance , and a few low words from the chemist giving directions to his pupil . 
`` And how 's the little woman ? '' 
suddenly asked Madame Homais . 
`` Silence ! '' 
exclaimed her husband , who was writing down some figures in his waste-book . 
`` Why did n't you bring her ? '' 
she went on in a low voice . 
`` Hush ! 
hush ! '' 
said Emma , pointing with her finger to the druggist . 
But Binet , quite absorbed in looking over his bill , had probably heard nothing . 
At last he went out . 
Then Emma , relieved , uttered a deep sigh . 
`` How hard you are breathing ! '' 
said Madame Homais . 
`` Well , you see , it 's rather warm , '' she replied . 
So the next day they talked over how to arrange their rendezvous . 
Emma wanted to bribe her servant with a present , but it would be better to find some safe house at Yonville . 
Rodolphe promised to look for one . 
All through the winter , three or four times a week , in the dead of night he came to the garden . 
Emma had on purpose taken away the key of the gate , which Charles thought lost . 
To call her , Rodolphe threw a sprinkle of sand at the shutters . 
She jumped up with a start ; but sometimes he had to wait , for Charles had a mania for chatting by the fireside , and he would not stop . 
She was wild with impatience ; if her eyes could have done it , she would have hurled him out at the window . 
At last she would begin to undress , then take up a book , and go on reading very quietly as if the book amused her . 
But Charles , who was in bed , called to her to come too . 
`` Come , now , Emma , '' he said , `` it is time . '' 
`` Yes , I am coming , '' she answered . 
Then , as the candles dazzled him ; he turned to the wall and fell asleep . 
She escaped , smiling , palpitating , undressed . 
Rodolphe had a large cloak ; he wrapped her in it , and putting his arm round her waist , he drew her without a word to the end of the garden . 
It was in the arbour , on the same seat of old sticks where formerly Leon had looked at her so amorously on the summer evenings . 
She never thought of him now . 
The stars shone through the leafless jasmine branches . 
Behind them they heard the river flowing , and now and again on the bank the rustling of the dry reeds . 
Masses of shadow here and there loomed out in the darkness , and sometimes , vibrating with one movement , they rose up and swayed like immense black waves pressing forward to engulf them . 
The cold of the nights made them clasp closer ; the sighs of their lips seemed to them deeper ; their eyes that they could hardly see , larger ; and in the midst of the silence low words were spoken that fell on their souls sonorous , crystalline , and that reverberated in multiplied vibrations . 
When the night was rainy , they took refuge in the consulting-room between the cart-shed and the stable . 
She lighted one of the kitchen candles that she had hidden behind the books . 
Rodolphe settled down there as if at home . 
The sight of the library , of the bureau , of the whole apartment , in fine , excited his merriment , and he could not refrain from making jokes about Charles , which rather embarrassed Emma . 
She would have liked to see him more serious , and even on occasions more dramatic ; as , for example , when she thought she heard a noise of approaching steps in the alley . 
`` Someone is coming ! '' 
she said . 
He blew out the light . 
`` Have you your pistols ? '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Why , to defend yourself , '' replied Emma . 
`` From your husband ? 
Oh , poor devil ! '' 
And Rodolphe finished his sentence with a gesture that said , `` I could crush him with a flip of my finger . '' 
She was wonder-stricken at his bravery , although she felt in it a sort of indecency and a naive coarseness that scandalised her . 
Rodolphe reflected a good deal on the affair of the pistols . 
If she had spoken seriously , it was very ridiculous , he thought , even odious ; for he had no reason to hate the good Charles , not being what is called devoured by jealousy ; and on this subject Emma had taken a great vow that he did not think in the best of taste . 
Besides , she was growing very sentimental . 
She had insisted on exchanging miniatures ; they had cut off handfuls of hair , and now she was asking for a ring -- a real wedding-ring , in sign of an eternal union . 
She often spoke to him of the evening chimes , of the voices of nature . 
Then she talked to him of her mother -- hers ! 
and of his mother -- his ! 
Rodolphe had lost his twenty years ago . 
Emma none the less consoled him with caressing words as one would have done a lost child , and she sometimes even said to him , gazing at the moon -- `` I am sure that above there together they approve of our love . '' 
But she was so pretty . 
He had possessed so few women of such ingenuousness . 
This love without debauchery was a new experience for him , and , drawing him out of his lazy habits , caressed at once his pride and his sensuality . 
Emma 's enthusiasm , which his bourgeois good sense disdained , seemed to him in his heart of hearts charming , since it was lavished on him . 
Then , sure of being loved , he no longer kept up appearances , and insensibly his ways changed . 
He had no longer , as formerly , words so gentle that they made her cry , nor passionate caresses that made her mad , so that their great love , which engrossed her life , seemed to lessen beneath her like the water of a stream absorbed into its channel , and she could see the bed of it . 
She would not believe it ; she redoubled in tenderness , and Rodolphe concealed his indifference less and less . 
She did not know if she regretted having yielded to him , or whether she did not wish , on the contrary , to enjoy him the more . 
The humiliation of feeling herself weak was turning to rancour , tempered by their voluptuous pleasures . 
It was not affection ; it was like a continual seduction . 
He subjugated her ; she almost feared him . 
Appearances , nevertheless , were calmer than ever , Rodolphe having succeeded in carrying out the adultery after his own fancy ; and at the end of six months , when the spring-time came , they were to one another like a married couple , tranquilly keeping up a domestic flame . 
It was the time of year when old Rouault sent his turkey in remembrance of the setting of his leg . 
The present always arrived with a letter . 
Emma cut the string that tied it to the basket , and read the following lines : -- `` My Dear Children -- I hope this will find you well , and that this one will be as good as the others . 
For it seems to me a little more tender , if I may venture to say so , and heavier . 
But next time , for a change , I 'll give you a turkeycock , unless you have a preference for some dabs ; and send me back the hamper , if you please , with the two old ones . 
I have had an accident with my cart-sheds , whose covering flew off one windy night among the trees . 
The harvest has not been overgood either . 
Finally , I do n't know when I shall come to see you . 
It is so difficult now to leave the house since I am alone , my poor Emma . '' 
Here there was a break in the lines , as if the old fellow had dropped his pen to dream a little while . 
`` For myself , I am very well , except for a cold I caught the other day at the fair at Yvetot , where I had gone to hire a shepherd , having turned away mine because he was too dainty . 
How we are to be pitied with such a lot of thieves ! 
Besides , he was also rude . 
I heard from a pedlar , who , travelling through your part of the country this winter , had a tooth drawn , that Bovary was as usual working hard . 
That does n't surprise me ; and he showed me his tooth ; we had some coffee together . 
I asked him if he had seen you , and he said not , but that he had seen two horses in the stables , from which I conclude that business is looking up . 
So much the better , my dear children , and may God send you every imaginable happiness ! 
It grieves me not yet to have seen my dear little grand-daughter , Berthe Bovary . 
I have planted an Orleans plum-tree for her in the garden under your room , and I wo n't have it touched unless it is to have jam made for her by and bye , that I will keep in the cupboard for her when she comes . 
`` Good-bye , my dear children . 
I kiss you , my girl , you too , my son-in-law , and the little one on both cheeks . 
I am , with best compliments , your loving father . 
`` Theodore Rouault . '' 
She held the coarse paper in her fingers for some minutes . 
The spelling mistakes were interwoven one with the other , and Emma followed the kindly thought that cackled right through it like a hen half hidden in the hedge of thorns . 
The writing had been dried with ashes from the hearth , for a little grey powder slipped from the letter on to her dress , and she almost thought she saw her father bending over the hearth to take up the tongs . 
How long since she had been with him , sitting on the footstool in the chimney-corner , where she used to burn the end of a bit of wood in the great flame of the sea-sedges ! 
She remembered the summer evenings all full of sunshine . 
The colts neighed when anyone passed by , and galloped , galloped . 
Under her window there was a beehive , and sometimes the bees wheeling round in the light struck against her window like rebounding balls of gold . 
What happiness there had been at that time , what freedom , what hope ! 
What an abundance of illusions ! 
Nothing was left of them now . 
She had got rid of them all in her soul 's life , in all her successive conditions of life , maidenhood , her marriage , and her love -- thus constantly losing them all her life through , like a traveller who leaves something of his wealth at every inn along his road . 
But what then , made her so unhappy ? 
What was the extraordinary catastrophe that had transformed her ? 
And she raised her head , looking round as if to seek the cause of that which made her suffer . 
An April ray was dancing on the china of the whatnot ; the fire burned ; beneath her slippers she felt the softness of the carpet ; the day was bright , the air warm , and she heard her child shouting with laughter . 
In fact , the little girl was just then rolling on the lawn in the midst of the grass that was being turned . 
She was lying flat on her stomach at the top of a rick . 
The servant was holding her by her skirt . 
Lestiboudois was raking by her side , and every time he came near she lent forward , beating the air with both her arms . 
`` Bring her to me , '' said her mother , rushing to embrace her . 
`` How I love you , my poor child ! 
How I love you ! '' 
Then noticing that the tips of her ears were rather dirty , she rang at once for warm water , and washed her , changed her linen , her stockings , her shoes , asked a thousand questions about her health , as if on the return from a long journey , and finally , kissing her again and crying a little , she gave her back to the servant , who stood quite thunderstricken at this excess of tenderness . 
That evening Rodolphe found her more serious than usual . 
`` That will pass over , '' he concluded ; `` it 's a whim : '' And he missed three rendezvous running . 
When he did come , she showed herself cold and almost contemptuous . 
`` Ah ! 
you 're losing your time , my lady ! '' 
And he pretended not to notice her melancholy sighs , nor the handkerchief she took out . 
Then Emma repented . 
She even asked herself why she detested Charles ; if it had not been better to have been able to love him ? 
But he gave her no opportunities for such a revival of sentiment , so that she was much embarrassed by her desire for sacrifice , when the druggist came just in time to provide her with an opportunity . 
He had recently read a eulogy on a new method for curing club-foot , and as he was a partisan of progress , he conceived the patriotic idea that Yonville , in order to keep to the fore , ought to have some operations for strephopody or club-foot . 
`` For , '' said he to Emma , `` what risk is there ? 
See -- '' -LRB- and he enumerated on his fingers the advantages of the attempt -RRB- , `` success , almost certain relief and beautifying of the patient , celebrity acquired by the operator . 
Why , for example , should not your husband relieve poor Hippolyte of the ` Lion d'Or ' ? 
Note that he would not fail to tell about his cure to all the travellers , and then '' -LRB- Homais lowered his voice and looked round him -RRB- `` who is to prevent me from sending a short paragraph on the subject to the paper ? 
Eh ! 
goodness me ! 
an article gets about ; it is talked of ; it ends by making a snowball ! 
And who knows ? 
who knows ? '' 
In fact , Bovary might succeed . 
Nothing proved to Emma that he was not clever ; and what a satisfaction for her to have urged him to a step by which his reputation and fortune would be increased ! 
She only wished to lean on something more solid than love . 
Charles , urged by the druggist and by her , allowed himself to be persuaded . 
He sent to Rouen for Dr. Duval 's volume , and every evening , holding his head between both hands , plunged into the reading of it . 
While he was studying equinus , varus , and valgus , that is to say , katastrephopody , endostrephopody , and exostrephopody -LRB- or better , the various turnings of the foot downwards , inwards , and outwards , with the hypostrephopody and anastrephopody -RRB- , otherwise torsion downwards and upwards , Monsier Homais , with all sorts of arguments , was exhorting the lad at the inn to submit to the operation . 
`` You will scarcely feel , probably , a slight pain ; it is a simple prick , like a little blood-letting , less than the extraction of certain corns . '' 
Hippolyte , reflecting , rolled his stupid eyes . 
`` However , '' continued the chemist , `` it does n't concern me . 
It 's for your sake , for pure humanity ! 
I should like to see you , my friend , rid of your hideous caudication , together with that waddling of the lumbar regions which , whatever you say , must considerably interfere with you in the exercise of your calling . '' 
Then Homais represented to him how much jollier and brisker he would feel afterwards , and even gave him to understand that he would be more likely to please the women ; and the stable-boy began to smile heavily . 
Then he attacked him through his vanity : `` Are n't you a man ? 
Hang it ! 
what would you have done if you had had to go into the army , to go and fight beneath the standard ? 
Ah ! 
Hippolyte ! '' 
And Homais retired , declaring that he could not understand this obstinacy , this blindness in refusing the benefactions of science . 
The poor fellow gave way , for it was like a conspiracy . 
Binet , who never interfered with other people 's business , Madame Lefrancois , Artemise , the neighbours , even the mayor , Monsieur Tuvache -- everyone persuaded him , lectured him , shamed him ; but what finally decided him was that it would cost him nothing . 
Bovary even undertook to provide the machine for the operation . 
This generosity was an idea of Emma 's , and Charles consented to it , thinking in his heart of hearts that his wife was an angel . 
So by the advice of the chemist , and after three fresh starts , he had a kind of box made by the carpenter , with the aid of the locksmith , that weighed about eight pounds , and in which iron , wood , sheer-iron , leather , screws , and nuts had not been spared . 
But to know which of Hippolyte 's tendons to cut , it was necessary first of all to find out what kind of club-foot he had . 
He had a foot forming almost a straight line with the leg , which , however , did not prevent it from being turned in , so that it was an equinus together with something of a varus , or else a slight varus with a strong tendency to equinus . 
But with this equinus , wide in foot like a horse 's hoof , with rugose skin , dry tendons , and large toes , on which the black nails looked as if made of iron , the clubfoot ran about like a deer from morn till night . 
He was constantly to be seen on the Place , jumping round the carts , thrusting his limping foot forwards . 
He seemed even stronger on that leg than the other . 
By dint of hard service it had acquired , as it were , moral qualities of patience and energy ; and when he was given some heavy work , he stood on it in preference to its fellow . 
Now , as it was an equinus , it was necessary to cut the tendon of Achilles , and , if need were , the anterior tibial muscle could be seen to afterwards for getting rid of the varus ; for the doctor did not dare to risk both operations at once ; he was even trembling already for fear of injuring some important region that he did not know . 
Neither Ambrose Pare , applying for the first time since Celsus , after an interval of fifteen centuries , a ligature to an artery , nor Dupuytren , about to open an abscess in the brain , nor Gensoul when he first took away the superior maxilla , had hearts that trembled , hands that shook , minds so strained as Monsieur Bovary when he approached Hippolyte , his tenotome between his fingers . 
And as at hospitals , near by on a table lay a heap of lint , with waxed thread , many bandages -- a pyramid of bandages -- every bandage to be found at the druggist 's . 
It was Monsieur Homais who since morning had been organising all these preparations , as much to dazzle the multitude as to keep up his illusions . 
Charles pierced the skin ; a dry crackling was heard . 
The tendon was cut , the operation over . 
Hippolyte could not get over his surprise , but bent over Bovary 's hands to cover them with kisses . 
`` Come , be calm , '' said the druggist ; `` later on you will show your gratitude to your benefactor . '' 
And he went down to tell the result to five or six inquirers who were waiting in the yard , and who fancied that Hippolyte would reappear walking properly . 
Then Charles , having buckled his patient into the machine , went home , where Emma , all anxiety , awaited him at the door . 
She threw herself on his neck ; they sat down to table ; he ate much , and at dessert he even wanted to take a cup of coffee , a luxury he only permitted himself on Sundays when there was company . 
The evening was charming , full of prattle , of dreams together . 
They talked about their future fortune , of the improvements to be made in their house ; he saw people 's estimation of him growing , his comforts increasing , his wife always loving him ; and she was happy to refresh herself with a new sentiment , healthier , better , to feel at last some tenderness for this poor fellow who adored her . 
The thought of Rodolphe for one moment passed through her mind , but her eyes turned again to Charles ; she even noticed with surprise that he had not bad teeth . 
They were in bed when Monsieur Homais , in spite of the servant , suddenly entered the room , holding in his hand a sheet of paper just written . 
It was the paragraph he intended for the `` Fanal de Rouen . '' 
He brought it for them to read . 
`` Read it yourself , '' said Bovary . 
He read -- '' ` Despite the prejudices that still invest a part of the face of Europe like a net , the light nevertheless begins to penetrate our country places . 
Thus on Tuesday our little town of Yonville found itself the scene of a surgical operation which is at the same time an act of loftiest philanthropy . 
Monsieur Bovary , one of our most distinguished practitioners -- ' '' `` Oh , that is too much ! 
too much ! '' 
said Charles , choking with emotion . 
`` No , no ! 
not at all ! 
What next ! '' '' ' 
-- Performed an operation on a club-footed man . ' 
I have not used the scientific term , because you know in a newspaper everyone would not perhaps understand . 
The masses must -- ' '' `` No doubt , '' said Bovary ; `` go on ! '' 
`` I proceed , '' said the chemist . '' 
` Monsieur Bovary , one of our most distinguished practitioners , performed an operation on a club-footed man called Hippolyte Tautain , stableman for the last twenty-five years at the hotel of the `` Lion d'Or , '' kept by Widow Lefrancois , at the Place d'Armes . 
The novelty of the attempt , and the interest incident to the subject , had attracted such a concourse of persons that there was a veritable obstruction on the threshold of the establishment . 
The operation , moreover , was performed as if by magic , and barely a few drops of blood appeared on the skin , as though to say that the rebellious tendon had at last given way beneath the efforts of art . 
The patient , strangely enough -- we affirm it as an eye-witness -- complained of no pain . 
His condition up to the present time leaves nothing to be desired . 
Everything tends to show that his convelescence will be brief ; and who knows even if at our next village festivity we shall not see our good Hippolyte figuring in the bacchic dance in the midst of a chorus of joyous boon-companions , and thus proving to all eyes by his verve and his capers his complete cure ? 
Honour , then , to the generous savants ! 
Honour to those indefatigable spirits who consecrate their vigils to the amelioration or to the alleviation of their kind ! 
Honour , thrice honour ! 
Is it not time to cry that the blind shall see , the deaf hear , the lame walk ? 
But that which fanaticism formerly promised to its elect , science now accomplishes for all men . 
We shall keep our readers informed as to the successive phases of this remarkable cure . ' '' 
This did not prevent Mere Lefrancois , from coming five days after , scared , and crying out -- `` Help ! 
he is dying ! 
I am going crazy ! '' 
Charles rushed to the `` Lion d'Or , '' and the chemist , who caught sight of him passing along the Place hatless , abandoned his shop . 
He appeared himself breathless , red , anxious , and asking everyone who was going up the stairs -- `` Why , what 's the matter with our interesting strephopode ? '' 
The strephopode was writhing in hideous convulsions , so that the machine in which his leg was enclosed was knocked against the wall enough to break it . 
With many precautions , in order not to disturb the position of the limb , the box was removed , and an awful sight presented itself . 
The outlines of the foot disappeared in such a swelling that the entire skin seemed about to burst , and it was covered with ecchymosis , caused by the famous machine . 
Hippolyte had already complained of suffering from it . 
No attention had been paid to him ; they had to acknowledge that he had not been altogether wrong , and he was freed for a few hours . 
But , hardly had the oedema gone down to some extent , than the two savants thought fit to put back the limb in the apparatus , strapping it tighter to hasten matters . 
At last , three days after , Hippolyte being unable to endure it any longer , they once more removed the machine , and were much surprised at the result they saw . 
The livid tumefaction spread over the leg , with blisters here and there , whence there oozed a black liquid . 
Matters were taking a serious turn . 
Hippolyte began to worry himself , and Mere Lefrancois , had him installed in the little room near the kitchen , so that he might at least have some distraction . 
But the tax-collector , who dined there every day , complained bitterly of such companionship . 
Then Hippolyte was removed to the billiard-room . 
He lay there moaning under his heavy coverings , pale with long beard , sunken eyes , and from time to time turning his perspiring head on the dirty pillow , where the flies alighted . 
Madame Bovary went to see him . 
She brought him linen for his poultices ; she comforted , and encouraged him . 
Besides , he did not want for company , especially on market-days , when the peasants were knocking about the billiard-balls round him , fenced with the cues , smoked , drank , sang , and brawled . 
`` How are you ? '' 
they said , clapping him on the shoulder . 
`` Ah ! 
you 're not up to much , it seems , but it 's your own fault . 
You should do this ! 
do that ! '' 
And then they told him stories of people who had all been cured by other remedies than his . 
Then by way of consolation they added -- `` You give way too much ! 
Get up ! 
You coddle yourself like a king ! 
All the same , old chap , you do n't smell nice ! '' 
Gangrene , in fact , was spreading more and more . 
Bovary himself turned sick at it . 
He came every hour , every moment . 
Hippolyte looked at him with eyes full of terror , sobbing -- `` When shall I get well ? 
Oh , save me ! 
How unfortunate I am ! 
How unfortunate I am ! '' 
And the doctor left , always recommending him to diet himself . 
`` Do n't listen to him , my lad , '' said Mere Lefrancois , `` Have n't they tortured you enough already ? 
You 'll grow still weaker . 
Here ! 
swallow this . '' 
And she gave him some good beef-tea , a slice of mutton , a piece of bacon , and sometimes small glasses of brandy , that he had not the strength to put to his lips . 
Abbe Bournisien , hearing that he was growing worse , asked to see him . 
He began by pitying his sufferings , declaring at the same time that he ought to rejoice at them since it was the will of the Lord , and take advantage of the occasion to reconcile himself to Heaven . 
`` For , '' said the ecclesiastic in a paternal tone , `` you rather neglected your duties ; you were rarely seen at divine worship . 
How many years is it since you approached the holy table ? 
I understand that your work , that the whirl of the world may have kept you from care for your salvation . 
But now is the time to reflect . 
Yet do n't despair . 
I have known great sinners , who , about to appear before God -LRB- you are not yet at this point I know -RRB- , had implored His mercy , and who certainly died in the best frame of mind . 
Let us hope that , like them , you will set us a good example . 
Thus , as a precaution , what is to prevent you from saying morning and evening a ` Hail Mary , full of grace , ' and ` Our Father which art in heaven ' ? 
Yes , do that , for my sake , to oblige me . 
That wo n't cost you anything . 
Will you promise me ? '' 
The poor devil promised . 
The cure came back day after day . 
He chatted with the landlady ; and even told anecdotes interspersed with jokes and puns that Hippolyte did not understand . 
Then , as soon as he could , he fell back upon matters of religion , putting on an appropriate expression of face . 
His zeal seemed successful , for the club-foot soon manifested a desire to go on a pilgrimage to Bon-Secours if he were cured ; to which Monsieur Bournisien replied that he saw no objection ; two precautions were better than one ; it was no risk anyhow . 
The druggist was indignant at what he called the manoeuvres of the priest ; they were prejudicial , he said , to Hippolyte 's convalescence , and he kept repeating to Madame Lefrancois , `` Leave him alone ! 
leave him alone ! 
You perturb his morals with your mysticism . '' 
But the good woman would no longer listen to him ; he was the cause of it all . 
From a spirit of contradiction she hung up near the bedside of the patient a basin filled with holy-water and a branch of box . 
Religion , however , seemed no more able to succour him than surgery , and the invincible gangrene still spread from the extremities towards the stomach . 
It was all very well to vary the potions and change the poultices ; the muscles each day rotted more and more ; and at last Charles replied by an affirmative nod of the head when Mere Lefrancois , asked him if she could not , as a forlorn hope , send for Monsieur Canivet of Neufchatel , who was a celebrity . 
A doctor of medicine , fifty years of age , enjoying a good position and self-possessed , Charles 's colleague did not refrain from laughing disdainfully when he had uncovered the leg , mortified to the knee . 
Then having flatly declared that it must be amputated , he went off to the chemist 's to rail at the asses who could have reduced a poor man to such a state . 
Shaking Monsieur Homais by the button of his coat , he shouted out in the shop -- `` These are the inventions of Paris ! 
These are the ideas of those gentry of the capital ! 
It is like strabismus , chloroform , lithotrity , a heap of monstrosities that the Government ought to prohibit . 
But they want to do the clever , and they cram you with remedies without , troubling about the consequences . 
We are not so clever , not we ! 
We are not savants , coxcombs , fops ! 
We are practitioners ; we cure people , and we should not dream of operating on anyone who is in perfect health . 
Straighten club-feet ! 
As if one could straighten club-feet ! 
It is as if one wished , for example , to make a hunchback straight ! '' 
Homais suffered as he listened to this discourse , and he concealed his discomfort beneath a courtier 's smile ; for he needed to humour Monsier Canivet , whose prescriptions sometimes came as far as Yonville . 
So he did not take up the defence of Bovary ; he did not even make a single remark , and , renouncing his principles , he sacrificed his dignity to the more serious interests of his business . 
This amputation of the thigh by Doctor Canivet was a great event in the village . 
On that day all the inhabitants got up earlier , and the Grande Rue , although full of people , had something lugubrious about it , as if an execution had been expected . 
At the grocer 's they discussed Hippolyte 's illness ; the shops did no business , and Madame Tuvache , the mayor 's wife , did not stir from her window , such was her impatience to see the operator arrive . 
He came in his gig , which he drove himself . 
But the springs of the right side having at length given way beneath the weight of his corpulence , it happened that the carriage as it rolled along leaned over a little , and on the other cushion near him could be seen a large box covered in red sheep-leather , whose three brass clasps shone grandly . 
After he had entered like a whirlwind the porch of the `` Lion d'Or , '' the doctor , shouting very loud , ordered them to unharness his horse . 
Then he went into the stable to see that she was eating her oats all right ; for on arriving at a patient 's he first of all looked after his mare and his gig . 
People even said about this -- `` Ah ! 
Monsieur Canivet 's a character ! '' 
And he was the more esteemed for this imperturbable coolness . 
The universe to the last man might have died , and he would not have missed the smallest of his habits . 
Homais presented himself . 
`` I count on you , '' said the doctor . 
`` Are we ready ? 
Come along ! '' 
But the druggist , turning red , confessed that he was too sensitive to assist at such an operation . 
`` When one is a simple spectator , '' he said , `` the imagination , you know , is impressed . 
And then I have such a nervous system ! '' 
`` Pshaw ! '' 
interrupted Canivet ; `` on the contrary , you seem to me inclined to apoplexy . 
Besides , that does n't astonish me , for you chemist fellows are always poking about your kitchens , which must end by spoiling your constitutions . 
Now just look at me . 
I get up every day at four o'clock ; I shave with cold water -LRB- and am never cold -RRB- . 
I do n't wear flannels , and I never catch cold ; my carcass is good enough ! 
I live now in one way , now in another , like a philosopher , taking pot-luck ; that is why I am not squeamish like you , and it is as indifferent to me to carve a Christian as the first fowl that turns up . 
Then , perhaps , you will say , habit ! 
habit ! '' 
Then , without any consideration for Hippolyte , who was sweating with agony between his sheets , these gentlemen entered into a conversation , in which the druggist compared the coolness of a surgeon to that of a general ; and this comparison was pleasing to Canivet , who launched out on the exigencies of his art . 
He looked upon , it as a sacred office , although the ordinary practitioners dishonoured it . 
At last , coming back to the patient , he examined the bandages brought by Homais , the same that had appeared for the club-foot , and asked for someone to hold the limb for him . 
Lestiboudois was sent for , and Monsieur Canivet having turned up his sleeves , passed into the billiard-room , while the druggist stayed with Artemise and the landlady , both whiter than their aprons , and with ears strained towards the door . 
Bovary during this time did not dare to stir from his house . 
He kept downstairs in the sitting-room by the side of the fireless chimney , his chin on his breast , his hands clasped , his eyes staring . 
`` What a mishap ! '' 
he thought , `` what a mishap ! '' 
Perhaps , after all , he had made some slip . 
He thought it over , but could hit upon nothing . 
But the most famous surgeons also made mistakes ; and that is what no one would ever believe ! 
People , on the contrary , would laugh , jeer ! 
It would spread as far as Forges , as Neufchatel , as Rouen , everywhere ! 
Who could say if his colleagues would not write against him . 
Polemics would ensue ; he would have to answer in the papers . 
Hippolyte might even prosecute him . 
He saw himself dishonoured , ruined , lost ; and his imagination , assailed by a world of hypotheses , tossed amongst them like an empty cask borne by the sea and floating upon the waves . 
Emma , opposite , watched him ; she did not share his humiliation ; she felt another -- that of having supposed such a man was worth anything . 
As if twenty times already she had not sufficiently perceived his mediocrity . 
Charles was walking up and down the room ; his boots creaked on the floor . 
`` Sit down , '' she said ; `` you fidget me . '' 
He sat down again . 
How was it that she -- she , who was so intelligent -- could have allowed herself to be deceived again ? 
and through what deplorable madness had she thus ruined her life by continual sacrifices ? 
She recalled all her instincts of luxury , all the privations of her soul , the sordidness of marriage , of the household , her dream sinking into the mire like wounded swallows ; all that she had longed for , all that she had denied herself , all that she might have had ! 
And for what ? 
for what ? 
In the midst of the silence that hung over the village a heart-rending cry rose on the air . 
Bovary turned white to fainting . 
She knit her brows with a nervous gesture , then went on . 
And it was for him , for this creature , for this man , who understood nothing , who felt nothing ! 
For he was there quite quiet , not even suspecting that the ridicule of his name would henceforth sully hers as well as his . 
She had made efforts to love him , and she had repented with tears for having yielded to another ! 
`` But it was perhaps a valgus ! '' 
suddenly exclaimed Bovary , who was meditating . 
At the unexpected shock of this phrase falling on her thought like a leaden bullet on a silver plate , Emma , shuddering , raised her head in order to find out what he meant to say ; and they looked at the other in silence , almost amazed to see each other , so far sundered were they by their inner thoughts . 
Charles gazed at her with the dull look of a drunken man , while he listened motionless to the last cries of the sufferer , that followed each other in long-drawn modulations , broken by sharp spasms like the far-off howling of some beast being slaughtered . 
Emma bit her wan lips , and rolling between her fingers a piece of coral that she had broken , fixed on Charles the burning glance of her eyes like two arrows of fire about to dart forth . 
Everything in him irritated her now ; his face , his dress , what he did not say , his whole person , his existence , in fine . 
She repented of her past virtue as of a crime , and what still remained of it rumbled away beneath the furious blows of her pride . 
She revelled in all the evil ironies of triumphant adultery . 
The memory of her lover came back to her with dazzling attractions ; she threw her whole soul into it , borne away towards this image with a fresh enthusiasm ; and Charles seemed to her as much removed from her life , as absent forever , as impossible and annihilated , as if he had been about to die and were passing under her eyes . 
There was a sound of steps on the pavement . 
Charles looked up , and through the lowered blinds he saw at the corner of the market in the broad sunshine Dr. Canivet , who was wiping his brow with his handkerchief . 
Homais , behind him , was carrying a large red box in his hand , and both were going towards the chemist 's . 
Then with a feeling of sudden tenderness and discouragement Charles turned to his wife saying to her -- `` Oh , kiss me , my own ! '' 
`` Leave me ! '' 
she said , red with anger . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
he asked , stupefied . 
`` Be calm ; compose yourself . 
You know well enough that I love you . 
Come ! '' 
`` Enough ! '' 
she cried with a terrible look . 
And escaping from the room , Emma closed the door so violently that the barometer fell from the wall and smashed on the floor . 
Charles sank back into his arm-chair overwhelmed , trying to discover what could be wrong with her , fancying some nervous illness , weeping , and vaguely feeling something fatal and incomprehensible whirling round him . 
When Rodolphe came to the garden that evening , he found his mistress waiting for him at the foot of the steps on the lowest stair . 
They threw their arms round one another , and all their rancour melted like snow beneath the warmth of that kiss . 
They began to love one another again . 
Often , even in the middle of the day , Emma suddenly wrote to him , then from the window made a sign to Justin , who , taking his apron off , quickly ran to La Huchette . 
Rodolphe would come ; she had sent for him to tell him that she was bored , that her husband was odious , her life frightful . 
`` But what can I do ? '' 
he cried one day impatiently . 
`` Ah ! 
if you would -- '' She was sitting on the floor between his knees , her hair loose , her look lost . 
`` Why , what ? '' 
said Rodolphe . 
She sighed . 
`` We would go and live elsewhere -- somewhere ! '' 
`` You are really mad ! '' 
he said laughing . 
`` How could that be possible ? '' 
She returned to the subject ; he pretended not to understand , and turned the conversation . 
What he did not understand was all this worry about so simple an affair as love . 
She had a motive , a reason , and , as it were , a pendant to her affection . 
Her tenderness , in fact , grew each day with her repulsion to her husband . 
The more she gave up herself to the one , the more she loathed the other . 
Never had Charles seemed to her so disagreeable , to have such stodgy fingers , such vulgar ways , to be so dull as when they found themselves together after her meeting with Rodolphe . 
Then , while playing the spouse and virtue , she was burning at the thought of that head whose black hair fell in a curl over the sunburnt brow , of that form at once so strong and elegant , of that man , in a word , who had such experience in his reasoning , such passion in his desires . 
It was for him that she filed her nails with the care of a chaser , and that there was never enough cold-cream for her skin , nor of patchouli for her handkerchiefs . 
She loaded herself with bracelets , rings , and necklaces . 
When he was coming she filled the two large blue glass vases with roses , and prepared her room and her person like a courtesan expecting a prince . 
The servant had to be constantly washing linen , and all day Felicite did not stir from the kitchen , where little Justin , who often kept her company , watched her at work . 
With his elbows on the long board on which she was ironing , he greedily watched all these women 's clothes spread about him , the dimity petticoats , the fichus , the collars , and the drawers with running strings , wide at the hips and growing narrower below . 
`` What is that for ? '' 
asked the young fellow , passing his hand over the crinoline or the hooks and eyes . 
`` Why , have n't you ever seen anything ? '' 
Felicite answered laughing . 
`` As if your mistress , Madame Homais , did n't wear the same . '' 
`` Oh , I daresay ! 
Madame Homais ! '' 
And he added with a meditative air , `` As if she were a lady like madame ! '' 
But Felicite grew impatient of seeing him hanging round her . 
She was six years older than he , and Theodore , Monsieur Guillaumin 's servant , was beginning to pay court to her . 
`` Let me alone , '' she said , moving her pot of starch . 
`` You 'd better be off and pound almonds ; you are always dangling about women . 
Before you meddle with such things , bad boy , wait till you 've got a beard to your chin . '' 
`` Oh , do n't be cross ! 
I 'll go and clean her boots . '' 
And he at once took down from the shelf Emma 's boots , all coated with mud , the mud of the rendezvous , that crumbled into powder beneath his fingers , and that he watched as it gently rose in a ray of sunlight . 
`` How afraid you are of spoiling them ! '' 
said the servant , who was n't so particular when she cleaned them herself , because as soon as the stuff of the boots was no longer fresh madame handed them over to her . 
Emma had a number in her cupboard that she squandered one after the other , without Charles allowing himself the slightest observation . 
So also he disbursed three hundred francs for a wooden leg that she thought proper to make a present of to Hippolyte . 
Its top was covered with cork , and it had spring joints , a complicated mechanism , covered over by black trousers ending in a patent-leather boot . 
But Hippolyte , not daring to use such a handsome leg every day , begged Madame Bovary to get him another more convenient one . 
The doctor , of course , had again to defray the expense of this purchase . 
So little by little the stable-man took up his work again . 
One saw him running about the village as before , and when Charles heard from afar the sharp noise of the wooden leg , he at once went in another direction . 
It was Monsieur Lheureux , the shopkeeper , who had undertaken the order ; this provided him with an excuse for visiting Emma . 
He chatted with her about the new goods from Paris , about a thousand feminine trifles , made himself very obliging , and never asked for his money . 
Emma yielded to this lazy mode of satisfying all her caprices . 
Thus she wanted to have a very handsome ridding-whip that was at an umbrella-maker 's at Rouen to give to Rodolphe . 
The week after Monsieur Lheureux placed it on her table . 
But the next day he called on her with a bill for two hundred and seventy francs , not counting the centimes . 
Emma was much embarrassed ; all the drawers of the writing-table were empty ; they owed over a fortnight 's wages to Lestiboudois , two quarters to the servant , for any quantity of other things , and Bovary was impatiently expecting Monsieur Derozeray 's account , which he was in the habit of paying every year about Midsummer . 
She succeeded at first in putting off Lheureux . 
At last he lost patience ; he was being sued ; his capital was out , and unless he got some in he should be forced to take back all the goods she had received . 
`` Oh , very well , take them ! '' 
said Emma . 
`` I was only joking , '' he replied ; `` the only thing I regret is the whip . 
My word ! 
I 'll ask monsieur to return it to me . '' 
`` No , no ! '' 
she said . 
`` Ah ! 
I 've got you ! '' 
thought Lheureux . 
And , certain of his discovery , he went out repeating to himself in an undertone , and with his usual low whistle -- `` Good ! 
we shall see ! 
we shall see ! '' 
She was thinking how to get out of this when the servant coming in put on the mantelpiece a small roll of blue paper `` from Monsieur Derozeray 's . '' 
Emma pounced upon and opened it . 
It contained fifteen napoleons ; it was the account . 
She heard Charles on the stairs ; threw the gold to the back of her drawer , and took out the key . 
Three days after Lheureux reappeared . 
`` I have an arrangement to suggest to you , '' he said . 
`` If , instead of the sum agreed on , you would take -- '' `` Here it is , '' she said placing fourteen napoleons in his hand . 
The tradesman was dumfounded . 
Then , to conceal his disappointment , he was profuse in apologies and proffers of service , all of which Emma declined ; then she remained a few moments fingering in the pocket of her apron the two five-franc pieces that he had given her in change . 
She promised herself she would economise in order to pay back later on . 
`` Pshaw ! '' 
she thought , `` he wo n't think about it again . '' 
Besides the riding-whip with its silver-gilt handle , Rodolphe had received a seal with the motto Amor nel cor * furthermore , a scarf for a muffler , and , finally , a cigar-case exactly like the Viscount 's , that Charles had formerly picked up in the road , and that Emma had kept . 
These presents , however , humiliated him ; he refused several ; she insisted , and he ended by obeying , thinking her tyrannical and overexacting . 
* A loving heart . 
Then she had strange ideas . 
`` When midnight strikes , '' she said , `` you must think of me . '' 
And if he confessed that he had not thought of her , there were floods of reproaches that always ended with the eternal question -- `` Do you love me ? '' 
`` Why , of course I love you , '' he answered . 
`` A great deal ? '' 
`` Certainly ! '' 
`` You have n't loved any others ? '' 
`` Did you think you 'd got a virgin ? '' 
he exclaimed laughing . 
Emma cried , and he tried to console her , adorning his protestations with puns . 
`` Oh , '' she went on , `` I love you ! 
I love you so that I could not live without you , do you see ? 
There are times when I long to see you again , when I am torn by all the anger of love . 
