But I should never end if I were to enumerate one after the other all the different products which the earth , well cultivated , like a generous mother , lavishes upon her children . 
Here it is the vine , elsewhere the apple tree for cider , there colza , farther on cheeses and flax . 
Gentlemen , let us not forget flax , which has made such great strides of late years , and to which I will more particularly call your attention . '' 
He had no need to call it , for all the mouths of the multitude were wide open , as if to drink in his words . 
Tuvache by his side listened to him with staring eyes . 
Monsieur Derozerays from time to time softly closed his eyelids , and farther on the chemist , with his son Napoleon between his knees , put his hand behind his ear in order not to lose a syllable . 
The chins of the other members of the jury went slowly up and down in their waistcoats in sign of approval . 
The firemen at the foot of the platform rested on their bayonets ; and Binet , motionless , stood with out-turned elbows , the point of his sabre in the air . 
Perhaps he could hear , but certainly he could see nothing , because of the visor of his helmet , that fell down on his nose . 
His lieutenant , the youngest son of Monsieur Tuvache , had a bigger one , for his was enormous , and shook on his head , and from it an end of his cotton scarf peeped out . 
He smiled beneath it with a perfectly infantine sweetness , and his pale little face , whence drops were running , wore an expression of enjoyment and sleepiness . 
The square as far as the houses was crowded with people . 
One saw folk leaning on their elbows at all the windows , others standing at doors , and Justin , in front of the chemist 's shop , seemed quite transfixed by the sight of what he was looking at . 
In spite of the silence Monsieur Lieuvain 's voice was lost in the air . 
It reached you in fragments of phrases , and interrupted here and there by the creaking of chairs in the crowd ; then you suddenly heard the long bellowing of an ox , or else the bleating of the lambs , who answered one another at street corners . 
In fact , the cowherds and shepherds had driven their beasts thus far , and these lowed from time to time , while with their tongues they tore down some scrap of foliage that hung above their mouths . 
Rodolphe had drawn nearer to Emma , and said to her in a low voice , speaking rapidly -- `` Does not this conspiracy of the world revolt you ? 
Is there a single sentiment it does not condemn ? 
The noblest instincts , the purest sympathies are persecuted , slandered ; and if at length two poor souls do meet , all is so organised that they can not blend together . 
Yet they will make the attempt ; they will flutter their wings ; they will call upon each other . 
Oh ! 
no matter . 
Sooner or later , in six months , ten years , they will come together , will love ; for fate has decreed it , and they are born one for the other . '' 
His arms were folded across his knees , and thus lifting his face towards Emma , close by her , he looked fixedly at her . 
She noticed in his eyes small golden lines radiating from black pupils ; she even smelt the perfume of the pomade that made his hair glossy . 
Then a faintness came over her ; she recalled the Viscount who had waltzed with her at Vaubyessard , and his beard exhaled like this air an odour of vanilla and citron , and mechanically she half-closed her eyes the better to breathe it in . 
But in making this movement , as she leant back in her chair , she saw in the distance , right on the line of the horizon , the old diligence , the `` Hirondelle , '' that was slowly descending the hill of Leux , dragging after it a long trail of dust . 
It was in this yellow carriage that Leon had so often come back to her , and by this route down there that he had gone for ever . 
She fancied she saw him opposite at his windows ; then all grew confused ; clouds gathered ; it seemed to her that she was again turning in the waltz under the light of the lustres on the arm of the Viscount , and that Leon was not far away , that he was coming ; and yet all the time she was conscious of the scent of Rodolphe 's head by her side . 
This sweetness of sensation pierced through her old desires , and these , like grains of sand under a gust of wind , eddied to and fro in the subtle breath of the perfume which suffused her soul . 
She opened wide her nostrils several times to drink in the freshness of the ivy round the capitals . 
She took off her gloves , she wiped her hands , then fanned her face with her handkerchief , while athwart the throbbing of her temples she heard the murmur of the crowd and the voice of the councillor intoning his phrases . 
He said -- `` Continue , persevere ; listen neither to the suggestions of routine , nor to the over-hasty councils of a rash empiricism . 
`` Apply yourselves , above all , to the amelioration of the soil , to good manures , to the development of the equine , bovine , ovine , and porcine races . 
Let these shows be to you pacific arenas , where the victor in leaving it will hold forth a hand to the vanquished , and will fraternise with him in the hope of better success . 
And you , aged servants , humble domestics , whose hard labour no Government up to this day has taken into consideration , come hither to receive the reward of your silent virtues , and be assured that the state henceforward has its eye upon you ; that it encourages you , protects you ; that it will accede to your just demands , and alleviate as much as in it lies the burden of your painful sacrifices . '' 
Monsieur Lieuvain then sat down ; Monsieur Derozerays got up , beginning another speech . 
His was not perhaps so florid as that of the councillor , but it recommended itself by a more direct style , that is to say , by more special knowledge and more elevated considerations . 
Thus the praise of the Government took up less space in it ; religion and agriculture more . 
He showed in it the relations of these two , and how they had always contributed to civilisation . 
Rodolphe with Madame Bovary was talking dreams , presentiments , magnetism . 
Going back to the cradle of society , the orator painted those fierce times when men lived on acorns in the heart of woods . 
Then they had left off the skins of beasts , had put on cloth , tilled the soil , planted the vine . 
Was this a good , and in this discovery was there not more of injury than of gain ? 
Monsieur Derozerays set himself this problem . 
From magnetism little by little Rodolphe had come to affinities , and while the president was citing Cincinnatus and his plough , Diocletian , planting his cabbages , and the Emperors of China inaugurating the year by the sowing of seed , the young man was explaining to the young woman that these irresistible attractions find their cause in some previous state of existence . 
`` Thus we , '' he said , `` why did we come to know one another ? 
What chance willed it ? 
It was because across the infinite , like two streams that flow but to unite ; our special bents of mind had driven us towards each other . '' 
And he seized her hand ; she did not withdraw it . 
`` For good farming generally ! '' 
cried the president . 
`` Just now , for example , when I went to your house . '' 
`` To Monsieur Bizat of Quincampoix . '' 
`` Did I know I should accompany you ? '' 
`` Seventy francs . '' 
`` A hundred times I wished to go ; and I followed you -- I remained . '' 
`` Manures ! '' 
`` And I shall remain to-night , to-morrow , all other days , all my life ! '' 
`` To Monsieur Caron of Argueil , a gold medal ! '' 
`` For I have never in the society of any other person found so complete a charm . '' 
`` To Monsieur Bain of Givry-Saint-Martin . '' 
`` And I shall carry away with me the remembrance of you . '' 
`` For a merino ram ! '' 
`` But you will forget me ; I shall pass away like a shadow . '' 
`` To Monsieur Belot of Notre-Dame . '' 
`` Oh , no ! 
I shall be something in your thought , in your life , shall I not ? '' 
`` Porcine race ; prizes -- equal , to Messrs. Leherisse and Cullembourg , sixty francs ! '' 
Rodolphe was pressing her hand , and he felt it all warm and quivering like a captive dove that wants to fly away ; but , whether she was trying to take it away or whether she was answering his pressure ; she made a movement with her fingers . 
He exclaimed -- `` Oh , I thank you ! 
You do not repulse me ! 
You are good ! 
You understand that I am yours ! 
Let me look at you ; let me contemplate you ! '' 
A gust of wind that blew in at the window ruffled the cloth on the table , and in the square below all the great caps of the peasant women were uplifted by it like the wings of white butterflies fluttering . 
`` Use of oil-cakes , '' continued the president . 
He was hurrying on : `` Flemish manure-flax-growing-drainage-long leases-domestic service . '' 
Rodolphe was no longer speaking . 
They looked at one another . 
A supreme desire made their dry lips tremble , and wearily , without an effort , their fingers intertwined . 
`` Catherine Nicaise Elizabeth Leroux , of Sassetot-la-Guerriere , for fifty-four years of service at the same farm , a silver medal -- value , twenty-five francs ! '' 
`` Where is Catherine Leroux ? '' 
repeated the councillor . 
She did not present herself , and one could hear voices whispering -- `` Go up ! '' 
`` Do n't be afraid ! '' 
`` Oh , how stupid she is ! '' 
`` Well , is she there ? '' 
cried Tuvache . 
`` Yes ; here she is . '' 
`` Then let her come up ! '' 
Then there came forward on the platform a little old woman with timid bearing , who seemed to shrink within her poor clothes . 
On her feet she wore heavy wooden clogs , and from her hips hung a large blue apron . 
Her pale face framed in a borderless cap was more wrinkled than a withered russet apple . 
And from the sleeves of her red jacket looked out two large hands with knotty joints , the dust of barns , the potash of washing the grease of wools had so encrusted , roughened , hardened these that they seemed dirty , although they had been rinsed in clear water ; and by dint of long service they remained half open , as if to bear humble witness for themselves of so much suffering endured . 
Something of monastic rigidity dignified her face . 
Nothing of sadness or of emotion weakened that pale look . 
In her constant living with animals she had caught their dumbness and their calm . 
It was the first time that she found herself in the midst of so large a company , and inwardly scared by the flags , the drums , the gentlemen in frock-coats , and the order of the councillor , she stood motionless , not knowing whether to advance or run away , nor why the crowd was pushing her and the jury were smiling at her . 
Thus stood before these radiant bourgeois this half-century of servitude . 
`` Approach , venerable Catherine Nicaise Elizabeth Leroux ! '' 
said the councillor , who had taken the list of prize-winners from the president ; and , looking at the piece of paper and the old woman by turns , he repeated in a fatherly tone -- `` Approach ! 
approach ! '' 
`` Are you deaf ? '' 
said Tuvache , fidgeting in his armchair ; and he began shouting in her ear , `` Fifty-four years of service . 
A silver medal ! 
Twenty-five francs ! 
For you ! '' 
Then , when she had her medal , she looked at it , and a smile of beatitude spread over her face ; and as she walked away they could hear her muttering `` I 'll give it to our cure up home , to say some masses for me ! '' 
`` What fanaticism ! '' 
exclaimed the chemist , leaning across to the notary . 
The meeting was over , the crowd dispersed , and now that the speeches had been read , each one fell back into his place again , and everything into the old grooves ; the masters bullied the servants , and these struck the animals , indolent victors , going back to the stalls , a green-crown on their horns . 
The National Guards , however , had gone up to the first floor of the town hall with buns spitted on their bayonets , and the drummer of the battalion carried a basket with bottles . 
Madame Bovary took Rodolphe 's arm ; he saw her home ; they separated at her door ; then he walked about alone in the meadow while he waited for the time of the banquet . 
The feast was long , noisy , ill served ; the guests were so crowded that they could hardly move their elbows ; and the narrow planks used for forms almost broke down under their weight . 
They ate hugely . 
Each one stuffed himself on his own account . 
Sweat stood on every brow , and a whitish steam , like the vapour of a stream on an autumn morning , floated above the table between the hanging lamps . 
Rodolphe , leaning against the calico of the tent was thinking so earnestly of Emma that he heard nothing . 
Behind him on the grass the servants were piling up the dirty plates , his neighbours were talking ; he did not answer them ; they filled his glass , and there was silence in his thoughts in spite of the growing noise . 
He was dreaming of what she had said , of the line of her lips ; her face , as in a magic mirror , shone on the plates of the shakos , the folds of her gown fell along the walls , and days of love unrolled to all infinity before him in the vistas of the future . 
He saw her again in the evening during the fireworks , but she was with her husband , Madame Homais , and the druggist , who was worrying about the danger of stray rockets , and every moment he left the company to go and give some advice to Binet . 
The pyrotechnic pieces sent to Monsieur Tuvache had , through an excess of caution , been shut up in his cellar , and so the damp powder would not light , and the principal set piece , that was to represent a dragon biting his tail , failed completely . 
Now and then a meagre Roman-candle went off ; then the gaping crowd sent up a shout that mingled with the cry of the women , whose waists were being squeezed in the darkness . 
Emma silently nestled against Charles 's shoulder ; then , raising her chin , she watched the luminous rays of the rockets against the dark sky . 
Rodolphe gazed at her in the light of the burning lanterns . 
They went out one by one . 
The stars shone out . 
A few crops of rain began to fall . 
She knotted her fichu round her bare head . 
At this moment the councillor 's carriage came out from the inn . 
His coachman , who was drunk , suddenly dozed off , and one could see from the distance , above the hood , between the two lanterns , the mass of his body , that swayed from right to left with the giving of the traces . 
`` Truly , '' said the druggist , `` one ought to proceed most rigorously against drunkenness ! 
I should like to see written up weekly at the door of the town hall on a board ad hoc * the names of all those who during the week got intoxicated on alcohol . 
Besides , with regard to statistics , one would thus have , as it were , public records that one could refer to in case of need . 
But excuse me ! '' 
* Specifically for that . 
And he once more ran off to the captain . 
The latter was going back to see his lathe again . 
`` Perhaps you would not do ill , '' Homais said to him , `` to send one of your men , or to go yourself -- '' `` Leave me alone ! '' 
answered the tax-collector . 
`` It 's all right ! '' 
`` Do not be uneasy , '' said the druggist , when he returned to his friends . 
`` Monsieur Binet has assured me that all precautions have been taken . 
No sparks have fallen ; the pumps are full . 
Let us go to rest . '' 
`` Ma foi ! 
I want it , '' said Madame Homais , yawning at large . 
`` But never mind ; we 've had a beautiful day for our fete . '' 
Rodolphe repeated in a low voice , and with a tender look , `` Oh , yes ! 
very beautiful ! '' 
And having bowed to one another , they separated . 
Two days later , in the `` Final de Rouen , '' there was a long article on the show . 
Homais had composed it with verve the very next morning . 
`` Why these festoons , these flowers , these garlands ? 
Whither hurries this crowd like the waves of a furious sea under the torrents of a tropical sun pouring its heat upon our heads ? '' 
Then he spoke of the condition of the peasants . 
Certainly the Government was doing much , but not enough . 
`` Courage ! '' 
he cried to it ; `` a thousand reforms are indispensable ; let us accomplish them ! '' 
Then touching on the entry of the councillor , he did not forget `` the martial air of our militia ; '' nor `` our most merry village maidens ; '' nor the `` bald-headed old men like patriarchs who were there , and of whom some , the remnants of our phalanxes , still felt their hearts beat at the manly sound of the drums . '' 
He cited himself among the first of the members of the jury , and he even called attention in a note to the fact that Monsieur Homais , chemist , had sent a memoir on cider to the agricultural society . 
When he came to the distribution of the prizes , he painted the joy of the prize-winners in dithyrambic strophes . 
`` The father embraced the son , the brother the brother , the husband his consort . 
More than one showed his humble medal with pride ; and no doubt when he got home to his good housewife , he hung it up weeping on the modest walls of his cot . 
`` About six o'clock a banquet prepared in the meadow of Monsieur Leigeard brought together the principal personages of the fete . 
The greatest cordiality reigned here . 
Divers toasts were proposed : Monsieur Lieuvain , the King ; Monsieur Tuvache , the Prefect ; Monsieur Derozerays , Agriculture ; Monsieur Homais , Industry and the Fine Arts , those twin sisters ; Monsieur Leplichey , Progress . 
In the evening some brilliant fireworks on a sudden illumined the air . 
One would have called it a veritable kaleidoscope , a real operatic scene ; and for a moment our little locality might have thought itself transported into the midst of a dream of the ` Thousand and One Nights . ' 
Let us state that no untoward event disturbed this family meeting . '' 
And he added `` Only the absence of the clergy was remarked . 
No doubt the priests understand progress in another fashion . 
Just as you please , messieurs the followers of Loyola ! '' 
Six weeks passed . 
Rodolphe did not come again . 
At last one evening he appeared . 
The day after the show he had said to himself -- `` We must n't go back too soon ; that would be a mistake . '' 
And at the end of a week he had gone off hunting . 
After the hunting he had thought it was too late , and then he reasoned thus -- `` If from the first day she loved me , she must from impatience to see me again love me more . 
Let 's go on with it ! '' 
And he knew that his calculation had been right when , on entering the room , he saw Emma turn pale . 
She was alone . 
The day was drawing in . 
The small muslin curtain along the windows deepened the twilight , and the gilding of the barometer , on which the rays of the sun fell , shone in the looking-glass between the meshes of the coral . 
Rodolphe remained standing , and Emma hardly answered his first conventional phrases . 
`` I , '' he said , `` have been busy . 
I have been ill . '' 
`` Seriously ? '' 
she cried . 
`` Well , '' said Rodolphe , sitting down at her side on a footstool , `` no ; it was because I did not want to come back . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Can you not guess ? '' 
He looked at her again , but so hard that she lowered her head , blushing . 
He went on -- `` Emma ! '' 
`` Sir , '' she said , drawing back a little . 
`` Ah ! 
you see , '' replied he in a melancholy voice , `` that I was right not to come back ; for this name , this name that fills my whole soul , and that escaped me , you forbid me to use ! 
Madame Bovary ! 
why all the world calls you thus ! 
Besides , it is not your name ; it is the name of another ! '' 
He repeated , `` of another ! '' 
And he hid his face in his hands . 
`` Yes , I think of you constantly . 
The memory of you drives me to despair . 
Ah ! 
forgive me ! 
I will leave you ! 
Farewell ! 
I will go far away , so far that you will never hear of me again ; and yet -- to-day -- I know not what force impelled me towards you . 
For one does not struggle against Heaven ; one can not resist the smile of angels ; one is carried away by that which is beautiful , charming , adorable . '' 
It was the first time that Emma had heard such words spoken to herself , and her pride , like one who reposes bathed in warmth , expanded softly and fully at this glowing language . 
`` But if I did not come , '' he continued , `` if I could not see you , at least I have gazed long on all that surrounds you . 
At night-every night-I arose ; I came hither ; I watched your house , its glimmering in the moon , the trees in the garden swaying before your window , and the little lamp , a gleam shining through the window-panes in the darkness . 
Ah ! 
you never knew that there , so near you , so far from you , was a poor wretch ! '' 
She turned towards him with a sob . 
`` Oh , you are good ! '' 
she said . 
`` No , I love you , that is all ! 
You do not doubt that ! 
Tell me -- one word -- only one word ! '' 
And Rodolphe imperceptibly glided from the footstool to the ground ; but a sound of wooden shoes was heard in the kitchen , and he noticed the door of the room was not closed . 
`` How kind it would be of you , '' he went on , rising , `` if you would humour a whim of mine . '' 
It was to go over her house ; he wanted to know it ; and Madame Bovary seeing no objection to this , they both rose , when Charles came in . 
`` Good morning , doctor , '' Rodolphe said to him . 
The doctor , flattered at this unexpected title , launched out into obsequious phrases . 
Of this the other took advantage to pull himself together a little . 
`` Madame was speaking to me , '' he then said , `` about her health . '' 
Charles interrupted him ; he had indeed a thousand anxieties ; his wife 's palpitations of the heart were beginning again . 
Then Rodolphe asked if riding would not be good . 
`` Certainly ! 
excellent ! 
just the thing ! 
There 's an idea ! 
You ought to follow it up . '' 
And as she objected that she had no horse , Monsieur Rodolphe offered one . 
She refused his offer ; he did not insist . 
Then to explain his visit he said that his ploughman , the man of the blood-letting , still suffered from giddiness . 
`` I 'll call around , '' said Bovary . 
`` No , no ! 
I 'll send him to you ; we 'll come ; that will be more convenient for you . '' 
`` Ah ! 
very good ! 
I thank you . '' 
And as soon as they were alone , `` Why do n't you accept Monsieur Boulanger 's kind offer ? '' 
She assumed a sulky air , invented a thousand excuses , and finally declared that perhaps it would look odd . 
`` Well , what the deuce do I care for that ? '' 
said Charles , making a pirouette . 
`` Health before everything ! 
You are wrong . '' 
`` And how do you think I can ride when I have n't got a habit ? '' 
`` You must order one , '' he answered . 
The riding-habit decided her . 
When the habit was ready , Charles wrote to Monsieur Boulanger that his wife was at his command , and that they counted on his good-nature . 
The next day at noon Rodolphe appeared at Charles 's door with two saddle-horses . 
One had pink rosettes at his ears and a deerskin side-saddle . 
Rodolphe had put on high soft boots , saying to himself that no doubt she had never seen anything like them . 
In fact , Emma was charmed with his appearance as he stood on the landing in his great velvet coat and white corduroy breeches . 
She was ready ; she was waiting for him . 
Justin escaped from the chemist 's to see her start , and the chemist also came out . 
He was giving Monsieur Boulanger a little good advice . 
`` An accident happens so easily . 
Be careful ! 
Your horses perhaps are mettlesome . '' 
She heard a noise above her ; it was Felicite drumming on the windowpanes to amuse little Berthe . 
The child blew her a kiss ; her mother answered with a wave of her whip . 
`` A pleasant ride ! '' 
cried Monsieur Homais . 
`` Prudence ! 
above all , prudence ! '' 
And he flourished his newspaper as he saw them disappear . 
As soon as he felt the ground , Emma 's horse set off at a gallop . 
Rodolphe galloped by her side . 
Now and then they exchanged a word . 
Her figure slightly bent , her hand well up , and her right arm stretched out , she gave herself up to the cadence of the movement that rocked her in her saddle . 
At the bottom of the hill Rodolphe gave his horse its head ; they started together at a bound , then at the top suddenly the horses stopped , and her large blue veil fell about her . 
It was early in October . 
There was fog over the land . 
Hazy clouds hovered on the horizon between the outlines of the hills ; others , rent asunder , floated up and disappeared . 
Sometimes through a rift in the clouds , beneath a ray of sunshine , gleamed from afar the roots of Yonville , with the gardens at the water 's edge , the yards , the walls and the church steeple . 
Emma half closed her eyes to pick out her house , and never had this poor village where she lived appeared so small . 
From the height on which they were the whole valley seemed an immense pale lake sending off its vapour into the air . 
Clumps of trees here and there stood out like black rocks , and the tall lines of the poplars that rose above the mist were like a beach stirred by the wind . 
By the side , on the turf between the pines , a brown light shimmered in the warm atmosphere . 
The earth , ruddy like the powder of tobacco , deadened the noise of their steps , and with the edge of their shoes the horses as they walked kicked the fallen fir cones in front of them . 
Rodolphe and Emma thus went along the skirt of the wood . 
She turned away from time to time to avoid his look , and then she saw only the pine trunks in lines , whose monotonous succession made her a little giddy . 
The horses were panting ; the leather of the saddles creaked . 
Just as they were entering the forest the sun shone out . 
`` God protects us ! '' 
said Rodolphe . 
`` Do you think so ? '' 
she said . 
`` Forward ! 
forward ! '' 
he continued . 
He `` tchk 'd '' with his tongue . 
The two beasts set off at a trot . 
Long ferns by the roadside caught in Emma 's stirrup . 
Rodolphe leant forward and removed them as they rode along . 
At other times , to turn aside the branches , he passed close to her , and Emma felt his knee brushing against her leg . 
The sky was now blue , the leaves no longer stirred . 
There were spaces full of heather in flower , and plots of violets alternated with the confused patches of the trees that were grey , fawn , or golden coloured , according to the nature of their leaves . 
Often in the thicket was heard the fluttering of wings , or else the hoarse , soft cry of the ravens flying off amidst the oaks . 
They dismounted . 
Rodolphe fastened up the horses . 
She walked on in front on the moss between the paths . 
But her long habit got in her way , although she held it up by the skirt ; and Rodolphe , walking behind her , saw between the black cloth and the black shoe the fineness of her white stocking , that seemed to him as if it were a part of her nakedness . 
She stopped . 
`` I am tired , '' she said . 
`` Come , try again , '' he went on . 
`` Courage ! '' 
Then some hundred paces farther on she again stopped , and through her veil , that fell sideways from her man 's hat over her hips , her face appeared in a bluish transparency as if she were floating under azure waves . 
`` But where are we going ? '' 
He did not answer . 
She was breathing irregularly . 
Rodolphe looked round him biting his moustache . 
They came to a larger space where the coppice had been cut . 
They sat down on the trunk of a fallen tree , and Rodolphe began speaking to her of his love . 
He did not begin by frightening her with compliments . 
He was calm , serious , melancholy . 
Emma listened to him with bowed head , and stirred the bits of wood on the ground with the tip of her foot . 
But at the words , `` Are not our destinies now one ? '' 
`` Oh , no ! '' 
she replied . 
`` You know that well . 
It is impossible ! '' 
She rose to go . 
He seized her by the wrist . 
She stopped . 
Then , having gazed at him for a few moments with an amorous and humid look , she said hurriedly -- `` Ah ! 
do not speak of it again ! 
Where are the horses ? 
Let us go back . '' 
He made a gesture of anger and annoyance . 
She repeated : `` Where are the horses ? 
Where are the horses ? '' 
Then smiling a strange smile , his pupil fixed , his teeth set , he advanced with outstretched arms . 
She recoiled trembling . 
She stammered : `` Oh , you frighten me ! 
You hurt me ! 
Let me go ! '' 
`` If it must be , '' he went on , his face changing ; and he again became respectful , caressing , timid . 
She gave him her arm . 
They went back . 
He said -- `` What was the matter with you ? 
Why ? 
I do not understand . 
You were mistaken , no doubt . 
In my soul you are as a Madonna on a pedestal , in a place lofty , secure , immaculate . 
But I need you to live ! 
I must have your eyes , your voice , your thought ! 
Be my friend , my sister , my angel ! '' 
And he put out his arm round her waist . 
She feebly tried to disengage herself . 
He supported her thus as they walked along . 
But they heard the two horses browsing on the leaves . 
`` Oh ! 
one moment ! '' 
said Rodolphe . 
`` Do not let us go ! 
Stay ! '' 
He drew her farther on to a small pool where duckweeds made a greenness on the water . 
Faded water lilies lay motionless between the reeds . 
At the noise of their steps in the grass , frogs jumped away to hide themselves . 
`` I am wrong ! 
I am wrong ! '' 
she said . 
`` I am mad to listen to you ! '' 
`` Why ? 
Emma ! 
Emma ! '' 
`` Oh , Rodolphe ! '' 
said the young woman slowly , leaning on his shoulder . 
The cloth of her habit caught against the velvet of his coat . 
She threw back her white neck , swelling with a sigh , and faltering , in tears , with a long shudder and hiding her face , she gave herself up to him -- The shades of night were falling ; the horizontal sun passing between the branches dazzled the eyes . 
Here and there around her , in the leaves or on the ground , trembled luminous patches , as it hummingbirds flying about had scattered their feathers . 
Silence was everywhere ; something sweet seemed to come forth from the trees ; she felt her heart , whose beating had begun again , and the blood coursing through her flesh like a stream of milk . 
Then far away , beyond the wood , on the other hills , she heard a vague prolonged cry , a voice which lingered , and in silence she heard it mingling like music with the last pulsations of her throbbing nerves . 
Rodolphe , a cigar between his lips , was mending with his penknife one of the two broken bridles . 
They returned to Yonville by the same road . 
On the mud they saw again the traces of their horses side by side , the same thickets , the same stones to the grass ; nothing around them seemed changed ; and yet for her something had happened more stupendous than if the mountains had moved in their places . 
Rodolphe now and again bent forward and took her hand to kiss it . 
She was charming on horseback -- upright , with her slender waist , her knee bent on the mane of her horse , her face somewhat flushed by the fresh air in the red of the evening . 
On entering Yonville she made her horse prance in the road . 
People looked at her from the windows . 
At dinner her husband thought she looked well , but she pretended not to hear him when he inquired about her ride , and she remained sitting there with her elbow at the side of her plate between the two lighted candles . 
`` Emma ! '' 
he said . 
`` What ? '' 
`` Well , I spent the afternoon at Monsieur Alexandre 's . 
He has an old cob , still very fine , only a little broken-kneed , and that could be bought ; I am sure , for a hundred crowns . '' 
He added , `` And thinking it might please you , I have bespoken it -- bought it . 
Have I done right ? 
Do tell me ? '' 
She nodded her head in assent ; then a quarter of an hour later -- `` Are you going out to-night ? '' 
she asked . 
`` Yes . 
Why ? '' 
`` Oh , nothing , nothing , my dear ! '' 
And as soon as she had got rid of Charles she went and shut herself up in her room . 
At first she felt stunned ; she saw the trees , the paths , the ditches , Rodolphe , and she again felt the pressure of his arm , while the leaves rustled and the reeds whistled . 
But when she saw herself in the glass she wondered at her face . 
Never had her eyes been so large , so black , of so profound a depth . 
Something subtle about her being transfigured her . 
She repeated , `` I have a lover ! 
a lover ! '' 
delighting at the idea as if a second puberty had come to her . 
So at last she was to know those joys of love , that fever of happiness of which she had despaired ! 
She was entering upon marvels where all would be passion , ecstasy , delirium . 
An azure infinity encompassed her , the heights of sentiment sparkled under her thought , and ordinary existence appeared only afar off , down below in the shade , through the interspaces of these heights . 
Then she recalled the heroines of the books that she had read , and the lyric legion of these adulterous women began to sing in her memory with the voice of sisters that charmed her . 
She became herself , as it were , an actual part of these imaginings , and realised the love-dream of her youth as she saw herself in this type of amorous women whom she had so envied . 
Besides , Emma felt a satisfaction of revenge . 
Had she not suffered enough ? 
But now she triumphed , and the love so long pent up burst forth in full joyous bubblings . 
She tasted it without remorse , without anxiety , without trouble . 
The day following passed with a new sweetness . 
They made vows to one another She told him of her sorrows . 
Rodolphe interrupted her with kisses ; and she looking at him through half-closed eyes , asked him to call her again by her name -- to say that he loved her They were in the forest , as yesterday , in the shed of some woodenshoe maker . 
The walls were of straw , and the roof so low they had to stoop . 
They were seated side by side on a bed of dry leaves . 
From that day forth they wrote to one another regularly every evening . 
Emma placed her letter at the end of the garden , by the river , in a fissure of the wall . 
Rodolphe came to fetch it , and put another there , that she always found fault with as too short . 
One morning , when Charles had gone out before day break , she was seized with the fancy to see Rodolphe at once . 
She would go quickly to La Huchette , stay there an hour , and be back again at Yonville while everyone was still asleep . 
This idea made her pant with desire , and she soon found herself in the middle of the field , walking with rapid steps , without looking behind her . 
Day was just breaking . 
Emma from afar recognised her lover 's house . 
Its two dove-tailed weathercocks stood out black against the pale dawn . 
Beyond the farmyard there was a detached building that she thought must be the chateau She entered -- it was if the doors at her approach had opened wide of their own accord . 
A large straight staircase led up to the corridor . 
Emma raised the latch of a door , and suddenly at the end of the room she saw a man sleeping . 
It was Rodolphe . 
She uttered a cry . 
`` You here ? 
You here ? '' 
he repeated . 
`` How did you manage to come ? 
Ah ! 
your dress is damp . '' 
`` I love you , '' she answered , throwing her arms about his neck . 
This first piece of daring successful , now every time Charles went out early Emma dressed quickly and slipped on tiptoe down the steps that led to the waterside . 
But when the plank for the cows was taken up , she had to go by the walls alongside of the river ; the bank was slippery ; in order not to fall she caught hold of the tufts of faded wallflowers . 
Then she went across ploughed fields , in which she sank , stumbling ; and clogging her thin shoes . 
Her scarf , knotted round her head , fluttered to the wind in the meadows . 
She was afraid of the oxen ; she began to run ; she arrived out of breath , with rosy cheeks , and breathing out from her whole person a fresh perfume of sap , of verdure , of the open air . 
At this hour Rodolphe still slept . 
It was like a spring morning coming into his room . 
The yellow curtains along the windows let a heavy , whitish light enter softly . 
Emma felt about , opening and closing her eyes , while the drops of dew hanging from her hair formed , as it were , a topaz aureole around her face . 
Rodolphe , laughing , drew her to him , and pressed her to his breast . 
Then she examined the apartment , opened the drawers of the tables , combed her hair with his comb , and looked at herself in his shaving-glass . 
Often she even put between her teeth the big pipe that lay on the table by the bed , amongst lemons and pieces of sugar near a bottle of water . 
It took them a good quarter of an hour to say goodbye . 
Then Emma cried . 
She would have wished never to leave Rodolphe . 
Something stronger than herself forced her to him ; so much so , that one day , seeing her come unexpectedly , he frowned as one put out . 
`` What is the matter with you ? '' 
she said . 
`` Are you ill ? 
Tell me ! '' 
At last he declared with a serious air that her visits were becoming imprudent -- that she was compromising herself . 
Gradually Rodolphe 's fears took possession of her . 
At first , love had intoxicated her ; and she had thought of nothing beyond . 
But now that he was indispensable to her life , she feared to lose anything of this , or even that it should be disturbed . 
When she came back from his house she looked all about her , anxiously watching every form that passed in the horizon , and every village window from which she could be seen . 
She listened for steps , cries , the noise of the ploughs , and she stopped short , white , and trembling more than the aspen leaves swaying overhead . 
One morning as she was thus returning , she suddenly thought she saw the long barrel of a carbine that seemed to be aimed at her . 
It stuck out sideways from the end of a small tub half-buried in the grass on the edge of a ditch . 
Emma , half-fainting with terror , nevertheless walked on , and a man stepped out of the tub like a Jack-in-the-box . 
He had gaiters buckled up to the knees , his cap pulled down over his eyes , trembling lips , and a red nose . 
It was Captain Binet lying in ambush for wild ducks . 
`` You ought to have called out long ago ! '' 
he exclaimed ; `` When one sees a gun , one should always give warning . '' 
The tax-collector was thus trying to hide the fright he had had , for a prefectorial order having prohibited duckhunting except in boats , Monsieur Binet , despite his respect for the laws , was infringing them , and so he every moment expected to see the rural guard turn up . 
But this anxiety whetted his pleasure , and , all alone in his tub , he congratulated himself on his luck and on his cuteness . 
At sight of Emma he seemed relieved from a great weight , and at once entered upon a conversation . 
`` It is n't warm ; it 's nipping . '' 
Emma answered nothing . 
He went on -- `` And you 're out so early ? '' 
`` Yes , '' she said stammering ; `` I am just coming from the nurse where my child is . '' 
`` Ah ! 
very good ! 
very good ! 
For myself , I am here , just as you see me , since break of day ; but the weather is so muggy , that unless one had the bird at the mouth of the gun -- '' `` Good evening , Monsieur Binet , '' she interrupted him , turning on her heel . 
`` Your servant , madame , '' he replied drily ; and he went back into his tub . 
Emma regretted having left the tax-collector so abruptly . 
No doubt he would form unfavourable conjectures . 
The story about the nurse was the worst possible excuse , everyone at Yonville knowing that the little Bovary had been at home with her parents for a year . 
Besides , no one was living in this direction ; this path led only to La Huchette . 
Binet , then , would guess whence she came , and he would not keep silence ; he would talk , that was certain . 
She remained until evening racking her brain with every conceivable lying project , and had constantly before her eyes that imbecile with the game-bag . 
Charles after dinner , seeing her gloomy , proposed , by way of distraction , to take her to the chemist 's , and the first person she caught sight of in the shop was the taxcollector again . 
He was standing in front of the counter , lit up by the gleams of the red bottle , and was saying -- `` Please give me half an ounce of vitriol . '' 
`` Justin , '' cried the druggist , `` bring us the sulphuric acid . '' 
Then to Emma , who was going up to Madame Homais ' room , `` No , stay here ; it is n't worth while going up ; she is just coming down . 
Warm yourself at the stove in the meantime . 
