For besides the great length of the whaling voyage , the numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery , and the impossibility of replacing them at the remote harbors usually frequented , it must be remembered , that of all ships , whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds , and especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the success of the voyage most depends . 
Hence , the spare boats , spare spars , and spare lines and harpoons , and spare everythings , almost , but a spare Captain and duplicate ship . 
At the period of our arrival at the Island , the heaviest storage of the Pequod had been almost completed ; comprising her beef , bread , water , fuel , and iron hoops and staves . 
But , as before hinted , for some time there was a continual fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things , both large and small . 
Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad 's sister , a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit , but withal very kindhearted , who seemed resolved that , if she could help it , nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod , after once fairly getting to sea . 
At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the steward 's pantry ; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate 's desk , where he kept his log ; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small of some one 's rheumatic back . 
Never did any woman better deserve her name , which was Charity -- Aunt Charity , as everybody called her . 
And like a sister of charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither , ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety , comfort , and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother Bildad was concerned , and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-saved dollars . 
But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board , as she did the last day , with a long oil-ladle in one hand , and a still longer whaling lance in the other . 
Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all backward . 
