Set all sail , and keep her to the wind ! '' 
And thus , while the one ship went cheerily before the breeze , the other stubbornly fought against it ; and so the two vessels parted ; the crew of the Pequod looking with grave , lingering glances towards the receding Bachelor ; but the Bachelor 's men never heeding their gaze for the lively revelry they were in . 
And as Ahab , leaning over the taffrail , eyed the homewardbound craft , he took from his pocket a small vial of sand , and then looking from the ship to the vial , seemed thereby bringing two remote associations together , for that vial was filled with Nantucket soundings . 
The Dying Whale Not seldom in this life , when , on the right side , fortune 's favorites sail close by us , we , though all adroop before , catch somewhat of the rushing breeze , and joyfully feel our bagging sails fill out . 
So seemed it with the Pequod . 
For next day after encountering the gay Bachelor , whales were seen and four were slain ; and one of them by Ahab . 
It was far down the afternoon ; and when all the spearings of the crimson fight were done ; and floating in the lovely sunset sea and sky , sun and whale both stilly died together ; then , such a sweetness and such plaintiveness , such inwreathing orisons curled up in that rosy air , that it almost seemed as if far over from the deep green convent valleys of the Manilla isles , the Spanish land-breeze , wantonly turned sailor , had gone to sea , freighted with these vesper hymns . 
Soothed again , but only soothed to deeper gloom , Ahab , who had sterned off from the whale , sat intently watching his final wanings from the now tranquil boat . 
For that strange spectacle observable in all sperm whales dying -- the turning sunwards of the head , and so expiring -- that strange spectacle , beheld of such a placid evening , somehow to Ahab conveyed a wondrousness unknown before . 
`` He turns and turns him to it , -- how slowly , but how steadfastly , his homage-rendering and invoking brow , with his last dying motions . 
