The magnetic energy , as developed in the mariner 's needle , is , as all know , essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven ; hence it is not to be much marvelled at , that such things should be . 
In instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel , so as to smite down some of the spars and rigging , the effect upon the needle has at times been still more fatal ; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated , so that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife 's knitting needle . 
But in either case , the needle never again , of itself , recovers the original virtue thus marred or lost ; and if the binnacle compasses be affected , the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship ; even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson . 
Deliberately standing before the binnacle , and eyeing the transpointed compasses , the old man , with the sharp of his extended hand , now took the precise bearing of the sun , and satisfied that the needles were exactly inverted , shouted out his orders for the ship 's course to be changed accordingly . 
The yards were hard up ; and once more the Pequod thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind , for the supposed fair one had only been juggling her . 
Meanwhile , whatever were his own secret thoughts , Starbuck said nothing , but quietly he issued all requisite orders ; while Stubb and Flask -- who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings -- likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced . 
As for the men , though some of them lowly rumbled , their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate . 
But as ever before , the pagan harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed ; or if impressed , it was only with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahab 's . 
For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries . 
But chancing to slip with his ivory heel , he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck . 
