Though thousands of miles from Oregon , still when he smells that savage musk , the rending , goring bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of the prairies , which this instant they may be trampling into dust . 
Thus , then , the muffled rollings of a milky sea ; the bleak rustlings of the festooned frosts of mountains ; the desolate shiftings of the windrowed snows of prairies ; all these , to Ishmael , are as the shaking of that buffalo robe to the frightened colt ! 
Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of which the mystic sign gives forth such hints ; yet with me , as with the colt , somewhere those things must exist . 
Though in many of its aspects this visible world seems formed in love , the invisible spheres were formed in fright . 
But not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness , and learned why it appeals with such power to the soul ; and more strange and far more portentous -- why , as we have seen , it is at once the most meaning symbol of spiritual things , nay , the very veil of the Christian 's Deity ; and yet should be as it is , the intensifying agent in things the most appalling to mankind . 
Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voids and immensities of the universe , and thus stabs us from behind with the thought of annihilation , when beholding the white depths of the milky way ? 
Or is it , that as in essence whiteness is not so much a color as the visible absence of color ; and at the same time the concrete of all colors ; is it for these reasons that there is such a dumb blankness , full of meaning , in a wide landscape of snows -- a colorless , all-color of atheism from which we shrink ? 
And when we consider that other theory of the natural philosophers , that all other earthly hues -- every stately or lovely emblazoning -- the sweet tinges of sunset skies and woods ; yea , and the gilded velvets of butterflies , and the butterfly cheeks of young girls ; all these are but subtile deceits , not actually inherent in substances , but only laid on from without ; so that all deified Nature absolutely paints like the harlot , whose allurements cover nothing but the charnel-house within ; and when we proceed further , and consider that the mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her hues , the great principle of light , for ever remains white or colorless in itself , and if operating without medium upon matter , would touch all objects , even tulips and roses , with its own blank tinge -- pondering all this , the palsied universe lies before us a leper ; and like wilful travellers in Lapland , who refuse to wear colored and coloring glasses upon their eyes , so the wretched infidel gazes himself blind at the monumental white shroud that wraps all the prospect around him . 
And of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol . 
Wonder ye then at the fiery hunt ? . . 
