The whale of to-day is as big as his ancestors in Pliny 's time . 
And if ever I go where Pliny is , I , a whaleman -LRB- more than he was -RRB- , will make bold to tell him so . 
Because I can not understand how it is , that while the Egyptian mummies that were buried thousands of years before even Pliny was born , do not measure so much in their coffins as a modern Kentuckian in his socks ; and while the cattle and other animals sculptured on the oldest Egyptian and Nineveh tablets , by the relative proportions in which they are drawn , just as plainly prove that the high-bred , stall-fed , prize cattle of Smithfield , not only equal , but far exceed in magnitude the fattest of Pharaoh 's fat kine ; in the face of all this , I will not admit that of all animals the whale alone should have degenerated . 
But still another inquiry remains ; one often agitated by the more recondite Nantucketers . 
Whether owing to the almost omniscient look-outs at the mast-heads of the whaleships , now penetrating even through Behring 's straits , and into the remotest secret drawers and lockers of the world ; and the thousand harpoons and lances darted along all continental coasts ; the moot point is , whether Leviathan can long endure so wide a chase , and so remorseless a havoc ; whether he must not at last be exterminated from the waters , and the last whale , like the last man , smoke his last pipe , and then himself evaporate in the final puff . 
Comparing the humped herds of whales with the humped herds of buffalo , which , not forty years ago , overspread by tens of thousands the prairies of Illinois and Missouri , and shook their iron manes and scowled with their thunder-clotted brows upon the sites of populous river-capitals , where now the polite broker sells you land at a dollar an inch ; in such a comparison an irresistible argument would seem furnished , to show that the hunted whale can not now escape speedy extinction . 
But you must look at this matter in every light . 
Though so short a period ago -- not a good lifetime -- the census of the buffalo in Illinois exceeded the census of men now in London , and though at the present day not one horn or hoof of them remains in all that region ; and though the cause of this wondrous extermination was the spear of man ; yet the far different nature of the whale-hunt peremptorily forbids so inglorious an end to the Leviathan . 
Forty men in one ship hunting the Sperm Whales for forty-eight months think they have done extremely well , and thank God , if at last they carry home the oil of forty fish . 
Whereas , in the days of the old Canadian and Indian hunters and trappers of the West , when the far west -LRB- in whose sunset suns still rise -RRB- was a wilderness and a virgin , the same number of moccasined men , for the same number of months , mounted on horse instead of sailing in ships , would have slain not forty , but forty thousand and more buffaloes ; a fact that , if need were , could be statistically stated . 
