Only the infidel sharks in the audacious seas may give ear to such words , when , with tornado brow , and eyes of red murder , and foam-glued lips , Ahab leaped after his prey . 
Meanwhile , all the boats tore on . 
The repeated specific allusions of Flask to `` that whale , '' as he called the fictitious monster which he declared to be incessantly tantalizing his boat 's bow with its tail -- these allusions of his were at times so vivid and life-like , that they would cause some one or two of his men to snatch a fearful look over his shoulder . 
But this was against all rule ; for the oarsmen must put out their eyes , and ram a skewer through their necks ; usages announcing that they must have no organs but ears ; and no limbs but arms , in these critical moments . 
It was a sight full of quick wonder and awe ! 
The vast swells of the omnipotent sea ; the surging , hollow roar they made , as they rolled along the eight gunwales , like gigantic bowls in a boundless bowling-green ; the brief suspended agony of the boat , as it would tip for an instant on the knife-like edge of the sharper waves , that almost seemed threatening to cut it in two ; the sudden profound dip into the watery glens and hollows ; the keen spurrings and goadings to gain the top of the opposite hill ; the headlong , sled-like slide down its other side ; -- all these , with the cries of the headsmen and harpooneers , and the shuddering gasps of the oarsmen , with the wondrous sight of the ivory Pequod bearing down upon her boats with outstretched sails , like a wild hen after her screaming brood ; -- all this was thrilling . 
Not the raw recruit , marching from the bosom of his wife into the fever heat of his first battle ; not the dead man 's ghost encountering the first unknown phantom in the other world ; -- neither of these can feel stranger and stronger emotions than that man does , who for the first time finds himself pulling into the charmed , churned circle of the hunted sperm whale . 
The dancing white water made by the chase was now becoming more and more visible , owing to the increasing darkness of the dun cloud-shadows flung upon the sea . 
The jets of vapor no longer blended , but tilted everywhere to right and left ; the whales seemed separating their wakes . 
The boats were pulled more apart ; Starbuck giving chase to three whales running dead to leeward . 
