One old Sag-Harbor whaleman 's chief reason for questioning the Hebrew story was this : -- He had one of those quaint old-fashioned Bibles , embellished with curious , unscientific plates ; one of which represented Jonah 's whale with two spouts in his head -- a peculiarity only true with respect to a species of the Leviathan -LRB- the Right Whale , and the varieties of that order -RRB- , concerning which the fishermen have this saying , `` A penny roll would choke him '' ; his swallow is so very small . 
But , to this , Bishop Jebb 's anticipative answer is ready . 
It is not necessary , hints the Bishop , that we consider Jonah as tombed in the whale 's belly , but as temporarily lodged in some part of his mouth . 
And this seems reasonable enough in the good Bishop . 
For truly , the Right Whale 's mouth would accommodate a couple of whist-tables , and comfortably seat all the players . 
Possibly , too , Jonah might have ensconced himself in a hollow tooth ; but , on second thoughts , the Right Whale is toothless . 
Another reason which Sag-Harbor -LRB- he went by that name -RRB- urged for his want of faith in this matter of the prophet , was something obscurely in reference to his incarcerated body and the whale 's gastric juices . 
But this objection likewise falls to the ground , because a German exegetist supposes that Jonah must have taken refuge in the floating body of a dead whale -- even as the French soldiers in the Russian campaign turned their dead horses into tents , and crawled into them . 
Besides , it has been divined by other continental commentators , that when Jonah was thrown overboard from the Joppa ship , he straightway effected his escape to another vessel near by , some vessel with a whale for a figure-head ; and , I would add , possibly called `` The Whale , '' as some craft are nowadays christened the `` Shark , '' the `` Gull , '' the `` Eagle . '' 
Nor have there been wanting learned exegetists who have opined that the whale mentioned in the book of Jonah merely meant a life-preserver -- an inflated bag of wind -- which the endangered prophet swam to , and so was saved from a watery doom . 
