Or , if for any reason thought to be corporeally incapacitated for that , yet such an one would seem superlatively competent to cheer and howl on his underlings to the attack . 
But be all this as it may , certain it is , that with the mad secret of his unabated rage bolted up and keyed in him , Ahab had purposely sailed upon the present voyage with the one only and all-engrossing object of hunting the White Whale . 
Had any one of his old acquaintances on shore but half dreamed of what was lurking in him then , how soon would their aghast and righteous souls have wrenched the ship from such a fiendish man ! 
They were bent on profitable cruises , the profit to be counted down in dollars from the mint . 
He was intent on an audacious , immitigable , and supernatural revenge . 
Here , then , was this grey-headed , ungodly old man , chasing with curses a Job 's whale round the world , at the head of a crew , too , chiefly made up of mongrel renegades , and castaways , and cannibals -- morally enfeebled also , by the incompetence of mere unaided virtue or right-mindedness in Starbuck , the invulnerable jollity of indifference and recklessness in Stubb , and the pervading mediocrity in Flask . 
Such a crew , so officered , seemed specially picked and packed by some infernal fatality to help him to his monomaniac revenge . 
How it was that they so aboundingly responded to the old man 's ire -- by what evil magic their souls were possessed , that at times his hate seemed almost theirs ; the White Whale as much their insufferable foe as his ; how all this came to be -- what the White Whale was to them , or how to their unconscious understandings , also , in some dim , unsuspected way , he might have seemed the gliding great demon of the seas of life , -- all this to explain , would be to dive deeper than Ishmael can go . 
The subterranean miner that works in us all , how can one tell whither leads his shaft by the ever shifting , muffled sound of his pick ? 
Who does not feel the irresistible arm drag ? 
