I confess , that since Jonah , few whalemen have penetrated very far beneath the skin of the adult whale ; nevertheless , I have been blessed with an opportunity to dissect him in miniature . 
In a ship I belonged to , a small cub Sperm Whale was once bodily hoisted to the deck for his poke or bag , to make sheaths for the barbs of the harpoons , and for the heads of the lances . 
Think you I let that chance go , without using my boat-hatchet and jack-knife , and breaking the seal and reading all the contents of that young cub ? 
And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in their gigantic , full grown development , for that rare knowledge I am indebted to my late royal friend Tranquo , king of Tranque , one of the Arsacides . 
For being at Tranque , years ago , when attached to the trading-ship Dey of Algiers , I was invited to spend part of the Arsacidean holidays with the lord of Tranque , at his retired palm villa at Pupella ; a sea-side glen not very far distant from what our sailors called Bamboo-Town , his capital . 
Among many other fine qualities , my royal friend Tranquo , being gifted with a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu , had brought together in Pupella whatever rare things the more ingenious of his people could invent ; chiefly carved woods of wonderful devices , chiselled shells , inlaid spears , costly paddles , aromatic canoes ; and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders , the wonder-freighted , tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores . 
Chief among these latter was a great Sperm Whale , which , after an unusually long raging gale , had been found dead and stranded , with his head against a cocoa-nut tree , whose plumage-like , tufted droopings seemed his verdant jet . 
When the vast body had at last been stripped of its fathomdeep enfoldings , and the bones become dust dry in the sun , then the skeleton was carefully transported up the Pupella glen , where a grand temple of lordly palms now sheltered it . 
The ribs were hung with trophies ; the vertebrae were carved with Arsacidean annals , in strange hieroglyphics ; in the skull , the priests kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame , so that the mystic head again sent forth its vapory spout ; while , suspended from a bough , the terrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees , like the hair-hung sword that so affrighted Damocles . 
It was a wondrous sight . 
