So , in good time my Queequeg gained strength ; and at length after sitting on the windlass for a few indolent days -LRB- but eating with a vigorous appetite -RRB- he suddenly leaped to his feet , threw out his arms and legs , gave himself a good stretching , yawned a little bit , and then springing into the head of his hoisted boat , and poising a harpoon , pronounced himself fit for a fight . 
With a wild whimsiness , he now used his coffin for a sea-chest ; and emptying into it his canvas bag of clothes , set them in order there . 
Many spare hours he spent , in carving the lid with all manner of grotesque figures and drawings ; and it seemed that hereby he was striving , in his rude way , to copy parts of the twisted tattooing on his body . 
And this tattooing had been the work of a departed prophet and seer of his island , who , by those hieroglyphic marks , had written out on his body a complete theory of the heavens and the earth , and a mystical treatise on the art of attaining truth ; so that Queequeg in his own proper person was a riddle to unfold ; a wondrous work in one volume ; but whose mysteries not even himself could read , though his own live heart beat against them ; and these mysteries were therefore destined in the end to moulder away with the living parchment whereon they were inscribed , and so be unsolved to the last . 
And this thought it must have been which suggested to Ahab that wild exclamation of his , when one morning turning away from surveying poor Queequeg -- `` Oh , devilish tantalization of the gods ! '' 
The Pacific When gliding by the Bashee isles we emerged at last upon the great South Sea ; were it not for other things I could have greeted my dear Pacific with uncounted thanks , for now the long supplication of my youth was answered ; that serene ocean rolled eastwards from me a thousand leagues of blue . 
There is , one knows not what sweet mystery about this sea , whose gently awful stirrings seems to speak of some hidden soul beneath ; like those fabled undulations of the Ephesian sod over the buried Evangelist St. John . 
And meet it is , that over these sea-pastures , wide-rolling watery prairies and Potters ' Fields of all four continents , the waves should rise and fall , and ebb and flow unceasingly ; for here , millions of mixed shades and shadows , drowned dreams , somnambulisms , reveries ; all that we call lives and souls , lie dreaming , dreaming , still ; tossing like slumberers in their beds ; the ever-rolling waves but made so by their restlessness . 
To any meditative Magian rover , this serene Pacific , once beheld , must ever after be the sea of his adoption . 
It rolls the midmost waters of the world , the Indian ocean and Atlantic being but its arms . 
