Already several fatalities had attended his chase . 
But though similar disasters , however little bruited ashore , were by no means unusual in the fishery ; yet , in most instances , such seemed the White Whale 's infernal aforethought of ferocity , that every dismembering or death that he caused , was not wholly regarded as having been inflicted by an unintelligent agent . 
Judge , then , to what pitches of inflamed , distracted fury the minds of his more desperate hunters were impelled , when amid the chips of chewed boats , and the sinking limbs of torn comrades , they swam out of the white curds of the whale 's direful wrath into the serene , exasperating sunlight , that smiled on , as if at a birth or a bridal . 
His three boats stove around him , and oars and men both whirling in the eddies ; one captain , seizing the line-knife from his broken prow , had dashed at the whale , as an Arkansas duellist at his foe , blindly seeking with a six inch blade to reach the fathom-deep life of the whale . 
That captain was Ahab . 
And then it was , that suddenly sweeping his sickle-shaped lower jaw beneath him , Moby Dick had reaped away Ahab 's leg , as a mower a blade of grass in the field . 
No turbaned Turk , no hired Venetian or Malay , could have smote him with more seeming malice . 
Small reason was there to doubt , then , that ever since that almost fatal encounter , Ahab had cherished a wild vindictiveness against the whale , all the more fell for that in his frantic morbidness he at last came to identify with him , not only all his bodily woes , but all his intellectual and spiritual exasperations . 
The White Whale swam before him as the monomaniac incarnation of all those malicious agencies which some deep men feel eating in them , till they are left living on with half a heart and half a lung . 
That intangible malignity which has been from the beginning ; to whose dominion even the modern Christians ascribe one-half of the worlds ; which the ancient Ophites of the east reverenced in their statue devil ; -- Ahab did not fall down and worship it like them ; but deliriously transferring its idea to the abhorred white whale , he pitted himself , all mutilated , against it . 
