No one having previously heard his history , could for the first time behold Father Mapple without the utmost interest , because there were certain engrafted clerical peculiarities about him , imputable to that adventurous maritime life he had led . 
When he entered I observed that he carried no umbrella , and certainly had not come in his carriage , for his tarpaulin hat ran down with melting sleet , and his great pilot cloth jacket seemed almost to drag him to the floor with the weight of the water it had absorbed . 
However , hat and coat and overshoes were one by one removed , and hung up in a little space in an adjacent corner ; when , arrayed in a decent suit , he quietly approached the pulpit . 
Like most old fashioned pulpits , it was a very lofty one , and since a regular stairs to such a height would , by its long angle with the floor , seriously contract the already small area of the chapel , the architect , it seemed , had acted upon the hint of Father Mapple , and finished the pulpit without a stairs , substituting a perpendicular side ladder , like those used in mounting a ship from a boat at sea . 
The wife of a whaling captain had provided the chapel with a handsome pair of red worsted man-ropes for this ladder , which , being itself nicely headed , and stained with a mahogany color , the whole contrivance , considering what manner of chapel it was , seemed by no means in bad taste . 
Halting for an instant at the foot of the ladder , and with both hands grasping the ornamental knobs of the man-ropes , Father Mapple cast a look upwards , and then with a truly sailor-like but still reverential dexterity , hand over hand , mounted the steps as if ascending the main-top of his vessel . 
The perpendicular parts of this side ladder , as is usually the case with swinging ones , were of cloth-covered rope , only the rounds were of wood , so that at every step there was a joint . 
At my first glimpse of the pulpit , it had not escaped me that however convenient for a ship , these joints in the present instance seemed unnecessary . 
For I was not prepared to see Father Mapple after gaining the height , slowly turn round , and stooping over the pulpit , deliberately drag up the ladder step by step , till the whole was deposited within , leaving him impregnable in his little Quebec . 
I pondered some time without fully comprehending the reason for this . 
