... The suddenness of the shock made the guns leap in their carriages , and several of the men were shaken out of their hammocks . 
Captain Davis , who lay with his head on a gun , was thrown out of his cabin ! '' 
Lionel then goes on to impute the shock to an earthquake , and seems to substantiate the imputation by stating that a great earthquake , somewhere about that time , did actually do great mischief along the Spanish land . 
But I should not much wonder if , in the darkness of that early hour of the morning , the shock was after all caused by an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull from beneath . 
I might proceed with several more examples , one way or another known to me , of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale . 
In more than one instance , he has been known , not only to chase the assailing boats back to their ships , but to pursue the ship itself , and long withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks . 
The English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head ; and , as for his strength , let me say , that there have been examples where the lines attached to a running sperm whale have , in a calm , been transferred to the ship , and secured there ! 
the whale towing her great hull through the water , as a horse walks off with a cart . 
Again , it is very often observed that , if the sperm whale , once struck , is allowed time to rally , he then acts , not so often with blind rage , as with wilful , deliberate designs of destruction to his pursuers ; nor is it without conveying some eloquent indication of his character , that upon being attacked he will frequently open his mouth , and retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutive minutes . 
But I must be content with only one more and a concluding illustration ; a remarkable and most significant one , by which you will not fail to see , that not only is the most marvellous event in this book corroborated by plain facts of the present day , but that these marvels -LRB- like all marvels -RRB- are mere repetitions of the ages ; so that for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon -- Verily there is nothing new under the sun . 
