But be all this as it may , certain it is that while the subordinate phantoms soon found their place among the crew , though still as it were somehow distinct from them , yet that hair-turbaned Fedallah remained a muffled mystery to the last . 
Whence he came in a mannerly world like this , by what sort of unaccountable tie he soon evinced himself to be linked with Ahab 's peculiar fortunes ; nay , so far as to have some sort of a half-hinted influence ; Heaven knows , but it might have been even authority over him ; all this none knew . 
But one can not sustain an indifferent air concerning Fedallah . 
He was such a creature as civilized , domestic people in the temperate zone only see in their dreams , and that but dimly ; but the like of whom now and then glide among the unchanging Asiatic communities , especially the Oriental isles to the east of the continent -- those insulated , immemorial , unalterable countries , which even in these modern days still preserve much of the ghostly aboriginalness of earth 's primal generations , when the memory of the first man was a distinct recollection , and all men his descendants , unknowing whence he came , eyed each other as real phantoms , and asked of the sun and the moon why they were created and to what end ; when though , according to Genesis , the angels indeed consorted with the daughters of men , the devils also , add the uncanonical Robbins , indulged in mundane amours . 
The Spirit-Spout Days , weeks passed , and under easy sail , the ivory Pequod had slowly swept across four several cruising-grounds ; that off the Azores ; off the Cape de Verdes ; on the Plate -LRB- so called -RRB- , being off the mouth of the Rio de la Plata ; and the Carrol Ground , an unstaked , watery locality , southerly from St. Helena . 
It was while gliding through these latter waters that one serene and moonlight night , when all the waves rolled by like scrolls of silver ; and , by their soft , suffusing seethings , made what seemed a silvery silence , not a solitude ; on such a silent night a silvery jet was seen far in advance of the white bubbles at the bow . 
Lit up by the moon , it looked celestial ; seemed some plumed and glittering god uprising from the sea . 
Fedallah first descried this jet . 
For of these moonlight nights , it was his wont to mount to the main-mast head , and stand a look-out there , with the same precision as if it had been day . 
And yet , though herds of whales were seen by night , not one whaleman in a hundred would venture a lowering for them . 
