When two large , loaded Indian-men chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks , what do the sailors do ? 
They do not suspend between them , at the point of coming contact , any merely hard substance , like iron or wood . 
No , they hold there a large , round wad of tow and cork , enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide . 
That bravely and uninjured takes the jam which would have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars . 
By itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive at . 
But supplementary to this , it has hypothetically occurred to me , that as ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder in them , capable , at will , of distension or contraction ; and as the Sperm Whale , as far as I know , has no such provision in him ; considering , too , the otherwise inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogether beneath the surface , and anon swims with it high elevated out of the water ; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope ; considering the unique interior of his head ; it has hypothetically occurred to me , I say , that those mystical lung-celled honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspected connexion with the outer air , so as to be susceptible to atmospheric distension and contraction . 
If this be so , fancy the irresistibleness of that might , to which the most impalpable and destructive of all elements contributes . 
Now , mark . 
Unerringly impelling this dead , impregnable , uninjurable wall , and this most buoyant thing within ; there swims behind it all a mass of tremendous life , only to be adequately estimated as piled wood is -- by the cord ; and all obedient to one volition , as the smallest insect . 
So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this expansive monster ; when I shall show you some of his more inconsiderable braining feats ; I trust you will have renounced all ignorant incredulity , and be ready to abide by this ; that though the Sperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien , and mixed the Atlantic with the Pacific , you would not elevate one hair of your eye-brow . 
