So rarely is it beheld , that though one and all of them declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean , yet very few of them have any but the most vague ideas concerning its true nature and form ; notwithstanding , they believe it to furnish to the sperm whale his only food . 
For though other species of whales find their food above water , and may be seen by man in the act of feeding , the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones below the surface ; and only by inference is it that any one can tell of what , precisely , that food consists . 
At times , when closely pursued , he will disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms of the squid ; some of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length . 
They fancy that the monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed of the ocean ; and that the sperm whale , unlike other species , is supplied with teeth in order to attack and tear it . 
There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of Bishop Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid . 
The manner in which the Bishop describes it , as alternately rising and sinking , with some other particulars he narrates , in all this the two correspond . 
But much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk he assigns it . 
By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysterious creature , here spoken of , it is included among the class of cuttle-fish , to which , indeed , in certain external respects it would seem to belong , but only as the Anak of the tribe . 
The Line With reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described , as well as for the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewhere presented , I have here to speak of the magical , sometimes horrible whale-line . 
The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp , slightly vapored with tar , not impregnated with it , as in the case of ordinary ropes ; for while tar , as ordinarily used , makes the hemp more pliable to the rope-maker , and also renders the rope itself more convenient to the sailor for common ship use ; yet , not only would the ordinary quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which it must be subjected ; but as most seamen are beginning to learn , tar in general by no means adds to the rope 's durability or strength , however much it may give it compactness and gloss . 
