At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whales hung by the tail for knockers to the road-side door . 
When the porter is sleepy , the anvil-headed whale would be best . 
But these knocking whales are seldom remarkable as faithful essays . 
On the spires of some old-fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed there for weathercocks ; but they are so elevated , and besides that are to all intents and purposes so labelled with `` Hands off ! '' 
you can not examine them closely enough to decide upon their merit . 
In bony , ribby regions of the earth , where at the base of high broken cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon the plain , you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of the Leviathan partly merged in grass , which of a windy day breaks against them in a surf of green surges . 
Then , again , in mountainous countries where the traveller is continually girdled by amphitheatrical heights ; here and there from some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of the profiles of whales defined along the undulating ridges . 
But you must be a thorough whaleman , to see these sights ; and not only that , but if you wish to return to such a sight again , you must be sure and take the exact intersecting latitude and longitude of your first stand-point , else so chance-like are such observations of the hills , that your precise , previous stand-point would require a laborious re-discovery ; like the Solomon islands , which still remain incognita , though once high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera chronicled them . 
Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject , can you fail to trace out great whales in the starry heavens , and boats in pursuit of them ; as when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern nations saw armies locked in battle among the clouds . 
Thus at the North have I chased Leviathan round and round the Pole with the revolutions of the bright points that first defined him to me . 
