Even now I am certain that those seas are not , and perhaps never can be , in the present constitution of things , a place for his habitual gregarious resort . 
But further investigations have recently proved to me , that in modern times there have been isolated instances of the presence of the sperm whale in the Mediterranean . 
I am told , on good authority , that on the Barbary coast , a Commodore Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of a sperm whale . 
Now , as a vessel of war readily passes through the Dardanelles , hence a sperm whale could , by the same route , pass out of the Mediterranean into the Propontis . 
In the Propontis , as far as I can learn , none of that peculiar substance called brit is to be found , the aliment of the right whale . 
But I have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm whale -- squid or cuttle-fish -- lurks at the bottom of that sea , because large creatures , but by no means the largest of that sort , have been found at its surface . 
If , then , you properly put these statements together , and reason upon them a bit , you will clearly perceive that , according to all human reasoning , Procopius 's sea-monster , that for half a century stove the ships of a Roman Emperor , must in all probability have been a sperm whale . 
Surmises Though , consumed with the hot fire of his purpose , Ahab in all his thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of Moby Dick ; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to that one passion ; nevertheless it may have been that he was by nature and long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman 's ways , altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage . 
Or at least if this were otherwise , there were not wanting other motives much more influential with him . 
It would be refining too much , perhaps , even considering his monomania , to hint that his vindictiveness towards the White Whale might have possibly extended itself in some degree to all sperm whales , and that the more monsters he slew by so much the more he multiplied the chances that each subsequently encountered whale would prove to be the hated one he hunted . 
