All that most maddens and torments ; all that stirs up the lees of things ; all truth with malice in it ; all that cracks the sinews and cakes the brain ; all the subtle demonisms of life and thought ; all evil , to crazy Ahab , were visibly personified , and made practically assailable in Moby Dick . 
He piled upon the whale 's white hump the sum of all the general rage and hate felt by his whole race from Adam down ; and then , as if his chest had been a mortar , he burst his hot heart 's shell upon it . 
It is not probable that this monomania in him took its instant rise at the precise time of his bodily dismemberment . 
Then , in darting at the monster , knife in hand , he had but given loose to a sudden , passionate , corporal animosity ; and when he received the stroke that tore him , he probably but felt the agonizing bodily laceration , but nothing more . 
Yet , when by this collision forced to turn towards home , and for long months of days and weeks , Ahab and anguish lay stretched together in one hammock , rounding in mid winter that dreary , howling Patagonian Cape ; then it was , that his torn body and gashed soul bled into one another ; and so interfusing , made him mad . 
That it was only then , on the homeward voyage , after the encounter , that the final monomania seized him , seems all but certain from the fact that , at intervals during the passage , he was a raving lunatic ; and , though unlimbed of a leg , yet such vital strength yet lurked in his Egyptian chest , and was moreover intensified by his delirium , that his mates were forced to lace him fast , even there , as he sailed , raving in his hammock . 
In a strait-jacket , he swung to the mad rockings of the gales . 
And , when running into more sufferable latitudes , the ship , with mild stun ` sails spread , floated across the tranquil tropics , and , to all appearances , the old man 's delirium seemed left behind him with the Cape Horn swells , and he came forth from his dark den into the blessed light and air ; even then , when he bore that firm , collected front , however pale , and issued his calm orders once again ; and his mates thanked God the direful madness was now gone ; even then , Ahab , in his hidden self , raved on . 
Human madness is oftentimes a cunning and most feline thing . 
When you think it fled , it may have but become transfigured into some still subtler form . 
