And , indeed , it seemed small matter for wonder , that for all his pervading , mad recklessness , Ahab , did at times give careful heed to the condition of that dead bone upon which he partly stood . 
For it had not been very long prior to the Pequod 's sailing from Nantucket , that he had been found one night lying prone upon the ground , and insensible ; by some unknown , and seemingly inexplicable , unimaginable casualty , his ivory limb having been so violently displaced , that it had stake-wise smitten , and all but pierced his groin ; nor was it without extreme difficulty that the agonizing wound was entirely cured . 
Nor , at the time , had it failed to enter his monomaniac mind , that all the anguish of that then present suffering was but the direct issue of a former woe ; and he too plainly seemed to see , that as the most poisonous reptile of the marsh perpetuates his kind as inevitably as the sweetest songster of the grove ; so , equally with every felicity , all miserable events do naturally beget their like . 
Yea , more than equally , thought Ahab ; since both the ancestry and posterity of Grief go further than the ancestry and posterity of Joy . 
For , not to hint of this : that it is an inference from certain canonic teachings , that while some natural enjoyments here shall have no children born to them for the other world , but , on the contrary , shall be followed by the joy-childlessness of all hell 's despair ; whereas , some guilty mortal miseries shall still fertilely beget to themselves an eternally progressive progeny of griefs beyond the grave ; not at all to hint of this , there still seems an inequality in the deeper analysis of the thing . 
For , thought Ahab , while even the highest earthly felicities ever have a certain unsignifying pettiness lurking in them , but , at bottom , all heartwoes , a mystic significance , and , in some men , an archangelic grandeur ; so do their diligent tracings-out not belie the obvious deduction . 
To trail the genealogies of these high mortal miseries , carries us at last among the sourceless primogenitures of the gods ; so that , in the face of all the glad , hay-making suns , and softcymballing , round harvest-moons , we must needs give in to this : that the gods themselves are not for ever glad . 
The ineffaceable , sad birth-mark in the brow of man , is but the stamp of sorrow in the signers . 
Unwittingly here a secret has been divulged , which perhaps might more properly , in set way , have been disclosed before . 
With many other particulars concerning Ahab , always had it remained a mystery to some , why it was , that for a certain period , both before and after the sailing of the Pequod , he had hidden himself away with such Grand-Lama-like exclusiveness ; and , for that one interval , sought speechless refuge , as it were , among the marble senate of the dead . 
