Still , for all this immutableness , was there some lack of common consistency about worthy Captain Bildad . 
Though refusing , from conscientious scruples , to bear arms against land invaders , yet himself had illimitably invaded the Atlantic and Pacific ; and though a sworn foe to human bloodshed , yet had he in his straight-bodied coat , spilled tuns upon tuns of leviathan gore . 
How now in the contemplative evening of his days , the pious Bildad reconciled these things in the reminiscence , I do not know ; but it did not seem to concern him much , and very probably he had long since come to the sage and sensible conclusion that a man 's religion is one thing , and this practical world quite another . 
This world pays dividends . 
Rising from a little cabin boy in short clothes of the drabbest drab , to a harpooneer in a broad shad-bellied waistcoat ; from that becoming boat-header , chief mate , and captain , and finally a shipowner ; Bildad , as I hinted before , had concluded his adventurous career by wholly retiring from active life at the goodly age of sixty , and dedicating his remaining days to the quiet receiving of his well-earned income . 
Now , Bildad , I am sorry to say , had the reputation of being an incorrigible old hunks , and in his sea-going days , a bitter , hard task-master . 
They told me in Nantucket , though it certainly seems a curious story , that when he sailed the old Categut whaleman , his crew , upon arriving home , were mostly all carried ashore to the hospital , sore exhausted and worn out . 
For a pious man , especially for a Quaker , he was certainly rather hard-hearted , to say the least . 
He never used to swear , though , at his men , they said ; but somehow he got an inordinate quantity of cruel , unmitigated hard work out of them . 
When Bildad was a chief-mate , to have his drab-colored eye intently looking at you , made you feel completely nervous , till you could clutch something -- a hammer or a marling-spike , and go to work like mad , at something or other , never mind what . 
