Upon each side of the Pequod 's quarter deck , and pretty close to the mizzen shrouds , there was an auger hole , bored about half an inch or so , into the plank . 
His bone leg steadied in that hole ; one arm elevated , and holding by a shroud ; Captain Ahab stood erect , looking straight out beyond the ship 's ever-pitching prow . 
There was an infinity of firmest fortitude , a determinate , unsurrenderable wilfulness , in the fixed and fearless , forward dedication of that glance . 
Not a word he spoke ; nor did his officers say aught to him ; though by all their minutest gestures and expressions , they plainly showed the uneasy , if not painful , consciousness of being under a troubled master-eye . 
And not only that , but moody stricken Ahab stood before them with a crucifixion in his face ; in all the nameless regal overbearing dignity of some mighty woe . 
Ere long , from his first visit in the air , he withdrew into his cabin . 
But after that morning , he was every day visible to the crew ; either standing in his pivot-hole , or seated upon an ivory stool he had ; or heavily walking the deck . 
As the sky grew less gloomy ; indeed , began to grow a little genial , he became still less and less a recluse ; as if , when the ship had sailed from home , nothing but the dead wintry bleakness of the sea had then kept him so secluded . 
And , by and by , it came to pass , that he was almost continually in the air ; but , as yet , for all that he said , or perceptibly did , on the at last sunny deck , he seemed as unnecessary there as another mast . 
But the Pequod was only making a passage now ; not regularly cruising ; nearly all whaling preparatives needing supervision the mates were fully competent to , so that there was little or nothing , out of himself , to employ or excite Ahab , now ; and thus chase away , for that one interval , the clouds that layer upon layer were piled upon his brow , as ever all clouds choose the loftiest peaks to pile themselves upon . 
