The permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man , thought Ahab , is sordidness . 
Granting that the White Whale fully incites the hearts of this my savage crew , and playing round their savageness even breeds a certain generous knight-errantism in them , still , while for the love of it they give chase to Moby Dick , they must also have food for their more common , daily appetites . 
For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of old times were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land to fight for their holy sepulchre , without committing burglaries , picking pockets , and gaining other pious perquisites by the way . 
Had they been strictly held to their one final and romantic object -- that final and romantic object , too many would have turned from in disgust . 
I will not strip these men , thought Ahab , of all hopes of cash -- aye , cash . 
They may scorn cash now ; but let some months go by , and no perspective promise of it to them , and then this same quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them , this same cash would soon cashier Ahab . 
Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more related to Ahab personally . 
Having impulsively , it is probable , and perhaps somewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of the Pequod 's voyage , Ahab was now entirely conscious that , in so doing , he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge of usurpation ; and with perfect impunity , both moral and legal , his crew if so disposed , and to that end competent , could refuse all further obedience to him , and even violently wrest from him the command . 
From even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation , and the possible consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground , Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself . 
That protection could only consist in his own predominating brain and heart and hand , backed by a heedful , closely calculating attention to every minute atmospheric influence which it was possible for his crew to be subjected to . 
