So that though Moby Dick had in a former year been seen , for example , on what is called the Seychelle ground in the Indian ocean , or Volcano Bay on the Japanese Coast ; yet it did not follow that were the Pequod to visit either of those spots at any subsequent corresponding season , she would infallibly encounter him there . 
So , too , with some other feeding-grounds , where he had at times revealed himself . 
But all these seemed only his casual stopping-places and ocean-inns , so to speak , not his places of prolonged abode . 
And where Ahab 's chances of accomplishing his object have hitherto been spoken of , allusion has only been made to whatever way-side , antecedent , extra prospects were his , ere a particular set time or place were attained , when all possibilities would become probabilities , and , as Ahab fondly thought , every possibility the next thing to a certainty . 
That particular set time and place were conjoined in the one technical phrase -- the Season-on-the-Line . 
For there and then , for several consecutive years , Moby Dick had been periodically descried , lingering in those waters for awhile , as the sun , in its annual round , loiters for a predicted interval in any one sign of the Zodiac . 
There it was , too , that most of the deadly encounters with the white whale had taken place ; there the waves were storied with his deeds ; there also was that tragic spot where the monomaniac old man had found the awful motive to his vengeance . 
But in the cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering vigilance with which Ahab threw his brooding soul into this unfaltering hunt , he would not permit himself to rest all his hopes upon the one crowning fact above mentioned , however flattering it might be to those hopes ; nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillize his unquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest . 
Now , the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning of the Season-on-the-Line . 
No possible endeavor then could enable her commander to make the great passage southwards , double Cape Horn , and then running down sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorial Pacific in time to cruise there . 
