Keeping at the centre of the lake , we were occasionally visited by small tame cows and calves ; the women and children of this routed host . 
Now , inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between the revolving outer circles , and inclusive of the spaces between the various pods in any one of those circles , the entire area at this juncture , embraced by the whole multitude , must have contained at least two or three square miles . 
At any rate -- though indeed such a test at such a time might be deceptive -- spoutings might be discovered from our low boat that seemed playing up almost from the rim of the horizon . 
I mention this circumstance , because , as if the cows and calves had been purposely locked up in this innermost fold ; and as if the wide extent of the herd had hitherto prevented them from learning the precise cause of its stopping ; or , possibly , being so young , unsophisticated , and every way innocent and inexperienced ; however it may have been , these smaller whales -- now and then visiting our becalmed boat from the margin of the lake -- evinced a wondrous fearlessness and confidence , or else a still becharmed panic which it was impossible not to marvel at . 
Like household dogs they came snuffling round us , right up to our gunwales , and touching them ; till it almost seemed that some spell had suddenly domesticated them . 
Queequeg patted their foreheads ; Starbuck scratched their backs with his lance ; but fearful of the consequences , for the time refrained from darting it . 
But far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface , another and still stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side . 
For , suspended in those watery vaults , floated the forms of the nursing mothers of the whales , and those that by their enormous girth seemed shortly to become mothers . 
The lake , as I have hinted , was to a considerable depth exceedingly transparent ; and as human infants while suckling will calmly and fixedly gaze away from the breast , as if leading two different lives at the time ; and while yet drawing mortal nourishment , be still spiritually feasting upon some unearthly reminiscence ; -- even so did the young of these whales seem looking up towards us , but not at us , as if we were but a bit of Gulfweed in their new-born sight . 
Floating on their sides , the mothers also seemed quietly eyeing us . 
