And then , without at all alluding to the shovel , he pointed to three lads , as the customary sweepers ; who , not being billeted at the pumps , had done little or nothing all day . 
To this , Radney replied , with an oath , in a most domineering and outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating his command ; meanwhile advancing upon the still seated Lakeman , with an uplifted cooper 's club hammer which he had snatched from a cask near by . 
`` Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps , for all his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill brook this bearing in the mate ; but somehow still smothering the conflagration within him , without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat , till at last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face , furiously commanding him to do his bidding . 
`` Steelkilt rose , and slowly retreating round the windlass , steadily followed by the mate with his menacing hammer , deliberately repeated his intention not to obey . 
Seeing , however , that his forbearance had not the slightest effect , by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man ; but it was to no purpose . 
And in this way the two went once slowly round the windlass ; when , resolved at last no longer to retreat , bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his humor , the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer : '' ` Mr. Radney , I will not obey you . 
Take that hammer away , or look to yourself . ' 
But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him , where the Lakeman stood fixed , now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth ; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions . 
Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch ; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching poniard of his glance , Steelkilt , clenching his right hand behind him and creepingly drawing it back , told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he -LRB- Steelkilt -RRB- would murder him . 
But , gentlemen , the fool had been branded for the slaughter by the gods . 
