But what plays the mischief with this masterly code is the admirable brevity of it , which necessitates a vast volume of commentaries to expound it . 
First : What is a Fast-Fish ? 
Alive or dead a fish is technically fast , when it is connected with an occupied ship or boat , by any medium at all controllable by the occupant or occupants , -- a mast , an oar , a nine-inch cable , a telegraph wire , or a strand of cobweb , it is all the same . 
Likewise a fish is technically fast when it bears a waif , or any other recognized symbol of possession ; so long as the party wailing it plainly evince their ability at any time to take it alongside , as well as their intention so to do . 
These are scientific commentaries ; but the commentaries of the whalemen themselves sometimes consist in hard words and harder knocks -- the Coke-upon-Littleton of the fist . 
True , among the more upright and honorable whalemen allowances are always made for peculiar cases , where it would be an outrageous moral injustice for one party to claim possession of a whale previously chased or killed by another party . 
But others are by no means so scrupulous . 
Some fifty years ago there was a curious case of whale-trover litigated in England , wherein the plaintiffs set forth that after a hard chase of a whale in the Northern seas ; and when indeed they -LRB- the plaintiffs -RRB- had succeeded in harpooning the fish ; they were at last , through peril of their lives , obliged to forsake not only their lines , but their boat itself . 
Ultimately the defendants -LRB- the crew of another ship -RRB- came up with the whale , struck , killed , seized , and finally appropriated it before the very eyes of the plaintiffs . 
And when those defendants were remonstrated with , their captain snapped his fingers in the plaintiffs ' teeth , and assured them that by way of doxology to the deed he had done , he would now retain their line , harpoons , and boat , which had remained attached to the whale at the time of the seizure . 
