But I can not completely make out his back parts ; and hint what he will about his face , I say again he has no face . 
The Grand Armada The long and narrow peninsula of Malacca , extending south-eastward from the territories of Birmah , forms the most southerly point of all Asia . 
In a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the long islands of Sumatra , Java , Bally , and Timor ; which , with many others , form a vast mole , or rampart , lengthwise connecting Asia with Australia , and dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from the thickly studded oriental archipelagoes . 
This rampart is pierced by several sally-ports for the convenience of ships and whales ; conspicuous among which are the straits of Sunda and Malacca . 
By the straits of Sunda , chiefly , vessels bound to China from the west , emerge into the China seas . 
Those narrow straits of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java ; and standing midway in that vast rampart of islands , buttressed by that bold green promontory , known to seamen as Java Head ; they not a little correspond to the central gateway opening into some vast walled empire : and considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices , and silks , and jewels , and gold , and ivory , with which the thousand islands of that oriental sea are enriched , it seems a significant provision of nature , that such treasures , by the very formation of the land , should at least bear the appearance , however ineffectual , of being guarded from the all-grasping western world . 
The shores of the Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with those domineering fortresses which guard the entrances to the Mediterranean , the Baltic , and the Propontis . 
Unlike the Danes , these Orientals do not demand the obsequious homage of lowered top-sails from the endless procession of ships before the wind , which for centuries past , by night and by day , have passed between the islands of Sumatra and Java , freighted with the costliest cargoes of the east . 
But while they freely waive a ceremonial like this , they do by no means renounce their claim to more solid tribute . 
Time out of mind the piratical proas of the Malays , lurking among the low shaded coves and islets of Sumatra , have sallied out upon the vessels sailing through the straits , fiercely demanding tribute at the point of their spears . 
