Though amid all the smoking horror and diabolism of a sea-fight , sharks will be seen longingly gazing up to the ship 's decks , like hungry dogs round a table where red meat is being carved , ready to bolt down every killed man that is tossed to them ; and though , while the valiant butchers over the deck-table are thus cannibally carving each other 's live meat with carving-knives all gilded and tasselled , the sharks , also , with their jewel-hilted mouths , are quarrelsomely carving away under the table at the dead meat ; and though , were you to turn the whole affair upside down , it would still be pretty much the same thing , that is to say , a shocking sharkish business enough for all parties ; and though sharks also are the invariable outriders of all slave ships crossing the Atlantic , systematically trotting alongside , to be handy in case a parcel is to be carried anywhere , or a dead slave to be decently buried ; and though one or two other like instances might be set down , touching the set terms , places , and occasions , when sharks do most socially congregate , and most hilariously feast ; yet is there no conceivable time or occasion when you will find them in such countless numbers , and in gayer or more jovial spirits , than around a dead sperm whale , moored by night to a whaleship at sea . 
If you have never seen that sight , then suspend your decision about the propriety of devil-worship , and the expediency of conciliating the devil . 
But , as yet , Stubb heeded not the mumblings of the banquet that was going on so nigh him , no more than the sharks heeded the smacking of his own epicurean lips . 
`` Cook , cook ! 
-- where 's that old Fleece ? '' 
he cried at length , widening his legs still further , as if to form a more secure base for his supper ; and , at the same time darting his fork into the dish , as if stabbing with his lance ; `` cook , you cook ! 
-- sail this way , cook ! '' 
The old black , not in any very high glee at having been previously routed from his warm hammock at a most unseasonable hour , came shambling along from his galley , for , like many old blacks , there was something the matter with his knee-pans , which he did not keep well scoured like his other pans ; this old Fleece , as they called him , came shuffling and limping along , assisting his step with his tongs , which , after a clumsy fashion , were made of straightened iron hoops ; this old Ebony floundered along , and in obedience to the word of command , came to a dead stop on the opposite side of Stubb 's sideboard ; when , with both hands folded before him , and resting on his two-legged cane , he bowed his arched back still further over , at the same time sideways inclining his head , so as to bring his best ear into play . 
`` Cook , '' said Stubb , rapidly lifting a rather reddish morsel to his mouth , `` do n't you think this steak is rather overdone ? 
You 've been beating this steak too much , cook ; it 's too tender . 
