But from the same point , take mankind in mass , and for the most part , they seem a mob of unnecessary duplicates , both contemporary and hereditary . 
But most humble though he was , and far from furnishing an example of the high , humane abstraction ; the Pequod 's carpenter was no duplicate ; hence , he now comes in person on this stage . 
Like all sea-going ship carpenters , and more especially those belonging to whaling vessels , he was , to a certain off-hand , practical extent , alike experienced in numerous trades and callings collateral to his own ; the carpenter 's pursuit being the ancient and outbranching trunk of all those numerous handicrafts which more or less have to do with wood as an auxiliary material . 
But , besides the application to him of the generic remark above , this carpenter of the Pequod was singularly efficient in those thousand nameless mechanical emergencies continually recurring in a large ship , upon a three or four years ' voyage , in uncivilized and far-distant seas . 
For not to speak of his readiness in ordinary duties : -- repairing stove boats , sprung spars , reforming the shape of clumsy-bladed oars , inserting bull 's eyes in the deck , or new tree-nails in the side planks , and other miscellaneous matters more directly pertaining to his special business ; he was moreover unhesitatingly expert in all manner of conflicting aptitudes , both useful and capricious . 
The one grand stage where he enacted all his various parts so manifold , was his vice-bench ; a long rude ponderous table furnished with several vices , of different sizes , and both of iron and of wood . 
At all times except when whales were alongside , this bench was securely lashed athwartships against the rear of the Try-works . 
A belaying pin is found too large to be easily inserted into its hole : the carpenter claps it into one of his ever ready vices , and straightway files it smaller . 
A lost landbird of strange plumage strays on board , and is made a captive : out of clean shaved rods of right-whale bone , and cross-beams of sperm whale ivory , the carpenter makes a pagoda-looking cage for it . 
An oarsman sprains his wrist : the carpenter concocts a soothing lotion . 
