All the oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions ; so that to the timid eye of the landsman , they seem as Indian jugglers , with the deadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs . 
Nor can any son of mortal woman , for the first time , seat himself amid those hempen intricacies , and while straining his utmost at the oar , bethink him that at any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted , and all these horrible contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings ; he can not be thus circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in his bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly . 
Yet habit -- strange thing ! 
what can not habit accomplish ? 
-- Gayer sallies , more merry mirth , better jokes , and brighter repartees , you never heard over your mahogany , than you will hear over the half-inch white cedar of the whaleboat , when thus hung in hangman 's nooses ; and , like the six burghers of Calais before King Edward , the six men composing the crew pull into the jaws of death , with a halter around every neck , as you may say . 
Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account for those repeated whaling disasters -- some few of which are casually chronicled -- of this man or that man being taken out of the boat by the line , and lost . 
For , when the line is darting out , to be seated then in the boat , is like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzings of a steam-engine in full play , when every flying beam , and shaft , and wheel , is grazing you . 
It is worse ; for you can not sit motionless in the heart of these perils , because the boat is rocking like a cradle , and you are pitched one way and the other , without the slightest warning ; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and simultaneousness of volition and action , can you escape being made a Mazeppa of , and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself could never pierce you out . 
Again : as the profound calm which only apparently precedes and prophesies of the storm , is perhaps more awful than the storm itself ; for , indeed , the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm ; and contains it in itself , as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the fatal powder , and the ball , and the explosion ; so the graceful repose of the line , as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen before being brought into actual play -- this is a thing which carries more of true terror than any other aspect of this dangerous affair . 
But why say more ? 
