Nor , considered aright , does it seem any argument in favor of the gradual extinction of the Sperm Whale , for example , that in former years -LRB- the latter part of the last century , say -RRB- these Leviathans , in small pods , were encountered much oftener than at present , and , in consequence , the voyages were not so prolonged , and were also much more remunerative . 
Because , as has been elsewhere noticed , those whales , influenced by some views to safety , now swim the seas in immense caravans , so that to a large degree the scattered solitaries , yokes , and pods , and schools of other days are now aggregated into vast but widely separated , unfrequent armies . 
That is all . 
And equally fallacious seems the conceit , that because the so-called whale-bone whales no longer haunt many grounds in former years abounding with them , hence that species also is declining . 
For they are only being driven from promontory to cape ; and if one coast is no longer enlivened with their jets , then , be sure , some other and remoter strand has been very recently startled by the unfamiliar spectacle . 
Furthermore : concerning these last mentioned Leviathans , they have two firm fortresses , which , in all human probability , will for ever remain impregnable . 
And as upon the invasion of their valleys , the frosty Swiss have retreated to their mountains ; so , hunted from the savannas and glades of the middle seas , the whale-bone whales can at last resort to their Polar citadels , and diving under the ultimate glassy barriers and walls there , come up among icy fields and floes ! 
and in a charmed circle of everlasting December , bid defiance to all pursuit from man . 
But as perhaps fifty of these whale-bone whales are harpooned for one cachalot , some philosophers of the forecastle have concluded that this positive havoc has already very seriously diminished their battalions . 
But though for some time past a number of these whales , not less than 13,000 , have been annually slain on the nor ` west coast by the Americans alone ; yet there are considerations which render even this circumstance of little or no account as an opposing argument in this matter . 
