In that grand order of battle in which Captain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on the whales , these three headsmen were as captains of companies . 
Or , being armed with their long keen whaling spears , they were as a picked trio of lancers ; even as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins . 
And since in this famous fishery , each mate or headsman , like a Gothic Knight of old , is always accompanied by his boat-steerer or harpooneer , who in certain conjunctures provides him with a fresh lance , when the former one has been badly twisted , or elbowed in the assault ; and moreover , as there generally subsists between the two , a close intimacy and friendliness ; it is therefore but meet , that in this place we set down who the Pequod 's harpooneers were , and to what headsman each of them belonged . 
First of all was Queequeg , whom Starbuck , the chief mate , had selected for his squire . 
But Queequeg is already known . 
Next was Tashtego , an unmixed Indian from Gay Head , the most westerly promontory of Martha 's Vineyard , where there still exists the last remnant of a village of red men , which has long supplied the neighboring island of Nantucket with many of her most daring harpooneers . 
In the fishery , they usually go by the generic name of Gay-Headers . 
Tashtego 's long , lean , sable hair , his high cheek bones , and black rounding eyes -- for an Indian , Oriental in their largeness , but Antarctic in their glittering expression -- all this sufficiently proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those proud warrior hunters , who , in quest of the great New England moose , had scoured , bow in hand , the aboriginal forests of the main . 
But no longer snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the woodland , Tashtego now hunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea ; the unerring harpoon of the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow of the sires . 
To look at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs , you would almost have credited the superstitions of some of the earlier Puritans and half-believed this wild Indian to be a son of the Prince of the Powers of the Air . 
