And beneath the effulgent Antarctic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis , and joined the chase against the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of Hydrus and the Flying Fish . 
With a frigate 's anchors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of harpoons for spurs , would I could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies , to see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tents really lie encamped beyond my mortal sight ! 
Brit Steering north-eastward from the Crozetts , we fell in with vast meadows of brit , the minute , yellow substance , upon which the Right Whale largely feeds . 
For leagues and leagues it undulated round us , so that we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe and golden wheat . 
On the second day , numbers of Right Whales were seen , who , secure from the attack of a Sperm-Whaler like the Pequod , with open jaws sluggishly swam through the brit , which , adhering to the fringing fibres of that wondrous Venetian blind in their mouths , was in that manner separated from the water that escaped at the lips . 
As morning mowers , who side by side slowly and seethingly advance their scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads ; even so these monsters swam , making a strange , grassy , cutting sound ; and leaving behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea . 
* * That part of the sea known among whalemen as the `` Brazil Banks '' does not bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do , because of there being shallows and soundings there , but because of this remarkable meadow-like appearance , caused by the vast drifts of brit continually floating in those latitudes , where the Right Whale is often chased . 
But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at all reminded one of mowers . 
Seen from the mast-heads , especially when they paused and were stationary for a while , their vast black forms looked more like lifeless masses of rock than anything else . 
And as in the great hunting countries of India , the stranger at a distance will sometimes pass on the plains recumbent elephants without knowing them to be such , taking them for bare , blackened elevations of the soil ; even so , often , with him , who for the first time beholds this species of the leviathans of the sea . 
