No use sterning all , then ; but as I was groping at midday , with a blinding sun , all crown-jewels ; as I was groping , I say , after the second iron , to toss it overboard -- down comes the tail like a Lima tower , cutting my boat in two , leaving each half in splinters ; and , flukes first , the white hump backed through the wreck , as though it was all chips . 
We all struck out . 
To escape his terrible flailings , I seized hold of my harpoon-pole sticking in him , and for a moment clung to that like a sucking fish . 
But a combing sea dashed me off , and at the same instant , the fish , taking one good dart forwards , went down like a flash ; and the barb of that cursed second iron towing along near me caught me here '' -LRB- clapping his hand just below his shoulder -RRB- ; `` yes , caught me just here , I say , and bore me down to Hell 's flames , I was thinking ; when , when , all of a sudden , thank the good God , the barb ript its way along the flesh -- clear along the whole length of my arm -- came out nigh my wrist , and up I floated ; -- and that gentleman there will tell you the rest -LRB- by the way , captain -- Dr. Bunger , ship 's surgeon : Bunger , my lad , -- the captain -RRB- . 
Now , Bunger boy , spin your part of the yarn . '' 
The professional gentleman thus familiarly pointed out , had been all the time standing near them , with nothing specific visible , to denote his gentlemanly rank on board . 
His face was an exceedingly round but sober one ; he was dressed in a faded blue woollen frock or shirt , and patched trowsers ; and had thus far been dividing his attention between a marlingspike he held in one hand , and a pill-box held in the other , occasionally casting a critical glance at the ivory limbs of the two crippled captains . 
But , at his superior 's introduction of him to Ahab , he politely bowed , and straightway went on to do his captain 's bidding . 
`` It was a shocking bad wound , '' began the whale-surgeon ; `` and , taking my advice , Captain Boomer here , stood our old Sammy - '' `` Samuel Enderby is the name of my ship , '' interrupted the one-armed captain , addressing Ahab ; `` go on , boy . '' 
`` Stood our old Sammy off to the northward , to get out of the blazing hot weather there on the Line . 
