On the day after that , he did not leave his bed . 
His portress , who prepared his scanty repasts , a few cabbages or potatoes with bacon , glanced at the brown earthenware plate and exclaimed : `` But you ate nothing yesterday , poor , dear man ! '' 
`` Certainly I did , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
`` The plate is quite full . '' 
`` Look at the water jug . 
It is empty . '' 
`` That proves that you have drunk ; it does not prove that you have eaten . '' 
`` Well , '' said Jean Valjean , `` what if I felt hungry only for water ? '' 
`` That is called thirst , and , when one does not eat at the same time , it is called fever . '' 
`` I will eat to-morrow . '' 
`` Or at Trinity day . 
Why not to-day ? 
Is it the thing to say : ` I will eat to-morrow ' ? 
The idea of leaving my platter without even touching it ! 
My ladyfinger potatoes were so good ! '' 
Jean Valjean took the old woman 's hand : `` I promise you that I will eat them , '' he said , in his benevolent voice . 
`` I am not pleased with you , '' replied the portress . 
Jean Valjean saw no other human creature than this good woman . 
There are streets in Paris through which no one ever passes , and houses to which no one ever comes . 
He was in one of those streets and one of those houses . 
While he still went out , he had purchased of a coppersmith , for a few sous , a little copper crucifix which he had hung up on a nail opposite his bed . 
That gibbet is always good to look at . 
A week passed , and Jean Valjean had not taken a step in his room . 
He still remained in bed . 
The portress said to her husband : -- `` The good man upstairs yonder does not get up , he no longer eats , he will not last long . 
That man has his sorrows , that he has . 
You wo n't get it out of my head that his daughter has made a bad marriage . '' 
The porter replied , with the tone of marital sovereignty : `` If he 's rich , let him have a doctor . 
If he is not rich , let him go without . 
If he has no doctor he will die . '' 
`` And if he has one ? '' 
`` He will die , '' said the porter . 
The portress set to scraping away the grass from what she called her pavement , with an old knife , and , as she tore out the blades , she grumbled : `` It 's a shame . 
Such a neat old man ! 
He 's as white as a chicken . '' 
She caught sight of the doctor of the quarter as he passed the end of the street ; she took it upon herself to request him to come up stairs . 
`` It 's on the second floor , '' said she . 
`` You have only to enter . 
As the good man no longer stirs from his bed , the door is always unlocked . '' 
The doctor saw Jean Valjean and spoke with him . 
When he came down again the portress interrogated him : `` Well , doctor ? '' 
`` Your sick man is very ill indeed . '' 
`` What is the matter with him ? '' 
`` Everything and nothing . 
He is a man who , to all appearances , has lost some person who is dear to him . 
People die of that . '' 
`` What did he say to you ? '' 
`` He told me that he was in good health . '' 
`` Shall you come again , doctor ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied the doctor . 
`` But some one else besides must come . '' 
A PEN IS HEAVY TO THE MAN WHO LIFTED THE FAUCHELEVENT 'S CART One evening Jean Valjean found difficulty in raising himself on his elbow ; he felt of his wrist and could not find his pulse ; his breath was short and halted at times ; he recognized the fact that he was weaker than he had ever been before . 
Then , no doubt under the pressure of some supreme preoccupation , he made an effort , drew himself up into a sitting posture and dressed himself . 
He put on his old workingman 's clothes . 
As he no longer went out , he had returned to them and preferred them . 
He was obliged to pause many times while dressing himself ; merely putting his arms through his waistcoat made the perspiration trickle from his forehead . 
Since he had been alone , he had placed his bed in the antechamber , in order to inhabit that deserted apartment as little as possible . 
He opened the valise and drew from it Cosette 's outfit . 
He spread it out on his bed . 
The Bishop 's candlesticks were in their place on the chimney-piece . 
He took from a drawer two wax candles and put them in the candlesticks . 
Then , although it was still broad daylight , -- it was summer , -- he lighted them . 
In the same way candles are to be seen lighted in broad daylight in chambers where there is a corpse . 
Every step that he took in going from one piece of furniture to another exhausted him , and he was obliged to sit down . 
It was not ordinary fatigue which expends the strength only to renew it ; it was the remnant of all movement possible to him , it was life drained which flows away drop by drop in overwhelming efforts and which will never be renewed . 
The chair into which he allowed himself to fall was placed in front of that mirror , so fatal for him , so providential for Marius , in which he had read Cosette 's reversed writing on the blotting book . 
He caught sight of himself in this mirror , and did not recognize himself . 
He was eighty years old ; before Marius ' marriage , he would have hardly been taken for fifty ; that year had counted for thirty . 
What he bore on his brow was no longer the wrinkles of age , it was the mysterious mark of death . 
The hollowing of that pitiless nail could be felt there . 
His cheeks were pendulous ; the skin of his face had the color which would lead one to think that it already had earth upon it ; the corners of his mouth drooped as in the mask which the ancients sculptured on tombs . 
He gazed into space with an air of reproach ; one would have said that he was one of those grand tragic beings who have cause to complain of some one . 
He was in that condition , the last phase of dejection , in which sorrow no longer flows ; it is coagulated , so to speak ; there is something on the soul like a clot of despair . 
Night had come . 
He laboriously dragged a table and the old arm-chair to the fireside , and placed upon the table a pen , some ink and some paper . 
That done , he had a fainting fit . 
When he recovered consciousness , he was thirsty . 
As he could not lift the jug , he tipped it over painfully towards his mouth , and swallowed a draught . 
As neither the pen nor the ink had been used for a long time , the point of the pen had curled up , the ink had dried away , he was forced to rise and put a few drops of water in the ink , which he did not accomplish without pausing and sitting down two or three times , and he was compelled to write with the back of the pen . 
He wiped his brow from time to time . 
Then he turned towards the bed , and , still seated , for he could not stand , he gazed at the little black gown and all those beloved objects . 
These contemplations lasted for hours which seemed minutes . 
All at once he shivered , he felt that a child was taking possession of him ; he rested his elbows on the table , which was illuminated by the Bishop 's candles and took up the pen . 
His hand trembled . 
He wrote slowly the few following lines : `` Cosette , I bless thee . 
I am going to explain to thee . 
Thy husband was right in giving me to understand that I ought to go away ; but there is a little error in what he believed , though he was in the right . 
He is excellent . 
Love him well even after I am dead . 
Monsieur Pontmercy , love my darling child well . 
Cosette , this paper will be found ; this is what I wish to say to thee , thou wilt see the figures , if I have the strength to recall them , listen well , this money is really thine . 
Here is the whole matter : White jet comes from Norway , black jet comes from England , black glass jewellery comes from Germany . 
Jet is the lightest , the most precious , the most costly . 
Imitations can be made in France as well as in Germany . 
What is needed is a little anvil two inches square , and a lamp burning spirits of wine to soften the wax . 
The wax was formerly made with resin and lampblack , and cost four livres the pound . 
I invented a way of making it with gum shellac and turpentine . 
It does not cost more than thirty sous , and is much better . 
Buckles are made with a violet glass which is stuck fast , by means of this wax , to a little framework of black iron . 
The glass must be violet for iron jewellery , and black for gold jewellery . 
Spain buys a great deal of it . 
It is the country of jet ... '' Here he paused , the pen fell from his fingers , he was seized by one of those sobs which at times welled up from the very depths of his being ; the poor man clasped his head in both hands , and meditated . 
`` Oh ! '' 
he exclaimed within himself -LSB- lamentable cries , heard by God alone -RSB- , `` all is over . 
I shall never see her more . 
She is a smile which passed over me . 
I am about to plunge into the night without even seeing her again . 
Oh ! 
one minute , one instant , to hear her voice , to touch her dress , to gaze upon her , upon her , the angel ! 
and then to die ! 
It is nothing to die , what is frightful is to die without seeing her . 
She would smile on me , she would say a word to me , would that do any harm to any one ? 
No , all is over , and forever . 
Here I am all alone . 
My God ! 
My God ! 
I shall never see her again ! '' 
At that moment there came a knock at the door . 
A BOTTLE OF INK WHICH ONLY SUCCEEDED IN WHITENING That same day , or to speak more accurately , that same evening , as Marius left the table , and was on the point of withdrawing to his study , having a case to look over , Basque handed him a letter saying : `` The person who wrote the letter is in the antechamber . '' 
Cosette had taken the grandfather 's arm and was strolling in the garden . 
A letter , like a man , may have an unprepossessing exterior . 
Coarse paper , coarsely folded -- the very sight of certain missives is displeasing . 
The letter which Basque had brought was of this sort . 
Marius took it . 
It smelled of tobacco . 
Nothing evokes a memory like an odor . 
Marius recognized that tobacco . 
He looked at the superscription : `` To Monsieur , Monsieur le Baron Pommerci . 
At his hotel . '' 
The recognition of the tobacco caused him to recognize the writing as well . 
It may be said that amazement has its lightning flashes . 
Marius was , as it were , illuminated by one of these flashes . 
The sense of smell , that mysterious aid to memory , had just revived a whole world within him . 
This was certainly the paper , the fashion of folding , the dull tint of ink ; it was certainly the well-known handwriting , especially was it the same tobacco . 
The Jondrette garret rose before his mind . 
Thus , strange freak of chance ! 
one of the two scents which he had so diligently sought , the one in connection with which he had lately again exerted so many efforts and which he supposed to be forever lost , had come and presented itself to him of its own accord . 
He eagerly broke the seal , and read : `` Monsieur le Baron : -- If the Supreme Being had given me the talents , I might have been baron Thenard , member of the Institute -LSB- academy of ciences -RSB- , but I am not . 
I only bear the same as him , happy if this memory recommends me to the eccellence of your kindnesses . 
The benefit with which you will honor me will be reciprocle . 
I am in possession of a secret concerning an individual . 
This individual concerns you . 
I hold the secret at your disposal desiring to have the honor to be huseful to you . 
I will furnish you with the simple means of driving from your honorabel family that individual who has no right there , madame la baronne being of lofty birth . 
The sanctuary of virtue can not cohabit longer with crime without abdicating . 
I awate in the entichamber the orders of monsieur le baron . 
`` With respect . '' 
The letter was signed `` Thenard . '' 
This signature was not false . 
It was merely a trifle abridged . 
Moreover , the rigmarole and the orthography completed the revelation . 
The certificate of origin was complete . 
Marius ' emotion was profound . 
After a start of surprise , he underwent a feeling of happiness . 
If he could now but find that other man of whom he was in search , the man who had saved him , Marius , there would be nothing left for him to desire . 
He opened the drawer of his secretary , took out several bank-notes , put them in his pocket , closed the secretary again , and rang the bell . 
Basque half opened the door . 
`` Show the man in , '' said Marius . 
Basque announced : `` Monsieur Thenard . '' 
A man entered . 
A fresh surprise for Marius . 
The man who entered was an utter stranger to him . 
This man , who was old , moreover , had a thick nose , his chin swathed in a cravat , green spectacles with a double screen of green taffeta over his eyes , and his hair was plastered and flattened down on his brow on a level with his eyebrows like the wigs of English coachmen in `` high life . '' 
His hair was gray . 
He was dressed in black from head to foot , in garments that were very threadbare but clean ; a bunch of seals depending from his fob suggested the idea of a watch . 
He held in his hand an old hat ! 
He walked in a bent attitude , and the curve in his spine augmented the profundity of his bow . 
The first thing that struck the observer was , that this personage 's coat , which was too ample although carefully buttoned , had not been made for him . 
Here a short digression becomes necessary . 
There was in Paris at that epoch , in a low-lived old lodging in the Rue Beautreillis , near the Arsenal , an ingenious Jew whose profession was to change villains into honest men . 
Not for too long , which might have proved embarrassing for the villain . 
The change was on sight , for a day or two , at the rate of thirty sous a day , by means of a costume which resembled the honesty of the world in general as nearly as possible . 
This costumer was called `` the Changer '' ; the pickpockets of Paris had given him this name and knew him by no other . 
He had a tolerably complete wardrobe . 
The rags with which he tricked out people were almost probable . 
He had specialties and categories ; on each nail of his shop hung a social status , threadbare and worn ; here the suit of a magistrate , there the outfit of a Cure , beyond the outfit of a banker , in one corner the costume of a retired military man , elsewhere the habiliments of a man of letters , and further on the dress of a statesman . 
This creature was the costumer of the immense drama which knavery plays in Paris . 
His lair was the green-room whence theft emerged , and into which roguery retreated . 
A tattered knave arrived at this dressing-room , deposited his thirty sous and selected , according to the part which he wished to play , the costume which suited him , and on descending the stairs once more , the knave was a somebody . 
On the following day , the clothes were faithfully returned , and the Changer , who trusted the thieves with everything , was never robbed . 
There was one inconvenience about these clothes , they `` did not fit '' ; not having been made for those who wore them , they were too tight for one , too loose for another and did not adjust themselves to any one . 
Every pickpocket who exceeded or fell short of the human average was ill at his ease in the Changer 's costumes . 
It was necessary that one should not be either too fat or too lean . 
The changer had foreseen only ordinary men . 
He had taken the measure of the species from the first rascal who came to hand , who is neither stout nor thin , neither tall nor short . 
Hence adaptations which were sometimes difficult and from which the Changer 's clients extricated themselves as best they might . 
So much the worse for the exceptions ! 
The suit of the statesman , for instance , black from head to foot , and consequently proper , would have been too large for Pitt and too small for Castelcicala . 
The costume of a statesman was designated as follows in the Changer 's catalogue ; we copy : `` A coat of black cloth , trowsers of black wool , a silk waistcoat , boots and linen . '' 
On the margin there stood : ex-ambassador , and a note which we also copy : `` In a separate box , a neatly frizzed peruke , green glasses , seals , and two small quills an inch long , wrapped in cotton . '' 
All this belonged to the statesman , the ex-ambassador . 
This whole costume was , if we may so express ourselves , debilitated ; the seams were white , a vague button-hole yawned at one of the elbows ; moreover , one of the coat buttons was missing on the breast ; but this was only detail ; as the hand of the statesman should always be thrust into his coat and laid upon his heart , its function was to conceal the absent button . 
If Marius had been familiar with the occult institutions of Paris , he would instantly have recognized upon the back of the visitor whom Basque had just shown in , the statesman 's suit borrowed from the pick-me-down-that shop of the Changer . 
Marius ' disappointment on beholding another man than the one whom he expected to see turned to the newcomer 's disadvantage . 
He surveyed him from head to foot , while that personage made exaggerated bows , and demanded in a curt tone : `` What do you want ? '' 
The man replied with an amiable grin of which the caressing smile of a crocodile will furnish some idea : `` It seems to me impossible that I should not have already had the honor of seeing Monsieur le Baron in society . 
I think I actually did meet monsieur personally , several years ago , at the house of Madame la Princesse Bagration and in the drawing-rooms of his Lordship the Vicomte Dambray , peer of France . '' 
It is always a good bit of tactics in knavery to pretend to recognize some one whom one does not know . 
Marius paid attention to the manner of this man 's speech . 
He spied on his accent and gesture , but his disappointment increased ; the pronunciation was nasal and absolutely unlike the dry , shrill tone which he had expected . 
He was utterly routed . 
`` I know neither Madame Bagration nor M. Dambray , '' said he . 
`` I have never set foot in the house of either of them in my life . '' 
The reply was ungracious . 
The personage , determined to be gracious at any cost , insisted . 
`` Then it must have been at Chateaubriand 's that I have seen Monsieur ! 
I know Chateaubriand very well . 
He is very affable . 
He sometimes says to me : ` Thenard , my friend ... wo n't you drink a glass of wine with me ? ' '' 
Marius ' brow grew more and more severe : `` I have never had the honor of being received by M. de Chateaubriand . 
Let us cut it short . 
What do you want ? '' 
The man bowed lower at that harsh voice . 
`` Monsieur le Baron , deign to listen to me . 
There is in America , in a district near Panama , a village called la Joya . 
That village is composed of a single house , a large , square house of three stories , built of bricks dried in the sun , each side of the square five hundred feet in length , each story retreating twelve feet back of the story below , in such a manner as to leave in front a terrace which makes the circuit of the edifice , in the centre an inner court where the provisions and munitions are kept ; no windows , loopholes , no doors , ladders , ladders to mount from the ground to the first terrace , and from the first to the second , and from the second to the third , ladders to descend into the inner court , no doors to the chambers , trap-doors , no staircases to the chambers , ladders ; in the evening the traps are closed , the ladders are withdrawn carbines and blunderbusses trained from the loopholes ; no means of entering , a house by day , a citadel by night , eight hundred inhabitants , -- that is the village . 
Why so many precautions ? 
because the country is dangerous ; it is full of cannibals . 
Then why do people go there ? 
because the country is marvellous ; gold is found there . '' 
`` What are you driving at ? '' 
interrupted Marius , who had passed from disappointment to impatience . 
`` At this , Monsieur le Baron . 
I am an old and weary diplomat . 
Ancient civilization has thrown me on my own devices . 
I want to try savages . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , egotism is the law of the world . 
The proletarian peasant woman , who toils by the day , turns round when the diligence passes by , the peasant proprietress , who toils in her field , does not turn round . 
The dog of the poor man barks at the rich man , the dog of the rich man barks at the poor man . 
Each one for himself . 
Self-interest -- that 's the object of men . 
Gold , that 's the loadstone . '' 
`` What then ? 
Finish . '' 
`` I should like to go and establish myself at la Joya . 
There are three of us . 
I have my spouse and my young lady ; a very beautiful girl . 
The journey is long and costly . 
I need a little money . '' 
`` What concern is that of mine ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
The stranger stretched his neck out of his cravat , a gesture characteristic of the vulture , and replied with an augmented smile . 
`` Has not Monsieur le Baron perused my letter ? '' 
There was some truth in this . 
The fact is , that the contents of the epistle had slipped Marius ' mind . 
He had seen the writing rather than read the letter . 
He could hardly recall it . 
But a moment ago a fresh start had been given him . 
He had noted that detail : `` my spouse and my young lady . '' 
He fixed a penetrating glance on the stranger . 
An examining judge could not have done the look better . 
He almost lay in wait for him . 
He confined himself to replying : `` State the case precisely . '' 
The stranger inserted his two hands in both his fobs , drew himself up without straightening his dorsal column , but scrutinizing Marius in his turn , with the green gaze of his spectacles . 
`` So be it , Monsieur le Baron . 
I will be precise . 
I have a secret to sell to you . '' 
`` A secret ? '' 
`` A secret . '' 
`` Which concerns me ? '' 
`` Somewhat . '' 
`` What is the secret ? '' 
Marius scrutinized the man more and more as he listened to him . 
`` I commence gratis , '' said the stranger . 
`` You will see that I am interesting . '' 
`` Speak . '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , you have in your house a thief and an assassin . '' 
Marius shuddered . 
`` In my house ? 
no , '' said he . 
The imperturbable stranger brushed his hat with his elbow and went on : `` An assassin and a thief . 
Remark , Monsieur le Baron , that I do not here speak of ancient deeds , deeds of the past which have lapsed , which can be effaced by limitation before the law and by repentance before God . 
I speak of recent deeds , of actual facts as still unknown to justice at this hour . 
I continue . 
This man has insinuated himself into your confidence , and almost into your family under a false name . 
I am about to tell you his real name . 
And to tell it to you for nothing . '' 
`` I am listening . '' 
`` His name is Jean Valjean . '' 
`` I know it . '' 
`` I am going to tell you , equally for nothing , who he is . '' 
`` Say on . '' 
`` He is an ex-convict . '' 
`` I know it . '' 
`` You know it since I have had the honor of telling you . '' 
`` No . 
I knew it before . '' 
Marius ' cold tone , that double reply of `` I know it , '' his laconicism , which was not favorable to dialogue , stirred up some smouldering wrath in the stranger . 
He launched a furious glance on the sly at Marius , which was instantly extinguished . 
Rapid as it was , this glance was of the kind which a man recognizes when he has once beheld it ; it did not escape Marius . 
Certain flashes can only proceed from certain souls ; the eye , that vent-hole of the thought , glows with it ; spectacles hide nothing ; try putting a pane of glass over hell ! 
The stranger resumed with a smile : `` I will not permit myself to contradict Monsieur le Baron . 
In any case , you ought to perceive that I am well informed . 
Now what I have to tell you is known to myself alone . 
This concerns the fortune of Madame la Baronne . 
It is an extraordinary secret . 
It is for sale -- I make you the first offer of it . 
Cheap . 
Twenty thousand francs . '' 
`` I know that secret as well as the others , '' said Marius . 
The personage felt the necessity of lowering his price a trifle . 
`` Monsieur le Baron , say ten thousand francs and I will speak . '' 
`` I repeat to you that there is nothing which you can tell me . 
I know what you wish to say to me . '' 
A fresh flash gleamed in the man 's eye . 
He exclaimed : `` But I must dine to-day , nevertheless . 
It is an extraordinary secret , I tell you . 
Monsieur le Baron , I will speak . 
I speak . 
Give me twenty francs . '' 
Marius gazed intently at him : `` I know your extraordinary secret , just as I knew Jean Valjean 's name , just as I know your name . '' 
`` My name ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` That is not difficult , Monsieur le Baron . 
I had the honor to write to you and to tell it to you . 
Thenard . '' '' 
-- Dier . '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
`` Thenardier . '' 
`` Who 's that ? '' 
In danger the porcupine bristles up , the beetle feigns death , the old guard forms in a square ; this man burst into laughter . 
Then he flicked a grain of dust from the sleeve of his coat with a fillip . 
Marius continued : `` You are also Jondrette the workman , Fabantou the comedian , Genflot the poet , Don Alvares the Spaniard , and Mistress Balizard . '' 
`` Mistress what ? '' 
`` And you kept a pot-house at Montfermeil . '' 
`` A pot-house ! 
Never . '' 
`` And I tell you that your name is Thenardier . '' 
`` I deny it . '' 
`` And that you are a rascal . 
Here . '' 
And Marius drew a bank-note from his pocket and flung it in his face . 
`` Thanks ! 
Pardon me ! 
five hundred francs ! 
Monsieur le Baron ! '' 
And the man , overcome , bowed , seized the note and examined it . 
`` Five hundred francs ! '' 
he began again , taken aback . 
And he stammered in a low voice : `` An honest rustler . '' 
-LSB- 69 -RSB- -LSB- 69 -RSB- Un fafiot serieux . 
Fafiot is the slang term for a bank-bill , derived from its rustling noise . 
Then brusquely : `` Well , so be it ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` Let us put ourselves at our ease . '' 
And with the agility of a monkey , flinging back his hair , tearing off his spectacles , and withdrawing from his nose by sleight of hand the two quills of which mention was recently made , and which the reader has also met with on another page of this book , he took off his face as the man takes off his hat . 
His eye lighted up ; his uneven brow , with hollows in some places and bumps in others , hideously wrinkled at the top , was laid bare , his nose had become as sharp as a beak ; the fierce and sagacious profile of the man of prey reappeared . 
`` Monsieur le Baron is infallible , '' he said in a clear voice whence all nasal twang had disappeared , `` I am Thenardier . '' 
And he straightened up his crooked back . 
Thenardier , for it was really he , was strangely surprised ; he would have been troubled , had he been capable of such a thing . 
He had come to bring astonishment , and it was he who had received it . 
This humiliation had been worth five hundred francs to him , and , taking it all in all , he accepted it ; but he was none the less bewildered . 
He beheld this Baron Pontmercy for the first time , and , in spite of his disguise , this Baron Pontmercy recognized him , and recognized him thoroughly . 
And not only was this Baron perfectly informed as to Thenardier , but he seemed well posted as to Jean Valjean . 
Who was this almost beardless young man , who was so glacial and so generous , who knew people 's names , who knew all their names , and who opened his purse to them , who bullied rascals like a judge , and who paid them like a dupe ? 
Thenardier , the reader will remember , although he had been Marius ' neighbor , had never seen him , which is not unusual in Paris ; he had formerly , in a vague way , heard his daughters talk of a very poor young man named Marius who lived in the house . 
He had written to him , without knowing him , the letter with which the reader is acquainted . 
No connection between that Marius and M. le Baron Pontmercy was possible in his mind . 
As for the name Pontmercy , it will be recalled that , on the battlefield of Waterloo , he had only heard the last two syllables , for which he always entertained the legitimate scorn which one owes to what is merely an expression of thanks . 
However , through his daughter Azelma , who had started on the scent of the married pair on the 16th of February , and through his own personal researches , he had succeeded in learning many things , and , from the depths of his own gloom , he had contrived to grasp more than one mysterious clew . 
He had discovered , by dint of industry , or , at least , by dint of induction , he had guessed who the man was whom he had encountered on a certain day in the Grand Sewer . 
From the man he had easily reached the name . 
He knew that Madame la Baronne Pontmercy was Cosette . 
But he meant to be discreet in that quarter . 
Who was Cosette ? 
He did not know exactly himself . 
He did , indeed , catch an inkling of illegitimacy , the history of Fantine had always seemed to him equivocal ; but what was the use of talking about that ? 
in order to cause himself to be paid for his silence ? 
He had , or thought he had , better wares than that for sale . 
And , according to all appearances , if he were to come and make to the Baron Pontmercy this revelation -- and without proof : `` Your wife is a bastard , '' the only result would be to attract the boot of the husband towards the loins of the revealer . 
From Thenardier 's point of view , the conversation with Marius had not yet begun . 
He ought to have drawn back , to have modified his strategy , to have abandoned his position , to have changed his front ; but nothing essential had been compromised as yet , and he had five hundred francs in his pocket . 
Moreover , he had something decisive to say , and , even against this very well-informed and well-armed Baron Pontmercy , he felt himself strong . 
For men of Thenardier 's nature , every dialogue is a combat . 
In the one in which he was about to engage , what was his situation ? 
He did not know to whom he was speaking , but he did know of what he was speaking , he made this rapid review of his inner forces , and after having said : `` I am Thenardier , '' he waited . 
Marius had become thoughtful . 
So he had hold of Thenardier at last . 
That man whom he had so greatly desired to find was before him . 
He could honor Colonel Pontmercy 's recommendation . 
He felt humiliated that that hero should have owned anything to this villain , and that the letter of change drawn from the depths of the tomb by his father upon him , Marius , had been protested up to that day . 
It also seemed to him , in the complex state of his mind towards Thenardier , that there was occasion to avenge the Colonel for the misfortune of having been saved by such a rascal . 
In any case , he was content . 
He was about to deliver the Colonel 's shade from this unworthy creditor at last , and it seemed to him that he was on the point of rescuing his father 's memory from the debtors ' prison . 
By the side of this duty there was another -- to elucidate , if possible , the source of Cosette 's fortune . 
The opportunity appeared to present itself . 
Perhaps Thenardier knew something . 
It might prove useful to see the bottom of this man . 
He commenced with this . 
Thenardier had caused the `` honest rustler '' to disappear in his fob , and was gazing at Marius with a gentleness that was almost tender . 
Marius broke the silence . 
`` Thenardier , I have told you your name . 
Now , would you like to have me tell you your secret -- the one that you came here to reveal to me ? 
I have information of my own , also . 
You shall see that I know more about it than you do . 
Jean Valjean , as you have said , is an assassin and a thief . 
A thief , because he robbed a wealthy manufacturer , whose ruin he brought about . 
An assassin , because he assassinated police-agent Javert . '' 
`` I do n't understand , sir , '' ejaculated Thenardier . 
`` I will make myself intelligible . 
In a certain arrondissement of the Pas de Calais , there was , in 1822 , a man who had fallen out with justice , and who , under the name of M. Madeleine , had regained his status and rehabilitated himself . 
This man had become a just man in the full force of the term . 
In a trade , the manufacture of black glass goods , he made the fortune of an entire city . 
As far as his personal fortune was concerned he made that also , but as a secondary matter , and in some sort , by accident . 
He was the foster-father of the poor . 
He founded hospitals , opened schools , visited the sick , dowered young girls , supported widows , and adopted orphans ; he was like the guardian angel of the country . 
He refused the cross , he was appointed Mayor . 
A liberated convict knew the secret of a penalty incurred by this man in former days ; he denounced him , and had him arrested , and profited by the arrest to come to Paris and cause the banker Laffitte , -- I have the fact from the cashier himself , -- by means of a false signature , to hand over to him the sum of over half a million which belonged to M. Madeleine . 
This convict who robbed M. Madeleine was Jean Valjean . 
As for the other fact , you have nothing to tell me about it either . 
Jean Valjean killed the agent Javert ; he shot him with a pistol . 
I , the person who is speaking to you , was present . '' 
Thenardier cast upon Marius the sovereign glance of a conquered man who lays his hand once more upon the victory , and who has just regained , in one instant , all the ground which he has lost . 
But the smile returned instantly . 
The inferior 's triumph in the presence of his superior must be wheedling . 
Thenardier contented himself with saying to Marius : `` Monsieur le Baron , we are on the wrong track . '' 
And he emphasized this phrase by making his bunch of seals execute an expressive whirl . 
`` What ! '' 
broke forth Marius , `` do you dispute that ? 
These are facts . '' 
`` They are chimeras . 
The confidence with which Monsieur le Baron honors me renders it my duty to tell him so . 
Truth and justice before all things . 
I do not like to see folks accused unjustly . 
Monsieur le Baron , Jean Valjean did not rob M. Madeleine and Jean Valjean did not kill Javert . '' 
`` This is too much ! 
How is this ? '' 
`` For two reasons . '' 
`` What are they ? 
Speak . '' 
`` This is the first : he did not rob M. Madeleine , because it is Jean Valjean himself who was M. Madeleine . '' 
`` What tale are you telling me ? '' 
`` And this is the second : he did not assassinate Javert , because the person who killed Javert was Javert . '' 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
`` That Javert committed suicide . '' 
`` Prove it ! 
prove it ! '' 
cried Marius beside himself . 
Thenardier resumed , scanning his phrase after the manner of the ancient Alexandrine measure : `` Police-agent-Ja-vert-was-found-drowned-un-der-a-boat-of-the-Pont-au-Change . '' 
`` But prove it ! '' 
Thenardier drew from his pocket a large envelope of gray paper , which seemed to contain sheets folded in different sizes . 
`` I have my papers , '' he said calmly . 
And he added : `` Monsieur le Baron , in your interests I desired to know Jean Valjean thoroughly . 
I say that Jean Valjean and M. Madeleine are one and the same man , and I say that Javert had no other assassin than Javert . 
If I speak , it is because I have proofs . 
Not manuscript proofs -- writing is suspicious , handwriting is complaisant , -- but printed proofs . '' 
As he spoke , Thenardier extracted from the envelope two copies of newspapers , yellow , faded , and strongly saturated with tobacco . 
One of these two newspapers , broken at every fold and falling into rags , seemed much older than the other . 
`` Two facts , two proofs , '' remarked Thenardier . 
And he offered the two newspapers , unfolded , to Marius , The reader is acquainted with these two papers . 
One , the most ancient , a number of the Drapeau Blanc of the 25th of July , 1823 , the text of which can be seen in the first volume , established the identity of M. Madeleine and Jean Valjean . 
The other , a Moniteur of the 15th of June , 1832 , announced the suicide of Javert , adding that it appeared from a verbal report of Javert to the prefect that , having been taken prisoner in the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , he had owed his life to the magnanimity of an insurgent who , holding him under his pistol , had fired into the air , instead of blowing out his brains . 
Marius read . 
He had evidence , a certain date , irrefragable proof , these two newspapers had not been printed expressly for the purpose of backing up Thenardier 's statements ; the note printed in the Moniteur had been an administrative communication from the Prefecture of Police . 
Marius could not doubt . 
The information of the cashier-clerk had been false , and he himself had been deceived . 
Jean Valjean , who had suddenly grown grand , emerged from his cloud . 
Marius could not repress a cry of joy . 
`` Well , then this unhappy wretch is an admirable man ! 
the whole of that fortune really belonged to him ! 
he is Madeleine , the providence of a whole countryside ! 
he is Jean Valjean , Javert 's savior ! 
he is a hero ! 
he is a saint ! '' 
`` He 's not a saint , and he 's not a hero ! '' 
said Thenardier . 
`` He 's an assassin and a robber . '' 
And he added , in the tone of a man who begins to feel that he possesses some authority : `` Let us be calm . '' 
Robber , assassin -- those words which Marius thought had disappeared and which returned , fell upon him like an ice-cold shower-bath . 
`` Again ! '' 
said he . 
`` Always , '' ejaculated Thenardier . 
`` Jean Valjean did not rob Madeleine , but he is a thief . 
He did not kill Javert , but he is a murderer . '' 
`` Will you speak , '' retorted Marius , `` of that miserable theft , committed forty years ago , and expiated , as your own newspapers prove , by a whole life of repentance , of self-abnegation and of virtue ? '' 
`` I say assassination and theft , Monsieur le Baron , and I repeat that I am speaking of actual facts . 
What I have to reveal to you is absolutely unknown . 
It belongs to unpublished matter . 
And perhaps you will find in it the source of the fortune so skilfully presented to Madame la Baronne by Jean Valjean . 
I say skilfully , because , by a gift of that nature it would not be so very unskilful to slip into an honorable house whose comforts one would then share , and , at the same stroke , to conceal one 's crime , and to enjoy one 's theft , to bury one 's name and to create for oneself a family . '' 
`` I might interrupt you at this point , '' said Marius , `` but go on . '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , I will tell you all , leaving the recompense to your generosity . 
This secret is worth massive gold . 
You will say to me : ` Why do not you apply to Jean Valjean ? ' 
For a very simple reason ; I know that he has stripped himself , and stripped himself in your favor , and I consider the combination ingenious ; but he has no longer a son , he would show me his empty hands , and , since I am in need of some money for my trip to la Joya , I prefer you , you who have it all , to him who has nothing . 
I am a little fatigued , permit me to take a chair . '' 
Marius seated himself and motioned to him to do the same . 
Thenardier installed himself on a tufted chair , picked up his two newspapers , thrust them back into their envelope , and murmured as he pecked at the Drapeau Blanc with his nail : `` It cost me a good deal of trouble to get this one . '' 
That done he crossed his legs and stretched himself out on the back of the chair , an attitude characteristic of people who are sure of what they are saying , then he entered upon his subject gravely , emphasizing his words : `` Monsieur le Baron , on the 6th of June , 1832 , about a year ago , on the day of the insurrection , a man was in the Grand Sewer of Paris , at the point where the sewer enters the Seine , between the Pont des Invalides and the Pont de Jena . '' 
Marius abruptly drew his chair closer to that of Thenardier . 
Thenardier noticed this movement and continued with the deliberation of an orator who holds his interlocutor and who feels his adversary palpitating under his words : `` This man , forced to conceal himself , and for reasons , moreover , which are foreign to politics , had adopted the sewer as his domicile and had a key to it . 
It was , I repeat , on the 6th of June ; it might have been eight o'clock in the evening . 
The man hears a noise in the sewer . 
Greatly surprised , he hides himself and lies in wait . 
It was the sound of footsteps , some one was walking in the dark , and coming in his direction . 
Strange to say , there was another man in the sewer besides himself . 
The grating of the outlet from the sewer was not far off . 
A little light which fell through it permitted him to recognize the newcomer , and to see that the man was carrying something on his back . 
He was walking in a bent attitude . 
