`` It was His Majesty 's beast . '' 
The hair-dresser felt , that after this observation , a short silence would be fitting , so he conformed himself to it , and then went on : -- `` The Emperor was never wounded but once , was he , sir ? '' 
The old soldier replied with the calm and sovereign tone of a man who had been there : -- `` In the heel . 
At Ratisbon . 
I never saw him so well dressed as on that day . 
He was as neat as a new sou . '' 
`` And you , Mr. Veteran , you must have been often wounded ? '' 
`` I ? '' 
said the soldier , `` ah ! 
not to amount to anything . 
At Marengo , I received two sabre-blows on the back of my neck , a bullet in the right arm at Austerlitz , another in the left hip at Jena . 
At Friedland , a thrust from a bayonet , there , -- at the Moskowa seven or eight lance-thrusts , no matter where , at Lutzen a splinter of a shell crushed one of my fingers . 
Ah ! 
and then at Waterloo , a ball from a biscaien in the thigh , that 's all . '' 
`` How fine that is ! '' 
exclaimed the hair-dresser , in Pindaric accents , `` to die on the field of battle ! 
On my word of honor , rather than die in bed , of an illness , slowly , a bit by bit each day , with drugs , cataplasms , syringes , medicines , I should prefer to receive a cannon-ball in my belly ! '' 
`` You 're not over fastidious , '' said the soldier . 
He had hardly spoken when a fearful crash shook the shop . 
The show-window had suddenly been fractured . 
The wig-maker turned pale . 
`` Ah , good God ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` it 's one of them ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` A cannon-ball . '' 
`` Here it is , '' said the soldier . 
And he picked up something that was rolling about the floor . 
It was a pebble . 
The hair-dresser ran to the broken window and beheld Gavroche fleeing at the full speed , towards the Marche Saint-Jean . 
As he passed the hair-dresser 's shop Gavroche , who had the two brats still in his mind , had not been able to resist the impulse to say good day to him , and had flung a stone through his panes . 
`` You see ! '' 
shrieked the hair-dresser , who from white had turned blue , `` that fellow returns and does mischief for the pure pleasure of it . 
What has any one done to that gamin ? '' 
THE CHILD IS AMAZED AT THE OLD MAN In the meantime , in the Marche Saint-Jean , where the post had already been disarmed , Gavroche had just `` effected a junction '' with a band led by Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Combeferre , and Feuilly . 
They were armed after a fashion . 
Bahorel and Jean Prouvaire had found them and swelled the group . 
Enjolras had a double-barrelled hunting-gun , Combeferre the gun of a National Guard bearing the number of his legion , and in his belt , two pistols which his unbuttoned coat allowed to be seen , Jean Prouvaire an old cavalry musket , Bahorel a rifle ; Courfeyrac was brandishing an unsheathed sword-cane . 
Feuilly , with a naked sword in his hand , marched at their head shouting : `` Long live Poland ! '' 
They reached the Quai Morland . 
Cravatless , hatless , breathless , soaked by the rain , with lightning in their eyes . 
Gavroche accosted them calmly : -- `` Where are we going ? '' 
`` Come along , '' said Courfeyrac . 
Behind Feuilly marched , or rather bounded , Bahorel , who was like a fish in water in a riot . 
He wore a scarlet waistcoat , and indulged in the sort of words which break everything . 
His waistcoat astounded a passer-by , who cried in bewilderment : -- `` Here are the reds ! '' 
`` The reds , the reds ! '' 
retorted Bahorel . 
`` A queer kind of fear , bourgeois . 
For my part I do n't tremble before a poppy , the little red hat inspires me with no alarm . 
Take my advice , bourgeois , let 's leave fear of the red to horned cattle . '' 
He caught sight of a corner of the wall on which was placarded the most peaceable sheet of paper in the world , a permission to eat eggs , a Lenten admonition addressed by the Archbishop of Paris to his `` flock . '' 
Bahorel exclaimed : -- '' ` Flock ' ; a polite way of saying geese . '' 
And he tore the charge from the nail . 
This conquered Gavroche . 
From that instant Gavroche set himself to study Bahorel . 
`` Bahorel , '' observed Enjolras , `` you are wrong . 
You should have let that charge alone , he is not the person with whom we have to deal , you are wasting your wrath to no purpose . 
Take care of your supply . 
One does not fire out of the ranks with the soul any more than with a gun . '' 
`` Each one in his own fashion , Enjolras , '' retorted Bahorel . 
`` This bishop 's prose shocks me ; I want to eat eggs without being permitted . 
Your style is the hot and cold ; I am amusing myself . 
Besides , I 'm not wasting myself , I 'm getting a start ; and if I tore down that charge , Hercle ! 
't was only to whet my appetite . '' 
This word , Hercle , struck Gavroche . 
He sought all occasions for learning , and that tearer-down of posters possessed his esteem . 
He inquired of him : -- `` What does Hercle mean ? '' 
Bahorel answered : -- `` It means cursed name of a dog , in Latin . '' 
Here Bahorel recognized at a window a pale young man with a black beard who was watching them as they passed , probably a Friend of the A B C . 
He shouted to him : -- `` Quick , cartridges , para bellum . '' 
`` A fine man ! 
that 's true , '' said Gavroche , who now understood Latin . 
A tumultuous retinue accompanied them , -- students , artists , young men affiliated to the Cougourde of Aix , artisans , longshoremen , armed with clubs and bayonets ; some , like Combeferre , with pistols thrust into their trousers . 
An old man , who appeared to be extremely aged , was walking in the band . 
He had no arms , and he made great haste , so that he might not be left behind , although he had a thoughtful air . 
Gavroche caught sight of him : -- `` Keksekca ? '' 
said he to Courfeyrac . 
`` He 's an old duffer . '' 
It was M. Mabeuf . 
THE OLD MAN Let us recount what had taken place . 
Enjolras and his friends had been on the Boulevard Bourdon , near the public storehouses , at the moment when the dragoons had made their charge . 
Enjolras , Courfeyrac , and Combeferre were among those who had taken to the Rue Bassompierre , shouting : `` To the barricades ! '' 
In the Rue Lesdiguieres they had met an old man walking along . 
What had attracted their attention was that the goodman was walking in a zig-zag , as though he were intoxicated . 
Moreover , he had his hat in his hand , although it had been raining all the morning , and was raining pretty briskly at the very time . 
Courfeyrac had recognized Father Mabeuf . 
He knew him through having many times accompanied Marius as far as his door . 
As he was acquainted with the peaceful and more than timid habits of the old beadle-book-collector , and was amazed at the sight of him in the midst of that uproar , a couple of paces from the cavalry charges , almost in the midst of a fusillade , hatless in the rain , and strolling about among the bullets , he had accosted him , and the following dialogue had been exchanged between the rioter of fire and the octogenarian : -- `` M. Mabeuf , go to your home . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` There 's going to be a row . '' 
`` That 's well . '' 
`` Thrusts with the sword and firing , M. Mabeuf . '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` Firing from cannon . '' 
`` That is good . 
Where are the rest of you going ? '' 
`` We are going to fling the government to the earth . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
And he had set out to follow them . 
From that moment forth he had not uttered a word . 
His step had suddenly become firm ; artisans had offered him their arms ; he had refused with a sign of the head . 
He advanced nearly to the front rank of the column , with the movement of a man who is marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping . 
`` What a fierce old fellow ! '' 
muttered the students . 
The rumor spread through the troop that he was a former member of the Convention , -- an old regicide . 
The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie . 
Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made of him a sort of trumpet . 
He sang : `` Voici la lune qui paratt , Quand irons-nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tou tou tou Pour Chatou . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Pour avoir bu de grand matin La rosee a meme le thym , Deux moineaux etaient en ribotte . 
Zi zi zi Pour Passy . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Et ces deux pauvres petits loups , Comme deux grives estaient souls ; Une tigre en riait dans sa grotte . 
Don don don Pour Meudon . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` L'un jurait et l'autre sacrait . 
Quand irons nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tin tin tin Pour Pantin . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . '' 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- They directed their course towards Saint-Merry . 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- Here is the morn appearing . 
When shall we go to the forest , Charlot asked Charlotte . 
Tou , tou , tou , for Chatou , I have but one God , one King , one half-farthing , and one boot . 
And these two poor little wolves were as tipsy as sparrows from having drunk dew and thyme very early in the morning . 
And these two poor little things were as drunk as thrushes in a vineyard ; a tiger laughed at them in his cave . 
The one cursed , the other swore . 
When shall we go to the forest ? 
Charlot asked Charlotte . 
RECRUITS The band augmented every moment . 
Near the Rue des Billettes , a man of lofty stature , whose hair was turning gray , and whose bold and daring mien was remarked by Courfeyrac , Enjolras , and Combeferre , but whom none of them knew , joined them . 
Gavroche , who was occupied in singing , whistling , humming , running on ahead and pounding on the shutters of the shops with the butt of his triggerless pistol ; paid no attention to this man . 
It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie , they passed in front of Courfeyrac 's door . 
`` This happens just right , '' said Courfeyrac , `` I have forgotten my purse , and I have lost my hat . '' 
He quitted the mob and ran up to his quarters at full speed . 
He seized an old hat and his purse . 
He also seized a large square coffer , of the dimensions of a large valise , which was concealed under his soiled linen . 
As he descended again at a run , the portress hailed him : -- `` Monsieur de Courfeyrac ! '' 
`` What 's your name , portress ? '' 
The portress stood bewildered . 
`` Why , you know perfectly well , I 'm the concierge ; my name is Mother Veuvain . '' 
`` Well , if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again , I shall call you Mother de Veuvain . 
Now speak , what 's the matter ? 
What do you want ? '' 
`` There is some one who wants to speak with you . '' 
`` Who is it ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` Where is he ? '' 
`` In my lodge . '' 
`` The devil ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` But the person has been waiting your return for over an hour , '' said the portress . 
At the same time , a sort of pale , thin , small , freckled , and youthful artisan , clad in a tattered blouse and patched trousers of ribbed velvet , and who had rather the air of a girl accoutred as a man than of a man , emerged from the lodge and said to Courfeyrac in a voice which was not the least in the world like a woman 's voice : -- `` Monsieur Marius , if you please . '' 
`` He is not here . '' 
`` Will he return this evening ? '' 
`` I know nothing about it . '' 
And Courfeyrac added : -- `` For my part , I shall not return . '' 
The young man gazed steadily at him and said : -- `` Why not ? '' 
`` Because . '' 
`` Where are you going , then ? '' 
`` What business is that of yours ? '' 
`` Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you ? '' 
`` I am going to the barricades . '' 
`` Would you like to have me go with you ? '' 
`` If you like ! '' 
replied Courfeyrac . 
`` The street is free , the pavements belong to every one . '' 
And he made his escape at a run to join his friends . 
When he had rejoined them , he gave the coffer to one of them to carry . 
It was only a quarter of an hour after this that he saw the young man , who had actually followed them . 
A mob does not go precisely where it intends . 
We have explained that a gust of wind carries it away . 
They overshot Saint-Merry and found themselves , without precisely knowing how , in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION The Parisians who nowadays on entering on the Rue Rambuteau at the end near the Halles , notice on their right , opposite the Rue Mondetour , a basket-maker 's shop having for its sign a basket in the form of Napoleon the Great with this inscription : -- NAPOLEON IS MADE WHOLLY OF WILLOW , have no suspicion of the terrible scenes which this very spot witnessed hardly thirty years ago . 
It was there that lay the Rue de la Chanvrerie , which ancient deeds spell Chanverrerie , and the celebrated public-house called Corinthe . 
The reader will remember all that has been said about the barricade effected at this point , and eclipsed , by the way , by the barricade Saint-Merry . 
It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , now fallen into profound obscurity , that we are about to shed a little light . 
May we be permitted to recur , for the sake of clearness in the recital , to the simple means which we have already employed in the case of Waterloo . 
Persons who wish to picture to themselves in a tolerably exact manner the constitution of the houses which stood at that epoch near the Pointe Saint-Eustache , at the northeast angle of the Halles of Paris , where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau , have only to imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its summit and the Halles with its base , and whose two vertical bars should form the Rue de la Grande-Truanderie , and the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and whose transverse bar should be formed by the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie . 
The old Rue Mondetour cut the three strokes of the N at the most crooked angles . 
So that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streets sufficed to form , on a space three fathoms square , between the Halles and the Rue Saint-Denis on the one hand , and between the Rue du Cygne and the Rue des Precheurs on the other , seven islands of houses , oddly cut up , of varying sizes , placed crosswise and hap-hazard , and barely separated , like the blocks of stone in a dock , by narrow crannies . 
We say narrow crannies , and we can give no more just idea of those dark , contracted , many-angled alleys , lined with eight-story buildings . 
These buildings were so decrepit that , in the Rue de la Chanvrerie and the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie , the fronts were shored up with beams running from one house to another . 
The street was narrow and the gutter broad , the pedestrian there walked on a pavement that was always wet , skirting little stalls resembling cellars , big posts encircled with iron hoops , excessive heaps of refuse , and gates armed with enormous , century-old gratings . 
The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that . 
The name of Mondetour paints marvellously well the sinuosities of that whole set of streets . 
A little further on , they are found still better expressed by the Rue Pirouette , which ran into the Rue Mondetour . 
The passer-by who got entangled from the Rue Saint-Denis in the Rue de la Chanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he had entered an elongated funnel . 
At the end of this street , which was very short , he found further passage barred in the direction of the Halles by a tall row of houses , and he would have thought himself in a blind alley , had he not perceived on the right and left two dark cuts through which he could make his escape . 
This was the Rue Mondetour , which on one side ran into the Rue de Precheurs , and on the other into the Rue du Cygne and the Petite-Truanderie . 
At the bottom of this sort of cul-de-sac , at the angle of the cutting on the right , there was to be seen a house which was not so tall as the rest , and which formed a sort of cape in the street . 
It is in this house , of two stories only , that an illustrious wine-shop had been merrily installed three hundred years before . 
This tavern created a joyous noise in the very spot which old Theophilus described in the following couplet : -- La branle le squelette horrible D'un pauvre amant qui se pendit . 
-LSB- 47 -RSB- -LSB- 47 -RSB- There swings the horrible skeleton of a poor lover who hung himself . 
The situation was good , and tavern-keepers succeeded each other there , from father to son . 
In the time of Mathurin Regnier , this cabaret was called the Pot-aux-Roses , and as the rebus was then in fashion , it had for its sign-board , a post -LRB- poteau -RRB- painted rose-color . 
In the last century , the worthy Natoire , one of the fantastic masters nowadays despised by the stiff school , having got drunk many times in this wine-shop at the very table where Regnier had drunk his fill , had painted , by way of gratitude , a bunch of Corinth grapes on the pink post . 
The keeper of the cabaret , in his joy , had changed his device and had caused to be placed in gilt letters beneath the bunch these words : `` At the Bunch of Corinth Grapes '' -LRB- `` Au Raisin de Corinthe '' -RRB- . 
Hence the name of Corinthe . 
Nothing is more natural to drunken men than ellipses . 
The ellipsis is the zig-zag of the phrase . 
Corinthe gradually dethroned the Pot-aux-Roses . 
The last proprietor of the dynasty , Father Hucheloup , no longer acquainted even with the tradition , had the post painted blue . 
A room on the ground floor , where the bar was situated , one on the first floor containing a billiard-table , a wooden spiral staircase piercing the ceiling , wine on the tables , smoke on the walls , candles in broad daylight , -- this was the style of this cabaret . 
A staircase with a trap-door in the lower room led to the cellar . 
On the second floor were the lodgings of the Hucheloup family . 
They were reached by a staircase which was a ladder rather than a staircase , and had for their entrance only a private door in the large room on the first floor . 
Under the roof , in two mansard attics , were the nests for the servants . 
The kitchen shared the ground-floor with the tap-room . 
Father Hucheloup had , possibly , been born a chemist , but the fact is that he was a cook ; people did not confine themselves to drinking alone in his wine-shop , they also ate there . 
Hucheloup had invented a capital thing which could be eaten nowhere but in his house , stuffed carps , which he called carpes au gras . 
These were eaten by the light of a tallow candle or of a lamp of the time of Louis XVI. , on tables to which were nailed waxed cloths in lieu of table-cloths . 
People came thither from a distance . 
Hucheloup , one fine morning , had seen fit to notify passers-by of this `` specialty '' ; he had dipped a brush in a pot of black paint , and as he was an orthographer on his own account , as well as a cook after his own fashion , he had improvised on his wall this remarkable inscription : -- CARPES HO GRAS . 
One winter , the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy to obliterate the S which terminated the first word , and the G which began the third ; this is what remained : -- CARPE HO RAS . 
Time and rain assisting , a humble gastronomical announcement had become a profound piece of advice . 
In this way it came about , that though he knew no French , Father Hucheloup understood Latin , that he had evoked philosophy from his kitchen , and that , desirous simply of effacing Lent , he had equalled Horace . 
And the striking thing about it was , that that also meant : `` Enter my wine-shop . '' 
Nothing of all this is in existence now . 
The Mondetour labyrinth was disembowelled and widely opened in 1847 , and probably no longer exists at the present moment . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie and Corinthe have disappeared beneath the pavement of the Rue Rambuteau . 
As we have already said , Corinthe was the meeting-place if not the rallying-point , of Courfeyrac and his friends . 
It was Grantaire who had discovered Corinthe . 
He had entered it on account of the Carpe horas , and had returned thither on account of the Carpes au gras . 
There they drank , there they ate , there they shouted ; they did not pay much , they paid badly , they did not pay at all , but they were always welcome . 
Father Hucheloup was a jovial host . 
Hucheloup , that amiable man , as was just said , was a wine-shop-keeper with a mustache ; an amusing variety . 
He always had an ill-tempered air , seemed to wish to intimidate his customers , grumbled at the people who entered his establishment , and had rather the mien of seeking a quarrel with them than of serving them with soup . 
And yet , we insist upon the word , people were always welcome there . 
This oddity had attracted customers to his shop , and brought him young men , who said to each other : `` Come hear Father Hucheloup growl . '' 
He had been a fencing-master . 
All of a sudden , he would burst out laughing . 
A big voice , a good fellow . 
He had a comic foundation under a tragic exterior , he asked nothing better than to frighten you , very much like those snuff-boxes which are in the shape of a pistol . 
The detonation makes one sneeze . 
Mother Hucheloup , his wife , was a bearded and a very homely creature . 
About 1830 , Father Hucheloup died . 
With him disappeared the secret of stuffed carps . 
His inconsolable widow continued to keep the wine-shop . 
But the cooking deteriorated , and became execrable ; the wine , which had always been bad , became fearfully bad . 
Nevertheless , Courfeyrac and his friends continued to go to Corinthe , -- out of pity , as Bossuet said . 
The Widow Hucheloup was breathless and misshapen and given to rustic recollections . 
She deprived them of their flatness by her pronunciation . 
She had a way of her own of saying things , which spiced her reminiscences of the village and of her springtime . 
It had formerly been her delight , so she affirmed , to hear the loups-de-gorge -LRB- rouges-gorges -RRB- chanter dans les ogrepines -LRB- aubepines -RRB- -- to hear the redbreasts sing in the hawthorn-trees . 
The hall on the first floor , where `` the restaurant '' was situated , was a large and long apartment encumbered with stools , chairs , benches , and tables , and with a crippled , lame , old billiard-table . 
It was reached by a spiral staircase which terminated in the corner of the room at a square hole like the hatchway of a ship . 
This room , lighted by a single narrow window , and by a lamp that was always burning , had the air of a garret . 
All the four-footed furniture comported itself as though it had but three legs -- the whitewashed walls had for their only ornament the following quatrain in honor of Mame Hucheloup : -- Elle etonne a dix pas , elle epouvente a deux , Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux ; On tremble a chaque instant qu'elle ne vous la mouche Et qu'un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche . 
-LSB- 48 -RSB- -LSB- 48 -RSB- She astounds at ten paces , she frightens at two , a wart inhabits her hazardous nose ; you tremble every instant lest she should blow it at you , and lest , some fine day , her nose should tumble into her mouth . 
This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall . 
Mame Hucheloup , a good likeness , went and came from morning till night before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity . 
Two serving-maids , named Matelote and Gibelotte , -LSB- 49 -RSB- and who had never been known by any other names , helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables the jugs of poor wine , and the various broths which were served to the hungry patrons in earthenware bowls . 
Matelote , large , plump , redhaired , and noisy , the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup , was homelier than any mythological monster , be it what it may ; still , as it becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress , she was less homely than Mame Hucheloup . 
Gibelotte , tall , delicate , white with a lymphatic pallor , with circles round her eyes , and drooping lids , always languid and weary , afflicted with what may be called chronic lassitude , the first up in the house and the last in bed , waited on every one , even the other maid , silently and gently , smiling through her fatigue with a vague and sleepy smile . 
-LSB- 49 -RSB- Matelote : a culinary preparation of various fishes . 
Gibelotte : stewed rabbits . 
Before entering the restaurant room , the visitor read on the door the following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac : -- Regale si tu peux et mange si tu l'oses . 
-LSB- 50 -RSB- -LSB- 50 -RSB- Treat if you can , and eat if you dare . 
PRELIMINARY GAYETIES Laigle de Meaux , as the reader knows , lived more with Joly than elsewhere . 
He had a lodging , as a bird has one on a branch . 
The two friends lived together , ate together , slept together . 
They had everything in common , even Musichetta , to some extent . 
They were , what the subordinate monks who accompany monks are called , bini . 
On the morning of the 5th of June , they went to Corinthe to breakfast . 
Joly , who was all stuffed up , had a catarrh which Laigle was beginning to share . 
Laigle 's coat was threadbare , but Joly was well dressed . 
It was about nine o'clock in the morning , when they opened the door of Corinthe . 
They ascended to the first floor . 
Matelote and Gibelotte received them . 
`` Oysters , cheese , and ham , '' said Laigle . 
And they seated themselves at a table . 
The wine-shop was empty ; there was no one there but themselves . 
Gibelotte , knowing Joly and Laigle , set a bottle of wine on the table . 
While they were busy with their first oysters , a head appeared at the hatchway of the staircase , and a voice said : -- `` I am passing by . 
I smell from the street a delicious odor of Brie cheese . 
I enter . '' 
It was Grantaire . 
Grantaire took a stool and drew up to the table . 
At the sight of Grantaire , Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on the table . 
That made three . 
`` Are you going to drink those two bottles ? '' 
Laigle inquired of Grantaire . 
Grantaire replied : -- `` All are ingenious , thou alone art ingenuous . 
Two bottles never yet astonished a man . '' 
The others had begun by eating , Grantaire began by drinking . 
Half a bottle was rapidly gulped down . 
`` So you have a hole in your stomach ? '' 
began Laigle again . 
`` You have one in your elbow , '' said Grantaire . 
And after having emptied his glass , he added : -- `` Ah , by the way , Laigle of the funeral oration , your coat is old . '' 
`` I should hope so , '' retorted Laigle . 
`` That 's why we get on well together , my coat and I . 
It has acquired all my folds , it does not bind me anywhere , it is moulded on my deformities , it falls in with all my movements , I am only conscious of it because it keeps me warm . 
Old coats are just like old friends . '' 
`` That 's true , '' ejaculated Joly , striking into the dialogue , `` an old goat is an old abi '' -LRB- ami , friend -RRB- . 
`` Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up , '' said Grantaire . 
`` Grantaire , '' demanded Laigle , `` have you just come from the boulevard ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` We have just seen the head of the procession pass , Joly and I. '' `` It 's a marvellous sight , '' said Joly . 
`` How quiet this street is ! '' 
exclaimed Laigle . 
`` Who would suspect that Paris was turned upside down ? 
How plainly it is to be seen that in former days there were nothing but convents here ! 
In this neighborhood ! 
Du Breul and Sauval give a list of them , and so does the Abbe Lebeuf . 
They were all round here , they fairly swarmed , booted and barefooted , shaven , bearded , gray , black , white , Franciscans , Minims , Capuchins , Carmelites , Little Augustines , Great Augustines , old Augustines -- there was no end of them . '' 
`` Do n't let 's talk of monks , '' interrupted Grantaire , `` it makes one want to scratch one 's self . '' 
Then he exclaimed : -- `` Bouh ! 
I 've just swallowed a bad oyster . 
Now hypochondria is taking possession of me again . 
The oysters are spoiled , the servants are ugly . 
I hate the human race . 
I just passed through the Rue Richelieu , in front of the big public library . 
That pile of oyster-shells which is called a library is disgusting even to think of . 
What paper ! 
What ink ! 
What scrawling ! 
And all that has been written ! 
What rascal was it who said that man was a featherless biped ? 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- And then , I met a pretty girl of my acquaintance , who is as beautiful as the spring , worthy to be called Floreal , and who is delighted , enraptured , as happy as the angels , because a wretch yesterday , a frightful banker all spotted with small-pox , deigned to take a fancy to her ! 
Alas ! 
woman keeps on the watch for a protector as much as for a lover ; cats chase mice as well as birds . 
Two months ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic , she adjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets , what do you call it ? 
She sewed , she had a camp bed , she dwelt beside a pot of flowers , she was contented . 
Now here she is a bankeress . 
This transformation took place last night . 
I met the victim this morning in high spirits . 
The hideous point about it is , that the jade is as pretty to-day as she was yesterday . 
Her financier did not show in her face . 
Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women , that the traces left upon them by caterpillars are visible . 
Ah ! 
there is no morality on earth . 
I call to witness the myrtle , the symbol of love , the laurel , the symbol of air , the olive , that ninny , the symbol of peace , the apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips , and the fig-tree , the grandfather of petticoats . 
As for right , do you know what right is ? 
The Gauls covet Clusium , Rome protects Clusium , and demands what wrong Clusium has done to them . 
Brennus answers : ` The wrong that Alba did to you , the wrong that Fidenae did to you , the wrong that the Eques , the Volsci , and the Sabines have done to you . 
They were your neighbors . 
The Clusians are ours . 
We understand neighborliness just as you do . 
You have stolen Alba , we shall take Clusium . ' 
Rome said : ` You shall not take Clusium . ' 
Brennus took Rome . 
Then he cried : ` Vae victis ! ' 
That is what right is . 
Ah ! 
what beasts of prey there are in this world ! 
What eagles ! 
It makes my flesh creep . '' 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- Bipede sans plume : biped without feathers -- pen . 
He held out his glass to Joly , who filled it , then he drank and went on , having hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine , of which no one , not even himself , had taken any notice : -- `` Brennus , who takes Rome , is an eagle ; the banker who takes the grisette is an eagle . 
There is no more modesty in the one case than in the other . 
So we believe in nothing . 
There is but one reality : drink . 
Whatever your opinion may be in favor of the lean cock , like the Canton of Uri , or in favor of the fat cock , like the Canton of Glaris , it matters little , drink . 
You talk to me of the boulevard , of that procession , et caetera , et caetera . 
Come now , is there going to be another revolution ? 
This poverty of means on the part of the good God astounds me . 
He has to keep greasing the groove of events every moment . 
There is a hitch , it wo n't work . 
Quick , a revolution ! 
The good God has his hands perpetually black with that cart-grease . 
If I were in his place , I 'd be perfectly simple about it , I would not wind up my mechanism every minute , I 'd lead the human race in a straightforward way , I 'd weave matters mesh by mesh , without breaking the thread , I would have no provisional arrangements , I would have no extraordinary repertory . 
What the rest of you call progress advances by means of two motors , men and events . 
But , sad to say , from time to time , the exceptional becomes necessary . 
The ordinary troupe suffices neither for event nor for men : among men geniuses are required , among events revolutions . 
Great accidents are the law ; the order of things can not do without them ; and , judging from the apparition of comets , one would be tempted to think that Heaven itself finds actors needed for its performance . 
At the moment when one expects it the least , God placards a meteor on the wall of the firmament . 
Some queer star turns up , underlined by an enormous tail . 
And that causes the death of Caesar . 
Brutus deals him a blow with a knife , and God a blow with a comet . 
Crac , and behold an aurora borealis , behold a revolution , behold a great man ; '93 in big letters , Napoleon on guard , the comet of 1811 at the head of the poster . 
Ah ! 
what a beautiful blue theatre all studded with unexpected flashes ! 
Boum ! 
Boum ! 
extraordinary show ! 
Raise your eyes , boobies . 
Everything is in disorder , the star as well as the drama . 
Good God , it is too much and not enough . 
These resources , gathered from exception , seem magnificence and poverty . 
My friends , Providence has come down to expedients . 
What does a revolution prove ? 
That God is in a quandry . 
He effects a coup d'etat because he , God , has not been able to make both ends meet . 
In fact , this confirms me in my conjectures as to Jehovah 's fortune ; and when I see so much distress in heaven and on earth , from the bird who has not a grain of millet to myself without a hundred thousand livres of income , when I see human destiny , which is very badly worn , and even royal destiny , which is threadbare , witness the Prince de Conde hung , when I see winter , which is nothing but a rent in the zenith through which the wind blows , when I see so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning on the crests of hills , when I see the drops of dew , those mock pearls , when I see the frost , that paste , when I see humanity ripped apart and events patched up , and so many spots on the sun and so many holes in the moon , when I see so much misery everywhere , I suspect that God is not rich . 
The appearance exists , it is true , but I feel that he is hard up . 
He gives a revolution as a tradesman whose money-box is empty gives a ball . 
God must not be judged from appearances . 
Beneath the gilding of heaven I perceive a poverty-stricken universe . 
Creation is bankrupt . 
That is why I am discontented . 
Here it is the 4th of June , it is almost night ; ever since this morning I have been waiting for daylight to come ; it has not come , and I bet that it wo n't come all day . 
This is the inexactness of an ill-paid clerk . 
Yes , everything is badly arranged , nothing fits anything else , this old world is all warped , I take my stand on the opposition , everything goes awry ; the universe is a tease . 
It 's like children , those who want them have none , and those who do n't want them have them . 
Total : I 'm vexed . 
Besides , Laigle de Meaux , that bald-head , offends my sight . 
It humiliates me to think that I am of the same age as that baldy . 
However , I criticise , but I do not insult . 
The universe is what it is . 
I speak here without evil intent and to ease my conscience . 
Receive , Eternal Father , the assurance of my distinguished consideration . 
Ah ! 
by all the saints of Olympus and by all the gods of paradise , I was not intended to be a Parisian , that is to say , to rebound forever , like a shuttlecock between two battledores , from the group of the loungers to the group of the roysterers . 
I was made to be a Turk , watching oriental houris all day long , executing those exquisite Egyptian dances , as sensuous as the dream of a chaste man , or a Beauceron peasant , or a Venetian gentleman surrounded by gentlewoman , or a petty German prince , furnishing the half of a foot-soldier to the Germanic confederation , and occupying his leisure with drying his breeches on his hedge , that is to say , his frontier . 
Those are the positions for which I was born ! 
Yes , I have said a Turk , and I will not retract . 
I do not understand how people can habitually take Turks in bad part ; Mohammed had his good points ; respect for the inventor of seraglios with houris and paradises with odalisques ! 
Let us not insult Mohammedanism , the only religion which is ornamented with a hen-roost ! 
Now , I insist on a drink . 
The earth is a great piece of stupidity . 
And it appears that they are going to fight , all those imbeciles , and to break each other 's profiles and to massacre each other in the heart of summer , in the month of June , when they might go off with a creature on their arm , to breathe the immense heaps of new-mown hay in the meadows ! 
Really , people do commit altogether too many follies . 
An old broken lantern which I have just seen at a bric-a-brac merchant 's suggests a reflection to my mind ; it is time to enlighten the human race . 
Yes , behold me sad again . 
That 's what comes of swallowing an oyster and a revolution the wrong way ! 
I am growing melancholy once more . 
Oh ! 
frightful old world . 
People strive , turn each other out , prostitute themselves , kill each other , and get used to it ! '' 
And Grantaire , after this fit of eloquence , had a fit of coughing , which was well earned . 
`` A propos of revolution , '' said Joly , `` it is decidedly abberent that Barius is in lub . '' 
`` Does any one know with whom ? '' 
demanded Laigle . 
`` Do . '' 
`` No ? '' 
`` Do ! 
I tell you . '' 
`` Marius ' love affairs ! '' 
exclaimed Grantaire . 
`` I can imagine it . 
Marius is a fog , and he must have found a vapor . 
Marius is of the race of poets . 
He who says poet , says fool , madman , Tymbraeus Apollo . 
Marius and his Marie , or his Marion , or his Maria , or his Mariette . 
They must make a queer pair of lovers . 
I know just what it is like . 
Ecstasies in which they forget to kiss . 
Pure on earth , but joined in heaven . 
They are souls possessed of senses . 
They lie among the stars . '' 
Grantaire was attacking his second bottle and , possibly , his second harangue , when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of the stairs . 
It was a boy less than ten years of age , ragged , very small , yellow , with an odd phiz , a vivacious eye , an enormous amount of hair drenched with rain , and wearing a contented air . 
The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three , addressed himself to Laigle de Meaux . 
`` Are you Monsieur Bossuet ? '' 
`` That is my nickname , '' replied Laigle . 
`` What do you want with me ? '' 
`` This . 
A tall blonde fellow on the boulevard said to me : ` Do you know Mother Hucheloup ? ' 
I said : ` Yes , Rue Chanvrerie , the old man 's widow ; ' he said to me : ` Go there . 
There you will find M. Bossuet . 
Tell him from me : `` A B C '' . ' 
It 's a joke that they 're playing on you , is n't it . 
He gave me ten sous . '' 
`` Joly , lend me ten sous , '' said Laigle ; and , turning to Grantaire : `` Grantaire , lend me ten sous . '' 
This made twenty sous , which Laigle handed to the lad . 
`` Thank you , sir , '' said the urchin . 
`` What is your name ? '' 
inquired Laigle . 
`` Navet , Gavroche 's friend . '' 
`` Stay with us , '' said Laigle . 
`` Breakfast with us , '' said Grantaire , The child replied : -- `` I ca n't , I belong in the procession , I 'm the one to shout ` Down with Polignac ! ' '' 
And executing a prolonged scrape of his foot behind him , which is the most respectful of all possible salutes , he took his departure . 
The child gone , Grantaire took the word : -- `` That is the pure-bred gamin . 
There are a great many varieties of the gamin species . 
The notary 's gamin is called Skip-the-Gutter , the cook 's gamin is called a scullion , the baker 's gamin is called a mitron , the lackey 's gamin is called a groom , the marine gamin is called the cabin-boy , the soldier 's gamin is called the drummer-boy , the painter 's gamin is called paint-grinder , the tradesman 's gamin is called an errand-boy , the courtesan gamin is called the minion , the kingly gamin is called the dauphin , the god gamin is called the bambino . '' 
In the meantime , Laigle was engaged in reflection ; he said half aloud : -- `` A B C , that is to say : the burial of Lamarque . '' 
`` The tall blonde , '' remarked Grantaire , `` is Enjolras , who is sending you a warning . '' 
`` Shall we go ? '' 
ejaculated Bossuet . 
`` It 's raiding , '' said Joly . 
`` I have sworn to go through fire , but not through water . 
I do n't wand to ged a gold . '' 
`` I shall stay here , '' said Grantaire . 
`` I prefer a breakfast to a hearse . '' 
`` Conclusion : we remain , '' said Laigle . 
`` Well , then , let us drink . 
Besides , we might miss the funeral without missing the riot . '' 
`` Ah ! 
the riot , I am with you ! '' 
cried Joly . 
Laigle rubbed his hands . 
`` Now we 're going to touch up the revolution of 1830 . 
As a matter of fact , it does hurt the people along the seams . '' 
`` I do n't think much of your revolution , '' said Grantaire . 
`` I do n't execrate this Government . 
It is the crown tempered by the cotton night-cap . 
It is a sceptre ending in an umbrella . 
In fact , I think that to-day , with the present weather , Louis Philippe might utilize his royalty in two directions , he might extend the tip of the sceptre end against the people , and open the umbrella end against heaven . '' 
The room was dark , large clouds had just finished the extinction of daylight . 
There was no one in the wine-shop , or in the street , every one having gone off `` to watch events . '' 
`` Is it mid-day or midnight ? '' 
cried Bossuet . 
`` You ca n't see your hand before your face . 
Gibelotte , fetch a light . '' 
Grantaire was drinking in a melancholy way . 
`` Enjolras disdains me , '' he muttered . 
