He thought he was putting Marius on the right road , and that `` the child '' would yield . 
Marius shivered ; it was the denial of his father that was required of him ; he dropped his eyes and replied : -- `` No , sir . '' 
`` Then , '' exclaimed the old man impetuously , with a grief that was poignant and full of wrath , `` what do you want of me ? '' 
Marius clasped his hands , advanced a step , and said in a feeble and trembling voice : -- `` Sir , have pity on me . '' 
These words touched M. Gillenormand ; uttered a little sooner , they would have rendered him tender , but they came too late . 
The grandfather rose ; he supported himself with both hands on his cane ; his lips were white , his brow wavered , but his lofty form towered above Marius as he bowed . 
`` Pity on you , sir ! 
It is youth demanding pity of the old man of ninety-one ! 
You are entering into life , I am leaving it ; you go to the play , to balls , to the cafe , to the billiard-hall ; you have wit , you please the women , you are a handsome fellow ; as for me , I spit on my brands in the heart of summer ; you are rich with the only riches that are really such , I possess all the poverty of age ; infirmity , isolation ! 
You have your thirty-two teeth , a good digestion , bright eyes , strength , appetite , health , gayety , a forest of black hair ; I have no longer even white hair , I have lost my teeth , I am losing my legs , I am losing my memory ; there are three names of streets that I confound incessantly , the Rue Charlot , the Rue du Chaume , and the Rue Saint-Claude , that is what I have come to ; you have before you the whole future , full of sunshine , and I am beginning to lose my sight , so far am I advancing into the night ; you are in love , that is a matter of course , I am beloved by no one in all the world ; and you ask pity of me ! 
Parbleu ! 
Moliere forgot that . 
If that is the way you jest at the courthouse , Messieurs the lawyers , I sincerely compliment you . 
You are droll . '' 
And the octogenarian went on in a grave and angry voice : -- `` Come , now , what do you want of me ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , `` I know that my presence is displeasing to you , but I have come merely to ask one thing of you , and then I shall go away immediately . '' 
`` You are a fool ! '' 
said the old man . 
`` Who said that you were to go away ? '' 
This was the translation of the tender words which lay at the bottom of his heart : -- `` Ask my pardon ! 
Throw yourself on my neck ! '' 
M. Gillenormand felt that Marius would leave him in a few moments , that his harsh reception had repelled the lad , that his hardness was driving him away ; he said all this to himself , and it augmented his grief ; and as his grief was straightway converted into wrath , it increased his harshness . 
He would have liked to have Marius understand , and Marius did not understand , which made the goodman furious . 
He began again : -- `` What ! 
you deserted me , your grandfather , you left my house to go no one knows whither , you drove your aunt to despair , you went off , it is easily guessed , to lead a bachelor life ; it 's more convenient , to play the dandy , to come in at all hours , to amuse yourself ; you have given me no signs of life , you have contracted debts without even telling me to pay them , you have become a smasher of windows and a blusterer , and , at the end of four years , you come to me , and that is all you have to say to me ! '' 
This violent fashion of driving a grandson to tenderness was productive only of silence on the part of Marius . 
M. Gillenormand folded his arms ; a gesture which with him was peculiarly imperious , and apostrophized Marius bitterly : -- `` Let us make an end of this . 
You have come to ask something of me , you say ? 
Well , what ? 
What is it ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , with the look of a man who feels that he is falling over a precipice , `` I have come to ask your permission to marry . '' 
M. Gillenormand rang the bell . 
Basque opened the door half-way . 
`` Call my daughter . '' 
A second later , the door was opened once more , Mademoiselle Gillenormand did not enter , but showed herself ; Marius was standing , mute , with pendant arms and the face of a criminal ; M. Gillenormand was pacing back and forth in the room . 
He turned to his daughter and said to her : -- `` Nothing . 
It is Monsieur Marius . 
Say good day to him . 
Monsieur wishes to marry . 
That 's all . 
Go away . '' 
The curt , hoarse sound of the old man 's voice announced a strange degree of excitement . 
The aunt gazed at Marius with a frightened air , hardly appeared to recognize him , did not allow a gesture or a syllable to escape her , and disappeared at her father 's breath more swiftly than a straw before the hurricane . 
In the meantime , Father Gillenormand had returned and placed his back against the chimney-piece once more . 
`` You marry ! 
At one and twenty ! 
You have arranged that ! 
You have only a permission to ask ! 
a formality . 
Sit down , sir . 
Well , you have had a revolution since I had the honor to see you last . 
The Jacobins got the upper hand . 
You must have been delighted . 
Are you not a Republican since you are a Baron ? 
You can make that agree . 
The Republic makes a good sauce for the barony . 
Are you one of those decorated by July ? 
Have you taken the Louvre at all , sir ? 
Quite near here , in the Rue Saint-Antoine , opposite the Rue des Nonamdieres , there is a cannon-ball incrusted in the wall of the third story of a house with this inscription : ` July 28th , 1830 . ' 
Go take a look at that . 
It produces a good effect . 
Ah ! 
those friends of yours do pretty things . 
By the way , are n't they erecting a fountain in the place of the monument of M. le Duc de Berry ? 
So you want to marry ? 
Whom ? 
Can one inquire without indiscretion ? '' 
He paused , and , before Marius had time to answer , he added violently : -- `` Come now , you have a profession ? 
A fortune made ? 
How much do you earn at your trade of lawyer ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' said Marius , with a sort of firmness and resolution that was almost fierce . 
`` Nothing ? 
Then all that you have to live upon is the twelve hundred livres that I allow you ? '' 
Marius did not reply . 
M. Gillenormand continued : -- `` Then I understand the girl is rich ? '' 
`` As rich as I am . '' 
`` What ! 
No dowry ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Expectations ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` Utterly naked ! 
What 's the father ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` And what 's her name ? '' 
`` Mademoiselle Fauchelevent . '' 
`` Fauchewhat ? '' 
`` Fauchelevent . '' 
`` Pttt ! '' 
ejaculated the old gentleman . 
`` Sir ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
M. Gillenormand interrupted him with the tone of a man who is speaking to himself : -- `` That 's right , one and twenty years of age , no profession , twelve hundred livres a year , Madame la Baronne de Pontmercy will go and purchase a couple of sous ' worth of parsley from the fruiterer . '' 
`` Sir , '' repeated Marius , in the despair at the last hope , which was vanishing , `` I entreat you ! 
I conjure you in the name of Heaven , with clasped hands , sir , I throw myself at your feet , permit me to marry her ! '' 
The old man burst into a shout of strident and mournful laughter , coughing and laughing at the same time . 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! 
ah ! 
You said to yourself : ` Pardine ! 
I 'll go hunt up that old blockhead , that absurd numskull ! 
What a shame that I 'm not twenty-five ! 
How I 'd treat him to a nice respectful summons ! 
How nicely I 'd get along without him ! 
It 's nothing to me , I 'd say to him : `` You 're only too happy to see me , you old idiot , I want to marry , I desire to wed Mamselle No-matter-whom , daughter of Monsieur No-matter-what , I have no shoes , she has no chemise , that just suits ; I want to throw my career , my future , my youth , my life to the dogs ; I wish to take a plunge into wretchedness with a woman around my neck , that 's an idea , and you must consent to it ! '' 
and the old fossil will consent . ' 
Go , my lad , do as you like , attach your paving-stone , marry your Pousselevent , your Coupelevent -- Never , sir , never ! '' 
`` Father -- '' `` Never ! '' 
At the tone in which that `` never '' was uttered , Marius lost all hope . 
He traversed the chamber with slow steps , with bowed head , tottering and more like a dying man than like one merely taking his departure . 
M. Gillenormand followed him with his eyes , and at the moment when the door opened , and Marius was on the point of going out , he advanced four paces , with the senile vivacity of impetuous and spoiled old gentlemen , seized Marius by the collar , brought him back energetically into the room , flung him into an armchair and said to him : -- `` Tell me all about it ! '' 
`` It was that single word `` father '' which had effected this revolution . 
Marius stared at him in bewilderment . 
M. Gillenormand 's mobile face was no longer expressive of anything but rough and ineffable good-nature . 
The grandsire had given way before the grandfather . 
`` Come , see here , speak , tell me about your love affairs , jabber , tell me everything ! 
Sapristi ! 
how stupid young folks are ! '' 
`` Father -- '' repeated Marius . 
The old man 's entire countenance lighted up with indescribable radiance . 
`` Yes , that 's right , call me father , and you 'll see ! '' 
There was now something so kind , so gentle , so openhearted , and so paternal in this brusqueness , that Marius , in the sudden transition from discouragement to hope , was stunned and intoxicated by it , as it were . 
He was seated near the table , the light from the candles brought out the dilapidation of his costume , which Father Gillenormand regarded with amazement . 
`` Well , father -- '' said Marius . 
`` Ah , by the way , '' interrupted M. Gillenormand , `` you really have not a penny then ? 
You are dressed like a pickpocket . '' 
He rummaged in a drawer , drew forth a purse , which he laid on the table : `` Here are a hundred louis , buy yourself a hat . '' 
`` Father , '' pursued Marius , `` my good father , if you only knew ! 
I love her . 
You can not imagine it ; the first time I saw her was at the Luxembourg , she came there ; in the beginning , I did not pay much heed to her , and then , I do n't know how it came about , I fell in love with her . 
Oh ! 
how unhappy that made me ! 
Now , at last , I see her every day , at her own home , her father does not know it , just fancy , they are going away , it is in the garden that we meet , in the evening , her father means to take her to England , then I said to myself : ` I 'll go and see my grandfather and tell him all about the affair . 
I should go mad first , I should die , I should fall ill , I should throw myself into the water . 
I absolutely must marry her , since I should go mad otherwise . ' 
This is the whole truth , and I do not think that I have omitted anything . 
She lives in a garden with an iron fence , in the Rue Plumet . 
It is in the neighborhood of the Invalides . '' 
Father Gillenormand had seated himself , with a beaming countenance , beside Marius . 
As he listened to him and drank in the sound of his voice , he enjoyed at the same time a protracted pinch of snuff . 
At the words `` Rue Plumet '' he interrupted his inhalation and allowed the remainder of his snuff to fall upon his knees . 
`` The Rue Plumet , the Rue Plumet , did you say ? 
-- Let us see ! 
-- Are there not barracks in that vicinity ? 
-- Why , yes , that 's it . 
Your cousin Theodule has spoken to me about it . 
The lancer , the officer . 
A gay girl , my good friend , a gay girl ! 
-- Pardieu , yes , the Rue Plumet . 
It is what used to be called the Rue Blomet . 
-- It all comes back to me now . 
I have heard of that little girl of the iron railing in the Rue Plumet . 
In a garden , a Pamela . 
Your taste is not bad . 
She is said to be a very tidy creature . 
Between ourselves , I think that simpleton of a lancer has been courting her a bit . 
I do n't know where he did it . 
However , that 's not to the purpose . 
Besides , he is not to be believed . 
He brags , Marius ! 
I think it quite proper that a young man like you should be in love . 
It 's the right thing at your age . 
I like you better as a lover than as a Jacobin . 
I like you better in love with a petticoat , sapristi ! 
with twenty petticoats , than with M. de Robespierre . 
For my part , I will do myself the justice to say , that in the line of sans-culottes , I have never loved any one but women . 
Pretty girls are pretty girls , the deuce ! 
There 's no objection to that . 
As for the little one , she receives you without her father 's knowledge . 
That 's in the established order of things . 
I have had adventures of that same sort myself . 
More than one . 
Do you know what is done then ? 
One does not take the matter ferociously ; one does not precipitate himself into the tragic ; one does not make one 's mind to marriage and M. le Maire with his scarf . 
One simply behaves like a fellow of spirit . 
One shows good sense . 
Slip along , mortals ; do n't marry . 
You come and look up your grandfather , who is a good-natured fellow at bottom , and who always has a few rolls of louis in an old drawer ; you say to him : ` See here , grandfather . ' 
And the grandfather says : ` That 's a simple matter . 
Youth must amuse itself , and old age must wear out . 
I have been young , you will be old . 
Come , my boy , you shall pass it on to your grandson . 
Here are two hundred pistoles . 
Amuse yourself , deuce take it ! ' 
Nothing better ! 
That 's the way the affair should be treated . 
You do n't marry , but that does no harm . 
You understand me ? '' 
Marius , petrified and incapable of uttering a syllable , made a sign with his head that he did not . 
The old man burst out laughing , winked his aged eye , gave him a slap on the knee , stared him full in the face with a mysterious and beaming air , and said to him , with the tenderest of shrugs of the shoulder : -- `` Booby ! 
make her your mistress . '' 
Marius turned pale . 
He had understood nothing of what his grandfather had just said . 
This twaddle about the Rue Blomet , Pamela , the barracks , the lancer , had passed before Marius like a dissolving view . 
Nothing of all that could bear any reference to Cosette , who was a lily . 
The good man was wandering in his mind . 
But this wandering terminated in words which Marius did understand , and which were a mortal insult to Cosette . 
Those words , `` make her your mistress , '' entered the heart of the strict young man like a sword . 
He rose , picked up his hat which lay on the floor , and walked to the door with a firm , assured step . 
There he turned round , bowed deeply to his grandfather , raised his head erect again , and said : -- `` Five years ago you insulted my father ; to-day you have insulted my wife . 
I ask nothing more of you , sir . 
Farewell . '' 
Father Gillenormand , utterly confounded , opened his mouth , extended his arms , tried to rise , and before he could utter a word , the door closed once more , and Marius had disappeared . 
The old man remained for several minutes motionless and as though struck by lightning , without the power to speak or breathe , as though a clenched fist grasped his throat . 
At last he tore himself from his arm-chair , ran , so far as a man can run at ninety-one , to the door , opened it , and cried : -- `` Help ! 
Help ! '' 
His daughter made her appearance , then the domestics . 
He began again , with a pitiful rattle : `` Run after him ! 
Bring him back ! 
What have I done to him ? 
He is mad ! 
He is going away ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
This time he will not come back ! '' 
He went to the window which looked out on the street , threw it open with his aged and palsied hands , leaned out more than half-way , while Basque and Nicolette held him behind , and shouted : -- `` Marius ! 
Marius ! 
Marius ! 
Marius ! '' 
But Marius could no longer hear him , for at that moment he was turning the corner of the Rue Saint-Louis . 
The octogenarian raised his hands to his temples two or three times with an expression of anguish , recoiled tottering , and fell back into an arm-chair , pulseless , voiceless , tearless , with quivering head and lips which moved with a stupid air , with nothing in his eyes and nothing any longer in his heart except a gloomy and profound something which resembled night . 
JEAN VALJEAN That same day , towards four o'clock in the afternoon , Jean Valjean was sitting alone on the back side of one of the most solitary slopes in the Champ-de-Mars . 
Either from prudence , or from a desire to meditate , or simply in consequence of one of those insensible changes of habit which gradually introduce themselves into the existence of every one , he now rarely went out with Cosette . 
He had on his workman 's waistcoat , and trousers of gray linen ; and his long-visored cap concealed his countenance . 
He was calm and happy now beside Cosette ; that which had , for a time , alarmed and troubled him had been dissipated ; but for the last week or two , anxieties of another nature had come up . 
One day , while walking on the boulevard , he had caught sight of Thenardier ; thanks to his disguise , Thenardier had not recognized him ; but since that day , Jean Valjean had seen him repeatedly , and he was now certain that Thenardier was prowling about in their neighborhood . 
This had been sufficient to make him come to a decision . 
Moreover , Paris was not tranquil : political troubles presented this inconvenient feature , for any one who had anything to conceal in his life , that the police had grown very uneasy and very suspicious , and that while seeking to ferret out a man like Pepin or Morey , they might very readily discover a man like Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had made up his mind to quit Paris , and even France , and go over to England . 
He had warned Cosette . 
He wished to set out before the end of the week . 
He had seated himself on the slope in the Champ-de-Mars , turning over all sorts of thoughts in his mind , -- Thenardier , the police , the journey , and the difficulty of procuring a passport . 
He was troubled from all these points of view . 
Last of all , an inexplicable circumstance which had just attracted his attention , and from which he had not yet recovered , had added to his state of alarm . 
On the morning of that very day , when he alone of the household was stirring , while strolling in the garden before Cosette 's shutters were open , he had suddenly perceived on the wall , the following line , engraved , probably with a nail : -- 16 Rue de la Verrerie . 
This was perfectly fresh , the grooves in the ancient black mortar were white , a tuft of nettles at the foot of the wall was powdered with the fine , fresh plaster . 
This had probably been written on the preceding night . 
What was this ? 
A signal for others ? 
A warning for himself ? 
In any case , it was evident that the garden had been violated , and that strangers had made their way into it . 
He recalled the odd incidents which had already alarmed the household . 
His mind was now filling in this canvas . 
He took good care not to speak to Cosette of the line written on the wall , for fear of alarming her . 
In the midst of his preoccupations , he perceived , from a shadow cast by the sun , that some one had halted on the crest of the slope immediately behind him . 
He was on the point of turning round , when a paper folded in four fell upon his knees as though a hand had dropped it over his head . 
He took the paper , unfolded it , and read these words written in large characters , with a pencil : -- `` MOVE AWAY FROM YOUR HOUSE . '' 
Jean Valjean sprang hastily to his feet ; there was no one on the slope ; he gazed all around him and perceived a creature larger than a child , not so large as a man , clad in a gray blouse and trousers of dust-colored cotton velvet , who was jumping over the parapet and who slipped into the moat of the Champde-Mars . 
Jean Valjean returned home at once , in a very thoughtful mood . 
MARIUS Marius had left M. Gillenormand in despair . 
He had entered the house with very little hope , and quitted it with immense despair . 
However , and those who have observed the depths of the human heart will understand this , the officer , the lancer , the ninny , Cousin Theodule , had left no trace in his mind . 
Not the slightest . 
The dramatic poet might , apparently , expect some complications from this revelation made point-blank by the grandfather to the grandson . 
But what the drama would gain thereby , truth would lose . 
Marius was at an age when one believes nothing in the line of evil ; later on comes the age when one believes everything . 
Suspicions are nothing else than wrinkles . 
Early youth has none of them . 
That which overwhelmed Othello glides innocuous over Candide . 
Suspect Cosette ! 
There are hosts of crimes which Marius could sooner have committed . 
He began to wander about the streets , the resource of those who suffer . 
He thought of nothing , so far as he could afterwards remember . 
At two o'clock in the morning he returned to Courfeyrac 's quarters and flung himself , without undressing , on his mattress . 
The sun was shining brightly when he sank into that frightful leaden slumber which permits ideas to go and come in the brain . 
When he awoke , he saw Courfeyrac , Enjolras , Feuilly , and Combeferre standing in the room with their hats on and all ready to go out . 
Courfeyrac said to him : -- `` Are you coming to General Lamarque 's funeral ? '' 
It seemed to him that Courfeyrac was speaking Chinese . 
He went out some time after them . 
He put in his pocket the pistols which Javert had given him at the time of the adventure on the 3d of February , and which had remained in his hands . 
These pistols were still loaded . 
It would be difficult to say what vague thought he had in his mind when he took them with him . 
All day long he prowled about , without knowing where he was going ; it rained at times , he did not perceive it ; for his dinner , he purchased a penny roll at a baker 's , put it in his pocket and forgot it . 
It appears that he took a bath in the Seine without being aware of it . 
There are moments when a man has a furnace within his skull . 
Marius was passing through one of those moments . 
He no longer hoped for anything ; this step he had taken since the preceding evening . 
He waited for night with feverish impatience , he had but one idea clearly before his mind ; -- this was , that at nine o'clock he should see Cosette . 
This last happiness now constituted his whole future ; after that , gloom . 
At intervals , as he roamed through the most deserted boulevards , it seemed to him that he heard strange noises in Paris . 
He thrust his head out of his revery and said : `` Is there fighting on hand ? '' 
At nightfall , at nine o'clock precisely , as he had promised Cosette , he was in the Rue Plumet . 
When he approached the grating he forgot everything . 
It was forty-eight hours since he had seen Cosette ; he was about to behold her once more ; every other thought was effaced , and he felt only a profound and unheard-of joy . 
Those minutes in which one lives centuries always have this sovereign and wonderful property , that at the moment when they are passing they fill the heart completely . 
Marius displaced the bar , and rushed headlong into the garden . 
Cosette was not at the spot where she ordinarily waited for him . 
He traversed the thicket , and approached the recess near the flight of steps : `` She is waiting for me there , '' said he . 
Cosette was not there . 
He raised his eyes , and saw that the shutters of the house were closed . 
He made the tour of the garden , the garden was deserted . 
Then he returned to the house , and , rendered senseless by love , intoxicated , terrified , exasperated with grief and uneasiness , like a master who returns home at an evil hour , he tapped on the shutters . 
He knocked and knocked again , at the risk of seeing the window open , and her father 's gloomy face make its appearance , and demand : `` What do you want ? '' 
This was nothing in comparison with what he dimly caught a glimpse of . 
When he had rapped , he lifted up his voice and called Cosette . 
-- `` Cosette ! '' 
he cried ; `` Cosette ! '' 
he repeated imperiously . 
There was no reply . 
All was over . 
No one in the garden ; no one in the house . 
Marius fixed his despairing eyes on that dismal house , which was as black and as silent as a tomb and far more empty . 
He gazed at the stone seat on which he had passed so many adorable hours with Cosette . 
Then he seated himself on the flight of steps , his heart filled with sweetness and resolution , he blessed his love in the depths of his thought , and he said to himself that , since Cosette was gone , all that there was left for him was to die . 
All at once he heard a voice which seemed to proceed from the street , and which was calling to him through the trees : -- `` Mr. Marius ! '' 
He started to his feet . 
`` Hey ? '' 
said he . 
`` Mr. Marius , are you there ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Mr. Marius , '' went on the voice , `` your friends are waiting for you at the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie . '' 
This voice was not wholly unfamiliar to him . 
It resembled the hoarse , rough voice of Eponine . 
Marius hastened to the gate , thrust aside the movable bar , passed his head through the aperture , and saw some one who appeared to him to be a young man , disappearing at a run into the gloom . 
M. MABEUF Jean Valjean 's purse was of no use to M. Mabeuf . 
M. Mabeuf , in his venerable , infantile austerity , had not accepted the gift of the stars ; he had not admitted that a star could coin itself into louis d'or . 
He had not divined that what had fallen from heaven had come from Gavroche . 
He had taken the purse to the police commissioner of the quarter , as a lost article placed by the finder at the disposal of claimants . 
The purse was actually lost . 
It is unnecessary to say that no one claimed it , and that it did not succor M. Mabeuf . 
Moreover , M. Mabeuf had continued his downward course . 
His experiments on indigo had been no more successful in the Jardin des Plantes than in his garden at Austerlitz . 
The year before he had owed his housekeeper 's wages ; now , as we have seen , he owed three quarters of his rent . 
The pawnshop had sold the plates of his Flora after the expiration of thirteen months . 
Some coppersmith had made stewpans of them . 
His copper plates gone , and being unable to complete even the incomplete copies of his Flora which were in his possession , he had disposed of the text , at a miserable price , as waste paper , to a second-hand bookseller . 
Nothing now remained to him of his life 's work . 
He set to work to eat up the money for these copies . 
When he saw that this wretched resource was becoming exhausted , he gave up his garden and allowed it to run to waste . 
Before this , a long time before , he had given up his two eggs and the morsel of beef which he ate from time to time . 
He dined on bread and potatoes . 
He had sold the last of his furniture , then all duplicates of his bedding , his clothing and his blankets , then his herbariums and prints ; but he still retained his most precious books , many of which were of the greatest rarity , among others , Les Quadrins Historiques de la Bible , edition of 1560 ; La Concordance des Bibles , by Pierre de Besse ; Les Marguerites de la Marguerite , of Jean de La Haye , with a dedication to the Queen of Navarre ; the book de la Charge et Dignite de l'Ambassadeur , by the Sieur de Villiers Hotman ; a Florilegium Rabbinicum of 1644 ; a Tibullus of 1567 , with this magnificent inscription : Venetiis , in aedibus Manutianis ; and lastly , a Diogenes Laertius , printed at Lyons in 1644 , which contained the famous variant of the manuscript 411 , thirteenth century , of the Vatican , and those of the two manuscripts of Venice , 393 and 394 , consulted with such fruitful results by Henri Estienne , and all the passages in Doric dialect which are only found in the celebrated manuscript of the twelfth century belonging to the Naples Library . 
M. Mabeuf never had any fire in his chamber , and went to bed at sundown , in order not to consume any candles . 
It seemed as though he had no longer any neighbors : people avoided him when he went out ; he perceived the fact . 
The wretchedness of a child interests a mother , the wretchedness of a young man interests a young girl , the wretchedness of an old man interests no one . 
It is , of all distresses , the coldest . 
Still , Father Mabeuf had not entirely lost his childlike serenity . 
His eyes acquired some vivacity when they rested on his books , and he smiled when he gazed at the Diogenes Laertius , which was a unique copy . 
His bookcase with glass doors was the only piece of furniture which he had kept beyond what was strictly indispensable . 
One day , Mother Plutarque said to him : -- `` I have no money to buy any dinner . '' 
What she called dinner was a loaf of bread and four or five potatoes . 
`` On credit ? '' 
suggested M. Mabeuf . 
`` You know well that people refuse me . '' 
M. Mabeuf opened his bookcase , took a long look at all his books , one after another , as a father obliged to decimate his children would gaze upon them before making a choice , then seized one hastily , put it in under his arm and went out . 
He returned two hours later , without anything under his arm , laid thirty sous on the table , and said : -- `` You will get something for dinner . '' 
From that moment forth , Mother Plutarque saw a sombre veil , which was never more lifted , descend over the old man 's candid face . 
On the following day , on the day after , and on the day after that , it had to be done again . 
M. Mabeuf went out with a book and returned with a coin . 
As the second-hand dealers perceived that he was forced to sell , they purchased of him for twenty sous that for which he had paid twenty francs , sometimes at those very shops . 
Volume by volume , the whole library went the same road . 
He said at times : `` But I am eighty ; '' as though he cherished some secret hope that he should arrive at the end of his days before reaching the end of his books . 
His melancholy increased . 
Once , however , he had a pleasure . 
He had gone out with a Robert Estienne , which he had sold for thirty-five sous under the Quai Malaquais , and he returned with an Aldus which he had bought for forty sous in the Rue des Gres . 
-- `` I owe five sous , '' he said , beaming on Mother Plutarque . 
That day he had no dinner . 
He belonged to the Horticultural Society . 
His destitution became known there . 
The president of the society came to see him , promised to speak to the Minister of Agriculture and Commerce about him , and did so . 
-- `` Why , what ! '' 
exclaimed the Minister , `` I should think so ! 
An old savant ! 
a botanist ! 
an inoffensive man ! 
Something must be done for him ! '' 
On the following day , M. Mabeuf received an invitation to dine with the Minister . 
Trembling with joy , he showed the letter to Mother Plutarque . 
`` We are saved ! '' 
said he . 
On the day appointed , he went to the Minister 's house . 
He perceived that his ragged cravat , his long , square coat , and his waxed shoes astonished the ushers . 
No one spoke to him , not even the Minister . 
About ten o'clock in the evening , while he was still waiting for a word , he heard the Minister 's wife , a beautiful woman in a low-necked gown whom he had not ventured to approach , inquire : `` Who is that old gentleman ? '' 
He returned home on foot at midnight , in a driving rain-storm . 
He had sold an Elzevir to pay for a carriage in which to go thither . 
He had acquired the habit of reading a few pages in his Diogenes Laertius every night , before he went to bed . 
He knew enough Greek to enjoy the peculiarities of the text which he owned . 
He had now no other enjoyment . 
Several weeks passed . 
All at once , Mother Plutarque fell ill . 
There is one thing sadder than having no money with which to buy bread at the baker 's and that is having no money to purchase drugs at the apothecary 's . 
One evening , the doctor had ordered a very expensive potion . 
And the malady was growing worse ; a nurse was required . 
M. Mabeuf opened his bookcase ; there was nothing there . 
The last volume had taken its departure . 
All that was left to him was Diogenes Laertius . 
He put this unique copy under his arm , and went out . 
It was the 4th of June , 1832 ; he went to the Porte Saint-Jacques , to Royal 's successor , and returned with one hundred francs . 
He laid the pile of five-franc pieces on the old serving-woman 's nightstand , and returned to his chamber without saying a word . 
On the following morning , at dawn , he seated himself on the overturned post in his garden , and he could be seen over the top of the hedge , sitting the whole morning motionless , with drooping head , his eyes vaguely fixed on the withered flower-beds . 
It rained at intervals ; the old man did not seem to perceive the fact . 
In the afternoon , extraordinary noises broke out in Paris . 
They resembled shots and the clamors of a multitude . 
Father Mabeuf raised his head . 
He saw a gardener passing , and inquired : -- `` What is it ? '' 
The gardener , spade on back , replied in the most unconcerned tone : -- `` It is the riots . '' 
`` What riots ? '' 
`` Yes , they are fighting . '' 
`` Why are they fighting ? '' 
`` Ah , good Heavens ! '' 
ejaculated the gardener . 
`` In what direction ? '' 
went on M. Mabeuf . 
`` In the neighborhood of the Arsenal . '' 
Father Mabeuf went to his room , took his hat , mechanically sought for a book to place under his arm , found none , said : `` Ah ! 
truly ! '' 
and went off with a bewildered air . 
BOOK TENTH . 
-- THE 5TH OF JUNE , 1832 THE SURFACE OF THE QUESTION Of what is revolt composed ? 
Of nothing and of everything . 
Of an electricity disengaged , little by little , of a flame suddenly darting forth , of a wandering force , of a passing breath . 
This breath encounters heads which speak , brains which dream , souls which suffer , passions which burn , wretchedness which howls , and bears them away . 
Whither ? 
At random . 
Athwart the state , the laws , athwart prosperity and the insolence of others . 
Irritated convictions , embittered enthusiasms , agitated indignations , instincts of war which have been repressed , youthful courage which has been exalted , generous blindness ; curiosity , the taste for change , the thirst for the unexpected , the sentiment which causes one to take pleasure in reading the posters for the new play , and love , the prompter 's whistle , at the theatre ; the vague hatreds , rancors , disappointments , every vanity which thinks that destiny has bankrupted it ; discomfort , empty dreams , ambitious that are hedged about , whoever hopes for a downfall , some outcome , in short , at the very bottom , the rabble , that mud which catches fire , -- such are the elements of revolt . 
That which is grandest and that which is basest ; the beings who prowl outside of all bounds , awaiting an occasion , bohemians , vagrants , vagabonds of the cross-roads , those who sleep at night in a desert of houses with no other roof than the cold clouds of heaven , those who , each day , demand their bread from chance and not from toil , the unknown of poverty and nothingness , the bare-armed , the bare-footed , belong to revolt . 
Whoever cherishes in his soul a secret revolt against any deed whatever on the part of the state , of life or of fate , is ripe for riot , and , as soon as it makes its appearance , he begins to quiver , and to feel himself borne away with the whirlwind . 
Revolt is a sort of waterspout in the social atmosphere which forms suddenly in certain conditions of temperature , and which , as it eddies about , mounts , descends , thunders , tears , razes , crushes , demolishes , uproots , bearing with it great natures and small , the strong man and the feeble mind , the tree trunk and the stalk of straw . 
Woe to him whom it bears away as well as to him whom it strikes ! 
It breaks the one against the other . 
It communicates to those whom it seizes an indescribable and extraordinary power . 
It fills the first-comer with the force of events ; it converts everything into projectiles . 
It makes a cannon-ball of a rough stone , and a general of a porter . 
If we are to believe certain oracles of crafty political views , a little revolt is desirable from the point of view of power . 
System : revolt strengthens those governments which it does not overthrow . 
It puts the army to the test ; it consecrates the bourgeoisie , it draws out the muscles of the police ; it demonstrates the force of the social framework . 
It is an exercise in gymnastics ; it is almost hygiene . 
Power is in better health after a revolt , as a man is after a good rubbing down . 
Revolt , thirty years ago , was regarded from still other points of view . 
There is for everything a theory , which proclaims itself `` good sense '' ; Philintus against Alcestis ; mediation offered between the false and the true ; explanation , admonition , rather haughty extenuation which , because it is mingled with blame and excuse , thinks itself wisdom , and is often only pedantry . 
A whole political school called `` the golden mean '' has been the outcome of this . 
As between cold water and hot water , it is the lukewarm water party . 
This school with its false depth , all on the surface , which dissects effects without going back to first causes , chides from its height of a demi-science , the agitation of the public square . 
If we listen to this school , `` The riots which complicated the affair of 1830 deprived that great event of a portion of its purity . 
The Revolution of July had been a fine popular gale , abruptly followed by blue sky . 
They made the cloudy sky reappear . 
They caused that revolution , at first so remarkable for its unanimity , to degenerate into a quarrel . 
In the Revolution of July , as in all progress accomplished by fits and starts , there had been secret fractures ; these riots rendered them perceptible . 
It might have been said : ` Ah ! 
this is broken . ' 
After the Revolution of July , one was sensible only of deliverance ; after the riots , one was conscious of a catastrophe . 
`` All revolt closes the shops , depresses the funds , throws the Exchange into consternation , suspends commerce , clogs business , precipitates failures ; no more money , private fortunes rendered uneasy , public credit shaken , industry disconcerted , capital withdrawing , work at a discount , fear everywhere ; counter-shocks in every town . 
Hence gulfs . 
It has been calculated that the first day of a riot costs France twenty millions , the second day forty , the third sixty , a three days ' uprising costs one hundred and twenty millions , that is to say , if only the financial result be taken into consideration , it is equivalent to a disaster , a shipwreck or a lost battle , which should annihilate a fleet of sixty ships of the line . 
`` No doubt , historically , uprisings have their beauty ; the war of the pavements is no less grandiose , and no less pathetic , than the war of thickets : in the one there is the soul of forests , in the other the heart of cities ; the one has Jean Chouan , the other has a Jeanne . 
Revolts have illuminated with a red glare all the most original points of the Parisian character , generosity , devotion , stormy gayety , students proving that bravery forms part of intelligence , the National Guard invincible , bivouacs of shopkeepers , fortresses of street urchins , contempt of death on the part of passers-by . 
Schools and legions clashed together . 
After all , between the combatants , there was only a difference of age ; the race is the same ; it is the same stoical men who died at the age of twenty for their ideas , at forty for their families . 
The army , always a sad thing in civil wars , opposed prudence to audacity . 
Uprisings , while proving popular intrepidity , also educated the courage of the bourgeois . 
`` This is well . 
But is all this worth the bloodshed ? 
And to the bloodshed add the future darkness , progress compromised , uneasiness among the best men , honest liberals in despair , foreign absolutism happy in these wounds dealt to revolution by its own hand , the vanquished of 1830 triumphing and saying : ` We told you so ! ' 
Add Paris enlarged , possibly , but France most assuredly diminished . 
Add , for all must needs be told , the massacres which have too often dishonored the victory of order grown ferocious over liberty gone mad . 
To sum up all , uprisings have been disastrous . '' 
Thus speaks that approximation to wisdom with which the bourgeoisie , that approximation to the people , so willingly contents itself . 
For our parts , we reject this word uprisings as too large , and consequently as too convenient . 
We make a distinction between one popular movement and another popular movement . 
We do not inquire whether an uprising costs as much as a battle . 
Why a battle , in the first place ? 
Here the question of war comes up . 
Is war less of a scourge than an uprising is of a calamity ? 
And then , are all uprisings calamities ? 
And what if the revolt of July did cost a hundred and twenty millions ? 
The establishment of Philip V. in Spain cost France two milliards . 
Even at the same price , we should prefer the 14th of July . 
However , we reject these figures , which appear to be reasons and which are only words . 
An uprising being given , we examine it by itself . 
In all that is said by the doctrinarian objection above presented , there is no question of anything but effect , we seek the cause . 
We will be explicit . 
THE ROOT OF THE MATTER There is such a thing as an uprising , and there is such a thing as insurrection ; these are two separate phases of wrath ; one is in the wrong , the other is in the right . 
In democratic states , the only ones which are founded on justice , it sometimes happens that the fraction usurps ; then the whole rises and the necessary claim of its rights may proceed as far as resort to arms . 
In all questions which result from collective sovereignty , the war of the whole against the fraction is insurrection ; the attack of the fraction against the whole is revolt ; according as the Tuileries contain a king or the Convention , they are justly or unjustly attacked . 
The same cannon , pointed against the populace , is wrong on the 10th of August , and right on the 14th of Vendemiaire . 
Alike in appearance , fundamentally different in reality ; the Swiss defend the false , Bonaparte defends the true . 
That which universal suffrage has effected in its liberty and in its sovereignty can not be undone by the street . 
It is the same in things pertaining purely to civilization ; the instinct of the masses , clear-sighted to-day , may be troubled to-morrow . 
The same fury legitimate when directed against Terray and absurd when directed against Turgot . 
The destruction of machines , the pillage of warehouses , the breaking of rails , the demolition of docks , the false routes of multitudes , the refusal by the people of justice to progress , Ramus assassinated by students , Rousseau driven out of Switzerland and stoned , -- that is revolt . 
Israel against Moses , Athens against Phocian , Rome against Cicero , -- that is an uprising ; Paris against the Bastille , -- that is insurrection . 
The soldiers against Alexander , the sailors against Christopher Columbus , -- this is the same revolt ; impious revolt ; why ? 
Because Alexander is doing for Asia with the sword that which Christopher Columbus is doing for America with the compass ; Alexander like Columbus , is finding a world . 
These gifts of a world to civilization are such augmentations of light , that all resistance in that case is culpable . 
Sometimes the populace counterfeits fidelity to itself . 
The masses are traitors to the people . 
Is there , for example , anything stranger than that long and bloody protest of dealers in contraband salt , a legitimate chronic revolt , which , at the decisive moment , on the day of salvation , at the very hour of popular victory , espouses the throne , turns into chouannerie , and , from having been an insurrection against , becomes an uprising for , sombre masterpieces of ignorance ! 
The contraband salt dealer escapes the royal gibbets , and with a rope 's end round his neck , mounts the white cockade . 
`` Death to the salt duties , '' brings forth , `` Long live the King ! '' 
The assassins of Saint-Barthelemy , the cut-throats of September , the manslaughterers of Avignon , the assassins of Coligny , the assassins of Madam Lamballe , the assassins of Brune , Miquelets , Verdets , Cadenettes , the companions of Jehu , the chevaliers of Brassard , -- behold an uprising . 
La Vendee is a grand , catholic uprising . 
The sound of right in movement is recognizable , it does not always proceed from the trembling of excited masses ; there are mad rages , there are cracked bells , all tocsins do not give out the sound of bronze . 
The brawl of passions and ignorances is quite another thing from the shock of progress . 
Show me in what direction you are going . 
Rise , if you will , but let it be that you may grow great . 
