She turned towards him ; she was making a visible effort to be calm and `` very good , '' as she expressed it in the feebleness of illness which resembles infancy , in order that , seeing her so peaceable , they might make no difficulty about bringing Cosette to her . 
But while she controlled herself she could not refrain from questioning M. Madeleine . 
`` Did you have a pleasant trip , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Oh ! 
how good you were to go and get her for me ! 
Only tell me how she is . 
Did she stand the journey well ? 
Alas ! 
she will not recognize me . 
She must have forgotten me by this time , poor darling ! 
Children have no memories . 
They are like birds . 
A child sees one thing to-day and another thing to-morrow , and thinks of nothing any longer . 
And did she have white linen ? 
Did those Thenardiers keep her clean ? 
How have they fed her ? 
Oh ! 
if you only knew how I have suffered , putting such questions as that to myself during all the time of my wretchedness . 
Now , it is all past . 
I am happy . 
Oh , how I should like to see her ! 
Do you think her pretty , Monsieur le Maire ? 
Is not my daughter beautiful ? 
You must have been very cold in that diligence ! 
Could she not be brought for just one little instant ? 
She might be taken away directly afterwards . 
Tell me ; you are the master ; it could be so if you chose ! '' 
He took her hand . 
`` Cosette is beautiful , '' he said , `` Cosette is well . 
You shall see her soon ; but calm yourself ; you are talking with too much vivacity , and you are throwing your arms out from under the clothes , and that makes you cough . '' 
In fact , fits of coughing interrupted Fantine at nearly every word . 
Fantine did not murmur ; she feared that she had injured by her too passionate lamentations the confidence which she was desirous of inspiring , and she began to talk of indifferent things . 
`` Montfermeil is quite pretty , is it not ? 
People go there on pleasure parties in summer . 
Are the Thenardiers prosperous ? 
There are not many travellers in their parts . 
That inn of theirs is a sort of a cook-shop . '' 
M. Madeleine was still holding her hand , and gazing at her with anxiety ; it was evident that he had come to tell her things before which his mind now hesitated . 
The doctor , having finished his visit , retired . 
Sister Simplice remained alone with them . 
But in the midst of this pause Fantine exclaimed : -- `` I hear her ! 
mon Dieu , I hear her ! '' 
She stretched out her arm to enjoin silence about her , held her breath , and began to listen with rapture . 
There was a child playing in the yard -- the child of the portress or of some work-woman . 
It was one of those accidents which are always occurring , and which seem to form a part of the mysterious stage-setting of mournful scenes . 
The child -- a little girl -- was going and coming , running to warm herself , laughing , singing at the top of her voice . 
Alas ! 
in what are the plays of children not intermingled . 
It was this little girl whom Fantine heard singing . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she resumed , `` it is my Cosette ! 
I recognize her voice . '' 
The child retreated as it had come ; the voice died away . 
Fantine listened for a while longer , then her face clouded over , and M. Madeleine heard her say , in a low voice : `` How wicked that doctor is not to allow me to see my daughter ! 
That man has an evil countenance , that he has . '' 
But the smiling background of her thoughts came to the front again . 
She continued to talk to herself , with her head resting on the pillow : `` How happy we are going to be ! 
We shall have a little garden the very first thing ; M. Madeleine has promised it to me . 
My daughter will play in the garden . 
She must know her letters by this time . 
I will make her spell . 
She will run over the grass after butterflies . 
I will watch her . 
Then she will take her first communion . 
Ah ! 
when will she take her first communion ? '' 
She began to reckon on her fingers . 
`` One , two , three , four -- she is seven years old . 
In five years she will have a white veil , and openwork stockings ; she will look like a little woman . 
O my good sister , you do not know how foolish I become when I think of my daughter 's first communion ! '' 
She began to laugh . 
He had released Fantine 's hand . 
He listened to her words as one listens to the sighing of the breeze , with his eyes on the ground , his mind absorbed in reflection which had no bottom . 
All at once she ceased speaking , and this caused him to raise his head mechanically . 
Fantine had become terrible . 
She no longer spoke , she no longer breathed ; she had raised herself to a sitting posture , her thin shoulder emerged from her chemise ; her face , which had been radiant but a moment before , was ghastly , and she seemed to have fixed her eyes , rendered large with terror , on something alarming at the other extremity of the room . 
`` Good God ! '' 
he exclaimed ; `` what ails you , Fantine ? '' 
She made no reply ; she did not remove her eyes from the object which she seemed to see . 
She removed one hand from his arm , and with the other made him a sign to look behind him . 
He turned , and beheld Javert . 
JAVERT SATISFIED This is what had taken place . 
The half-hour after midnight had just struck when M. Madeleine quitted the Hall of Assizes in Arras . 
He regained his inn just in time to set out again by the mail-wagon , in which he had engaged his place . 
A little before six o'clock in the morning he had arrived at M. sur M. , and his first care had been to post a letter to M. Laffitte , then to enter the infirmary and see Fantine . 
However , he had hardly quitted the audience hall of the Court of Assizes , when the district-attorney , recovering from his first shock , had taken the word to deplore the mad deed of the honorable mayor of M. sur M. , to declare that his convictions had not been in the least modified by that curious incident , which would be explained thereafter , and to demand , in the meantime , the condemnation of that Champmathieu , who was evidently the real Jean Valjean . 
The district-attorney 's persistence was visibly at variance with the sentiments of every one , of the public , of the court , and of the jury . 
The counsel for the defence had some difficulty in refuting this harangue and in establishing that , in consequence of the revelations of M. Madeleine , that is to say , of the real Jean Valjean , the aspect of the matter had been thoroughly altered , and that the jury had before their eyes now only an innocent man . 
Thence the lawyer had drawn some epiphonemas , not very fresh , unfortunately , upon judicial errors , etc. , etc. ; the President , in his summing up , had joined the counsel for the defence , and in a few minutes the jury had thrown Champmathieu out of the case . 
Nevertheless , the district-attorney was bent on having a Jean Valjean ; and as he had no longer Champmathieu , he took Madeleine . 
Immediately after Champmathieu had been set at liberty , the district-attorney shut himself up with the President . 
They conferred `` as to the necessity of seizing the person of M. le Maire of M. sur M. '' This phrase , in which there was a great deal of of , is the district-attorney 's , written with his own hand , on the minutes of his report to the attorney-general . 
His first emotion having passed off , the President did not offer many objections . 
Justice must , after all , take its course . 
And then , when all was said , although the President was a kindly and a tolerably intelligent man , he was , at the same time , a devoted and almost an ardent royalist , and he had been shocked to hear the Mayor of M. sur M. say the Emperor , and not Bonaparte , when alluding to the landing at Cannes . 
The order for his arrest was accordingly despatched . 
The district-attorney forwarded it to M. sur M. by a special messenger , at full speed , and entrusted its execution to Police Inspector Javert . 
The reader knows that Javert had returned to M. sur M. immediately after having given his deposition . 
Javert was just getting out of bed when the messenger handed him the order of arrest and the command to produce the prisoner . 
The messenger himself was a very clever member of the police , who , in two words , informed Javert of what had taken place at Arras . 
The order of arrest , signed by the district-attorney , was couched in these words : `` Inspector Javert will apprehend the body of the Sieur Madeleine , mayor of M. sur M. , who , in this day 's session of the court , was recognized as the liberated convict , Jean Valjean . '' 
Any one who did not know Javert , and who had chanced to see him at the moment when he penetrated the antechamber of the infirmary , could have divined nothing of what had taken place , and would have thought his air the most ordinary in the world . 
He was cool , calm , grave , his gray hair was perfectly smooth upon his temples , and he had just mounted the stairs with his habitual deliberation . 
Any one who was thoroughly acquainted with him , and who had examined him attentively at the moment , would have shuddered . 
The buckle of his leather stock was under his left ear instead of at the nape of his neck . 
This betrayed unwonted agitation . 
Javert was a complete character , who never had a wrinkle in his duty or in his uniform ; methodical with malefactors , rigid with the buttons of his coat . 
That he should have set the buckle of his stock awry , it was indispensable that there should have taken place in him one of those emotions which may be designated as internal earthquakes . 
He had come in a simple way , had made a requisition on the neighboring post for a corporal and four soldiers , had left the soldiers in the courtyard , had had Fantine 's room pointed out to him by the portress , who was utterly unsuspicious , accustomed as she was to seeing armed men inquiring for the mayor . 
On arriving at Fantine 's chamber , Javert turned the handle , pushed the door open with the gentleness of a sick-nurse or a police spy , and entered . 
Properly speaking , he did not enter . 
He stood erect in the half-open door , his hat on his head and his left hand thrust into his coat , which was buttoned up to the chin . 
In the bend of his elbow the leaden head of his enormous cane , which was hidden behind him , could be seen . 
Thus he remained for nearly a minute , without his presence being perceived . 
All at once Fantine raised her eyes , saw him , and made M. Madeleine turn round . 
The instant that Madeleine 's glance encountered Javert 's glance , Javert , without stirring , without moving from his post , without approaching him , became terrible . 
No human sentiment can be as terrible as joy . 
It was the visage of a demon who has just found his damned soul . 
The satisfaction of at last getting hold of Jean Valjean caused all that was in his soul to appear in his countenance . 
The depths having been stirred up , mounted to the surface . 
The humiliation of having , in some slight degree , lost the scent , and of having indulged , for a few moments , in an error with regard to Champmathieu , was effaced by pride at having so well and accurately divined in the first place , and of having for so long cherished a just instinct . 
Javert 's content shone forth in his sovereign attitude . 
The deformity of triumph overspread that narrow brow . 
All the demonstrations of horror which a satisfied face can afford were there . 
Javert was in heaven at that moment . 
Without putting the thing clearly to himself , but with a confused intuition of the necessity of his presence and of his success , he , Javert , personified justice , light , and truth in their celestial function of crushing out evil . 
Behind him and around him , at an infinite distance , he had authority , reason , the case judged , the legal conscience , the public prosecution , all the stars ; he was protecting order , he was causing the law to yield up its thunders , he was avenging society , he was lending a helping hand to the absolute , he was standing erect in the midst of a glory . 
There existed in his victory a remnant of defiance and of combat . 
Erect , haughty , brilliant , he flaunted abroad in open day the superhuman bestiality of a ferocious archangel . 
The terrible shadow of the action which he was accomplishing caused the vague flash of the social sword to be visible in his clenched fist ; happy and indignant , he held his heel upon crime , vice , rebellion , perdition , hell ; he was radiant , he exterminated , he smiled , and there was an incontestable grandeur in this monstrous Saint Michael . 
Javert , though frightful , had nothing ignoble about him . 
Probity , sincerity , candor , conviction , the sense of duty , are things which may become hideous when wrongly directed ; but which , even when hideous , remain grand : their majesty , the majesty peculiar to the human conscience , clings to them in the midst of horror ; they are virtues which have one vice , -- error . 
The honest , pitiless joy of a fanatic in the full flood of his atrocity preserves a certain lugubriously venerable radiance . 
Without himself suspecting the fact , Javert in his formidable happiness was to be pitied , as is every ignorant man who triumphs . 
Nothing could be so poignant and so terrible as this face , wherein was displayed all that may be designated as the evil of the good . 
AUTHORITY REASSERTS ITS RIGHTS Fantine had not seen Javert since the day on which the mayor had torn her from the man . 
Her ailing brain comprehended nothing , but the only thing which she did not doubt was that he had come to get her . 
She could not endure that terrible face ; she felt her life quitting her ; she hid her face in both hands , and shrieked in her anguish : -- `` Monsieur Madeleine , save me ! '' 
Jean Valjean -- we shall henceforth not speak of him otherwise -- had risen . 
He said to Fantine in the gentlest and calmest of voices : -- `` Be at ease ; it is not for you that he is come . '' 
Then he addressed Javert , and said : -- `` I know what you want . '' 
Javert replied : -- `` Be quick about it ! '' 
There lay in the inflection of voice which accompanied these words something indescribably fierce and frenzied . 
Javert did not say , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
he said `` Bequiabouit . '' 
No orthography can do justice to the accent with which it was uttered : it was no longer a human word : it was a roar . 
He did not proceed according to his custom , he did not enter into the matter , he exhibited no warrant of arrest . 
In his eyes , Jean Valjean was a sort of mysterious combatant , who was not to be laid hands upon , a wrestler in the dark whom he had had in his grasp for the last five years , without being able to throw him . 
This arrest was not a beginning , but an end . 
He confined himself to saying , `` Be quick about it ! '' 
As he spoke thus , he did not advance a single step ; he hurled at Jean Valjean a glance which he threw out like a grappling-hook , and with which he was accustomed to draw wretches violently to him . 
It was this glance which Fantine had felt penetrating to the very marrow of her bones two months previously . 
At Javert 's exclamation , Fantine opened her eyes once more . 
But the mayor was there ; what had she to fear ? 
Javert advanced to the middle of the room , and cried : -- `` See here now ! 
Art thou coming ? '' 
The unhappy woman glanced about her . 
No one was present excepting the nun and the mayor . 
To whom could that abject use of `` thou '' be addressed ? 
To her only . 
She shuddered . 
Then she beheld a most unprecedented thing , a thing so unprecedented that nothing equal to it had appeared to her even in the blackest deliriums of fever . 
She beheld Javert , the police spy , seize the mayor by the collar ; she saw the mayor bow his head . 
It seemed to her that the world was coming to an end . 
Javert had , in fact , grasped Jean Valjean by the collar . 
`` Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
shrieked Fantine . 
Javert burst out laughing with that frightful laugh which displayed all his gums . 
`` There is no longer any Monsieur le Maire here ! '' 
Jean Valjean made no attempt to disengage the hand which grasped the collar of his coat . 
He said : -- `` Javert -- '' Javert interrupted him : `` Call me Mr. Inspector . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I should like to say a word to you in private . '' 
`` Aloud ! 
Say it aloud ! '' 
replied Javert ; `` people are in the habit of talking aloud to me . '' 
Jean Valjean went on in a lower tone : -- `` I have a request to make of you -- '' `` I tell you to speak loud . '' 
`` But you alone should hear it -- '' `` What difference does that make to me ? 
I shall not listen . '' 
Jean Valjean turned towards him and said very rapidly and in a very low voice : -- `` Grant me three days ' grace ! 
three days in which to go and fetch the child of this unhappy woman . 
I will pay whatever is necessary . 
You shall accompany me if you choose . '' 
`` You are making sport of me ! '' 
cried Javert . 
`` Come now , I did not think you such a fool ! 
You ask me to give you three days in which to run away ! 
You say that it is for the purpose of fetching that creature 's child ! 
Ah ! 
Ah ! 
That 's good ! 
That 's really capital ! '' 
Fantine was seized with a fit of trembling . 
`` My child ! '' 
she cried , `` to go and fetch my child ! 
She is not here , then ! 
Answer me , sister ; where is Cosette ? 
I want my child ! 
Monsieur Madeleine ! 
Monsieur le Maire ! '' 
Javert stamped his foot . 
`` And now there 's the other one ! 
Will you hold your tongue , you hussy ? 
It 's a pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates , and where women of the town are cared for like countesses ! 
Ah ! 
But we are going to change all that ; it is high time ! '' 
He stared intently at Fantine , and added , once more taking into his grasp Jean Valjean 's cravat , shirt and collar : -- `` I tell you that there is no Monsieur Madeleine and that there is no Monsieur le Maire . 
There is a thief , a brigand , a convict named Jean Valjean ! 
And I have him in my grasp ! 
That 's what there is ! '' 
Fantine raised herself in bed with a bound , supporting herself on her stiffened arms and on both hands : she gazed at Jean Valjean , she gazed at Javert , she gazed at the nun , she opened her mouth as though to speak ; a rattle proceeded from the depths of her throat , her teeth chattered ; she stretched out her arms in her agony , opening her hands convulsively , and fumbling about her like a drowning person ; then suddenly fell back on her pillow . 
Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on her breast , with gaping mouth and staring , sightless eyes . 
She was dead . 
Jean Valjean laid his hand upon the detaining hand of Javert , and opened it as he would have opened the hand of a baby ; then he said to Javert : -- `` You have murdered that woman . '' 
`` Let 's have an end of this ! '' 
shouted Javert , in a fury ; `` I am not here to listen to argument . 
Let us economize all that ; the guard is below ; march on instantly , or you 'll get the thumb-screws ! '' 
In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead , which was in a decidedly decrepit state , and which served the sisters as a camp-bed when they were watching with the sick . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to this bed , in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece , which was already in a dilapidated condition , an easy matter to muscles like his , grasped the principal rod like a bludgeon , and glanced at Javert . 
Javert retreated towards the door . 
Jean Valjean , armed with his bar of iron , walked slowly up to Fantine 's couch . 
When he arrived there he turned and said to Javert , in a voice that was barely audible : -- `` I advise you not to disturb me at this moment . '' 
One thing is certain , and that is , that Javert trembled . 
It did occur to him to summon the guard , but Jean Valjean might avail himself of that moment to effect his escape ; so he remained , grasped his cane by the small end , and leaned against the door-post , without removing his eyes from Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean rested his elbow on the knob at the head of the bed , and his brow on his hand , and began to contemplate the motionless body of Fantine , which lay extended there . 
He remained thus , mute , absorbed , evidently with no further thought of anything connected with this life . 
Upon his face and in his attitude there was nothing but inexpressible pity . 
After a few moments of this meditation he bent towards Fantine , and spoke to her in a low voice . 
What did he say to her ? 
What could this man , who was reproved , say to that woman , who was dead ? 
What words were those ? 
No one on earth heard them . 
Did the dead woman hear them ? 
There are some touching illusions which are , perhaps , sublime realities . 
The point as to which there exists no doubt is , that Sister Simplice , the sole witness of the incident , often said that at the moment that Jean Valjean whispered in Fantine 's ear , she distinctly beheld an ineffable smile dawn on those pale lips , and in those dim eyes , filled with the amazement of the tomb . 
Jean Valjean took Fantine 's head in both his hands , and arranged it on the pillow as a mother might have done for her child ; then he tied the string of her chemise , and smoothed her hair back under her cap . 
That done , he closed her eyes . 
Fantine 's face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment . 
Death , that signifies entrance into the great light . 
Fantine 's hand was hanging over the side of the bed . 
Jean Valjean knelt down before that hand , lifted it gently , and kissed it . 
Then he rose , and turned to Javert . 
`` Now , '' said he , `` I am at your disposal . '' 
A SUITABLE TOMB Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison . 
The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation , or rather , an extraordinary commotion in M. sur M . 
We are sorry that we can not conceal the fact , that at the single word , `` He was a convict , '' nearly every one deserted him . 
In less than two hours all the good that he had done had been forgotten , and he was nothing but a `` convict from the galleys . '' 
It is just to add that the details of what had taken place at Arras were not yet known . 
All day long conversations like the following were to be heard in all quarters of the town : -- `` You do n't know ? 
He was a liberated convict ! '' 
`` Who ? '' 
`` The mayor . '' 
`` Bah ! 
M. Madeleine ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` His name was not Madeleine at all ; he had a frightful name , Bejean , Bojean , Boujean . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Good God ! '' 
`` He has been arrested . '' 
`` Arrested ! '' 
`` In prison , in the city prison , while waiting to be transferred . '' 
`` Until he is transferred ! '' 
`` He is to be transferred ! '' 
`` Where is he to be taken ? '' 
`` He will be tried at the Assizes for a highway robbery which he committed long ago . '' 
`` Well ! 
I suspected as much . 
That man was too good , too perfect , too affected . 
He refused the cross ; he bestowed sous on all the little scamps he came across . 
I always thought there was some evil history back of all that . '' 
The `` drawing-rooms '' particularly abounded in remarks of this nature . 
One old lady , a subscriber to the Drapeau Blanc , made the following remark , the depth of which it is impossible to fathom : -- `` I am not sorry . 
It will be a lesson to the Bonapartists ! '' 
It was thus that the phantom which had been called M. Madeleine vanished from M. sur M. Only three or four persons in all the town remained faithful to his memory . 
The old portress who had served him was among the number . 
On the evening of that day the worthy old woman was sitting in her lodge , still in a thorough fright , and absorbed in sad reflections . 
The factory had been closed all day , the carriage gate was bolted , the street was deserted . 
There was no one in the house but the two nuns , Sister Perpetue and Sister Simplice , who were watching beside the body of Fantine . 
Towards the hour when M. Madeleine was accustomed to return home , the good portress rose mechanically , took from a drawer the key of M. Madeleine 's chamber , and the flat candlestick which he used every evening to go up to his quarters ; then she hung the key on the nail whence he was accustomed to take it , and set the candlestick on one side , as though she was expecting him . 
Then she sat down again on her chair , and became absorbed in thought once more . 
The poor , good old woman bad done all this without being conscious of it . 
It was only at the expiration of two hours that she roused herself from her revery , and exclaimed , `` Hold ! 
My good God Jesus ! 
And I hung his key on the nail ! '' 
At that moment the small window in the lodge opened , a hand passed through , seized the key and the candlestick , and lighted the taper at the candle which was burning there . 
The portress raised her eyes , and stood there with gaping mouth , and a shriek which she confined to her throat . 
She knew that hand , that arm , the sleeve of that coat . 
It was M. Madeleine . 
It was several seconds before she could speak ; she had a seizure , as she said herself , when she related the adventure afterwards . 
`` Good God , Monsieur le Maire , '' she cried at last , `` I thought you were -- '' She stopped ; the conclusion of her sentence would have been lacking in respect towards the beginning . 
Jean Valjean was still Monsieur le Maire to her . 
He finished her thought . 
`` In prison , '' said he . 
`` I was there ; I broke a bar of one of the windows ; I let myself drop from the top of a roof , and here I am . 
I am going up to my room ; go and find Sister Simplice for me . 
She is with that poor woman , no doubt . '' 
The old woman obeyed in all haste . 
He gave her no orders ; he was quite sure that she would guard him better than he should guard himself . 
No one ever found out how he had managed to get into the courtyard without opening the big gates . 
He had , and always carried about him , a pass-key which opened a little side-door ; but he must have been searched , and his latch-key must have been taken from him . 
This point was never explained . 
He ascended the staircase leading to his chamber . 
On arriving at the top , he left his candle on the top step of his stairs , opened his door with very little noise , went and closed his window and his shutters by feeling , then returned for his candle and re-entered his room . 
It was a useful precaution ; it will be recollected that his window could be seen from the street . 
He cast a glance about him , at his table , at his chair , at his bed which had not been disturbed for three days . 
No trace of the disorder of the night before last remained . 
The portress had `` done up '' his room ; only she had picked out of the ashes and placed neatly on the table the two iron ends of the cudgel and the forty-sou piece which had been blackened by the fire . 
He took a sheet of paper , on which he wrote : `` These are the two tips of my iron-shod cudgel and the forty-sou piece stolen from Little Gervais , which I mentioned at the Court of Assizes , '' and he arranged this piece of paper , the bits of iron , and the coin in such a way that they were the first things to be seen on entering the room . 
From a cupboard he pulled out one of his old shirts , which he tore in pieces . 
In the strips of linen thus prepared he wrapped the two silver candlesticks . 
He betrayed neither haste nor agitation ; and while he was wrapping up the Bishop 's candlesticks , he nibbled at a piece of black bread . 
It was probably the prison-bread which he had carried with him in his flight . 
This was proved by the crumbs which were found on the floor of the room when the authorities made an examination later on . 
There came two taps at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said he . 
It was Sister Simplice . 
She was pale ; her eyes were red ; the candle which she carried trembled in her hand . 
The peculiar feature of the violences of destiny is , that however polished or cool we may be , they wring human nature from our very bowels , and force it to reappear on the surface . 
The emotions of that day had turned the nun into a woman once more . 
She had wept , and she was trembling . 
Jean Valjean had just finished writing a few lines on a paper , which he handed to the nun , saying , `` Sister , you will give this to Monsieur le Cure . '' 
The paper was not folded . 
She cast a glance upon it . 
`` You can read it , '' said he . 
She read : -- `` I beg Monsieur le Cure to keep an eye on all that I leave behind me . 
He will be so good as to pay out of it the expenses of my trial , and of the funeral of the woman who died yesterday . 
The rest is for the poor . '' 
The sister tried to speak , but she only managed to stammer a few inarticulate sounds . 
She succeeded in saying , however : -- `` Does not Monsieur le Maire desire to take a last look at that poor , unhappy woman ? '' 
`` No , '' said he ; `` I am pursued ; it would only end in their arresting me in that room , and that would disturb her . '' 
He had hardly finished when a loud noise became audible on the staircase . 
They heard a tumult of ascending footsteps , and the old portress saying in her loudest and most piercing tones : -- `` My good sir , I swear to you by the good God , that not a soul has entered this house all day , nor all the evening , and that I have not even left the door . '' 
A man responded : -- `` But there is a light in that room , nevertheless . '' 
They recognized Javert 's voice . 
The chamber was so arranged that the door in opening masked the corner of the wall on the right . 
Jean Valjean blew out the light and placed himself in this angle . 
Sister Simplice fell on her knees near the table . 
The door opened . 
Javert entered . 
The whispers of many men and the protestations of the portress were audible in the corridor . 
The nun did not raise her eyes . 
She was praying . 
The candle was on the chimney-piece , and gave but very little light . 
Javert caught sight of the nun and halted in amazement . 
It will be remembered that the fundamental point in Javert , his element , the very air he breathed , was veneration for all authority . 
This was impregnable , and admitted of neither objection nor restriction . 
In his eyes , of course , the ecclesiastical authority was the chief of all ; he was religious , superficial and correct on this point as on all others . 
In his eyes , a priest was a mind , who never makes a mistake ; a nun was a creature who never sins ; they were souls walled in from this world , with a single door which never opened except to allow the truth to pass through . 
On perceiving the sister , his first movement was to retire . 
But there was also another duty which bound him and impelled him imperiously in the opposite direction . 
His second movement was to remain and to venture on at least one question . 
This was Sister Simplice , who had never told a lie in her life . 
Javert knew it , and held her in special veneration in consequence . 
`` Sister , '' said he , `` are you alone in this room ? '' 
A terrible moment ensued , during which the poor portress felt as though she should faint . 
The sister raised her eyes and answered : -- `` Yes . '' 
`` Then , '' resumed Javert , `` you will excuse me if I persist ; it is my duty ; you have not seen a certain person -- a man -- this evening ? 
He has escaped ; we are in search of him -- that Jean Valjean ; you have not seen him ? '' 
The sister replied : -- `` No . '' 
She lied . 
She had lied twice in succession , one after the other , without hesitation , promptly , as a person does when sacrificing herself . 
`` Pardon me , '' said Javert , and he retired with a deep bow . 
O sainted maid ! 
you left this world many years ago ; you have rejoined your sisters , the virgins , and your brothers , the angels , in the light ; may this lie be counted to your credit in paradise ! 
The sister 's affirmation was for Javert so decisive a thing that he did not even observe the singularity of that candle which had but just been extinguished , and which was still smoking on the table . 
An hour later , a man , marching amid trees and mists , was rapidly departing from M. sur M. in the direction of Paris . 
That man was Jean Valjean . 
It has been established by the testimony of two or three carters who met him , that he was carrying a bundle ; that he was dressed in a blouse . 
Where had he obtained that blouse ? 
No one ever found out . 
But an aged workman had died in the infirmary of the factory a few days before , leaving behind him nothing but his blouse . 
Perhaps that was the one . 
One last word about Fantine . 
We all have a mother , -- the earth . 
Fantine was given back to that mother . 
The cure thought that he was doing right , and perhaps he really was , in reserving as much money as possible from what Jean Valjean had left for the poor . 
Who was concerned , after all ? 
A convict and a woman of the town . 
That is why he had a very simple funeral for Fantine , and reduced it to that strictly necessary form known as the pauper 's grave . 
So Fantine was buried in the free corner of the cemetery which belongs to anybody and everybody , and where the poor are lost . 
Fortunately , God knows where to find the soul again . 
Fantine was laid in the shade , among the first bones that came to hand ; she was subjected to the promiscuousness of ashes . 
She was thrown into the public grave . 
Her grave resembled her bed . 
-LSB- The end of Volume I. `` Fantine '' -RSB- COSETTE WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES Last year -LRB- 1861 -RRB- , on a beautiful May morning , a traveller , the person who is telling this story , was coming from Nivelles , and directing his course towards La Hulpe . 
He was on foot . 
He was pursuing a broad paved road , which undulated between two rows of trees , over the hills which succeed each other , raise the road and let it fall again , and produce something in the nature of enormous waves . 
He had passed Lillois and Bois-Seigneur-Isaac . 
In the west he perceived the slate-roofed tower of Braine-l'Alleud , which has the form of a reversed vase . 
He had just left behind a wood upon an eminence ; and at the angle of the cross-road , by the side of a sort of mouldy gibbet bearing the inscription Ancient Barrier No. 4 , a public house , bearing on its front this sign : At the Four Winds -LRB- Aux Quatre Vents -RRB- . 
Echabeau , Private Cafe . 
A quarter of a league further on , he arrived at the bottom of a little valley , where there is water which passes beneath an arch made through the embankment of the road . 
The clump of sparsely planted but very green trees , which fills the valley on one side of the road , is dispersed over the meadows on the other , and disappears gracefully and as in order in the direction of Braine-l'Alleud . 
On the right , close to the road , was an inn , with a four-wheeled cart at the door , a large bundle of hop-poles , a plough , a heap of dried brushwood near a flourishing hedge , lime smoking in a square hole , and a ladder suspended along an old penthouse with straw partitions . 
A young girl was weeding in a field , where a huge yellow poster , probably of some outside spectacle , such as a parish festival , was fluttering in the wind . 
At one corner of the inn , beside a pool in which a flotilla of ducks was navigating , a badly paved path plunged into the bushes . 
The wayfarer struck into this . 
After traversing a hundred paces , skirting a wall of the fifteenth century , surmounted by a pointed gable , with bricks set in contrast , he found himself before a large door of arched stone , with a rectilinear impost , in the sombre style of Louis XIV. , flanked by two flat medallions . 
A severe facade rose above this door ; a wall , perpendicular to the facade , almost touched the door , and flanked it with an abrupt right angle . 
In the meadow before the door lay three harrows , through which , in disorder , grew all the flowers of May . 
The door was closed . 
The two decrepit leaves which barred it were ornamented with an old rusty knocker . 
The sun was charming ; the branches had that soft shivering of May , which seems to proceed rather from the nests than from the wind . 
A brave little bird , probably a lover , was carolling in a distracted manner in a large tree . 
The wayfarer bent over and examined a rather large circular excavation , resembling the hollow of a sphere , in the stone on the left , at the foot of the pier of the door . 
At this moment the leaves of the door parted , and a peasant woman emerged . 
She saw the wayfarer , and perceived what he was looking at . 
`` It was a French cannon-ball which made that , '' she said to him . 
And she added : -- `` That which you see there , higher up in the door , near a nail , is the hole of a big iron bullet as large as an egg . 
The bullet did not pierce the wood . '' 
`` What is the name of this place ? '' 
inquired the wayfarer . 
`` Hougomont , '' said the peasant woman . 
The traveller straightened himself up . 
He walked on a few paces , and went off to look over the tops of the hedges . 
On the horizon through the trees , he perceived a sort of little elevation , and on this elevation something which at that distance resembled a lion . 
He was on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
HOUGOMONT Hougomont , -- this was a funereal spot , the beginning of the obstacle , the first resistance , which that great wood-cutter of Europe , called Napoleon , encountered at Waterloo , the first knot under the blows of his axe . 
It was a chateau ; it is no longer anything but a farm . 
For the antiquary , Hougomont is Hugomons . 
This manor was built by Hugo , Sire of Somerel , the same who endowed the sixth chaplaincy of the Abbey of Villiers . 
The traveller pushed open the door , elbowed an ancient calash under the porch , and entered the courtyard . 
The first thing which struck him in this paddock was a door of the sixteenth century , which here simulates an arcade , everything else having fallen prostrate around it . 
A monumental aspect often has its birth in ruin . 
In a wall near the arcade opens another arched door , of the time of Henry IV. , permitting a glimpse of the trees of an orchard ; beside this door , a manure-hole , some pickaxes , some shovels , some carts , an old well , with its flagstone and its iron reel , a chicken jumping , and a turkey spreading its tail , a chapel surmounted by a small bell-tower , a blossoming pear-tree trained in espalier against the wall of the chapel -- behold the court , the conquest of which was one of Napoleon 's dreams . 
This corner of earth , could he but have seized it , would , perhaps , have given him the world likewise . 
Chickens are scattering its dust abroad with their beaks . 
A growl is audible ; it is a huge dog , who shows his teeth and replaces the English . 
The English behaved admirably there . 
Cooke 's four companies of guards there held out for seven hours against the fury of an army . 
Hougomont viewed on the map , as a geometrical plan , comprising buildings and enclosures , presents a sort of irregular rectangle , one angle of which is nicked out . 
It is this angle which contains the southern door , guarded by this wall , which commands it only a gun 's length away . 
Hougomont has two doors , -- the southern door , that of the chateau ; and the northern door , belonging to the farm . 
Napoleon sent his brother Jerome against Hougomont ; the divisions of Foy , Guilleminot , and Bachelu hurled themselves against it ; nearly the entire corps of Reille was employed against it , and miscarried ; Kellermann 's balls were exhausted on this heroic section of wall . 
Bauduin 's brigade was not strong enough to force Hougomont on the north , and the brigade of Soye could not do more than effect the beginning of a breach on the south , but without taking it . 
The farm buildings border the courtyard on the south . 
A bit of the north door , broken by the French , hangs suspended to the wall . 
It consists of four planks nailed to two cross-beams , on which the scars of the attack are visible . 
The northern door , which was beaten in by the French , and which has had a piece applied to it to replace the panel suspended on the wall , stands half-open at the bottom of the paddock ; it is cut squarely in the wall , built of stone below , of brick above which closes in the courtyard on the north . 
It is a simple door for carts , such as exist in all farms , with the two large leaves made of rustic planks : beyond lie the meadows . 
The dispute over this entrance was furious . 
For a long time , all sorts of imprints of bloody hands were visible on the door-posts . 
It was there that Bauduin was killed . 
The storm of the combat still lingers in this courtyard ; its horror is visible there ; the confusion of the fray was petrified there ; it lives and it dies there ; it was only yesterday . 
The walls are in the death agony , the stones fall ; the breaches cry aloud ; the holes are wounds ; the drooping , quivering trees seem to be making an effort to flee . 
This courtyard was more built up in 1815 than it is to-day . 
Buildings which have since been pulled down then formed redans and angles . 
The English barricaded themselves there ; the French made their way in , but could not stand their ground . 
Beside the chapel , one wing of the chateau , the only ruin now remaining of the manor of Hougomont , rises in a crumbling state , -- disembowelled , one might say . 
The chateau served for a dungeon , the chapel for a block-house . 
There men exterminated each other . 
The French , fired on from every point , -- from behind the walls , from the summits of the garrets , from the depths of the cellars , through all the casements , through all the air-holes , through every crack in the stones , -- fetched fagots and set fire to walls and men ; the reply to the grape-shot was a conflagration . 
In the ruined wing , through windows garnished with bars of iron , the dismantled chambers of the main building of brick are visible ; the English guards were in ambush in these rooms ; the spiral of the staircase , cracked from the ground floor to the very roof , appears like the inside of a broken shell . 
The staircase has two stories ; the English , besieged on the staircase , and massed on its upper steps , had cut off the lower steps . 
These consisted of large slabs of blue stone , which form a heap among the nettles . 
Half a score of steps still cling to the wall ; on the first is cut the figure of a trident . 
These inaccessible steps are solid in their niches . 
All the rest resembles a jaw which has been denuded of its teeth . 
There are two old trees there : one is dead ; the other is wounded at its base , and is clothed with verdure in April . 
Since 1815 it has taken to growing through the staircase . 
A massacre took place in the chapel . 
The interior , which has recovered its calm , is singular . 
The mass has not been said there since the carnage . 
Nevertheless , the altar has been left there -- an altar of unpolished wood , placed against a background of roughhewn stone . 
Four whitewashed walls , a door opposite the altar , two small arched windows ; over the door a large wooden crucifix , below the crucifix a square air-hole stopped up with a bundle of hay ; on the ground , in one corner , an old window-frame with the glass all broken to pieces -- such is the chapel . 
Near the altar there is nailed up a wooden statue of Saint Anne , of the fifteenth century ; the head of the infant Jesus has been carried off by a large ball . 
The French , who were masters of the chapel for a moment , and were then dislodged , set fire to it . 
The flames filled this building ; it was a perfect furnace ; the door was burned , the floor was burned , the wooden Christ was not burned . 
The fire preyed upon his feet , of which only the blackened stumps are now to be seen ; then it stopped , -- a miracle , according to the assertion of the people of the neighborhood . 
The infant Jesus , decapitated , was less fortunate than the Christ . 
The walls are covered with inscriptions . 
Near the feet of Christ this name is to be read : Henquinez . 
Then these others : Conde de Rio Maior Marques y Marquesa de Almagro -LRB- Habana -RRB- . 
There are French names with exclamation points , -- a sign of wrath . 
The wall was freshly whitewashed in 1849 . 
The nations insulted each other there . 
It was at the door of this chapel that the corpse was picked up which held an axe in its hand ; this corpse was Sub-Lieutenant Legros . 
On emerging from the chapel , a well is visible on the left . 
There are two in this courtyard . 
One inquires , Why is there no bucket and pulley to this ? 
It is because water is no longer drawn there . 
Why is water not drawn there ? 
Because it is full of skeletons . 
The last person who drew water from the well was named Guillaume van Kylsom . 
He was a peasant who lived at Hougomont , and was gardener there . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , his family fled and concealed themselves in the woods . 
The forest surrounding the Abbey of Villiers sheltered these unfortunate people who had been scattered abroad , for many days and nights . 
There are at this day certain traces recognizable , such as old boles of burned trees , which mark the site of these poor bivouacs trembling in the depths of the thickets . 
Guillaume van Kylsom remained at Hougomont , `` to guard the chateau , '' and concealed himself in the cellar . 
The English discovered him there . 
They tore him from his hiding-place , and the combatants forced this frightened man to serve them , by administering blows with the flats of their swords . 
They were thirsty ; this Guillaume brought them water . 
It was from this well that he drew it . 
Many drank there their last draught . 
This well where drank so many of the dead was destined to die itself . 
After the engagement , they were in haste to bury the dead bodies . 
Death has a fashion of harassing victory , and she causes the pest to follow glory . 
The typhus is a concomitant of triumph . 
This well was deep , and it was turned into a sepulchre . 
Three hundred dead bodies were cast into it . 
