Twenty months had barely elapsed since the Revolution of July , the year 1832 had opened with an aspect of something impending and threatening . 
The distress of the people , the laborers without bread , the last Prince de Conde engulfed in the shadows , Brussels expelling the Nassaus as Paris did the Bourbons , Belgium offering herself to a French Prince and giving herself to an English Prince , the Russian hatred of Nicolas , behind us the demons of the South , Ferdinand in Spain , Miguel in Portugal , the earth quaking in Italy , Metternich extending his hand over Bologna , France treating Austria sharply at Ancona , at the North no one knew what sinister sound of the hammer nailing up Poland in her coffin , irritated glances watching France narrowly all over Europe , England , a suspected ally , ready to give a push to that which was tottering and to hurl herself on that which should fall , the peerage sheltering itself behind Beccaria to refuse four heads to the law , the fleurs-de-lys erased from the King 's carriage , the cross torn from Notre Dame , Lafayette lessened , Laffitte ruined , Benjamin Constant dead in indigence , Casimir Perier dead in the exhaustion of his power ; political and social malady breaking out simultaneously in the two capitals of the kingdom , the one in the city of thought , the other in the city of toil ; at Paris civil war , at Lyons servile war ; in the two cities , the same glare of the furnace ; a crater-like crimson on the brow of the people ; the South rendered fanatic , the West troubled , the Duchesse de Berry in la Vendee , plots , conspiracies , risings , cholera , added the sombre roar of tumult of events to the sombre roar of ideas . 
FACTS WHENCE HISTORY SPRINGS AND WHICH HISTORY IGNORES Towards the end of April , everything had become aggravated . 
The fermentation entered the boiling state . 
Ever since 1830 , petty partial revolts had been going on here and there , which were quickly suppressed , but ever bursting forth afresh , the sign of a vast underlying conflagration . 
Something terrible was in preparation . 
Glimpses could be caught of the features still indistinct and imperfectly lighted , of a possible revolution . 
France kept an eye on Paris ; Paris kept an eye on the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine , which was in a dull glow , was beginning its ebullition . 
The wine-shops of the Rue de Charonne were , although the union of the two epithets seems singular when applied to wine-shops , grave and stormy . 
The government was there purely and simply called in question . 
There people publicly discussed the question of fighting or of keeping quiet . 
There were back shops where workingmen were made to swear that they would hasten into the street at the first cry of alarm , and `` that they would fight without counting the number of the enemy . '' 
This engagement once entered into , a man seated in the corner of the wine-shop `` assumed a sonorous tone , '' and said , `` You understand ! 
You have sworn ! '' 
Sometimes they went up stairs , to a private room on the first floor , and there scenes that were almost masonic were enacted . 
They made the initiated take oaths to render service to himself as well as to the fathers of families . 
That was the formula . 
In the tap-rooms , `` subversive '' pamphlets were read . 
They treated the government with contempt , says a secret report of that time . 
Words like the following could be heard there : -- `` I do n't know the names of the leaders . 
We folks shall not know the day until two hours beforehand . '' 
One workman said : `` There are three hundred of us , let each contribute ten sous , that will make one hundred and fifty francs with which to procure powder and shot . '' 
Another said : `` I do n't ask for six months , I do n't ask for even two . 
In less than a fortnight we shall be parallel with the government . 
With twenty-five thousand men we can face them . '' 
Another said : `` I do n't sleep at night , because I make cartridges all night . '' 
From time to time , men `` of bourgeois appearance , and in good coats '' came and `` caused embarrassment , '' and with the air of `` command , '' shook hands with the most important , and then went away . 
They never stayed more than ten minutes . 
Significant remarks were exchanged in a low tone : `` The plot is ripe , the matter is arranged . '' 
`` It was murmured by all who were there , '' to borrow the very expression of one of those who were present . 
The exaltation was such that one day , a workingman exclaimed , efore the whole wine-shop : `` We have no arms ! '' 
One of his comrades replied : `` The soldiers have ! '' 
thus parodying without being aware of the fact , Bonaparte 's proclamation to the army in Italy : `` When they had anything of a more secret nature on hand , '' adds one report , `` they did not communicate it to each other . '' 
It is not easy to understand what they could conceal after what they said . 
These reunions were sometimes periodical . 
At certain ones of them , there were never more than eight or ten persons present , and they were always the same . 
In others , any one entered who wished , and the room was so full that they were forced to stand . 
Some went thither through enthusiasm and passion ; others because it was on their way to their work . 
As during the Revolution , there were patriotic women in some of these wine-shops who embraced new-comers . 
Other expressive facts came to light . 
A man would enter a shop , drink , and go his way with the remark : `` Wine-merchant , the revolution will pay what is due to you . '' 
Revolutionary agents were appointed in a wine-shop facing the Rue de Charonne . 
The balloting was carried on in their caps . 
Workingmen met at the house of a fencing-master who gave lessons in the Rue de Cotte . 
There there was a trophy of arms formed of wooden broadswords , canes , clubs , and foils . 
One day , the buttons were removed from the foils . 
A workman said : `` There are twenty-five of us , but they do n't count on me , because I am looked upon as a machine . '' 
Later on , that machine became Quenisset . 
The indefinite things which were brewing gradually acquired a strange and indescribable notoriety . 
A woman sweeping off her doorsteps said to another woman : `` For a long time , there has been a strong force busy making cartridges . '' 
In the open street , proclamation could be seen addressed to the National Guard in the departments . 
One of these proclamations was signed : Burtot , wine-merchant . 
One day a man with his beard worn like a collar and with an Italian accent mounted a stone post at the door of a liquor-seller in the Marche Lenoir , and read aloud a singular document , which seemed to emanate from an occult power . 
Groups formed around him , and applauded . 
The passages which touched the crowd most deeply were collected and noted down . '' 
-- Our doctrines are trammelled , our proclamations torn , our bill-stickers are spied upon and thrown into prison . '' 
-- `` The breakdown which has recently taken place in cottons has converted to us many mediums . '' 
-- `` The future of nations is being worked out in our obscure ranks . '' 
-- '' Here are the fixed terms : action or reaction , revolution or counter-revolution . 
For , at our epoch , we no longer believe either in inertia or in immobility . 
For the people against the people , that is the question . 
There is no other . '' 
-- `` On the day when we cease to suit you , break us , but up to that day , help us to march on . '' 
All this in broad daylight . 
Other deeds , more audacious still , were suspicious in the eyes of the people by reason of their very audacity . 
On the 4th of April , 1832 , a passer-by mounted the post on the corner which forms the angle of the Rue Sainte-Marguerite and shouted : `` I am a Babouvist ! '' 
But beneath Babeuf , the people scented Gisquet . 
Among other things , this man said : -- `` Down with property ! 
The opposition of the left is cowardly and treacherous . 
When it wants to be on the right side , it preaches revolution , it is democratic in order to escape being beaten , and royalist so that it may not have to fight . 
The republicans are beasts with feathers . 
Distrust the republicans , citizens of the laboring classes . '' 
`` Silence , citizen spy ! '' 
cried an artisan . 
This shout put an end to the discourse . 
Mysterious incidents occurred . 
At nightfall , a workingman encountered near the canal a `` very well dressed man , '' who said to him : `` Whither are you bound , citizen ? '' 
`` Sir , '' replied the workingman , `` I have not the honor of your acquaintance . '' 
`` I know you very well , however . '' 
And the man added : `` Do n't be alarmed , I am an agent of the committee . 
You are suspected of not being quite faithful . 
You know that if you reveal anything , there is an eye fixed on you . '' 
Then he shook hands with the workingman and went away , saying : `` We shall meet again soon . '' 
The police , who were on the alert , collected singular dialogues , not only in the wine-shops , but in the street . 
`` Get yourself received very soon , '' said a weaver to a cabinet-maker . 
`` Why ? '' 
`` There is going to be a shot to fire . '' 
Two ragged pedestrians exchanged these remarkable replies , fraught with evident Jacquerie : -- `` Who governs us ? '' 
`` M. Philippe . '' 
`` No , it is the bourgeoisie . '' 
The reader is mistaken if he thinks that we take the word Jacquerie in a bad sense . 
The Jacques were the poor . 
On another occasion two men were heard to say to each other as they passed by : `` We have a good plan of attack . '' 
Only the following was caught of a private conversation between four men who were crouching in a ditch of the circle of the Barriere du Trone : -- `` Everything possible will be done to prevent his walking about Paris any more . '' 
Who was the he ? 
Menacing obscurity . 
`` The principal leaders , '' as they said in the faubourg , held themselves apart . 
It was supposed that they met for consultation in a wine-shop near the point Saint-Eustache . 
A certain Aug -- , chief of the Society aid for tailors , Rue Mondetour , had the reputation of serving as intermediary central between the leaders and the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
Nevertheless , there was always a great deal of mystery about these leaders , and no certain fact can invalidate the singular arrogance of this reply made later on by a man accused before the Court of Peers : -- `` Who was your leader ? '' 
`` I knew of none and I recognized none . '' 
There was nothing but words , transparent but vague ; sometimes idle reports , rumors , hearsay . 
Other indications cropped up . 
A carpenter , occupied in nailing boards to a fence around the ground on which a house was in process of construction , in the Rue de Reuilly found on that plot the torn fragment of a letter on which were still legible the following lines : -- The committee must take measures to prevent recruiting in the sections for the different societies . 
And , as a postscript : -- We have learned that there are guns in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonniere , No. 5 -LSB- bis -RSB- , to the number of five or six thousand , in the house of a gunsmith in that court . 
The section owns no arms . 
What excited the carpenter and caused him to show this thing to his neighbors was the fact , that a few paces further on he picked up another paper , torn like the first , and still more significant , of which we reproduce a facsimile , because of the historical interest attaching to these strange documents : -- + ------------------------------------------------------------ + | Q | C | D | E | Learn this list by heart . 
After so doing | | | | | | you will tear it up . 
The men admitted | | | | | | will do the same when you have transmitted | | | | | | their orders to them . 
| | | | | | Health and Fraternity , | | | | | | u og a fe L. | + ------------------------------------------------------------ + It was only later on that the persons who were in the secret of this find at the time , learned the significance of those four capital letters : quinturions , centurions , decurions , eclaireurs -LSB- scouts -RSB- , and the sense of the letters : u og a fe , which was a date , and meant April 15th , 1832 . 
Under each capital letter were inscribed names followed by very characteristic notes . 
Thus : Q. Bannerel . 
8 guns , 83 cartridges . 
A safe man . 
-- C. Boubiere . 
1 pistol , 40 cartridges . 
-- D. Rollet . 
1 foil , 1 pistol , 1 pound of powder . 
-- E. Tessier . 
1 sword , 1 cartridge-box . 
Exact . 
-- Terreur . 
8 guns . 
Brave , etc. . 
Finally , this carpenter found , still in the same enclosure , a third paper on which was written in pencil , but very legibly , this sort of enigmatical list : -- Unite : Blanchard : Arbre-Sec . 
6 . 
Barra . 
Soize . 
Salle-au-Comte . 
Kosciusko . 
Aubry the Butcher ? 
J. J. R. Caius Gracchus . 
Right of revision . 
Dufond . 
Four . 
Fall of the Girondists . 
Derbac . 
Maubuee . 
Washington . 
Pinson . 
1 pistol , 86 cartridges . 
Marseillaise . 
Sovereignty of the people . 
Michel . 
Quincampoix . 
Sword . 
Hoche . 
Marceau . 
Plato . 
Arbre-Sec . 
Warsaw . 
Tilly , crier of the Populaire . 
The honest bourgeois into whose hands this list fell knew its significance . 
It appears that this list was the complete nomenclature of the sections of the fourth arondissement of the Society of the Rights of Man , with the names and dwellings of the chiefs of sections . 
To-day , when all these facts which were obscure are nothing more than history , we may publish them . 
It should be added , that the foundation of the Society of the Rights of Man seems to have been posterior to the date when this paper was found . 
Perhaps this was only a rough draft . 
Still , according to all the remarks and the words , according to written notes , material facts begin to make their appearance . 
In the Rue Popincourt , in the house of a dealer in bric-abrac , there were seized seven sheets of gray paper , all folded alike lengthwise and in four ; these sheets enclosed twenty-six squares of this same gray paper folded in the form of a cartridge , and a card , on which was written the following : -- Saltpetre ... 12 ounces . 
Sulphur ... 2 ounces . 
Charcoal ... 2 ounces and a half . 
Water ... 2 ounces . 
The report of the seizure stated that the drawer exhaled a strong smell of powder . 
A mason returning from his day 's work , left behind him a little package on a bench near the bridge of Austerlitz . 
This package was taken to the police station . 
It was opened , and in it were found two printed dialogues , signed Lahautiere , a song entitled : `` Workmen , band together , '' and a tin box full of cartridges . 
One artisan drinking with a comrade made the latter feel him to see how warm he was ; the other man felt a pistol under his waistcoat . 
In a ditch on the boulevard , between Pere-Lachaise and the Barriere du Trone , at the most deserted spot , some children , while playing , discovered beneath a mass of shavings and refuse bits of wood , a bag containing a bullet-mould , a wooden punch for the preparation of cartridges , a wooden bowl , in which there were grains of hunting-powder , and a little cast-iron pot whose interior presented evident traces of melted lead . 
Police agents , making their way suddenly and unexpectedly at five o'clock in the morning , into the dwelling of a certain Pardon , who was afterwards a member of the Barricade-Merry section and got himself killed in the insurrection of April , 1834 , found him standing near his bed , and holding in his hand some cartridges which he was in the act of preparing . 
Towards the hour when workingmen repose , two men were seen to meet between the Barriere Picpus and the Barriere Charenton in a little lane between two walls , near a wine-shop , in front of which there was a `` Jeu de Siam . '' 
-LSB- 33 -RSB- One drew a pistol from beneath his blouse and handed it to the other . 
As he was handing it to him , he noticed that the perspiration of his chest had made the powder damp . 
He primed the pistol and added more powder to what was already in the pan . 
Then the two men parted . 
-LSB- 33 -RSB- A game of ninepins , in which one side of the ball is smaller than the other , so that it does not roll straight , but describes a curve on the ground . 
A certain Gallais , afterwards killed in the Rue Beaubourg in the affair of April , boasted of having in his house seven hundred cartridges and twenty-four flints . 
The government one day received a warning that arms and two hundred thousand cartridges had just been distributed in the faubourg . 
On the following week thirty thousand cartridges were distributed . 
The remarkable point about it was , that the police were not able to seize a single one . 
An intercepted letter read : `` The day is not far distant when , within four hours by the clock , eighty thousand patriots will be under arms . '' 
All this fermentation was public , one might almost say tranquil . 
The approaching insurrection was preparing its storm calmly in the face of the government . 
No singularity was lacking to this still subterranean crisis , which was already perceptible . 
The bourgeois talked peaceably to the working-classes of what was in preparation . 
They said : `` How is the rising coming along ? '' 
in the same tone in which they would have said : `` How is your wife ? '' 
A furniture-dealer , of the Rue Moreau , inquired : `` Well , when are you going to make the attack ? '' 
Another shop-keeper said : -- `` The attack will be made soon . '' 
`` I know it . 
A month ago , there were fifteen thousand of you , now there are twenty-five thousand . '' 
He offered his gun , and a neighbor offered a small pistol which he was willing to sell for seven francs . 
Moreover , the revolutionary fever was growing . 
Not a point in Paris nor in France was exempt from it . 
The artery was beating everywhere . 
Like those membranes which arise from certain inflammations and form in the human body , the network of secret societies began to spread all over the country . 
From the associations of the Friends of the People , which was at the same time public and secret , sprang the Society of the Rights of Man , which also dated from one of the orders of the day : Pluviose , Year 40 of the republican era , which was destined to survive even the mandate of the Court of Assizes which pronounced its dissolution , and which did not hesitate to bestow on its sections significant names like the following : -- Pikes . 
Tocsin . 
Signal cannon . 
Phrygian cap . 
January 21 . 
The beggars . 
The vagabonds . 
Forward march . 
Robespierre . 
Level . 
Ca Ira . 
The Society of the Rights of Man engendered the Society of Action . 
These were impatient individuals who broke away and hastened ahead . 
Other associations sought to recruit themselves from the great mother societies . 
The members of sections complained that they were torn asunder . 
Thus , the Gallic Society , and the committee of organization of the Municipalities . 
Thus the associations for the liberty of the press , for individual liberty , for the instruction of the people against indirect taxes . 
Then the Society of Equal Workingmen which was divided into three fractions , the levellers , the communists , the reformers . 
Then the Army of the Bastilles , a sort of cohort organized on a military footing , four men commanded by a corporal , ten by a sergeant , twenty by a sub-lieutenant , forty by a lieutenant ; there were never more than five men who knew each other . 
Creation where precaution is combined with audacity and which seemed stamped with the genius of Venice . 
The central committee , which was at the head , had two arms , the Society of Action , and the Army of the Bastilles . 
A legitimist association , the Chevaliers of Fidelity , stirred about among these the republican affiliations . 
It was denounced and repudiated there . 
The Parisian societies had ramifications in the principal cities , Lyons , Nantes , Lille , Marseilles , and each had its Society of the Rights of Man , the Charbonniere , and The Free Men . 
All had a revolutionary society which was called the Cougourde . 
We have already mentioned this word . 
In Paris , the Faubourg Saint-Marceau kept up an equal buzzing with the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , and the schools were no less moved than the faubourgs . 
A cafe in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the Seven Billiards , Rue des Mathurins-Saint-Jacques , served as rallying points for the students . 
The Society of the Friends of the A B C affiliated to the Mutualists of Angers , and to the Cougourde of Aix , met , as we have seen , in the Cafe Musain . 
These same young men assembled also , as we have stated already , in a restaurant wine-shop of the Rue Mondetour which was called Corinthe . 
These meetings were secret . 
Others were as public as possible , and the reader can judge of their boldness from these fragments of an interrogatory undergone in one of the ulterior prosecutions : `` Where was this meeting held ? '' 
`` In the Rue de la Paix . '' 
`` At whose house ? '' 
`` In the street . '' 
`` What sections were there ? '' 
`` Only one . '' 
`` Which ? '' 
`` The Manuel section . '' 
`` Who was its leader ? '' 
`` I. '' `` You are too young to have decided alone upon the bold course of attacking the government . 
Where did your instructions come from ? '' 
`` From the central committee . '' 
The army was mined at the same time as the population , as was proved subsequently by the operations of Beford , Luneville , and Epinard . 
They counted on the fifty-second regiment , on the fifth , on the eighth , on the thirty-seventh , and on the twentieth light cavalry . 
In Burgundy and in the southern towns they planted the liberty tree ; that is to say , a pole surmounted by a red cap . 
Such was the situation . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine , more than any other group of the population , as we stated in the beginning , accentuated this situation and made it felt . 
That was the sore point . 
This old faubourg , peopled like an ant-hill , laborious , courageous , and angry as a hive of bees , was quivering with expectation and with the desire for a tumult . 
Everything was in a state of agitation there , without any interruption , however , of the regular work . 
It is impossible to convey an idea of this lively yet sombre physiognomy . 
In this faubourg exists poignant distress hidden under attic roofs ; there also exist rare and ardent minds . 
It is particularly in the matter of distress and intelligence that it is dangerous to have extremes meet . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine had also other causes to tremble ; for it received the counter-shock of commercial crises , of failures , strikes , slack seasons , all inherent to great political disturbances . 
In times of revolution misery is both cause and effect . 
The blow which it deals rebounds upon it . 
This population full of proud virtue , capable to the highest degree of latent heat , always ready to fly to arms , prompt to explode , irritated , deep , undermined , seemed to be only awaiting the fall of a spark . 
Whenever certain sparks float on the horizon chased by the wind of events , it is impossible not to think of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and of the formidable chance which has placed at the very gates of Paris that powder-house of suffering and ideas . 
The wine-shops of the Faubourg Antoine , which have been more than once drawn in the sketches which the reader has just perused , possess historical notoriety . 
In troublous times people grow intoxicated there more on words than on wine . 
A sort of prophetic spirit and an afflatus of the future circulates there , swelling hearts and enlarging souls . 
The cabarets of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine resemble those taverns of Mont Aventine erected on the cave of the Sibyl and communicating with the profound and sacred breath ; taverns where the tables were almost tripods , and where was drunk what Ennius calls the sibylline wine . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine is a reservoir of people . 
Revolutionary agitations create fissures there , through which trickles the popular sovereignty . 
This sovereignty may do evil ; it can be mistaken like any other ; but , even when led astray , it remains great . 
We may say of it as of the blind cyclops , Ingens . 
In ' 93 , according as the idea which was floating about was good or evil , according as it was the day of fanaticism or of enthusiasm , there leaped forth from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine now savage legions , now heroic bands . 
Savage . 
Let us explain this word . 
When these bristling men , who in the early days of the revolutionary chaos , tattered , howling , wild , with uplifted bludgeon , pike on high , hurled themselves upon ancient Paris in an uproar , what did they want ? 
They wanted an end to oppression , an end to tyranny , an end to the sword , work for men , instruction for the child , social sweetness for the woman , liberty , equality , fraternity , bread for all , the idea for all , the Edenizing of the world . 
Progress ; and that holy , sweet , and good thing , progress , they claimed in terrible wise , driven to extremities as they were , half naked , club in fist , a roar in their mouths . 
They were savages , yes ; but the savages of civilization . 
They proclaimed right furiously ; they were desirous , if only with fear and trembling , to force the human race to paradise . 
They seemed barbarians , and they were saviours . 
They demanded light with the mask of night . 
Facing these men , who were ferocious , we admit , and terrifying , but ferocious and terrifying for good ends , there are other men , smiling , embroidered , gilded , beribboned , starred , in silk stockings , in white plumes , in yellow gloves , in varnished shoes , who , with their elbows on a velvet table , beside a marble chimney-piece , insist gently on demeanor and the preservation of the past , of the Middle Ages , of divine right , of fanaticism , of innocence , of slavery , of the death penalty , of war , glorifying in low tones and with politeness , the sword , the stake , and the scaffold . 
For our part , if we were forced to make a choice between the barbarians of civilization and the civilized men of barbarism , we should choose the barbarians . 
But , thank Heaven , still another choice is possible . 
No perpendicular fall is necessary , in front any more than in the rear . 
Neither despotism nor terrorism . 
We desire progress with a gentle slope . 
God takes care of that . 
God 's whole policy consists in rendering slopes less steep . 
ENJOLRAS AND HIS LIEUTENANTS It was about this epoch that Enjolras , in view of a possible catastrophe , instituted a kind of mysterious census . 
All were present at a secret meeting at the Cafe Musain . 
Enjolras said , mixing his words with a few half-enigmatical but significant metaphors : -- `` It is proper that we should know where we stand and on whom we may count . 
If combatants are required , they must be provided . 
It can do no harm to have something with which to strike . 
Passers-by always have more chance of being gored when there are bulls on the road than when there are none . 
Let us , therefore , reckon a little on the herd . 
How many of us are there ? 
There is no question of postponing this task until to-morrow . 
Revolutionists should always be hurried ; progress has no time to lose . 
Let us mistrust the unexpected . 
Let us not be caught unprepared . 
We must go over all the seams that we have made and see whether they hold fast . 
This business ought to be concluded to-day . 
Courfeyrac , you will see the polytechnic students . 
It is their day to go out . 
To-day is Wednesday . 
Feuilly , you will see those of the Glaciere , will you not ? 
Combeferre has promised me to go to Picpus . 
There is a perfect swarm and an excellent one there . 
Bahorel will visit the Estrapade . 
Prouvaire , the masons are growing lukewarm ; you will bring us news from the lodge of the Rue de Grenelle-Saint-Honore . 
Joly will go to Dupuytren 's clinical lecture , and feel the pulse of the medical school . 
Bossuet will take a little turn in the court and talk with the young law licentiates . 
I will take charge of the Cougourde myself . '' 
`` That arranges everything , '' said Courfeyrac . 
`` No . '' 
`` What else is there ? '' 
`` A very important thing . '' 
`` What is that ? '' 
asked Courfeyrac . 
`` The Barriere du Maine , '' replied Enjolras . 
Enjolras remained for a moment as though absorbed in reflection , then he resumed : -- `` At the Barriere du Maine there are marble-workers , painters , and journeymen in the studios of sculptors . 
They are an enthusiastic family , but liable to cool off . 
I do n't know what has been the matter with them for some time past . 
They are thinking of something else . 
They are becoming extinguished . 
They pass their time playing dominoes . 
There is urgent need that some one should go and talk with them a little , but with firmness . 
They meet at Richefeu 's . 
They are to be found there between twelve and one o'clock . 
Those ashes must be fanned into a glow . 
For that errand I had counted on that abstracted Marius , who is a good fellow on the whole , but he no longer comes to us . 
I need some one for the Barriere du Maine . 
I have no one . '' 
`` What about me ? '' 
said Grantaire . 
`` Here am I. '' `` You ? '' 
`` I. '' `` You indoctrinate republicans ! 
you warm up hearts that have grown cold in the name of principle ! '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` Are you good for anything ? '' 
`` I have a vague ambition in that direction , '' said Grantaire . 
`` You do not believe in everything . '' 
`` I believe in you . '' 
`` Grantaire will you do me a service ? '' 
`` Anything . 
I 'll black your boots . '' 
`` Well , do n't meddle with our affairs . 
Sleep yourself sober from your absinthe . '' 
`` You are an ingrate , Enjolras . '' 
`` You the man to go to the Barriere du Maine ! 
You capable of it ! '' 
`` I am capable of descending the Rue de Gres , of crossing the Place Saint-Michel , of sloping through the Rue Monsieur-le-Prince , of taking the Rue de Vaugirard , of passing the Carmelites , of turning into the Rue d'Assas , of reaching the Rue du Cherche-Midi , of leaving behind me the Conseil de Guerre , of pacing the Rue des Vielles Tuileries , of striding across the boulevard , of following the Chaussee du Maine , of passing the barrier , and entering Richefeu 's . 
I am capable of that . 
My shoes are capable of that . '' 
`` Do you know anything of those comrades who meet at Richefeu 's ? '' 
`` Not much . 
We only address each other as thou . '' 
`` What will you say to them ? '' 
`` I will speak to them of Robespierre , pardi ! 
Of Danton . 
Of principles . '' 
`` You ? '' 
`` I . 
But I do n't receive justice . 
When I set about it , I am terrible . 
I have read Prudhomme , I know the Social Contract , I know my constitution of the year Two by heart . 
` The liberty of one citizen ends where the liberty of another citizen begins . ' 
Do you take me for a brute ? 
I have an old bank-bill of the Republic in my drawer . 
The Rights of Man , the sovereignty of the people , sapristi ! 
I am even a bit of a Hebertist . 
I can talk the most superb twaddle for six hours by the clock , watch in hand . '' 
`` Be serious , '' said Enjolras . 
`` I am wild , '' replied Grantaire . 
Enjolras meditated for a few moments , and made the gesture of a man who has taken a resolution . 
`` Grantaire , '' he said gravely , `` I consent to try you . 
You shall go to the Barriere du Maine . '' 
Grantaire lived in furnished lodgings very near the Cafe Musain . 
He went out , and five minutes later he returned . 
He had gone home to put on a Robespierre waistcoat . 
`` Red , '' said he as he entered , and he looked intently at Enjolras . 
Then , with the palm of his energetic hand , he laid the two scarlet points of the waistcoat across his breast . 
And stepping up to Enjolras , he whispered in his ear : -- `` Be easy . '' 
He jammed his hat on resolutely and departed . 
A quarter of an hour later , the back room of the Cafe Musain was deserted . 
All the friends of the A B C were gone , each in his own direction , each to his own task . 
Enjolras , who had reserved the Cougourde of Aix for himself , was the last to leave . 
Those members of the Cougourde of Aix who were in Paris then met on the plain of Issy , in one of the abandoned quarries which are so numerous in that side of Paris . 
As Enjolras walked towards this place , he passed the whole situation in review in his own mind . 
The gravity of events was self-evident . 
When facts , the premonitory symptoms of latent social malady , move heavily , the slightest complication stops and entangles them . 
A phenomenon whence arises ruin and new births . 
Enjolras descried a luminous uplifting beneath the gloomy skirts of the future . 
Who knows ? 
Perhaps the moment was at hand . 
The people were again taking possession of right , and what a fine spectacle ! 
The revolution was again majestically taking possession of France and saying to the world : `` The sequel to-morrow ! '' 
Enjolras was content . 
The furnace was being heated . 
He had at that moment a powder train of friends scattered all over Paris . 
He composed , in his own mind , with Combeferre 's philosophical and penetrating eloquence , Feuilly 's cosmopolitan enthusiasm , Courfeyrac 's dash , Bahorel 's smile , Jean Prouvaire 's melancholy , Joly 's science , Bossuet 's sarcasms , a sort of electric spark which took fire nearly everywhere at once . 
All hands to work . 
Surely , the result would answer to the effort . 
This was well . 
This made him think of Grantaire . 
`` Hold , '' said he to himself , `` the Barriere du Maine will not take me far out of my way . 
What if I were to go on as far as Richefeu 's ? 
Let us have a look at what Grantaire is about , and see how he is getting on . '' 
One o'clock was striking from the Vaugirard steeple when Enjolras reached the Richefeu smoking-room . 
He pushed open the door , entered , folded his arms , letting the door fall to and strike his shoulders , and gazed at that room filled with tables , men , and smoke . 
A voice broke forth from the mist of smoke , interrupted by another voice . 
It was Grantaire holding a dialogue with an adversary . 
Grantaire was sitting opposite another figure , at a marble Saint-Anne table , strewn with grains of bran and dotted with dominos . 
He was hammering the table with his fist , and this is what Enjolras heard : -- `` Double-six . '' 
`` Fours . '' 
`` The pig ! 
I have no more . '' 
`` You are dead . 
A two . '' 
`` Six . '' 
`` Three . '' 
`` One . '' 
`` It 's my move . '' 
`` Four points . '' 
`` Not much . '' 
`` It 's your turn . '' 
`` I have made an enormous mistake . '' 
`` You are doing well . '' 
`` Fifteen . '' 
`` Seven more . '' 
`` That makes me twenty-two . '' 
-LSB- Thoughtfully , `` Twenty-two ! '' -RSB- 
`` You were n't expecting that double-six . 
If I had placed it at the beginning , the whole play would have been changed . '' 
`` A two again . '' 
`` One . '' 
`` One ! 
Well , five . '' 
`` I have n't any . '' 
`` It was your play , I believe ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Blank . '' 
`` What luck he has ! 
Ah ! 
You are lucky ! 
-LSB- Long revery . -RSB- 
Two . '' 
`` One . '' 
`` Neither five nor one . 
That 's bad for you . '' 
`` Domino . '' 
`` Plague take it ! '' 
THE LARK 'S MEADOW Marius had witnessed the unexpected termination of the ambush upon whose track he had set Javert ; but Javert had no sooner quitted the building , bearing off his prisoners in three hackney-coaches , than Marius also glided out of the house . 
It was only nine o'clock in the evening . 
Marius betook himself to Courfeyrac . 
Courfeyrac was no longer the imperturbable inhabitant of the Latin Quarter , he had gone to live in the Rue de la Verrerie `` for political reasons '' ; this quarter was one where , at that epoch , insurrection liked to install itself . 
Marius said to Courfeyrac : `` I have come to sleep with you . '' 
Courfeyrac dragged a mattress off his bed , which was furnished with two , spread it out on the floor , and said : `` There . '' 
At seven o'clock on the following morning , Marius returned to the hovel , paid the quarter 's rent which he owed to Ma'am Bougon , had his books , his bed , his table , his commode , and his two chairs loaded on a hand-cart and went off without leaving his address , so that when Javert returned in the course of the morning , for the purpose of questioning Marius as to the events of the preceding evening , he found only Ma'am Bougon , who answered : `` Moved away ! '' 
Ma'am Bougon was convinced that Marius was to some extent an accomplice of the robbers who had been seized the night before . 
`` Who would ever have said it ? '' 
she exclaimed to the portresses of the quarter , `` a young man like that , who had the air of a girl ! '' 
Marius had two reasons for this prompt change of residence . 
The first was , that he now had a horror of that house , where he had beheld , so close at hand , and in its most repulsive and most ferocious development , a social deformity which is , perhaps , even more terrible than the wicked rich man , the wicked poor man . 
The second was , that he did not wish to figure in the lawsuit which would insue in all probability , and be brought in to testify against Thenardier . 
Javert thought that the young man , whose name he had forgotten , was afraid , and had fled , or perhaps , had not even returned home at the time of the ambush ; he made some efforts to find him , however , but without success . 
A month passed , then another . 
Marius was still with Courfeyrac . 
He had learned from a young licentiate in law , an habitual frequenter of the courts , that Thenardier was in close confinement . 
Every Monday , Marius had five francs handed in to the clerk 's office of La Force for Thenardier . 
As Marius had no longer any money , he borrowed the five francs from Courfeyrac . 
It was the first time in his life that he had ever borrowed money . 
These periodical five francs were a double riddle to Courfeyrac who lent and to Thenardier who received them . 
`` To whom can they go ? '' 
thought Courfeyrac . 
`` Whence can this come to me ? '' 
Thenardier asked himself . 
Moreover , Marius was heart-broken . 
Everything had plunged through a trap-door once more . 
He no longer saw anything before him ; his life was again buried in mystery where he wandered fumblingly . 
He had for a moment beheld very close at hand , in that obscurity , the young girl whom he loved , the old man who seemed to be her father , those unknown beings , who were his only interest and his only hope in this world ; and , at the very moment when he thought himself on the point of grasping them , a gust had swept all these shadows away . 
Not a spark of certainty and truth had been emitted even in the most terrible of collisions . 
No conjecture was possible . 
He no longer knew even the name that he thought he knew . 
It certainly was not Ursule . 
And the Lark was a nickname . 
And what was he to think of the old man ? 
Was he actually in hiding from the police ? 
The white-haired workman whom Marius had encountered in the vicinity of the Invalides recurred to his mind . 
It now seemed probable that that workingman and M. Leblanc were one and the same person . 
So he disguised himself ? 
That man had his heroic and his equivocal sides . 
Why had he not called for help ? 
Why had he fled ? 
Was he , or was he not , the father of the young girl ? 
Was he , in short , the man whom Thenardier thought that he recognized ? 
Thenardier might have been mistaken . 
These formed so many insoluble problems . 
All this , it is true , detracted nothing from the angelic charms of the young girl of the Luxembourg . 
Heart-rending distress ; Marius bore a passion in his heart , and night over his eyes . 
He was thrust onward , he was drawn , and he could not stir . 
All had vanished , save love . 
Of love itself he had lost the instincts and the sudden illuminations . 
Ordinarily , this flame which burns us lights us also a little , and casts some useful gleams without . 
But Marius no longer even heard these mute counsels of passion . 
He never said to himself : `` What if I were to go to such a place ? 
What if I were to try such and such a thing ? '' 
