Former days did not recognize Yesterday . 
People no longer had the feeling for what was grand . 
There was some one who called Bonaparte Scapin . 
This Society no longer exists . 
Nothing of it , we repeat , exists to-day . 
When we select from it some one figure at random , and attempt to make it live again in thought , it seems as strange to us as the world before the Deluge . 
It is because it , too , as a matter of fact , has been engulfed in a deluge . 
It has disappeared beneath two Revolutions . 
What billows are ideas ! 
How quickly they cover all that it is their mission to destroy and to bury , and how promptly they create frightful gulfs ! 
Such was the physiognomy of the salons of those distant and candid times when M. Martainville had more wit than Voltaire . 
These salons had a literature and politics of their own . 
They believed in Fievee . 
M. Agier laid down the law in them . 
They commentated M. Colnet , the old bookseller and publicist of the Quay Malaquais . 
Napoleon was to them thoroughly the Corsican Ogre . 
Later on the introduction into history of M. le Marquis de Bonaparte , Lieutenant-General of the King 's armies , was a concession to the spirit of the age . 
These salons did not long preserve their purity . 
Beginning with 1818 , doctrinarians began to spring up in them , a disturbing shade . 
Their way was to be Royalists and to excuse themselves for being so . 
Where the ultras were very proud , the doctrinarians were rather ashamed . 
They had wit ; they had silence ; their political dogma was suitably impregnated with arrogance ; they should have succeeded . 
They indulged , and usefully too , in excesses in the matter of white neckties and tightly buttoned coats . 
The mistake or the misfortune of the doctrinarian party was to create aged youth . 
They assumed the poses of wise men . 
They dreamed of engrafting a temperate power on the absolute and excessive principle . 
They opposed , and sometimes with rare intelligence , conservative liberalism to the liberalism which demolishes . 
They were heard to say : `` Thanks for Royalism ! 
It has rendered more than one service . 
It has brought back tradition , worship , religion , respect . 
It is faithful , brave , chivalric , loving , devoted . 
It has mingled , though with regret , the secular grandeurs of the monarchy with the new grandeurs of the nation . 
Its mistake is not to understand the Revolution , the Empire , glory , liberty , young ideas , young generations , the age . 
But this mistake which it makes with regard to us , -- have we not sometimes been guilty of it towards them ? 
The Revolution , whose heirs we are , ought to be intelligent on all points . 
To attack Royalism is a misconstruction of liberalism . 
What an error ! 
And what blindness ! 
Revolutionary France is wanting in respect towards historic France , that is to say , towards its mother , that is to say , towards itself . 
After the 5th of September , the nobility of the monarchy is treated as the nobility of the Empire was treated after the 5th of July . 
They were unjust to the eagle , we are unjust to the fleur-de-lys . 
It seems that we must always have something to proscribe ! 
Does it serve any purpose to ungild the crown of Louis XIV. , to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV . ? 
We scoff at M. de Vaublanc for erasing the N 's from the bridge of Jena ! 
What was it that he did ? 
What are we doing ? 
Bouvines belongs to us as well as Marengo . 
The fleurs-de-lys are ours as well as the N 's . 
That is our patrimony . 
To what purpose shall we diminish it ? 
We must not deny our country in the past any more than in the present . 
Why not accept the whole of history ? 
Why not love the whole of France ? 
It is thus that doctrinarians criticised and protected Royalism , which was displeased at criticism and furious at protection . 
The ultras marked the first epoch of Royalism , congregation characterized the second . 
Skill follows ardor . 
Let us confine ourselves here to this sketch . 
In the course of this narrative , the author of this book has encountered in his path this curious moment of contemporary history ; he has been forced to cast a passing glance upon it , and to trace once more some of the singular features of this society which is unknown to-day . 
But he does it rapidly and without any bitter or derisive idea . 
Souvenirs both respectful and affectionate , for they touch his mother , attach him to this past . 
Moreover , let us remark , this same petty world had a grandeur of its own . 
One may smile at it , but one can neither despise nor hate it . 
It was the France of former days . 
Marius Pontmercy pursued some studies , as all children do . 
When he emerged from the hands of Aunt Gillenormand , his grandfather confided him to a worthy professor of the most purely classic innocence . 
This young soul which was expanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant . 
Marius went through his years of college , then he entered the law school . 
He was a Royalist , fanatical and severe . 
He did not love his grandfather much , as the latter 's gayety and cynicism repelled him , and his feelings towards his father were gloomy . 
He was , on the whole , a cold and ardent , noble , generous , proud , religious , enthusiastic lad ; dignified to harshness , pure to shyness . 
END OF THE BRIGAND The conclusion of Marius ' classical studies coincided with M. Gillenormand 's departure from society . 
The old man bade farewell to the Faubourg Saint-Germain and to Madame de T. 's salon , and established himself in the Mardis , in his house of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
There he had for servants , in addition to the porter , that chambermaid , Nicolette , who had succeeded to Magnon , and that short-breathed and pursy Basque , who have been mentioned above . 
In 1827 , Marius had just attained his seventeenth year . 
One evening , on his return home , he saw his grandfather holding a letter in his hand . 
`` Marius , '' said M. Gillenormand , `` you will set out for Vernon to-morrow . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` To see your father . '' 
Marius was seized with a trembling fit . 
He had thought of everything except this -- that he should one day be called upon to see his father . 
Nothing could be more unexpected , more surprising , and , let us admit it , more disagreeable to him . 
It was forcing estrangement into reconciliation . 
It was not an affliction , but it was an unpleasant duty . 
Marius , in addition to his motives of political antipathy , was convinced that his father , the slasher , as M. Gillenormand called him on his amiable days , did not love him ; this was evident , since he had abandoned him to others . 
Feeling that he was not beloved , he did not love . 
`` Nothing is more simple , '' he said to himself . 
He was so astounded that he did not question M. Gillenormand . 
The grandfather resumed : -- `` It appears that he is ill . 
He demands your presence . '' 
And after a pause , he added : -- `` Set out to-morrow morning . 
I think there is a coach which leaves the Cour des Fontaines at six o'clock , and which arrives in the evening . 
Take it . 
He says that here is haste . '' 
Then he crushed the letter in his hand and thrust it into his pocket . 
Marius might have set out that very evening and have been with his father on the following morning . 
A diligence from the Rue du Bouloi took the trip to Rouen by night at that date , and passed through Vernon . 
Neither Marius nor M.Gillenormand thought of making inquiries about it . 
The next day , at twilight , Marius reached Vernon . 
People were just beginning to light their candles . 
He asked the first person whom be met for `` M. Pontmercy 's house . '' 
For in his own mind , he agreed with the Restoration , and like it , did not recognize his father 's claim to the title of either colonel or baron . 
The house was pointed out to him . 
He rang ; a woman with a little lamp in her hand opened the door . 
`` M. Pontmercy ? '' 
said Marius . 
The woman remained motionless . 
`` Is this his house ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
The woman nodded affirmatively . 
`` Can I speak with him ? '' 
The woman shook her head . 
`` But I am his son ! '' 
persisted Marius . 
`` He is expecting me . '' 
`` He no longer expects you , '' said the woman . 
Then he perceived that she was weeping . 
She pointed to the door of a room on the ground-floor ; he entered . 
In that room , which was lighted by a tallow candle standing on the chimney-piece , there were three men , one standing erect , another kneeling , and one lying at full length , on the floor in his shirt . 
The one on the floor was the colonel . 
The other two were the doctor , and the priest , who was engaged in prayer . 
The colonel had been attacked by brain fever three days previously . 
As he had a foreboding of evil at the very beginning of his illness , he had written to M. Gillenormand to demand his son . 
The malady had grown worse . 
On the very evening of Marius ' arrival at Vernon , the colonel had had an attack of delirium ; he had risen from his bed , in spite of the servant 's efforts to prevent him , crying : `` My son is not coming ! 
I shall go to meet him ! '' 
Then he ran out of his room and fell prostrate on the floor of the antechamber . 
He had just expired . 
The doctor had been summoned , and the cure . 
The doctor had arrived too late . 
The son had also arrived too late . 
By the dim light of the candle , a large tear could be distinguished on the pale and prostrate colonel 's cheek , where it had trickled from his dead eye . 
The eye was extinguished , but the tear was not yet dry . 
That tear was his son 's delay . 
Marius gazed upon that man whom he beheld for the first time , on that venerable and manly face , on those open eyes which saw not , on those white locks , those robust limbs , on which , here and there , brown lines , marking sword-thrusts , and a sort of red stars , which indicated bullet-holes , were visible . 
He contemplated that gigantic sear which stamped heroism on that countenance upon which God had imprinted goodness . 
He reflected that this man was his father , and that this man was dead , and a chill ran over him . 
The sorrow which he felt was the sorrow which he would have felt in the presence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched out in death . 
Anguish , poignant anguish , was in that chamber . 
The servant-woman was lamenting in a corner , the cure was praying , and his sobs were audible , the doctor was wiping his eyes ; the corpse itself was weeping . 
The doctor , the priest , and the woman gazed at Marius in the midst of their affliction without uttering a word ; he was the stranger there . 
Marius , who was far too little affected , felt ashamed and embarrassed at his own attitude ; he held his hat in his hand ; and he dropped it on the floor , in order to produce the impression that grief had deprived him of the strength to hold it . 
At the same time , he experienced remorse , and he despised himself for behaving in this manner . 
But was it his fault ? 
He did not love his father ? 
Why should he ! 
The colonel had left nothing . 
The sale of big furniture barely paid the expenses of his burial . 
The servant found a scrap of paper , which she handed to Marius . 
It contained the following , in the colonel 's handwriting : -- `` For my son . 
-- The Emperor made me a Baron on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I purchased with my blood , my son shall take it and bear it . 
That he will be worthy of it is a matter of course . '' 
Below , the colonel had added : `` At that same battle of Waterloo , a sergeant saved my life . 
The man 's name was Thenardier . 
I think that he has recently been keeping a little inn , in a village in the neighborhood of Paris , at Chelles or Montfermeil . 
If my son meets him , he will do all the good he can to Thenardier . '' 
Marius took this paper and preserved it , not out of duty to his father , but because of that vague respect for death which is always imperious in the heart of man . 
Nothing remained of the colonel . 
M. Gillenormand had his sword and uniform sold to an old-clothes dealer . 
The neighbors devastated the garden and pillaged the rare flowers . 
The other plants turned to nettles and weeds , and died . 
Marius remained only forty-eight hours at Vernon . 
After the interment he returned to Paris , and applied himself again to his law studies , with no more thought of his father than if the latter had never lived . 
In two days the colonel was buried , and in three forgotten . 
Marius wore crape on his hat . 
That was all . 
THE UTILITY OF GOING TO MASS , IN ORDER TO BECOME A REVOLUTIONIST Marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood . 
One Sunday , when he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice , at that same chapel of the Virgin whither his aunt had led him when a small lad , he placed himself behind a pillar , being more absent-minded and thoughtful than usual on that occasion , and knelt down , without paying any special heed , upon a chair of Utrecht velvet , on the back of which was inscribed this name : Monsieur Mabeuf , warden . 
Mass had hardly begun when an old man presented himself and said to Marius : -- `` This is my place , sir . '' 
Marius stepped aside promptly , and the old man took possession of his chair . 
The mass concluded , Marius still stood thoughtfully a few paces distant ; the old man approached him again and said : -- `` I beg your pardon , sir , for having disturbed you a while ago , and for again disturbing you at this moment ; you must have thought me intrusive , and I will explain myself . '' 
`` There is no need of that , Sir , '' said Marius . 
`` Yes ! '' 
went on the old man , `` I do not wish you to have a bad opinion of me . 
You see , I am attached to this place . 
It seems to me that the mass is better from here . 
Why ? 
I will tell you . 
It is from this place , that I have watched a poor , brave father come regularly , every two or three months , for the last ten years , since he had no other opportunity and no other way of seeing his child , because he was prevented by family arrangements . 
He came at the hour when he knew that his son would be brought to mass . 
The little one never suspected that his father was there . 
Perhaps he did not even know that he had a father , poor innocent ! 
The father kept behind a pillar , so that he might not be seen . 
He gazed at his child and he wept . 
He adored that little fellow , poor man ! 
I could see that . 
This spot has become sanctified in my sight , and I have contracted a habit of coming hither to listen to the mass . 
I prefer it to the stall to which I have a right , in my capacity of warden . 
I knew that unhappy gentleman a little , too . 
He had a father-in-law , a wealthy aunt , relatives , I do n't know exactly what all , who threatened to disinherit the child if he , the father , saw him . 
He sacrificed himself in order that his son might be rich and happy some day . 
He was separated from him because of political opinions . 
Certainly , I approve of political opinions , but there are people who do not know where to stop . 
Mon Dieu ! 
a man is not a monster because he was at Waterloo ; a father is not separated from his child for such a reason as that . 
He was one of Bonaparte 's colonels . 
He is dead , I believe . 
He lived at Vernon , where I have a brother who is a cure , and his name was something like Pontmarie or Montpercy . 
He had a fine sword-cut , on my honor . '' 
`` Pontmercy , '' suggested Marius , turning pale . 
`` Precisely , Pontmercy . 
Did you know him ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , `` he was my father . '' 
The old warden clasped his hands and exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
you are the child ! 
Yes , that 's true , he must be a man by this time . 
Well ! 
poor child , you may say that you had a father who loved you dearly ! '' 
Marius offered his arm to the old man and conducted him to his lodgings . 
On the following day , he said to M. Gillenormand : -- `` I have arranged a hunting-party with some friends . 
Will you permit me to be absent for three days ? '' 
`` Four ! '' 
replied his grandfather . 
`` Go and amuse yourself . '' 
And he said to his daughter in a low tone , and with a wink , `` Some love affair ! '' 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN Where it was that Marius went will be disclosed a little further on . 
Marius was absent for three days , then he returned to Paris , went straight to the library of the law-school and asked for the files of the Moniteur . 
He read the Moniteur , he read all the histories of the Republic and the Empire , the Memorial de Sainte-Helene , all the memoirs , all the newspapers , the bulletins , the proclamations ; he devoured everything . 
The first time that he came across his father 's name in the bulletins of the grand army , he had a fever for a week . 
He went to see the generals under whom Georges Pontmercy had served , among others , Comte H. Church-warden Mabeuf , whom he went to see again , told him about the life at Vernon , the colonel 's retreat , his flowers , his solitude . 
Marius came to a full knowledge of that rare , sweet , and sublime man , that species of lion-lamb who had been his father . 
In the meanwhile , occupied as he was with this study which absorbed all his moments as well as his thoughts , he hardly saw the Gillenormands at all . 
He made his appearance at meals ; then they searched for him , and he was not to be found . 
Father Gillenormand smiled . 
`` Bah ! 
bah ! 
He is just of the age for the girls ! '' 
Sometimes the old man added : `` The deuce ! 
I thought it was only an affair of gallantry , It seems that it is an affair of passion ! '' 
It was a passion , in fact . 
Marius was on the high road to adoring his father . 
At the same time , his ideas underwent an extraordinary change . 
The phases of this change were numerous and successive . 
As this is the history of many minds of our day , we think it will prove useful to follow these phases step by step and to indicate them all . 
That history upon which he had just cast his eyes appalled him . 
The first effect was to dazzle him . 
Up to that time , the Republic , the Empire , had been to him only monstrous words . 
The Republic , a guillotine in the twilight ; the Empire , a sword in the night . 
He had just taken a look at it , and where he had expected to find only a chaos of shadows , he had beheld , with a sort of unprecedented surprise , mingled with fear and joy , stars sparkling , Mirabeau , Vergniaud , Saint-Just , Robespierre , Camille , Desmoulins , Danton , and a sun arise , Napoleon . 
He did not know where he stood . 
He recoiled , blinded by the brilliant lights . 
Little by little , when his astonishment had passed off , he grew accustomed to this radiance , he contemplated these deeds without dizziness , he examined these personages without terror ; the Revolution and the Empire presented themselves luminously , in perspective , before his mind 's eye ; he beheld each of these groups of events and of men summed up in two tremendous facts : the Republic in the sovereignty of civil right restored to the masses , the Empire in the sovereignty of the French idea imposed on Europe ; he beheld the grand figure of the people emerge from the Revolution , and the grand figure of France spring forth from the Empire . 
He asserted in his conscience , that all this had been good . 
What his dazzled state neglected in this , his first far too synthetic estimation , we do not think it necessary to point out here . 
It is the state of a mind on the march that we are recording . 
Progress is not accomplished in one stage . 
That stated , once for all , in connection with what precedes as well as with what is to follow , we continue . 
He then perceived that , up to that moment , he had comprehended his country no more than he had comprehended his father . 
He had not known either the one or the other , and a sort of voluntary night had obscured his eyes . 
Now he saw , and on the one hand he admired , while on the other he adored . 
He was filled with regret and remorse , and he reflected in despair that all he had in his soul could now be said only to the tomb . 
Oh ! 
if his father had still been in existence , if he had still had him , if God , in his compassion and his goodness , had permitted his father to be still among the living , how he would have run , how he would have precipitated himself , how he would have cried to his father : `` Father ! 
Here I am ! 
It is I ! 
I have the same heart as thou ! 
I am thy son ! '' 
How he would have embraced that white head , bathed his hair in tears , gazed upon his scar , pressed his hands , adored his garment , kissed his feet ! 
Oh ! 
Why had his father died so early , before his time , before the justice , the love of his son had come to him ? 
Marius had a continual sob in his heart , which said to him every moment : `` Alas ! '' 
At the same time , he became more truly serious , more truly grave , more sure of his thought and his faith . 
At each instant , gleams of the true came to complete his reason . 
An inward growth seemed to be in progress within him . 
He was conscious of a sort of natural enlargement , which gave him two things that were new to him -- his father and his country . 
As everything opens when one has a key , so he explained to himself that which he had hated , he penetrated that which he had abhorred ; henceforth he plainly perceived the providential , divine and human sense of the great things which he had been taught to detest , and of the great men whom he had been instructed to curse . 
When he reflected on his former opinions , which were but those of yesterday , and which , nevertheless , seemed to him already so very ancient , he grew indignant , yet he smiled . 
From the rehabilitation of his father , he naturally passed to the rehabilitation of Napoleon . 
But the latter , we will confess , was not effected without labor . 
From his infancy , he had been imbued with the judgments of the party of 1814 , on Bonaparte . 
Now , all the prejudices of the Restoration , all its interests , all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon . 
It execrated him even more than it did Robespierre . 
It had very cleverly turned to sufficiently good account the fatigue of the nation , and the hatred of mothers . 
Bonaparte had become an almost fabulous monster , and in order to paint him to the imagination of the people , which , as we lately pointed out , resembles the imagination of children , the party of 1814 made him appear under all sorts of terrifying masks in succession , from that which is terrible though it remains grandiose to that which is terrible and becomes grotesque , from Tiberius to the bugaboo . 
Thus , in speaking of Bonaparte , one was free to sob or to puff up with laughter , provided that hatred lay at the bottom . 
Marius had never entertained -- about that man , as he was called -- any other ideas in his mind . 
They had combined with the tenacity which existed in his nature . 
There was in him a headstrong little man who hated Napoleon . 
On reading history , on studying him , especially in the documents and materials for history , the veil which concealed Napoleon from the eyes of Marius was gradually rent . 
He caught a glimpse of something immense , and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment , on the score of Bonaparte as about all the rest ; each day he saw more distinctly ; and he set about mounting , slowly , step by step , almost regretfully in the beginning , then with intoxication and as though attracted by an irresistible fascination , first the sombre steps , then the vaguely illuminated steps , at last the luminous and splendid steps of enthusiasm . 
One night , he was alone in his little chamber near the roof . 
His candle was burning ; he was reading , with his elbows resting on his table close to the open window . 
All sorts of reveries reached him from space , and mingled with his thoughts . 
What a spectacle is the night ! 
One hears dull sounds , without knowing whence they proceed ; one beholds Jupiter , which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth , glowing like a firebrand , the azure is black , the stars shine ; it is formidable . 
He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army , those heroic strophes penned on the field of battle ; there , at intervals , he beheld his father 's name , always the name of the Emperor ; the whole of that great Empire presented itself to him ; he felt a flood swelling and rising within him ; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close to him like a breath , and whispered in his ear ; he gradually got into a singular state ; he thought that he heard drums , cannon , trumpets , the measured tread of battalions , the dull and distant gallop of the cavalry ; from time to time , his eyes were raised heavenward , and gazed upon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless depths of space , then they fell upon his book once more , and there they beheld other colossal things moving confusedly . 
His heart contracted within him . 
He was in a transport , trembling , panting . 
All at once , without himself knowing what was in him , and what impulse he was obeying , he sprang to his feet , stretched both arms out of the window , gazed intently into the gloom , the silence , the infinite darkness , the eternal immensity , and exclaimed : `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
From that moment forth , all was over ; the Ogre of Corsica , -- the usurper , -- the tyrant , -- the monster who was the lover of his own sisters , -- the actor who took lessons of Talma , -- the poisoner of Jaffa , -- the tiger , -- Buonaparte , -- all this vanished , and gave place in his mind to a vague and brilliant radiance in which shone , at an inaccessible height , the pale marble phantom of Caesar . 
The Emperor had been for his father only the well-beloved captain whom one admires , for whom one sacrifices one 's self ; he was something more to Marius . 
He was the predestined constructor of the French group , succeeding the Roman group in the domination of the universe . 
He was a prodigious architect , of a destruction , the continuer of Charlemagne , of Louis XI. , of Henry IV. , of Richelieu , of Louis XIV. , and of the Committee of Public Safety , having his spots , no doubt , his faults , his crimes even , being a man , that is to say ; but august in his faults , brilliant in his spots , powerful in his crime . 
He was the predestined man , who had forced all nations to say : `` The great nation ! '' 
He was better than that , he was the very incarnation of France , conquering Europe by the sword which he grasped , and the world by the light which he shed . 
Marius saw in Bonaparte the dazzling spectre which will always rise upon the frontier , and which will guard the future . 
Despot but dictator ; a despot resulting from a republic and summing up a revolution . 
Napoleon became for him the man-people as Jesus Christ is the man-God . 
It will be perceived , that like all new converts to a religion , his conversion intoxicated him , he hurled himself headlong into adhesion and he went too far . 
His nature was so constructed ; once on the downward slope , it was almost impossible for him to put on the drag . 
Fanaticism for the sword took possession of him , and complicated in his mind his enthusiasm for the idea . 
He did not perceive that , along with genius , and pell-mell , he was admitting force , that is to say , that he was installing in two compartments of his idolatry , on the one hand that which is divine , on the other that which is brutal . 
In many respects , he had set about deceiving himself otherwise . 
He admitted everything . 
There is a way of encountering error while on one 's way to the truth . 
He had a violent sort of good faith which took everything in the lump . 
In the new path which he had entered on , in judging the mistakes of the old regime , as in measuring the glory of Napoleon , he neglected the attenuating circumstances . 
At all events , a tremendous step had been taken . 
Where he had formerly beheld the fall of the monarchy , he now saw the advent of France . 
His orientation had changed . 
What had been his East became the West . 
He had turned squarely round . 
All these revolutions were accomplished within him , without his family obtaining an inkling of the case . 
When , during this mysterious labor , he had entirely shed his old Bourbon and ultra skin , when he had cast off the aristocrat , the Jacobite and the Royalist , when he had become thoroughly a revolutionist , profoundly democratic and republican , he went to an engraver on the Quai des Orfevres and ordered a hundred cards bearing this name : Le Baron Marius Pontmercy . 
This was only the strictly logical consequence of the change which had taken place in him , a change in which everything gravitated round his father . 
Only , as he did not know any one and could not sow his cards with any porter , he put them in his pocket . 
By another natural consequence , in proportion as he drew nearer to his father , to the latter 's memory , and to the things for which the colonel had fought five and twenty years before , he receded from his grandfather . 
We have long ago said , that M. Gillenormand 's temper did not please him . 
There already existed between them all the dissonances of the grave young man and the frivolous old man . 
The gayety of Geronte shocks and exasperates the melancholy of Werther . 
So long as the same political opinions and the same ideas had been common to them both , Marius had met M. Gillenormand there as on a bridge . 
When the bridge fell , an abyss was formed . 
And then , over and above all , Marius experienced unutterable impulses to revolt , when he reflected that it was M. Gillenormand who had , from stupid motives , torn him ruthlessly from the colonel , thus depriving the father of the child , and the child of the father . 
By dint of pity for his father , Marius had nearly arrived at aversion for his grandfather . 
Nothing of this sort , however , was betrayed on the exterior , as we have already said . 
Only he grew colder and colder ; laconic at meals , and rare in the house . 
When his aunt scolded him for it , he was very gentle and alleged his studies , his lectures , the examinations , etc. , as a pretext . 
His grandfather never departed from his infallible diagnosis : `` In love ! 
I know all about it . '' 
From time to time Marius absented himself . 
`` Where is it that he goes off like this ? '' 
said his aunt . 
On one of these trips , which were always very brief , he went to Montfermeil , in order to obey the injunction which his father had left him , and he sought the old sergeant to Waterloo , the inn-keeper Thenardier . 
Thenardier had failed , the inn was closed , and no one knew what had become of him . 
Marius was away from the house for four days on this quest . 
`` He is getting decidedly wild , '' said his grandfather . 
They thought they had noticed that he wore something on his breast , under his shirt , which was attached to his neck by a black ribbon . 
SOME PETTICOAT We have mentioned a lancer . 
He was a great-grand-nephew of M. Gillenormand , on the paternal side , who led a garrison life , outside the family and far from the domestic hearth . 
Lieutenant Theodule Gillenormand fulfilled all the conditions required to make what is called a fine officer . 
He had `` a lady 's waist , '' a victorious manner of trailing his sword and of twirling his mustache in a hook . 
He visited Paris very rarely , and so rarely that Marius had never seen him . 
The cousins knew each other only by name . 
We think we have said that Theodule was the favorite of Aunt Gillenormand , who preferred him because she did not see him . 
Not seeing people permits one to attribute to them all possible perfections . 
One morning , Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder returned to her apartment as much disturbed as her placidity was capable of allowing . 
Marius had just asked his grandfather 's permission to take a little trip , adding that he meant to set out that very evening . 
`` Go ! '' 
had been his grandfather 's reply , and M. Gillenormand had added in an aside , as he raised his eyebrows to the top of his forehead : `` Here he is passing the night out again . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand had ascended to her chamber greatly puzzled , and on the staircase had dropped this exclamation : `` This is too much ! '' 
-- and this interrogation : `` But where is it that he goes ? '' 
She espied some adventure of the heart , more or less illicit , a woman in the shadow , a rendezvous , a mystery , and she would not have been sorry to thrust her spectacles into the affair . 
Tasting a mystery resembles getting the first flavor of a scandal ; sainted souls do not detest this . 
There is some curiosity about scandal in the secret compartments of bigotry . 
So she was the prey of a vague appetite for learning a history . 
In order to get rid of this curiosity which agitated her a little beyond her wont , she took refuge in her talents , and set about scalloping , with one layer of cotton after another , one of those embroideries of the Empire and the Restoration , in which there are numerous cart-wheels . 
The work was clumsy , the worker cross . 
She had been seated at this for several hours when the door opened . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand raised her nose . 
Lieutenant Theodule stood before her , making the regulation salute . 
She uttered a cry of delight . 
One may be old , one may be a prude , one may be pious , one may be an aunt , but it is always agreeable to see a lancer enter one 's chamber . 
`` You here , Theodule ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
`` On my way through town , aunt . '' 
`` Embrace me . '' 
`` Here goes ! '' 
said Theodule . 
And he kissed her . 
Aunt Gillenormand went to her writing-desk and opened it . 
`` You will remain with us a week at least ? '' 
`` I leave this very evening , aunt . '' 
`` It is not possible ! '' 
`` Mathematically ! '' 
`` Remain , my little Theodule , I beseech you . '' 
`` My heart says ` yes , ' but my orders say ` no . ' 
The matter is simple . 
They are changing our garrison ; we have been at Melun , we are being transferred to Gaillon . 
It is necessary to pass through Paris in order to get from the old post to the new one . 
I said : ` I am going to see my aunt . ' '' 
`` Here is something for your trouble . '' 
And she put ten louis into his hand . 
`` For my pleasure , you mean to say , my dear aunt . '' 
Theodule kissed her again , and she experienced the joy of having some of the skin scratched from her neck by the braidings on his uniform . 
`` Are you making the journey on horseback , with your regiment ? '' 
she asked him . 
`` No , aunt . 
I wanted to see you . 
I have special permission . 
My servant is taking my horse ; I am travelling by diligence . 
And , by the way , I want to ask you something . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Is my cousin Marius Pontmercy travelling so , too ? '' 
`` How do you know that ? '' 
said his aunt , suddenly pricked to the quick with a lively curiosity . 
`` On my arrival , I went to the diligence to engage my seat in the coupe . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` A traveller had already come to engage a seat in the imperial . 
I saw his name on the card . '' 
`` What name ? '' 
`` Marius Pontmercy . '' 
`` The wicked fellow ! '' 
exclaimed his aunt . 
`` Ah ! 
your cousin is not a steady lad like yourself . 
To think that he is to pass the night in a diligence ! '' 
`` Just as I am going to do . '' 
`` But you -- it is your duty ; in his case , it is wildness . '' 
`` Bosh ! '' 
said Theodule . 
Here an event occurred to Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder , -- an idea struck her . 
If she had been a man , she would have slapped her brow . 
She apostrophized Theodule : -- `` Are you aware whether your cousin knows you ? '' 
`` No . 
I have seen him ; but he has never deigned to notice me . '' 
`` So you are going to travel together ? '' 
`` He in the imperial , I in the coupe . '' 
`` Where does this diligence run ? '' 
`` To Andelys . '' 
`` Then that is where Marius is going ? '' 
`` Unless , like myself , he should stop on the way . 
I get down at Vernon , in order to take the branch coach for Gaillon . 
I know nothing of Marius ' plan of travel . '' 
`` Marius ! 
what an ugly name ! 
what possessed them to name him Marius ? 
While you , at least , are called Theodule . '' 
`` I would rather be called Alfred , '' said the officer . 
`` Listen , Theodule . '' 
`` I am listening , aunt . '' 
`` Pay attention . '' 
`` I am paying attention . '' 
`` You understand ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , Marius absents himself ! '' 
`` Eh ! 
eh ! '' 
`` He travels . '' 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! '' 
`` He spends the night out . '' 
`` Oh ! 
oh ! '' 
`` We should like to know what there is behind all this . '' 
Theodule replied with the composure of a man of bronze : -- `` Some petticoat or other . '' 
And with that inward laugh which denotes certainty , he added : -- `` A lass . '' 
`` That is evident , '' exclaimed his aunt , who thought she heard M. Gillenormand speaking , and who felt her conviction become irresistible at that word fillette , accentuated in almost the very same fashion by the granduncle and the grandnephew . 
She resumed : -- `` Do us a favor . 
Follow Marius a little . 
He does not know you , it will be easy . 
Since a lass there is , try to get a sight of her . 
You must write us the tale . 
It will amuse his grandfather . '' 
Theodule had no excessive taste for this sort of spying ; but he was much touched by the ten louis , and he thought he saw a chance for a possible sequel . 
He accepted the commission and said : `` As you please , aunt . '' 
And he added in an aside , to himself : `` Here I am a duenna . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand embraced him . 
`` You are not the man to play such pranks , Theodule . 
You obey discipline , you are the slave of orders , you are a man of scruples and duty , and you would not quit your family to go and see a creature . '' 
The lancer made the pleased grimace of Cartouche when praised for his probity . 
Marius , on the evening following this dialogue , mounted the diligence without suspecting that he was watched . 
As for the watcher , the first thing he did was to fall asleep . 
His slumber was complete and conscientious . 
Argus snored all night long . 
At daybreak , the conductor of the diligence shouted : `` Vernon ! 
relay of Vernon ! 
Travellers for Vernon ! '' 
And Lieutenant Theodule woke . 
`` Good , '' he growled , still half asleep , `` this is where I get out . '' 
Then , as his memory cleared by degrees , the effect of waking , he recalled his aunt , the ten louis , and the account which he had undertaken to render of the deeds and proceedings of Marius . 
This set him to laughing . 
`` Perhaps he is no longer in the coach , '' he thought , as he rebuttoned the waistcoat of his undress uniform . 
`` He may have stopped at Poissy ; he may have stopped at Triel ; if he did not get out at Meulan , he may have got out at Mantes , unless he got out at Rolleboise , or if he did not go on as far as Pacy , with the choice of turning to the left at Evreus , or to the right at Laroche-Guyon . 
Run after him , aunty . 
What the devil am I to write to that good old soul ? '' 
At that moment a pair of black trousers descending from the imperial , made its appearance at the window of the coupe . 
`` Can that be Marius ? '' 
said the lieutenant . 
It was Marius . 
A little peasant girl , all entangled with the horses and the postilions at the end of the vehicle , was offering flowers to the travellers . 
`` Give your ladies flowers ! '' 
she cried . 
Marius approached her and purchased the finest flowers in her flat basket . 
`` Come now , '' said Theodule , leaping down from the coupe , `` this piques my curiosity . 
Who the deuce is he going to carry those flowers to ? 
She must be a splendidly handsome woman for so fine a bouquet . 
I want to see her . '' 
And no longer in pursuance of orders , but from personal curiosity , like dogs who hunt on their own account , he set out to follow Marius . 
Marius paid no attention to Theodule . 
Elegant women descended from the diligence ; he did not glance at them . 
He seemed to see nothing around him . 
`` He is pretty deeply in love ! '' 
thought Theodule . 
Marius directed his steps towards the church . 
`` Capital , '' said Theodule to himself . 
`` Rendezvous seasoned with a bit of mass are the best sort . 
Nothing is so exquisite as an ogle which passes over the good God 's head . '' 
On arriving at the church , Marius did not enter it , but skirted the apse . 
He disappeared behind one of the angles of the apse . 
