There is a market for human flesh ; and it is not with your shadowy hands , shuddering around them , that you will prevent them from entering it ! 
Think of the street , think of the pavement covered with passers-by , think of the shops past which women go and come with necks all bare , and through the mire . 
These women , too , were pure once . 
Think of your sisters , those of you who have them . 
Misery , prostitution , the police , Saint-Lazare -- that is what those beautiful , delicate girls , those fragile marvels of modesty , gentleness and loveliness , fresher than lilacs in the month of May , will come to . 
Ah ! 
you have got yourselves killed ! 
You are no longer on hand ! 
That is well ; you have wished to release the people from Royalty , and you deliver over your daughters to the police . 
Friends , have a care , have mercy . 
Women , unhappy women , we are not in the habit of bestowing much thought on them . 
We trust to the women not having received a man 's education , we prevent their reading , we prevent their thinking , we prevent their occupying themselves with politics ; will you prevent them from going to the dead-house this evening , and recognizing your bodies ? 
Let us see , those who have families must be tractable , and shake hands with us and take themselves off , and leave us here alone to attend to this affair . 
I know well that courage is required to leave , that it is hard ; but the harder it is , the more meritorious . 
You say : ` I have a gun , I am at the barricade ; so much the worse , I shall remain there . ' 
So much the worse is easily said . 
My friends , there is a morrow ; you will not be here to-morrow , but your families will ; and what sufferings ! 
See , here is a pretty , healthy child , with cheeks like an apple , who babbles , prattles , chatters , who laughs , who smells sweet beneath your kiss , -- and do you know what becomes of him when he is abandoned ? 
I have seen one , a very small creature , no taller than that . 
His father was dead . 
Poor people had taken him in out of charity , but they had bread only for themselves . 
The child was always hungry . 
It was winter . 
He did not cry . 
You could see him approach the stove , in which there was never any fire , and whose pipe , you know , was of mastic and yellow clay . 
His breathing was hoarse , his face livid , his limbs flaccid , his belly prominent . 
He said nothing . 
If you spoke to him , he did not answer . 
He is dead . 
He was taken to the Necker Hospital , where I saw him . 
I was house-surgeon in that hospital . 
Now , if there are any fathers among you , fathers whose happiness it is to stroll on Sundays holding their child 's tiny hand in their robust hand , let each one of those fathers imagine that this child is his own . 
That poor brat , I remember , and I seem to see him now , when he lay nude on the dissecting table , how his ribs stood out on his skin like the graves beneath the grass in a cemetery . 
A sort of mud was found in his stomach . 
There were ashes in his teeth . 
Come , let us examine ourselves conscientiously and take counsel with our heart . 
Statistics show that the mortality among abandoned children is fifty-five per cent . 
I repeat , it is a question of women , it concerns mothers , it concerns young girls , it concerns little children . 
Who is talking to you of yourselves ? 
We know well what you are ; we know well that you are all brave , parbleu ! 
we know well that you all have in your souls the joy and the glory of giving your life for the great cause ; we know well that you feel yourselves elected to die usefully and magnificently , and that each one of you clings to his share in the triumph . 
Very well . 
But you are not alone in this world . 
There are other beings of whom you must think . 
You must not be egoists . '' 
All dropped their heads with a gloomy air . 
Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments . 
Combeferre , who spoke thus , was not an orphan . 
He recalled the mothers of other men , and forgot his own . 
He was about to get himself killed . 
He was `` an egoist . '' 
Marius , fasting , fevered , having emerged in succession from all hope , and having been stranded in grief , the most sombre of shipwrecks , and saturated with violent emotions and conscious that the end was near , had plunged deeper and deeper into that visionary stupor which always precedes the fatal hour voluntarily accepted . 
A physiologist might have studied in him the growing symptoms of that febrile absorption known to , and classified by , science , and which is to suffering what voluptuousness is to pleasure . 
Despair , also , has its ecstasy . 
Marius had reached this point . 
He looked on at everything as from without ; as we have said , things which passed before him seemed far away ; he made out the whole , but did not perceive the details . 
He beheld men going and coming as through a flame . 
He heard voices speaking as at the bottom of an abyss . 
But this moved him . 
There was in this scene a point which pierced and roused even him . 
He had but one idea now , to die ; and he did not wish to be turned aside from it , but he reflected , in his gloomy somnambulism , that while destroying himself , he was not prohibited from saving some one else . 
He raised his voice . 
`` Enjolras and Combeferre are right , '' said he ; `` no unnecessary sacrifice . 
I join them , and you must make haste . 
Combeferre has said convincing things to you . 
There are some among you who have families , mothers , sisters , wives , children . 
Let such leave the ranks . '' 
No one stirred . 
`` Married men and the supporters of families , step out of the ranks ! '' 
repeated Marius . 
His authority was great . 
Enjolras was certainly the head of the barricade , but Marius was its savior . 
`` I order it , '' cried Enjolras . 
`` I entreat you , '' said Marius . 
Then , touched by Combeferre 's words , shaken by Enjolras ' order , touched by Marius ' entreaty , these heroic men began to denounce each other . 
-- `` It is true , '' said one young man to a full grown man , `` you are the father of a family . 
Go . '' 
-- `` It is your duty rather , '' retorted the man , `` you have two sisters whom you maintain . '' 
-- And an unprecedented controversy broke forth . 
Each struggled to determine which should not allow himself to be placed at the door of the tomb . 
`` Make haste , '' said Courfeyrac , `` in another quarter of an hour it will be too late . '' 
`` Citizens , '' pursued Enjolras , `` this is the Republic , and universal suffrage reigns . 
Do you yourselves designate those who are to go . '' 
They obeyed . 
After the expiration of a few minutes , five were unanimously selected and stepped out of the ranks . 
`` There are five of them ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
There were only four uniforms . 
`` Well , '' began the five , `` one must stay behind . '' 
And then a struggle arose as to who should remain , and who should find reasons for the others not remaining . 
The generous quarrel began afresh . 
`` You have a wife who loves you . '' 
-- `` You have your aged mother . '' 
-- '' You have neither father nor mother , and what is to become of your three little brothers ? '' 
-- `` You are the father of five children . '' 
-- `` You have a right to live , you are only seventeen , it is too early for you to die . '' 
These great revolutionary barricades were assembling points for heroism . 
The improbable was simple there . 
These men did not astonish each other . 
`` Be quick , '' repeated Courfeyrac . 
Men shouted to Marius from the groups : `` Do you designate who is to remain . '' 
`` Yes , '' said the five , `` choose . 
We will obey you . '' 
Marius did not believe that he was capable of another emotion . 
Still , at this idea , that of choosing a man for death , his blood rushed back to his heart . 
He would have turned pale , had it been possible for him to become any paler . 
He advanced towards the five , who smiled upon him , and each , with his eyes full of that grand flame which one beholds in the depths of history hovering over Thermopylae , cried to him : `` Me ! 
me ! 
me ! '' 
And Marius stupidly counted them ; there were still five of them ! 
Then his glance dropped to the four uniforms . 
At that moment , a fifth uniform fell , as if from heaven , upon the other four . 
The fifth man was saved . 
Marius raised his eyes and recognized M. Fauchelevent . 
Jean Valjean had just entered the barricade . 
He had arrived by way of Mondetour lane , whither by dint of inquiries made , or by instinct , or chance . 
Thanks to his dress of a National Guardsman , he had made his way without difficulty . 
The sentinel stationed by the insurgents in the Rue Mondetour had no occasion to give the alarm for a single National Guardsman , and he had allowed the latter to entangle himself in the street , saying to himself : `` Probably it is a reinforcement , in any case it is a prisoner . '' 
The moment was too grave to admit of the sentinel abandoning his duty and his post of observation . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean entered the redoubt , no one had noticed him , all eyes being fixed on the five chosen men and the four uniforms . 
Jean Valjean also had seen and heard , and he had silently removed his coat and flung it on the pile with the rest . 
The emotion aroused was indescribable . 
`` Who is this man ? '' 
demanded Bossuet . 
`` He is a man who saves others , '' replied Combeferre . 
Marius added in a grave voice : `` I know him . '' 
This guarantee satisfied every one . 
Enjolras turned to Jean Valjean . 
`` Welcome , citizen . '' 
And he added : `` You know that we are about to die . '' 
Jean Valjean , without replying , helped the insurgent whom he was saving to don his uniform . 
THE HORIZON WHICH ONE BEHOLDS FROM THE SUMMIT OF A BARRICADE The situation of all in that fatal hour and that pitiless place , had as result and culminating point Enjolras ' supreme melancholy . 
Enjolras bore within him the plenitude of the revolution ; he was incomplete , however , so far as the absolute can be so ; he had too much of Saint-Just about him , and not enough of Anacharsis Cloots ; still , his mind , in the society of the Friends of the A B C , had ended by undergoing a certain polarization from Combeferre 's ideas ; for some time past , he had been gradually emerging from the narrow form of dogma , and had allowed himself to incline to the broadening influence of progress , and he had come to accept , as a definitive and magnificent evolution , the transformation of the great French Republic , into the immense human republic . 
As far as the immediate means were concerned , a violent situation being given , he wished to be violent ; on that point , he never varied ; and he remained of that epic and redoubtable school which is summed up in the words : `` Eighty-three . '' 
Enjolras was standing erect on the staircase of paving-stones , one elbow resting on the stock of his gun . 
He was engaged in thought ; he quivered , as at the passage of prophetic breaths ; places where death is have these effects of tripods . 
A sort of stifled fire darted from his eyes , which were filled with an inward look . 
All at once he threw back his head , his blond locks fell back like those of an angel on the sombre quadriga made of stars , they were like the mane of a startled lion in the flaming of an halo , and Enjolras cried : `` Citizens , do you picture the future to yourselves ? 
The streets of cities inundated with light , green branches on the thresholds , nations sisters , men just , old men blessing children , the past loving the present , thinkers entirely at liberty , believers on terms of full equality , for religion heaven , God the direct priest , human conscience become an altar , no more hatreds , the fraternity of the workshop and the school , for sole penalty and recompense fame , work for all , right for all , peace over all , no more bloodshed , no more wars , happy mothers ! 
To conquer matter is the first step ; to realize the ideal is the second . 
Reflect on what progress has already accomplished . 
Formerly , the first human races beheld with terror the hydra pass before their eyes , breathing on the waters , the dragon which vomited flame , the griffin who was the monster of the air , and who flew with the wings of an eagle and the talons of a tiger ; fearful beasts which were above man . 
Man , nevertheless , spread his snares , consecrated by intelligence , and finally conquered these monsters . 
We have vanquished the hydra , and it is called the locomotive ; we are on the point of vanquishing the griffin , we already grasp it , and it is called the balloon . 
On the day when this Promethean task shall be accomplished , and when man shall have definitely harnessed to his will the triple Chimaera of antiquity , the hydra , the dragon and the griffin , he will be the master of water , fire , and of air , and he will be for the rest of animated creation that which the ancient gods formerly were to him . 
Courage , and onward ! 
Citizens , whither are we going ? 
To science made government , to the force of things become the sole public force , to the natural law , having in itself its sanction and its penalty and promulgating itself by evidence , to a dawn of truth corresponding to a dawn of day . 
We are advancing to the union of peoples ; we are advancing to the unity of man . 
No more fictions ; no more parasites . 
The real governed by the true , that is the goal . 
Civilization will hold its assizes at the summit of Europe , and , later on , at the centre of continents , in a grand parliament of the intelligence . 
Something similar has already been seen . 
The amphictyons had two sittings a year , one at Delphos the seat of the gods , the other at Thermopylae , the place of heroes . 
Europe will have her amphictyons ; the globe will have its amphictyons . 
France bears this sublime future in her breast . 
This is the gestation of the nineteenth century . 
That which Greece sketched out is worthy of being finished by France . 
Listen to me , you , Feuilly , valiant artisan , man of the people . 
I revere you . 
Yes , you clearly behold the future , yes , you are right . 
You had neither father nor mother , Feuilly ; you adopted humanity for your mother and right for your father . 
You are about to die , that is to say to triumph , here . 
Citizens , whatever happens to-day , through our defeat as well as through our victory , it is a revolution that we are about to create . 
As conflagrations light up a whole city , so revolutions illuminate the whole human race . 
And what is the revolution that we shall cause ? 
I have just told you , the Revolution of the True . 
From a political point of view , there is but a single principle ; the sovereignty of man over himself . 
This sovereignty of myself over myself is called Liberty . 
Where two or three of these sovereignties are combined , the state begins . 
But in that association there is no abdication . 
Each sovereignty concedes a certain quantity of itself , for the purpose of forming the common right . 
This quantity is the same for all of us . 
This identity of concession which each makes to all , is called Equality . 
Common right is nothing else than the protection of all beaming on the right of each . 
This protection of all over each is called Fraternity . 
The point of intersection of all these assembled sovereignties is called society . 
This intersection being a junction , this point is a knot . 
Hence what is called the social bond . 
Some say social contract ; which is the same thing , the word contract being etymologically formed with the idea of a bond . 
Let us come to an understanding about equality ; for , if liberty is the summit , equality is the base . 
Equality , citizens , is not wholly a surface vegetation , a society of great blades of grass and tiny oaks ; a proximity of jealousies which render each other null and void ; legally speaking , it is all aptitudes possessed of the same opportunity ; politically , it is all votes possessed of the same weight ; religiously , it is all consciences possessed of the same right . 
Equality has an organ : gratuitous and obligatory instruction . 
The right to the alphabet , that is where the beginning must be made . 
The primary school imposed on all , the secondary school offered to all , that is the law . 
From an identical school , an identical society will spring . 
Yes , instruction ! 
light ! 
light ! 
everything comes from light , and to it everything returns . 
Citizens , the nineteenth century is great , but the twentieth century will be happy . 
Then , there will be nothing more like the history of old , we shall no longer , as to-day , have to fear a conquest , an invasion , a usurpation , a rivalry of nations , arms in hand , an interruption of civilization depending on a marriage of kings , on a birth in hereditary tyrannies , a partition of peoples by a congress , a dismemberment because of the failure of a dynasty , a combat of two religions meeting face to face , like two bucks in the dark , on the bridge of the infinite ; we shall no longer have to fear famine , farming out , prostitution arising from distress , misery from the failure of work and the scaffold and the sword , and battles and the ruffianism of chance in the forest of events . 
One might almost say : There will be no more events . 
We shall be happy . 
The human race will accomplish its law , as the terrestrial globe accomplishes its law ; harmony will be re-established between the soul and the star ; the soul will gravitate around the truth , as the planet around the light . 
Friends , the present hour in which I am addressing you , is a gloomy hour ; but these are terrible purchases of the future . 
A revolution is a toll . 
Oh ! 
the human race will be delivered , raised up , consoled ! 
We affirm it on this barrier . 
Whence should proceed that cry of love , if not from the heights of sacrifice ? 
Oh my brothers , this is the point of junction , of those who think and of those who suffer ; this barricade is not made of paving-stones , nor of joists , nor of bits of iron ; it is made of two heaps , a heap of ideas , and a heap of woes . 
Here misery meets the ideal . 
The day embraces the night , and says to it : ` I am about to die , and thou shalt be born again with me . ' 
From the embrace of all desolations faith leaps forth . 
Sufferings bring hither their agony and ideas their immortality . 
This agony and this immortality are about to join and constitute our death . 
Brothers , he who dies here dies in the radiance of the future , and we are entering a tomb all flooded with the dawn . '' 
Enjolras paused rather than became silent ; his lips continued to move silently , as though he were talking to himself , which caused them all to gaze attentively at him , in the endeavor to hear more . 
There was no applause ; but they whispered together for a long time . 
Speech being a breath , the rustling of intelligences resembles the rustling of leaves . 
MARIUS HAGGARD , JAVERT LACONIC Let us narrate what was passing in Marius ' thoughts . 
Let the reader recall the state of his soul . 
We have just recalled it , everything was a vision to him now . 
His judgment was disturbed . 
Marius , let us insist on this point , was under the shadow of the great , dark wings which are spread over those in the death agony . 
He felt that he had entered the tomb , it seemed to him that he was already on the other side of the wall , and he no longer beheld the faces of the living except with the eyes of one dead . 
How did M. Fauchelevent come there ? 
Why was he there ? 
What had he come there to do ? 
Marius did not address all these questions to himself . 
Besides , since our despair has this peculiarity , that it envelops others as well as ourselves , it seemed logical to him that all the world should come thither to die . 
Only , he thought of Cosette with a pang at his heart . 
However , M. Fauchelevent did not speak to him , did not look at him , and had not even the air of hearing him , when Marius raised his voice to say : `` I know him . '' 
As far as Marius was concerned , this attitude of M. Fauchelevent was comforting , and , if such a word can be used for such impressions , we should say that it pleased him . 
He had always felt the absolute impossibility of addressing that enigmatical man , who was , in his eyes , both equivocal and imposing . 
Moreover , it had been a long time since he had seen him ; and this still further augmented the impossibility for Marius ' timid and reserved nature . 
The five chosen men left the barricade by way of Mondetour lane ; they bore a perfect resemblance to members of the National Guard . 
One of them wept as he took his leave . 
Before setting out , they embraced those who remained . 
When the five men sent back to life had taken their departure , Enjolras thought of the man who had been condemned to death . 
He entered the tap-room . 
Javert , still bound to the post , was engaged in meditation . 
`` Do you want anything ? '' 
Enjolras asked him . 
`` Javert replied : `` When are you going to kill me ? '' 
`` Wait . 
We need all our cartridges just at present . '' 
`` Then give me a drink , '' said Javert . 
Enjolras himself offered him a glass of water , and , as Javert was pinioned , he helped him to drink . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
inquired Enjolras . 
`` I am uncomfortable against this post , '' replied Javert . 
`` You are not tender to have left me to pass the night here . 
Bind me as you please , but you surely might lay me out on a table like that other man . '' 
And with a motion of the head , he indicated the body of M. Mabeuf . 
There was , as the reader will remember , a long , broad table at the end of the room , on which they had been running bullets and making cartridges . 
All the cartridges having been made , and all the powder used , this table was free . 
At Enjolras ' command , four insurgents unbound Javert from the post . 
While they were loosing him , a fifth held a bayonet against his breast . 
Leaving his arms tied behind his back , they placed about his feet a slender but stout whip-cord , as is done to men on the point of mounting the scaffold , which allowed him to take steps about fifteen inches in length , and made him walk to the table at the end of the room , where they laid him down , closely bound about the middle of the body . 
By way of further security , and by means of a rope fastened to his neck , they added to the system of ligatures which rendered every attempt at escape impossible , that sort of bond which is called in prisons a martingale , which , starting at the neck , forks on the stomach , and meets the hands , after passing between the legs . 
While they were binding Javert , a man standing on the threshold was surveying him with singular attention . 
The shadow cast by this man made Javert turn his head . 
He raised his eyes , and recognized Jean Valjean . 
He did not even start , but dropped his lids proudly and confined himself to the remark : `` It is perfectly simple . '' 
THE SITUATION BECOMES AGGRAVATED The daylight was increasing rapidly . 
Not a window was opened , not a door stood ajar ; it was the dawn but not the awaking . 
The end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , opposite the barricade , had been evacuated by the troops , as we have stated it seemed to be free , and presented itself to passers-by with a sinister tranquillity . 
The Rue Saint-Denis was as dumb as the avenue of Sphinxes at Thebes . 
Not a living being in the cross-roads , which gleamed white in the light of the sun . 
Nothing is so mournful as this light in deserted streets . 
Nothing was to be seen , but there was something to be heard . 
A mysterious movement was going on at a certain distance . 
It was evident that the critical moment was approaching . 
As on the previous evening , the sentinels had come in ; but this time all had come . 
The barricade was stronger than on the occasion of the first attack . 
Since the departure of the five , they had increased its height still further . 
On the advice of the sentinel who had examined the region of the Halles , Enjolras , for fear of a surprise in the rear , came to a serious decision . 
He had the small gut of the Mondetour lane , which had been left open up to that time , barricaded . 
For this purpose , they tore up the pavement for the length of several houses more . 
In this manner , the barricade , walled on three streets , in front on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , to the left on the Rues du Cygne and de la Petite Truanderie , to the right on the Rue Mondetour , was really almost impregnable ; it is true that they were fatally hemmed in there . 
It had three fronts , but no exit . 
-- `` A fortress but a rat hole too , '' said Courfeyrac with a laugh . 
Enjolras had about thirty paving-stones `` torn up in excess , '' said Bossuet , piled up near the door of the wine-shop . 
The silence was now so profound in the quarter whence the attack must needs come , that Enjolras had each man resume his post of battle . 
An allowance of brandy was doled out to each . 
Nothing is more curious than a barricade preparing for an assault . 
Each man selects his place as though at the theatre . 
They jostle , and elbow and crowd each other . 
There are some who make stalls of paving-stones . 
Here is a corner of the wall which is in the way , it is removed ; here is a redan which may afford protection , they take shelter behind it . 
Left-handed men are precious ; they take the places that are inconvenient to the rest . 
Many arrange to fight in a sitting posture . 
They wish to be at ease to kill , and to die comfortably . 
In the sad war of June , 1848 , an insurgent who was a formidable marksman , and who was firing from the top of a terrace upon a roof , had a reclining-chair brought there for his use ; a charge of grape-shot found him out there . 
As soon as the leader has given the order to clear the decks for action , all disorderly movements cease ; there is no more pulling from one another ; there are no more coteries ; no more asides , there is no more holding aloof ; everything in their spirits converges in , and changes into , a waiting for the assailants . 
A barricade before the arrival of danger is chaos ; in danger , it is discipline itself . 
Peril produces order . 
As soon as Enjolras had seized his double-barrelled rifle , and had placed himself in a sort of embrasure which he had reserved for himself , all the rest held their peace . 
A series of faint , sharp noises resounded confusedly along the wall of paving-stones . 
It was the men cocking their guns . 
Moreover , their attitudes were prouder , more confident than ever ; the excess of sacrifice strengthens ; they no longer cherished any hope , but they had despair , despair , -- the last weapon , which sometimes gives victory ; Virgil has said so . 
Supreme resources spring from extreme resolutions . 
To embark in death is sometimes the means of escaping a shipwreck ; and the lid of the coffin becomes a plank of safety . 
As on the preceding evening , the attention of all was directed , we might almost say leaned upon , the end of the street , now lighted up and visible . 
They had not long to wait . 
A stir began distinctly in the Saint-Leu quarter , but it did not resemble the movement of the first attack . 
A clashing of chains , the uneasy jolting of a mass , the click of brass skipping along the pavement , a sort of solemn uproar , announced that some sinister construction of iron was approaching . 
There arose a tremor in the bosoms of these peaceful old streets , pierced and built for the fertile circulation of interests and ideas , and which are not made for the horrible rumble of the wheels of war . 
The fixity of eye in all the combatants upon the extremity of the street became ferocious . 
A cannon made its appearance . 
Artillery-men were pushing the piece ; it was in firing trim ; the fore-carriage had been detached ; two upheld the gun-carriage , four were at the wheels ; others followed with the caisson . 
They could see the smoke of the burning lint-stock . 
`` Fire ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The whole barricade fired , the report was terrible ; an avalanche of smoke covered and effaced both cannon and men ; after a few seconds , the cloud dispersed , and the cannon and men re-appeared ; the gun-crew had just finished rolling it slowly , correctly , without haste , into position facing the barricade . 
Not one of them had been struck . 
Then the captain of the piece , bearing down upon the breech in order to raise the muzzle , began to point the cannon with the gravity of an astronomer levelling a telescope . 
`` Bravo for the cannoneers ! '' 
cried Bossuet . 
And the whole barricade clapped their hands . 
A moment later , squarely planted in the very middle of the street , astride of the gutter , the piece was ready for action . 
A formidable pair of jaws yawned on the barricade . 
`` Come , merrily now ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` That 's the brutal part of it . 
After the fillip on the nose , the blow from the fist . 
The army is reaching out its big paw to us . 
The barricade is going to be severely shaken up . 
The fusillade tries , the cannon takes . '' 
`` It is a piece of eight , new model , brass , '' added Combeferre . 
`` Those pieces are liable to burst as soon as the proportion of ten parts of tin to one hundred of brass is exceeded . 
The excess of tin renders them too tender . 
Then it comes to pass that they have caves and chambers when looked at from the vent hole . 
In order to obviate this danger , and to render it possible to force the charge , it may become necessary to return to the process of the fourteenth century , hooping , and to encircle the piece on the outside with a series of unwelded steel bands , from the breech to the trunnions . 
In the meantime , they remedy this defect as best they may ; they manage to discover where the holes are located in the vent of a cannon , by means of a searcher . 
But there is a better method , with Gribeauval 's movable star . '' 
`` In the sixteenth century , '' remarked Bossuet , `` they used to rifle cannon . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` that augments the projectile force , but diminishes the accuracy of the firing . 
In firing at short range , the trajectory is not as rigid as could be desired , the parabola is exaggerated , the line of the projectile is no longer sufficiently rectilinear to allow of its striking intervening objects , which is , nevertheless , a necessity of battle , the importance of which increases with the proximity of the enemy and the precipitation of the discharge . 
This defect of the tension of the curve of the projectile in the rifled cannon of the sixteenth century arose from the smallness of the charge ; small charges for that sort of engine are imposed by the ballistic necessities , such , for instance , as the preservation of the gun-carriage . 
In short , that despot , the cannon , can not do all that it desires ; force is a great weakness . 
A cannon-ball only travels six hundred leagues an hour ; light travels seventy thousand leagues a second . 
Such is the superiority of Jesus Christ over Napoleon . '' 
`` Reload your guns , '' said Enjolras . 
How was the casing of the barricade going to behave under the cannon-balls ? 
Would they effect a breach ? 
That was the question . 
While the insurgents were reloading their guns , the artillery-men were loading the cannon . 
The anxiety in the redoubt was profound . 
The shot sped the report burst forth . 
`` Present ! '' 
shouted a joyous voice . 
And Gavroche flung himself into the barricade just as the ball dashed against it . 
He came from the direction of the Rue du Cygne , and he had nimbly climbed over the auxiliary barricade which fronted on the labyrinth of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Gavroche produced a greater sensation in the barricade than the cannon-ball . 
The ball buried itself in the mass of rubbish . 
At the most there was an omnibus wheel broken , and the old Anceau cart was demolished . 
On seeing this , the barricade burst into a laugh . 
`` Go on ! '' 
shouted Bossuet to the artillerists . 
THE ARTILLERY-MEN COMPEL PEOPLE TO TAKE THEM SERIOUSLY Thet flocked round Gavroche . 
But he had no time to tell anything . 
Marius drew him aside with a shudder . 
`` What are you doing here ? '' 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said the child , `` what are you doing here yourself ? '' 
And he stared at Marius intently with his epic effrontery . 
His eyes grew larger with the proud light within them . 
It was with an accent of severity that Marius continued : `` Who told you to come back ? 
Did you deliver my letter at the address ? '' 
Gavroche was not without some compunctions in the matter of that letter . 
In his haste to return to the barricade , he had got rid of it rather than delivered it . 
He was forced to acknowledge to himself that he had confided it rather lightly to that stranger whose face he had not been able to make out . 
It is true that the man was bareheaded , but that was not sufficient . 
In short , he had been administering to himself little inward remonstrances and he feared Marius ' reproaches . 
In order to extricate himself from the predicament , he took the simplest course ; he lied abominably . 
`` Citizen , I delivered the letter to the porter . 
The lady was asleep . 
She will have the letter when she wakes up . 
Marius had had two objects in sending that letter : to bid farewell to Cosette and to save Gavroche . 
He was obliged to content himself with the half of his desire . 
The despatch of his letter and the presence of M. Fauchelevent in the barricade , was a coincidence which occurred to him . 
He pointed out M. Fauchelevent to Gavroche . 
`` Do you know that man ? '' 
`` No , '' said Gavroche . 
Gavroche had , in fact , as we have just mentioned , seen Jean Valjean only at night . 
The troubled and unhealthy conjectures which had outlined themselves in Marius ' mind were dissipated . 
Did he know M. Fauchelevent 's opinions ? 
Perhaps M. Fauchelevent was a republican . 
Hence his very natural presence in this combat . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche was shouting , at the other end of the barricade : `` My gun ! '' 
Courfeyrac had it returned to him . 
Gavroche warned `` his comrades '' as he called them , that the barricade was blocked . 
He had had great difficulty in reaching it . 
A battalion of the line whose arms were piled in the Rue de la Petite Truanderie was on the watch on the side of the Rue du Cygne ; on the opposite side , the municipal guard occupied the Rue des Precheurs . 
The bulk of the army was facing them in front . 
This information given , Gavroche added : `` I authorize you to hit 'em a tremendous whack . '' 
Meanwhile , Enjolras was straining his ears and watching at his embrasure . 
The assailants , dissatisfied , no doubt , with their shot , had not repeated it . 
A company of infantry of the line had come up and occupied the end of the street behind the piece of ordnance . 
The soldiers were tearing up the pavement and constructing with the stones a small , low wall , a sort of side-work not more than eighteen inches high , and facing the barricade . 
In the angle at the left of this epaulement , there was visible the head of the column of a battalion from the suburbs massed in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
Enjolras , on the watch , thought he distinguished the peculiar sound which is produced when the shells of grape-shot are drawn from the caissons , and he saw the commander of the piece change the elevation and incline the mouth of the cannon slightly to the left . 
Then the cannoneers began to load the piece . 
The chief seized the lint-stock himself and lowered it to the vent . 
`` Down with your heads , hug the wall ! '' 
shouted Enjolras , `` and all on your knees along the barricade ! '' 
The insurgents who were straggling in front of the wine-shop , and who had quitted their posts of combat on Gavroche 's arrival , rushed pell-mell towards the barricade ; but before Enjolras ' order could be executed , the discharge took place with the terrifying rattle of a round of grape-shot . 
This is what it was , in fact . 
The charge had been aimed at the cut in the redoubt , and had there rebounded from the wall ; and this terrible rebound had produced two dead and three wounded . 
If this were continued , the barricade was no longer tenable . 
The grape-shot made its way in . 
A murmur of consternation arose . 
`` Let us prevent the second discharge , '' said Enjolras . 
And , lowering his rifle , he took aim at the captain of the gun , who , at that moment , was bearing down on the breach of his gun and rectifying and definitely fixing its pointing . 
The captain of the piece was a handsome sergeant of artillery , very young , blond , with a very gentle face , and the intelligent air peculiar to that predestined and redoubtable weapon which , by dint of perfecting itself in horror , must end in killing war . 
Combeferre , who was standing beside Enjolras , scrutinized this young man . 
`` What a pity ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` What hideous things these butcheries are ! 
Come , when there are no more kings , there will be no more war . 
Enjolras , you are taking aim at that sergeant , you are not looking at him . 
Fancy , he is a charming young man ; he is intrepid ; it is evident that he is thoughtful ; those young artillery-men are very well educated ; he has a father , a mother , a family ; he is probably in love ; he is not more than five and twenty at the most ; he might be your brother . '' 
`` He is , '' said Enjolras . 
`` Yes , '' replied Combeferre , `` he is mine too . 
Well , let us not kill him . '' 
`` Let me alone . 
It must be done . '' 
And a tear trickled slowly down Enjolras ' marble cheek . 
At the same moment , he pressed the trigger of his rifle . 
The flame leaped forth . 
The artillery-man turned round twice , his arms extended in front of him , his head uplifted , as though for breath , then he fell with his side on the gun , and lay there motionless . 
They could see his back , from the centre of which there flowed directly a stream of blood . 
The ball had traversed his breast from side to side . 
He was dead . 
He had to be carried away and replaced by another . 
Several minutes were thus gained , in fact . 
EMPLOYMENT OF THE OLD TALENTS OF A POACHER AND THAT INFALLIBLE MARKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796 Opinions were exchanged in the barricade . 
The firing from the gun was about to begin again . 
Against that grape-shot , they could not hold out a quarter of an hour longer . 
It was absolutely necessary to deaden the blows . 
Enjolras issued this command : `` We must place a mattress there . '' 
`` We have none , '' said Combeferre , `` the wounded are lying on them . '' 
Jean Valjean , who was seated apart on a stone post , at the corner of the tavern , with his gun between his knees , had , up to that moment , taken no part in anything that was going on . 
He did not appear to hear the combatants saying around him : `` Here is a gun that is doing nothing . '' 
At the order issued by Enjolras , he rose . 
It will be remembered that , on the arrival of the rabble in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , an old woman , foreseeing the bullets , had placed her mattress in front of her window . 
This window , an attic window , was on the roof of a six-story house situated a little beyond the barricade . 
The mattress , placed cross-wise , supported at the bottom on two poles for drying linen , was upheld at the top by two ropes , which , at that distance , looked like two threads , and which were attached to two nails planted in the window frames . 
These ropes were distinctly visible , like hairs , against the sky . 
`` Can some one lend me a double-barrelled rifle ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
Enjolras , who had just re-loaded his , handed it to him . 
Jean Valjean took aim at the attic window and fired . 
One of the mattress ropes was cut . 
The mattress now hung by one thread only . 
Jean Valjean fired the second charge . 
The second rope lashed the panes of the attic window . 
The mattress slipped between the two poles and fell into the street . 
The barricade applauded . 
All voices cried : `` Here is a mattress ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said Combeferre , `` but who will go and fetch it ? '' 
The mattress had , in fact , fallen outside the barricade , between besiegers and besieged . 
Now , the death of the sergeant of artillery having exasperated the troop , the soldiers had , for several minutes , been lying flat on their stomachs behind the line of paving-stones which they had erected , and , in order to supply the forced silence of the piece , which was quiet while its service was in course of reorganization , they had opened fire on the barricade . 
The insurgents did not reply to this musketry , in order to spare their ammunition The fusillade broke against the barricade ; but the street , which it filled , was terrible . 
Jean Valjean stepped out of the cut , entered the street , traversed the storm of bullets , walked up to the mattress , hoisted it upon his back , and returned to the barricade . 
He placed the mattress in the cut with his own hands . 
He fixed it there against the wall in such a manner that the artillery-men should not see it . 
That done , they awaited the next discharge of grape-shot . 
It was not long in coming . 
The cannon vomited forth its package of buck-shot with a roar . 
But there was no rebound . 
The effect which they had foreseen had been attained . 
The barricade was saved . 
`` Citizen , '' said Enjolras to Jean Valjean , `` the Republic thanks you . '' 
Bossuet admired and laughed . 
He exclaimed : `` It is immoral that a mattress should have so much power . 
Triumph of that which yields over that which strikes with lightning . 
But never mind , glory to the mattress which annuls a cannon ! '' 
DAWN At that moment , Cosette awoke . 
Her chamber was narrow , neat , unobtrusive , with a long sash-window , facing the East on the back court-yard of the house . 
Cosette knew nothing of what was going on in Paris . 
She had not been there on the preceding evening , and she had already retired to her chamber when Toussaint had said : `` It appears that there is a row . '' 
Cosette had slept only a few hours , but soundly . 
She had had sweet dreams , which possibly arose from the fact that her little bed was very white . 
Some one , who was Marius , had appeared to her in the light . 
She awoke with the sun in her eyes , which , at first , produced on her the effect of being a continuation of her dream . 
Her first thought on emerging from this dream was a smiling one . 
Cosette felt herself thoroughly reassured . 
Like Jean Valjean , she had , a few hours previously , passed through that reaction of the soul which absolutely will not hear of unhappiness . 
She began to cherish hope , with all her might , without knowing why . 
Then she felt a pang at her heart . 
It was three days since she had seen Marius . 
But she said to herself that he must have received her letter , that he knew where she was , and that he was so clever that he would find means of reaching her . 
-- And that certainly to-day , and perhaps that very morning . 
-- It was broad daylight , but the rays of light were very horizontal ; she thought that it was very early , but that she must rise , nevertheless , in order to receive Marius . 
She felt that she could not live without Marius , and that , consequently , that was sufficient and that Marius would come . 
No objection was valid . 
All this was certain . 
It was monstrous enough already to have suffered for three days . 
Marius absent three days , this was horrible on the part of the good God . 
Now , this cruel teasing from on high had been gone through with . 
Marius was about to arrive , and he would bring good news . 
Youth is made thus ; it quickly dries its eyes ; it finds sorrow useless and does not accept it . 
Youth is the smile of the future in the presence of an unknown quantity , which is itself . 
It is natural to it to be happy . 
It seems as though its respiration were made of hope . 
Moreover , Cosette could not remember what Marius had said to her on the subject of this absence which was to last only one day , and what explanation of it he had given her . 
