The girl whom he could no longer call Ursule was evidently somewhere ; nothing warned Marius in what direction he should seek her . 
His whole life was now summed up in two words ; absolute uncertainty within an impenetrable fog . 
To see her once again ; he still aspired to this , but he no longer expected it . 
To crown all , his poverty had returned . 
He felt that icy breath close to him , on his heels . 
In the midst of his torments , and long before this , he had discontinued his work , and nothing is more dangerous than discontinued work ; it is a habit which vanishes . 
A habit which is easy to get rid of , and difficult to take up again . 
A certain amount of dreaming is good , like a narcotic in discreet doses . 
It lulls to sleep the fevers of the mind at labor , which are sometimes severe , and produces in the spirit a soft and fresh vapor which corrects the over-harsh contours of pure thought , fills in gaps here and there , binds together and rounds off the angles of the ideas . 
But too much dreaming sinks and drowns . 
Woe to the brain-worker who allows himself to fall entirely from thought into revery ! 
He thinks that he can re-ascend with equal ease , and he tells himself that , after all , it is the same thing . 
Error ! 
Thought is the toil of the intelligence , revery its voluptuousness . 
To replace thought with revery is to confound a poison with a food . 
Marius had begun in that way , as the reader will remember . 
Passion had supervened and had finished the work of precipitating him into chimaeras without object or bottom . 
One no longer emerges from one 's self except for the purpose of going off to dream . 
Idle production . 
Tumultuous and stagnant gulf . 
And , in proportion as labor diminishes , needs increase . 
This is a law . 
Man , in a state of revery , is generally prodigal and slack ; the unstrung mind can not hold life within close bounds . 
There is , in that mode of life , good mingled with evil , for if enervation is baleful , generosity is good and healthful . 
But the poor man who is generous and noble , and who does not work , is lost . 
Resources are exhausted , needs crop up . 
Fatal declivity down which the most honest and the firmest as well as the most feeble and most vicious are drawn , and which ends in one of two holds , suicide or crime . 
By dint of going outdoors to think , the day comes when one goes out to throw one 's self in the water . 
Excess of revery breeds men like Escousse and Lebras . 
Marius was descending this declivity at a slow pace , with his eyes fixed on the girl whom he no longer saw . 
What we have just written seems strange , and yet it is true . 
The memory of an absent being kindles in the darkness of the heart ; the more it has disappeared , the more it beams ; the gloomy and despairing soul sees this light on its horizon ; the star of the inner night . 
She -- that was Marius ' whole thought . 
He meditated of nothing else ; he was confusedly conscious that his old coat was becoming an impossible coat , and that his new coat was growing old , that his shirts were wearing out , that his hat was wearing out , that his boots were giving out , and he said to himself : `` If I could but see her once again before I die ! '' 
One sweet idea alone was left to him , that she had loved him , that her glance had told him so , that she did not know his name , but that she did know his soul , and that , wherever she was , however mysterious the place , she still loved him perhaps . 
Who knows whether she were not thinking of him as he was thinking of her ? 
Sometimes , in those inexplicable hours such as are experienced by every heart that loves , though he had no reasons for anything but sadness and yet felt an obscure quiver of joy , he said to himself : `` It is her thoughts that are coming to me ! '' 
Then he added : `` Perhaps my thoughts reach her also . '' 
This illusion , at which he shook his head a moment later , was sufficient , nevertheless , to throw beams , which at times resembled hope , into his soul . 
From time to time , especially at that evening hour which is the most depressing to even the dreamy , he allowed the purest , the most impersonal , the most ideal of the reveries which filled his brain , to fall upon a notebook which contained nothing else . 
He called this `` writing to her . '' 
It must not be supposed that his reason was deranged . 
Quite the contrary . 
He had lost the faculty of working and of moving firmly towards any fixed goal , but he was endowed with more clear-sightedness and rectitude than ever . 
Marius surveyed by a calm and real , although peculiar light , what passed before his eyes , even the most indifferent deeds and men ; he pronounced a just criticism on everything with a sort of honest dejection and candid disinterestedness . 
His judgment , which was almost wholly disassociated from hope , held itself aloof and soared on high . 
In this state of mind nothing escaped him , nothing deceived him , and every moment he was discovering the foundation of life , of humanity , and of destiny . 
Happy , even in the midst of anguish , is he to whom God has given a soul worthy of love and of unhappiness ! 
He who has not viewed the things of this world and the heart of man under this double light has seen nothing and knows nothing of the true . 
The soul which loves and suffers is in a state of sublimity . 
However , day followed day , and nothing new presented itself . 
It merely seemed to him , that the sombre space which still remained to be traversed by him was growing shorter with every instant . 
He thought that he already distinctly perceived the brink of the bottomless abyss . 
`` What ! '' 
he repeated to himself , `` shall I not see her again before then ! '' 
When you have ascended the Rue Saint-Jacques , left the barrier on one side and followed the old inner boulevard for some distance , you reach the Rue de la Sante , then the Glaciere , and , a little while before arriving at the little river of the Gobelins , you come to a sort of field which is the only spot in the long and monotonous chain of the boulevards of Paris , where Ruysdeel would be tempted to sit down . 
There is something indescribable there which exhales grace , a green meadow traversed by tightly stretched lines , from which flutter rags drying in the wind , and an old market-gardener 's house , built in the time of Louis XIII. , with its great roof oddly pierced with dormer windows , dilapidated palisades , a little water amid poplar-trees , women , voices , laughter ; on the horizon the Pantheon , the pole of the Deaf-Mutes , the Val-de-Grace , black , squat , fantastic , amusing , magnificent , and in the background , the severe square crests of the towers of Notre Dame . 
As the place is worth looking at , no one goes thither . 
Hardly one cart or wagoner passes in a quarter of an hour . 
It chanced that Marius ' solitary strolls led him to this plot of ground , near the water . 
That day , there was a rarity on the boulevard , a passer-by . 
Marius , vaguely impressed with the almost savage beauty of the place , asked this passer-by : -- `` What is the name of this spot ? '' 
The person replied : `` It is the Lark 's meadow . '' 
And he added : `` It was here that Ulbach killed the shepherdess of Ivry . '' 
But after the word `` Lark '' Marius heard nothing more . 
These sudden congealments in the state of revery , which a single word suffices to evoke , do occur . 
The entire thought is abruptly condensed around an idea , and it is no longer capable of perceiving anything else . 
The Lark was the appellation which had replaced Ursule in the depths of Marius ' melancholy . 
-- `` Stop , '' said he with a sort of unreasoning stupor peculiar to these mysterious asides , `` this is her meadow . 
I shall know where she lives now . '' 
It was absurd , but irresistible . 
And every day he returned to that meadow of the Lark . 
EMBRYONIC FORMATION OF CRIMES IN THE INCUBATION OF PRISONS Javert 's triumph in the Gorbeau hovel seemed complete , but had not been so . 
In the first place , and this constituted the principal anxiety , Javert had not taken the prisoner prisoner . 
The assassinated man who flees is more suspicious than the assassin , and it is probable that this personage , who had been so precious a capture for the ruffians , would be no less fine a prize for the authorities . 
And then , Montparnasse had escaped Javert . 
Another opportunity of laying hands on that `` devil 's dandy '' must be waited for . 
Montparnasse had , in fact , encountered Eponine as she stood on the watch under the trees of the boulevard , and had led her off , preferring to play Nemorin with the daughter rather than Schinderhannes with the father . 
It was well that he did so . 
He was free . 
As for Eponine , Javert had caused her to be seized ; a mediocre consolation . 
Eponine had joined Azelma at Les Madelonettes . 
And finally , on the way from the Gorbeau house to La Force , one of the principal prisoners , Claquesous , had been lost . 
It was not known how this had been effected , the police agents and the sergeants `` could not understand it at all . '' 
He had converted himself into vapor , he had slipped through the handcuffs , he had trickled through the crevices of the carriage , the fiacre was cracked , and he had fled ; all that they were able to say was , that on arriving at the prison , there was no Claquesous . 
Either the fairies or the police had had a hand in it . 
Had Claquesous melted into the shadows like a snow-flake in water ? 
Had there been unavowed connivance of the police agents ? 
Did this man belong to the double enigma of order and disorder ? 
Was he concentric with infraction and repression ? 
Had this sphinx his fore paws in crime and his hind paws in authority ? 
Javert did not accept such comminations , and would have bristled up against such compromises ; but his squad included other inspectors besides himself , who were more initiated than he , perhaps , although they were his subordinates in the secrets of the Prefecture , and Claquesous had been such a villain that he might make a very good agent . 
It is an excellent thing for ruffianism and an admirable thing for the police to be on such intimate juggling terms with the night . 
These double-edged rascals do exist . 
However that may be , Claquesous had gone astray and was not found again . 
Javert appeared to be more irritated than amazed at this . 
As for Marius , `` that booby of a lawyer , '' who had probably become frightened , and whose name Javert had forgotten , Javert attached very little importance to him . 
Moreover , a lawyer can be hunted up at any time . 
But was he a lawyer after all ? 
The investigation had begun . 
The magistrate had thought it advisable not to put one of these men of the band of Patron Minette in close confinement , in the hope that he would chatter . 
This man was Brujon , the long-haired man of the Rue du Petit-Banquier . 
He had been let loose in the Charlemagne courtyard , and the eyes of the watchers were fixed on him . 
This name of Brujon is one of the souvenirs of La Force . 
In that hideous courtyard , called the court of the Batiment-Neuf -LRB- New Building -RRB- , which the administration called the court Saint-Bernard , and which the robbers called the Fosseaux-Lions -LRB- The Lion 's Ditch -RRB- , on that wall covered with scales and leprosy , which rose on the left to a level with the roofs , near an old door of rusty iron which led to the ancient chapel of the ducal residence of La Force , then turned in a dormitory for ruffians , there could still be seen , twelve years ago , a sort of fortress roughly carved in the stone with a nail , and beneath it this signature : -- BRUJON , 1811 . 
The Brujon of 1811 was the father of the Brujon of 1832 . 
The latter , of whom the reader caught but a glimpse at the Gorbeau house , was a very cunning and very adroit young spark , with a bewildered and plaintive air . 
It was in consequence of this plaintive air that the magistrate had released him , thinking him more useful in the Charlemagne yard than in close confinement . 
Robbers do not interrupt their profession because they are in the hands of justice . 
They do not let themselves be put out by such a trifle as that . 
To be in prison for one crime is no reason for not beginning on another crime . 
They are artists , who have one picture in the salon , and who toil , none the less , on a new work in their studios . 
Brujon seemed to be stupefied by prison . 
He could sometimes be seen standing by the hour together in front of the sutler 's window in the Charlemagne yard , staring like an idiot at the sordid list of prices which began with : garlic , 62 centimes , and ended with : cigar , 5 centimes . 
Or he passed his time in trembling , chattering his teeth , saying that he had a fever , and inquiring whether one of the eight and twenty beds in the fever ward was vacant . 
All at once , towards the end of February , 1832 , it was discovered that Brujon , that somnolent fellow , had had three different commissions executed by the errand-men of the establishment , not under his own name , but in the name of three of his comrades ; and they had cost him in all fifty sous , an exorbitant outlay which attracted the attention of the prison corporal . 
Inquiries were instituted , and on consulting the tariff of commissions posted in the convict 's parlor , it was learned that the fifty sous could be analyzed as follows : three commissions ; one to the Pantheon , ten sous ; one to Val-de-Grace , fifteen sous ; and one to the Barriere de Grenelle , twenty-five sous . 
This last was the dearest of the whole tariff . 
Now , at the Pantheon , at the Val-de-Grace , and at the Barriere de Grenelle were situated the domiciles of the three very redoubtable prowlers of the barriers , Kruideniers , alias Bizarre , Glorieux , an ex-convict , and Barre-Carosse , upon whom the attention of the police was directed by this incident . 
It was thought that these men were members of Patron Minette ; two of those leaders , Babet and Gueulemer , had been captured . 
It was supposed that the messages , which had been addressed , not to houses , but to people who were waiting for them in the street , must have contained information with regard to some crime that had been plotted . 
They were in possession of other indications ; they laid hand on the three prowlers , and supposed that they had circumvented some one or other of Brujon 's machinations . 
About a week after these measures had been taken , one night , as the superintendent of the watch , who had been inspecting the lower dormitory in the Batiment-Neuf , was about to drop his chestnut in the box -- this was the means adopted to make sure that the watchmen performed their duties punctually ; every hour a chestnut must be dropped into all the boxes nailed to the doors of the dormitories -- a watchman looked through the peep-hole of the dormitory and beheld Brujon sitting on his bed and writing something by the light of the hall-lamp . 
The guardian entered , Brujon was put in a solitary cell for a month , but they were not able to seize what he had written . 
The police learned nothing further about it . 
What is certain is , that on the following morning , a `` postilion '' was flung from the Charlemagne yard into the Lions ' Ditch , over the five-story building which separated the two court-yards . 
What prisoners call a `` postilion '' is a pallet of bread artistically moulded , which is sent into Ireland , that is to say , over the roofs of a prison , from one courtyard to another . 
Etymology : over England ; from one land to another ; into Ireland . 
This little pellet falls in the yard . 
The man who picks it up opens it and finds in it a note addressed to some prisoner in that yard . 
If it is a prisoner who finds the treasure , he forwards the note to its destination ; if it is a keeper , or one of the prisoners secretly sold who are called sheep in prisons and foxes in the galleys , the note is taken to the office and handed over to the police . 
On this occasion , the postilion reached its address , although the person to whom it was addressed was , at that moment , in solitary confinement . 
This person was no other than Babet , one of the four heads of Patron Minette . 
The postilion contained a roll of paper on which only these two lines were written : -- `` Babet . 
There is an affair in the Rue Plumet . 
A gate on a garden . '' 
This is what Brujon had written the night before . 
In spite of male and female searchers , Babet managed to pass the note on from La Force to the Salpetriere , to a `` good friend '' whom he had and who was shut up there . 
This woman in turn transmitted the note to another woman of her acquaintance , a certain Magnon , who was strongly suspected by the police , though not yet arrested . 
This Magnon , whose name the reader has already seen , had relations with the Thenardier , which will be described in detail later on , and she could , by going to see Eponine , serve as a bridge between the Salpetriere and Les Madelonettes . 
It happened , that at precisely that moment , as proofs were wanting in the investigation directed against Thenardier in the matter of his daughters , Eponine and Azelma were released . 
When Eponine came out , Magnon , who was watching the gate of the Madelonettes , handed her Brujon 's note to Babet , charging her to look into the matter . 
Eponine went to the Rue Plumet , recognized the gate and the garden , observed the house , spied , lurked , and , a few days later , brought to Magnon , who delivers in the Rue Clocheperce , a biscuit , which Magnon transmitted to Babet 's mistress in the Salpetriere . 
A biscuit , in the shady symbolism of prisons , signifies : Nothing to be done . 
So that in less than a week from that time , as Brujon and Babet met in the circle of La Force , the one on his way to the examination , the other on his way from it : -- `` Well ? '' 
asked Brujon , `` the Rue P. ? '' 
`` Biscuit , '' replied Babet . 
Thus did the foetus of crime engendered by Brujon in La Force miscarry . 
This miscarriage had its consequences , however , which were perfectly distinct from Brujon 's programme . 
The reader will see what they were . 
Often when we think we are knotting one thread , we are tying quite another . 
APPARITION TO FATHER MABEUF Marius no longer went to see any one , but he sometimes encountered Father Mabeuf by chance . 
While Marius was slowly descending those melancholy steps which may be called the cellar stairs , and which lead to places without light , where the happy can be heard walking overhead , M. Mabeuf was descending on his side . 
The Flora of Cauteretz no longer sold at all . 
The experiments on indigo had not been successful in the little garden of Austerlitz , which had a bad exposure . 
M. Mabeuf could cultivate there only a few plants which love shade and dampness . 
Nevertheless , he did not become discouraged . 
He had obtained a corner in the Jardin des Plantes , with a good exposure , to make his trials with indigo `` at his own expense . '' 
For this purpose he had pawned his copperplates of the Flora . 
He had reduced his breakfast to two eggs , and he left one of these for his old servant , to whom he had paid no wages for the last fifteen months . 
And often his breakfast was his only meal . 
He no longer smiled with his infantile smile , he had grown morose and no longer received visitors . 
Marius did well not to dream of going thither . 
Sometimes , at the hour when M. Mabeuf was on his way to the Jardin des Plantes , the old man and the young man passed each other on the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
They did not speak , and only exchanged a melancholy sign of the head . 
A heart-breaking thing it is that there comes a moment when misery looses bonds ! 
Two men who have been friends become two chance passers-by . 
Royal the bookseller was dead . 
M. Mabeuf no longer knew his books , his garden , or his indigo : these were the three forms which happiness , pleasure , and hope had assumed for him . 
This sufficed him for his living . 
He said to himself : `` When I shall have made my balls of blueing , I shall be rich , I will withdraw my copperplates from the pawn-shop , I will put my Flora in vogue again with trickery , plenty of money and advertisements in the newspapers and I will buy , I know well where , a copy of Pierre de Medine 's Art de Naviguer , with wood-cuts , edition of 1655 . '' 
In the meantime , he toiled all day over his plot of indigo , and at night he returned home to water his garden , and to read his books . 
At that epoch , M. Mabeuf was nearly eighty years of age . 
One evening he had a singular apparition . 
He had returned home while it was still broad daylight . 
Mother Plutarque , whose health was declining , was ill and in bed . 
He had dined on a bone , on which a little meat lingered , and a bit of bread that he had found on the kitchen table , and had seated himself on an overturned stone post , which took the place of a bench in his garden . 
Near this bench there rose , after the fashion in orchard-gardens , a sort of large chest , of beams and planks , much dilapidated , a rabbit-hutch on the ground floor , a fruit-closet on the first . 
There was nothing in the hutch , but there were a few apples in the fruit-closet , -- the remains of the winter 's provision . 
M. Mabeuf had set himself to turning over and reading , with the aid of his glasses , two books of which he was passionately fond and in which , a serious thing at his age , he was interested . 
His natural timidity rendered him accessible to the acceptance of superstitions in a certain degree . 
The first of these books was the famous treatise of President Delancre , De l'inconstance des Demons ; the other was a quarto by Mutor de la Rubaudiere , Sur les Diables de Vauvert et les Gobelins de la Bievre . 
This last-mentioned old volume interested him all the more , because his garden had been one of the spots haunted by goblins in former times . 
The twilight had begun to whiten what was on high and to blacken all below . 
As he read , over the top of the book which he held in his hand , Father Mabeuf was surveying his plants , and among others a magnificent rhododendron which was one of his consolations ; four days of heat , wind , and sun without a drop of rain , had passed ; the stalks were bending , the buds drooping , the leaves falling ; all this needed water , the rhododendron was particularly sad . 
Father Mabeuf was one of those persons for whom plants have souls . 
The old man had toiled all day over his indigo plot , he was worn out with fatigue , but he rose , laid his books on the bench , and walked , all bent over and with tottering footsteps , to the well , but when he had grasped the chain , he could not even draw it sufficiently to unhook it . 
Then he turned round and cast a glance of anguish toward heaven which was becoming studded with stars . 
The evening had that serenity which overwhelms the troubles of man beneath an indescribably mournful and eternal joy . 
The night promised to be as arid as the day had been . 
`` Stars everywhere ! '' 
thought the old man ; `` not the tiniest cloud ! 
Not a drop of water ! '' 
And his head , which had been upraised for a moment , fell back upon his breast . 
He raised it again , and once more looked at the sky , murmuring : -- `` A tear of dew ! 
A little pity ! '' 
He tried again to unhook the chain of the well , and could not . 
At that moment , he heard a voice saying : -- `` Father Mabeuf , would you like to have me water your garden for you ? '' 
At the same time , a noise as of a wild animal passing became audible in the hedge , and he beheld emerging from the shrubbery a sort of tall , slender girl , who drew herself up in front of him and stared boldly at him . 
She had less the air of a human being than of a form which had just blossomed forth from the twilight . 
Before Father Mabeuf , who was easily terrified , and who was , as we have said , quick to take alarm , was able to reply by a single syllable , this being , whose movements had a sort of odd abruptness in the darkness , had unhooked the chain , plunged in and withdrawn the bucket , and filled the watering-pot , and the goodman beheld this apparition , which had bare feet and a tattered petticoat , running about among the flower-beds distributing life around her . 
The sound of the watering-pot on the leaves filled Father Mabeuf 's soul with ecstasy . 
It seemed to him that the rhododendron was happy now . 
The first bucketful emptied , the girl drew a second , then a third . 
She watered the whole garden . 
There was something about her , as she thus ran about among paths , where her outline appeared perfectly black , waving her angular arms , and with her fichu all in rags , that resembled a bat . 
When she had finished , Father Mabeuf approached her with tears in his eyes , and laid his hand on her brow . 
`` God will bless you , '' said he , `` you are an angel since you take care of the flowers . '' 
`` No , '' she replied . 
`` I am the devil , but that 's all the same to me . '' 
The old man exclaimed , without either waiting for or hearing her response : -- `` What a pity that I am so unhappy and so poor , and that I can do nothing for you ! '' 
`` You can do something , '' said she . 
`` What ? '' 
`` Tell me where M. Marius lives . '' 
The old man did not understand . 
`` What Monsieur Marius ? '' 
He raised his glassy eyes and seemed to be seeking something that had vanished . 
`` A young man who used to come here . '' 
In the meantime , M. Mabeuf had searched his memory . 
`` Ah ! 
yes -- '' he exclaimed . 
`` I know what you mean . 
Wait ! 
Monsieur Marius -- the Baron Marius Pontmercy , parbleu ! 
He lives , -- or rather , he no longer lives , -- ah well , I do n't know . '' 
As he spoke , he had bent over to train a branch of rhododendron , and he continued : -- `` Hold , I know now . 
He very often passes along the boulevard , and goes in the direction of the Glaciere , Rue Croulebarbe . 
The meadow of the Lark . 
Go there . 
It is not hard to meet him . '' 
When M. Mabeuf straightened himself up , there was no longer any one there ; the girl had disappeared . 
He was decidedly terrified . 
`` Really , '' he thought , `` if my garden had not been watered , I should think that she was a spirit . '' 
An hour later , when he was in bed , it came back to him , and as he fell asleep , at that confused moment when thought , like that fabulous bird which changes itself into a fish in order to cross the sea , little by little assumes the form of a dream in order to traverse slumber , he said to himself in a bewildered way : -- `` In sooth , that greatly resembles what Rubaudiere narrates of the goblins . 
Could it have been a goblin ? '' 
AN APPARITION TO MARIUS Some days after this visit of a `` spirit '' to Farmer Mabeuf , one morning , -- it was on a Monday , the day when Marius borrowed the hundred-sou piece from Courfeyrac for Thenardier -- Marius had put this coin in his pocket , and before carrying it to the clerk 's office , he had gone `` to take a little stroll , '' in the hope that this would make him work on his return . 
It was always thus , however . 
As soon as he rose , he seated himself before a book and a sheet of paper in order to scribble some translation ; his task at that epoch consisted in turning into French a celebrated quarrel between Germans , the Gans and Savigny controversy ; he took Savigny , he took Gans , read four lines , tried to write one , could not , saw a star between him and his paper , and rose from his chair , saying : `` I shall go out . 
That will put me in spirits . '' 
And off he went to the Lark 's meadow . 
There he beheld more than ever the star , and less than ever Savigny and Gans . 
He returned home , tried to take up his work again , and did not succeed ; there was no means of re-knotting a single one of the threads which were broken in his brain ; then he said to himself : `` I will not go out to-morrow . 
It prevents my working . '' 
And he went out every day . 
He lived in the Lark 's meadow more than in Courfeyrac 's lodgings . 
That was his real address : Boulevard de la Sante , at the seventh tree from the Rue Croulebarbe . 
That morning he had quitted the seventh tree and had seated himself on the parapet of the River des Gobelins . 
A cheerful sunlight penetrated the freshly unfolded and luminous leaves . 
He was dreaming of `` Her . '' 
And his meditation turning to a reproach , fell back upon himself ; he reflected dolefully on his idleness , his paralysis of soul , which was gaining on him , and of that night which was growing more dense every moment before him , to such a point that he no longer even saw the sun . 
Nevertheless , athwart this painful extrication of indistinct ideas which was not even a monologue , so feeble had action become in him , and he had no longer the force to care to despair , athwart this melancholy absorption , sensations from without did reach him . 
He heard behind him , beneath him , on both banks of the river , the laundresses of the Gobelins beating their linen , and above his head , the birds chattering and singing in the elm-trees . 
On the one hand , the sound of liberty , the careless happiness of the leisure which has wings ; on the other , the sound of toil . 
What caused him to meditate deeply , and almost reflect , were two cheerful sounds . 
All at once , in the midst of his dejected ecstasy , he heard a familiar voice saying : -- `` Come ! 
Here he is ! '' 
He raised his eyes , and recognized that wretched child who had come to him one morning , the elder of the Thenardier daughters , Eponine ; he knew her name now . 
Strange to say , she had grown poorer and prettier , two steps which it had not seemed within her power to take . 
She had accomplished a double progress , towards the light and towards distress . 
She was barefooted and in rags , as on the day when she had so resolutely entered his chamber , only her rags were two months older now , the holes were larger , the tatters more sordid . 
It was the same harsh voice , the same brow dimmed and wrinkled with tan , the same free , wild , and vacillating glance . 
She had besides , more than formerly , in her face that indescribably terrified and lamentable something which sojourn in a prison adds to wretchedness . 
She had bits of straw and hay in her hair , not like Ophelia through having gone mad from the contagion of Hamlet 's madness , but because she had slept in the loft of some stable . 
And in spite of it all , she was beautiful . 
What a star art thou , O youth ! 
In the meantime , she had halted in front of Marius with a trace of joy in her livid countenance , and something which resembled a smile . 
She stood for several moments as though incapable of speech . 
`` So I have met you at last ! '' 
she said at length . 
`` Father Mabeuf was right , it was on this boulevard ! 
How I have hunted for you ! 
If you only knew ! 
Do you know ? 
I have been in the jug . 
A fortnight ! 
They let me out ! 
seeing that there was nothing against me , and that , moreover , I had not reached years of discretion . 
I lack two months of it . 
Oh ! 
how I have hunted for you ! 
These six weeks ! 
So you do n't live down there any more ? '' 
`` No , '' said Marius . 
`` Ah ! 
I understand . 
Because of that affair . 
Those take-downs are disagreeable . 
You cleared out . 
Come now ! 
Why do you wear old hats like this ! 
A young man like you ought to have fine clothes . 
Do you know , Monsieur Marius , Father Mabeuf calls you Baron Marius , I do n't know what . 
It is n't true that you are a baron ? 
Barons are old fellows , they go to the Luxembourg , in front of the chateau , where there is the most sun , and they read the Quotidienne for a sou . 
I once carried a letter to a baron of that sort . 
He was over a hundred years old . 
Say , where do you live now ? '' 
Marius made no reply . 
`` Ah ! '' 
she went on , `` you have a hole in your shirt . 
I must sew it up for you . '' 
She resumed with an expression which gradually clouded over : -- `` You do n't seem glad to see me . '' 
Marius held his peace ; she remained silent for a moment , then exclaimed : -- `` But if I choose , nevertheless , I could force you to look glad ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
you used to call me thou , '' she retorted . 
`` Well , then , what dost thou mean ? '' 
She bit her lips ; she seemed to hesitate , as though a prey to some sort of inward conflict . 
At last she appeared to come to a decision . 
`` So much the worse , I do n't care . 
You have a melancholy air , I want you to be pleased . 
Only promise me that you will smile . 
I want to see you smile and hear you say : ` Ah , well , that 's good . ' 
Poor Mr. Marius ! 
you know ? 
You promised me that you would give me anything I like -- '' `` Yes ! 
Only speak ! '' 
She looked Marius full in the eye , and said : -- `` I have the address . '' 
Marius turned pale . 
All the blood flowed back to his heart . 
`` What address ? '' 
`` The address that you asked me to get ! '' 
She added , as though with an effort : -- `` The address -- you know very well ! '' 
`` Yes ! '' 
stammered Marius . 
`` Of that young lady . '' 
This word uttered , she sighed deeply . 
Marius sprang from the parapet on which he had been sitting and seized her hand distractedly . 
`` Oh ! 
Well ! 
lead me thither ! 
Tell me ! 
Ask of me anything you wish ! 
Where is it ? '' 
`` Come with me , '' she responded . 
`` I do n't know the street or number very well ; it is in quite the other direction from here , but I know the house well , I will take you to it . '' 
She withdrew her hand and went on , in a tone which could have rent the heart of an observer , but which did not even graze Marius in his intoxicated and ecstatic state : -- `` Oh ! 
how glad you are ! '' 
A cloud swept across Marius ' brow . 
He seized Eponine by the arm : -- `` Swear one thing to me ! '' 
`` Swear ! '' 
said she , `` what does that mean ? 
Come ! 
You want me to swear ? '' 
And she laughed . 
`` Your father ! 
promise me , Eponine ! 
Swear to me that you will not give this address to your father ! '' 
She turned to him with a stupefied air . 
`` Eponine ! 
How do you know that my name is Eponine ? '' 
`` Promise what I tell you ! '' 
But she did not seem to hear him . 
`` That 's nice ! 
You have called me Eponine ! '' 
Marius grasped both her arms at once . 
`` But answer me , in the name of Heaven ! 
pay attention to what I am saying to you , swear to me that you will not tell your father this address that you know ! '' 
`` My father ! '' 
said she . 
`` Ah yes , my father ! 
Be at ease . 
He 's in close confinement . 
Besides , what do I care for my father ! '' 
`` But you do not promise me ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
`` Let go of me ! '' 
she said , bursting into a laugh , `` how you do shake me ! 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
I promise that ! 
I swear that to you ! 
What is that to me ? 
I will not tell my father the address . 
There ! 
Is that right ? 
Is that it ? '' 
`` Nor to any one ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` Nor to any one . '' 
`` Now , '' resumed Marius , `` take me there . '' 
`` Immediately ? '' 
`` Immediately . '' 
`` Come along . 
Ah ! 
how pleased he is ! '' 
said she . 
After a few steps she halted . 
`` You are following me too closely , Monsieur Marius . 
Let me go on ahead , and follow me so , without seeming to do it . 
A nice young man like you must not be seen with a woman like me . '' 
No tongue can express all that lay in that word , woman , thus pronounced by that child . 
She proceeded a dozen paces and then halted once more ; Marius joined her . 
She addressed him sideways , and without turning towards him : -- `` By the way , you know that you promised me something ? '' 
Marius fumbled in his pocket . 
All that he owned in the world was the five francs intended for Thenardier the father . 
He took them and laid them in Eponine 's hand . 
She opened her fingers and let the coin fall to the ground , and gazed at him with a gloomy air . 
`` I do n't want your money , '' said she . 
THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET About the middle of the last century , a chief justice in the Parliament of Paris having a mistress and concealing the fact , for at that period the grand seignors displayed their mistresses , and the bourgeois concealed them , had `` a little house '' built in the Faubourg Saint-Germain , in the deserted Rue Blomet , which is now called Rue Plumet , not far from the spot which was then designated as Combat des Animaux . 
This house was composed of a single-storied pavilion ; two rooms on the ground floor , two chambers on the first floor , a kitchen down stairs , a boudoir up stairs , an attic under the roof , the whole preceded by a garden with a large gate opening on the street . 
This garden was about an acre and a half in extent . 
This was all that could be seen by passers-by ; but behind the pavilion there was a narrow courtyard , and at the end of the courtyard a low building consisting of two rooms and a cellar , a sort of preparation destined to conceal a child and nurse in case of need . 
This building communicated in the rear by a masked door which opened by a secret spring , with a long , narrow , paved winding corridor , open to the sky , hemmed in with two lofty walls , which , hidden with wonderful art , and lost as it were between garden enclosures and cultivated land , all of whose angles and detours it followed , ended in another door , also with a secret lock which opened a quarter of a league away , almost in another quarter , at the solitary extremity of the Rue du Babylone . 
Through this the chief justice entered , so that even those who were spying on him and following him would merely have observed that the justice betook himself every day in a mysterious way somewhere , and would never have suspected that to go to the Rue de Babylone was to go to the Rue Blomet . 
Thanks to clever purchasers of land , the magistrate had been able to make a secret , sewer-like passage on his own property , and consequently , without interference . 
Later on , he had sold in little parcels , for gardens and market gardens , the lots of ground adjoining the corridor , and the proprietors of these lots on both sides thought they had a party wall before their eyes , and did not even suspect the long , paved ribbon winding between two walls amid their flower-beds and their orchards . 
Only the birds beheld this curiosity . 
It is probable that the linnets and tomtits of the last century gossiped a great deal about the chief justice . 
The pavilion , built of stone in the taste of Mansard , wainscoted and furnished in the Watteau style , rocaille on the inside , old-fashioned on the outside , walled in with a triple hedge of flowers , had something discreet , coquettish , and solemn about it , as befits a caprice of love and magistracy . 
This house and corridor , which have now disappeared , were in existence fifteen years ago . 
In '93 a coppersmith had purchased the house with the idea of demolishing it , but had not been able to pay the price ; the nation made him bankrupt . 
So that it was the house which demolished the coppersmith . 
After that , the house remained uninhabited , and fell slowly to ruin , as does every dwelling to which the presence of man does not communicate life . 
It had remained fitted with its old furniture , was always for sale or to let , and the ten or a dozen people who passed through the Rue Plumet were warned of the fact by a yellow and illegible bit of writing which had hung on the garden wall since 1819 . 
Towards the end of the Restoration , these same passers-by might have noticed that the bill had disappeared , and even that the shutters on the first floor were open . 
The house was occupied , in fact . 
The windows had short curtains , a sign that there was a woman about . 
In the month of October , 1829 , a man of a certain age had presented himself and had hired the house just as it stood , including , of course , the back building and the lane which ended in the Rue de Babylone . 
He had had the secret openings of the two doors to this passage repaired . 
The house , as we have just mentioned , was still very nearly furnished with the justice 's old fitting ; the new tenant had ordered some repairs , had added what was lacking here and there , had replaced the paving-stones in the yard , bricks in the floors , steps in the stairs , missing bits in the inlaid floors and the glass in the lattice windows , and had finally installed himself there with a young girl and an elderly maid-servant , without commotion , rather like a person who is slipping in than like a man who is entering his own house . 
The neighbors did not gossip about him , for the reason that there were no neighbors . 
This unobtrusive tenant was Jean Valjean , the young girl was Cosette . 
The servant was a woman named Toussaint , whom Jean Valjean had saved from the hospital and from wretchedness , and who was elderly , a stammerer , and from the provinces , three qualities which had decided Jean Valjean to take her with him . 
He had hired the house under the name of M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman . 
In all that has been related heretofore , the reader has , doubtless , been no less prompt than Thenardier to recognize Jean Valjean . 
Why had Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Petit-Picpus ? 
What had happened ? 
Nothing had happened . 
It will be remembered that Jean Valjean was happy in the convent , so happy that his conscience finally took the alarm . 
He saw Cosette every day , he felt paternity spring up and develop within him more and more , he brooded over the soul of that child , he said to himself that she was his , that nothing could take her from him , that this would last indefinitely , that she would certainly become a nun , being thereto gently incited every day , that thus the convent was henceforth the universe for her as it was for him , that he should grow old there , and that she would grow up there , that she would grow old there , and that he should die there ; that , in short , delightful hope , no separation was possible . 
On reflecting upon this , he fell into perplexity . 
He interrogated himself . 
He asked himself if all that happiness were really his , if it were not composed of the happiness of another , of the happiness of that child which he , an old man , was confiscating and stealing ; if that were not theft ? 
He said to himself , that this child had a right to know life before renouncing it , that to deprive her in advance , and in some sort without consulting her , of all joys , under the pretext of saving her from all trials , to take advantage of her ignorance of her isolation , in order to make an artificial vocation germinate in her , was to rob a human creature of its nature and to lie to God . 
And who knows if , when she came to be aware of all this some day , and found herself a nun to her sorrow , Cosette would not come to hate him ? 
A last , almost selfish thought , and less heroic than the rest , but which was intolerable to him . 
He resolved to quit the convent . 
He resolved on this ; he recognized with anguish , the fact that it was necessary . 
As for objections , there were none . 
Five years ' sojourn between these four walls and of disappearance had necessarily destroyed or dispersed the elements of fear . 
He could return tranquilly among men . 
He had grown old , and all had undergone a change . 
Who would recognize him now ? 
And then , to face the worst , there was danger only for himself , and he had no right to condemn Cosette to the cloister for the reason that he had been condemned to the galleys . 
Besides , what is danger in comparison with the right ? 
Finally , nothing prevented his being prudent and taking his precautions . 
As for Cosette 's education , it was almost finished and complete . 
His determination once taken , he awaited an opportunity . 
It was not long in presenting itself . 
Old Fauchelevent died . 
Jean Valjean demanded an audience with the revered prioress and told her that , having come into a little inheritance at the death of his brother , which permitted him henceforth to live without working , he should leave the service of the convent and take his daughter with him ; but that , as it was not just that Cosette , since she had not taken the vows , should have received her education gratuitously , he humbly begged the Reverend Prioress to see fit that he should offer to the community , as indemnity , for the five years which Cosette had spent there , the sum of five thousand francs . 
It was thus that Jean Valjean quitted the convent of the Perpetual Adoration . 
On leaving the convent , he took in his own arms the little valise the key to which he still wore on his person , and would permit no porter to touch it . 
This puzzled Cosette , because of the odor of embalming which proceeded from it . 
Let us state at once , that this trunk never quitted him more . 
He always had it in his chamber . 
It was the first and only thing sometimes , that he carried off in his moving when he moved about . 
Cosette laughed at it , and called this valise his inseparable , saying : `` I am jealous of it . '' 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean did not reappear in the open air without profound anxiety . 
He discovered the house in the Rue Plumet , and hid himself from sight there . 
Henceforth he was in the possession of the name : -- Ultime Fauchelevent . 
At the same time he hired two other apartments in Paris , in order that he might attract less attention than if he were to remain always in the same quarter , and so that he could , at need , take himself off at the slightest disquietude which should assail him , and in short , so that he might not again be caught unprovided as on the night when he had so miraculously escaped from Javert . 
These two apartments were very pitiable , poor in appearance , and in two quarters which were far remote from each other , the one in the Rue de l'Ouest , the other in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
He went from time to time , now to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , now to the Rue de l'Ouest , to pass a month or six weeks , without taking Toussaint . 
He had himself served by the porters , and gave himself out as a gentleman from the suburbs , living on his funds , and having a little temporary resting-place in town . 
This lofty virtue had three domiciles in Paris for the sake of escaping from the police . 
JEAN VALJEAN AS A NATIONAL GUARD However , properly speaking , he lived in the Rue Plumet , and he had arranged his existence there in the following fashion : -- Cosette and the servant occupied the pavilion ; she had the big sleeping-room with the painted pier-glasses , the boudoir with the gilded fillets , the justice 's drawing-room furnished with tapestries and vast arm-chairs ; she had the garden . 
Jean Valjean had a canopied bed of antique damask in three colors and a beautiful Persian rug purchased in the Rue du Figuier-Saint-Paul at Mother Gaucher 's , put into Cosette 's chamber , and , in order to redeem the severity of these magnificent old things , he had amalgamated with this bric-a-brac all the gay and graceful little pieces of furniture suitable to young girls , an etagere , a bookcase filled with gilt-edged books , an inkstand , a blotting-book , paper , a work-table incrusted with mother of pearl , a silver-gilt dressing-case , a toilet service in Japanese porcelain . 
Long damask curtains with a red foundation and three colors , like those on the bed , hung at the windows of the first floor . 
On the ground floor , the curtains were of tapestry . 
All winter long , Cosette 's little house was heated from top to bottom . 
Jean Valjean inhabited the sort of porter 's lodge which was situated at the end of the back courtyard , with a mattress on a folding-bed , a white wood table , two straw chairs , an earthenware water-jug , a few old volumes on a shelf , his beloved valise in one corner , and never any fire . 
He dined with Cosette , and he had a loaf of black bread on the table for his own use . 
When Toussaint came , he had said to her : `` It is the young lady who is the mistress of this house . '' 
-- `` And you , monsieur ? '' 
Toussaint replied in amazement . 
-- `` I am a much better thing than the master , I am the father . '' 
Cosette had been taught housekeeping in the convent , and she regulated their expenditure , which was very modest . 
Every day , Jean Valjean put his arm through Cosette 's and took her for a walk . 
He led her to the Luxembourg , to the least frequented walk , and every Sunday he took her to mass at Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas , because that was a long way off . 
As it was a very poor quarter , he bestowed alms largely there , and the poor people surrounded him in church , which had drawn down upon him Thenardier 's epistle : `` To the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . '' 
He was fond of taking Cosette to visit the poor and the sick . 
No stranger ever entered the house in the Rue Plumet . 
Toussaint brought their provisions , and Jean Valjean went himself for water to a fountain near by on the boulevard . 
Their wood and wine were put into a half-subterranean hollow lined with rock-work which lay near the Rue de Babylone and which had formerly served the chief-justice as a grotto ; for at the epoch of follies and `` Little Houses '' no love was without a grotto . 
In the door opening on the Rue de Babylone , there was a box destined for the reception of letters and papers ; only , as the three inhabitants of the pavilion in the Rue Plumet received neither papers nor letters , the entire usefulness of that box , formerly the go-between of a love affair , and the confidant of a love-lorn lawyer , was now limited to the tax-collector 's notices , and the summons of the guard . 
For M. Fauchelevent , independent gentleman , belonged to the national guard ; he had not been able to escape through the fine meshes of the census of 1831 . 
The municipal information collected at that time had even reached the convent of the Petit-Picpus , a sort of impenetrable and holy cloud , whence Jean Valjean had emerged in venerable guise , and , consequently , worthy of mounting guard in the eyes of the townhall . 
Three or four times a year , Jean Valjean donned his uniform and mounted guard ; he did this willingly , however ; it was a correct disguise which mixed him with every one , and yet left him solitary . 
Jean Valjean had just attained his sixtieth birthday , the age of legal exemption ; but he did not appear to be over fifty ; moreover , he had no desire to escape his sergeant-major nor to quibble with Comte de Lobau ; he possessed no civil status , he was concealing his name , he was concealing his identity , so he concealed his age , he concealed everything ; and , as we have just said , he willingly did his duty as a national guard ; the sum of his ambition lay in resembling any other man who paid his taxes . 
This man had for his ideal , within , the angel , without , the bourgeois . 
Let us note one detail , however ; when Jean Valjean went out with Cosette , he dressed as the reader has already seen , and had the air of a retired officer . 
When he went out alone , which was generally at night , he was always dressed in a workingman 's trousers and blouse , and wore a cap which concealed his face . 
Was this precaution or humility ? 
Both . 
Cosette was accustomed to the enigmatical side of her destiny , and hardly noticed her father 's peculiarities . 
As for Toussaint , she venerated Jean Valjean , and thought everything he did right . 
