Some combatants , having discovered a few crusts of rather mouldy bread , in a drawer , were eagerly devouring them . 
Marius was disturbed with regard to what his father was about to say to him . 
THE VULTURE BECOME PREY We must insist upon one psychological fact peculiar to barricades . 
Nothing which is characteristic of that surprising war of the streets should be omitted . 
Whatever may have been the singular inward tranquillity which we have just mentioned , the barricade , for those who are inside it , remains , none the less , a vision . 
There is something of the apocalypse in civil war , all the mists of the unknown are commingled with fierce flashes , revolutions are sphinxes , and any one who has passed through a barricade thinks he has traversed a dream . 
The feelings to which one is subject in these places we have pointed out in the case of Marius , and we shall see the consequences ; they are both more and less than life . 
On emerging from a barricade , one no longer knows what one has seen there . 
One has been terrible , but one knows it not . 
One has been surrounded with conflicting ideas which had human faces ; one 's head has been in the light of the future . 
There were corpses lying prone there , and phantoms standing erect . 
The hours were colossal and seemed hours of eternity . 
One has lived in death . 
Shadows have passed by . 
What were they ? 
One has beheld hands on which there was blood ; there was a deafening horror ; there was also a frightful silence ; there were open mouths which shouted , and other open mouths which held their peace ; one was in the midst of smoke , of night , perhaps . 
One fancied that one had touched the sinister ooze of unknown depths ; one stares at something red on one 's finger nails . 
One no longer remembers anything . 
Let us return to the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
All at once , between two discharges , the distant sound of a clock striking the hour became audible . 
`` It is midday , '' said Combeferre . 
The twelve strokes had not finished striking when Enjolras sprang to his feet , and from the summit of the barricade hurled this thundering shout : `` Carry stones up into the houses ; line the windowsills and the roofs with them . 
Half the men to their guns , the other half to the paving-stones . 
There is not a minute to be lost . '' 
A squad of sappers and miners , axe on shoulder , had just made their appearance in battle array at the end of the street . 
This could only be the head of a column ; and of what column ? 
The attacking column , evidently ; the sappers charged with the demolition of the barricade must always precede the soldiers who are to scale it . 
They were , evidently , on the brink of that moment which M. Clermont-Tonnerre , in 1822 , called `` the tug of war . '' 
Enjolras ' order was executed with the correct haste which is peculiar to ships and barricades , the only two scenes of combat where escape is impossible . 
In less than a minute , two thirds of the stones which Enjolras had had piled up at the door of Corinthe had been carried up to the first floor and the attic , and before a second minute had elapsed , these stones , artistically set one upon the other , walled up the sash-window on the first floor and the windows in the roof to half their height . 
A few loop-holes carefully planned by Feuilly , the principal architect , allowed of the passage of the gun-barrels . 
This armament of the windows could be effected all the more easily since the firing of grape-shot had ceased . 
The two cannons were now discharging ball against the centre of the barrier in order to make a hole there , and , if possible , a breach for the assault . 
When the stones destined to the final defence were in place , Enjolras had the bottles which he had set under the table where Mabeuf lay , carried to the first floor . 
`` Who is to drink that ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
`` They , '' replied Enjolras . 
Then they barricaded the window below , and held in readiness the iron cross-bars which served to secure the door of the wine-shop at night . 
The fortress was complete . 
The barricade was the rampart , the wine-shop was the dungeon . 
With the stones which remained they stopped up the outlet . 
As the defenders of a barricade are always obliged to be sparing of their ammunition , and as the assailants know this , the assailants combine their arrangements with a sort of irritating leisure , expose themselves to fire prematurely , though in appearance more than in reality , and take their ease . 
The preparations for attack are always made with a certain methodical deliberation ; after which , the lightning strikes . 
This deliberation permitted Enjolras to take a review of everything and to perfect everything . 
He felt that , since such men were to die , their death ought to be a masterpiece . 
He said to Marius : `` We are the two leaders . 
I will give the last orders inside . 
Do you remain outside and observe . '' 
Marius posted himself on the lookout upon the crest of the barricade . 
Enjolras had the door of the kitchen , which was the ambulance , as the reader will remember , nailed up . 
`` No splashing of the wounded , '' he said . 
He issued his final orders in the tap-room in a curt , but profoundly tranquil tone ; Feuilly listened and replied in the name of all . 
`` On the first floor , hold your axes in readiness to cut the staircase . 
Have you them ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Feuilly . 
`` How many ? '' 
`` Two axes and a pole-axe . '' 
`` That is good . 
There are now twenty-six combatants of us on foot . 
How many guns are there ? '' 
`` Thirty-four . '' 
`` Eight too many . 
Keep those eight guns loaded like the rest and at hand . 
Swords and pistols in your belts . 
Twenty men to the barricade . 
Six ambushed in the attic windows , and at the window on the first floor to fire on the assailants through the loop-holes in the stones . 
Let not a single worker remain inactive here . 
Presently , when the drum beats the assault , let the twenty below stairs rush to the barricade . 
The first to arrive will have the best places . '' 
These arrangements made , he turned to Javert and said : `` I am not forgetting you . '' 
And , laying a pistol on the table , he added : `` The last man to leave this room will smash the skull of this spy . '' 
`` Here ? '' 
inquired a voice . 
`` No , let us not mix their corpses with our own . 
The little barricade of the Mondetour lane can be scaled . 
It is only four feet high . 
The man is well pinioned . 
He shall be taken thither and put to death . '' 
There was some one who was more impassive at that moment than Enjolras , it was Javert . 
Here Jean Valjean made his appearance . 
He had been lost among the group of insurgents . 
He stepped forth and said to Enjolras : `` You are the commander ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You thanked me a while ago . '' 
`` In the name of the Republic . 
The barricade has two saviors , Marius Pontmercy and yourself . '' 
`` Do you think that I deserve a recompense ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` Well , I request one . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` That I may blow that man 's brains out . '' 
Javert raised his head , saw Jean Valjean , made an almost imperceptible movement , and said : `` That is just . '' 
As for Enjolras , he had begun to re-load his rifle ; he cut his eyes about him : `` No objections . '' 
And he turned to Jean Valjean : `` Take the spy . '' 
Jean Valjean did , in fact , take possession of Javert , by seating himself on the end of the table . 
He seized the pistol , and a faint click announced that he had cocked it . 
Almost at the same moment , a blast of trumpets became audible . 
`` Take care ! '' 
shouted Marius from the top of the barricade . 
Javert began to laugh with that noiseless laugh which was peculiar to him , and gazing intently at the insurgents , he said to them : `` You are in no better case than I am . '' 
`` All out ! '' 
shouted Enjolras . 
The insurgents poured out tumultuously , and , as they went , received in the back , -- may we be permitted the expression , -- this sally of Javert 's : `` We shall meet again shortly ! '' 
JEAN VALJEAN TAKES HIS REVENGE When Jean Valjean was left alone with Javert , he untied the rope which fastened the prisoner across the middle of the body , and the knot of which was under the table . 
After this he made him a sign to rise . 
Javert obeyed with that indefinable smile in which the supremacy of enchained authority is condensed . 
Jean Valjean took Javert by the martingale , as one would take a beast of burden by the breast-band , and , dragging the latter after him , emerged from the wine-shop slowly , because Javert , with his impeded limbs , could take only very short steps . 
Jean Valjean had the pistol in his hand . 
In this manner they crossed the inner trapezium of the barricade . 
The insurgents , all intent on the attack , which was imminent , had their backs turned to these two . 
Marius alone , stationed on one side , at the extreme left of the barricade , saw them pass . 
This group of victim and executioner was illuminated by the sepulchral light which he bore in his own soul . 
Jean Valjean with some difficulty , but without relaxing his hold for a single instant , made Javert , pinioned as he was , scale the little entrenchment in the Mondetour lane . 
When they had crossed this barrier , they found themselves alone in the lane . 
No one saw them . 
Among the heap they could distinguish a livid face , streaming hair , a pierced hand and the half nude breast of a woman . 
It was Eponine . 
The corner of the houses hid them from the insurgents . 
The corpses carried away from the barricade formed a terrible pile a few paces distant . 
Javert gazed askance at this body , and , profoundly calm , said in a low tone : `` It strikes me that I know that girl . '' 
Then he turned to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean thrust the pistol under his arm and fixed on Javert a look which it required no words to interpret : `` Javert , it is I. '' Javert replied : `` Take your revenge . '' 
Jean Valjean drew from his pocket a knife , and opened it . 
`` A clasp-knife ! '' 
exclaimed Javert , `` you are right . 
That suits you better . '' 
Jean Valjean cut the martingale which Javert had about his neck , then he cut the cords on his wrists , then , stooping down , he cut the cord on his feet ; and , straightening himself up , he said to him : `` You are free . '' 
Javert was not easily astonished . 
Still , master of himself though he was , he could not repress a start . 
He remained open-mouthed and motionless . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` I do not think that I shall escape from this place . 
But if , by chance , I do , I live , under the name of Fauchelevent , in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Javert snarled like a tiger , which made him half open one corner of his mouth , and he muttered between his teeth : `` Have a care . '' 
`` Go , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert began again : `` Thou saidst Fauchelevent , Rue de l'Homme Arme ? '' 
`` Number 7 . '' 
Javert repeated in a low voice : -- `` Number 7 . '' 
He buttoned up his coat once more , resumed the military stiffness between his shoulders , made a half turn , folded his arms and , supporting his chin on one of his hands , he set out in the direction of the Halles . 
Jean Valjean followed him with his eyes : A few minutes later , Javert turned round and shouted to Jean Valjean : `` You annoy me . 
Kill me , rather . '' 
Javert himself did not notice that he no longer addressed Jean Valjean as `` thou . '' 
`` Be off with you , '' said Jean Valjean . 
Javert retreated slowly . 
A moment later he turned the corner of the Rue des Precheurs . 
When Javert had disappeared , Jean Valjean fired his pistol in the air . 
Then he returned to the barricade and said : `` It is done . '' 
In the meanwhile , this is what had taken place . 
Marius , more intent on the outside than on the interior , had not , up to that time , taken a good look at the pinioned spy in the dark background of the tap-room . 
When he beheld him in broad daylight , striding over the barricade in order to proceed to his death , he recognized him . 
Something suddenly recurred to his mind . 
He recalled the inspector of the Rue de Pontoise , and the two pistols which the latter had handed to him and which he , Marius , had used in this very barricade , and not only did he recall his face , but his name as well . 
This recollection was misty and troubled , however , like all his ideas . 
It was not an affirmation that he made , but a question which he put to himself : `` Is not that the inspector of police who told me that his name was Javert ? '' 
Perhaps there was still time to intervene in behalf of that man . 
But , in the first place , he must know whether this was Javert . 
Marius called to Enjolras , who had just stationed himself at the other extremity of the barricade : `` Enjolras ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` What is the name of yonder man ? '' 
`` What man ? '' 
`` The police agent . 
Do you know his name ? '' 
`` Of course . 
He told us . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Javert . '' 
Marius sprang to his feet . 
At that moment , they heard the report of the pistol . 
Jean Valjean re-appeared and cried : `` It is done . '' 
A gloomy chill traversed Marius ' heart . 
THE DEAD ARE IN THE RIGHT AND THE LIVING ARE NOT IN THE WRONG The death agony of the barricade was about to begin . 
Everything contributed to its tragic majesty at that supreme moment ; a thousand mysterious crashes in the air , the breath of armed masses set in movement in the streets which were not visible , the intermittent gallop of cavalry , the heavy shock of artillery on the march , the firing by squads , and the cannonades crossing each other in the labyrinth of Paris , the smokes of battle mounting all gilded above the roofs , indescribable and vaguely terrible cries , lightnings of menace everywhere , the tocsin of Saint-Merry , which now had the accents of a sob , the mildness of the weather , the splendor of the sky filled with sun and clouds , the beauty of the day , and the alarming silence of the houses . 
For , since the preceding evening , the two rows of houses in the Rue de la Chanvrerie had become two walls ; ferocious walls , doors closed , windows closed , shutters closed . 
In those days , so different from those in which we live , when the hour was come , when the people wished to put an end to a situation , which had lasted too long , with a charter granted or with a legal country , when universal wrath was diffused in the atmosphere , when the city consented to the tearing up of the pavements , when insurrection made the bourgeoisie smile by whispering its password in its ear , then the inhabitant , thoroughly penetrated with the revolt , so to speak , was the auxiliary of the combatant , and the house fraternized with the improvised fortress which rested on it . 
When the situation was not ripe , when the insurrection was not decidedly admitted , when the masses disowned the movement , all was over with the combatants , the city was changed into a desert around the revolt , souls grew chilled , refuges were nailed up , and the street turned into a defile to help the army to take the barricade . 
A people can not be forced , through surprise , to walk more quickly than it chooses . 
Woe to whomsoever tries to force its hand ! 
A people does not let itself go at random . 
Then it abandons the insurrection to itself . 
The insurgents become noxious , infected with the plague . 
A house is an escarpment , a door is a refusal , a facade is a wall . 
This wall hears , sees and will not . 
It might open and save you . 
No . 
This wall is a judge . 
It gazes at you and condemns you . 
What dismal things are closed houses . 
They seem dead , they are living . 
Life which is , as it were , suspended there , persists there . 
No one has gone out of them for four and twenty hours , but no one is missing from them . 
In the interior of that rock , people go and come , go to bed and rise again ; they are a family party there ; there they eat and drink ; they are afraid , a terrible thing ! 
Fear excuses this fearful lack of hospitality ; terror is mixed with it , an extenuating circumstance . 
Sometimes , even , and this has been actually seen , fear turns to passion ; fright may change into fury , as prudence does into rage ; hence this wise saying : `` The enraged moderates . '' 
There are outbursts of supreme terror , whence springs wrath like a mournful smoke . 
-- `` What do these people want ? 
What have they come there to do ? 
Let them get out of the scrape . 
So much the worse for them . 
It is their fault . 
They are only getting what they deserve . 
It does not concern us . 
Here is our poor street all riddled with balls . 
They are a pack of rascals . 
Above all things , do n't open the door . '' 
-- And the house assumes the air of a tomb . 
The insurgent is in the death-throes in front of that house ; he sees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near ; if he cries , he knows that they are listening to him , and that no one will come ; there stand walls which might protect him , there are men who might save him ; and these walls have ears of flesh , and these men have bowels of stone . 
Whom shall he reproach ? 
No one and every one . 
The incomplete times in which we live . 
It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted into revolution , and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest , and from Minerva turns to Pallas . 
The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaits it ; it almost always comes too soon . 
Then it becomes resigned , and stoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph . 
It serves those who deny it without complaint , even excusing them , and even disculpates them , and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment . 
It is indomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle towards ingratitude . 
Is this ingratitude , however ? 
Yes , from the point of view of the human race . 
No , from the point of view of the individual . 
Progress is man 's mode of existence . 
The general life of the human race is called Progress , the collective stride of the human race is called Progress . 
Progress advances ; it makes the great human and terrestrial journey towards the celestial and the divine ; it has its halting places where it rallies the laggard troop , it has its stations where it meditates , in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled on its horizon , it has its nights when it sleeps ; and it is one of the poignant anxieties of the thinker that he sees the shadow resting on the human soul , and that he gropes in darkness without being able to awaken that slumbering Progress . 
`` God is dead , perhaps , '' said Gerard de Nerval one day to the writer of these lines , confounding progress with God , and taking the interruption of movement for the death of Being . 
He who despairs is in the wrong . 
Progress infallibly awakes , and , in short , we may say that it marches on , even when it is asleep , for it has increased in size . 
When we behold it erect once more , we find it taller . 
To be always peaceful does not depend on progress any more than it does on the stream ; erect no barriers , cast in no boulders ; obstacles make water froth and humanity boil . 
Hence arise troubles ; but after these troubles , we recognize the fact that ground has been gained . 
Until order , which is nothing else than universal peace , has been established , until harmony and unity reign , progress will have revolutions as its halting-places . 
What , then , is progress ? 
We have just enunciated it ; the permanent life of the peoples . 
Now , it sometimes happens , that the momentary life of individuals offers resistance to the eternal life of the human race . 
Let us admit without bitterness , that the individual has his distinct interests , and can , without forfeiture , stipulate for his interest , and defend it ; the present has its pardonable dose of egotism ; momentary life has its rights , and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to the future . 
The generation which is passing in its turn over the earth , is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations , its equal , after all , who will have their turn later on . 
-- `` I exist , '' murmurs that some one whose name is All . 
`` I am young and in love , I am old and I wish to repose , I am the father of a family , I toil , I prosper , I am successful in business , I have houses to lease , I have money in the government funds , I am happy , I have a wife and children , I have all this , I desire to live , leave me in peace . '' 
-- Hence , at certain hours , a profound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race . 
Utopia , moreover , we must admit , quits its radiant sphere when it makes war . 
It , the truth of to-morrow , borrows its mode of procedure , battle , from the lie of yesterday . 
It , the future , behaves like the past . 
It , pure idea , becomes a deed of violence . 
It complicates its heroism with a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer ; a violence of occasion and expedient , contrary to principle , and for which it is fatally punished . 
The Utopia , insurrection , fights with the old military code in its fist ; it shoots spies , it executes traitors ; it suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown darkness . 
It makes use of death , a serious matter . 
It seems as though Utopia had no longer any faith in radiance , its irresistible and incorruptible force . 
It strikes with the sword . 
Now , no sword is simple . 
Every blade has two edges ; he who wounds with the one is wounded with the other . 
Having made this reservation , and made it with all severity , it is impossible for us not to admire , whether they succeed or not , those the glorious combatants of the future , the confessors of Utopia . 
Even when they miscarry , they are worthy of veneration ; and it is , perhaps , in failure , that they possess the most majesty . 
Victory , when it is in accord with progress , merits the applause of the people ; but a heroic defeat merits their tender compassion . 
The one is magnificent , the other sublime . 
For our own part , we prefer martyrdom to success . 
John Brown is greater than Washington , and Pisacane is greater than Garibaldi . 
It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of the vanquished . 
We are unjust towards these great men who attempt the future , when they fail . 
Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad . 
Every barricade seems a crime . 
Their theories are incriminated , their aim suspected , their ulterior motive is feared , their conscience denounced . 
They are reproached with raising , erecting , and heaping up , against the reigning social state , a mass of miseries , of griefs , of iniquities , of wrongs , of despairs , and of tearing from the lowest depths blocks of shadow in order therein to embattle themselves and to combat . 
People shout to them : `` You are tearing up the pavements of hell ! '' 
They might reply : `` That is because our barricade is made of good intentions . '' 
The best thing , assuredly , is the pacific solution . 
In short , let us agree that when we behold the pavement , we think of the bear , and it is a good will which renders society uneasy . 
But it depends on society to save itself , it is to its own good will that we make our appeal . 
No violent remedy is necessary . 
To study evil amiably , to prove its existence , then to cure it . 
It is to this that we invite it . 
However that may be , even when fallen , above all when fallen , these men , who at every point of the universe , with their eyes fixed on France , are striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of the ideal , are august ; they give their life a free offering to progress ; they accomplish the will of providence ; they perform a religious act . 
At the appointed hour , with as much disinterestedness as an actor who answers to his cue , in obedience to the divine stage-manager , they enter the tomb . 
And this hopeless combat , this stoical disappearance they accept in order to bring about the supreme and universal consequences , the magnificent and irresistibly human movement begun on the 14th of July , 1789 ; these soldiers are priests . 
The French revolution is an act of God . 
Moreover , there are , and it is proper to add this distinction to the distinctions already pointed out in another chapter , -- there are accepted revolutions , revolutions which are called revolutions ; there are refused revolutions , which are called riots . 
An insurrection which breaks out , is an idea which is passing its examination before the people . 
If the people lets fall a black ball , the idea is dried fruit ; the insurrection is a mere skirmish . 
Waging war at every summons and every time that Utopia desires it , is not the thing for the peoples . 
Nations have not always and at every hour the temperament of heroes and martyrs . 
They are positive . 
A priori , insurrection is repugnant to them , in the first place , because it often results in a catastrophe , in the second place , because it always has an abstraction as its point of departure . 
Because , and this is a noble thing , it is always for the ideal , and for the ideal alone , that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrifice themselves . 
An insurrection is an enthusiasm . 
Enthusiasm may wax wroth ; hence the appeal to arms . 
But every insurrection , which aims at a government or a regime , aims higher . 
Thus , for instance , and we insist upon it , what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832 , and , in particular , the young enthusiasts of the Rue de la Chanvrerie were combating , was not precisely Louis Philippe . 
The majority of them , when talking freely , did justice to this king who stood midway between monarchy and revolution ; no one hated him . 
But they attacked the younger branch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they had attacked its elder branch in Charles X. ; and that which they wished to overturn in overturning royalty in France , was , as we have explained , the usurpation of man over man , and of privilege over right in the entire universe . 
Paris without a king has as result the world without despots . 
This is the manner in which they reasoned . 
Their aim was distant no doubt , vague perhaps , and it retreated in the face of their efforts ; but it was great . 
Thus it is . 
And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions , which are almost always illusions for the sacrificed , but illusions with which , after all , the whole of human certainty is mingled . 
We throw ourselves into these tragic affairs and become intoxicated with that which we are about to do . 
Who knows ? 
We may succeed . 
We are few in number , we have a whole army arrayed against us ; but we are defending right , the natural law , the sovereignty of each one over himself from which no abdication is possible , justice and truth , and in case of need , we die like the three hundred Spartans . 
We do not think of Don Quixote but of Leonidas . 
And we march straight before us , and once pledged , we do not draw back , and we rush onwards with head held low , cherishing as our hope an unprecedented victory , revolution completed , progress set free again , the aggrandizement of the human race , universal deliverance ; and in the event of the worst , Thermopylae . 
These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck , and we have just explained why . 
The crowd is restive in the presence of the impulses of paladins . 
Heavy masses , the multitudes which are fragile because of their very weight , fear adventures ; and there is a touch of adventure in the ideal . 
Moreover , and we must not forget this , interests which are not very friendly to the ideal and the sentimental are in the way . 
Sometimes the stomach paralyzes the heart . 
The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this , that she takes less from the stomach than other nations : she more easily knots the rope about her loins . 
She is the first awake , the last asleep . 
She marches forwards . 
She is a seeker . 
This arises from the fact that she is an artist . 
The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic , the same as the beautiful is nothing but the summit of the true . 
Artistic peoples are also consistent peoples . 
To love beauty is to see the light . 
That is why the torch of Europe , that is to say of civilization , was first borne by Greece , who passed it on to Italy , who handed it on to France . 
Divine , illuminating nations of scouts ! 
Vitaelampada tradunt . 
It is an admirable thing that the poetry of a people is the element of its progress . 
The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity of imagination . 
Only , a civilizing people should remain a manly people . 
Corinth , yes ; Sybaris , no . 
Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a bastard . 
He must be neither a dilettante nor a virtuoso : but he must be artistic . 
In the matter of civilization , he must not refine , but he must sublime . 
On this condition , one gives to the human race the pattern of the ideal . 
The modern ideal has its type in art , and its means is science . 
It is through science that it will realize that august vision of the poets , the socially beautiful . 
Eden will be reconstructed by A+B . 
At the point which civilization has now reached , the exact is a necessary element of the splendid , and the artistic sentiment is not only served , but completed by the scientific organ ; dreams must be calculated . 
Art , which is the conqueror , should have for support science , which is the walker ; the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance . 
The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the genius of India as its vehicle ; Alexander on the elephant . 
Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit to guide civilization . 
Genuflection before the idol or before money wastes away the muscles which walk and the will which advances . 
Hieratic or mercantile absorption lessens a people 's power of radiance , lowers its horizon by lowering its level , and deprives it of that intelligence , at once both human and divine of the universal goal , which makes missionaries of nations . 
Babylon has no ideal ; Carthage has no ideal . 
Athens and Rome have and keep , throughout all the nocturnal darkness of the centuries , halos of civilization . 
France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy . 
She is Athenian in the matter of beauty , and Roman in her greatness . 
Moreover , she is good . 
She gives herself . 
Oftener than is the case with other races , is she in the humor for self-devotion and sacrifice . 
Only , this humor seizes upon her , and again abandons her . 
And therein lies the great peril for those who run when she desires only to walk , or who walk on when she desires to halt . 
France has her relapses into materialism , and , at certain instants , the ideas which obstruct that sublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatness and are of the dimensions of a Missouri or a South Carolina . 
What is to be done in such a case ? 
The giantess plays at being a dwarf ; immense France has her freaks of pettiness . 
That is all . 
To this there is nothing to say . 
Peoples , like planets , possess the right to an eclipse . 
And all is well , provided that the light returns and that the eclipse does not degenerate into night . 
Dawn and resurrection are synonymous . 
The reappearance of the light is identical with the persistence of the I. Let us state these facts calmly . 
Death on the barricade or the tomb in exile , is an acceptable occasion for devotion . 
The real name of devotion is disinterestedness . 
Let the abandoned allow themselves to be abandoned , let the exiled allow themselves to be exiled , and let us confine ourselves to entreating great nations not to retreat too far , when they do retreat . 
One must not push too far in descent under pretext of a return to reason . 
Matter exists , the minute exists , interest exists , the stomach exists ; but the stomach must not be the sole wisdom . 
The life of the moment has its rights , we admit , but permanent life has its rights also . 
Alas ! 
the fact that one is mounted does not preclude a fall . 
This can be seen in history more frequently than is desirable : A nation is great , it tastes the ideal , then it bites the mire , and finds it good ; and if it be asked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff , it replies : `` Because I love statesmen . '' 
One word more before returning to our subject , the conflict . 
A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothing else than a convulsion towards the ideal . 
Progress trammelled is sickly , and is subject to these tragic epilepsies . 
With that malady of progress , civil war , we have been obliged to come in contact in our passage . 
This is one of the fatal phases , at once act and entr ` acte of that drama whose pivot is a social condemnation , and whose veritable title is Progress . 
Progress ! 
The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought ; and , at the point of this drama which we have now reached , the idea which it contains having still more than one trial to undergo , it is , perhaps , permitted to us , if not to lift the veil from it , to at least allow its light to shine through . 
The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is , from one end to the other , as a whole and in detail , whatever may be its intermittences , exceptions and faults , the march from evil to good , from the unjust to the just , from night to day , from appetite to conscience , from rottenness to life , from hell to heaven , from nothingness to God . 
Point of departure : matter ; point of arrival : the soul . 
The hydra at the beginning , the angel at the end . 
THE HEROES All at once , the drum beat the charge . 
The attack was a hurricane . 
On the evening before , in the darkness , the barricade had been approached silently , as by a boa . 
Now , in broad daylight , in that widening street , surprise was decidedly impossible , rude force had , moreover , been unmasked , the cannon had begun the roar , the army hurled itself on the barricade . 
Fury now became skill . 
A powerful detachment of infantry of the line , broken at regular intervals , by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot , and supported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen , debauched into the street at a run , with drums beating , trumpets braying , bayonets levelled , the sappers at their head , and , imperturbable under the projectiles , charged straight for the barricade with the weight of a brazen beam against a wall . 
The wall held firm . 
The insurgents fired impetuously . 
The barricade once scaled had a mane of lightning flashes . 
The assault was so furious , that for one moment , it was inundated with assailants ; but it shook off the soldiers as the lion shakes off the dogs , and it was only covered with besiegers as the cliff is covered with foam , to re-appear , a moment later , beetling , black and formidable . 
The column , forced to retreat , remained massed in the street , unprotected but terrible , and replied to the redoubt with a terrible discharge of musketry . 
Any one who has seen fireworks will recall the sheaf formed of interlacing lightnings which is called a bouquet . 
Let the reader picture to himself this bouquet , no longer vertical but horizontal , bearing a bullet , buck-shot or a biscaien at the tip of each one of its jets of flame , and picking off dead men one after another from its clusters of lightning . 
The barricade was underneath it . 
On both sides , the resolution was equal . 
The bravery exhibited there was almost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocity which began by the sacrifice of self . 
This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave . 
The troop wished to make an end of it , insurrection was desirous of fighting . 
The acceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth and in the flush of health turns intrepidity into frenzy . 
In this fray , each one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour . 
The street was strewn with corpses . 
The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at the other . 
Enjolras , who carried the whole barricade in his head , reserved and sheltered himself ; three soldiers fell , one after the other , under his embrasure , without having even seen him ; Marius fought unprotected . 
He made himself a target . 
He stood with more than half his body above the breastworks . 
There is no more violent prodigal than the avaricious man who takes the bit in his teeth ; there is no man more terrible in action than a dreamer . 
Marius was formidable and pensive . 
In battle he was as in a dream . 
One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged in firing a gun . 
The insurgents ' cartridges were giving out ; but not their sarcasms . 
In this whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood , they laughed . 
Courfeyrac was bare-headed . 
`` What have you done with your hat ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
Courfeyrac replied : `` They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls . '' 
Or they uttered haughty comments . 
`` Can any one understand , '' exclaimed Feuilly bitterly , `` those men , -- -LSB- and he cited names , well-known names , even celebrated names , some belonging to the old army -RSB- -- who had promised to join us , and taken an oath to aid us , and who had pledged their honor to it , and who are our generals , and who abandon us ! '' 
And Combeferre restricted himself to replying with a grave smile . 
`` There are people who observe the rules of honor as one observes the stars , from a great distance . '' 
The interior of the barricade was so strewn with torn cartridges that one would have said that there had been a snowstorm . 
The assailants had numbers in their favor ; the insurgents had position . 
They were at the top of a wall , and they thundered point-blank upon the soldiers tripping over the dead and wounded and entangled in the escarpment . 
This barricade , constructed as it was and admirably buttressed , was really one of those situations where a handful of men hold a legion in check . 
Nevertheless , the attacking column , constantly recruited and enlarged under the shower of bullets , drew inexorably nearer , and now , little by little , step by step , but surely , the army closed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the wine-press . 
One assault followed another . 
The horror of the situation kept increasing . 
Then there burst forth on that heap of paving-stones , in that Rue de la Chanvrerie , a battle worthy of a wall of Troy . 
These haggard , ragged , exhausted men , who had had nothing to eat for four and twenty hours , who had not slept , who had but a few more rounds to fire , who were fumbling in their pockets which had been emptied of cartridges , nearly all of whom were wounded , with head or arm bandaged with black and blood-stained linen , with holes in their clothes from which the blood trickled , and who were hardly armed with poor guns and notched swords , became Titans . 
The barricade was ten times attacked , approached , assailed , scaled , and never captured . 
In order to form an idea of this struggle , it is necessary to imagine fire set to a throng of terrible courages , and then to gaze at the conflagration . 
It was not a combat , it was the interior of a furnace ; there mouths breathed the flame ; there countenances were extraordinary . 
The human form seemed impossible there , the combatants flamed forth there , and it was formidable to behold the going and coming in that red glow of those salamanders of the fray . 
The successive and simultaneous scenes of this grand slaughter we renounce all attempts at depicting . 
The epic alone has the right to fill twelve thousand verses with a battle . 
One would have pronounced this that hell of Brahmanism , the most redoubtable of the seventeen abysses , which the Veda calls the Forest of Swords . 
They fought hand to hand , foot to foot , with pistol shots , with blows of the sword , with their fists , at a distance , close at hand , from above , from below , from everywhere , from the roofs of the houses , from the windows of the wine-shop , from the cellar windows , whither some had crawled . 
They were one against sixty . 
The facade of Corinthe , half demolished , was hideous . 
The window , tattooed with grape-shot , had lost glass and frame and was nothing now but a shapeless hole , tumultuously blocked with paving-stones . 
Bossuet was killed ; Feuilly was killed ; Courfeyrac was killed ; Combeferre , transfixed by three blows from a bayonet in the breast at the moment when he was lifting up a wounded soldier , had only time to cast a glance to heaven when he expired . 
Marius , still fighting , was so riddled with wounds , particularly in the head , that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood , and one would have said that his face was covered with a red kerchief . 
Enjolras alone was not struck . 
When he had no longer any weapon , he reached out his hands to right and left and an insurgent thrust some arm or other into his fist . 
All he had left was the stumps of four swords ; one more than Francois I. at Marignan . 
Homer says : `` Diomedes cuts the throat of Axylus , son of Teuthranis , who dwelt in happy Arisba ; Euryalus , son of Mecistaeus , exterminates Dresos and Opheltios , Esepius , and that Pedasus whom the naiad Abarbarea bore to the blameless Bucolion ; Ulysses overthrows Pidytes of Percosius ; Antilochus , Ablerus ; Polypaetes , Astyalus ; Polydamas , Otos , of Cyllene ; and Teucer , Aretaon . 
Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus ' pike . 
Agamemnon , king of the heroes , flings to earth Elatos , born in the rocky city which is laved by the sounding river Satnois . '' 
In our old poems of exploits , Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore with a cobbler 's shoulder-stick of fire , and the latter defends himself by stoning the hero with towers which he plucks up by the roots . 
Our ancient mural frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon , armed , emblazoned and crested in war-like guise , on horseback and approaching each other , their battle-axes in hand , masked with iron , gloved with iron , booted with iron , the one caparisoned in ermine , the other draped in azure : Bretagne with his lion between the two horns of his crown , Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor . 
But , in order to be superb , it is not necessary to wear , like Yvon , the ducal morion , to have in the fist , like Esplandian , a living flame , or , like Phyles , father of Polydamas , to have brought back from Ephyra a good suit of mail , a present from the king of men , Euphetes ; it suffices to give one 's life for a conviction or a loyalty . 
This ingenuous little soldier , yesterday a peasant of Bauce or Limousin , who prowls with his clasp-knife by his side , around the children 's nurses in the Luxembourg garden , this pale young student bent over a piece of anatomy or a book , a blond youth who shaves his beard with scissors , -- take both of them , breathe upon them with a breath of duty , place them face to face in the Carrefour Boucherat or in the blind alley Planche-Mibray , and let the one fight for his flag , and the other for his ideal , and let both of them imagine that they are fighting for their country ; the struggle will be colossal ; and the shadow which this raw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that grand epic field where humanity is striving , will equal the shadow cast by Megaryon , King of Lycia , tiger-filled , crushing in his embrace the immense body of Ajax , equal to the gods . 
FOOT TO FOOT When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive , except Enjolras and Marius at the two extremities of the barricade , the centre , which had so long sustained Courfeyrac , Joly , Bossuet , Feuilly and Combeferre , gave way . 
The cannon , though it had not effected a practicable breach , had made a rather large hollow in the middle of the redoubt ; there , the summit of the wall had disappeared before the balls , and had crumbled away ; and the rubbish which had fallen , now inside , now outside , had , as it accumulated , formed two piles in the nature of slopes on the two sides of the barrier , one on the inside , the other on the outside . 
The exterior slope presented an inclined plane to the attack . 
A final assault was there attempted , and this assault succeeded . 
The mass bristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run , came up with irresistible force , and the serried front of battle of the attacking column made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of the battlements . 
This time , it was decisive . 
The group of insurgents who were defending the centre retreated in confusion . 
Then the gloomy love of life awoke once more in some of them . 
Many , finding themselves under the muzzles of this forest of guns , did not wish to die . 
This is a moment when the instinct of self-preservation emits howls , when the beast re-appears in men . 
They were hemmed in by the lofty , six-story house which formed the background of their redoubt . 
This house might prove their salvation . 
The building was barricaded , and walled , as it were , from top to bottom . 
Before the troops of the line had reached the interior of the redoubt , there was time for a door to open and shut , the space of a flash of lightning was sufficient for that , and the door of that house , suddenly opened a crack and closed again instantly , was life for these despairing men . 
Behind this house , there were streets , possible flight , space . 
They set to knocking at that door with the butts of their guns , and with kicks , shouting , calling , entreating , wringing their hands . 
No one opened . 
From the little window on the third floor , the head of the dead man gazed down upon them . 
But Enjolras and Marius , and the seven or eight rallied about them , sprang forward and protected them . 
Enjolras had shouted to the soldiers : `` Do n't advance ! '' 
and as an officer had not obeyed , Enjolras had killed the officer . 
He was now in the little inner court of the redoubt , with his back planted against the Corinthe building , a sword in one hand , a rifle in the other , holding open the door of the wine-shop which he barred against assailants . 
He shouted to the desperate men : -- `` There is but one door open ; this one . '' 
-- And shielding them with his body , and facing an entire battalion alone , he made them pass in behind him . 
All precipitated themselves thither . 
Enjolras , executing with his rifle , which he now used like a cane , what single-stick players call a `` covered rose '' round his head , levelled the bayonets around and in front of him , and was the last to enter ; and then ensued a horrible moment , when the soldiers tried to make their way in , and the insurgents strove to bar them out . 
The door was slammed with such violence , that , as it fell back into its frame , it showed the five fingers of a soldier who had been clinging to it , cut off and glued to the post . 
Marius remained outside . 
A shot had just broken his collar bone , he felt that he was fainting and falling . 
At that moment , with eyes already shut , he felt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him , and the swoon in which his senses vanished , hardly allowed him time for the thought , mingled with a last memory of Cosette : -- `` I am taken prisoner . 
I shall be shot . '' 
Enjolras , not seeing Marius among those who had taken refuge in the wine-shop , had the same idea . 
But they had reached a moment when each man has not the time to meditate on his own death . 
Enjolras fixed the bar across the door , and bolted it , and double-locked it with key and chain , while those outside were battering furiously at it , the soldiers with the butts of their muskets , the sappers with their axes . 
The assailants were grouped about that door . 
The siege of the wine-shop was now beginning . 
The soldiers , we will observe , were full of wrath . 
The death of the artillery-sergeant had enraged them , and then , a still more melancholy circumstance . 
during the few hours which had preceded the attack , it had been reported among them that the insurgents were mutilating their prisoners , and that there was the headless body of a soldier in the wine-shop . 
This sort of fatal rumor is the usual accompaniment of civil wars , and it was a false report of this kind which , later on , produced the catastrophe of the Rue Transnonain . 
When the door was barricaded , Enjolras said to the others : `` Let us sell our lives dearly . '' 
Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche . 
Beneath the black cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible , one large , the other small , and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath the cold folds of the shroud . 
A hand projected from beneath the winding sheet and hung near the floor . 
It was that of the old man . 
Enjolras bent down and kissed that venerable hand , just as he had kissed his brow on the preceding evening . 
These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course of his life . 
Let us abridge the tale . 
The barricade had fought like a gate of Thebes ; the wine-shop fought like a house of Saragossa . 
These resistances are dogged . 
No quarter . 
No flag of truce possible . 
Men are willing to die , provided their opponent will kill them . 
When Suchet says : -- `` Capitulate , '' -- Palafox replies : `` After the war with cannon , the war with knives . '' 
Nothing was lacking in the capture by assault of the Hucheloup wine-shop ; neither paving-stones raining from the windows and the roof on the besiegers and exasperating the soldiers by crushing them horribly , nor shots fired from the attic-windows and the cellar , nor the fury of attack , nor , finally , when the door yielded , the frenzied madness of extermination . 
The assailants , rushing into the wine-shop , their feet entangled in the panels of the door which had been beaten in and flung on the ground , found not a single combatant there . 
The spiral staircase , hewn asunder with the axe , lay in the middle of the tap-room , a few wounded men were just breathing their last , every one who was not killed was on the first floor , and from there , through the hole in the ceiling , which had formed the entrance of the stairs , a terrific fire burst forth . 
It was the last of their cartridges . 
When they were exhausted , when these formidable men on the point of death had no longer either powder or ball , each grasped in his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved , and of which we have spoken , and held the scaling party in check with these frightfully fragile clubs . 
They were bottles of aquafortis . 
We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred . 
The besieged man , alas ! 
converts everything into a weapon . 
Greek fire did not disgrace Archimedes , boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard . 
All war is a thing of terror , and there is no choice in it . 
