One was the bearded old woman who swept out his chamber , and caused Courfeyrac to say : `` Seeing that his servant woman wears his beard , Marius does not wear his own beard . '' 
The other was a sort of little girl whom he saw very often , and whom he never looked at . 
For more than a year , Marius had noticed in one of the walks of the Luxembourg , the one which skirts the parapet of the Pepiniere , a man and a very young girl , who were almost always seated side by side on the same bench , at the most solitary end of the alley , on the Rue de l'Ouest side . 
Every time that that chance which meddles with the strolls of persons whose gaze is turned inwards , led Marius to that walk , -- and it was nearly every day , -- he found this couple there . 
The man appeared to be about sixty years of age ; he seemed sad and serious ; his whole person presented the robust and weary aspect peculiar to military men who have retired from the service . 
If he had worn a decoration , Marius would have said : `` He is an ex-officer . '' 
He had a kindly but unapproachable air , and he never let his glance linger on the eyes of any one . 
He wore blue trousers , a blue frock coat and a broad-brimmed hat , which always appeared to be new , a black cravat , a quaker shirt , that is to say , it was dazzlingly white , but of coarse linen . 
A grisette who passed near him one day , said : `` Here 's a very tidy widower . '' 
His hair was very white . 
The first time that the young girl who accompanied him came and seated herself on the bench which they seemed to have adopted , she was a sort of child thirteen or fourteen years of age , so thin as to be almost homely , awkward , insignificant , and with a possible promise of handsome eyes . 
Only , they were always raised with a sort of displeasing assurance . 
Her dress was both aged and childish , like the dress of the scholars in a convent ; it consisted of a badly cut gown of black merino . 
They had the air of being father and daughter . 
Marius scanned this old man , who was not yet aged , and this little girl , who was not yet a person , for a few days , and thereafter paid no attention to them . 
They , on their side , did not appear even to see him . 
They conversed together with a peaceful and indifferent air . 
The girl chattered incessantly and merrily . 
The old man talked but little , and , at times , he fixed on her eyes overflowing with an ineffable paternity . 
Marius had acquired the mechanical habit of strolling in that walk . 
He invariably found them there . 
This is the way things went : -- Marius liked to arrive by the end of the alley which was furthest from their bench ; he walked the whole length of the alley , passed in front of them , then returned to the extremity whence he had come , and began again . 
This he did five or six times in the course of his promenade , and the promenade was taken five or six times a week , without its having occurred to him or to these people to exchange a greeting . 
That personage , and that young girl , although they appeared , -- and perhaps because they appeared , -- to shun all glances , had , naturally , caused some attention on the part of the five or six students who strolled along the Pepiniere from time to time ; the studious after their lectures , the others after their game of billiards . 
Courfeyrac , who was among the last , had observed them several times , but , finding the girl homely , he had speedily and carefully kept out of the way . 
He had fled , discharging at them a sobriquet , like a Parthian dart . 
Impressed solely with the child 's gown and the old man 's hair , he had dubbed the daughter Mademoiselle Lanoire , and the father , Monsieur Leblanc , so that as no one knew them under any other title , this nickname became a law in the default of any other name . 
The students said : `` Ah ! 
Monsieur Leblanc is on his bench . '' 
And Marius , like the rest , had found it convenient to call this unknown gentleman Monsieur Leblanc . 
We shall follow their example , and we shall say M. Leblanc , in order to facilitate this tale . 
So Marius saw them nearly every day , at the same hour , during the first year . 
He found the man to his taste , but the girl insipid . 
LUX FACTA EST During the second year , precisely at the point in this history which the reader has now reached , it chanced that this habit of the Luxembourg was interrupted , without Marius himself being quite aware why , and nearly six months elapsed , during which he did not set foot in the alley . 
One day , at last , he returned thither once more ; it was a serene summer morning , and Marius was in joyous mood , as one is when the weather is fine . 
It seemed to him that he had in his heart all the songs of the birds that he was listening to , and all the bits of blue sky of which he caught glimpses through the leaves of the trees . 
He went straight to `` his alley , '' and when he reached the end of it he perceived , still on the same bench , that well-known couple . 
Only , when he approached , it certainly was the same man ; but it seemed to him that it was no longer the same girl . 
The person whom he now beheld was a tall and beautiful creature , possessed of all the most charming lines of a woman at the precise moment when they are still combined with all the most ingenuous graces of the child ; a pure and fugitive moment , which can be expressed only by these two words , -- `` fifteen years . '' 
She had wonderful brown hair , shaded with threads of gold , a brow that seemed made of marble , cheeks that seemed made of rose-leaf , a pale flush , an agitated whiteness , an exquisite mouth , whence smiles darted like sunbeams , and words like music , a head such as Raphael would have given to Mary , set upon a neck that Jean Goujon would have attributed to a Venus . 
And , in order that nothing might be lacking to this bewitching face , her nose was not handsome -- it was pretty ; neither straight nor curved , neither Italian nor Greek ; it was the Parisian nose , that is to say , spiritual , delicate , irregular , pure , -- which drives painters to despair , and charms poets . 
When Marius passed near her , he could not see her eyes , which were constantly lowered . 
He saw only her long chestnut lashes , permeated with shadow and modesty . 
This did not prevent the beautiful child from smiling as she listened to what the white-haired old man was saying to her , and nothing could be more fascinating than that fresh smile , combined with those drooping eyes . 
For a moment , Marius thought that she was another daughter of the same man , a sister of the former , no doubt . 
But when the invariable habit of his stroll brought him , for the second time , near the bench , and he had examined her attentively , he recognized her as the same . 
In six months the little girl had become a young maiden ; that was all . 
Nothing is more frequent than this phenomenon . 
There is a moment when girls blossom out in the twinkling of an eye , and become roses all at once . 
One left them children but yesterday ; today , one finds them disquieting to the feelings . 
This child had not only grown , she had become idealized . 
As three days in April suffice to cover certain trees with flowers , six months had sufficed to clothe her with beauty . 
Her April had arrived . 
One sometimes sees people , who , poor and mean , seem to wake up , pass suddenly from indigence to luxury , indulge in expenditures of all sorts , and become dazzling , prodigal , magnificent , all of a sudden . 
That is the result of having pocketed an income ; a note fell due yesterday . 
The young girl had received her quarterly income . 
And then , she was no longer the school-girl with her felt hat , her merino gown , her scholar 's shoes , and red hands ; taste had come to her with beauty ; she was a well-dressed person , clad with a sort of rich and simple elegance , and without affectation . 
She wore a dress of black damask , a cape of the same material , and a bonnet of white crape . 
Her white gloves displayed the delicacy of the hand which toyed with the carved , Chinese ivory handle of a parasol , and her silken shoe outlined the smallness of her foot . 
When one passed near her , her whole toilette exhaled a youthful and penetrating perfume . 
As for the man , he was the same as usual . 
The second time that Marius approached her , the young girl raised her eyelids ; her eyes were of a deep , celestial blue , but in that veiled azure , there was , as yet , nothing but the glance of a child . 
She looked at Marius indifferently , as she would have stared at the brat running beneath the sycamores , or the marble vase which cast a shadow on the bench , and Marius , on his side , continued his promenade , and thought about something else . 
He passed near the bench where the young girl sat , five or six times , but without even turning his eyes in her direction . 
On the following days , he returned , as was his wont , to the Luxembourg ; as usual , he found there `` the father and daughter ; '' but he paid no further attention to them . 
He thought no more about the girl now that she was beautiful than he had when she was homely . 
He passed very near the bench where she sat , because such was his habit . 
EFFECT OF THE SPRING One day , the air was warm , the Luxembourg was inundated with light and shade , the sky was as pure as though the angels had washed it that morning , the sparrows were giving vent to little twitters in the depths of the chestnut-trees . 
Marius had thrown open his whole soul to nature , he was not thinking of anything , he simply lived and breathed , he passed near the bench , the young girl raised her eyes to him , the two glances met . 
What was there in the young girl 's glance on this occasion ? 
Marius could not have told . 
There was nothing and there was everything . 
It was a strange flash . 
She dropped her eyes , and he pursued his way . 
What he had just seen was no longer the ingenuous and simple eye of a child ; it was a mysterious gulf which had half opened , then abruptly closed again . 
There comes a day when the young girl glances in this manner . 
Woe to him who chances to be there ! 
That first gaze of a soul which does not , as yet , know itself , is like the dawn in the sky . 
It is the awakening of something radiant and strange . 
Nothing can give any idea of the dangerous charm of that unexpected gleam , which flashes suddenly and vaguely forth from adorable shadows , and which is composed of all the innocence of the present , and of all the passion of the future . 
It is a sort of undecided tenderness which reveals itself by chance , and which waits . 
It is a snare which the innocent maiden sets unknown to herself , and in which she captures hearts without either wishing or knowing it . 
It is a virgin looking like a woman . 
It is rare that a profound revery does not spring from that glance , where it falls . 
All purities and all candors meet in that celestial and fatal gleam which , more than all the best-planned tender glances of coquettes , possesses the magic power of causing the sudden blossoming , in the depths of the soul , of that sombre flower , impregnated with perfume and with poison , which is called love . 
That evening , on his return to his garret , Marius cast his eyes over his garments , and perceived , for the first time , that he had been so slovenly , indecorous , and inconceivably stupid as to go for his walk in the Luxembourg with his `` every-day clothes , '' that is to say , with a hat battered near the band , coarse carter 's boots , black trousers which showed white at the knees , and a black coat which was pale at the elbows . 
BEGINNING OF A GREAT MALADY On the following day , at the accustomed hour , Marius drew from his wardrobe his new coat , his new trousers , his new hat , and his new boots ; he clothed himself in this complete panoply , put on his gloves , a tremendous luxury , and set off for the Luxembourg . 
On the way thither , he encountered Courfeyrac , and pretended not to see him . 
Courfeyrac , on his return home , said to his friends : -- `` I have just met Marius ' new hat and new coat , with Marius inside them . 
He was going to pass an examination , no doubt . 
He looked utterly stupid . '' 
On arriving at the Luxembourg , Marius made the tour of the fountain basin , and stared at the swans ; then he remained for a long time in contemplation before a statue whose head was perfectly black with mould , and one of whose hips was missing . 
Near the basin there was a bourgeois forty years of age , with a prominent stomach , who was holding by the hand a little urchin of five , and saying to him : `` Shun excess , my son , keep at an equal distance from despotism and from anarchy . '' 
Marius listened to this bourgeois . 
Then he made the circuit of the basin once more . 
At last he directed his course towards `` his alley , '' slowly , and as if with regret . 
One would have said that he was both forced to go there and withheld from doing so . 
He did not perceive it himself , and thought that he was doing as he always did . 
On turning into the walk , he saw M. Leblanc and the young girl at the other end , `` on their bench . '' 
He buttoned his coat up to the very top , pulled it down on his body so that there might be no wrinkles , examined , with a certain complaisance , the lustrous gleams of his trousers , and marched on the bench . 
This march savored of an attack , and certainly of a desire for conquest . 
So I say that he marched on the bench , as I should say : `` Hannibal marched on Rome . '' 
However , all his movements were purely mechanical , and he had interrupted none of the habitual preoccupations of his mind and labors . 
At that moment , he was thinking that the Manuel du Baccalaureat was a stupid book , and that it must have been drawn up by rare idiots , to allow of three tragedies of Racine and only one comedy of Moliere being analyzed therein as masterpieces of the human mind . 
There was a piercing whistling going on in his ears . 
As he approached the bench , he held fast to the folds in his coat , and fixed his eyes on the young girl . 
It seemed to him that she filled the entire extremity of the alley with a vague blue light . 
In proportion as he drew near , his pace slackened more and more . 
On arriving at some little distance from the bench , and long before he had reached the end of the walk , he halted , and could not explain to himself why he retraced his steps . 
He did not even say to himself that he would not go as far as the end . 
It was only with difficulty that the young girl could have perceived him in the distance and noted his fine appearance in his new clothes . 
Nevertheless , he held himself very erect , in case any one should be looking at him from behind . 
He attained the opposite end , then came back , and this time he approached a little nearer to the bench . 
He even got to within three intervals of trees , but there he felt an indescribable impossibility of proceeding further , and he hesitated . 
He thought he saw the young girl 's face bending towards him . 
But he exerted a manly and violent effort , subdued his hesitation , and walked straight ahead . 
A few seconds later , he rushed in front of the bench , erect and firm , reddening to the very ears , without daring to cast a glance either to the right or to the left , with his hand thrust into his coat like a statesman . 
At the moment when he passed , -- under the cannon of the place , -- he felt his heart beat wildly . 
As on the preceding day , she wore her damask gown and her crape bonnet . 
He heard an ineffable voice , which must have been `` her voice . '' 
She was talking tranquilly . 
She was very pretty . 
He felt it , although he made no attempt to see her . 
`` She could not , however , '' he thought , `` help feeling esteem and consideration for me , if she only knew that I am the veritable author of the dissertation on Marcos Obregon de la Ronde , which M. Francois de Neufchateau put , as though it were his own , at the head of his edition of Gil Blas . '' 
He went beyond the bench as far as the extremity of the walk , which was very near , then turned on his heel and passed once more in front of the lovely girl . 
This time , he was very pale . 
Moreover , all his emotions were disagreeable . 
As he went further from the bench and the young girl , and while his back was turned to her , he fancied that she was gazing after him , and that made him stumble . 
He did not attempt to approach the bench again ; he halted near the middle of the walk , and there , a thing which he never did , he sat down , and reflecting in the most profoundly indistinct depths of his spirit , that after all , it was hard that persons whose white bonnet and black gown he admired should be absolutely insensible to his splendid trousers and his new coat . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour , he rose , as though he were on the point of again beginning his march towards that bench which was surrounded by an aureole . 
But he remained standing there , motionless . 
For the first time in fifteen months , he said to himself that that gentleman who sat there every day with his daughter , had , on his side , noticed him , and probably considered his assiduity singular . 
For the first time , also , he was conscious of some irreverence in designating that stranger , even in his secret thoughts , by the sobriquet of M. le Blanc . 
He stood thus for several minutes , with drooping head , tracing figures in the sand , with the cane which he held in his hand . 
Then he turned abruptly in the direction opposite to the bench , to M. Leblanc and his daughter , and went home . 
That day he forgot to dine . 
At eight o'clock in the evening he perceived this fact , and as it was too late to go down to the Rue Saint-Jacques , he said : `` Never mind ! '' 
and ate a bit of bread . 
He did not go to bed until he had brushed his coat and folded it up with great care . 
DIVRS CLAPS OF THUNDER FALL ON MA'AM BOUGON On the following day , Ma'am Bougon , as Courfeyrac styled the old portress-principal-tenant , housekeeper of the Gorbeau hovel , Ma'am Bougon , whose name was , in reality , Madame Burgon , as we have found out , but this iconoclast , Courfeyrac , respected nothing , -- Ma'am Bougon observed , with stupefaction , that M. Marius was going out again in his new coat . 
He went to the Luxembourg again , but he did not proceed further than his bench midway of the alley . 
He seated himself there , as on the preceding day , surveying from a distance , and clearly making out , the white bonnet , the black dress , and above all , that blue light . 
He did not stir from it , and only went home when the gates of the Luxembourg closed . 
He did not see M. Leblanc and his daughter retire . 
He concluded that they had quitted the garden by the gate on the Rue de l'Ouest . 
Later on , several weeks afterwards , when he came to think it over , he could never recall where he had dined that evening . 
On the following day , which was the third , Ma'am Bougon was thunderstruck . 
Marius went out in his new coat . 
`` Three days in succession ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
She tried to follow him , but Marius walked briskly , and with immense strides ; it was a hippopotamus undertaking the pursuit of a chamois . 
She lost sight of him in two minutes , and returned breathless , three-quarters choked with asthma , and furious . 
`` If there is any sense , '' she growled , `` in putting on one 's best clothes every day , and making people run like this ! '' 
Marius betook himself to the Luxembourg . 
The young girl was there with M. Leblanc . 
Marius approached as near as he could , pretending to be busy reading a book , but he halted afar off , then returned and seated himself on his bench , where he spent four hours in watching the house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk , and who produced on him the impression that they were making sport of him . 
A fortnight passed thus . 
Marius went to the Luxembourg no longer for the sake of strolling there , but to seat himself always in the same spot , and that without knowing why . 
Once arrived there , he did not stir . 
He put on his new coat every morning , for the purpose of not showing himself , and he began all over again on the morrow . 
She was decidedly a marvellous beauty . 
The only remark approaching a criticism , that could be made , was , that the contradiction between her gaze , which was melancholy , and her smile , which was merry , gave a rather wild effect to her face , which sometimes caused this sweet countenance to become strange without ceasing to be charming . 
TAKEN PRISONER On one of the last days of the second week , Marius was seated on his bench , as usual , holding in his hand an open book , of which he had not turned a page for the last two hours . 
All at once he started . 
An event was taking place at the other extremity of the walk . 
Leblanc and his daughter had just left their seat , and the daughter had taken her father 's arm , and both were advancing slowly , towards the middle of the alley where Marius was . 
Marius closed his book , then opened it again , then forced himself to read ; he trembled ; the aureole was coming straight towards him . 
`` Ah ! 
good Heavens ! '' 
thought he , `` I shall not have time to strike an attitude . '' 
Still the white-haired man and the girl advanced . 
It seemed to him that this lasted for a century , and that it was but a second . 
`` What are they coming in this direction for ? '' 
he asked himself . 
`` What ! 
She will pass here ? 
Her feet will tread this sand , this walk , two paces from me ? '' 
He was utterly upset , he would have liked to be very handsome , he would have liked to own the cross . 
He heard the soft and measured sound of their approaching footsteps . 
He imagined that M. Leblanc was darting angry glances at him . 
`` Is that gentleman going to address me ? '' 
he thought to himself . 
He dropped his head ; when he raised it again , they were very near him . 
The young girl passed , and as she passed , she glanced at him . 
She gazed steadily at him , with a pensive sweetness which thrilled Marius from head to foot . 
It seemed to him that she was reproaching him for having allowed so long a time to elapse without coming as far as her , and that she was saying to him : `` I am coming myself . '' 
Marius was dazzled by those eyes fraught with rays and abysses . 
He felt his brain on fire . 
She had come to him , what joy ! 
And then , how she had looked at him ! 
She appeared to him more beautiful than he had ever seen her yet . 
Beautiful with a beauty which was wholly feminine and angelic , with a complete beauty which would have made Petrarch sing and Dante kneel . 
It seemed to him that he was floating free in the azure heavens . 
At the same time , he was horribly vexed because there was dust on his boots . 
He thought he felt sure that she had looked at his boots too . 
He followed her with his eyes until she disappeared . 
Then he started up and walked about the Luxembourg garden like a madman . 
It is possible that , at times , he laughed to himself and talked aloud . 
He was so dreamy when he came near the children 's nurses , that each one of them thought him in love with her . 
He quitted the Luxembourg , hoping to find her again in the street . 
He encountered Courfeyrac under the arcades of the Odeon , and said to him : `` Come and dine with me . '' 
They went off to Rousseau 's and spent six francs . 
Marius ate like an ogre . 
He gave the waiter six sous . 
At dessert , he said to Courfeyrac . 
`` Have you read the paper ? 
What a fine discourse Audry de Puyraveau delivered ! '' 
He was desperately in love . 
After dinner , he said to Courfeyrac : `` I will treat you to the play . '' 
They went to the Porte-Sainte-Martin to see Frederick in l'Auberge des Adrets . 
Marius was enormously amused . 
At the same time , he had a redoubled attack of shyness . 
On emerging from the theatre , he refused to look at the garter of a modiste who was stepping across a gutter , and Courfeyrac , who said : `` I should like to put that woman in my collection , '' almost horrified him . 
Courfeyrac invited him to breakfast at the Cafe Voltaire on the following morning . 
Marius went thither , and ate even more than on the preceding evening . 
He was very thoughtful and very merry . 
One would have said that he was taking advantage of every occasion to laugh uproariously . 
He tenderly embraced some man or other from the provinces , who was presented to him . 
A circle of students formed round the table , and they spoke of the nonsense paid for by the State which was uttered from the rostrum in the Sorbonne , then the conversation fell upon the faults and omissions in Guicherat 's dictionaries and grammars . 
Marius interrupted the discussion to exclaim : `` But it is very agreeable , all the same to have the cross ! '' 
`` That 's queer ! '' 
whispered Courfeyrac to Jean Prouvaire . 
`` No , '' responded Prouvaire , `` that 's serious . '' 
It was serious ; in fact , Marius had reached that first violent and charming hour with which grand passions begin . 
A glance had wrought all this . 
When the mine is charged , when the conflagration is ready , nothing is more simple . 
A glance is a spark . 
It was all over with him . 
Marius loved a woman . 
His fate was entering the unknown . 
The glance of women resembles certain combinations of wheels , which are tranquil in appearance yet formidable . 
You pass close to them every day , peaceably and with impunity , and without a suspicion of anything . 
A moment arrives when you forget that the thing is there . 
You go and come , dream , speak , laugh . 
All at once you feel yourself clutched ; all is over . 
The wheels hold you fast , the glance has ensnared you . 
It has caught you , no matter where or how , by some portion of your thought which was fluttering loose , by some distraction which had attacked you . 
You are lost . 
The whole of you passes into it . 
A chain of mysterious forces takes possession of you . 
You struggle in vain ; no more human succor is possible . 
You go on falling from gearing to gearing , from agony to agony , from torture to torture , you , your mind , your fortune , your future , your soul ; and , according to whether you are in the power of a wicked creature , or of a noble heart , you will not escape from this terrifying machine otherwise than disfigured with shame , or transfigured by passion . 
ADVENTURES OF THE LETTER U DELIVERED OVER TO CONJECTURES Isolation , detachment , from everything , pride , independence , the taste of nature , the absence of daily and material activity , the life within himself , the secret conflicts of chastity , a benevolent ecstasy towards all creation , had prepared Marius for this possession which is called passion . 
His worship of his father had gradually become a religion , and , like all religions , it had retreated to the depths of his soul . 
Something was required in the foreground . 
Love came . 
A full month elapsed , during which Marius went every day to the Luxembourg . 
When the hour arrived , nothing could hold him back . 
-- `` He is on duty , '' said Courfeyrac . 
Marius lived in a state of delight . 
It is certain that the young girl did look at him . 
He had finally grown bold , and approached the bench . 
Still , he did not pass in front of it any more , in obedience to the instinct of timidity and to the instinct of prudence common to lovers . 
He considered it better not to attract `` the attention of the father . '' 
He combined his stations behind the trees and the pedestals of the statues with a profound diplomacy , so that he might be seen as much as possible by the young girl and as little as possible by the old gentleman . 
Sometimes , he remained motionless by the half-hour together in the shade of a Leonidas or a Spartacus , holding in his hand a book , above which his eyes , gently raised , sought the beautiful girl , and she , on her side , turned her charming profile towards him with a vague smile . 
While conversing in the most natural and tranquil manner in the world with the white-haired man , she bent upon Marius all the reveries of a virginal and passionate eye . 
Ancient and time-honored manoeuvre which Eve understood from the very first day of the world , and which every woman understands from the very first day of her life ! 
her mouth replied to one , and her glance replied to another . 
It must be supposed , that M. Leblanc finally noticed something , for often , when Marius arrived , he rose and began to walk about . 
He had abandoned their accustomed place and had adopted the bench by the Gladiator , near the other end of the walk , as though with the object of seeing whether Marius would pursue them thither . 
Marius did not understand , and committed this error . 
`` The father '' began to grow inexact , and no longer brought `` his daughter '' every day . 
Sometimes , he came alone . 
Then Marius did not stay . 
Another blunder . 
Marius paid no heed to these symptoms . 
From the phase of timidity , he had passed , by a natural and fatal progress , to the phase of blindness . 
His love increased . 
He dreamed of it every night . 
And then , an unexpected bliss had happened to him , oil on the fire , a redoubling of the shadows over his eyes . 
One evening , at dusk , he had found , on the bench which `` M. Leblanc and his daughter '' had just quitted , a handkerchief , a very simple handkerchief , without embroidery , but white , and fine , and which seemed to him to exhale ineffable perfume . 
He seized it with rapture . 
This handkerchief was marked with the letters U. F. Marius knew nothing about this beautiful child , -- neither her family name , her Christian name nor her abode ; these two letters were the first thing of her that he had gained possession of , adorable initials , upon which he immediately began to construct his scaffolding . 
U was evidently the Christian name . 
`` Ursule ! '' 
he thought , `` what a delicious name ! '' 
He kissed the handkerchief , drank it in , placed it on his heart , on his flesh , during the day , and at night , laid it beneath his lips that he might fall asleep on it . 
`` I feel that her whole soul lies within it ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
This handkerchief belonged to the old gentleman , who had simply let it fall from his pocket . 
In the days which followed the finding of this treasure , he only displayed himself at the Luxembourg in the act of kissing the handkerchief and laying it on his heart . 
The beautiful child understood nothing of all this , and signified it to him by imperceptible signs . 
`` O modesty ! '' 
said Marius . 
THE VETERANS THEMSELVES CAN BE HAPPY Since we have pronounced the word modesty , and since we conceal nothing , we ought to say that once , nevertheless , in spite of his ecstasies , `` his Ursule '' caused him very serious grief . 
It was on one of the days when she persuaded M. Leblanc to leave the bench and stroll along the walk . 
A brisk May breeze was blowing , which swayed the crests of the plaintain-trees . 
The father and daughter , arm in arm , had just passed Marius ' bench . 
Marius had risen to his feet behind them , and was following them with his eyes , as was fitting in the desperate situation of his soul . 
All at once , a gust of wind , more merry than the rest , and probably charged with performing the affairs of Springtime , swept down from the nursery , flung itself on the alley , enveloped the young girl in a delicious shiver , worthy of Virgil 's nymphs , and the fawns of Theocritus , and lifted her dress , the robe more sacred than that of Isis , almost to the height of her garter . 
A leg of exquisite shape appeared . 
Marius saw it . 
He was exasperated and furious . 
The young girl had hastily thrust down her dress , with a divinely troubled motion , but he was none the less angry for all that . 
He was alone in the alley , it is true . 
But there might have been some one there . 
And what if there had been some one there ! 
Can any one comprehend such a thing ? 
What she had just done is horrible ! 
-- Alas , the poor child had done nothing ; there had been but one culprit , the wind ; but Marius , in whom quivered the Bartholo who exists in Cherubin , was determined to be vexed , and was jealous of his own shadow . 
It is thus , in fact , that the harsh and capricious jealousy of the flesh awakens in the human heart , and takes possession of it , even without any right . 
Moreover , setting aside even that jealousy , the sight of that charming leg had contained nothing agreeable for him ; the white stocking of the first woman he chanced to meet would have afforded him more pleasure . 
When `` his Ursule , '' after having reached the end of the walk , retraced her steps with M. Leblanc , and passed in front of the bench on which Marius had seated himself once more , Marius darted a sullen and ferocious glance at her . 
The young girl gave way to that slight straightening up with a backward movement , accompanied by a raising of the eyelids , which signifies : `` Well , what is the matter ? '' 
This was `` their first quarrel . '' 
Marius had hardly made this scene at her with his eyes , when some one crossed the walk . 
It was a veteran , very much bent , extremely wrinkled , and pale , in a uniform of the Louis XV . 
pattern , bearing on his breast the little oval plaque of red cloth , with the crossed swords , the soldier 's cross of Saint-Louis , and adorned , in addition , with a coat-sleeve , which had no arm within it , with a silver chin and a wooden leg . 
Marius thought he perceived that this man had an extremely well satisfied air . 
It even struck him that the aged cynic , as he hobbled along past him , addressed to him a very fraternal and very merry wink , as though some chance had created an understanding between them , and as though they had shared some piece of good luck together . 
What did that relic of Mars mean by being so contented ? 
What had passed between that wooden leg and the other ? 
Marius reached a paroxysm of jealousy . 
-- `` Perhaps he was there ! '' 
he said to himself ; `` perhaps he saw ! '' 
-- And he felt a desire to exterminate the veteran . 
With the aid of time , all points grow dull . 
Marius ' wrath against `` Ursule , '' just and legitimate as it was , passed off . 
He finally pardoned her ; but this cost him a great effort ; he sulked for three days . 
Nevertheless , in spite of all this , and because of all this , his passion augmented and grew to madness . 
ECLIPSE The reader has just seen how Marius discovered , or thought that he discovered , that She was named Ursule . 
Appetite grows with loving . 
To know that her name was Ursule was a great deal ; it was very little . 
In three or four weeks , Marius had devoured this bliss . 
He wanted another . 
He wanted to know where she lived . 
He had committed his first blunder , by falling into the ambush of the bench by the Gladiator . 
He had committed a second , by not remaining at the Luxembourg when M. Leblanc came thither alone . 
He now committed a third , and an immense one . 
He followed `` Ursule . '' 
She lived in the Rue de l'Ouest , in the most unfrequented spot , in a new , three-story house , of modest appearance . 
From that moment forth , Marius added to his happiness of seeing her at the Luxembourg the happiness of following her home . 
His hunger was increasing . 
He knew her first name , at least , a charming name , a genuine woman 's name ; he knew where she lived ; he wanted to know who she was . 
One evening , after he had followed them to their dwelling , and had seen them disappear through the carriage gate , he entered in their train and said boldly to the porter : -- `` Is that the gentleman who lives on the first floor , who has just come in ? '' 
`` No , '' replied the porter . 
`` He is the gentleman on the third floor . '' 
Another step gained . 
This success emboldened Marius . 
`` On the front ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
said the porter , `` the house is only built on the street . '' 
`` And what is that gentleman 's business ? '' 
began Marius again . 
`` He is a gentleman of property , sir . 
A very kind man who does good to the unfortunate , though not rich himself . '' 
`` What is his name ? '' 
resumed Marius . 
The porter raised his head and said : -- `` Are you a police spy , sir ? '' 
Marius went off quite abashed , but delighted . 
He was getting on . 
`` Good , '' thought he , `` I know that her name is Ursule , that she is the daughter of a gentleman who lives on his income , and that she lives there , on the third floor , in the Rue de l'Ouest . '' 
On the following day , M. Leblanc and his daughter made only a very brief stay in the Luxembourg ; they went away while it was still broad daylight . 
Marius followed them to the Rue de l'Ouest , as he had taken up the habit of doing . 
On arriving at the carriage entrance M. Leblanc made his daughter pass in first , then paused , before crossing the threshold , and stared intently at Marius . 
On the next day they did not come to the Luxembourg . 
Marius waited for them all day in vain . 
At nightfall , he went to the Rue de l'Ouest , and saw a light in the windows of the third story . 
He walked about beneath the windows until the light was extinguished . 
The next day , no one at the Luxembourg . 
Marius waited all day , then went and did sentinel duty under their windows . 
This carried him on to ten o'clock in the evening . 
His dinner took care of itself . 
Fever nourishes the sick man , and love the lover . 
He spent a week in this manner . 
M. Leblanc no longer appeared at the Luxembourg . 
Marius indulged in melancholy conjectures ; he dared not watch the porte cochere during the day ; he contented himself with going at night to gaze upon the red light of the windows . 
At times he saw shadows flit across them , and his heart began to beat . 
On the eighth day , when he arrived under the windows , there was no light in them . 
`` Hello ! '' 
he said , `` the lamp is not lighted yet . 
But it is dark . 
Can they have gone out ? '' 
He waited until ten o'clock . 
Until midnight . 
Until one in the morning . 
Not a light appeared in the windows of the third story , and no one entered the house . 
He went away in a very gloomy frame of mind . 
On the morrow , -- for he only existed from morrow to morrow , there was , so to speak , no to-day for him , -- on the morrow , he found no one at the Luxembourg ; he had expected this . 
At dusk , he went to the house . 
No light in the windows ; the shades were drawn ; the third floor was totally dark . 
Marius rapped at the porte cochere , entered , and said to the porter : -- `` The gentleman on the third floor ? '' 
`` Has moved away , '' replied the porter . 
Marius reeled and said feebly : -- `` How long ago ? '' 
`` Yesterday . '' 
`` Where is he living now ? '' 
`` I do n't know anything about it . '' 
`` So he has not left his new address ? '' 
`` No . '' 
And the porter , raising his eyes , recognized Marius . 
`` Come ! 
So it 's you ! '' 
said he ; `` but you are decidedly a spy then ? '' 
BOOK SEVENTH . 
-- PATRON MINETTE MINES AND MINERS Human societies all have what is called in theatrical parlance , a third lower floor . 
The social soil is everywhere undermined , sometimes for good , sometimes for evil . 
These works are superposed one upon the other . 
There are superior mines and inferior mines . 
There is a top and a bottom in this obscure sub-soil , which sometimes gives way beneath civilization , and which our indifference and heedlessness trample under foot . 
The Encyclopedia , in the last century , was a mine that was almost open to the sky . 
The shades , those sombre hatchers of primitive Christianity , only awaited an opportunity to bring about an explosion under the Caesars and to inundate the human race with light . 
For in the sacred shadows there lies latent light . 
Volcanoes are full of a shadow that is capable of flashing forth . 
Every form begins by being night . 
The catacombs , in which the first mass was said , were not alone the cellar of Rome , they were the vaults of the world . 
Beneath the social construction , that complicated marvel of a structure , there are excavations of all sorts . 
There is the religious mine , the philosophical mine , the economic mine , the revolutionary mine . 
Such and such a pick-axe with the idea , such a pick with ciphers . 
Such another with wrath . 
People hail and answer each other from one catacomb to another . 
Utopias travel about underground , in the pipes . 
There they branch out in every direction . 
They sometimes meet , and fraternize there . 
Jean-Jacques lends his pick to Diogenes , who lends him his lantern . 
Sometimes they enter into combat there . 
Calvin seizes Socinius by the hair . 
But nothing arrests nor interrupts the tension of all these energies toward the goal , and the vast , simultaneous activity , which goes and comes , mounts , descends , and mounts again in these obscurities , and which immense unknown swarming slowly transforms the top and the bottom and the inside and the outside . 
Society hardly even suspects this digging which leaves its surface intact and changes its bowels . 
There are as many different subterranean stages as there are varying works , as there are extractions . 
What emerges from these deep excavations ? 
The future . 
The deeper one goes , the more mysterious are the toilers . 
The work is good , up to a degree which the social philosophies are able to recognize ; beyond that degree it is doubtful and mixed ; lower down , it becomes terrible . 
At a certain depth , the excavations are no longer penetrable by the spirit of civilization , the limit breathable by man has been passed ; a beginning of monsters is possible . 
The descending scale is a strange one ; and each one of the rungs of this ladder corresponds to a stage where philosophy can find foothold , and where one encounters one of these workmen , sometimes divine , sometimes misshapen . 
Below John Huss , there is Luther ; below Luther , there is Descartes ; below Descartes , there is Voltaire ; below Voltaire , there is Condorcet ; below Condorcet , there is Robespierre ; below Robespierre , there is Marat ; below Marat there is Babeuf . 
And so it goes on . 
Lower down , confusedly , at the limit which separates the indistinct from the invisible , one perceives other gloomy men , who perhaps do not exist as yet . 
The men of yesterday are spectres ; those of to-morrow are forms . 
The eye of the spirit distinguishes them but obscurely . 
The embryonic work of the future is one of the visions of philosophy . 
A world in limbo , in the state of foetus , what an unheard-of spectre ! 
Saint-Simon , Owen , Fourier , are there also , in lateral galleries . 
Surely , although a divine and invisible chain unknown to themselves , binds together all these subterranean pioneers who , almost always , think themselves isolated , and who are not so , their works vary greatly , and the light of some contrasts with the blaze of others . 
The first are paradisiacal , the last are tragic . 
Nevertheless , whatever may be the contrast , all these toilers , from the highest to the most nocturnal , from the wisest to the most foolish , possess one likeness , and this is it : disinterestedness . 
Marat forgets himself like Jesus . 
They throw themselves on one side , they omit themselves , they think not of themselves . 
They have a glance , and that glance seeks the absolute . 
The first has the whole heavens in his eyes ; the last , enigmatical though he may be , has still , beneath his eyelids , the pale beam of the infinite . 
Venerate the man , whoever he may be , who has this sign -- the starry eye . 
The shadowy eye is the other sign . 
With it , evil commences . 
Reflect and tremble in the presence of any one who has no glance at all . 
The social order has its black miners . 
There is a point where depth is tantamount to burial , and where light becomes extinct . 
Below all these mines which we have just mentioned , below all these galleries , below this whole immense , subterranean , venous system of progress and utopia , much further on in the earth , much lower than Marat , lower than Babeuf , lower , much lower , and without any connection with the upper levels , there lies the last mine . 
A formidable spot . 
This is what we have designated as the le troisieme dessous . 
It is the grave of shadows . 
It is the cellar of the blind . 
Inferi . 
This communicates with the abyss . 
THE LOWEST DEPTHS There disinterestedness vanishes . 
The demon is vaguely outlined ; each one is for himself . 
The I in the eyes howls , seeks , fumbles , and gnaws . 
The social Ugolino is in this gulf . 
The wild spectres who roam in this grave , almost beasts , almost phantoms , are not occupied with universal progress ; they are ignorant both of the idea and of the word ; they take no thought for anything but the satisfaction of their individual desires . 
They are almost unconscious , and there exists within them a sort of terrible obliteration . 
They have two mothers , both step-mothers , ignorance and misery . 
They have a guide , necessity ; and for all forms of satisfaction , appetite . 
They are brutally voracious , that is to say , ferocious , not after the fashion of the tyrant , but after the fashion of the tiger . 
From suffering these spectres pass to crime ; fatal affiliation , dizzy creation , logic of darkness . 
That which crawls in the social third lower level is no longer complaint stifled by the absolute ; it is the protest of matter . 
Man there becomes a dragon . 
To be hungry , to be thirsty -- that is the point of departure ; to be Satan -- that is the point reached . 
From that vault Lacenaire emerges . 
We have just seen , in Book Fourth , one of the compartments of the upper mine , of the great political , revolutionary , and philosophical excavation . 
There , as we have just said , all is pure , noble , dignified , honest . 
There , assuredly , one might be misled ; but error is worthy of veneration there , so thoroughly does it imply heroism . 
The work there effected , taken as a whole has a name : Progress . 
The moment has now come when we must take a look at other depths , hideous depths . 
There exists beneath society , we insist upon this point , and there will exist , until that day when ignorance shall be dissipated , the great cavern of evil . 
This cavern is below all , and is the foe of all . 
It is hatred , without exception . 
This cavern knows no philosophers ; its dagger has never cut a pen . 
Its blackness has no connection with the sublime blackness of the inkstand . 
Never have the fingers of night which contract beneath this stifling ceiling , turned the leaves of a book nor unfolded a newspaper . 
Babeuf is a speculator to Cartouche ; Marat is an aristocrat to Schinderhannes . 
This cavern has for its object the destruction of everything . 
Of everything . 
Including the upper superior mines , which it execrates . 
It not only undermines , in its hideous swarming , the actual social order ; it undermines philosophy , it undermines human thought , it undermines civilization , it undermines revolution , it undermines progress . 
Its name is simply theft , prostitution , murder , assassination . 
It is darkness , and it desires chaos . 
Its vault is formed of ignorance . 
All the others , those above it , have but one object -- to suppress it . 
It is to this point that philosophy and progress tend , with all their organs simultaneously , by their amelioration of the real , as well as by their contemplation of the absolute . 
Destroy the cavern Ignorance and you destroy the lair Crime . 
Let us condense , in a few words , a part of what we have just written . 
The only social peril is darkness . 
Humanity is identity . 
All men are made of the same clay . 
There is no difference , here below , at least , in predestination . 
The same shadow in front , the same flesh in the present , the same ashes afterwards . 
But ignorance , mingled with the human paste , blackens it . 
This incurable blackness takes possession of the interior of a man and is there converted into evil . 
BABET , GUEULEMER , CLAQUESOUS , AND MONTPARNASSE A quartette of ruffians , Claquesous , Gueulemer , Babet , and Montparnasse governed the third lower floor of Paris , from 1830 to 1835 . 
