
'You are very modest.... But I should like to know something about you,
about your family, about your father, for whom you are forsaking us.'

'Why is she talking like that?' thought Bazarov.

'All that's not in the least interesting,' he uttered aloud,
'especially for you; we are obscure people....'

'And you regard me as an aristocrat?'

Bazarov lifted his eyes to Madame Odintsov.

'Yes,' he said, with exaggerated sharpness.

She smiled. 'I see you know me very little, though you do maintain that
all people are alike, and it's not worth while to study them. I will
tell you my life some time or other ... but first you tell me yours.'

'I know you very little,' repeated Bazarov. 'Perhaps you are right;
perhaps, really, every one is a riddle. You, for instance; you avoid
society, you are oppressed by it, and you have invited two students to
stay with you. What makes you, with your intellect, with your beauty,
live in the country?'

'What? What was it you said?' Madame Odintsov interposed eagerly. 'With
my ... beauty?'

Bazarov scowled. 'Never mind that,' he muttered; 'I meant to say that I
don't exactly understand why you have settled in the country?'

'You don't understand it.... But you explain it to yourself in some
way?'

'Yes ... I assume that you remain continually in the same place because
you indulge yourself, because you are very fond of comfort and ease,
and very indifferent to everything else.'

Madame Odintsov smiled again. 'You would absolutely refuse to believe
that I am capable of being carried away by anything?'

Bazarov glanced at her from under his brows.

'By curiosity, perhaps; but not otherwise.'

'Really? Well, now I understand why we are such friends; you are just
like me, you see.'

'We are such friends ...' Bazarov articulated in a choked voice.

'Yes!... Why, I'd forgotten you wanted to go away.'

Bazarov got up. The lamp burnt dimly in the middle of the dark,
luxurious, isolated room; from time to time the blind was shaken, and
there flowed in the freshness of the insidious night; there was heard
its mysterious whisperings. Madame Odintsov did not move in a single
limb; but she was gradually possessed by concealed emotion.

It communicated itself to Bazarov. He was suddenly conscious that he
was alone with a young and lovely woman....

'Where are you going?' she said slowly.

He answered nothing, and sank into a chair.

'And so you consider me a placid, pampered, spoiled creature,' she went
on in the same voice, never taking her eyes off the window. 'While I
know so much about myself, that I am unhappy.'

'You unhappy? What for? Surely you can't attach any importance to idle
gossip?'

Madame Odintsov frowned. It annoyed her that he had given such a
meaning to her words.

'Such gossip does not affect me, Yevgeny Vassilyitch, and I am too
proud to allow it to disturb me. I am unhappy because ... I have no
desires, no passion for life. You look at me incredulously; you think
that's said by an "aristocrat," who is all in lace, and sitting in a
velvet armchair. I don't conceal the fact: I love what you call
comfort, and at the same time I have little desire to live. Explain
that contradiction as best you can. But all that's romanticism in your
eyes.'

Bazarov shook his head. 'You are in good health, independent, rich;
what more would you have? What do you want?'

'What do I want,' echoed Madame Odintsov, and she sighed, 'I am very
tired, I am old, I feel as if I have had a very long life. Yes, I am
old,' she added, softly drawing the ends of her lace over her bare
arms. Her eyes met Bazarov's eyes, and she faintly blushed. 'Behind me
I have already so many memories: my life in Petersburg, wealth, then
poverty, then my father's death, marriage, then the inevitable tour in
due order.... So many memories, and nothing to remember, and before me,
before me--a long, long road, and no goal.... I have no wish to go on.'

'Are you so disillusioned?' queried Bazarov.

'No, but I am dissatisfied,' Madame Odintsov replied, dwelling on each
syllable. 'I think if I could interest myself strongly in
something....'

'You want to fall in love,' Bazarov interrupted her, 'and you can't
love; that's where your unhappiness lies.'

Madame Odintsov began to examine the sleeve of her lace.

'Is it true I can't love?' she said.

'I should say not! Only I was wrong in calling that an unhappiness. On
the contrary, any one's more to be pitied when such a mischance befalls
him.'

'Mischance, what?'

'Falling in love.'

'And how do you come to know that?'

'By hearsay,' answered Bazarov angrily.

'You're flirting,' he thought; 'you're bored, and teasing me for want
of something to do, while I ...' His heart really seemed as though it
were being torn to pieces.

'Besides, you are perhaps too exacting,' he said, bending his whole
frame forward and playing with the fringe of the chair.

'Perhaps. My idea is everything or nothing. A life for a life. Take
mine, give up thine, and that without regret or turning back. Or else
better have nothing.'

'Well?' observed Bazarov; 'that's fair terms, and I'm surprised that so
far you ... have not found what you wanted.'

'And do you think it would be easy to give oneself up wholly to
anything whatever?'

'Not easy, if you begin reflecting, waiting and attaching value to
yourself, prizing yourself, I mean; but to give oneself up without
reflection is very easy.'

'How can one help prizing oneself? If I am of no value, who could need
my devotion?'

'That's not my affair; that's the other's business to discover what is
my value. The chief thing is to be able to devote oneself.'

Madame Odintsov bent forward from the back of her chair. 'You speak,'
she began, 'as though you had experienced all that.'

'It happened to come up, Anna Sergyevna; all that, as you know, is not
in my line.'

'But you could devote yourself?'

'I don't know. I shouldn't like to boast.'

Madame Odintsov said nothing, and Bazarov was mute. The sounds of the
piano floated up to them from the drawing-room.

'How is it Katya is playing so late?' observed Madame Odintsov.

Bazarov got up. 'Yes, it is really late now; it's time for you to go to
bed.'

'Wait a little; why are you in a hurry?... I want to say one word to
you.'

'What is it?'

'Wait a little,' whispered Madame Odintsov. Her eyes rested on Bazarov;
it seemed as though she were examining him attentively.

He walked across the room, then suddenly went up to her, hurriedly said
'Good-bye,' squeezed her hand so that she almost screamed, and was
gone. She raised her crushed fingers to her lips, breathed on them, and
suddenly, impulsively getting up from her low chair, she moved with
rapid steps towards the door, as though she wished to bring Bazarov
back.... A maid came into the room with a decanter on a silver tray.
Madame Odintsov stood still, told her she could go, and sat down again,
and again sank into thought. Her hair slipped loose and fell in a dark
coil down her shoulders. Long after the lamp was still burning in Anna
Sergyevna's room, and for long she stayed without moving, only from
time to time chafing her hands, which ached a little from the cold of
the night.

Bazarov went back two hours later to his bed-room with his boots wet
with dew, dishevelled and ill-humoured. He found Arkady at the
writing-table with a book in his hands, his coat buttoned up to the
throat.

'You're not in bed yet?' he said, in a tone, it seemed, of annoyance.

'You stopped a long while with Anna Sergyevna this evening,' remarked
Arkady, not answering him.

'Yes, I stopped with her all the while you were playing the piano with
Katya Sergyevna.'

'I did not play ...' Arkady began, and he stopped. He felt the tears
were coming into his eyes, and he did not like to cry before his
sarcastic friend.






The following morning when Madame Odintsov came down to morning tea,
Bazarov sat a long while bending over his cup, then suddenly he glanced
up at her.... She turned to him as though he had struck her a blow, and
he fancied that her face was a little paler since the night before. She
quickly went off to her own room, and did not appear till lunch. It
rained from early morning; there was no possibility of going for a
walk. The whole company assembled in the drawing-room. Arkady took up
the new number of a journal and began reading it aloud. The princess,
as was her habit, tried to express her amazement in her face, as though
he were doing something improper, then glared angrily at him; but he
paid no attention to her.

'Yevgeny Vassilyitch' said Anna Sergyevna, 'come to my room.... I want
to ask you.... You mentioned a textbook yesterday ...'

She got up and went to the door. The princess looked round with an
expression that seemed to say, 'Look at me; see how shocked I am!' and
again glared at Arkady; but he raised his voice, and exchanging glances
with Katya, near whom he was sitting, he went on reading.

Madame Odintsov went with rapid steps to her study. Bazarov followed
her quickly, not raising his eyes, and only with his ears catching the
delicate swish and rustle of her silk gown gliding before him. Madame
Odintsov sank into the same easy-chair in which she had sat the
previous evening, and Bazarov took up the same position as before.

'What was the name of that book?' she began, after a brief silence.

'Pelouse et Frémy, _Notions générales_,' answered Bazarov. 'I might
though recommend you also Ganot, _Traité élémentaire de physique
éxpérimentale_. In that book the illustrations are clearer, and in
general it's a text-book.'

Madame Odintsov stretched out her hand. 'Yevgeny Vassilyitch, I beg
your pardon, but I didn't invite you in here to discuss text-books. I
wanted to continue our conversation of last night. You went away so
suddenly.... It will not bore you ...'

'I am at your service, Anna Sergyevna. But what were we talking about
last night?'

Madame Odintsov flung a sidelong glance at Bazarov.

'We were talking of happiness, I believe. I told you about myself. By
the way, I mentioned the word "happiness." Tell me why it is that even
when we are enjoying music, for instance, or a fine evening, or a
conversation with sympathetic people, it all seems an intimation of
some measureless happiness existing apart somewhere rather than actual
happiness--such, I mean, as we ourselves are in possession of? Why is
it? Or perhaps you have no feeling like that?'

'You know the saying, "Happiness is where we are not,"' replied
Bazarov; 'besides, you told me yesterday you are discontented. I
certainly never have such ideas come into my head.'

'Perhaps they seem ridiculous to you?'

'No; but they don't come into my head.'

'Really? Do you know, I should very much like to know what you do think
about?'

'What? I don't understand.'

'Listen; I have long wanted to speak openly to you. There's no need to
tell you--you are conscious of it yourself--that you are not an
ordinary man; you are still young--all life is before you. What are you
preparing yourself for? What future is awaiting you? I mean to
say--what object do you want to attain? What are you going forward to?
What is in your heart? in short, who are you? What are you?'

'You surprise me, Anna Sergyevna. You are aware that I am studying
natural science, and who I ...'

'Well, who are you?'

'I have explained to you already that I am going to be a district
doctor.'

Anna Sergyevna made a movement of impatience.

'What do you say that for? You don't believe it yourself. Arkady might
answer me in that way, but not you.'

'Why, in what is Arkady ...'

'Stop! Is it possible you could content yourself with such a humble
career, and aren't you always maintaining yourself that you don't
believe in medicine? You--with your ambition--a district doctor! You
answer me like that to put me off, because you have no confidence in
me. But, do you know, Yevgeny Vassilyitch, that I could understand you;
I have been poor myself, and ambitious, like you; I have been perhaps
through the same trials as you.'

'That is all very well, Anna Sergyevna, but you must pardon me for ...
I am not in the habit of talking freely about myself at any time as a
rule, and between you and me there is such a gulf ...'

'What sort of gulf? You mean to tell me again that I am an aristocrat?
No more of that, Yevgeny Vassilyitch; I thought I had proved to
you ...'

'And even apart from that,' broke in Bazarov, 'what could induce one to
talk and think about the future, which for the most part does not
depend on us? If a chance turns up of doing something--so much the
better; and if it doesn't turn up--at least one will be glad one didn't
gossip idly about it beforehand.'

'You call a friendly conversation idle gossip?... Or perhaps you
consider me as a woman unworthy of your confidence? I know you despise
us all.'

'I don't despise you, Anna Sergyevna, and you know that.'

'No, I don't know anything ... but let us suppose so. I understand your
disinclination to talk of your future career; but as to what is taking
place within you now ...'

'Taking place!' repeated Bazarov, 'as though I were some sort of
government or society! In any case, it is utterly uninteresting; and
besides, can a man always speak of everything that "takes place" in
him?'

'Why, I don't see why you can't speak freely of everything you have in
your heart.'

'Can _you_?' asked Bazarov.

'Yes,' answered Anna Sergyevna, after a brief hesitation.

Bazarov bowed his head. 'You are more fortunate than I am.'

Anna Sergyevna looked at him questioningly. 'As you please,' she went
on, 'but still something tells me that we have not come together for
nothing; that we shall be great friends. I am sure this--what should I
say, constraint, reticence in you will vanish at last.'

'So you have noticed reticence ... as you expressed it ... constraint?'

'Yes.'

Bazarov got up and went to the window. 'And would you like to know the
reason of this reticence? Would you like to know what is passing within
me?'

'Yes,' repeated Madame Odintsov, with a sort of dread she did not at
the time understand.

'And you will not be angry?'

'No.'

'No?' Bazarov was standing with his back to her. 'Let me tell you then
that I love you like a fool, like a madman.... There, you've forced it
out of me.'

Madame Odintsov held both hands out before her; but Bazarov was leaning
with his forehead pressed against the window pane. He breathed hard;
his whole body was visibly trembling. But it was not the tremor of
youthful timidity, not the sweet alarm of the first declaration that
possessed him; it was passion struggling in him, strong and
painful--passion not unlike hatred, and perhaps akin to it.... Madame
Odintsov felt both afraid and sorry for him.

'Yevgeny Vassilyitch!' she said, and there was the ring of unconscious
tenderness in her voice.

He turned quickly, flung a searching look on her, and snatching both
her hands, he drew her suddenly to his breast.

She did not at once free herself from his embrace, but an instant
later, she was standing far away in a corner, and looking from there at
Bazarov. He rushed at her ...

'You have misunderstood me,' she whispered hurriedly, in alarm. It
seemed if he had made another step she would have screamed.... Bazarov
bit his lips, and went out.

Half-an-hour after, a maid gave Anna Sergyevna a note from Bazarov; it
consisted simply of one line: 'Am I to go to-day, or can I stop till
to-morrow?'

'Why should you go? I did not understand you--you did not understand
me,' Anna Sergyevna answered him, but to herself she thought: 'I did
not understand myself either.'

She did not show herself till dinner-time, and kept walking to and fro
in her room, stopping sometimes at the window, sometimes at the
looking-glass, and slowly rubbing her handkerchief over her neck, on
which she still seemed to feel a burning spot. She asked herself what
had induced her to 'force' Bazarov's words, his confidence, and whether
she had suspected nothing ... 'I am to blame,' she decided aloud, 'but
I could not have foreseen this.' She fell to musing, and blushed
crimson, remembering Bazarov's almost animal face when he had rushed at
her....

'Oh?' she uttered suddenly aloud, and she stopped short and shook back
her curls.... She caught sight of herself in the glass; her head thrown
back, with a mysterious smile on the half-closed, half-opened eyes and
lips, told her, it seemed, in a flash something at which she herself
was confused....

'No,' she made up her mind at last. 'God knows what it would lead to;
he couldn't be played with; peace is anyway the best thing in the
world.'

Her peace of mind was not shaken; but she felt gloomy, and even shed a
few tears once though she could not have said why--certainly not for
the insult done her. She did not feel insulted; she was more inclined
to feel guilty. Under the influence of various vague emotions, the
sense of life passing by, the desire of novelty, she had forced herself
to go up to a certain point, forced herself to look behind herself, and
had seen behind her not even an abyss, but what was empty ... or
revolting.






Great as was Madame Odintsov's self-control, and superior as she was to
every kind of prejudice, she felt awkward when she went into the
dining-room to dinner. The meal went off fairly successfully, however.
Porfiry Platonovitch made his appearance and told various anecdotes; he
had just come back from the town. Among other things, he informed them
that the governor had ordered his secretaries on special commissions to
wear spurs, in case he might send them off anywhere for greater speed
on horseback. Arkady talked in an undertone to Katya, and
diplomatically attended to the princess's wants. Bazarov maintained a
grim and obstinate silence. Madame Odintsov looked at him twice, not
stealthily, but straight in the face, which was bilious and forbidding,
with downcast eyes, and contemptuous determination stamped on every
feature, and thought: 'No ... no ... no.' ... After dinner, she went
with the whole company into the garden, and seeing that Bazarov wanted
to speak to her, she took a few steps to one side and stopped. He went
up to her, but even then did not raise his eyes, and said hoarsely--

'I have to apologise to you, Anna Sergyevna. You must be in a fury with
me.'

'No, I'm not angry with you, Yevgeny Vassilyitch,' answered Madame
Odintsov; 'but I am sorry.'

'So much the worse. Any way, I'm sufficiently punished. My position,
you will certainly agree, is most foolish. You wrote to me, "Why go
away?" But I cannot stay, and don't wish to. To-morrow I shall be
gone.'

'Yevgeny Vassilyitch, why are you ...'

'Why am I going away?'

'No; I didn't mean to say that.'

'There's no recalling the past, Anna Sergyevna ... and this was bound
to come about sooner or later. Consequently I must go. I can only
conceive of one condition upon which I could remain; but that condition
will never be. Excuse my impertinence, but you don't love me, and you
never will love me, I suppose?'

Bazarov's eyes glittered for an instant under their dark brows.

Anna Sergyevna did not answer him. 'I'm afraid of this man,' flashed
through her brain.

'Good-bye, then,' said Bazarov, as though he guessed her thought, and
he went back into the house.

Anna Sergyevna walked slowly after him, and calling Katya to her, she
took her arm. She did not leave her side till quite evening. She did
not play cards, and was constantly laughing, which did not at all
accord with her pale and perplexed face. Arkady was bewildered, and
looked on at her as all young people look on--that's to say, he was
constantly asking himself, 'What is the meaning of that?' Bazarov shut
himself up in his room; he came back to tea, however. Anna Sergyevna
longed to say some friendly word to him, but she did not know how to
address him....

An unexpected incident relieved her from her embarrassment; a steward
announced the arrival of Sitnikov.

It is difficult to do justice in words to the strange figure cut by the
young apostle of progress as he fluttered into the room. Though, with
his characteristic impudence, he had made up his mind to go into the
country to visit a woman whom he hardly knew, who had never invited
him; but with whom, according to information he had gathered, such
talented and intimate friends were staying, he was nevertheless
trembling to the marrow of his bones; and instead of bringing out the
apologies and compliments he had learned by heart beforehand, he
muttered some absurdity about Evdoksya Kukshin having sent him to
inquire after Anna Sergyevna's health, and Arkady Nikolaevitch's too,
