having always spoken to him in the highest terms.... At this point he
faltered and lost his presence of mind so completely that he sat down
on his own hat. However, since no one turned him out, and Anna
Sergyevna even presented him to her aunt and her sister, he soon
recovered himself and began to chatter volubly. The introduction of the
commonplace is often an advantage in life; it relieves over-strained
tension, and sobers too self-confident or self-sacrificing emotions by
recalling its close kinship with them. With Sitnikov's appearance
everything became somehow duller and simpler; they all even ate a more
solid supper, and retired to bed half-an-hour earlier than usual.

'I might now repeat to you,' said Arkady, as he lay down in bed, to
Bazarov, who was also undressing, what you once said to me, 'Why are
you so melancholy? One would think you had fulfilled some sacred duty.'
For some time past a sort of pretence of free-and-easy banter had
sprung up between the two young men, which is always an unmistakable
sign of secret displeasure or unexpressed suspicions.

'I'm going to my father's to-morrow,' said Bazarov.

Arkady raised himself and leaned on his elbow. He felt both surprised,
and for some reason or other pleased. 'Ah!' he commented, 'and is that
why you're sad?'

Bazarov yawned. 'You'll get old if you know too much.'

'And Anna Sergyevna?' persisted Arkady.

'What about Anna Sergyevna?'

'I mean, will she let you go?'

'I'm not her paid man.'

Arkady grew thoughtful, while Bazarov lay down and turned with his face
to the wall.

Some minutes went by in silence. 'Yevgeny?' cried Arkady suddenly.

'Well?'

'I will leave with you to-morrow too.'

Bazarov made no answer.

'Only I will go home,' continued Arkady. 'We will go together as far as
Hohlovsky, and there you can get horses at Fedot's. I should be
delighted to make the acquaintance of your people, but I'm afraid of
being in their way and yours. You are coming to us again later, of
course?'

'I've left all my things with you,' Bazarov said, without turning
round.

'Why doesn't he ask me why I am going, and just as suddenly as he?'
thought Arkady. 'In reality, why am I going, and why is he going?' he
pursued his reflections. He could find no satisfactory answer to his
own question, though his heart was filled with some bitter feeling. He
felt it would be hard to part from this life to which he had grown so
accustomed; but for him to remain alone would be rather odd. 'Something
has passed between them,' he reasoned to himself; 'what good would it
be for me to hang on after he's gone? She's utterly sick of me; I'm
losing the last that remained to me.' He began to imagine Anna
Sergyevna to himself, then other features gradually eclipsed the lovely
image of the young widow.

'I'm sorry to lose Katya too!' Arkady whispered to his pillow, on which
a tear had already fallen.... All at once he shook back his hair and
said aloud--

'What the devil made that fool of a Sitnikov turn up here?'

Bazarov at first stirred a little in his bed, then he uttered the
following rejoinder: 'You're still a fool, my boy, I see. Sitnikovs are
indispensable to us. I--do you understand? I need dolts like him. It's
not for the gods to bake bricks, in fact!'...

'Oho!' Arkady thought to himself, and then in a flash all the
fathomless depths of Bazarov's conceit dawned upon him. 'Are you and I
gods then? at least, you're a god; am not I a dolt then?'

'Yes,' repeated Bazarov; 'you're still a fool.'

Madame Odintsov expressed no special surprise when Arkady told her the
next day that he was going with Bazarov; she seemed tired and absorbed.
Katya looked at him silently and seriously; the princess went so far as
to cross herself under her shawl so that he could not help noticing it.
Sitnikov, on the other hand, was completely disconcerted. He had only
just come in to lunch in a new and fashionable get-up, not on this
occasion of a Slavophil cut; the evening before he had astonished the
man told off to wait on him by the amount of linen he had brought with
him, and now all of a sudden his comrades were deserting him! He took a
few tiny steps, doubled back like a hunted hare at the edge of a copse,
and abruptly, almost with dismay, almost with a wail, announced that he
proposed going too. Madame Odintsov did not attempt to detain him.

'I have a very comfortable carriage,' added the luckless young man,
turning to Arkady; 'I can take you, while Yevgeny Vassilyitch can take
your coach, so it will be even more convenient.'

'But, really, it's not at all in your way, and it's a long way to my
place.'

'That's nothing, nothing; I've plenty of time; besides, I have business
in that direction.'

'Gin-selling?' asked Arkady, rather too contemptuously.

But Sitnikov was reduced to such desperation that he did not even laugh
as usual. 'I assure you, my carriage is exceedingly comfortable,' he
muttered; 'and there will be room for all.'

'Don't wound Monsieur Sitnikov by a refusal,' commented Anna Sergyevna.

Arkady glanced at her, and bowed his head significantly.

The visitors started off after lunch. As she said good-bye to Bazarov,
Madame Odintsov held out her hand to him, and said, 'We shall meet
again, shan't we?'

'As you command,' answered Bazarov.

'In that case, we shall.'

Arkady was the first to descend the steps; he got into Sitnikov's
carriage. A steward tucked him in respectfully, but he could have
killed him with pleasure, or have burst into tears.

Bazarov took his seat in the coach. When they reached Hohlovsky, Arkady
waited till Fedot, the keeper of the posting-station, had put in the
horses, and going up to the coach, he said, with his old smile, to
Bazarov, 'Yevgeny, take me with you; I want to come to you.'

'Get in,' Bazarov brought out through his teeth.

Sitnikov, who had been walking to and fro round the wheels of his
carriage, whistling briskly, could only gape when he heard these
words; while Arkady coolly pulled his luggage out of the carriage,
took his seat beside Bazarov, and bowing politely to his former
fellow-traveller, he called, 'Whip up!' The coach rolled away, and was
soon out of sight.... Sitnikov, utterly confused, looked at his
coachman, but the latter was flicking his whip about the tail of the
off horse. Then Sitnikov jumped into the carriage, and growling at two
passing peasants, 'Put on your caps, idiots!' he drove to the town,
where he arrived very late, and where, next day, at Madame Kukshin's,
he dealt very severely with two 'disgusting stuck-up churls.'

When he was seated in the coach by Bazarov, Arkady pressed his hand
warmly, and for a long while he said nothing. It seemed as though
Bazarov understood and appreciated both the pressure and the silence.
He had not slept all the previous night, and had not smoked, and had
eaten scarcely anything for several days. His profile, already thinner,
stood out darkly and sharply under his cap, which was pulled down to
his eyebrows.

'Well, brother,' he said at last, 'give us a cigarette. But look, I
say, is my tongue yellow?'

'Yes, it is,' answered Arkady.

'Hm ... and the cigarette's tasteless. The machine's out of gear.'

'You look changed lately certainly,' observed Arkady.

'It's nothing! we shall soon be all right. One thing's a bother--my
mother's so tender-hearted; if you don't grow as round as a tub, and
eat ten times a day, she's quite upset. My father's all right, he's
known all sorts of ups and downs himself. No, I can't smoke,' he added,
and he flung the cigarette into the dust of the road.

'Do you think it's twenty miles?' asked Arkady.

'Yes. But ask this sage here.' He indicated the peasant sitting on the
box, a labourer of Fedot's.

But the sage only answered, 'Who's to know--miles hereabout aren't
measured,' and went on swearing in an undertone at the shaft horse for
'kicking with her head-piece,' that is, shaking with her head down.

'Yes, yes,' began Bazarov; 'it's a lesson to you, my young friend, an
instructive example. God knows, what rot it is? Every man hangs on a
thread, the abyss may open under his feet any minute, and yet he must
go and invent all sorts of discomforts for himself, and spoil his
life.'

'What are you alluding to?' asked Arkady.

'I'm not alluding to anything; I'm saying straight out that we've both
behaved like fools. What's the use of talking about it! Still, I've
noticed in hospital practice, the man who's furious at his
illness--he's sure to get over it.'

'I don't quite understand you,' observed Arkady; 'I should have thought
you had nothing to complain of.'

'And since you don't quite understand me, I'll tell you this--to my
mind, it's better to break stones on the highroad than to let a woman
have the mastery of even the end of one's little finger. That's all
...' Bazarov was on the point of uttering his favourite word,
'romanticism,' but he checked himself, and said, 'rubbish. You don't
believe me now, but I tell you; you and I have been in feminine
society, and very nice we found it; but to throw up society like that
is for all the world like a dip in cold water on a hot day. A man
hasn't time to attend to such trifles; a man ought not to be tame, says
an excellent Spanish proverb. Now, you, I suppose, my sage friend,' he
added, turning to the peasant sitting on the box--'you've a wife?'

The peasant showed both the friends his dull blear-eyed face.

'A wife? Yes. Every man has a wife.'

'Do you beat her?'

'My wife? Everything happens sometimes. We don't beat her without good
reason!'

'That's excellent. Well, and does she beat you?'

The peasant gave a tug at the reins. 'That's a strange thing to say,
sir. You like your joke.'... He was obviously offended.

'You hear, Arkady Nikolaevitch! But we have taken a beating ... that's
what comes of being educated people.'

Arkady gave a forced laugh, while Bazarov turned away, and did not open
his mouth again the whole journey.

The twenty miles seemed to Arkady quite forty. But at last, on the
slope of some rising ground, appeared the small hamlet where Bazarov's
parents lived. Beside it, in a young birch copse, could be seen a small
house with a thatched roof.

Two peasants stood with their hats on at the first hut, abusing each
other. 'You're a great sow,' said one; 'and worse than a little sucking
pig.'

'And your wife's a witch,' retorted the other.

'From their unconstrained behaviour,' Bazarov remarked to Arkady, 'and
the playfulness of their retorts, you can guess that my father's
peasants are not too much oppressed. Why, there he is himself coming
out on the steps of his house. They must have heard the bells. It's he;
it's he--I know his figure. Ay, ay! how grey he's grown though, poor
chap!'






Bazarov leaned out of the coach, while Arkady thrust his head out
behind his companion's back, and caught sight on the steps of the
little manor-house of a tall, thinnish man with dishevelled hair, and a
thin hawk nose, dressed in an old military coat not buttoned up. He was
standing, his legs wide apart, smoking a long pipe and screwing up his
eyes to keep the sun out of them.

The horses stopped.

'Arrived at last,' said Bazarov's father, still going on smoking though
the pipe was fairly dancing up and down between his fingers. 'Come, get
out; get out; let me hug you.'

He began embracing his son ... 'Enyusha, Enyusha,' was heard a
trembling woman's voice. The door was flung open, and in the doorway
was seen a plump, short, little old woman in a white cap and a short
striped jacket. She moaned, staggered, and would certainly have fallen,
had not Bazarov supported her. Her plump little hands were instantly
twined round his neck, her head was pressed to his breast, and there
was a complete hush. The only sound heard was her broken sobs.

Old Bazarov breathed hard and screwed his eyes up more than ever.

'There, that's enough, that's enough, Arisha! give over,' he said,
exchanging a glance with Arkady, who remained motionless in the coach,
while the peasant on the box even turned his head away; 'that's not at
all necessary, please give over.'

'Ah, Vassily Ivanitch,' faltered the old woman, 'for what ages, my dear
one, my darling, Enyusha,' ... and, not unclasping her hands, she drew
her wrinkled face, wet with tears and working with tenderness, a little
away from Bazarov, and gazed at him with blissful and comic-looking
eyes, and again fell on his neck.

'Well, well, to be sure, that's all in the nature of things,' commented
Vassily Ivanitch, 'only we'd better come indoors. Here's a visitor come
with Yevgeny. You must excuse it,' he added, turning to Arkady, and
scraping with his foot; 'you understand, a woman's weakness; and well,
a mother's heart ...'

His lips and eyebrows too were twitching, and his beard was quivering
... but he was obviously trying to control himself and appear almost
indifferent.

'Let's come in, mother, really,' said Bazarov, and he led the enfeebled
old woman into the house. Putting her into a comfortable armchair, he
once more hurriedly embraced his father and introduced Arkady to him.

'Heartily glad to make your acquaintance,' said Vassily Ivanovitch,
'but you mustn't expect great things; everything here in my house is
done in a plain way, on a military footing. Arina Vlasyevna, calm
yourself, pray; what weakness! The gentleman our guest will think ill
of you.'

'My dear sir,' said the old lady through her tears, 'your name and your
father's I haven't the honour of knowing....'

'Arkady Nikolaitch,' put in Vassily Ivanitch solemnly, in a low voice.

'You must excuse a silly old woman like me.' The old woman blew her
nose, and bending her head to right and to left, carefully wiped one
eye after the other. 'You must excuse me. You see, I thought I should
die, that I should not live to see my da .. arling.'

'Well, here we have lived to see him, madam,' put in Vassily
Ivanovitch. 'Tanyushka,' he turned to a bare-legged little girl of
thirteen in a bright red cotton dress, who was timidly peeping in at
the door, 'bring your mistress a glass of water--on a tray, do you
hear?--and you, gentlemen,' he added, with a kind of old-fashioned
playfulness, 'let me ask you into the study of a retired old veteran.'

'Just once more let me embrace you, Enyusha,' moaned Arina Vlasyevna.
Bazarov bent down to her. 'Why, what a handsome fellow you have grown!'

'Well, I don't know about being handsome,' remarked Vassily Ivanovitch,
'but he's a man, as the saying is, _ommfay_. And now I hope, Arina
Vlasyevna, that having satisfied your maternal heart, you will turn
your thoughts to satisfying the appetites of our dear guests, because,
as you're aware, even nightingales can't be fed on fairy tales.'

The old lady got up from her chair. 'This minute, Vassily Ivanovitch,
the table shall be laid. I will run myself to the kitchen and order the
samovar to be brought in; everything shall be ready, everything. Why, I
have not seen him, not given him food or drink these three years; is
that nothing?'

'There, mind, good mother, bustle about; don't put us to shame; while
you, gentlemen, I beg you to follow me. Here's Timofeitch come to pay
his respects to you, Yevgeny. He, too, I daresay, is delighted, the old
dog. Eh, aren't you delighted, old dog? Be so good as to follow me.'

And Vassily Ivanovitch went bustling forward, scraping and flapping
with his slippers trodden down at heel.

His whole house consisted of six tiny rooms. One of them--the one to
which he led our friends--was called the study. A thick-legged table,
littered over with papers black with the accumulation of ancient dust
as though they had been smoked, occupied all the space between the two
windows; on the walls hung Turkish firearms, whips, a sabre, two maps,
some anatomical diagrams, a portrait of Hoffland, a monogram woven in
hair in a blackened frame, and a diploma under glass; a leather sofa,
torn and worn into hollows in parts, was placed between two huge
cupboards of birch-wood; on the shelves books, boxes, stuffed birds,
jars, and phials were huddled together in confusion; in one corner
stood a broken galvanic battery.

'I warned you, my dear Arkady Nikolaitch,' began Vassily Ivanitch,
'that we live, so to say, bivouacking....'

'There, stop that, what are you apologising for?' Bazarov interrupted.
'Kirsanov knows very well we're not Croesuses, and that you have no
butler. Where are we going to put him, that's the question?'

'To be sure, Yevgeny; I have a capital room there in the little lodge;
he will be very comfortable there.'

'Have you had a lodge put up then?'

'Why, where the bath-house is,' put in Timofeitch.

'That is next to the bathroom,' Vassily Ivanitch added hurriedly. 'It's
summer now ... I will run over there at once, and make arrangements;
and you, Timofeitch, meanwhile bring in their things. You, Yevgeny, I
shall of course offer my study. _Suum cuique_.'

'There you have him! A comical old chap, and very good-natured,'
remarked Bazarov, directly Vassily Ivanitch had gone. 'Just such a
queer fish as yours, only in another way. He chatters too much.'

'And your mother seems an awfully nice woman,' observed Arkady.

'Yes, there's no humbug about her. You'll see what a dinner she'll give
us.'

'They didn't expect you to-day, sir; they've not brought any beef?'
observed Timofeitch, who was just dragging in Bazarov's box.

'We shall get on very well without beef. It's no use crying for the
moon. Poverty, they say, is no vice.'

'How many serfs has your father?' Arkady asked suddenly.

'The estate's not his, but mother's; there are fifteen serfs, if I
remember.'

'Twenty-two in all,' Timofeitch added, with an air of displeasure.

The flapping of slippers was heard, and Vassily Ivanovitch reappeared.
'In a few minutes your room will be ready to receive you,' he cried
triumphantly. Arkady ... Nikolaitch? I think that is right? And here is
your attendant,' he added, indicating a short-cropped boy, who had come
in with him in a blue full-skirted coat with ragged elbows and a pair
of boots which did not belong to him. 'His name is Fedka. Again, I
repeat, even though my son tells me not to, you mustn't expect great
things. He knows how to fill a pipe, though. You smoke, of course?'

'I generally smoke cigars,' answered Arkady.

'And you do very sensibly. I myself give the preference to cigars, but
in these solitudes it is exceedingly difficult to obtain them.'

'There, that's enough humble pie,' Bazarov interrupted again. 'You'd
much better sit here on the sofa and let us have a look at you.'

Vassily Ivanovitch laughed and sat down. He was very like his son in
face, only his brow was lower and narrower, and his mouth rather wider,
and he was for ever restless, shrugging up his shoulder as though his
coat cut him under the armpits, blinking, clearing his throat, and
gesticulating with his fingers, while his son was distinguished by a
kind of nonchalant immobility.

'Humble-pie!' repeated Vassily Ivanovitch. 'You must not imagine,
Yevgeny, I want to appeal, so to speak, to our guest's sympathies by
making out we live in such a wilderness. Quite the contrary, I maintain
that for a thinking man nothing is a wilderness. At least, I try as far
as possible not to get rusty, so to speak, not to fall behind the age.'

Vassily Ivanovitch drew out of his pocket a new yellow silk
handkerchief, which he had had time to snatch up on the way to Arkady's
room, and flourishing it in the air, he proceeded: 'I am not now
alluding to the fact that, for example, at the cost of sacrifices not
inconsiderable for me, I have put my peasants on the rent-system and
given up my land to them on half profits. I regarded that as my duty;
common sense itself enjoins such a proceeding, though other proprietors
do not even dream of it; I am alluding to the sciences, to culture.'

'Yes; I see you have here _The Friend of Health_ for 1855,' remarked
Bazarov.

'It's sent me by an old comrade out of friendship,' Vassily Ivanovitch
made haste to answer; 'but we have, for instance, some idea even of
phrenology,' he added, addressing himself principally, however, to
Arkady, and pointing to a small plaster head on the cupboard, divided
into numbered squares; 'we are not unacquainted even with Schenlein and
Rademacher.'

'Why do people still believe in Rademacher in this province?' asked
Bazarov.

Vassily Ivanovitch cleared his throat. 'In this province.... Of course,
gentlemen, you know best; how could we keep pace with you? You are here
to take our places. In my day, too, there was some sort of a
Humouralist school, Hoffmann, and Brown too with his vitalism--they
seemed very ridiculous to us, but, of course, they too had been great
men at one time or other. Some one new has taken the place of
Rademacher with you; you bow down to him, but in another twenty years
it will be his turn to be laughed at.'

'For your consolation I will tell you,' observed Bazarov, 'that
nowadays we laugh at medicine altogether, and don't bow down to any
one.'

'How's that? Why, you're going to be a doctor, aren't you?'

'Yes, but the one fact doesn't prevent the other.'

Vassily Ivanovitch poked his third finger into his pipe, where a little
smouldering ash was still left. 'Well, perhaps, perhaps--I am not going
to dispute. What am I? A retired army-doctor, _volla-too_; now fate has
made me take to farming. I served in your grandfather's brigade,' he
addressed himself again to Arkady; 'yes, yes, I have seen many sights
in my day. And I was thrown into all kinds of society, brought into
contact with all sorts of people! I myself, the man you see before you
now, have felt the pulse of Prince Wittgenstein and of Zhukovsky! They
were in the southern army, in the fourteenth, you understand' (and here
Vassily Ivanovitch pursed his mouth up significantly). 'Well, well, but
my business was on one side; stick to your lancet, and let everything
else go hang! Your grandfather was a very honourable man, a real
soldier.'

'Confess, now, he was rather a blockhead,' remarked Bazarov lazily.

'Ah, Yevgeny, how can you use such an expression! Do consider.... Of
course, General Kirsanov was not one of the ...'

'Come, drop him,' broke in Bazarov; 'I was pleased as I was driving
along here to see your birch copse; it has shot up capitally.'

Vassily Ivanovitch brightened up. 'And you must see what a little
garden I've got now! I planted every tree myself. I've fruit, and
raspberries, and all kinds of medicinal herbs. However clever you young
gentlemen may be, old Paracelsus spoke the holy truth: _in herbis
verbis et lapidibus_.... I've retired from practice, you know, of
course, but two or three times a week it will happen that I'm brought
back to my old work. They come for advice--I can't drive them away.
Sometimes the poor have recourse to me for help. And indeed there are
no doctors here at all. There's one of the neighbours here, a retired
major, only fancy, he doctors the people too. I asked the question,
"Has he studied medicine?" And they told me, "No, he's not studied; he
does it more from philanthropy."... Ha! ha! ha! from philanthropy! What
