
Ignat trembled for joy, embraced her firmly, and said in a dull voice:

"You're a fine fellow, Natalya! Natasha, if it should be a son! If you
bear me a son I'll enrich you! I tell you plainly, I'll be your slave!
By God! I'll lie down at your feet, and you may trample upon me, if you
like!"

"This is not within our power; it's the will of the Lord," said she in a
low voice.

"Yes, the Lord's!" exclaimed Ignat with bitterness and drooped his head
sadly.

From that moment he began to look after his wife as though she were a
little child.

"Why do you sit near the window? Look out. You'll catch cold in your
side; you may take sick," he used to say to her, both sternly and
mildly. "Why do you skip on the staircase? You may hurt yourself. And
you had better eat more, eat for two, that he may have enough."

And the pregnancy made Natalya more morose and silent, as though she
were looking still deeper into herself, absorbed in the throbbing of new
life within her. But the smile on her lips became clearer, and in her
eyes flashed at times something new, weak and timid, like the first ray
of the dawn.

When, at last, the time of confinement came, it was early on an autumn
morning. At the first cry of pain she uttered, Ignat turned pale and
started to say something, but only waved his hand and left the bedroom,
where his wife was shrinking convulsively, and went down to the little
room which had served his late mother as a chapel. He ordered vodka,
seated himself by the table and began to drink sternly, listening to the
alarm in the house and to the moans of his wife that came from above. In
the corner of the room, the images of the ikons, indifferent and dark,
stood out confusedly, dimly illumined by the glimmering light of the
image lamp. There was a stamping and scraping of feet over his head,
something heavy was moved from one side of the floor to the other, there
was a clattering of dishes, people were bustling hurriedly, up and down
the staircase. Everything was being done in haste, yet time was creeping
slowly. Ignat could hear a muffled voice from above,

"As it seems, she cannot be delivered that way. We had better send to
the church to open the gates of the Lord."

Vassushka, one of the hangers-on in his house, entered the room next to
Ignat's and began to pray in a loud whisper:

"God, our Lord, descend from the skies in Thy benevolence, born of
the Holy Virgin. Thou dost divine the helplessness of human creatures.
Forgive Thy servant."

And suddenly drowning all other sounds, a superhuman, soul-rending cry
rang out, and a continuous moan floated softly over the room and died
out in the corners, which were filled now with the twilight. Ignat cast
stern glances at the ikons, heaved a deep sigh and thought:

"Is it possible that it's again a daughter?"

At times he arose, stupidly stood in the middle of the room, and crossed
himself in silence, bowing before the ikons; then he went back to the
table, drank the vodka, which had not made him dizzy during these hours,
dozed off, and thus passed the whole night and following morning until
noon.

And then, at last, the midwife came down hastily, crying to him in a
thin, joyous voice.

"I congratulate you with a son, Ignat Matveyich!"

"You lie!" said he in a dull voice. "What's the matter with you,
batushka!" Heaving a sigh with all the strength of his massive chest,
Ignat went down on his knees, and clasping his hands firmly to his
breast, muttered in a trembling voice:

"Thank God! Evidently Thou didst not want that my stem should be
checked! My sins before Thee shall not remain without repentance. I
thank Thee, Oh Lord. Oh!" and, rising to his feet, he immediately began
to command noisily:

"Eh! Let someone go to St. Nicholas for a priest. Tell him that Ignat
Matveyich asked him to come! Let him come to make a prayer for the
woman."

The chambermaid appeared and said to him with alarm:

"Ignat Matveyich, Natalya Fominichna is calling you. She is feeling
bad."

"Why bad? It'll pass!" he roared, his eyes flashing cheerfully. "Tell
her I'll be there immediately! Tell her she's a fine fellow! I'll just
get a present for her and I'll come! Hold on! Prepare something to eat
for the priest. Send somebody after Mayakin!"

His enormous figure looked as though it had grown bigger, and
intoxicated with joy, he stupidly tossed about the room; he was smiling,
rubbing his hands and casting fervent glances at the images; he crossed
himself swinging his hand wide. At last he went up to his wife.

His eyes first of all caught a glimpse of the little red body, which the
midwife was bathing in a tub. Noticing him, Ignat stood up on tiptoes,
and, folding his hands behind his back, walked up to him, stepping
carefully and comically putting forth his lips. The little one was
whimpering and sprawling in the water, naked, impotent and pitiful.

"Look out there! Handle him more carefully! He hasn't got any bones
yet," said Ignat to the midwife, softly.

She began to laugh, opening her toothless mouth, and cleverly throwing
the child over from one hand to the other.

"You better go to your wife."

He obediently moved toward the bed and asked on his way:

"Well, how is it, Natalya?"

Then, on reaching her, he drew back the bed curtain, which had thrown a
shadow over the bed.

"I'll not survive this," said she in a low, hoarse voice.

Ignat was silent, fixedly staring at his wife's face, sunk in the white
pillow, over which her dark locks were spread out like dead snakes.
Yellow, lifeless, with black circles around her large, wide-open
eyes--her face was strange to him. And the glance of those terrible
eyes, motionlessly fixed somewhere in the distance through the
wall--that, too, was unfamiliar to Ignat. His heart, compressed by a
painful foreboding, slackened its joyous throbbing.

"That's nothing. That's nothing. It's always like this," said he softly,
bending over his wife to give her a kiss. But she moaned right into his
face:

"I'll not survive this."

Her lips were gray and cold, and when he touched them with his own he
understood that death was already within her.

"Oh, Lord!" he uttered, in an alarmed whisper, feeling that fright was
choking his throat and suppressing his breath.

"Natasha? What will become of him? He must be nursed! What is the matter
with you?"

He almost began to cry at his wife. The midwife was bustling about him;
shaking the crying child in the air. She spoke to him reassuringly, but
he heard nothing--he could not turn his eyes away from the frightful
face of his wife. Her lips were moving, and he heard words spoken in
a low voice, but could not understand them. Sitting on the edge of the
bed, he spoke in a dull and timid voice: "Just think of it! He cannot
do without you; he's an infant! Gather strength! Drive this thought away
from you! Drive it away."

He talked, yet he understood he was speaking useless words. Tears welled
up within him, and in his breast there came a feeling heavy as stone and
cold as ice.

"Forgive me. Goodbye! Take care. Look out. Don't drink," whispered
Natalya, soundlessly.

The priest came, and, covering her face with something, and sighing,
began to read gentle, beseeching words:

"Oh God, Almighty Lord, who cureth every disease, cure also Thy servant
Natalya, who has just given birth to a child; and restore her from the
bed on which she now lies, for in the words of David, 'We indulge in
lawlessness and are wicked in Thine eyes."'

The old man's voice was interrupted now and then, his thin face was
stern and from his clothes came the odour of rock-rose.

"Guard the infant born of her, guard him from all possible temptation,
from all possible cruelty, from all possible storms, from evil spirits,
night and day."

Ignat listened to the prayer, and wept silently. His big, hot tears fell
on the bare hand of his wife. But the hand, evidently, did not feel that
the tears were dropping upon it: it remained motionless, and the skin
did not tremble from the fall of the tears. After the prayer Natalya
became unconscious and a day later she died, without saying another
word--she died just as quietly as she had lived. Having arranged
a pompous funeral, Ignat christened his son, named him Foma, and
unwillingly gave his boy into the family of the godfather, his old
friend Mayakin, whose wife, too, had given birth to a child not long
before. The death of his wife had sown many gray hairs in Ignat's dark
beard, but in the stern glitter of his eyes appeared a new expression,
gentle, clear and mild.




MAYAKIN lived in an enormous two-story house near a big palisade, where
sturdy, old spreading linden trees were growing magnificently. The rank
branches covered the windows with a dense, dark embroidery, and the sun
in broken rays peeped into the small rooms, which were closely crowded
with miscellaneous furniture and big trunks, wherefore a stern and
melancholy semi-darkness always reigned there supreme. The family was
devout--the odour of wax, of rock-rose and of image-lamp oil filled the
house, and penitent sighs and prayers soared about in the air. Religious
ceremonials were performed infallibly, with pleasure, absorbing all the
free power of the souls of the dwellers of the house. Feminine figures
almost noiselessly moved about the rooms in the half-dark, stifling,
heavy atmosphere. They were dressed in black, wore soft slippers on
their feet, and always had a penitent look on their faces.

The family of Yakov Tarazovich Mayakin consisted of himself, his wife, a
daughter and five kinswomen, the youngest of whom was thirty-four years
old. These were alike devout and impersonal, and subordinate to Antonina
Ivanovna, the mistress of the house. She was a tall, thin woman, with
a dark face and with stern gray eyes, which had an imperious and
intelligent expression. Mayakin also had a son Taras, but his name
was never mentioned in the house; acquaintances knew that since the
nineteen-year-old Taras had gone to study in Moscow--he married there
three years later, against his father's will--Yakov disowned him. Taras
disappeared without leaving any trace. It was rumoured that he had been
sent to Siberia for something.

Yakov Mayakin was very queerly built. Short, thin, lively, with a little
red beard, sly greenish eyes, he looked as though he said to each and
every one:

"Never mind, sir, don't be uneasy. Even though I know you for what you
are, if you don't annoy me I will not give you away."

His beard resembled an egg in shape and was monstrously big. His high
forehead, covered with wrinkles, joined his bald crown, and it seemed
as though he really had two faces--one an open, penetrating and
intellectual face, with a long gristle nose, and above this face another
one, eyeless and mouthless, covered with wrinkles, behind which Mayakin
seemed to hide his eyes and his lips until a certain time; and when that
time had arrived, he would look at the world with different eyes and
smile a different smile.

He was the owner of a rope-yard and kept a store in town near the
harbour. In this store, filled up to the ceiling with rope, twine, hemp
and tow, he had a small room with a creaking glass door. In this room
stood a big, old, dilapidated table, and near it a deep armchair,
covered with oilcloth, in which Mayakin sat all day long, sipping
tea and always reading the same "Moskovskiya Vedomosty," to which he
subscribed, year in and year out, all his life. Among merchants he
enjoyed the respect and reputation of a "brainy" man, and he was very
fond of boasting of the antiquity of his race, saying in a hoarse voice:

"We, the Mayakins, were merchants during the reign of 'Mother'
Catherine, consequently I am a pure-blooded man."

In this family Ignat Gordyeeff's son lived for six years. By the time
he was seven years old Foma was a big-headed, broad-shouldered boy,
seemingly older that his years, both in his size and in the serious look
of his dark, almond-shaped eyes. Quiet, silent and persistent in his
childish desires, he spent all his days over his playthings, with
Mayakin's daughter, Luba, quietly looked after by one of the kinswomen,
a stout, pock-marked old maid, who was, for some reason or other,
nicknamed "Buzya." She was a dull, somewhat timid creature; and even to
the children she spoke in a low voice, in words of monosyllables. Having
devoted her time to learning prayers, she had no stories to tell Foma.

Foma was on friendly terms with the little girl, but when she angered
or teased him he turned pale, his nostrils became distended, his eyes
stared comically and he beat her audaciously. She cried, ran to her
mother and complained to her, but Antonina loved Foma and she paid but
little attention to her daughter's complaints, which strengthened the
friendship between the children still more. Foma's day was long and
uniform. Getting out of bed and washing himself, he used to place
himself before the image, and under the whispering of the pock-marked
Buzya he recited long prayers. Then they drank tea and ate many
biscuits, cakes and pies. After tea--during the summer--the children
went to the big palisade, which ran down to a ravine, whose bottom
always looked dark and damp, filling them with terror. The children were
not allowed to go even to the edge of the ravine, and this inspired in
them a fear of it. In winter, from tea time to dinner, they played in
the house when it was very cold outside, or went out in the yard to
slide down the big ice hill.

They had dinner at noon, "in Russian style," as Mayakin said. At first a
big bowl of fat, sour cabbage soup was served with rye biscuits in,
but without meat, then the same soup was eaten with meat cut into small
pieces; then they ate roast meat--pork, goose, veal or rennet, with
gruel--then again a bowl of soup with vermicelli, and all this was
usually followed by dessert. They drank kvass made of red bilberries,
juniper-berries, or of bread--Antonina Ivanovna always carried a stock
of different kinds of kvass. They ate in silence, only now and then
uttering a sigh of fatigue; the children each ate out of a separate
bowl, the adults eating out of one bowl. Stupefied by such a dinner,
they went to sleep; and for two or three hours Mayakin's house was
filled with snoring and with drowsy sighs.

Awaking from sleep, they drank tea and talked about local news, the
choristers, the deacons, weddings, or the dishonourable conduct of this
or that merchant. After tea Mayakin used to say to his wife:

"Well, mother, hand me the Bible."

Yakov Tarasovich used to read the Book of Job more often than anything
else. Putting his heavy, silver-framed spectacles on his big, ravenous
nose, he looked around at his listeners to see whether all were in their
places.

They were all seated where he was accustomed to see them and on their
faces was a familiar, dull and timid expression of piety.

"There was a man in the land of Uz," began Mayakin, in a hoarse voice,
and Foma, sitting beside Luba on the lounge in the corner of the room,
knew beforehand that soon his godfather would become silent and pat his
bald head with his hand. He sat and, listening, pictured to himself
this man from the land of Uz. The man was tall and bare, his eyes were
enormously large, like those of the image of the Saviour, and his voice
was like a big brass trumpet on which the soldiers played in the camps.
The man was constantly growing bigger and bigger; and, reaching the sky,
he thrust his dark hands into the clouds, and, tearing them asunder,
cried out in a terrible voice:

"Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged
in?"

Dread fell on Foma, and he trembled, slumber fled from his eyes, he
heard the voice of his godfather, who said, with a light smile, now and
then pinching his beard:

"See how audacious he was!"

The boy knew that his godfather spoke of the man from the land of Uz,
and the godfather's smile soothed the child. So the man would not break
the sky; he would not rend it asunder with his terrible arms. And then
Foma sees the man again--he sits on the ground, "his flesh is clothed
with worms and clods of dust, his skin is broken." But now he is small
and wretched, he is like a beggar at the church porch.

Here he says:

"What is man, that he should be clean? And he which is born of woman,
that he should be righteous?" [These words attributed by Mayakin to Job
are from Eliphaz the Temanite's reply--Translator's Note.]

"He says this to God," explained Mayakin, inspired. "How, says he, can I
be righteous, since I am made of flesh? That's a question asked of God.
How is that?"

And the reader, triumphantly and interrogatively looks around at his
listeners.

"He merited it, the righteous man," they replied with a sigh.

Yakov Mayakin eyes them with a smile, and says:

"Fools! You better put the children to sleep."

Ignat visited the Mayakins every day, brought playthings for his son,
caught him up into his arms and hugged him, but sometimes dissatisfied
he said to him with ill-concealed uneasiness:

"Why are you such a bugbear? Oh! Why do you laugh so little?"

And he would complain to the lad's godfather:

"I am afraid that he may turn out to be like his mother. His eyes are
cheerless."

"You disturb yourself rather too soon," Mayakin smilingly replied.

He, too, loved his godson, and when Ignat announced to him one day that
he would take Foma to his own house, Mayakin was very much grieved.

"Leave him here," he begged. "See, the child is used to us; there! he's
crying."

"He'll cease crying. I did not beget him for you. The air of the
place is disagreeable. It is as tedious here as in an old believer's
hermitage. This is harmful to the child. And without him I am lonesome.
I come home--it is empty. I can see nothing there. It would not do for
me to remove to your house for his sake. I am not for him, he is for me.
So. And now that my sister has come to my house there will be somebody
to look after him."

And the boy was brought to his father's house.

There he was met by a comical old woman, with a long, hook-like nose and
with a mouth devoid of teeth. Tall, stooping, dressed in gray, with gray
hair, covered by a black silk cap, she did not please the boy at first;
she even frightened him. But when he noticed on the wrinkled face her
black eyes, which beamed so tenderly on him, he at once pressed his head
close to her knees in confidence.

"My sickly little orphan!" she said in a velvet-like voice that trembled
from the fulness of sound, and quietly patted his face with her hand,
"stay close to me, my dear child!"

There was something particularly sweet and soft in her caresses,
something altogether new to Foma, and he stared into the old woman's
eyes with curiosity and expectation on his face. This old woman led him
into a new world, hitherto unknown to him. The very first day, having
put him to bed, she seated herself by his side, and, bending over the
child, asked him:

"Shall I tell you a story, Fomushka?"

And after that Foma always fell asleep amid the velvet-like sounds of
the old woman's voice, which painted before him a magic life. Giants
defeating monsters, wise princesses, fools who turned out to be
wise--troops of new and wonderful people were passing before the boy's
bewitched imagination, and his soul was nourished by the wholesome
beauty of the national creative power. Inexhaustible were the treasures
of the memory and the fantasy of this old woman, who oftentimes,
in slumber, appeared to the boy--now like the witch of the
fairy-tales--only a kind and amiable old witch--now like the beautiful,
all-wise Vasilisa. His eyes wide open, holding his breath, the boy
looked into the darkness that filled his chamber and watched it as it
slowly trembled in the light of the little lamp that was burning before
the image. And Foma filled this darkness with wonderful pictures of
fairy-tale life. Silent, yet living shadows, were creeping over the
walls and across the floor; it was both pleasant and terrible to him to
watch their life; to deal out unto them forms and colours, and, having
endowed them with life, instantly to destroy them all with a single
twinkle of the eyelashes. Something new appeared in his dark eyes,
something more childish and naive, less grave; the loneliness and the
darkness, awaking in him a painful feeling of expectation, stirred his
curiosity, compelled him to go out to the dark corner and see what
was hidden there beyond the thick veils of darkness. He went and found
nothing, but he lost no hope of finding it out.

He feared his father and respected him. Ignat's enormous size, his
harsh, trumpet-like voice, his bearded face, his gray-haired head, his
powerful, long arms and his flashing eyes--all these gave to Ignat the
resemblance of the fairy-tale robbers.

Foma shuddered whenever he heard his voice or his heavy, firm steps; but
when the father, smiling kind-heartedly, and talking playfully in a loud
voice, took him upon his knees or threw him high up in the air with his
big hands the boy's fear vanished.

Once, when the boy was about eight years old, he asked his father, who
had returned from a long journey:

"Papa, where were you?"

"On the Volga."

"Were you robbing there?" asked Foma, softly.

"Wha-at?" Ignat drawled out, and his eyebrows contracted.

"Aren't you a robber, papa? I know it," said Foma, winking his eyes
slyly, satisfied that he had already read the secret of his father's
life.

"I am a merchant!" said Ignat, sternly, but after a moment's thought he
smiled kind-heartedly and added: "And you are a little fool! I deal in
corn, I run a line of steamers. Have you seen the 'Yermak'? Well, that
is my steamer. And yours, too."

"It is a very big one," said Foma with a sigh.

"Well, I'll buy you a small one while you are small yourself. Shall I?"

"Very well," Foma assented, but after a thoughtful silence he again
drawled out regretfully: "But I thought you were a robber or a giant."

"I tell you I am a merchant!" repeated Ignat, insinuatingly, and there
was something discontented and almost timorous in his glance at the
disenchanted face of his son.

"Like Grandpa Fedor, the Kalatch baker?" asked Foma, having thought
awhile.

"Well, yes, like him. Only I am richer than he. I have more money than
Fedor."

"Have you much money?"

"Well, some people have still more."

"How many barrels do you have?"

"Of what?"

"Of money, I mean."

"Fool! Is money counted by the barrel?"

"How else?" exclaimed Foma, enthusiastically, and, turning his face
toward his father, began to tell him quickly: "Maksimka, the robber,
came once to a certain town and filled up twelve barrels with money
belonging to some rich man there. And he took different silverware and
robbed a church. And cut up a man with his sword and threw him down the
steeple because he tried to sound an alarm."

"Did your aunt tell you that?" asked Ignat admiring his son's
enthusiasm.

"Yes! Why?"

"Nothing!" said Ignat, laughing. "So you thought your father was a
robber."

"And perhaps you were a robber long ago?"

Foma again returned to his theme, and it was evident on his face that he
would be very glad to hear an affirmative answer.
