"So. Well, you may go! That's all right, go. Observe what kind of
people there are in the world. You cannot pass your life alone, without
friendship. Your godfather and I, for instance, have been friends for
more than twenty years, and I have profited a great deal by his common
sense. So you, too, try to be friendly with those that are better and
wiser than you. Rub against a good man, like a copper coin against
silver, and you may then pass for a silver coin yourself."

And, bursting into laughter at his comparison, Ignat added seriously:

"I was only jesting. Try to be, not artificial, but genuine. And have
some common sense, no matter how little, but your own. Have you many
lessons to do?"

"Many!" sighed the boy, and to his sigh, like an echo, his aunt answered
with a heavy sigh.

"Well, study. Don't be worse than others at school. Although, I'll tell
you, even if there were twenty-five classes in your school, they could
never teach you there anything save reading, writing and arithmetic. You
may also learn some naughty things, but God protect you! I shall give
you a terrible spanking if you do. If you smoke tobacco I'll cut your
lips off."

"Remember God, Fomushka," said the aunt. "See that you don't forget our
Lord."

"That's true! Honour God and your father. But I wish to tell you that
school books are but a trivial matter. You need these as a carpenter
needs an adze and a pointer. They are tools, but the tools cannot teach
you how to make use of them. Understand? Let us see: Suppose an adze
were handed to a carpenter for him to square a beam with it. It's not
enough to have hands and an adze; it is also necessary for him to know
how to strike the wood so as not to hit his foot instead. To you the
knowledge of reading and writing is given, and you must regulate your
life with it. Thus it follows that books alone are but a trifle in this
matter; it is necessary to be able to take advantage of them. And it is
this ability that is more cunning than any books, and yet nothing about
it is written in the books. This, Foma, you must learn from Life itself.
A book is a dead thing, you may take it as you please, you may tear it,
break it--it will not cry out. While should you but make a single wrong
step in life, or wrongly occupy a place in it, Life will start to bawl
at you in a thousand voices; it will deal you a blow, felling you to the
ground."

Foma, his elbows leaning on the table, attentively listened to his
father, and under the sound of his powerful voice he pictured to himself
now the carpenter squaring a beam, now himself, his hands outstretched,
carefully and stealthily approaching some colossal and living thing, and
desiring to grasp that terrible something.

"A man must preserve himself for his work and must be thoroughly
acquainted with the road to it. A man, dear, is like the pilot on a
ship. In youth, as at high tide, go straight! A way is open to you
everywhere. But you must know when it is time to steer. The waters
recede--here you see a sandbank, there, a rock; it is necessary to know
all this and to slip off in time, in order to reach the harbour safe and
sound."

"I will reach it!" said the boy, looking at his father proudly and with
confidence.

"Eh? You speak courageously!" Ignat burst into laughter. And the aunt
also began to laugh kindly.

Since his trip with his father on the Volga, Foma became more lively and
talkative at home, with his father, with his aunt and with Mayakin. But
on the street, in a new place, or in the presence of strangers, he was
always gloomy, always looking about him with suspicion, as though he
felt something hostile to him everywhere, something hidden from him
spying on him.

At nights he sometimes awoke of a sudden and listened for a long time
to the silence about him, fixedly staring into the dark with wide-open
eyes. And then his father's stories were transformed before him into
images and pictures. Without being aware of it, he mixed up those
stories with his aunt's fairy-tales, thus creating for himself a chaos
of adventures wherein the bright colours of fantasy were whimsically
intertwined with the stern shades of reality. This resulted in something
colossal, incomprehensible; the boy closed his eyes and drove it all
away from him and tried to check the play of his imagination, which
frightened him. In vain he attempted to fall asleep, and the chamber
became more and more crowded with dark images. Then he quietly roused
his aunt.

"Auntie! Auntie!"

"What? Christ be with you."

"I'll come to you," whispered Foma.

"Why? Sleep, darling, sleep."

"I am afraid," confessed the boy.

"You better say to yourself, 'And the Lord will rise again,' then you
won't be afraid."

Foma lies with his eyes open and says the prayer. The silence of the
night pictures itself before him in the form of an endless expanse
of perfectly calm, dark water, which has overflowed everything and
congealed; there is not a ripple on it, not a shadow of a motion, and
neither is there anything within it, although it is bottomlessly deep.
It is very terrible for one to look down from the dark at this dead
water. But now the sound of the night watchman's mallet is heard, and
the boy sees that the surface of the water is beginning to tremble, and,
covering the surface with ripples, light little balls are dancing upon
it. The sound of the bell on the steeple, with one mighty swing, brings
all the water in agitation and it is slightly trembling from that sound;
a big spot of light is also trembling, spreading light upon the water,
radiating from its centre into the dark distance, there growing paler
and dying out. Again there is weary and deathlike repose in this dark
desert.

"Auntie," whispers Foma, beseechingly.

"Dearest?"

"I am coming to you."

"Come, then, come, my darling."

Going over into auntie's bed, he presses close to her, begging:

"Tell me something."

"At night?" protests auntie, sleepily.

"Please."

He does not have to ask her long. Yawning, her eyes closed, the old
woman begins slowly in a voice grown heavy with sleep:

"Well, my dear sir, in a certain kingdom, in a certain empire, there
lived a man and his wife, and they were very poor. They were so
unfortunate that they had nothing to eat. They would go around begging,
somebody would give them a crust of stale bread and that would keep them
for awhile. And it came to pass that the wife begot a child--a child was
born--it was necessary to christen it, but, being poor, they could not
entertain the godparents and the guests, so nobody came to christen the
child. They tried this and they tried that--yet nobody came. And they
began to pray to the Lord, 'Oh Lord! Oh Lord!'"

Foma knew this awful story about God's godchild. He had heard it more
than once and was already picturing to himself this godchild riding on
a white horse to his godfather and godmother; he was riding in the
darkness, over the desert, and he saw there all the unbearable miseries
to which sinners are condemned. And he heard their faint moans and
requests:

"Oh! Man! Ask the Lord yet how long are we to suffer here!"

Then it appeared to Foma that it was he who was riding at night on the
white horse, and that the moans and the implorings were addressed to
him. His heart contracts with some incomprehensible desire; sorrow
compressed his breast and tears gathered in his eyes, which he had
firmly closed and now feared to open.

He is tossing about in his bed restlessly.

"Sleep, my child. Christ be with you!" says the old woman, interrupting
her tale of men suffering for their sins.

But in the morning after such a night Foma rose sound and cheerful,
washed himself hastily, drank his tea in haste and ran off to school,
provided with sweet cakes, which were awaited by the always hungry
little Yozhov, who greedily subsisted on his rich friend's generosity.

"Got anything to eat?" he accosted Foma, turning up his sharp-pointed
nose. "Let me have it, for I left the house without eating anything. I
slept too long, devil take it! I studied up to two o'clock last night.
Have you solved your problems?"

"No, I haven't."

"Eh, you lazy bones! Well, I'll dash them off for you directly!"

Driving his small, thin teeth into the cakes, he purred something like a
kitten, stamped his left foot, beating time, and at the same time solved
the problem, rattling off short phrases to Foma:

"See? Eight bucketfuls leaked out in one hour. And how many hours did it
leak--six? Eh, what good things they eat in your house! Consequently, we
must multiply six by eight. Do you like cake with green onions? Oh, how
I like it! So that in six hours forty-eight bucketfuls leaked out of
the first gauge-cock. And altogether the tub contained ninety. Do you
understand the rest?"

Foma liked Yozhov better than Smolin, but he was more friendly with
Smolin. He wondered at the ability and the sprightliness of the little
fellow. He saw that Yozhov was more clever and better than himself; he
envied him, and felt offended on that account, and at the same time he
pitied him with the condescending compassion of a satisfied man for a
hungry one. Perhaps it was this very compassion that prevented him from
preferring this bright boy to the boring red-headed Smolin. Yozhov,
fond of having a laugh at the expense of his well-fed friends, told them
quite often: "Eh, you are little trunks full of cakes!"

Foma was angry with him for his sneers, and one day, touched to the
quick, said wickedly and with contempt:

"And you are a beggar--a pauper!"

Yozhov's yellow face became overcast, and he replied slowly:

"Very well, so be it! I shall never prompt you again--and you'll be like
a log of wood!"

And they did not speak to each other for about three days, very much to
the regret of the teacher, who during these days had to give the lowest
markings to the son of the esteemed Ignat Matveyich.

Yozhov knew everything: he related at school how the procurator's
chambermaid gave birth to a child, and that for this the procurator's
wife poured hot coffee over her husband; he could tell where and when it
was best to catch perch; he knew how to make traps and cages for birds;
he could give a detailed account of how the soldier had hanged himself
in the garret of the armoury, and knew from which of the pupils' parents
the teacher had received a present that day and precisely what sort of a
present it was.

The sphere of Smolin's knowledge and interests was confined to the
merchant's mode of life, and, above all, the red-headed boy was fond of
judging whether this man was richer than that, valuing and pricing their
houses, their vessels and their horses. All this he knew to perfection,
and spoke of it with enthusiasm.

Like Foma, he regarded Yozhov with the same condescending pity, but more
as a friend and equal. Whenever Gordyeeff quarrelled with Yozhov, Smolin
hastened to reconcile them, and he said to Foma one day, on their way
home:

"Why do you always quarrel with Yozhov?"

"Well, why is he so self-conceited?" said Foma, angrily.

"He is proud because you never know your lessons, and he always helps
you out. He is clever. And because he is poor--is he to blame for that?
He can learn anything he wants to, and he will be rich, too."

"He is like a mosquito," said Foma, disdainfully; "he will buzz and
buzz, and then of a sudden will bite."

But there was something in the life of these boys that united them all;
there were hours when the consciousness of difference in their natures
and positions was entirely lost. On Sundays they all gathered at
Smolin's, and, getting up on the roof of the wing, where they had an
enormous pigeon-house, they let the pigeons loose.

The beautiful, well-fed birds, ruffling their snow-white wings, darted
out of the pigeon-house one by one, and, seating themselves in a row
on the ridge of the roof, and, illumined by the sun, cooing, flaunted
before the boys.

"Scare them!" implored Yozhov, trembling for impatience.

Smolin swung a pole with a bast-wisp fastened to its end, and whistled.

The frightened pigeons rushed into the air, filling it with the hurried
flapping of their wings. And now, outlining big circles, they easily
soar upwards, into the blue depths of the sky; they float higher and
higher, their silver and snow-white feathers flashing. Some of them are
striving to reach the dome of the skies with the light soaring of the
falcon, their wings outstretched wide and almost motionless; others
play, turn over in the air, now dropping downward in a snowy lump, now
darting up like an arrow. Now the entire flock seems as though hanging
motionless in the desert of the sky, and, growing smaller and smaller,
seems to sink in it. With heads thrown back, the boys admire the birds
in silence, without taking their eyes from them--their tired eyes, so
radiant with calm joy, not altogether free from envying these winged
creatures, which so freely took flight from earth up into the pure
and calm atmosphere full of the glitter of the sun. The small group of
scarcely visible dots, now mere specks in the azure of the sky, leads
on the imagination of the children, and Yozhov expresses their common
feeling when, in a low voice, he says thoughtfully:

"That's the way we ought to fly, friends."

While Foma, knowing that human souls, soaring heavenward, oftentimes
assume the form of pigeons, felt in his breast the rising of a burning,
powerful desire.

Unified by their joy, attentively and mutely awaiting the return of
their birds from the depths of the sky, the boys, pressing close to one
another, drifted far away from the breath of life, even as their pigeons
were far from earth; at this moment they are merely children, knowing
neither envy nor anger; free from everything, they are near to one
another, they are mute, judging their feelings by the light in their
eyes--and they feel as happy as the birds in the sky.

But now the pigeons come down on the roof again, and, tired out by their
flight, are easily driven into the pigeon-house.

"Friends, let's go for apples?" suggests Yozhov, the instigator of all
games and adventures.

His call drives out of the children's souls the peacefulness brought
into them by the pigeons, and then, like plunderers, carefully listening
for each and every sound, they steal quietly across the back yards
toward the neighbouring garden. The fear of being caught is balanced by
the hope of stealing with impunity. But stealing is work and dangerous
work at that, and everything that is earned by your own labour is so
sweet! And the more effort required to gain it, the sweeter it is.
Carefully the boys climb over the fence of the garden, and, bending
down, crawl toward the apple trees and, full of fright, look around
vigilantly. Their hearts tremble and their throbbing slackens at the
faintest rustle. They are alike afraid of being caught, and, if noticed,
of being recognised, but in case they should only see them and yell
at them, they would be satisfied. They would separate, each going in a
different direction, and then, meeting again, their eyes aglow with joy
and boldness, would laughingly tell one another how they felt when they
heard some one giving chase to them, and what happened to them when they
ran so quickly through the garden, as though the ground were burning
under their feet.

Such invasions were more to Foma's liking than all other adventures
and games, and his behaviour during these invasions was marked with
a boldness that at once astounded and angered his companions. He was
intentionally careless in other people's gardens: he spoke loud, noisily
broke the branches of apple trees, and, tearing off a worm-eaten apple,
threw it in the direction of the proprietor's house. The danger of being
caught in the act did not frighten him; it rather encouraged him--his
eyes would turn darker, his teeth would clench, and his face would
assume an expression of anger and pride.

Smolin, distorting his big mouth contemptibly, would say to him:

"You are making entirely too much fuss about yourself."

"I am not a coward anyway!" replied Foma.

"I know that you are not a coward, but why do you boast of it? One may
do a thing as well without boasting."

Yozhov blamed him from a different point of view:

"If you thrust yourself into their hands willingly you can go to the
devil! I am not your friend. They'll catch you and bring you to your
father--he wouldn't do anything to you, while I would get such a
spanking that all my bones would be skinned."

"Coward!" Foma persisted, stubbornly.

And it came to pass one day that Foma was caught by the second captain,
Chumakov, a thin little old man. Noiselessly approaching the boy, who
was hiding away in his bosom the stolen apples, the old man seized him
by the shoulders and cried in a threatening voice:

"Now I have you, little rogue! Aha!"

Foma was then about fifteen years old, and he cleverly slipped out of
the old man's hands. Yet he did not run from him, but, knitting his brow
and clenching his fist, he said threateningly:

"You dare to touch me!"

"I wouldn't touch you. I'll just turn you over to the police! Whose son
are you?"

Foma did not expect this, and all his boldness and spitefulness suddenly
left him.

The trip to the police station seemed to him something which his father
would never forgive him. He shuddered and said confusedly:

"Gordyeeff."

"Ignat Gordyeeff's?"

"Yes."

Now the second captain was taken aback. He straightened himself,
expanded his chest and for some reason or other cleared his throat
impressively. Then his shoulders sank and he said to the boy in a
fatherly tone:

"It's a shame! The son of such a well-known and respected man! It is
unbecoming your position. You may go. But should this happen again! Hm!
I should be compelled to notify your father, to whom, by the way, I have
the honour of presenting my respects."

Foma watched the play of the old man's physiognomy and understood that
he was afraid of his father. Like a young wolf, he looked askance at
Chumakov; while the old man, with comical seriousness, twisted his
gray moustache, hesitating before the boy, who did not go away,
notwithstanding the given permission.

"You may go," repeated the old man, pointing at the road leading to his
house.

"And how about the police?" asked Foma, sternly, and was immediately
frightened at the possible answer.

"I was but jesting," smiled the old man. "I just wanted to frighten
you."

"You are afraid of my father yourself," said Foma, and, turning his back
to the old man, walked off into the depth of the garden.

"I am afraid? Ah! Very well!" exclaimed Chumakov after him, and Foma
knew by the sound of his voice that he had offended the old man. He felt
sad and ashamed; he passed the afternoon in walking, and, coming home,
he was met by his father's stern question:

"Foma! Did you go to Chumakov's garden?"

"Yes, I did," said the boy, calmly, looking into his father's eyes.

Evidently Ignat did not expect such an answer and he was silent for
awhile, stroking his beard.

"Fool! Why did you do it? Have you not enough of your own apples?"

Foma cast down his eyes and was silent, standing before his father.

"See, you are shamed! Yozhishka must have incited you to this! I'll
give it to him when he comes, or I'll make an end of your friendship
altogether."

"I did it myself," said Foma, firmly.

"From bad to worse!" exclaimed Ignat. "But why did you do it?"

"Because."

"Because!" mocked the father. "Well, if you did it you ought to be
able to explain to yourself and to others the reason for so doing. Come
here!"

Foma walked up to his father, who was sitting on a chair, and placed
himself between his knees. Ignat put his hand on the boy's shoulders,
and, smiling, looked into his eyes.

"Are you ashamed?"

"I am ashamed," sighed Foma.

"There you have it, fool! You have disgraced me and yourself."

Pressing his son's head to his breast, he stroked his hair and asked
again:

"Why should you do such a thing--stealing other people's apples?"

"I--I don't know," said Foma, confusedly. "Perhaps because it is so
lonesome. I play and play the same thing day after day. I am growing
tired of it! While this is dangerous."

"Exciting?" asked the father, smiling.

"Yes."

"Mm, perhaps it is so. But, nevertheless, Foma, look out--drop this, or
I shall deal with you severely."

"I'll never climb anywhere again," said the boy with confidence.

"And that you take all the blame on yourself--that is good. What will
become of you in the future, only God knows, but meanwhile--it is pretty
good. It is not a trifle if a man is willing to pay for his deeds with
his own skin. Someone else in your place would have blamed his friends,
while you say: 'I did it myself.' That's the proper way, Foma. You
commit the sin, but you also account for it. Didn't Chumakov strike
you?" asked Ignat, pausing as he spoke.

"I would have struck him back," declared Foma, calmly.

"Mm," roared his father, significantly.

"I told him that he was afraid of you. That is why he complained.
Otherwise he was not going to say anything to you about it."

"Is that so?"

"'By God! Present my respects to your father,' he said."

"Did he?"

"Yes."

"Ah! the dog! See what kind of people there are; he is robbed and yet he
makes a bow and presents his respects! Ha, ha! It is true it might have
been worth no more than a kopeck, but a kopeck is to him what a rouble
is to me. And it isn't the kopeck, but since it is mine, no one dares
touch it unless I throw it away myself. Eh! The devil take them! Well,
tell me--where have you been, what have you seen?"

The boy sat down beside his father and told him in detail all the
impressions of that day. Ignat listened, fixedly watching the animated
face of his son, and the eyebrows of the big man contracted pensively.

"You are still but floating on the surface, dear. You are still but a
child. Eh! Eh!"

"We scared an owl in the ravine," related the boy. "That was fun! It
began to fly about and struck against a tree--bang! It even began to
squeak so pitifully. And we scared it again; again it rose and flew
about here and there, and again it struck against something, so that its
feathers were coming out. It flew about in the ravine and at last hid
itself somewhere with difficulty. We did not try to look for it, we felt
