"But I am alone! Whom shall I fight? There are no enemies here. There
are no men! I live here in a prison!"

Foma listened to her words, fixedly examining the fingers of his hand;
he felt that in her words was some great distress, but he could not
understand her. And when she became silent, depressed and sad, he found
nothing to tell her save a few words that were like a reproach:

"There, you yourself say that books are worthless to you, and yet you
instruct me to read."

She looked into his face, and anger flashed in her eyes.

"Oh, how I wish that all these torments would awaken within you, the
torments that constantly oppress me. That your thoughts, like mine,
would rob you of your sleep, that you, too, would be disgusted with
everything, and with yourself as well! I despise every one of you. I
hate you!"

All aflush, she looked at him so angrily and spoke with so much
spitefulness, that in his astonishment he did not even feel offended by
her. She had never before spoken to him in such manner.

"What's the matter with you?" he asked her.

"I hate you, too! You, what are you? Dead, empty; how will you live?
What will you give to mankind?" she said with malice, in a low voice.

"I'll give nothing; let them strive for it themselves," answered Foma,
knowing that these words would augment her anger.

"Unfortunate creature!" exclaimed the girl with contempt.

The assurance and the power of her reproaches involuntarily compelled
Foma to listen attentively to her spiteful words; he felt there was
common sense in them. He even came nearer to her, but she, enraged and
exasperated, turned away from him and became silent.

It was still light outside, and the reflection of the setting sun lay
still on the branches of the linden-trees before the windows, but the
room was already filled with twilight, and the sideboard, the clock and
the cupboard seemed to have grown in size. The huge pendulum peeped
out every moment from beneath the glass of the clock-case, and flashing
dimly, was hiding with a weary sound now on the right side, now on
the left. Foma looked at the pendulum and he began to feel awkward and
lonesome. Luba arose and lighted the lamp which was hanging over the
table. The girl's face was pale and stern.

"You went for me," said Foma, reservedly. "What for? I can't
understand."

"I don't want to speak to you!" replied Luba, angrily.

"That's your affair. But nevertheless, what wrong have I done to you?"

"You?

"I."

"Understand me, I am suffocating! It is close here. Is this life? Is
this the way how to live? What am I? I am a hanger-on in my father's
house. They keep me here as a housekeeper. Then they'll marry me! Again
housekeeping. It's a swamp. I am drowning, suffocating."

"And what have I to do with it?" asked Foma.

"You are no better than the others."

"And therefore I am guilty before you?"

"Yes, guilty! You must desire to be better."

"But do I not wish it?" exclaimed Foma.

The girl was about to tell him something, but at this time the bell
began to ring somewhere, and she said in a low voice, leaning back in
her chair:

"It's father."

"I would not feel sorry if he stayed away a little longer," said Foma.
"I wish I could listen to you some more. You speak so very oddly."

"Ah! my children, my doves!" exclaimed Yakov Tarasovich, appearing in
the doorway. "You're drinking tea? Pour out some tea for me, Lugava!"

Sweetly smiling, and rubbing his hands, he sat down near Foma and asked,
playfully jostling him in the side:

"What have you been cooing about?"

"So--about different trifles," answered Luba.

"I haven't asked you, have I?" said her father to her, with a grimace.
"You just sit there, hold your tongue, and mind your woman's affairs."

"I've been telling her about the dinner," Foma interrupted his
godfather's words.

"Aha! So-o-o. Well, then, I'll also speak about the dinner. I have been
watching you of late. You don't behave yourself sensibly!"

"What do you mean?" asked Foma, knitting his brow, ill pleased.

"I just mean that your behaviour is preposterous, and that's all. When
the governor, for instance, speaks to you, you keep quiet."

"What should I tell him? He says that it is a misfortune to lose a
father. Well, I know it. What could I tell him?"

"But as the Lord willed it so, I do not grumble, your Excellency. That's
what you should have said, or something in this spirit. Governors, my
dear, are very fond of meekness in a man."

"Was I to look at him like a lamb?" said Foma, with a smile.

"You did look like a lamb, and that was unnecessary. You must look
neither like a lamb, nor like a wolf, but just play off before him as
though saying: 'You are our father, we are your children,' and he will
immediately soften."

"And what is this for?"

"For any event. A governor, my dear, can always be of use somewhere."

"What do you teach him, papa?" said Luba, indignantly, in a low voice.

"Well, what?"

"To dance attendance."

"You lie, you learned fool! I teach him politics, not dancing
attendance; I teach him the politics of life. You had better leave us
alone! Depart from evil, and prepare some lunch for us. Go ahead!"

Luba rose quickly and throwing the towel across the back of the chair,
left the room. Mayakin, winking his eyes, looked after her, tapped the
table with his fingers and said:

"I shall instruct you, Foma. I shall teach you the most genuine, true
knowledge and philosophy, and if you understand them, your life will be
faultless."

Foma saw how the wrinkles on the old man's forehead were twitching, and
they seemed to him like lines of Slavonic letters.

"First of all, Foma, since you live on this earth, it is your duty to
think over everything that takes place about you. Why? That you may
not suffer for your own senselessness, and may not harm others by your
folly. Now, every act of man is double-faced, Foma. One is visible to
all--this is the wrong side; the other is concealed--and that is the
real one. It is that one that you must be able to find in order to
understand the sense of the thing. Take for example the lodging-asylums,
the work-houses, the poor-houses and other similar institutions. Just
consider, what are they for?"

"What is there to consider here?" said Foma, wearily "Everybody knows
what they are for--for the poor and feeble."

"Eh, dear! Sometimes everybody knows that a certain man is a rascal and
a scoundrel, and yet all call him Ivan or Peter, and instead of abusing
him they respectfully add his father's name to his own."

"What has this to do with it?"

"It's all to the point. So you say that these houses are for the poor,
for beggars, consequently, in accordance with Christ's commandment.
Very well! But who is the beggar? The beggar is a man, forced by fate
to remind us of Christ; he is a brother of Christ; he is the bell of the
Lord and he rings in life to rouse our conscience, to arouse the satiety
of the flesh of man. He stands by the window and sings out: 'For the
sake of Christ!' and by his singing he reminds us of Christ, of His holy
commandment to help the neighbour. But men have so arranged their life
that it is impossible for them to act according to the teachings of
Christ, and Jesus Christ has become altogether unnecessary to us. Not
one time, but perhaps a hundred thousand times have we turned Him
over to the cross, and yet we cannot drive Him altogether out of life,
because His poor brethren sing His Holy name on the streets and thus
remind us of Him. And now we have arranged to lock up these beggars
in separate houses that they should not walk around on the streets and
should not rouse our conscience.

"Cle-ver!" whispered Foma, amazed, staring fixedly at his godfather.

"Aha!" exclaimed Mayakin, his eyes beaming with triumph.

"How is it that my father did not think of this?" asked Foma, uneasily.

"Just wait! Listen further, it is still worse. So you see, we have
arranged to lock them up in all sorts of houses and that they might be
kept there cheaply, we have compelled those old and feeble beggars
to work and we need give no alms now, and since our streets have been
cleared of the various ragged beggars, we do not see their terrible
distress and poverty, and we may, therefore, think that all men on earth
are well-fed, shod and clothed. That's what all these different houses
are for, for the concealment of the truth, for the banishment of Christ
from our life! Is this clear to you?"

"Yes!" said Foma, confused by the old man's clever words.

"And this is not all. The pool is not yet baled out to the bottom!"
exclaimed Mayakin, swinging his hand in the air with animation.

The wrinkles of his face were in motion; his long, ravenous nose was
stirring, and in his voice rang notes of irritability and emotion.

"Now, let us look at this thing from the other side. Who contributes
most in favour of the poor, for the support of these houses, asylums,
poor-houses? The rich people, the merchants, our body of merchants.
Very well! And who commands our life and regulates it? The nobles, the
functionaries and all sorts of other people, not belonging to our class.
From them come the laws, the newspapers, science--everything from them.
Before, they were land-owners, now their land was snatched away from
them--and they started out in service. Very well! But who are the most
powerful people today? The merchant is the supreme power in an empire,
because he has the millions on his side! Isn't that so?"

"True!" assented Foma, eager to hear the sooner that which was to
follow, and which was already sparkling in the eyes of his godfather.

"Just mark this," the old man went on distinctly and impressively. "We
merchants had no hand in the arrangement of life, nor do we have a voice
or a hand in it today. Life was arranged by others, and it is they that
multiplied all sorts of scabs in life--idlers and poor unfortunates;
and since by multiplying them they obstructed life and spoilt it--it is,
justly judging, now their duty to purify it. But we are purifying it,
we contribute money for the poor, we look after them--we, judge it for
yourself, why should we mend another's rags, since we did not tear them?
Why should we repair a house, since others have lived in it and since
it belongs to others? Were it not wiser for us to step aside and watch
until a certain time how rottenness is multiplying and choking those
that are strangers to us? They cannot conquer it, they have not the
means to do it. Then they will turn to us and say: 'Pray, help us,
gentlemen!' and we'll tell them: 'Let us have room for our work! Rank us
among the builders of this same life!' And as soon as they do this we,
too, will have to clear life at one sweep of all sorts of filth and
chaff. Then the Emperor will see with his clear eyes who are really his
faithful servants, and how much wisdom they have saved up while their
hands were idle. Do you understand?"

"Of course, I do!" exclaimed Foma.

When his godfather spoke of the functionaries, Foma reminded himself
of the people that were present at the dinner; he recalled the brisk
secretary, and a thought flashed through his mind that this stout little
man has in all probability an income of no more than a thousand roubles
a year, while he, Foma, has a million. But that man lives so easily and
freely, while he, Foma, does not know how to live, is indeed abashed to
live. This comparison and his godfather's speech roused in him a whirl
of thoughts, but he had time to grasp and express only one of them:

"Indeed, do we work for the sake of money only? What's the use of money
if it can give us no power?"

"Aha!" said Mayakin, winking his eyes.

"Eh!" exclaimed Foma, offended. "How about my father? Have you spoken to
him?"

"I spoke to him for twenty years."

"Well, how about him?"

"My words did not reach him. The crown of your father's head was rather
thick. His soul was open to all, while his mind was hidden away far
within him. Yes, he made a blunder, and I am very sorry about the
money."

"I am not sorry for the money."

"You should have tried to earn even a tenth part of it, then speak."

"May I come in?" came Luba's voice from behind the door.

"Yes, step right in," said the father.

"Will you have lunch now?" she asked, entering.

"Let us have it."

She walked up to the sideboard and soon the dishes were rattling. Yakov
Tarasovich looked at her, moved his lips, and suddenly striking Foma's
knee with his hand, he said to him:

"That's the way, my godson! Think."

Foma responded with a smile and thought: "But he's clever--cleverer than
my father."

But another voice within him immediately replied:

"Cleverer, but worse."




FOMA'S dual relation toward Mayakin grew stronger and stronger as time
went on; listening to his words attentively and with eager curiosity, he
felt that each meeting with his godfather was strengthening in him the
feeling of hostility toward the old man. Sometimes Yakov Tarasovich
roused in his godson a feeling akin to fear, sometimes even physical
aversion. The latter usually came to Foma whenever the old man was
pleased with something and laughed. From laughter the old man's wrinkles
would tremble, thus changing the expression of his face every now
and then; his dry, thin lips would stretch out and move nervously,
displaying black broken teeth, and his red little beard was as though
aflame. His laughter sounded like the squeaking of rusty hinges, and
altogether the old man looked like a lizard at play. Unable to conceal
his feelings, Foma often expressed them to Mayakin rather rudely, both
in words and in gesture, but the old man, pretending not to notice it,
kept a vigilant eye on him, directing his each and every step. Wholly
absorbed by the steamship affairs of the young Gordyeeff, he even
neglected his own little shop, and allowed Foma considerable leisure
time. Thanks to Mayakin's important position in town and to his
extensive acquaintance on the Volga, business was splendid, but
Mayakin's zealous interest in his affairs strengthened Foma's suspicions
that his godfather was firmly resolved to marry him to Luba, and this
made the old man more repulsive to him.

He liked Luba, but at the same time she seemed suspicious and dangerous
for him. She did not marry, and Mayakin never said a word about it; he
gave no evening parties, invited none of the youths to his house and did
not allow Luba to leave the house. And all her girl friends were married
already. Foma admired her words and listened to her just as eagerly as
to her father; but whenever she started to speak of Taras with love and
anguish, it seemed to him that she was hiding another man under that
name, perhaps that same Yozhov, who according to her words, had to leave
the university for some reason or other, and go to Moscow. There was a
great deal of simplemindedness and kindness in her, which pleased Foma,
and ofttimes her words awakened in him a feeling of pity for her; it
seemed to him that she was not alive, that she was dreaming though
awake.

His conduct at the funeral feast for his father became known to all the
merchants and gave him a bad reputation. On the Exchange, he noticed,
everybody looked at him sneeringly, malevolently, and spoke to him in
some peculiar way. One day he heard behind him a low exclamation, full
of contempt:

"Gordyeeff! Milksop!"

He felt that this was said of him, but he did not turn around to see who
it was that flung those words at him. The rich people, who had inspired
him with timidity before, were now losing in his eyes the witchery of
their wealth and wisdom. They had more than once snatched out of his
hands this or that profitable contract; he clearly saw that they would
do it again, and they all seemed to him alike--greedy for money, always
ready to cheat one another. When he imparted to his godfather his
observation, the old man said:

"How then? Business is just the same as war--a hazardous affair. There
they fight for the purse, and in the purse is the soul."

"I don't like this," announced Foma.

"Neither do I like everything--there's too much fraud.

"But to be fair in business matters is utterly impossible; you must be
shrewd! In business, dear, on approaching a man you must hold honey in
your left hand, and clutch a knife in your right. Everybody would like
to buy five copecks' worth for a half a copeck."

"Well, this isn't too good," said Foma, thoughtfully. "But it will be
good later. When you have taken the upper hand, then it will be good.
Life, dear Foma, is very simple: either bite everybody, or lie in the
gutter."

The old man smiled, and the broken teeth in his mouth roused in Foma the
keen thought:

"You have bitten many, it seems."

"There's but one word--battle!" repeated the old man.

"Is this the real one?" asked Foma, looking at Mayakin searchingly.

"That is, what do you mean--the real?"

"Is there nothing better than this? Does this contain everything?"

"Where else should it be? Everybody lives for himself. Each of us wishes
the best for himself. And what is the best? To go in front of others, to
stand above them. So that everybody is trying to attain the first place
in life--one by this means, another by that means. But everyone is
positively anxious to be seen from afar, like a tower. And man was
indeed appointed to go upward. Even the Book of Job says: 'Man is born
unto trouble, as the sparks, to fly upward.' Just see: even children at
play always wish to surpass one another. And each and every game has its
climax, which makes it interesting. Do you understand?"

"I understand this!" said Foma, firmly and confidently.

"But you must also feel this. With understanding alone you cannot go
far, and you must desire, and desire so that a big mountain should seem
to you but a hillock, and the sea but a puddle. Eh! When I was of your
age I had an easy life, while you are only taking aim. But then, good
fruit does not ripen early."

The old man's monotonous speeches soon accomplished what they were
intended to do. Foma listened to them and made clear to himself the aim
of life. He must be better than others, he resolved, and the ambition,
kindled by the old man, took deep root in his heart. It took root
within his heart, but did not fill it up, for Foma's relations toward
Medinskaya assumed that character, which they were bound to assume. He
longed for her, he always yearned to see her; while in her presence
he became timid, awkward and stupid; he knew it and suffered on this
account. He frequently visited her, but it was hard to find her at home
alone; perfumed dandies like flies over a piece of sugar--were always
flitting about her. They spoke to her in French, sang and laughed, while
he looked at them in silence, tortured by anger and jealousy. His
legs crossed, he sat somewhere in a corner of her richly furnished
drawing-room, where it was extremely difficult to walk without
overturning or at least striking against something--Foma sat and watched
them sternly.

Over the soft rugs she was noiselessly passing hither and thither,
casting to him kind glances and smiles, while her admirers were fawning
upon her, and they all, like serpents, were cleverly gliding by the
various little tables, chairs, screens, flower-stands--a storehouse
full of beautiful and frail things, scattered about the room with a
carelessness equally dangerous to them and to Foma. But when he walked
there, the rugs did not drown his footsteps, and all these things caught
at his coat, trembled and fell. Beside the piano stood a sailor made of
bronze, whose hand was lifted, ready to throw the life-saving ring; on
this ring were ropes of wire, and these always pulled Foma by the hair.
All this provoked laughter among Sophya Pavlovna and her admirers, and
Foma suffered greatly, changing from heat to cold.

But he felt no less uncomfortable even when alone with her. Greeting him
with a kindly smile, she would take a seat beside him in one of the cosy
corners of her drawing-room and would usually start her conversation by
complaining to him of everybody:

"You wouldn't believe how glad I am to see you!" Bending like a cat,
she would gaze into his eyes with her dark glance, in which something
avidious would now flash up.

"I love to speak to you," she said, musically drawling her words. "I've
grown tired of all the rest of them. They're all so boring, ordinary
and worn-out, while you are fresh, sincere. You don't like those people
either, do you?"

"I can't bear them!" replied Foma, firmly.

"And me?" she asked softly.

Foma turned his eyes away from her and said, with a sigh:

"How many times have you asked me that?"

"Is it hard for you to tell me?"

"It isn't hard, but what for?"

"I must know it."

"You are making sport of me," said Foma, sternly. And she opened her
eyes wide and inquired in a tone of great astonishment:

"How do I make sport of you? What does it mean to make sport?"

And her face looked so angelic that he could not help believing her.

"I love you! I love you! It is impossible not to love you!" said he
hotly, and immediately added sadly, lowering his voice: "But you don't
need it!"

"There you have it!" sighed Medinskaya, satisfied, drawing back from
him. "I am always extremely pleased to hear you say this, with so much
youthfulness and originality. Would you like to kiss my hand?"

Without saying a word he seized her thin, white little hand and
carefully bending down to it, he passionately kissed it for a long time.
Smiling and graceful, not in the least moved by his passion, she freed
her hand from his. Pensively, she looked at him with that strange
glitter in her eyes, which always confused Foma; she examined him as
something rare and extremely curious, and said:

"How much strength and power and freshness of soul you possess! Do you
know? You merchants are an altogether new race, an entire race with
original traditions, with an enormous energy of body and soul. Take you,
for instance--you are a precious stone, and you should be polished. Oh!"

Whenever she told him: "You," or "according to your merchant fashion,"
it seemed to Foma that she was pushing him away from her with these
words. This at once saddened and offended him. He was silent, looking
at her small maidenly figure, which was always somehow particularly well
dressed, always sweet-scented like a flower. Sometimes he was seized
with a wild, coarse desire to embrace and kiss her. But her beauty
and the fragility of her thin, supple body awakened in him a fear of
breaking and disfiguring her, and her calm, caressing voice and the
clear, but somewhat cautious look of her eyes chilled his passion;
it seemed to him as though she were looking straight into his soul,
divining all his thoughts. But these bursts of emotion were rare.
Generally the youth regarded Medinskaya with adoration, admiring
everything in her--her beauty, her words, her dresses. And beside
this adoration there was in him a painfully keen consciousness of his
remoteness from her, of her supremacy over him.

These relations were established between them within a short time; after
