
"Is it harmful to aid people?" asked Foma, hotly.

"Eh, you cabbage head!" said Mayakin with a smile. "You had better come
up to my house, I'll open your eyes in regard to this. I must teach you!
Will you come?"

"Very well, I will come!" replied Foma.

"So. And in the meantime, hold yourself proud at the laying of the
corner-stone. Stand in view of everybody. If I don't tell this to you,
you might hide yourself behind somebody's back."

"Why should I hide myself?" said Foma, displeased.

"That's just what I say: there is no reason why. For the money was
donated by your father and you are entitled to the honour as his heir.
Honour is just the same as money. With honour a business man will get
credit everywhere, and everywhere there is a way open to him. Then come
forward, so that everybody may see you and that if you do five copecks'
worth of work, you should get a rouble in return for it. And if you will
hide yourself--nothing but foolishness will be the result."

They arrived at their destination, where all the important people had
gathered already, and an enormous crowd of people surrounded the piles
of wood, bricks and earth. The bishop, the governor, the representatives
of the city's aristocracy and the administration formed, together with
the splendidly dressed ladies, a big bright group and looked at the
efforts of the two stonemasons, who were preparing the bricks and the
lime. Mayakin and his godson wended their way toward this group. He
whispered to Foma:

"Lose no courage, these people have robbed their bellies to cover
themselves with silk."

And he greeted the governor before the bishop, in a respectfully
cheerful voice.

"How do you do, your Excellency? Give me your blessing, your Holiness!"

"Ah, Yakov Tarasovich!" exclaimed the governor with a friendly smile,
shaking and squeezing Mayakin's hand, while the old man was at the same
time kissing the bishop's hand. "How are you, deathless old man?"

"I thank you humbly, your Excellency! My respects to Sophya Pavlovna!"
Mayakin spoke fast, whirling like a peg-top amid the crowd of people.
In a minute he managed to shake hands with the presiding justice of the
court, with the prosecutor, with the mayor--in a word, with all those
people whom he considered it necessary to greet first; such as these,
however, were few. He jested, smiled and at once attracted everybody's
attention to his little figure, and Foma with downcast head stood
behind him, looking askance at these people wrapped in costly stuffs,
embroidered with gold; he envied the old man's adroitness and lost his
courage, and feeling that he was losing his courage--he grew still
more timid. But now Mayakin seized him by the hand and drew him up to
himself.

"There, your Excellency, this is my godson, Foma, the late Ignat's only
son."

"Ah!" said the governor in his basso, "I'm very pleased. I sympathise
with you in your misfortune, young man!" he said, shaking Foma's hand,
and became silent; then he added resolutely and confidently: "To lose a
father, that is a very painful misfortune."

And, having waited about two seconds for Foma's answer, he turned away
from him, addressing Mayakin approvingly:

"I am delighted with the speech you made yesterday in the city hall!
Beautiful, clever, Yakov Tarasovich. Proposing to use the money for this
public club, they do not understand the real needs of the population."

"And then, your Excellency, a small capital means that the city will
have to add its own money."

"Perfectly true! Perfectly true!"

"Temperance, I say, is good! Would to God that all were sober! I don't
drink, either, but what is the use of these performances, libraries and
all that, since the people cannot even read?"

The governor replied approvingly.

"Here, I say, you better use this money for a technical institution. If
it should be established on a small plan, this money alone will suffice,
and in case it shouldn't, we can ask for more in St. Petersburg--they'll
give it to us. Then the city wouldn't have to add of its own money, and
the whole affair would be more sensible."

"Precisely! I fully agree with you! But how the liberals began to cry at
you! Eh? Ha, ha!"

"That has always been their business, to cry."

The deep cough of the archdeacon of the cathedral announced the
beginning of the divine service.

Sophya Pavlovna came up to Foma, greeted him and said in a sad, low
voice:

"I looked at your face on the day of the funeral, and my heart saddened.
My God, I thought, how he must suffer!"

And Foma listened to her and felt as though he was drinking honey.

"These cries of yours, they shook my soul, my poor child! I may speak to
you this way, for I am an old woman already."

"You!" exclaimed Foma, softly.

"Isn't that so?" she asked, naively looking into his face.

Foma was silent, his head bent on his breast.

"Don't you believe that I am an old woman?"

"I believe you; that is, I believe everything you may say; only this is
not true!" said Foma, feelingly, in a low voice.

"What is not true? What do you believe me?"

"No! not this, but that. I--excuse me! I cannot speak!" said Foma,
sadly, all aflush with confusion. "I am not cultured."

"You need not trouble yourself on this account," said Medinskaya,
patronisingly. "You are so young, and education is accessible
to everybody. But there are people to whom education is not only
unnecessary, but who can also be harmed by it. Those that are pure of
heart, sanguine, sincere, like children, and you are of those people.
You are, are you not?"

What could Foma say in answer to this question? He said sincerely:

"I thank you humbly!"

And noticing that his words called forth a gay gleam in Medinskaya's
eyes, Foma appeared ridiculous and stupid in his own eyes; he
immediately became angry at himself and said in a muffled voice:

"Yes, I am such. I always speak my mind. I cannot deceive. If I see
something to laugh at, I laugh openly. I am stupid!"

"What makes you speak that way?" said the woman, reproachfully, and
adjusting her dress, she accidentally stroked Foma's hand, in which he
held his hat. This made him look at his wrist and smile joyously and
confusedly.

"You will surely be present at the dinner, won't you?" asked Medinskaya.

"Yes."

"And tomorrow at the meeting in my house?"

"Without fail!"

"And perhaps sometime you will drop in, simply on a visit, wouldn't
you?"

"I--I thank you! I'll come!"

"I must thank you for the promise."

They became silent. In the air soared the reverently soft voice of the
bishop, who recited the prayer expressively, outstretching his hand over
the place where the corner-stone of the house was laid:

"May neither the wind, nor water, nor anything else bring harm unto it;
may it be completed in thy benevolence, and free all those that are to
live in it from all kinds of calumny."

"How rich and beautiful our prayers are, are they not?" asked
Medinskaya.

"Yes," said Foma, shortly, without understanding her words and feeling
that he was blushing again.

"They will always be opponents of our commercial interests," Mayakin
whispered loudly and convincingly, standing beside the city mayor, not
far from Foma. "What is it to them? All they want is somehow to deserve
the approval of the newspaper. But they cannot reach the main point.
They live for mere display, not for the organisation of life; these
are their only measures: the newspapers and Sweden! [Mayakin speaks of
Sweden, meaning Switzerland.--Translator's note.] The doctor scoffed at
me all day yesterday with this Sweden. The public education, says he,
in Sweden, and everything else there is first-class! But what is Sweden,
anyway? It may be that Sweden is but a fib, is but used as an example,
and that there is no education whatever or any of the other things
there. And then, we don't live for the sake of Sweden, and Sweden cannot
put us to test. We have to make our lip according to our own last. Isn't
it so?"

And the archdeacon droned, his head thrown back:

"Eternal me-emo-ory to the founder of this ho-ouse!"

Foma shuddered, but Mayakin was already by his side, and pulling him by
the sleeve, asked:

"Are you going to the dinner?"

And Medinskaya's velvet-like, warm little hand glided once more over
Foma's hand.

The dinner was to Foma a real torture. For the first time in his
life among these uniformed people, he saw that they were eating and
speaking--doing everything better than he, and he felt that between him
and Medinskaya, who was seated just opposite him, was a high mountain,
not a table. Beside him sat the secretary of the society of which Foma
had been made an honorary member; he was a young court officer, bearing
the odd name of Ookhtishchev. As if to make his name appear more
absurd than it really was, he spoke in a loud, ringing tenor, and
altogether--plump, short, round-faced and a lively talker--he looked
like a brand new bell.

"The very best thing in our society is the patroness; the most
reasonable is what we are doing--courting the patroness; the most
difficult is to tell the patroness such a compliment as would satisfy
her; and the most sensible thing is to admire the patroness silently and
hopelessly. So that in reality, you are a member not of 'the Society
of Solicitude,' and so on, but of the Society of Tantaluses, which is
composed of persons bent on pleasing Sophya Medinskaya."

Foma listened to his chatter, now and then looking at the patroness, who
was absorbed in a conversation with the chief of the police; Foma roared
in reply to his interlocutor, pretending to be busy eating, and he
wished that all this would end the sooner. He felt that he was wretched,
stupid, ridiculous and he was certain that everybody was watching and
censuring him. This tied him with invisible shackles, thus checking his
words and his thoughts. At last he went so far, that the line of various
physiognomies, stretched out by the table opposite him, seemed to him a
long and wavy white strip besprinkled with laughing eyes, and all these
eyes were pricking him unpleasantly and painfully.

Mayakin sat near the city mayor, waved his fork in the air quickly,
and kept on talking all the time, now contracting, now expanding the
wrinkles of his face. The mayor, a gray-headed, red-faced, short-necked
man, stared at him like a bull, with obstinate attention and at times he
rapped on the edge of the table with his big finger affirmatively. The
animated talk and laughter drowned his godfather's bold speech, and Foma
was unable to hear a single word of it, much more so that the tenor of
the secretary was unceasingly ringing in his ears:

"Look, there, the archdeacon arose; he is filling his lungs with air; he
will soon proclaim an eternal memory for Ignat Matveyich."

"May I not go away?" asked Foma in a low voice.

"Why not? Everybody will understand this."

The deacon's resounding voice drowned and seemed to have crushed the
noise in the hail; the eminent merchants fixed their eyes on the big,
wide-open mouth, from which a deep sound was streaming forth, and
availing himself of this moment, Foma arose from his seat and left the
hall.

After awhile he breathed freely and, sitting in his cab, thought sadly
that there was no place for him amid these people. Inwardly, he called
them polished. He did not like their brilliancy, their faces, their
smiles or their words, but the freedom and the cleverness of their
movements, their ability to speak much and on any subject, their pretty
costumes--all this aroused in him a mixture of envy and respect for
them. He felt sad and oppressed at the consciousness of being unable to
talk so much and so fluently as all these people, and here he recalled
that Luba Mayakina had more than once scoffed at him on this account.

Foma did not like Mayakin's daughter, and since he had learned from his
father of Mayakin's intention to marry him to Luba, the young Gordyeeff
began to shun her. But after his father's death he was almost every day
at the Mayakins, and somehow Luba said to him one day:

"I am looking at you, and, do you know?--you do not resemble a merchant
at all."

"Nor do you look like a merchant's daughter," said Foma, and looked at
her suspiciously. He did not understand the meaning of her words; did
she mean to offend him, or did she say these words without any kind
thoughts?

"Thank God for this!" said she and smiled to him a kind, friendly smile.

"What makes you so glad?" he asked.

"The fact that we don't resemble our fathers."

Foma glanced at her in astonishment and kept silent.

"Tell me frankly," said she, lowering her voice, "you do not love my
father, do you? You don't like him?"

"Not very much," said Foma, slowly.

"And I dislike him very much."

"What for?"

"For everything. When you grow wiser, you will know it yourself. Your
father was a better man."

"Of course!" said Foma, proudly.

After this conversation an attachment sprang up between them almost
immediately, and growing stronger from day to day, it soon developed
into friendship, though a somewhat odd friendship it was.

Though Luba was not older than her god-brother, she nevertheless treated
him as an older person would treat a little boy. She spoke to him
condescendingly, often jesting at his expense; her talk was always full
of words which were unfamiliar to Foma; and she pronounced these
words with particular emphasis and with evident satisfaction. She was
especially fond of speaking about her brother Taras, whom she had never
seen, but of whom she was telling such stories as would make him look
like Aunt Anfisa's brave and noble robbers. Often, when complaining of
her father, she said to Foma:

"You will also be just such a skinflint."

All this was unpleasant to the youth and stung his vanity. But at
times she was straightforward, simple-minded, and particularly kind and
friendly to him; then he would unburden his heart before her, and for a
long time they would share each other's thoughts and feelings.

Both spoke a great deal and spoke sincerely, but neither one understood
the other; it seemed to Foma that whatever Luba had to say was foreign
to him and unnecessary to her, and at the same time he clearly saw that
his awkward words did not at all interest her, and that she did not care
to understand them. No matter how long these conversations lasted, they
gave both of them the sensation of discomfort and dissatisfaction. As
if an invisible wall of perplexity had suddenly arisen and stood between
them. They did not venture to touch this wall, or to tell each other
that they felt it was there--they resumed their conversations, dimly
conscious that there was something in each of them that might bind and
unite them.

When Foma arrived at his godfather's house, he found Luba alone. She
came out to meet him, and it was evident that she was either ill or out
of humour; her eyes were flashing feverishly and were surrounded with
black circles. Feeling cold, she muffled herself in a warm shawl and
said with a smile:

"It is good that you've come! For I was sitting here alone; it is
lonesome--I don't feel like going anywhere. Will you drink tea?"

"I will. What is the matter with you, are you ill?"

"Go to the dining-room, and I'll tell them to bring the samovar," she
said, not answering his question.

He went into one of the small rooms of the house, whose two windows
overlooked the garden. In the middle of the room stood an oval table,
surrounded with old-fashioned, leather-covered chairs; on one partition
hung a clock in a long case with a glass door, in the corner was a
cupboard for dishes, and opposite the windows, by the walls, was an
oaken sideboard as big as a fair-sized room.

"Are you coming from the banquet?" asked Luba, entering.

Foma nodded his head mutely.

"Well, how was it? Grand?"

"It was terrible!" Foma smiled. "I sat there as if on hot coals. They
all looked there like peacocks, while I looked like a barn-owl."

Luba was taking out dishes from the cupboard and said nothing to Foma.

"Really, why are you so sad?" asked Foma again, glancing at her gloomy
face.

She turned to him and said with enthusiasm and anxiety:

"Ah, Foma! What a book I've read! If you could only understand it!"

"It must be a good book, since it worked you up in this way," said Foma,
smiling.

"I did not sleep. I read all night long. Just think of it: you read--and
it seems to you that the gates of another kingdom are thrown open
before you. And the people there are different, and their language is
different, everything different! Life itself is different there."

"I don't like this," said Foma, dissatisfied. "That's all fiction,
deceit; so is the theatre. The merchants are ridiculed there. Are they
really so stupid? Of course! Take your father, for example."

"The theatre and the school are one and the same, Foma," said Luba,
instructively. "The merchants used to be like this. And what deceit can
there be in books?"

"Just as in fairy--tales, nothing is real."

"You are wrong! You have read no books; how can you judge? Books are
precisely real. They teach you how to live."

"Come, come!" Foma waved his hand. "Drop it; no good will come out of
your books! There, take your father, for example, does he read books?
And yet he is clever! I looked at him today and envied him. His
relations with everybody are so free, so clever, he has a word for each
and every one. You can see at once that whatever he should desire he is
sure to attain."

"What is he striving for?" exclaimed Luba. "Nothing but money. But there
are people that want happiness for all on earth, and to gain this end
they work without sparing themselves; they suffer and perish! How can my
father be compared with these?"

"You need not compare them. They evidently like one thing, while your
father likes another."

"They do not like anything!"

How's that?

"They want to change everything."

"So they do strive for something?" said Foma, thoughtfully. "They do
wish for something?"

"They wish for happiness for all!" cried Luba, hotly. "I can't
understand this," said Foma, nodding his head. "Who cares there for my
happiness? And then again, what happiness can they give me, since I,
myself, do not know as yet what I want? No, you should have rather
looked at those that were at the banquet."

"Those are not men!" announced Luba, categorically.

"I do not know what they are in your eyes, but you can see at once that
they know their place. A clever, easy-going lot."

"Ah, Foma!" exclaimed Luba, vexed. "You understand nothing! Nothing
agitates you! You are an idler."

"Now, that's going too far! I've simply not had time enough to see where
I am."

"You are simply an empty man," said Luba, resolutely and firmly.

"You were not within my soul," replied Foma, calmly. "You cannot know my
thoughts."

"What is there that you should think of?" said Luba, shrugging her
shoulders.

"So? First of all, I am alone. Secondly, I must live. Don't I understand
that it is altogether impossible for me to live as I am now? I do not
care to be made the laughing-stock of others. I cannot even speak
to people. No, nor can I think." Foma concluded his words and smiled
confusedly.

"It is necessary to read, to study," Luba advised him convincingly,
pacing up and down the room.

"Something is stirring within my soul," Foma went on, not looking at
her, as though speaking to himself; "but I cannot tell what it is.
I see, for instance, that whatever my godfather says is clever and
reasonable. But that does not attract me. The other people are by far
more interesting to me."

"You mean the aristocrats?" asked Luba.

"Yes."

"That's just the place for you!" said Luba, with a smile of contempt.
"Eh, you! Are they men? Do they have souls?"

"How do you know them? You are not acquainted with them."

"And the books? Have I not read books about them?"

The maid brought in the samovar, and the conversation was interrupted.
Luba made tea in silence while Foma looked at her and thought of
Medinskaya. He was wishing to have a talk with her.

"Yes," said the girl, thoughtfully, "I am growing more and more
convinced everyday that it is hard to live. What shall I do? Marry?
Whom? Shall I marry a merchant who will do nothing but rob people all
his life, nothing but drink and play cards? A savage? I do not want
it! I want to be an individual. I am such, for I know how wrong the
construction of life is. Shall I study? My father will not allow this.
Oh Lord! Shall I run away? I have not enough courage. What am I to do?"

She clasped her hands and bowed her head over the table.

"If you knew but how repulsive everything is. There is not a living soul
around here. Since my mother died, my father drove everyone away. Some
went off to study. Lipa, too, left us. She writes me:

'Read.' Ah, I am reading! I am reading!' she exclaimed, with despair in
her voice, and after a moment's silence she went on sadly:

"Books do not contain what the heart needs most, and there's much I
cannot understand in them. And then, I feel weary to be reading all the
time alone, alone! I want to speak to a man, but there is none to speak
to! I feel disgusted. We live but once, and it is high time for me to
live, and yet there is not a soul! Wherefore shall I live? Lipa tells
me: 'Read and you will understand it.' I want bread and she gives me
a stone. I understand what one must do--one must stand up for what he
loves and believes. He must fight for it."

And she concluded, uttering something like a moan:

