sorry it was all bruised. Papa, is an owl entirely blind in daytime?"

"Blind!" said Ignat; "some men will toss about in life even as this owl
in daytime. Ever searching for his place, he strives and strives--only
feathers fly from him, but all to no purpose. He is bruised, sickened,
stripped of everything, and then with all his might he thrusts himself
anywhere, just to find repose from his restlessness. Woe to such people.
Woe to them, dear!"

"How painful is it to them?" said Foma in a low voice.

"Just as painful as to that owl."

"And why is it so?"

"Why? It is hard to tell. Someone suffers because he is darkened by his
pride--he desires much, but has but little strength. Another because of
his foolishness. But then there are a thousand and one other reasons,
which you cannot understand."

"Come in and have some tea," Anfisa called to them. She had been
standing in the doorway for quite a long while, and, folding her hands,
lovingly admired the enormous figure of her brother, who bent over Foma
with such friendliness, and the pensive pose of the boy, who clung to
his father's shoulder.

Thus day by day Foma's life developed slowly--a quiet, peaceful life,
not at all brimful of emotions. Powerful impressions, rousing the boy's
soul for an hour or for a day, sometimes stood out strikingly against
the general background of this monotonous life, but these were soon
obliterated. The boy's soul was as yet but a calm lake--a lake hidden
from the stormy winds of life, and all that touched the surface of the
lake either sank to the bottom, stirring the placid water for a moment,
or gliding over the smooth surface, swam apart in big circles and
disappeared.

Having stayed at the district school for five years, Foma passed four
classes tolerably well and came out a brave, dark-haired fellow, with
a swarthy face, heavy eyebrows and dark down on the upper lip. His
big dark eyes had a naive and pensive look, and his lips were like a
child's, half-open; but when meeting with opposition to his desires
or when irritated by something else, the pupils of his eyes would grow
wide, his lips press tight, and his whole face assume a stubborn and
resolute expression. His godfather, smiling sceptically, would often say
to him:

"To women, Foma, you'll be sweeter than honey, but as yet not much
common sense can be seen in you."

Ignat would heave a sigh at these words.

"You had better start out your son as soon as possible."

"There's time yet, wait."

"Why wait? He'll go about the Volga for two or three years and then
we'll have him married. There's my Lubov."

Lubov Mayakina was now studying in the fifth class of some boarding
school. Foma often met her on the street at which meeting she always
bowed condescendingly, her fair head in a fashionable cap. Foma liked
her, but her rosy cheeks, her cheerful brown eyes and crimson lips could
not smooth the impression of offence given to him by her condescending
bows. She was acquainted with some Gymnasium students, and although
Yozhov, his old friend, was among them, Foma felt no inclination to be
with them, and their company embarrassed him. It seemed to him that
they were all boasting of their learning before him and that they were
mocking his ignorance. Gathered together in Lubov's house they would
read some books, and whenever he found them reading or loudly arguing,
they became silent at his sight. All this removed them further from him.
One day when he was at Mayakin's, Luba called him to go for a walk in
the garden, and there, walking by his side, asked him with a grimace on
her face:

"Why are you so unsociable? You never talk about anything."

"What shall I talk about, since I know nothing!" said Foma, plainly.

"Study--read books."

"I don't feel like doing it."

"You see, the Gymnasium students know everything, and know how to talk
about everything. Take Yozhov, for instance."

"I know Yozhov--a chatterbox."

"You simply envy him. He is very clever--yes. He will soon graduate from
the Gymnasium--and then he'll go to Moscow to study in the University."

"Well, what of it?" said Foma, indifferently.

"And you'll remain just an ignorant man."

"Well, be it so."

"That will be nice!" exclaimed Luba, ironically.

"I shall hold my ground without science," said Foma, sarcastically. "And
I'll have a laugh at all the learned people. Let the hungry study. I
don't need it."

"Pshaw, how stupid you are, bad, disgusting!" said the girl with
contempt and went away, leaving him alone in the garden. Offended and
gloomy, he looked after her, moved his eyebrows and lowering his head,
slowly walked off into the depth of the garden.

He already began to recognise the beauty of solitude and the sweet
poison of contemplation. Oftentimes, during summer evenings, when
everything was coloured by the fiery tints of sunset, kindling the
imagination, an uneasy longing for something incomprehensible penetrated
his breast. Sitting somewhere in a dark corner of the garden or lying
in bed, he conjured up before him the images of the fairy-tale
princesses--they appeared with the face of Luba and of other young
ladies of his acquaintance, noiselessly floating before him in the
twilight and staring into his eyes with enigmatic looks. At times these
visions awakened in him a mighty energy, as though intoxicating him--he
would rise and, straightening his shoulders, inhale the perfumed air
with a full chest; but sometimes these same visions brought to him a
feeling of sadness--he felt like crying, but ashamed of shedding tears,
he restrained himself and never wept in silence. Or suddenly his heart
began to tremble with the desire to express his gratitude to God, to
bow before Him; the words of the prayer flashed through his memory, and
beholding the sky, he whispered them for a long time, one by one, and
his heart grew lighter, breathing into prayer the excess of his power.

The father patiently and carefully introduced him into commercial
circles, took him on the Exchange, told him about his contracts and
enterprises, about his co-associates, described to him how they had made
their way, what fortunes they now possessed, what natures were theirs.
Foma soon mastered it, regarding everything seriously and thoughtfully.

"Our bud is blooming into a blood-red cup-rose!" Mayakin smiled, winking
to Ignat.

And yet, even when Foma was nineteen years old, there was something
childish in him, something naive which distinguished him from the boys
of his age. They were laughing at him, considering him stupid; he kept
away from them, offended by their relations toward him. As for his
father and Mayakin, who were watching him vigilantly, this uncertainty
of Foma's character inspired them with serious apprehensions.

"I cannot understand him!" Ignat would say with contrite heart. "He does
not lead a dissipated life, he does not seem to run after the women,
treats me and you with respect, listens to everything--he is more like a
pretty girl than a fellow! And yet he does not seem to be stupid!"

"No, there's nothing particularly stupid about him," said Mayakin.

"It looks as though he were waiting for something--as though some kind
of shroud were covering his eyes. His late mother groped on earth in the
same way.

"Just look, there's Afrikanka Smolin, but two years older than my
boy--what a man he has become! That is, it is difficult to tell whether
he is his father's head or his father his. He wants to go to some
factory to study. He swears:

"'Eh,' says he, 'papa, you have not taught me enough.' Yes. While mine
does not express himself at all. Oh Lord!"

"Look here," Mayakin advised him, "you had better push him head foremost
into some active business! I assure you! Gold is tested in fire. We'll
see what his inclinations are when at liberty. Send him out on the
Kama--alone."

"To give him a trial?"

"Well, he'll do some mischief--you'll lose something--but then we'll
know what stuff he is made of."

"Indeed--I'll send him off," Ignat decided.

And thus in the spring, Ignat sent his son off on the Kama with two
barges laden with corn. The barges were led by Gordyeeff's steamer
"Philezhny," under the command of Foma's old acquaintance, the former
sailor Yefim--now, Yefim Ilyich, a squarely built man of about thirty
with lynx-like eyes--a sober-minded, steady and very strict captain.

They sailed fast and cheerfully, because all were contented. At first
Foma was proud of the responsible commission with which he had been
charged. Yefim was pleased with the presence of the young master, who
did not rebuke or abuse him for each and every oversight; and the happy
frame of mind of the two most important persons on the steamer reflected
in straight rays on the entire crew. Having left the place where they
had taken in their cargo of corn in April, the steamer reached the place
of its destination in the beginning of May, and the barges were anchored
near the shore with the steamer at their side. Foma's duty was to
deliver the corn as soon as possible, and receiving the payments, start
off for Perm, where a cargo of iron was awaiting him, which Ignat had
undertaken to deliver at the market.

The barges stood opposite a large village, near a pine forest, about two
versts distant from the shore. On the very next day after their arrival,
a big and noisy crowd of women and peasants, on foot and on horses,
came up to the shore early in the morning. Shouting and singing, they
scattered on the decks and in an instant work started expeditiously.
Having descended into the holds, the women were filling the sacks with
rye, the peasants, throwing the sacks upon their shoulders, ran over the
gang-planks to the shore, and from the shore, carts, heavily laden with
the long-expected corn, went off slowly to the village. The women sang
songs; the peasants jested and gaily abused one another; the sailors
representing the guardians of peace, scolded the working people now and
then; the gang-planks, bending under the feet of the carriers, splashed
against the water heavily; while on the shore the horses neighed, and
the carts and the sand under the wheels were creaking.

The sun had just risen, the air was fresh and invigorating and densely
filled with the odour of pines; the calm water of the river, reflecting
the clear sky, was gently murmuring, breaking against the sides of the
vessels and the chains of the anchors. The loud and cheerful noise
of toil, the youthful beauty of nature, gaily illumined by the
sunbeams--all was full of a kind-hearted, somewhat crude, sound power,
which pleasantly stirred Foma's soul, awakening in him new and perplexed
sensations and desires. He was sitting by the table under the awning of
the steamer and drinking tea, together with Yefim and the receiver of
the corn, a provincial clerk--a redheaded, short-sighted gentleman in
glasses. Nervously shrugging his shoulders the receiver was telling in
a hoarse voice how the peasants were starving, but Foma paid little
attention to his words, looking now at the work below, now at the other
side of the river--a tall, yellow, sandy steep shore, whose edges were
covered with pine trees. It was unpeopled and quiet.

"I'll have to go over there," thought Foma. And as though from a
distance the receiver's tiresome, unpleasant, harsh voice fell on his
ears:

"You wouldn't believe it--at last it became horrible! Such an incident
took place! A peasant came up to a certain intelligent man in Osa and
brought along with him a girl about sixteen years old.

"'What do you wish?"

"'Here,' he says, 'I've brought my daughter to your Honour.'

"'What for?'

"'Perhaps,' he says, 'you'll take her--you are a bachelor.'

"'That is, how? What do you mean?'

"'I took her around town,' he says. 'I wanted to hire her out as a
servant--but nobody would have her--take her at least as your mistress!'

"Do you understand? He offered his own daughter--just think of it! A
daughter--as a mistress! The devil knows what that is! Eh? The man, of
course, became indignant and began abusing the peasant. But the peasant
spoke to him reasonably:

"'Your Honour! Of what use is she to me at this time? Utterly useless.
I have,' says he, 'three boys--they will be working men; it is necessary
to keep them up. Give me,' says he, 'ten roubles for the girl, and that
will improve my lot and that of my boys.'

"How is that? Eh? It is simply terrible, I tell you."

"No good!" sighed Yefim. "As they say--hunger will break through stone
walls. The stomach, you see, has its own laws."

This story called forth in Foma a great incomprehensible interest in the
fate of the girl, and the youth hastened to enquire of the receiver:

"Well, did the man buy her?"

"Of course not!" exclaimed the receiver, reproachfully.

"Well, and what became of her?"

"Some good people took pity on her--and provided for her."

"A-h!" drawled Foma, and suddenly he said firmly and angrily: "I would
have given that peasant such a thrashing! I would have broken his head!"
And he showed the receiver his big tightly-clenched fist.

"Eh! What for?" cried the receiver in a sickly, loud voice, tearing his
spectacles from his eyes. "You do not understand the motive."

"I do understand it!" said Foma, with an obstinate shake of his head.

"But what could he do? It came to his mind."

"How can one allow himself to sell a human being?"

"Ah! It is brutal, I agree with you."

"And a girl at that! I would have given him the ten roubles!"

The receiver waved his hand hopelessly and became silent. His gesture
confused Foma. He arose from his seat, walked off to the railing
and looked down at the deck of the barge, which was covered with an
industriously working crowd of people. The noise intoxicated him, and
the uneasy something, which was rambling in his soul, was now defined
into a powerful desire to work, to have the strength of a giant, to
possess enormous shoulders and put on them at one time a hundred bags of
rye, that every one looking at him might be astonished.

"Come now, hurry up there!" he shouted down in a ringing voice. A few
heads were raised to him, some faces appeared before him, and one of
them--the face of a dark-eyed woman--smiled at him a gentle and enticing
smile. Something flared up in his breast at this smile and began to
spread over his veins in a hot wave. He drew back from the railing and
walked up to the table again, feeling that his cheeks were burning.

"Listen!" said the receiver, addressing him, "wire to your father asking
him to allow some grain for waste! Just see how much is lost here. And
here every pound is precious! You should have understood this! What a
fine father you have," he concluded with a biting grimace.

"How much shall I allow?" asked Foma, boldly and disdainfully. "Do
you want a hundred puds? [A pud is a weight of 40 Russian pounds.] Two
hundred?"

"I--I thank you!" exclaimed the receiver, overjoyed and confused, "if
you have the right to do it."

"I am the master!" said Foma, firmly. "And you must not speak that way
about my father--nor make such faces."

"Pardon me! I--I do not doubt that you have full power. I thank you
heartily. And your father, too--in behalf of all these men--in behalf of
the people!"

Yefim looked cautiously at the young master, spreading out and smacking
his lips, while the master with an air of pride on his face listened
to the quick-witted speech of the receiver, who was pressing his hand
firmly.

"Two hundred puds! That is Russian-like, young man! I shall directly
notify the peasants of your gift. You'll see how grateful they will
be--how glad." And he shouted down:

"Eh, boys! The master is giving away two hundred puds."

"Three hundred!" interposed Foma.

"Three hundred puds. Oh! Thank you! Three hundred puds of grain, boys!"

But their response was weak. The peasants lifted up their heads and
mutely lowered them again, resuming their work. A few voices said
irresolutely and as though unwillingly:

"Thanks. May God give you. We thank you very humbly."

And some cried out gaily and disdainfully:

"What's the use of that? If they had given each of us a glass of vodka
instead--that would be a just favour. For the grain is not for us--but
for the country Council."

"Eh! They do not understand!" exclaimed the receiver, confused. "I'll go
down and explain it to them."

And he disappeared. But the peasants' regard for his gift did not
interest Foma. He saw that the black eyes of the rosy-cheeked woman were
looking at him so strangely and pleasingly. They seemed to thank him
and caressingly beckoned him, and besides those eyes he saw nothing. The
woman was dressed like the city women. She wore shoes, a calico waist,
and over her black hair she had a peculiar kerchief. Tall and supple,
seated on a pile of wood, she repaired sacks, quickly moving her hands,
which were bare up to the elbows, and she smiled at Foma all the time.

"Foma Ignatyich!" he heard Yefim's reproachful voice, "you've showed off
too much. Well, if it were only about fifty puds! But why so much? Look
out that we don't get a good scolding for this."

"Leave me alone!" said Foma, shortly.

"What is it to me? I'll keep quiet. But as you are so young, and as I
was told to keep an eye on you, I may get a rap on the snout for being
heedless."

"I'll tell my father all about it. Keep quiet!" said Foma.

"As for me--let it be so--so that you are master here."

"Very well."

"I have said this, Foma Ignatyich, for your own sake--because you are so
young and simple-minded."

"Leave me alone, Yefim!"

Yefim heaved a sigh and became silent, while Foma stared at the woman
and thought:

"I wish they would bring such a woman for sale to me."

His heart beat rapidly. Though as yet physically pure, he already knew
from conversations the mysteries of intimate relations between men and
women. He knew by rude and shameful names, and these names kindled in
him an unpleasant, burning curiosity and shame; his imagination worked
obstinately, for he could not picture it to himself in intelligible
images. And in his soul he did not believe that those relations were
really so simple and rude, as he had been told. When they had laughed
at him and assured him that they were such, and, indeed, could not be
otherwise, he smiled stupidly and confusedly, but thought nevertheless
that the relations with women did not have to be in such a shameful form
for everyone, and that, in all probability, there was something purer,
less rude and abusive to a human being.

Now looking at the dark-eyed working woman with admiration, Foma
distinctly felt just that rude inclination toward her, and he was
ashamed and afraid of something. And Yefim, standing beside him, said
admonitively:

"There you are staring at the woman, so that I cannot keep silence any
longer. You do not know her, but when she winks at you, you may, because
of your youth--and with a nature like yours--you may do such a thing
that we'll have to go home on foot by the shore. And we'll have to thank
God if our trousers at least remain with us."

"What do you want?" asked Foma, red with confusion.

"I want nothing. And you had better mind me. In regard to affairs with
women I may perfectly well be a teacher. You must deal with a woman very
plainly--give her a bottle of vodka, something to eat after it, then a
couple of bottles of beer and after everything give her twenty kopecks
in cash. For this price she will show you all her love in the best way
possible."

"You are lying," said Foma, softly.

"I am lying? Why shall I lie to you since I have observed that same
policy perhaps a hundred times? Just charge me to have dealings with
her. Eh? I'll make you acquainted with her in a moment."

"Very well," said Foma, feeling that he could hardly breathe and that
something was choking his throat.

"Well, then, I'll bring her up in the evening."

And Yefim smiled approvingly into Foma's face and walked off. Until
evening Foma walked about as though lost in mist, not noticing the
respectful and beseeching glances with which the peasants greeted him
at the receiver's instigation. Dread fell on him, he felt himself guilty
before somebody, and to all those that addressed him he replied humbly
and gently, as though excusing himself for something. Some of the
working people went home toward evening, others gathered on the shore
near a big, bright bonfire and began cooking their supper. Fragments of
their conversation floated about in the stillness of the evening. The
reflection of the fire fell on the river in red and yellow stripes,
which trembled on the calm water and on the window panes of the cabin
where Foma was sitting. He sat in the corner on a lounge, which was
covered with oilcloth--and waited. On the table before him were a few
bottles of vodka and beer, and plates with bread and dessert. He
covered the windows and did not light the lamp; the faint light from
the bonfire, penetrating through the curtains, fell on the table, on
the bottles and on the wall, and trembled, now growing brighter, now
fainter. It was quiet on the steamer and on the barges, only from
the shore came indistinct sounds of conversation, and the river was
splashing, scarcely audible, against the sides of the steamer. It seemed
to Foma that somebody was hiding in the dark near by, listening to him
and spying upon him. Now somebody is walking over the gang-plank of the
barges with quick and heavy steps--the gang-plank strikes against the
water clangously and angrily. Foma hears the muffled laughter of the
captain and his lowered voice. Yefim stands by the cabin door and
speaks softly, but somewhat reprimandingly, as though instructing. Foma
suddenly felt like crying out:

"It is not necessary!"

And he arose from the lounge--but at this moment the cabin door was
opened, the tall form of a woman appeared on the threshold, and,
noiselessly closing the door behind her, she said in a low voice:

"Oh dear! How dark it is! Is there a living soul somewhere around here?"

"Yes," answered Foma, softly.

"Well, then, good evening."

And the woman moved forward carefully.

"I'll light the lamp," said Foma in a broken voice, and, sinking on the
lounge, he curled himself up in the corner.

"It is good enough this way. When you get used to it you can see
everything in the dark as well."

"Be seated," said Foma.

"I will."

She sat down on the lounge about two steps away from him. Foma saw the
glitter of her eyes, he saw a smile on her full lips. It seemed to
him that this smile of hers was not at all like that other smile
before--this smile seemed plaintive, sad. This smile encouraged him;
he breathed with less difficulty at the sight of these eyes, which, on
meeting his own, suddenly glanced down on the floor. But he did not know
what to say to this woman and for about two minutes both were silent. It
was a heavy, awkward silence. She began to speak:

"You must be feeling lonesome here all alone?"

"Yes," answered Foma.

"And do you like our place here?" asked the woman in a low voice.

"It is nice. There are many woods here."

