Zephine was laughing , Fantine smiling , Listolier blowing a wooden trumpet which he had purchased at Saint-Cloud . 
Favourite gazed tenderly at Blachevelle and said : -- `` Blachevelle , I adore you . '' 
This called forth a question from Blachevelle : -- `` What would you do , Favourite , if I were to cease to love you ? '' 
`` I ! '' 
cried Favourite . 
`` Ah ! 
Do not say that even in jest ! 
If you were to cease to love me , I would spring after you , I would scratch you , I should rend you , I would throw you into the water , I would have you arrested . '' 
Blachevelle smiled with the voluptuous self-conceit of a man who is tickled in his self-love . 
Favourite resumed : -- `` Yes , I would scream to the police ! 
Ah ! 
I should not restrain myself , not at all ! 
Rabble ! '' 
Blachevelle threw himself back in his chair , in an ecstasy , and closed both eyes proudly . 
Dahlia , as she ate , said in a low voice to Favourite , amid the uproar : -- `` So you really idolize him deeply , that Blachevelle of yours ? '' 
`` I ? 
I detest him , '' replied Favourite in the same tone , seizing her fork again . 
`` He is avaricious . 
I love the little fellow opposite me in my house . 
He is very nice , that young man ; do you know him ? 
One can see that he is an actor by profession . 
I love actors . 
As soon as he comes in , his mother says to him : ` Ah ! 
mon Dieu ! 
my peace of mind is gone . 
There he goes with his shouting . 
But , my dear , you are splitting my head ! ' 
So he goes up to rat-ridden garrets , to black holes , as high as he can mount , and there he sets to singing , declaiming , how do I know what ? 
so that he can be heard down stairs ! 
He earns twenty sous a day at an attorney 's by penning quibbles . 
He is the son of a former precentor of Saint-Jacques-du-Haut-Pas . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
He idolizes me so , that one day when he saw me making batter for some pancakes , he said to me : ` Mamselle , make your gloves into fritters , and I will eat them . ' 
It is only artists who can say such things as that . 
Ah ! 
he is very nice . 
I am in a fair way to go out of my head over that little fellow . 
Never mind ; I tell Blachevelle that I adore him -- how I lie ! 
Hey ! 
How I do lie ! '' 
Favourite paused , and then went on : -- `` I am sad , you see , Dahlia . 
It has done nothing but rain all summer ; the wind irritates me ; the wind does not abate . 
Blachevelle is very stingy ; there are hardly any green peas in the market ; one does not know what to eat . 
I have the spleen , as the English say , butter is so dear ! 
and then you see it is horrible , here we are dining in a room with a bed in it , and that disgusts me with life . '' 
In the meantime , while some sang , the rest talked together tumultuously all at once ; it was no longer anything but noise . 
Tholomyes intervened . 
`` Let us not talk at random nor too fast , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Let us reflect , if we wish to be brilliant . 
Too much improvisation empties the mind in a stupid way . 
Running beer gathers no froth . 
No haste , gentlemen . 
Let us mingle majesty with the feast . 
Let us eat with meditation ; let us make haste slowly . 
Let us not hurry . 
Consider the springtime ; if it makes haste , it is done for ; that is to say , it gets frozen . 
Excess of zeal ruins peach-trees and apricot-trees . 
Excess of zeal kills the grace and the mirth of good dinners . 
No zeal , gentlemen ! 
Grimod de la Reyniere agrees with Talleyrand . '' 
A hollow sound of rebellion rumbled through the group . 
`` Leave us in peace , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` Down with the tyrant ! '' 
said Fameuil . 
`` Bombarda , Bombance , and Bambochel ! '' 
cried Listolier . 
`` Sunday exists , '' resumed Fameuil . 
`` We are sober , '' added Listolier . 
`` Tholomyes , '' remarked Blachevelle , `` contemplate my calmness -LSB- mon calme -RSB- . '' 
`` You are the Marquis of that , '' retorted Tholomyes . 
This mediocre play upon words produced the effect of a stone in a pool . 
The Marquis de Montcalm was at that time a celebrated royalist . 
All the frogs held their peace . 
`` Friends , '' cried Tholomyes , with the accent of a man who had recovered his empire , `` Come to yourselves . 
This pun which has fallen from the skies must not be received with too much stupor . 
Everything which falls in that way is not necessarily worthy of enthusiasm and respect . 
The pun is the dung of the mind which soars . 
The jest falls , no matter where ; and the mind after producing a piece of stupidity plunges into the azure depths . 
A whitish speck flattened against the rock does not prevent the condor from soaring aloft . 
Far be it from me to insult the pun ! 
I honor it in proportion to its merits ; nothing more . 
All the most august , the most sublime , the most charming of humanity , and perhaps outside of humanity , have made puns . 
Jesus Christ made a pun on St. Peter , Moses on Isaac , AEschylus on Polynices , Cleopatra on Octavius . 
And observe that Cleopatra 's pun preceded the battle of Actium , and that had it not been for it , no one would have remembered the city of Toryne , a Greek name which signifies a ladle . 
That once conceded , I return to my exhortation . 
I repeat , brothers , I repeat , no zeal , no hubbub , no excess ; even in witticisms , gayety , jollities , or plays on words . 
Listen to me . 
I have the prudence of Amphiaraus and the baldness of Caesar . 
There must be a limit , even to rebuses . 
Est modus in rebus . 
`` There must be a limit , even to dinners . 
You are fond of apple turnovers , ladies ; do not indulge in them to excess . 
Even in the matter of turnovers , good sense and art are requisite . 
Gluttony chastises the glutton , Gula punit Gulax . 
Indigestion is charged by the good God with preaching morality to stomachs . 
And remember this : each one of our passions , even love , has a stomach which must not be filled too full . 
In all things the word finis must be written in good season ; self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent ; the bolt must be drawn on appetite ; one must set one 's own fantasy to the violin , and carry one 's self to the post . 
The sage is the man who knows how , at a given moment , to effect his own arrest . 
Have some confidence in me , for I have succeeded to some extent in my study of the law , according to the verdict of my examinations , for I know the difference between the question put and the question pending , for I have sustained a thesis in Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered at Rome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was quaestor of the Parricide ; because I am going to be a doctor , apparently it does not follow that it is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile . 
I recommend you to moderation in your desires . 
It is true that my name is Felix Tholomyes ; I speak well . 
Happy is he who , when the hour strikes , takes a heroic resolve , and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes . '' 
Favourite listened with profound attention . 
`` Felix , '' said she , `` what a pretty word ! 
I love that name . 
It is Latin ; it means prosper . '' 
Tholomyes went on : -- `` Quirites , gentlemen , caballeros , my friends . 
Do you wish never to feel the prick , to do without the nuptial bed , and to brave love ? 
Nothing more simple . 
Here is the receipt : lemonade , excessive exercise , hard labor ; work yourself to death , drag blocks , sleep not , hold vigil , gorge yourself with nitrous beverages , and potions of nymphaeas ; drink emulsions of poppies and agnus castus ; season this with a strict diet , starve yourself , and add thereto cold baths , girdles of herbs , the application of a plate of lead , lotions made with the subacetate of lead , and fomentations of oxycrat . '' 
`` I prefer a woman , '' said Listolier . 
`` Woman , '' resumed Tholomyes ; `` distrust her . 
Woe to him who yields himself to the unstable heart of woman ! 
Woman is perfidious and disingenuous . 
She detests the serpent from professional jealousy . 
The serpent is the shop over the way . '' 
`` Tholomyes ! '' 
cried Blachevelle , `` you are drunk ! '' 
`` Pardieu , '' said Tholomyes . 
`` Then be gay , '' resumed Blachevelle . 
`` I agree to that , '' responded Tholomyes . 
And , refilling his glass , he rose . 
`` Glory to wine ! 
Nunc te , Bacche , canam ! 
Pardon me ladies ; that is Spanish . 
And the proof of it , senoras , is this : like people , like cask . 
The arrobe of Castile contains sixteen litres ; the cantaro of Alicante , twelve ; the almude of the Canaries , twenty-five ; the cuartin of the Balearic Isles , twenty-six ; the boot of Tzar Peter , thirty . 
Long live that Tzar who was great , and long live his boot , which was still greater ! 
Ladies , take the advice of a friend ; make a mistake in your neighbor if you see fit . 
The property of love is to err . 
A love affair is not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an English serving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing . 
It is not made for that ; it errs gayly , our gentle love . 
It has been said , error is human ; I say , error is love . 
Ladies , I idolize you all . 
O Zephine , O Josephine , face more than irregular , you would be charming were you not all askew . 
You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one has sat down by mistake . 
As for Favourite , O nymphs and muses ! 
one day when Blachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guerin-Boisseau , he espied a beautiful girl with white stockings well drawn up , which displayed her legs . 
This prologue pleased him , and Blachevelle fell in love . 
The one he loved was Favourite . 
O Favourite , thou hast Ionian lips . 
There was a Greek painter named Euphorion , who was surnamed the painter of the lips . 
That Greek alone would have been worthy to paint thy mouth . 
Listen ! 
before thee , there was never a creature worthy of the name . 
Thou wert made to receive the apple like Venus , or to eat it like Eve ; beauty begins with thee . 
I have just referred to Eve ; it is thou who hast created her . 
Thou deservest the letters-patent of the beautiful woman . 
O Favourite , I cease to address you as ` thou , ' because I pass from poetry to prose . 
You were speaking of my name a little while ago . 
That touched me ; but let us , whoever we may be , distrust names . 
They may delude us . 
I am called Felix , and I am not happy . 
Words are liars . 
Let us not blindly accept the indications which they afford us . 
It would be a mistake to write to Liege -LSB- 2 -RSB- for corks , and to Pau for gloves . 
Miss Dahlia , were I in your place , I would call myself Rosa . 
A flower should smell sweet , and woman should have wit . 
I say nothing of Fantine ; she is a dreamer , a musing , thoughtful , pensive person ; she is a phantom possessed of the form of a nymph and the modesty of a nun , who has strayed into the life of a grisette , but who takes refuge in illusions , and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure without very well knowing what she sees or what she is doing , and who , with her eyes fixed on heaven , wanders in a garden where there are more birds than are in existence . 
O Fantine , know this : I , Tholomyes , I am all illusion ; but she does not even hear me , that blond maid of Chimeras ! 
as for the rest , everything about her is freshness , suavity , youth , sweet morning light . 
O Fantine , maid worthy of being called Marguerite or Pearl , you are a woman from the beauteous Orient . 
Ladies , a second piece of advice : do not marry ; marriage is a graft ; it takes well or ill ; avoid that risk . 
But bah ! 
what am I saying ? 
I am wasting my words . 
Girls are incurable on the subject of marriage , and all that we wise men can say will not prevent the waistcoat-makers and the shoe-stitchers from dreaming of husbands studded with diamonds . 
Well , so be it ; but , my beauties , remember this , you eat too much sugar . 
You have but one fault , O woman , and that is nibbling sugar . 
O nibbling sex , your pretty little white teeth adore sugar . 
Now , heed me well , sugar is a salt . 
All salts are withering . 
Sugar is the most desiccating of all salts ; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins ; hence the coagulation , and then the solidification of the blood ; hence tubercles in the lungs , hence death . 
That is why diabetes borders on consumption . 
Then , do not crunch sugar , and you will live . 
I turn to the men : gentlemen , make conquest , rob each other of your well-beloved without remorse . 
Chassez across . 
In love there are no friends . 
Everywhere where there is a pretty woman hostility is open . 
No quarter , war to the death ! 
a pretty woman is a casus belli ; a pretty woman is flagrant misdemeanor . 
All the invasions of history have been determined by petticoats . 
Woman is man 's right . 
Romulus carried off the Sabines ; William carried off the Saxon women ; Caesar carried off the Roman women . 
The man who is not loved soars like a vulture over the mistresses of other men ; and for my own part , to all those unfortunate men who are widowers , I throw the sublime proclamation of Bonaparte to the army of Italy : `` Soldiers , you are in need of everything ; the enemy has it . '' 
-LSB- 2 -RSB- Liege : a cork-tree . 
Pau : a jest on peau , skin . 
Tholomyes paused . 
`` Take breath , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
At the same moment Blachevelle , supported by Listolier and Fameuil , struck up to a plaintive air , one of those studio songs composed of the first words which come to hand , rhymed richly and not at all , as destitute of sense as the gesture of the tree and the sound of the wind , which have their birth in the vapor of pipes , and are dissipated and take their flight with them . 
This is the couplet by which the group replied to Tholomyes ' harangue : -- `` The father turkey-cocks so grave Some money to an agent gave , That master good Clermont-Tonnerre Might be made pope on Saint Johns ' day fair . 
But this good Clermont could not be Made pope , because no priest was he ; And then their agent , whose wrath burned , With all their money back returned . '' 
This was not calculated to calm Tholomyes ' improvisation ; he emptied his glass , filled , refilled it , and began again : -- `` Down with wisdom ! 
Forget all that I have said . 
Let us be neither prudes nor prudent men nor prudhommes . 
I propose a toast to mirth ; be merry . 
Let us complete our course of law by folly and eating ! 
Indigestion and the digest . 
Let Justinian be the male , and Feasting , the female ! 
Joy in the depths ! 
Live , O creation ! 
The world is a great diamond . 
I am happy . 
The birds are astonishing . 
What a festival everywhere ! 
The nightingale is a gratuitous Elleviou . 
Summer , I salute thee ! 
O Luxembourg ! 
O Georgics of the Rue Madame , and of the Allee de l'Observatoire ! 
O pensive infantry soldiers ! 
O all those charming nurses who , while they guard the children , amuse themselves ! 
The pampas of America would please me if I had not the arcades of the Odeon . 
My soul flits away into the virgin forests and to the savannas . 
All is beautiful . 
The flies buzz in the sun . 
The sun has sneezed out the humming bird . 
Embrace me , Fantine ! '' 
He made a mistake and embraced Favourite . 
`` The dinners are better at Edon 's than at Bombarda 's , '' exclaimed Zephine . 
`` I prefer Bombarda to Edon , '' declared Blachevelle . 
`` There is more luxury . 
It is more Asiatic . 
Look at the room downstairs ; there are mirrors -LSB- glaces -RSB- on the walls . '' 
`` I prefer them -LSB- glaces , ices -RSB- on my plate , '' said Favourite . 
Blachevelle persisted : -- `` Look at the knives . 
The handles are of silver at Bombarda 's and of bone at Edon 's . 
Now , silver is more valuable than bone . '' 
`` Except for those who have a silver chin , '' observed Tholomyes . 
He was looking at the dome of the Invalides , which was visible from Bombarda 's windows . 
A pause ensued . 
`` Tholomyes , '' exclaimed Fameuil , `` Listolier and I were having a discussion just now . '' 
`` A discussion is a good thing , '' replied Tholomyes ; `` a quarrel is better . '' 
`` We were disputing about philosophy . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Which do you prefer , Descartes or Spinoza ? '' 
`` Desaugiers , '' said Tholomyes . 
This decree pronounced , he took a drink , and went on : -- `` I consent to live . 
All is not at an end on earth since we can still talk nonsense . 
For that I return thanks to the immortal gods . 
We lie . 
One lies , but one laughs . 
One affirms , but one doubts . 
The unexpected bursts forth from the syllogism . 
That is fine . 
There are still human beings here below who know how to open and close the surprise box of the paradox merrily . 
This , ladies , which you are drinking with so tranquil an air is Madeira wine , you must know , from the vineyard of Coural das Freiras , which is three hundred and seventeen fathoms above the level of the sea . 
Attention while you drink ! 
three hundred and seventeen fathoms ! 
and Monsieur Bombarda , the magnificent eating-house keeper , gives you those three hundred and seventeen fathoms for four francs and fifty centimes . '' 
Again Fameuil interrupted him : -- `` Tholomyes , your opinions fix the law . 
Who is your favorite author ? '' 
`` Ber -- '' `` Quin ? '' 
`` No ; Choux . '' 
And Tholomyes continued : -- `` Honor to Bombarda ! 
He would equal Munophis of Elephanta if he could but get me an Indian dancing-girl , and Thygelion of Chaeronea if he could bring me a Greek courtesan ; for , oh , ladies ! 
there were Bombardas in Greece and in Egypt . 
Apuleius tells us of them . 
Alas ! 
always the same , and nothing new ; nothing more unpublished by the creator in creation ! 
Nil sub sole novum , says Solomon ; amor omnibus idem , says Virgil ; and Carabine mounts with Carabin into the bark at Saint-Cloud , as Aspasia embarked with Pericles upon the fleet at Samos . 
One last word . 
Do you know what Aspasia was , ladies ? 
Although she lived at an epoch when women had , as yet , no soul , she was a soul ; a soul of a rosy and purple hue , more ardent hued than fire , fresher than the dawn . 
Aspasia was a creature in whom two extremes of womanhood met ; she was the goddess prostitute ; Socrates plus Manon Lescaut . 
Aspasia was created in case a mistress should be needed for Prometheus . '' 
Tholomyes , once started , would have found some difficulty in stopping , had not a horse fallen down upon the quay just at that moment . 
The shock caused the cart and the orator to come to a dead halt . 
It was a Beauceron mare , old and thin , and one fit for the knacker , which was dragging a very heavy cart . 
On arriving in front of Bombarda 's , the worn-out , exhausted beast had refused to proceed any further . 
This incident attracted a crowd . 
Hardly had the cursing and indignant carter had time to utter with proper energy the sacramental word , Matin -LRB- the jade -RRB- , backed up with a pitiless cut of the whip , when the jade fell , never to rise again . 
On hearing the hubbub made by the passersby , Tholomyes ' merry auditors turned their heads , and Tholomyes took advantage of the opportunity to bring his allocution to a close with this melancholy strophe : -- `` Elle etait de ce monde ou coucous et carrosses -LSB- 3 -RSB- Ont le meme destin ; Et , rosse , elle a vecu ce que vivant les rosses , L'espace d'un matin ! '' 
-LSB- 3 -RSB- She belonged to that circle where cuckoos and carriages share the same fate ; and a jade herself , she lived , as jades live , for the space of a morning -LRB- or jade -RRB- . 
`` Poor horse ! '' 
sighed Fantine . 
And Dahlia exclaimed : -- `` There is Fantine on the point of crying over horses . 
How can one be such a pitiful fool as that ! '' 
At that moment Favourite , folding her arms and throwing her head back , looked resolutely at Tholomyes and said : -- `` Come , now ! 
the surprise ? '' 
`` Exactly . 
The moment has arrived , '' replied Tholomyes . 
`` Gentlemen , the hour for giving these ladies a surprise has struck . 
Wait for us a moment , ladies . '' 
`` It begins with a kiss , '' said Blachevelle . 
`` On the brow , '' added Tholomyes . 
Each gravely bestowed a kiss on his mistress 's brow ; then all four filed out through the door , with their fingers on their lips . 
Favourite clapped her hands on their departure . 
`` It is beginning to be amusing already , '' said she . 
`` Do n't be too long , '' murmured Fantine ; `` we are waiting for you . '' 
When the young girls were left alone , they leaned two by two on the window-sills , chatting , craning out their heads , and talking from one window to the other . 
They saw the young men emerge from the Cafe Bombarda arm in arm . 
The latter turned round , made signs to them , smiled , and disappeared in that dusty Sunday throng which makes a weekly invasion into the Champs-Elysees . 
`` Do n't be long ! '' 
cried Fantine . 
`` What are they going to bring us ? '' 
said Zephine . 
`` It will certainly be something pretty , '' said Dahlia . 
`` For my part , '' said Favourite , `` I want it to be of gold . '' 
Their attention was soon distracted by the movements on the shore of the lake , which they could see through the branches of the large trees , and which diverted them greatly . 
It was the hour for the departure of the mail-coaches and diligences . 
Nearly all the stage-coaches for the south and west passed through the Champs-Elysees . 
The majority followed the quay and went through the Passy Barrier . 
From moment to moment , some huge vehicle , painted yellow and black , heavily loaded , noisily harnessed , rendered shapeless by trunks , tarpaulins , and valises , full of heads which immediately disappeared , rushed through the crowd with all the sparks of a forge , with dust for smoke , and an air of fury , grinding the pavements , changing all the paving-stones into steels . 
This uproar delighted the young girls . 
Favourite exclaimed : -- `` What a row ! 
One would say that it was a pile of chains flying away . '' 
It chanced that one of these vehicles , which they could only see with difficulty through the thick elms , halted for a moment , then set out again at a gallop . 
This surprised Fantine . 
`` That 's odd ! '' 
said she . 
`` I thought the diligence never stopped . '' 
Favourite shrugged her shoulders . 
`` This Fantine is surprising . 
I am coming to take a look at her out of curiosity . 
She is dazzled by the simplest things . 
Suppose a case : I am a traveller ; I say to the diligence , ` I will go on in advance ; you shall pick me up on the quay as you pass . ' 
The diligence passes , sees me , halts , and takes me . 
That is done every day . 
You do not know life , my dear . '' 
In this manner a certain time elapsed . 
All at once Favourite made a movement , like a person who is just waking up . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` and the surprise ? '' 
`` Yes , by the way , '' joined in Dahlia , `` the famous surprise ? '' 
`` They are a very long time about it ! '' 
said Fantine . 
As Fantine concluded this sigh , the waiter who had served them at dinner entered . 
He held in his hand something which resembled a letter . 
`` What is that ? '' 
demanded Favourite . 
The waiter replied : -- `` It is a paper that those gentlemen left for these ladies . '' 
`` Why did you not bring it at once ? '' 
`` Because , '' said the waiter , `` the gentlemen ordered me not to deliver it to the ladies for an hour . '' 
Favourite snatched the paper from the waiter 's hand . 
It was , in fact , a letter . 
`` Stop ! '' 
said she ; `` there is no address ; but this is what is written on it -- '' `` THIS IS THE SURPRISE . '' 
She tore the letter open hastily , opened it , and read -LSB- she knew how to read -RSB- : -- `` OUR BELOVED : -- `` You must know that we have parents . 
Parents -- you do not know much about such things . 
They are called fathers and mothers by the civil code , which is puerile and honest . 
Now , these parents groan , these old folks implore us , these good men and these good women call us prodigal sons ; they desire our return , and offer to kill calves for us . 
Being virtuous , we obey them . 
At the hour when you read this , five fiery horses will be bearing us to our papas and mammas . 
We are pulling up our stakes , as Bossuet says . 
We are going ; we are gone . 
We flee in the arms of Lafitte and on the wings of Caillard . 
The Toulouse diligence tears us from the abyss , and the abyss is you , O our little beauties ! 
We return to society , to duty , to respectability , at full trot , at the rate of three leagues an hour . 
It is necessary for the good of the country that we should be , like the rest of the world , prefects , fathers of families , rural police , and councillors of state . 
Venerate us . 
We are sacrificing ourselves . 
Mourn for us in haste , and replace us with speed . 
If this letter lacerates you , do the same by it . 
Adieu . 
`` For the space of nearly two years we have made you happy . 
We bear you no grudge for that . 
`` Signed : BLACHEVELLE . 
FAMUEIL . 
LISTOLIER . 
FELIX THOLOMYES . 
`` Postscriptum . 
The dinner is paid for . '' 
The four young women looked at each other . 
Favourite was the first to break the silence . 
`` Well ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` it 's a very pretty farce , all the same . '' 
`` It is very droll , '' said Zephine . 
`` That must have been Blachevelle 's idea , '' resumed Favourite . 
`` It makes me in love with him . 
No sooner is he gone than he is loved . 
This is an adventure , indeed . '' 
`` No , '' said Dahlia ; `` it was one of Tholomyes ' ideas . 
That is evident . 
`` In that case , '' retorted Favourite , `` death to Blachevelle , and long live Tholomyes ! '' 
`` Long live Tholomyes ! '' 
exclaimed Dahlia and Zephine . 
And they burst out laughing . 
Fantine laughed with the rest . 
An hour later , when she had returned to her room , she wept . 
It was her first love affair , as we have said ; she had given herself to this Tholomyes as to a husband , and the poor girl had a child . 
POWER There was , at Montfermeil , near Paris , during the first quarter of this century , a sort of cook-shop which no longer exists . 
This cook-shop was kept by some people named Thenardier , husband and wife . 
It was situated in Boulanger Lane . 
Over the door there was a board nailed flat against the wall . 
Upon this board was painted something which resembled a man carrying another man on his back , the latter wearing the big gilt epaulettes of a general , with large silver stars ; red spots represented blood ; the rest of the picture consisted of smoke , and probably represented a battle . 
Below ran this inscription : AT THE SIGN OF SERGEANT OF WATERLOO -LRB- Au Sargent de Waterloo -RRB- . 
Nothing is more common than a cart or a truck at the door of a hostelry . 
Nevertheless , the vehicle , or , to speak more accurately , the fragment of a vehicle , which encumbered the street in front of the cook-shop of the Sergeant of Waterloo , one evening in the spring of 1818 , would certainly have attracted , by its mass , the attention of any painter who had passed that way . 
It was the fore-carriage of one of those trucks which are used in wooded tracts of country , and which serve to transport thick planks and the trunks of trees . 
This fore-carriage was composed of a massive iron axle-tree with a pivot , into which was fitted a heavy shaft , and which was supported by two huge wheels . 
The whole thing was compact , overwhelming , and misshapen . 
It seemed like the gun-carriage of an enormous cannon . 
The ruts of the road had bestowed on the wheels , the fellies , the hub , the axle , and the shaft , a layer of mud , a hideous yellowish daubing hue , tolerably like that with which people are fond of ornamenting cathedrals . 
The wood was disappearing under mud , and the iron beneath rust . 
Under the axle-tree hung , like drapery , a huge chain , worthy of some Goliath of a convict . 
This chain suggested , not the beams , which it was its office to transport , but the mastodons and mammoths which it might have served to harness ; it had the air of the galleys , but of cyclopean and superhuman galleys , and it seemed to have been detached from some monster . 
Homer would have bound Polyphemus with it , and Shakespeare , Caliban . 
Why was that fore-carriage of a truck in that place in the street ? 
In the first place , to encumber the street ; next , in order that it might finish the process of rusting . 
There is a throng of institutions in the old social order , which one comes across in this fashion as one walks about outdoors , and which have no other reasons for existence than the above . 
