Old Rouault embraced his future son-in-law . 
The discussion of money matters was put off ; moreover , there was plenty of time before them , as the marriage could not decently take place till Charles was out of mourning , that is to say , about the spring of the next year . 
The winter passed waiting for this . 
Mademoiselle Rouault was busy with her trousseau . 
Part of it was ordered at Rouen , and she made herself chemises and nightcaps after fashion-plates that she borrowed . 
When Charles visited the farmer , the preparations for the wedding were talked over ; they wondered in what room they should have dinner ; they dreamed of the number of dishes that would be wanted , and what should be entrees . 
Emma would , on the contrary , have preferred to have a midnight wedding with torches , but old Rouault could not understand such an idea . 
So there was a wedding at which forty-three persons were present , at which they remained sixteen hours at table , began again the next day , and to some extent on the days following . 
The guests arrived early in carriages , in one-horse chaises , two-wheeled cars , old open gigs , waggonettes with leather hoods , and the young people from the nearer villages in carts , in which they stood up in rows , holding on to the sides so as not to fall , going at a trot and well shaken up . 
Some came from a distance of thirty miles , from Goderville , from Normanville , and from Cany . 
All the relatives of both families had been invited , quarrels between friends arranged , acquaintances long since lost sight of written to . 
From time to time one heard the crack of a whip behind the hedge ; then the gates opened , a chaise entered . 
Galloping up to the foot of the steps , it stopped short and emptied its load . 
They got down from all sides , rubbing knees and stretching arms . 
The ladies , wearing bonnets , had on dresses in the town fashion , gold watch chains , pelerines with the ends tucked into belts , or little coloured fichus fastened down behind with a pin , and that left the back of the neck bare . 
The lads , dressed like their papas , seemed uncomfortable in their new clothes -LRB- many that day hand-sewed their first pair of boots -RRB- , and by their sides , speaking never a work , wearing the white dress of their first communion lengthened for the occasion were some big girls of fourteen or sixteen , cousins or elder sisters no doubt , rubicund , bewildered , their hair greasy with rose pomade , and very much afraid of dirtying their gloves . 
As there were not enough stable-boys to unharness all the carriages , the gentlemen turned up their sleeves and set about it themselves . 
According to their different social positions they wore tail-coats , overcoats , shooting jackets , cutaway-coats ; fine tail-coats , redolent of family respectability , that only came out of the wardrobe on state occasions ; overcoats with long tails flapping in the wind and round capes and pockets like sacks ; shooting jackets of coarse cloth , generally worn with a cap with a brass-bound peak ; very short cutaway-coats with two small buttons in the back , close together like a pair of eyes , and the tails of which seemed cut out of one piece by a carpenter 's hatchet . 
Some , too -LRB- but these , you may be sure , would sit at the bottom of the table -RRB- , wore their best blouses -- that is to say , with collars turned down to the shoulders , the back gathered into small plaits and the waist fastened very low down with a worked belt . 
And the shirts stood out from the chests like cuirasses ! 
Everyone had just had his hair cut ; ears stood out from the heads ; they had been close-shaved ; a few , even , who had had to get up before daybreak , and not been able to see to shave , had diagonal gashes under their noses or cuts the size of a three-franc piece along the jaws , which the fresh air en route had enflamed , so that the great white beaming faces were mottled here and there with red dabs . 
The mairie was a mile and a half from the farm , and they went thither on foot , returning in the same way after the ceremony in the church . 
The procession , first united like one long coloured scarf that undulated across the fields , along the narrow path winding amid the green corn , soon lengthened out , and broke up into different groups that loitered to talk . 
The fiddler walked in front with his violin , gay with ribbons at its pegs . 
Then came the married pair , the relations , the friends , all following pell-mell ; the children stayed behind amusing themselves plucking the bell-flowers from oat-ears , or playing amongst themselves unseen . 
Emma 's dress , too long , trailed a little on the ground ; from time to time she stopped to pull it up , and then delicately , with her gloved hands , she picked off the coarse grass and the thistledowns , while Charles , empty handed , waited till she had finished . 
Old Rouault , with a new silk hat and the cuffs of his black coat covering his hands up to the nails , gave his arm to Madame Bovary senior . 
As to Monsieur Bovary senior , who , heartily despising all these folk , had come simply in a frock-coat of military cut with one row of buttons -- he was passing compliments of the bar to a fair young peasant . 
She bowed , blushed , and did not know what to say . 
The other wedding guests talked of their business or played tricks behind each other 's backs , egging one another on in advance to be jolly . 
Those who listened could always catch the squeaking of the fiddler , who went on playing across the fields . 
When he saw that the rest were far behind he stopped to take breath , slowly rosined his bow , so that the strings should sound more shrilly , then set off again , by turns lowering and raising his neck , the better to mark time for himself . 
The noise of the instrument drove away the little birds from afar . 
The table was laid under the cart-shed . 
On it were four sirloins , six chicken fricassees , stewed veal , three legs of mutton , and in the middle a fine roast suckling pig , flanked by four chitterlings with sorrel . 
At the corners were decanters of brandy . 
Sweet bottled-cider frothed round the corks , and all the glasses had been filled to the brim with wine beforehand . 
Large dishes of yellow cream , that trembled with the least shake of the table , had designed on their smooth surface the initials of the newly wedded pair in nonpareil arabesques . 
A confectioner of Yvetot had been intrusted with the tarts and sweets . 
As he had only just set up on the place , he had taken a lot of trouble , and at dessert he himself brought in a set dish that evoked loud cries of wonderment . 
To begin with , at its base there was a square of blue cardboard , representing a temple with porticoes , colonnades , and stucco statuettes all round , and in the niches constellations of gilt paper stars ; then on the second stage was a dungeon of Savoy cake , surrounded by many fortifications in candied angelica , almonds , raisins , and quarters of oranges ; and finally , on the upper platform a green field with rocks set in lakes of jam , nutshell boats , and a small Cupid balancing himself in a chocolate swing whose two uprights ended in real roses for balls at the top . 
Until night they ate . 
When any of them were too tired of sitting , they went out for a stroll in the yard , or for a game with corks in the granary , and then returned to table . 
Some towards the finish went to sleep and snored . 
But with the coffee everyone woke up . 
Then they began songs , showed off tricks , raised heavy weights , performed feats with their fingers , then tried lifting carts on their shoulders , made broad jokes , kissed the women . 
At night when they left , the horses , stuffed up to the nostrils with oats , could hardly be got into the shafts ; they kicked , reared , the harness broke , their masters laughed or swore ; and all night in the light of the moon along country roads there were runaway carts at full gallop plunging into the ditches , jumping over yard after yard of stones , clambering up the hills , with women leaning out from the tilt to catch hold of the reins . 
Those who stayed at the Bertaux spent the night drinking in the kitchen . 
The children had fallen asleep under the seats . 
The bride had begged her father to be spared the usual marriage pleasantries . 
However , a fishmonger , one of their cousins -LRB- who had even brought a pair of soles for his wedding present -RRB- , began to squirt water from his mouth through the keyhole , when old Rouault came up just in time to stop him , and explain to him that the distinguished position of his son-in-law would not allow of such liberties . 
The cousin all the same did not give in to these reasons readily . 
In his heart he accused old Rouault of being proud , and he joined four or five other guests in a corner , who having , through mere chance , been several times running served with the worst helps of meat , also were of opinion they had been badly used , and were whispering about their host , and with covered hints hoping he would ruin himself . 
Madame Bovary , senior , had not opened her mouth all day . 
She had been consulted neither as to the dress of her daughter-in-law nor as to the arrangement of the feast ; she went to bed early . 
Her husband , instead of following her , sent to Saint-Victor for some cigars , and smoked till daybreak , drinking kirsch-punch , a mixture unknown to the company . 
This added greatly to the consideration in which he was held . 
Charles , who was not of a facetious turn , did not shine at the wedding . 
He answered feebly to the puns , doubles entendres * , compliments , and chaff that it was felt a duty to let off at him as soon as the soup appeared . 
* Double meanings . 
The next day , on the other hand , he seemed another man . 
It was he who might rather have been taken for the virgin of the evening before , whilst the bride gave no sign that revealed anything . 
The shrewdest did not know what to make of it , and they looked at her when she passed near them with an unbounded concentration of mind . 
But Charles concealed nothing . 
He called her `` my wife '' , tutoyed * her , asked for her of everyone , looked for her everywhere , and often he dragged her into the yards , where he could be seen from far between the trees , putting his arm around her waist , and walking half-bending over her , ruffling the chemisette of her bodice with his head . 
* Used the familiar form of address . 
Two days after the wedding the married pair left . 
Charles , on account of his patients , could not be away longer . 
Old Rouault had them driven back in his cart , and himself accompanied them as far as Vassonville . 
Here he embraced his daughter for the last time , got down , and went his way . 
When he had gone about a hundred paces he stopped , and as he saw the cart disappearing , its wheels turning in the dust , he gave a deep sigh . 
Then he remembered his wedding , the old times , the first pregnancy of his wife ; he , too , had been very happy the day when he had taken her from her father to his home , and had carried her off on a pillion , trotting through the snow , for it was near Christmas-time , and the country was all white . 
She held him by one arm , her basket hanging from the other ; the wind blew the long lace of her Cauchois headdress so that it sometimes flapped across his mouth , and when he turned his head he saw near him , on his shoulder , her little rosy face , smiling silently under the gold bands of her cap . 
To warm her hands she put them from time to time in his breast . 
How long ago it all was ! 
Their son would have been thirty by now . 
Then he looked back and saw nothing on the road . 
He felt dreary as an empty house ; and tender memories mingling with the sad thoughts in his brain , addled by the fumes of the feast , he felt inclined for a moment to take a turn towards the church . 
As he was afraid , however , that this sight would make him yet more sad , he went right away home . 
Monsieur and Madame Charles arrived at Tostes about six o'clock . 
The neighbors came to the windows to see their doctor 's new wife . 
The old servant presented herself , curtsied to her , apologised for not having dinner ready , and suggested that madame , in the meantime , should look over her house . 
The brick front was just in a line with the street , or rather the road . 
Behind the door hung a cloak with a small collar , a bridle , and a black leather cap , and on the floor , in a corner , were a pair of leggings , still covered with dry mud . 
On the right was the one apartment , that was both dining and sitting room . 
A canary yellow paper , relieved at the top by a garland of pale flowers , was puckered everywhere over the badly stretched canvas ; white calico curtains with a red border hung crossways at the length of the window ; and on the narrow mantelpiece a clock with a head of Hippocrates shone resplendent between two plate candlesticks under oval shades . 
On the other side of the passage was Charles 's consulting room , a little room about six paces wide , with a table , three chairs , and an office chair . 
Volumes of the `` Dictionary of Medical Science , '' uncut , but the binding rather the worse for the successive sales through which they had gone , occupied almost along the six shelves of a deal bookcase . 
The smell of melted butter penetrated through the walls when he saw patients , just as in the kitchen one could hear the people coughing in the consulting room and recounting their histories . 
Then , opening on the yard , where the stable was , came a large dilapidated room with a stove , now used as a wood-house , cellar , and pantry , full of old rubbish , of empty casks , agricultural implements past service , and a mass of dusty things whose use it was impossible to guess . 
The garden , longer than wide , ran between two mud walls with espaliered apricots , to a hawthorn hedge that separated it from the field . 
In the middle was a slate sundial on a brick pedestal ; four flower beds with eglantines surrounded symmetrically the more useful kitchen garden bed . 
Right at the bottom , under the spruce bushes , was a cure in plaster reading his breviary . 
Emma went upstairs . 
The first room was not furnished , but in the second , which was their bedroom , was a mahogany bedstead in an alcove with red drapery . 
A shell box adorned the chest of drawers , and on the secretary near the window a bouquet of orange blossoms tied with white satin ribbons stood in a bottle . 
It was a bride 's bouquet ; it was the other one 's . 
She looked at it . 
Charles noticed it ; he took it and carried it up to the attic , while Emma seated in an arm-chair -LRB- they were putting her things down around her -RRB- thought of her bridal flowers packed up in a bandbox , and wondered , dreaming , what would be done with them if she were to die . 
During the first days she occupied herself in thinking about changes in the house . 
She took the shades off the candlesticks , had new wallpaper put up , the staircase repainted , and seats made in the garden round the sundial ; she even inquired how she could get a basin with a jet fountain and fishes . 
Finally her husband , knowing that she liked to drive out , picked up a second-hand dogcart , which , with new lamps and splashboard in striped leather , looked almost like a tilbury . 
He was happy then , and without a care in the world . 
A meal together , a walk in the evening on the highroad , a gesture of her hands over her hair , the sight of her straw hat hanging from the window-fastener , and many another thing in which Charles had never dreamed of pleasure , now made up the endless round of his happiness . 
In bed , in the morning , by her side , on the pillow , he watched the sunlight sinking into the down on her fair cheek , half hidden by the lappets of her night-cap . 
Seen thus closely , her eyes looked to him enlarged , especially when , on waking up , she opened and shut them rapidly many times . 
Black in the shade , dark blue in broad daylight , they had , as it were , depths of different colours , that , darker in the centre , grew paler towards the surface of the eye . 
His own eyes lost themselves in these depths ; he saw himself in miniature down to the shoulders , with his handkerchief round his head and the top of his shirt open . 
He rose . 
She came to the window to see him off , and stayed leaning on the sill between two pots of geranium , clad in her dressing gown hanging loosely about her . 
Charles , in the street buckled his spurs , his foot on the mounting stone , while she talked to him from above , picking with her mouth some scrap of flower or leaf that she blew out at him . 
Then this , eddying , floating , described semicircles in the air like a bird , and was caught before it reached the ground in the ill-groomed mane of the old white mare standing motionless at the door . 
Charles from horseback threw her a kiss ; she answered with a nod ; she shut the window , and he set off . 
And then along the highroad , spreading out its long ribbon of dust , along the deep lanes that the trees bent over as in arbours , along paths where the corn reached to the knees , with the sun on his back and the morning air in his nostrils , his heart full of the joys of the past night , his mind at rest , his flesh at ease , he went on , re-chewing his happiness , like those who after dinner taste again the truffles which they are digesting . 
Until now what good had he had of his life ? 
His time at school , when he remained shut up within the high walls , alone , in the midst of companions richer than he or cleverer at their work , who laughed at his accent , who jeered at his clothes , and whose mothers came to the school with cakes in their muffs ? 
Later on , when he studied medicine , and never had his purse full enough to treat some little work-girl who would have become his mistress ? 
Afterwards , he had lived fourteen months with the widow , whose feet in bed were cold as icicles . 
But now he had for life this beautiful woman whom he adored . 
For him the universe did not extend beyond the circumference of her petticoat , and he reproached himself with not loving her . 
He wanted to see her again ; he turned back quickly , ran up the stairs with a beating heart . 
Emma , in her room , was dressing ; he came up on tiptoe , kissed her back ; she gave a cry . 
He could not keep from constantly touching her comb , her ring , her fichu ; sometimes he gave her great sounding kisses with all his mouth on her cheeks , or else little kisses in a row all along her bare arm from the tip of her fingers up to her shoulder , and she put him away half-smiling , half-vexed , as you do a child who hangs about you . 
Before marriage she thought herself in love ; but the happiness that should have followed this love not having come , she must , she thought , have been mistaken . 
And Emma tried to find out what one meant exactly in life by the words felicity , passion , rapture , that had seemed to her so beautiful in books . 
She had read `` Paul and Virginia , '' and she had dreamed of the little bamboo-house , the nigger Domingo , the dog Fidele , but above all of the sweet friendship of some dear little brother , who seeks red fruit for you on trees taller than steeples , or who runs barefoot over the sand , bringing you a bird 's nest . 
When she was thirteen , her father himself took her to town to place her in the convent . 
They stopped at an inn in the St. Gervais quarter , where , at their supper , they used painted plates that set forth the story of Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
The explanatory legends , chipped here and there by the scratching of knives , all glorified religion , the tendernesses of the heart , and the pomps of court . 
Far from being bored at first at the convent , she took pleasure in the society of the good sisters , who , to amuse her , took her to the chapel , which one entered from the refectory by a long corridor . 
She played very little during recreation hours , knew her catechism well , and it was she who always answered Monsieur le Vicaire 's difficult questions . 
Living thus , without ever leaving the warm atmosphere of the classrooms , and amid these pale-faced women wearing rosaries with brass crosses , she was softly lulled by the mystic languor exhaled in the perfumes of the altar , the freshness of the holy water , and the lights of the tapers . 
Instead of attending to mass , she looked at the pious vignettes with their azure borders in her book , and she loved the sick lamb , the sacred heart pierced with sharp arrows , or the poor Jesus sinking beneath the cross he carries . 
She tried , by way of mortification , to eat nothing a whole day . 
She puzzled her head to find some vow to fulfil . 
When she went to confession , she invented little sins in order that she might stay there longer , kneeling in the shadow , her hands joined , her face against the grating beneath the whispering of the priest . 
The comparisons of betrothed , husband , celestial lover , and eternal marriage , that recur in sermons , stirred within her soul depths of unexpected sweetness . 
In the evening , before prayers , there was some religious reading in the study . 
On week-nights it was some abstract of sacred history or the Lectures of the Abbe Frayssinous , and on Sundays passages from the `` Genie du Christianisme , '' as a recreation . 
How she listened at first to the sonorous lamentations of its romantic melancholies reechoing through the world and eternity ! 
If her childhood had been spent in the shop-parlour of some business quarter , she might perhaps have opened her heart to those lyrical invasions of Nature , which usually come to us only through translation in books . 
But she knew the country too well ; she knew the lowing of cattle , the milking , the ploughs . 
Accustomed to calm aspects of life , she turned , on the contrary , to those of excitement . 
She loved the sea only for the sake of its storms , and the green fields only when broken up by ruins . 
She wanted to get some personal profit out of things , and she rejected as useless all that did not contribute to the immediate desires of her heart , being of a temperament more sentimental than artistic , looking for emotions , not landscapes . 
At the convent there was an old maid who came for a week each month to mend the linen . 
Patronized by the clergy , because she belonged to an ancient family of noblemen ruined by the Revolution , she dined in the refectory at the table of the good sisters , and after the meal had a bit of chat with them before going back to her work . 
The girls often slipped out from the study to go and see her . 
She knew by heart the love songs of the last century , and sang them in a low voice as she stitched away . 
She told stories , gave them news , went errands in the town , and on the sly lent the big girls some novel , that she always carried in the pockets of her apron , and of which the good lady herself swallowed long chapters in the intervals of her work . 
They were all love , lovers , sweethearts , persecuted ladies fainting in lonely pavilions , postilions killed at every stage , horses ridden to death on every page , sombre forests , heartaches , vows , sobs , tears and kisses , little skiffs by moonlight , nightingales in shady groves , `` gentlemen '' brave as lions , gentle as lambs , virtuous as no one ever was , always well dressed , and weeping like fountains . 
For six months , then , Emma , at fifteen years of age , made her hands dirty with books from old lending libraries . 
Through Walter Scott , later on , she fell in love with historical events , dreamed of old chests , guard-rooms and minstrels . 
She would have liked to live in some old manor-house , like those long-waisted chatelaines who , in the shade of pointed arches , spent their days leaning on the stone , chin in hand , watching a cavalier with white plume galloping on his black horse from the distant fields . 
At this time she had a cult for Mary Stuart and enthusiastic veneration for illustrious or unhappy women . 
Joan of Arc , Heloise , Agnes Sorel , the beautiful Ferroniere , and Clemence Isaure stood out to her like comets in the dark immensity of heaven , where also were seen , lost in shadow , and all unconnected , St. Louis with his oak , the dying Bayard , some cruelties of Louis XI , a little of St. Bartholomew 's Day , the plume of the Bearnais , and always the remembrance of the plates painted in honour of Louis XIV . 
In the music class , in the ballads she sang , there was nothing but little angels with golden wings , madonnas , lagunes , gondoliers ; - mild compositions that allowed her to catch a glimpse athwart the obscurity of style and the weakness of the music of the attractive phantasmagoria of sentimental realities . 
Some of her companions brought `` keepsakes '' given them as new year 's gifts to the convent . 
These had to be hidden ; it was quite an undertaking ; they were read in the dormitory . 
Delicately handling the beautiful satin bindings , Emma looked with dazzled eyes at the names of the unknown authors , who had signed their verses for the most part as counts or viscounts . 
She trembled as she blew back the tissue paper over the engraving and saw it folded in two and fall gently against the page . 
Here behind the balustrade of a balcony was a young man in a short cloak , holding in his arms a young girl in a white dress wearing an alms-bag at her belt ; or there were nameless portraits of English ladies with fair curls , who looked at you from under their round straw hats with their large clear eyes . 
Some there were lounging in their carriages , gliding through parks , a greyhound bounding along in front of the equipage driven at a trot by two midget postilions in white breeches . 
Others , dreaming on sofas with an open letter , gazed at the moon through a slightly open window half draped by a black curtain . 
The naive ones , a tear on their cheeks , were kissing doves through the bars of a Gothic cage , or , smiling , their heads on one side , were plucking the leaves of a marguerite with their taper fingers , that curved at the tips like peaked shoes . 
And you , too , were there , Sultans with long pipes reclining beneath arbours in the arms of Bayaderes ; Djiaours , Turkish sabres , Greek caps ; and you especially , pale landscapes of dithyrambic lands , that often show us at once palm trees and firs , tigers on the right , a lion to the left , Tartar minarets on the horizon ; the whole framed by a very neat virgin forest , and with a great perpendicular sunbeam trembling in the water , where , standing out in relief like white excoriations on a steel-grey ground , swans are swimming about . 
And the shade of the argand lamp fastened to the wall above Emma 's head lighted up all these pictures of the world , that passed before her one by one in the silence of the dormitory , and to the distant noise of some belated carriage rolling over the Boulevards . 
When her mother died she cried much the first few days . 
She had a funeral picture made with the hair of the deceased , and , in a letter sent to the Bertaux full of sad reflections on life , she asked to be buried later on in the same grave . 
The goodman thought she must be ill , and came to see her . 
Emma was secretly pleased that she had reached at a first attempt the rare ideal of pale lives , never attained by mediocre hearts . 
She let herself glide along with Lamartine meanderings , listened to harps on lakes , to all the songs of dying swans , to the falling of the leaves , the pure virgins ascending to heaven , and the voice of the Eternal discoursing down the valleys . 
She wearied of it , would not confess it , continued from habit , and at last was surprised to feel herself soothed , and with no more sadness at heart than wrinkles on her brow . 
The good nuns , who had been so sure of her vocation , perceived with great astonishment that Mademoiselle Rouault seemed to be slipping from them . 
They had indeed been so lavish to her of prayers , retreats , novenas , and sermons , they had so often preached the respect due to saints and martyrs , and given so much good advice as to the modesty of the body and the salvation of her soul , that she did as tightly reined horses ; she pulled up short and the bit slipped from her teeth . 
This nature , positive in the midst of its enthusiasms , that had loved the church for the sake of the flowers , and music for the words of the songs , and literature for its passional stimulus , rebelled against the mysteries of faith as it grew irritated by discipline , a thing antipathetic to her constitution . 
When her father took her from school , no one was sorry to see her go . 
The Lady Superior even thought that she had latterly been somewhat irreverent to the community . 
Emma , at home once more , first took pleasure in looking after the servants , then grew disgusted with the country and missed her convent . 
When Charles came to the Bertaux for the first time , she thought herself quite disillusioned , with nothing more to learn , and nothing more to feel . 
But the uneasiness of her new position , or perhaps the disturbance caused by the presence of this man , had sufficed to make her believe that she at last felt that wondrous passion which , till then , like a great bird with rose-coloured wings , hung in the splendour of the skies of poesy ; and now she could not think that the calm in which she lived was the happiness she had dreamed . 
She thought , sometimes , that , after all , this was the happiest time of her life -- the honeymoon , as people called it . 
To taste the full sweetness of it , it would have been necessary doubtless to fly to those lands with sonorous names where the days after marriage are full of laziness most suave . 
In post chaises behind blue silken curtains to ride slowly up steep road , listening to the song of the postilion re-echoed by the mountains , along with the bells of goats and the muffled sound of a waterfall ; at sunset on the shores of gulfs to breathe in the perfume of lemon trees ; then in the evening on the villa-terraces above , hand in hand to look at the stars , making plans for the future . 
It seemed to her that certain places on earth must bring happiness , as a plant peculiar to the soil , and that can not thrive elsewhere . 
Why could not she lean over balconies in Swiss chalets , or enshrine her melancholy in a Scotch cottage , with a husband dressed in a black velvet coat with long tails , and thin shoes , a pointed hat and frills ? 
Perhaps she would have liked to confide all these things to someone . 
But how tell an undefinable uneasiness , variable as the clouds , unstable as the winds ? 
Words failed her -- the opportunity , the courage . 
If Charles had but wished it , if he had guessed it , if his look had but once met her thought , it seemed to her that a sudden plenty would have gone out from her heart , as the fruit falls from a tree when shaken by a hand . 
But as the intimacy of their life became deeper , the greater became the gulf that separated her from him . 
Charles 's conversation was commonplace as a street pavement , and everyone 's ideas trooped through it in their everyday garb , without exciting emotion , laughter , or thought . 
He had never had the curiosity , he said , while he lived at Rouen , to go to the theatre to see the actors from Paris . 
He could neither swim , nor fence , nor shoot , and one day he could not explain some term of horsemanship to her that she had come across in a novel . 
A man , on the contrary , should he not know everything , excel in manifold activities , initiate you into the energies of passion , the refinements of life , all mysteries ? 
But this one taught nothing , knew nothing , wished nothing . 
He thought her happy ; and she resented this easy calm , this serene heaviness , the very happiness she gave him . 
Sometimes she would draw ; and it was great amusement to Charles to stand there bolt upright and watch her bend over her cardboard , with eyes half-closed the better to see her work , or rolling , between her fingers , little bread-pellets . 
As to the piano , the more quickly her fingers glided over it the more he wondered . 
She struck the notes with aplomb , and ran from top to bottom of the keyboard without a break . 
Thus shaken up , the old instrument , whose strings buzzed , could be heard at the other end of the village when the window was open , and often the bailiff 's clerk , passing along the highroad bare-headed and in list slippers , stopped to listen , his sheet of paper in his hand . 
Emma , on the other hand , knew how to look after her house . 
She sent the patients ' accounts in well-phrased letters that had no suggestion of a bill . 
When they had a neighbour to dinner on Sundays , she managed to have some tasty dish -- piled up pyramids of greengages on vine leaves , served up preserves turned out into plates -- and even spoke of buying finger-glasses for dessert . 
From all this much consideration was extended to Bovary . 
Charles finished by rising in his own esteem for possessing such a wife . 
He showed with pride in the sitting room two small pencil sketches by her that he had had framed in very large frames , and hung up against the wallpaper by long green cords . 
People returning from mass saw him at his door in his wool-work slippers . 
He came home late -- at ten o'clock , at midnight sometimes . 
Then he asked for something to eat , and as the servant had gone to bed , Emma waited on him . 
He took off his coat to dine more at his ease . 
He told her , one after the other , the people he had met , the villages where he had been , the prescriptions he had written , and , well pleased with himself , he finished the remainder of the boiled beef and onions , picked pieces off the cheese , munched an apple , emptied his water-bottle , and then went to bed , and lay on his back and snored . 
As he had been for a time accustomed to wear nightcaps , his handkerchief would not keep down over his ears , so that his hair in the morning was all tumbled pell-mell about his face and whitened with the feathers of the pillow , whose strings came untied during the night . 
He always wore thick boots that had two long creases over the instep running obliquely towards the ankle , while the rest of the upper continued in a straight line as if stretched on a wooden foot . 
He said that `` was quite good enough for the country . '' 
His mother approved of his economy , for she came to see him as formerly when there had been some violent row at her place ; and yet Madame Bovary senior seemed prejudiced against her daughter-in-law . 
She thought `` her ways too fine for their position '' ; the wood , the sugar , and the candles disappeared as `` at a grand establishment , '' and the amount of firing in the kitchen would have been enough for twenty-five courses . 
She put her linen in order for her in the presses , and taught her to keep an eye on the butcher when he brought the meat . 
Emma put up with these lessons . 
Madame Bovary was lavish of them ; and the words `` daughter '' and `` mother '' were exchanged all day long , accompanied by little quiverings of the lips , each one uttering gentle words in a voice trembling with anger . 
In Madame Dubuc 's time the old woman felt that she was still the favorite ; but now the love of Charles for Emma seemed to her a desertion from her tenderness , an encroachment upon what was hers , and she watched her son 's happiness in sad silence , as a ruined man looks through the windows at people dining in his old house . 
She recalled to him as remembrances her troubles and her sacrifices , and , comparing these with Emma 's negligence , came to the conclusion that it was not reasonable to adore her so exclusively . 
Charles knew not what to answer : he respected his mother , and he loved his wife infinitely ; he considered the judgment of the one infallible , and yet he thought the conduct of the other irreproachable . 
When Madam Bovary had gone , he tried timidly and in the same terms to hazard one or two of the more anodyne observations he had heard from his mamma . 
Emma proved to him with a word that he was mistaken , and sent him off to his patients . 
And yet , in accord with theories she believed right , she wanted to make herself in love with him . 
By moonlight in the garden she recited all the passionate rhymes she knew by heart , and , sighing , sang to him many melancholy adagios ; but she found herself as calm after as before , and Charles seemed no more amorous and no more moved . 
When she had thus for a while struck the flint on her heart without getting a spark , incapable , moreover , of understanding what she did not experience as of believing anything that did not present itself in conventional forms , she persuaded herself without difficulty that Charles 's passion was nothing very exorbitant . 
His outbursts became regular ; he embraced her at certain fixed times . 
It was one habit among other habits , and , like a dessert , looked forward to after the monotony of dinner . 
A gamekeeper , cured by the doctor of inflammation of the lungs , had given madame a little Italian greyhound ; she took her out walking , for she went out sometimes in order to be alone for a moment , and not to see before her eyes the eternal garden and the dusty road . 
She went as far as the beeches of Banneville , near the deserted pavilion which forms an angle of the wall on the side of the country . 
Amidst the vegetation of the ditch there are long reeds with leaves that cut you . 
She began by looking round her to see if nothing had changed since last she had been there . 
She found again in the same places the foxgloves and wallflowers , the beds of nettles growing round the big stones , and the patches of lichen along the three windows , whose shutters , always closed , were rotting away on their rusty iron bars . 
Her thoughts , aimless at first , wandered at random , like her greyhound , who ran round and round in the fields , yelping after the yellow butterflies , chasing the shrew-mice , or nibbling the poppies on the edge of a cornfield . 
Then gradually her ideas took definite shape , and , sitting on the grass that she dug up with little prods of her sunshade , Emma repeated to herself , `` Good heavens ! 
Why did I marry ? '' 
She asked herself if by some other chance combination it would have not been possible to meet another man ; and she tried to imagine what would have been these unrealised events , this different life , this unknown husband . 
All , surely , could not be like this one . 
He might have been handsome , witty , distinguished , attractive , such as , no doubt , her old companions of the convent had married . 
What were they doing now ? 
In town , with the noise of the streets , the buzz of the theatres and the lights of the ballroom , they were living lives where the heart expands , the senses bourgeon out . 
But she -- her life was cold as a garret whose dormer window looks on the north , and ennui , the silent spider , was weaving its web in the darkness in every corner of her heart . 
She recalled the prize days , when she mounted the platform to receive her little crowns , with her hair in long plaits . 
In her white frock and open prunella shoes she had a pretty way , and when she went back to her seat , the gentlemen bent over her to congratulate her ; the courtyard was full of carriages ; farewells were called to her through their windows ; the music master with his violin case bowed in passing by . 
How far all of this ! 
How far away ! 
She called Djali , took her between her knees , and smoothed the long delicate head , saying , `` Come , kiss mistress ; you have no troubles . '' 
Then noting the melancholy face of the graceful animal , who yawned slowly , she softened , and comparing her to herself , spoke to her aloud as to somebody in trouble whom one is consoling . 
Occasionally there came gusts of winds , breezes from the sea rolling in one sweep over the whole plateau of the Caux country , which brought even to these fields a salt freshness . 
The rushes , close to the ground , whistled ; the branches trembled in a swift rustling , while their summits , ceaselessly swaying , kept up a deep murmur . 
Emma drew her shawl round her shoulders and rose . 
In the avenue a green light dimmed by the leaves lit up the short moss that crackled softly beneath her feet . 
The sun was setting ; the sky showed red between the branches , and the trunks of the trees , uniform , and planted in a straight line , seemed a brown colonnade standing out against a background of gold . 
A fear took hold of her ; she called Djali , and hurriedly returned to Tostes by the high road , threw herself into an armchair , and for the rest of the evening did not speak . 
But towards the end of September something extraordinary fell upon her life ; she was invited by the Marquis d'Andervilliers to Vaubyessard . 
Secretary of State under the Restoration , the Marquis , anxious to re-enter political life , set about preparing for his candidature to the Chamber of Deputies long beforehand . 
In the winter he distributed a great deal of wood , and in the Conseil General always enthusiastically demanded new roads for his arrondissement . 
During the dog-days he had suffered from an abscess , which Charles had cured as if by miracle by giving a timely little touch with the lancet . 
The steward sent to Tostes to pay for the operation reported in the evening that he had seen some superb cherries in the doctor 's little garden . 
Now cherry trees did not thrive at Vaubyessard ; the Marquis asked Bovary for some slips ; made it his business to thank his personally ; saw Emma ; thought she had a pretty figure , and that she did not bow like a peasant ; so that he did not think he was going beyond the bounds of condescension , nor , on the other hand , making a mistake , in inviting the young couple . 
On Wednesday at three o'clock , Monsieur and Madame Bovary , seated in their dog-cart , set out for Vaubyessard , with a great trunk strapped on behind and a bonnet-box in front of the apron . 
Besides these Charles held a bandbox between his knees . 
They arrived at nightfall , just as the lamps in the park were being lit to show the way for the carriages . 
The chateau , a modern building in Italian style , with two projecting wings and three flights of steps , lay at the foot of an immense green-sward , on which some cows were grazing among groups of large trees set out at regular intervals , while large beds of arbutus , rhododendron , syringas , and guelder roses bulged out their irregular clusters of green along the curve of the gravel path . 
A river flowed under a bridge ; through the mist one could distinguish buildings with thatched roofs scattered over the field bordered by two gently sloping , well timbered hillocks , and in the background amid the trees rose in two parallel lines the coach houses and stables , all that was left of the ruined old chateau . 
Charles 's dog-cart pulled up before the middle flight of steps ; servants appeared ; the Marquis came forward , and , offering his arm to the doctor 's wife , conducted her to the vestibule . 
It was paved with marble slabs , was very lofty , and the sound of footsteps and that of voices re-echoed through it as in a church . 
Opposite rose a straight staircase , and on the left a gallery overlooking the garden led to the billiard room , through whose door one could hear the click of the ivory balls . 
As she crossed it to go to the drawing room , Emma saw standing round the table men with grave faces , their chins resting on high cravats . 
They all wore orders , and smiled silently as they made their strokes . 
On the dark wainscoting of the walls large gold frames bore at the bottom names written in black letters . 
She read : `` Jean-Antoine d'Andervilliers d'Yvervonbille , Count de la Vaubyessard and Baron de la Fresnay , killed at the battle of Coutras on the 20th of October , 1587 . '' 
And on another : `` Jean-Antoine-Henry-Guy d'Andervilliers de la Vaubyessard , Admiral of France and Chevalier of the Order of St. Michael , wounded at the battle of the Hougue-Saint-Vaast on the 29th of May , 1692 ; died at Vaubyessard on the 23rd of January 1693 . '' 
One could hardly make out those that followed , for the light of the lamps lowered over the green cloth threw a dim shadow round the room . 
Burnishing the horizontal pictures , it broke up against these in delicate lines where there were cracks in the varnish , and from all these great black squares framed in with gold stood out here and there some lighter portion of the painting -- a pale brow , two eyes that looked at you , perukes flowing over and powdering red-coated shoulders , or the buckle of a garter above a well-rounded calf . 
The Marquis opened the drawing room door ; one of the ladies -LRB- the Marchioness herself -RRB- came to meet Emma . 
She made her sit down by her on an ottoman , and began talking to her as amicably as if she had known her a long time . 
She was a woman of about forty , with fine shoulders , a hook nose , a drawling voice , and on this evening she wore over her brown hair a simple guipure fichu that fell in a point at the back . 
A fair young woman sat in a high-backed chair in a corner ; and gentlemen with flowers in their buttonholes were talking to ladies round the fire . 
At seven dinner was served . 
The men , who were in the majority , sat down at the first table in the vestibule ; the ladies at the second in the dining room with the Marquis and Marchioness . 
Emma , on entering , felt herself wrapped round by the warm air , a blending of the perfume of flowers and of the fine linen , of the fumes of the viands , and the odour of the truffles . 
The silver dish covers reflected the lighted wax candles in the candelabra , the cut crystal covered with light steam reflected from one to the other pale rays ; bouquets were placed in a row the whole length of the table ; and in the large-bordered plates each napkin , arranged after the fashion of a bishop 's mitre , held between its two gaping folds a small oval shaped roll . 
The red claws of lobsters hung over the dishes ; rich fruit in open baskets was piled up on moss ; there were quails in their plumage ; smoke was rising ; and in silk stockings , knee-breeches , white cravat , and frilled shirt , the steward , grave as a judge , offering ready carved dishes between the shoulders of the guests , with a touch of the spoon gave you the piece chosen . 
On the large stove of porcelain inlaid with copper baguettes the statue of a woman , draped to the chin , gazed motionless on the room full of life . 
Madame Bovary noticed that many ladies had not put their gloves in their glasses . 
But at the upper end of the table , alone amongst all these women , bent over his full plate , and his napkin tied round his neck like a child , an old man sat eating , letting drops of gravy drip from his mouth . 
His eyes were bloodshot , and he wore a little queue tied with black ribbon . 
He was the Marquis 's father-in-law , the old Duke de Laverdiere , once on a time favourite of the Count d'Artois , in the days of the Vaudreuil hunting-parties at the Marquis de Conflans ' , and had been , it was said , the lover of Queen Marie Antoinette , between Monsieur de Coigny and Monsieur de Lauzun . 
He had lived a life of noisy debauch , full of duels , bets , elopements ; he had squandered his fortune and frightened all his family . 
A servant behind his chair named aloud to him in his ear the dishes that he pointed to stammering , and constantly Emma 's eyes turned involuntarily to this old man with hanging lips , as to something extraordinary . 
He had lived at court and slept in the bed of queens ! 
Iced champagne was poured out . 
Emma shivered all over as she felt it cold in her mouth . 
She had never seen pomegranates nor tasted pineapples . 
The powdered sugar even seemed to her whiter and finer than elsewhere . 
The ladies afterwards went to their rooms to prepare for the ball . 
Emma made her toilet with the fastidious care of an actress on her debut . 
She did her hair according to the directions of the hairdresser , and put on the barege dress spread out upon the bed . 
Charles 's trousers were tight across the belly . 
`` My trouser-straps will be rather awkward for dancing , '' he said . 
`` Dancing ? '' 
repeated Emma . 
`` Yes ! '' 
`` Why , you must be mad ! 
They would make fun of you ; keep your place . 
Besides , it is more becoming for a doctor , '' she added . 
Charles was silent . 
He walked up and down waiting for Emma to finish dressing . 
He saw her from behind in the glass between two lights . 
Her black eyes seemed blacker than ever . 
Her hair , undulating towards the ears , shone with a blue lustre ; a rose in her chignon trembled on its mobile stalk , with artificial dewdrops on the tip of the leaves . 
She wore a gown of pale saffron trimmed with three bouquets of pompon roses mixed with green . 
Charles came and kissed her on her shoulder . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
she said ; `` you are tumbling me . '' 
One could hear the flourish of the violin and the notes of a horn . 
She went downstairs restraining herself from running . 
Dancing had begun . 
Guests were arriving . 
There was some crushing . 
She sat down on a form near the door . 
The quadrille over , the floor was occupied by groups of men standing up and talking and servants in livery bearing large trays . 
Along the line of seated women painted fans were fluttering , bouquets half hid smiling faces , and gold stoppered scent-bottles were turned in partly-closed hands , whose white gloves outlined the nails and tightened on the flesh at the wrists . 
Lace trimmings , diamond brooches , medallion bracelets trembled on bodices , gleamed on breasts , clinked on bare arms . 
The hair , well-smoothed over the temples and knotted at the nape , bore crowns , or bunches , or sprays of mytosotis , jasmine , pomegranate blossoms , ears of corn , and corn-flowers . 
Calmly seated in their places , mothers with forbidding countenances were wearing red turbans . 
Emma 's heart beat rather faster when , her partner holding her by the tips of the fingers , she took her place in a line with the dancers , and waited for the first note to start . 
But her emotion soon vanished , and , swaying to the rhythm of the orchestra , she glided forward with slight movements of the neck . 
A smile rose to her lips at certain delicate phrases of the violin , that sometimes played alone while the other instruments were silent ; one could hear the clear clink of the louis d'or that were being thrown down upon the card tables in the next room ; then all struck again , the cornet-a-piston uttered its sonorous note , feet marked time , skirts swelled and rustled , hands touched and parted ; the same eyes falling before you met yours again . 
A few men -LRB- some fifteen or so -RRB- , of twenty-five to forty , scattered here and there among the dancers or talking at the doorways , distinguished themselves from the crowd by a certain air of breeding , whatever their differences in age , dress , or face . 
Their clothes , better made , seemed of finer cloth , and their hair , brought forward in curls towards the temples , glossy with more delicate pomades . 
They had the complexion of wealth -- that clear complexion that is heightened by the pallor of porcelain , the shimmer of satin , the veneer of old furniture , and that an ordered regimen of exquisite nurture maintains at its best . 
Their necks moved easily in their low cravats , their long whiskers fell over their turned-down collars , they wiped their lips upon handkerchiefs with embroidered initials that gave forth a subtle perfume . 
Those who were beginning to grow old had an air of youth , while there was something mature in the faces of the young . 
In their unconcerned looks was the calm of passions daily satiated , and through all their gentleness of manner pierced that peculiar brutality , the result of a command of half-easy things , in which force is exercised and vanity amused -- the management of thoroughbred horses and the society of loose women . 
A few steps from Emma a gentleman in a blue coat was talking of Italy with a pale young woman wearing a parure of pearls . 
They were praising the breadth of the columns of St. Peter 's , Tivoly , Vesuvius , Castellamare , and Cassines , the roses of Genoa , the Coliseum by moonlight . 
With her other ear Emma was listening to a conversation full of words she did not understand . 
A circle gathered round a very young man who the week before had beaten `` Miss Arabella '' and `` Romolus , '' and won two thousand louis jumping a ditch in England . 
One complained that his racehorses were growing fat ; another of the printers ' errors that had disfigured the name of his horse . 
The atmosphere of the ball was heavy ; the lamps were growing dim . 
Guests were flocking to the billiard room . 
A servant got upon a chair and broke the window-panes . 
At the crash of the glass Madame Bovary turned her head and saw in the garden the faces of peasants pressed against the window looking in at them . 
Then the memory of the Bertaux came back to her . 
She saw the farm again , the muddy pond , her father in a blouse under the apple trees , and she saw herself again as formerly , skimming with her finger the cream off the milk-pans in the dairy . 
But in the refulgence of the present hour her past life , so distinct until then , faded away completely , and she almost doubted having lived it . 
She was there ; beyond the ball was only shadow overspreading all the rest . 
She was just eating a maraschino ice that she held with her left hand in a silver-gilt cup , her eyes half-closed , and the spoon between her teeth . 
A lady near her dropped her fan . 
A gentlemen was passing . 
`` Would you be so good , '' said the lady , `` as to pick up my fan that has fallen behind the sofa ? '' 
The gentleman bowed , and as he moved to stretch out his arm , Emma saw the hand of a young woman throw something white , folded in a triangle , into his hat . 
The gentleman , picking up the fan , offered it to the lady respectfully ; she thanked him with an inclination of the head , and began smelling her bouquet . 
After supper , where were plenty of Spanish and Rhine wines , soups a la bisque and au lait d'amandes * , puddings a la Trafalgar , and all sorts of cold meats with jellies that trembled in the dishes , the carriages one after the other began to drive off . 
Raising the corners of the muslin curtain , one could see the light of their lanterns glimmering through the darkness . 
The seats began to empty , some card-players were still left ; the musicians were cooling the tips of their fingers on their tongues . 
Charles was half asleep , his back propped against a door . 
* With almond milk At three o'clock the cotillion began . 
Emma did not know how to waltz . 
Everyone was waltzing , Mademoiselle d'Andervilliers herself and the Marquis ; only the guests staying at the castle were still there , about a dozen persons . 
One of the waltzers , however , who was familiarly called Viscount , and whose low cut waistcoat seemed moulded to his chest , came a second time to ask Madame Bovary to dance , assuring her that he would guide her , and that she would get through it very well . 
They began slowly , then went more rapidly . 
They turned ; all around them was turning -- the lamps , the furniture , the wainscoting , the floor , like a disc on a pivot . 
On passing near the doors the bottom of Emma 's dress caught against his trousers . 
Their legs commingled ; he looked down at her ; she raised her eyes to his . 
A torpor seized her ; she stopped . 
They started again , and with a more rapid movement ; the Viscount , dragging her along disappeared with her to the end of the gallery , where panting , she almost fell , and for a moment rested her head upon his breast . 
And then , still turning , but more slowly , he guided her back to her seat . 
She leaned back against the wall and covered her eyes with her hands . 
When she opened them again , in the middle of the drawing room three waltzers were kneeling before a lady sitting on a stool . 
She chose the Viscount , and the violin struck up once more . 
Everyone looked at them . 
They passed and re-passed , she with rigid body , her chin bent down , and he always in the same pose , his figure curved , his elbow rounded , his chin thrown forward . 
That woman knew how to waltz ! 
They kept up a long time , and tired out all the others . 
Then they talked a few moments longer , and after the goodnights , or rather good mornings , the guests of the chateau retired to bed . 
Charles dragged himself up by the balusters . 
His `` knees were going up into his body . '' 
He had spent five consecutive hours standing bolt upright at the card tables , watching them play whist , without understanding anything about it , and it was with a deep sigh of relief that he pulled off his boots . 
Emma threw a shawl over her shoulders , opened the window , and leant out . 
The night was dark ; some drops of rain were falling . 
She breathed in the damp wind that refreshed her eyelids . 
The music of the ball was still murmuring in her ears . 
And she tried to keep herself awake in order to prolong the illusion of this luxurious life that she would soon have to give up . 
Day began to break . 
She looked long at the windows of the chateau , trying to guess which were the rooms of all those she had noticed the evening before . 
She would fain have known their lives , have penetrated , blended with them . 
But she was shivering with cold . 
She undressed , and cowered down between the sheets against Charles , who was asleep . 
There were a great many people to luncheon . 
The repast lasted ten minutes ; no liqueurs were served , which astonished the doctor . 
Next , Mademoiselle d'Andervilliers collected some pieces of roll in a small basket to take them to the swans on the ornamental waters , and they went to walk in the hot-houses , where strange plants , bristling with hairs , rose in pyramids under hanging vases , whence , as from over-filled nests of serpents , fell long green cords interlacing . 
The orangery , which was at the other end , led by a covered way to the outhouses of the chateau . 
The Marquis , to amuse the young woman , took her to see the stables . 
Above the basket-shaped racks porcelain slabs bore the names of the horses in black letters . 
Each animal in its stall whisked its tail when anyone went near and said `` Tchk ! 
