Emma had wept , grown angry ; she had accused Charles of this misfortune . 
Monsieur Lheureux , a draper , who happened to be in the coach with her , had tried to console her by a number of examples of lost dogs recognizing their masters at the end of long years . 
One , he said had been told of , who had come back to Paris from Constantinople . 
Another had gone one hundred and fifty miles in a straight line , and swum four rivers ; and his own father had possessed a poodle , which , after twelve years of absence , had all of a sudden jumped on his back in the street as he was going to dine in town . 
Emma got out first , then Felicite , Monsieur Lheureux , and a nurse , and they had to wake up Charles in his corner , where he had slept soundly since night set in . 
Homais introduced himself ; he offered his homages to madame and his respects to monsieur ; said he was charmed to have been able to render them some slight service , and added with a cordial air that he had ventured to invite himself , his wife being away . 
When Madame Bovary was in the kitchen she went up to the chimney . 
With the tips of her fingers she caught her dress at the knee , and having thus pulled it up to her ankle , held out her foot in its black boot to the fire above the revolving leg of mutton . 
The flame lit up the whole of her , penetrating with a crude light the woof of her gowns , the fine pores of her fair skin , and even her eyelids , which she blinked now and again . 
A great red glow passed over her with the blowing of the wind through the half-open door . 
On the other side of the chimney a young man with fair hair watched her silently . 
As he was a good deal bored at Yonville , where he was a clerk at the notary 's , Monsieur Guillaumin , Monsieur Leon Dupuis -LRB- it was he who was the second habitue of the `` Lion d'Or '' -RRB- frequently put back his dinner-hour in hope that some traveler might come to the inn , with whom he could chat in the evening . 
On the days when his work was done early , he had , for want of something else to do , to come punctually , and endure from soup to cheese a tete-a-tete with Binet . 
It was therefore with delight that he accepted the landlady 's suggestion that he should dine in company with the newcomers , and they passed into the large parlour where Madame Lefrancois , for the purpose of showing off , had had the table laid for four . 
Homais asked to be allowed to keep on his skull-cap , for fear of coryza ; then , turning to his neighbour -- `` Madame is no doubt a little fatigued ; one gets jolted so abominably in our ` Hirondelle . ' '' 
`` That is true , '' replied Emma ; `` but moving about always amuses me . 
I like change of place . '' 
`` It is so tedious , '' sighed the clerk , `` to be always riveted to the same places . '' 
`` If you were like me , '' said Charles , `` constantly obliged to be in the saddle '' -- `` But , '' Leon went on , addressing himself to Madame Bovary , `` nothing , it seems to me , is more pleasant -- when one can , '' he added . 
`` Moreover , '' said the druggist , `` the practice of medicine is not very hard work in our part of the world , for the state of our roads allows us the use of gigs , and generally , as the farmers are prosperous , they pay pretty well . 
We have , medically speaking , besides the ordinary cases of enteritis , bronchitis , bilious affections , etc. , now and then a few intermittent fevers at harvest-time ; but on the whole , little of a serious nature , nothing special to note , unless it be a great deal of scrofula , due , no doubt , to the deplorable hygienic conditions of our peasant dwellings . 
Ah ! 
you will find many prejudices to combat , Monsieur Bovary , much obstinacy of routine , with which all the efforts of your science will daily come into collision ; for people still have recourse to novenas , to relics , to the priest , rather than come straight to the doctor or the chemist . 
The climate , however , is not , truth to tell , bad , and we even have a few nonagenarians in our parish . 
The thermometer -LRB- I have made some observations -RRB- falls in winter to 4 degrees Centigrade at the outside , which gives us 24 degrees Reaumur as the maximum , or otherwise 54 degrees Fahrenheit -LRB- English scale -RRB- , not more . 
And , as a matter of fact , we are sheltered from the north winds by the forest of Argueil on the one side , from the west winds by the St. Jean range on the other ; and this heat , moreover , which , on account of the aqueous vapours given off by the river and the considerable number of cattle in the fields , which , as you know , exhale much ammonia , that is to say , nitrogen , hydrogen and oxygen -LRB- no , nitrogen and hydrogen alone -RRB- , and which sucking up into itself the humus from the ground , mixing together all those different emanations , unites them into a stack , so to say , and combining with the electricity diffused through the atmosphere , when there is any , might in the long run , as in tropical countries , engender insalubrious miasmata -- this heat , I say , finds itself perfectly tempered on the side whence it comes , or rather whence it should come -- that is to say , the southern side -- by the south-eastern winds , which , having cooled themselves passing over the Seine , reach us sometimes all at once like breezes from Russia . '' 
`` At any rate , you have some walks in the neighbourhood ? '' 
continued Madame Bovary , speaking to the young man . 
`` Oh , very few , '' he answered . 
`` There is a place they call La Pature , on the top of the hill , on the edge of the forest . 
Sometimes , on Sundays , I go and stay there with a book , watching the sunset . '' 
`` I think there is nothing so admirable as sunsets , '' she resumed ; `` but especially by the side of the sea . '' 
`` Oh , I adore the sea ! '' 
said Monsieur Leon . 
`` And then , does it not seem to you , '' continued Madame Bovary , `` that the mind travels more freely on this limitless expanse , the contemplation of which elevates the soul , gives ideas of the infinite , the ideal ? '' 
`` It is the same with mountainous landscapes , '' continued Leon . 
`` A cousin of mine who travelled in Switzerland last year told me that one could not picture to oneself the poetry of the lakes , the charm of the waterfalls , the gigantic effect of the glaciers . 
One sees pines of incredible size across torrents , cottages suspended over precipices , and , a thousand feet below one , whole valleys when the clouds open . 
Such spectacles must stir to enthusiasm , incline to prayer , to ecstasy ; and I no longer marvel at that celebrated musician who , the better to inspire his imagination , was in the habit of playing the piano before some imposing site . '' 
`` You play ? '' 
she asked . 
`` No , but I am very fond of music , '' he replied . 
`` Ah ! 
do n't you listen to him , Madame Bovary , '' interrupted Homais , bending over his plate . 
`` That 's sheer modesty . 
Why , my dear fellow , the other day in your room you were singing ` L'Ange Gardien ' ravishingly . 
I heard you from the laboratory . 
You gave it like an actor . '' 
Leon , in fact , lodged at the chemist 's where he had a small room on the second floor , overlooking the Place . 
He blushed at the compliment of his landlord , who had already turned to the doctor , and was enumerating to him , one after the other , all the principal inhabitants of Yonville . 
He was telling anecdotes , giving information ; the fortune of the notary was not known exactly , and `` there was the Tuvache household , '' who made a good deal of show . 
Emma continued , `` And what music do you prefer ? '' 
`` Oh , German music ; that which makes you dream . '' 
`` Have you been to the opera ? '' 
`` Not yet ; but I shall go next year , when I am living at Paris to finish reading for the bar . '' 
`` As I had the honour of putting it to your husband , '' said the chemist , `` with regard to this poor Yanoda who has run away , you will find yourself , thanks to his extravagance , in the possession of one of the most comfortable houses of Yonville . 
Its greatest convenience for a doctor is a door giving on the Walk , where one can go in and out unseen . 
Moreover , it contains everything that is agreeable in a household -- a laundry , kitchen with offices , sitting-room , fruit-room , and so on . 
He was a gay dog , who did n't care what he spent . 
At the end of the garden , by the side of the water , he had an arbour built just for the purpose of drinking beer in summer ; and if madame is fond of gardening she will be able -- '' `` My wife does n't care about it , '' said Charles ; `` although she has been advised to take exercise , she prefers always sitting in her room reading . '' 
`` Like me , '' replied Leon . 
`` And indeed , what is better than to sit by one 's fireside in the evening with a book , while the wind beats against the window and the lamp is burning ? '' 
`` What , indeed ? '' 
she said , fixing her large black eyes wide open upon him . 
`` One thinks of nothing , '' he continued ; `` the hours slip by . 
Motionless we traverse countries we fancy we see , and your thought , blending with the fiction , playing with the details , follows the outline of the adventures . 
It mingles with the characters , and it seems as if it were yourself palpitating beneath their costumes . '' 
`` That is true ! 
That is true ? '' 
she said . 
`` Has it ever happened to you , '' Leon went on , `` to come across some vague idea of one 's own in a book , some dim image that comes back to you from afar , and as the completest expression of your own slightest sentiment ? '' 
`` I have experienced it , '' she replied . 
`` That is why , '' he said , `` I especially love the poets . 
I think verse more tender than prose , and that it moves far more easily to tears . '' 
`` Still in the long run it is tiring , '' continued Emma . 
`` Now I , on the contrary , adore stories that rush breathlessly along , that frighten one . 
I detest commonplace heroes and moderate sentiments , such as there are in nature . '' 
`` In fact , '' observed the clerk , `` these works , not touching the heart , miss , it seems to me , the true end of art . 
It is so sweet , amid all the disenchantments of life , to be able to dwell in thought upon noble characters , pure affections , and pictures of happiness . 
For myself , living here far from the world , this is my one distraction ; but Yonville affords so few resources . '' 
`` Like Tostes , no doubt , '' replied Emma ; `` and so I always subscribed to a lending library . '' 
`` If madame will do me the honour of making use of it '' , said the chemist , who had just caught the last words , `` I have at her disposal a library composed of the best authors , Voltaire , Rousseau , Delille , Walter Scott , the ` Echo des Feuilletons ' ; and in addition I receive various periodicals , among them the ` Fanal de Rouen ' daily , having the advantage to be its correspondent for the districts of Buchy , Forges , Neufchatel , Yonville , and vicinity . '' 
For two hours and a half they had been at table ; for the servant Artemis , carelessly dragging her old list slippers over the flags , brought one plate after the other , forgot everything , and constantly left the door of the billiard-room half open , so that it beat against the wall with its hooks . 
Unconsciously , Leon , while talking , had placed his foot on one of the bars of the chair on which Madame Bovary was sitting . 
She wore a small blue silk necktie , that kept up like a ruff a gauffered cambric collar , and with the movements of her head the lower part of her face gently sunk into the linen or came out from it . 
Thus side by side , while Charles and the chemist chatted , they entered into one of those vague conversations where the hazard of all that is said brings you back to the fixed centre of a common sympathy . 
The Paris theatres , titles of novels , new quadrilles , and the world they did not know ; Tostes , where she had lived , and Yonville , where they were ; they examined all , talked of everything till to the end of dinner . 
When coffee was served Felicite went away to get ready the room in the new house , and the guests soon raised the siege . 
Madame Lefrancois was asleep near the cinders , while the stable-boy , lantern in hand , was waiting to show Monsieur and Madame Bovary the way home . 
Bits of straw stuck in his red hair , and he limped with his left leg . 
When he had taken in his other hand the cure 's umbrella , they started . 
The town was asleep ; the pillars of the market threw great shadows ; the earth was all grey as on a summer 's night . 
But as the doctor 's house was only some fifty paces from the inn , they had to say good-night almost immediately , and the company dispersed . 
As soon as she entered the passage , Emma felt the cold of the plaster fall about her shoulders like damp linen . 
The walls were new and the wooden stairs creaked . 
In their bedroom , on the first floor , a whitish light passed through the curtainless windows . 
She could catch glimpses of tree tops , and beyond , the fields , half-drowned in the fog that lay reeking in the moonlight along the course of the river . 
In the middle of the room , pell-mell , were scattered drawers , bottles , curtain-rods , gilt poles , with mattresses on the chairs and basins on the ground -- the two men who had brought the furniture had left everything about carelessly . 
This was the fourth time that she had slept in a strange place . 
The first was the day of her going to the convent ; the second , of her arrival at Tostes ; the third , at Vaubyessard ; and this was the fourth . 
And each one had marked , as it were , the inauguration of a new phase in her life . 
She did not believe that things could present themselves in the same way in different places , and since the portion of her life lived had been bad , no doubt that which remained to be lived would be better . 
The next day , as she was getting up , she saw the clerk on the Place . 
She had on a dressing-gown . 
He looked up and bowed . 
She nodded quickly and reclosed the window . 
Leon waited all day for six o'clock in the evening to come , but on going to the inn , he found no one but Monsieur Binet , already at table . 
The dinner of the evening before had been a considerable event for him ; he had never till then talked for two hours consecutively to a `` lady . '' 
How then had he been able to explain , and in such language , the number of things that he could not have said so well before ? 
He was usually shy , and maintained that reserve which partakes at once of modesty and dissimulation . 
At Yonville he was considered `` well-bred . '' 
He listened to the arguments of the older people , and did not seem hot about politics -- a remarkable thing for a young man . 
Then he had some accomplishments ; he painted in water-colours , could read the key of G , and readily talked literature after dinner when he did not play cards . 
Monsieur Homais respected him for his education ; Madame Homais liked him for his good-nature , for he often took the little Homais into the garden -- little brats who were always dirty , very much spoilt , and somewhat lymphatic , like their mother . 
Besides the servant to look after them , they had Justin , the chemist 's apprentice , a second cousin of Monsieur Homais , who had been taken into the house from charity , and who was useful at the same time as a servant . 
The druggist proved the best of neighbours . 
He gave Madame Bovary information as to the trades-people , sent expressly for his own cider merchant , tasted the drink himself , and saw that the casks were properly placed in the cellar ; he explained how to set about getting in a supply of butter cheap , and made an arrangement with Lestiboudois , the sacristan , who , besides his sacerdotal and funeral functions , looked after the principal gardens at Yonville by the hour or the year , according to the taste of the customers . 
The need of looking after others was not the only thing that urged the chemist to such obsequious cordiality ; there was a plan underneath it all . 
He had infringed the law of the 19th Ventose , year xi. , article I , which forbade all persons not having a diploma to practise medicine ; so that , after certain anonymous denunciations , Homais had been summoned to Rouen to see the procurer of the king in his own private room ; the magistrate receiving him standing up , ermine on shoulder and cap on head . 
It was in the morning , before the court opened . 
In the corridors one heard the heavy boots of the gendarmes walking past , and like a far-off noise great locks that were shut . 
The druggist 's ears tingled as if he were about to have an apoplectic stroke ; he saw the depths of dungeons , his family in tears , his shop sold , all the jars dispersed ; and he was obliged to enter a cafe and take a glass of rum and seltzer to recover his spirits . 
Little by little the memory of this reprimand grew fainter , and he continued , as heretofore , to give anodyne consultations in his back-parlour . 
But the mayor resented it , his colleagues were jealous , everything was to be feared ; gaining over Monsieur Bovary by his attentions was to earn his gratitude , and prevent his speaking out later on , should he notice anything . 
So every morning Homais brought him `` the paper , '' and often in the afternoon left his shop for a few moments to have a chat with the Doctor . 
Charles was dull : patients did not come . 
He remained seated for hours without speaking , went into his consulting room to sleep , or watched his wife sewing . 
Then for diversion he employed himself at home as a workman ; he even tried to do up the attic with some paint which had been left behind by the painters . 
But money matters worried him . 
He had spent so much for repairs at Tostes , for madame 's toilette , and for the moving , that the whole dowry , over three thousand crowns , had slipped away in two years . 
Then how many things had been spoilt or lost during their carriage from Tostes to Yonville , without counting the plaster cure , who falling out of the coach at an over-severe jolt , had been dashed into a thousand fragments on the pavements of Quincampoix ! 
A pleasanter trouble came to distract him , namely , the pregnancy of his wife . 
As the time of her confinement approached he cherished her the more . 
It was another bond of the flesh establishing itself , and , as it were , a continued sentiment of a more complex union . 
When from afar he saw her languid walk , and her figure without stays turning softly on her hips ; when opposite one another he looked at her at his ease , while she took tired poses in her armchair , then his happiness knew no bounds ; he got up , embraced her , passed his hands over her face , called her little mamma , wanted to make her dance , and half-laughing , half-crying , uttered all kinds of caressing pleasantries that came into his head . 
The idea of having begotten a child delighted him . 
Now he wanted nothing . 
He knew human life from end to end , and he sat down to it with serenity . 
Emma at first felt a great astonishment ; then was anxious to be delivered that she might know what it was to be a mother . 
But not being able to spend as much as she would have liked , to have a swing-bassinette with rose silk curtains , and embroidered caps , in a fit of bitterness she gave up looking after the trousseau , and ordered the whole of it from a village needlewoman , without choosing or discussing anything . 
Thus she did not amuse herself with those preparations that stimulate the tenderness of mothers , and so her affection was from the very outset , perhaps , to some extent attenuated . 
As Charles , however , spoke of the boy at every meal , she soon began to think of him more consecutively . 
She hoped for a son ; he would be strong and dark ; she would call him George ; and this idea of having a male child was like an expected revenge for all her impotence in the past . 
A man , at least , is free ; he may travel over passions and over countries , overcome obstacles , taste of the most far-away pleasures . 
But a woman is always hampered . 
At once inert and flexible , she has against her the weakness of the flesh and legal dependence . 
Her will , like the veil of her bonnet , held by a string , flutters in every wind ; there is always some desire that draws her , some conventionality that restrains . 
She was confined on a Sunday at about six o'clock , as the sun was rising . 
`` It is a girl ! '' 
said Charles . 
She turned her head away and fainted . 
Madame Homais , as well as Madame Lefrancois of the Lion d'Or , almost immediately came running in to embrace her . 
The chemist , as man of discretion , only offered a few provincial felicitations through the half-opened door . 
He wished to see the child and thought it well made . 
Whilst she was getting well she occupied herself much in seeking a name for her daughter . 
First she went over all those that have Italian endings , such as Clara , Louisa , Amanda , Atala ; she liked Galsuinde pretty well , and Yseult or Leocadie still better . 
Charles wanted the child to be called after her mother ; Emma opposed this . 
They ran over the calendar from end to end , and then consulted outsiders . 
`` Monsieur Leon , '' said the chemist , `` with whom I was talking about it the other day , wonders you do not chose Madeleine . 
It is very much in fashion just now . '' 
But Madame Bovary , senior , cried out loudly against this name of a sinner . 
As to Monsieur Homais , he had a preference for all those that recalled some great man , an illustrious fact , or a generous idea , and it was on this system that he had baptized his four children . 
Thus Napoleon represented glory and Franklin liberty ; Irma was perhaps a concession to romanticism , but Athalie was a homage to the greatest masterpiece of the French stage . 
For his philosophical convictions did not interfere with his artistic tastes ; in him the thinker did not stifle the man of sentiment ; he could make distinctions , make allowances for imagination and fanaticism . 
In this tragedy , for example , he found fault with the ideas , but admired the style ; he detested the conception , but applauded all the details , and loathed the characters while he grew enthusiastic over their dialogue . 
When he read the fine passages he was transported , but when he thought that mummers would get something out of them for their show , he was disconsolate ; and in this confusion of sentiments in which he was involved he would have liked at once to crown Racine with both his hands and discuss with him for a good quarter of an hour . 
At last Emma remembered that at the chateau of Vaubyessard she had heard the Marchioness call a young lady Berthe ; from that moment this name was chosen ; and as old Rouault could not come , Monsieur Homais was requested to stand godfather . 
His gifts were all products from his establishment , to wit : six boxes of jujubes , a whole jar of racahout , three cakes of marshmallow paste , and six sticks of sugar-candy into the bargain that he had come across in a cupboard . 
On the evening of the ceremony there was a grand dinner ; the cure was present ; there was much excitement . 
Monsieur Homais towards liqueur-time began singing `` Le Dieu des bonnes gens . '' 
Monsieur Leon sang a barcarolle , and Madame Bovary , senior , who was godmother , a romance of the time of the Empire ; finally , M. Bovary , senior , insisted on having the child brought down , and began baptizing it with a glass of champagne that he poured over its head . 
This mockery of the first of the sacraments made the Abbe Bournisien angry ; old Bovary replied by a quotation from `` La Guerre des Dieux '' ; the cure wanted to leave ; the ladies implored , Homais interfered ; and they succeeded in making the priest sit down again , and he quietly went on with the half-finished coffee in his saucer . 
Monsieur Bovary , senior , stayed at Yonville a month , dazzling the natives by a superb policeman 's cap with silver tassels that he wore in the morning when he smoked his pipe in the square . 
Being also in the habit of drinking a good deal of brandy , he often sent the servant to the Lion d'Or to buy him a bottle , which was put down to his son 's account , and to perfume his handkerchiefs he used up his daughter-in-law 's whole supply of eau-de-cologne . 
The latter did not at all dislike his company . 
He had knocked about the world , he talked about Berlin , Vienna , and Strasbourg , of his soldier times , of the mistresses he had had , the grand luncheons of which he had partaken ; then he was amiable , and sometimes even , either on the stairs , or in the garden , would seize hold of her waist , crying , `` Charles , look out for yourself . '' 
Then Madame Bovary , senior , became alarmed for her son 's happiness , and fearing that her husband might in the long-run have an immoral influence upon the ideas of the young woman , took care to hurry their departure . 
Perhaps she had more serious reasons for uneasiness . 
Monsieur Bovary was not the man to respect anything . 
One day Emma was suddenly seized with the desire to see her little girl , who had been put to nurse with the carpenter 's wife , and , without looking at the calendar to see whether the six weeks of the Virgin were yet passed , she set out for the Rollets ' house , situated at the extreme end of the village , between the highroad and the fields . 
It was mid-day , the shutters of the houses were closed and the slate roofs that glittered beneath the fierce light of the blue sky seemed to strike sparks from the crest of the gables . 
A heavy wind was blowing ; Emma felt weak as she walked ; the stones of the pavement hurt her ; she was doubtful whether she would not go home again , or go in somewhere to rest . 
At this moment Monsieur Leon came out from a neighbouring door with a bundle of papers under his arm . 
He came to greet her , and stood in the shade in front of the Lheureux 's shop under the projecting grey awning . 
Madame Bovary said she was going to see her baby , but that she was beginning to grow tired . 
`` If -- '' said Leon , not daring to go on . 
`` Have you any business to attend to ? '' 
she asked . 
And on the clerk 's answer , she begged him to accompany her . 
That same evening this was known in Yonville , and Madame Tuvache , the mayor 's wife , declared in the presence of her servant that `` Madame Bovary was compromising herself . '' 
To get to the nurse 's it was necessary to turn to the left on leaving the street , as if making for the cemetery , and to follow between little houses and yards a small path bordered with privet hedges . 
They were in bloom , and so were the speedwells , eglantines , thistles , and the sweetbriar that sprang up from the thickets . 
Through openings in the hedges one could see into the huts , some pigs on a dung-heap , or tethered cows rubbing their horns against the trunk of trees . 
The two , side by side walked slowly , she leaning upon him , and he restraining his pace , which he regulated by hers ; in front of them a swarm of midges fluttered , buzzing in the warm air . 
They recognized the house by an old walnut-tree which shaded it . 
Low and covered with brown tiles , there hung outside it , beneath the dormer-window of the garret , a string of onions . 
Faggots upright against a thorn fence surrounded a bed of lettuce , a few square feet of lavender , and sweet peas strung on sticks . 
Dirty water was running here and there on the grass , and all round were several indefinite rags , knitted stockings , a red calico jacket , and a large sheet of coarse linen spread over the hedge . 
At the noise of the gate the nurse appeared with a baby she was suckling on one arm . 
With her other hand she was pulling along a poor puny little fellow , his face covered with scrofula , the son of a Rouen hosier , whom his parents , too taken up with their business , left in the country . 
`` Go in , '' she said ; `` your little one is there asleep . '' 
The room on the ground-floor , the only one in the dwelling , had at its farther end , against the wall , a large bed without curtains , while a kneading-trough took up the side by the window , one pane of which was mended with a piece of blue paper . 
In the corner behind the door , shining hob-nailed shoes stood in a row under the slab of the washstand , near a bottle of oil with a feather stuck in its mouth ; a Matthieu Laensberg lay on the dusty mantelpiece amid gunflints , candle-ends , and bits of amadou . 
Finally , the last luxury in the apartment was a `` Fame '' blowing her trumpets , a picture cut out , no doubt , from some perfumer 's prospectus and nailed to the wall with six wooden shoe-pegs . 
Emma 's child was asleep in a wicker-cradle . 
She took it up in the wrapping that enveloped it and began singing softly as she rocked herself to and fro . 
Leon walked up and down the room ; it seemed strange to him to see this beautiful woman in her nankeen dress in the midst of all this poverty . 
Madam Bovary reddened ; he turned away , thinking perhaps there had been an impertinent look in his eyes . 
Then she put back the little girl , who had just been sick over her collar . 
The nurse at once came to dry her , protesting that it would n't show . 
`` She gives me other doses , '' she said : `` I am always a-washing of her . 
If you would have the goodness to order Camus , the grocer , to let me have a little soap , it would really be more convenient for you , as I need n't trouble you then . '' 
`` Very well ! 
very well ! '' 
said Emma . 
`` Good morning , Madame Rollet , '' and she went out , wiping her shoes at the door . 
The good woman accompanied her to the end of the garden , talking all the time of the trouble she had getting up of nights . 
`` I 'm that worn out sometimes as I drop asleep on my chair . 
I 'm sure you might at least give me just a pound of ground coffee ; that 'd last me a month , and I 'd take it of a morning with some milk . '' 
After having submitted to her thanks , Madam Bovary left . 
She had gone a little way down the path when , at the sound of wooden shoes , she turned round . 
It was the nurse . 
`` What is it ? '' 
Then the peasant woman , taking her aside behind an elm tree , began talking to her of her husband , who with his trade and six francs a year that the captain -- `` Oh , be quick ! '' 
said Emma . 
`` Well , '' the nurse went on , heaving sighs between each word , `` I 'm afraid he 'll be put out seeing me have coffee alone , you know men -- '' `` But you are to have some , '' Emma repeated ; `` I will give you some . 
You bother me ! '' 
`` Oh , dear ! 
my poor , dear lady ! 
you see in consequence of his wounds he has terrible cramps in the chest . 
He even says that cider weakens him . '' 
`` Do make haste , Mere Rollet ! '' 
`` Well , '' the latter continued , making a curtsey , `` if it were n't asking too much , '' and she curtsied once more , `` if you would '' -- and her eyes begged -- `` a jar of brandy , '' she said at last , `` and I 'd rub your little one 's feet with it ; they 're as tender as one 's tongue . '' 
Once rid of the nurse , Emma again took Monsieur Leon 's arm . 
She walked fast for some time , then more slowly , and looking straight in front of her , her eyes rested on the shoulder of the young man , whose frock-coat had a black-velvety collar . 
His brown hair fell over it , straight and carefully arranged . 
She noticed his nails which were longer than one wore them at Yonville . 
It was one of the clerk 's chief occupations to trim them , and for this purpose he kept a special knife in his writing desk . 
They returned to Yonville by the water-side . 
In the warm season the bank , wider than at other times , showed to their foot the garden walls whence a few steps led to the river . 
It flowed noiselessly , swift , and cold to the eye ; long , thin grasses huddled together in it as the current drove them , and spread themselves upon the limpid water like streaming hair ; sometimes at the tip of the reeds or on the leaf of a water-lily an insect with fine legs crawled or rested . 
The sun pierced with a ray the small blue bubbles of the waves that , breaking , followed each other ; branchless old willows mirrored their grey backs in the water ; beyond , all around , the meadows seemed empty . 
It was the dinner-hour at the farms , and the young woman and her companion heard nothing as they walked but the fall of their steps on the earth of the path , the words they spoke , and the sound of Emma 's dress rustling round her . 
The walls of the gardens with pieces of bottle on their coping were hot as the glass windows of a conservatory . 
Wallflowers had sprung up between the bricks , and with the tip of her open sunshade Madame Bovary , as she passed , made some of their faded flowers crumble into a yellow dust , or a spray of overhanging honeysuckle and clematis caught in its fringe and dangled for a moment over the silk . 
They were talking of a troupe of Spanish dancers who were expected shortly at the Rouen theatre . 
`` Are you going ? '' 
she asked . 
`` If I can , '' he answered . 
Had they nothing else to say to one another ? 
Yet their eyes were full of more serious speech , and while they forced themselves to find trivial phrases , they felt the same languor stealing over them both . 
It was the whisper of the soul , deep , continuous , dominating that of their voices . 
Surprised with wonder at this strange sweetness , they did not think of speaking of the sensation or of seeking its cause . 
Coming joys , like tropical shores , throw over the immensity before them their inborn softness , an odorous wind , and we are lulled by this intoxication without a thought of the horizon that we do not even know . 
In one place the ground had been trodden down by the cattle ; they had to step on large green stones put here and there in the mud . 
She often stopped a moment to look where to place her foot , and tottering on a stone that shook , her arms outspread , her form bent forward with a look of indecision , she would laugh , afraid of falling into the puddles of water . 
When they arrived in front of her garden , Madame Bovary opened the little gate , ran up the steps and disappeared . 
Leon returned to his office . 
His chief was away ; he just glanced at the briefs , then cut himself a pen , and at last took up his hat and went out . 
He went to La Pature at the top of the Argueil hills at the beginning of the forest ; he threw himself upon the ground under the pines and watched the sky through his fingers . 
`` How bored I am ! '' 
he said to himself , `` how bored I am ! '' 
He thought he was to be pitied for living in this village , with Homais for a friend and Monsieru Guillaumin for master . 
The latter , entirely absorbed by his business , wearing gold-rimmed spectacles and red whiskers over a white cravat , understood nothing of mental refinements , although he affected a stiff English manner , which in the beginning had impressed the clerk . 
As to the chemist 's spouse , she was the best wife in Normandy , gentle as a sheep , loving her children , her father , her mother , her cousins , weeping for other 's woes , letting everything go in her household , and detesting corsets ; but so slow of movement , such a bore to listen to , so common in appearance , and of such restricted conversation , that although she was thirty , he only twenty , although they slept in rooms next each other and he spoke to her daily , he never thought that she might be a woman for another , or that she possessed anything else of her sex than the gown . 
And what else was there ? 
Binet , a few shopkeepers , two or three publicans , the cure , and finally , Monsieur Tuvache , the mayor , with his two sons , rich , crabbed , obtuse persons , who farmed their own lands and had feasts among themselves , bigoted to boot , and quite unbearable companions . 
But from the general background of all these human faces Emma 's stood out isolated and yet farthest off ; for between her and him he seemed to see a vague abyss . 
In the beginning he had called on her several times along with the druggist . 
Charles had not appeared particularly anxious to see him again , and Leon did not know what to do between his fear of being indiscreet and the desire for an intimacy that seemed almost impossible . 
When the first cold days set in Emma left her bedroom for the sitting-room , a long apartment with a low ceiling , in which there was on the mantelpiece a large bunch of coral spread out against the looking-glass . 
Seated in her arm chair near the window , she could see the villagers pass along the pavement . 
Twice a day Leon went from his office to the Lion d'Or . 
Emma could hear him coming from afar ; she leant forward listening , and the young man glided past the curtain , always dressed in the same way , and without turning his head . 
But in the twilight , when , her chin resting on her left hand , she let the embroidery she had begun fall on her knees , she often shuddered at the apparition of this shadow suddenly gliding past . 
She would get up and order the table to be laid . 
Monsieur Homais called at dinner-time . 
Skull-cap in hand , he came in on tiptoe , in order to disturb no one , always repeating the same phrase , `` Good evening , everybody . '' 
Then , when he had taken his seat at the table between the pair , he asked the doctor about his patients , and the latter consulted his as to the probability of their payment . 
Next they talked of `` what was in the paper . '' 
Homais by this hour knew it almost by heart , and he repeated it from end to end , with the reflections of the penny-a-liners , and all the stories of individual catastrophes that had occurred in France or abroad . 
But the subject becoming exhausted , he was not slow in throwing out some remarks on the dishes before him . 
Sometimes even , half-rising , he delicately pointed out to madame the tenderest morsel , or turning to the servant , gave her some advice on the manipulation of stews and the hygiene of seasoning . 
He talked aroma , osmazome , juices , and gelatine in a bewildering manner . 
Moreover , Homais , with his head fuller of recipes than his shop of jars , excelled in making all kinds of preserves , vinegars , and sweet liqueurs ; he knew also all the latest inventions in economic stoves , together with the art of preserving cheese and of curing sick wines . 
At eight o'clock Justin came to fetch him to shut up the shop . 
Then Monsieur Homais gave him a sly look , especially if Felicite was there , for he half noticed that his apprentice was fond of the doctor 's house . 
`` The young dog , '' he said , `` is beginning to have ideas , and the devil take me if I do n't believe he 's in love with your servant ! '' 
But a more serious fault with which he reproached Justin was his constantly listening to conversation . 
On Sunday , for example , one could not get him out of the drawing-room , whither Madame Homais had called him to fetch the children , who were falling asleep in the arm-chairs , and dragging down with their backs calico chair-covers that were too large . 
Not many people came to these soirees at the chemist 's , his scandal-mongering and political opinions having successfully alienated various respectable persons from him . 
The clerk never failed to be there . 
As soon as he heard the bell he ran to meet Madame Bovary , took her shawl , and put away under the shop-counter the thick list shoes that she wore over her boots when there was snow . 
First they played some hands at trente-et-un ; next Monsieur Homais played ecarte with Emma ; Leon behind her gave her advice . 
Standing up with his hands on the back of her chair he saw the teeth of her comb that bit into her chignon . 
With every movement that she made to throw her cards the right side of her dress was drawn up . 
From her turned-up hair a dark colour fell over her back , and growing gradually paler , lost itself little by little in the shade . 
Then her dress fell on both sides of her chair , puffing out full of folds , and reached the ground . 
When Leon occasionally felt the sole of his boot resting on it , he drew back as if he had trodden upon some one . 
When the game of cards was over , the druggist and the Doctor played dominoes , and Emma , changing her place , leant her elbow on the table , turning over the leaves of `` L'Illustration '' . 
She had brought her ladies ' journal with her . 
Leon sat down near her ; they looked at the engravings together , and waited for one another at the bottom of the pages . 
She often begged him to read her the verses ; Leon declaimed them in a languid voice , to which he carefully gave a dying fall in the love passages . 
But the noise of the dominoes annoyed him . 
Monsieur Homais was strong at the game ; he could beat Charles and give him a double-six . 
Then the three hundred finished , they both stretched themselves out in front of the fire , and were soon asleep . 
The fire was dying out in the cinders ; the teapot was empty , Leon was still reading . 
Emma listened to him , mechanically turning around the lampshade , on the gauze of which were painted clowns in carriages , and tight-rope dances with their balancing-poles . 
Leon stopped , pointing with a gesture to his sleeping audience ; then they talked in low tones , and their conversation seemed the more sweet to them because it was unheard . 
Thus a kind of bond was established between them , a constant commerce of books and of romances . 
Monsieur Bovary , little given to jealousy , did not trouble himself about it . 
On his birthday he received a beautiful phrenological head , all marked with figures to the thorax and painted blue . 
This was an attention of the clerk 's . 
He showed him many others , even to doing errands for him at Rouen ; and the book of a novelist having made the mania for cactuses fashionable , Leon bought some for Madame Bovary , bringing them back on his knees in the `` Hirondelle , '' pricking his fingers on their hard hairs . 
She had a board with a balustrade fixed against her window to hold the pots . 
The clerk , too , had his small hanging garden ; they saw each other tending their flowers at their windows . 
Of the windows of the village there was one yet more often occupied ; for on Sundays from morning to night , and every morning when the weather was bright , one could see at the dormer-window of the garret the profile of Monsieur Binet bending over his lathe , whose monotonous humming could be heard at the Lion d'Or . 
One evening on coming home Leon found in his room a rug in velvet and wool with leaves on a pale ground . 
He called Madame Homais , Monsieur Homais , Justin , the children , the cook ; he spoke of it to his chief ; every one wanted to see this rug . 
Why did the doctor 's wife give the clerk presents ? 
It looked queer . 
They decided that she must be his lover . 
He made this seem likely , so ceaselessly did he talk of her charms and of her wit ; so much so , that Binet once roughly answered him -- `` What does it matter to me since I 'm not in her set ? '' 
He tortured himself to find out how he could make his declaration to her , and always halting between the fear of displeasing her and the shame of being such a coward , he wept with discouragement and desire . 
Then he took energetic resolutions , wrote letters that he tore up , put it off to times that he again deferred . 
Often he set out with the determination to dare all ; but this resolution soon deserted him in Emma 's presence , and when Charles , dropping in , invited him to jump into his chaise to go with him to see some patient in the neighbourhood , he at once accepted , bowed to madame , and went out . 
Her husband , was he not something belonging to her ? 
As to Emma , she did not ask herself whether she loved . 
Love , she thought , must come suddenly , with great outbursts and lightnings -- a hurricane of the skies , which falls upon life , revolutionises it , roots up the will like a leaf , and sweeps the whole heart into the abyss . 
She did not know that on the terrace of houses it makes lakes when the pipes are choked , and she would thus have remained in her security when she suddenly discovered a rent in the wall of it . 
It was a Sunday in February , an afternoon when the snow was falling . 
They had all , Monsieur and Madame Bovary , Homais , and Monsieur Leon , gone to see a yarn-mill that was being built in the valley a mile and a half from Yonville . 
The druggist had taken Napoleon and Athalie to give them some exercise , and Justin accompanied them , carrying the umbrellas on his shoulder . 
Nothing , however , could be less curious than this curiosity . 
A great piece of waste ground , on which pell-mell , amid a mass of sand and stones , were a few break-wheels , already rusty , surrounded by a quadrangular building pierced by a number of little windows . 
The building was unfinished ; the sky could be seen through the joists of the roofing . 
Attached to the stop-plank of the gable a bunch of straw mixed with corn-ears fluttered its tricoloured ribbons in the wind . 
Homais was talking . 
He explained to the company the future importance of this establishment , computed the strength of the floorings , the thickness of the walls , and regretted extremely not having a yard-stick such as Monsieur Binet possessed for his own special use . 
Emma , who had taken his arm , bent lightly against his shoulder , and she looked at the sun 's disc shedding afar through the mist his pale splendour . 
She turned . 
Charles was there . 
His cap was drawn down over his eyebrows , and his two thick lips were trembling , which added a look of stupidity to his face ; his very back , his calm back , was irritating to behold , and she saw written upon his coat all the platitude of the bearer . 
While she was considering him thus , tasting in her irritation a sort of depraved pleasure , Leon made a step forward . 
The cold that made him pale seemed to add a more gentle languor to his face ; between his cravat and his neck the somewhat loose collar of his shirt showed the skin ; the lobe of his ear looked out from beneath a lock of hair , and his large blue eyes , raised to the clouds , seemed to Emma more limpid and more beautiful than those mountain-lakes where the heavens are mirrored . 
`` Wretched boy ! '' 
suddenly cried the chemist . 
And he ran to his son , who had just precipitated himself into a heap of lime in order to whiten his boots . 
At the reproaches with which he was being overwhelmed Napoleon began to roar , while Justin dried his shoes with a wisp of straw . 
But a knife was wanted ; Charles offered his . 
`` Ah ! '' 
she said to herself , `` he carried a knife in his pocket like a peasant . '' 
The hoar-frost was falling , and they turned back to Yonville . 
In the evening Madame Bovary did not go to her neighbour 's , and when Charles had left and she felt herself alone , the comparison re-began with the clearness of a sensation almost actual , and with that lengthening of perspective which memory gives to things . 
Looking from her bed at the clean fire that was burning , she still saw , as she had down there , Leon standing up with one hand behind his cane , and with the other holding Athalie , who was quietly sucking a piece of ice . 
She thought him charming ; she could not tear herself away from him ; she recalled his other attitudes on other days , the words he had spoken , the sound of his voice , his whole person ; and she repeated , pouting out her lips as if for a kiss -- `` Yes , charming ! 
charming ! 
Is he not in love ? '' 
she asked herself ; `` but with whom ? 
With me ? '' 
All the proofs arose before her at once ; her heart leapt . 
The flame of the fire threw a joyous light upon the ceiling ; she turned on her back , stretching out her arms . 
Then began the eternal lamentation : `` Oh , if Heaven had not willed it ! 
And why not ? 
What prevented it ? '' 
When Charles came home at midnight , she seemed to have just awakened , and as he made a noise undressing , she complained of a headache , then asked carelessly what had happened that evening . 
`` Monsieur Leon , '' he said , `` went to his room early . '' 
She could not help smiling , and she fell asleep , her soul filled with a new delight . 
The next day , at dusk , she received a visit from Monsieur Lherueux , the draper . 
He was a man of ability , was this shopkeeper . 
Born a Gascon but bred a Norman , he grafted upon his southern volubility the cunning of the Cauchois . 
His fat , flabby , beardless face seemed dyed by a decoction of liquorice , and his white hair made even more vivid the keen brilliance of his small black eyes . 
No one knew what he had been formerly ; a pedlar said some , a banker at Routot according to others . 
What was certain was that he made complex calculations in his head that would have frightened Binet himself . 
Polite to obsequiousness , he always held himself with his back bent in the position of one who bows or who invites . 
After leaving at the door his hat surrounded with crape , he put down a green bandbox on the table , and began by complaining to madame , with many civilities , that he should have remained till that day without gaining her confidence . 
A poor shop like his was not made to attract a `` fashionable lady '' ; he emphasized the words ; yet she had only to command , and he would undertake to provide her with anything she might wish , either in haberdashery or linen , millinery or fancy goods , for he went to town regularly four times a month . 
He was connected with the best houses . 
You could speak of him at the `` Trois Freres , '' at the `` Barbe d'Or , '' or at the `` Grand Sauvage '' ; all these gentlemen knew him as well as the insides of their pockets . 
To-day , then he had come to show madame , in passing , various articles he happened to have , thanks to the most rare opportunity . 
And he pulled out half-a-dozen embroidered collars from the box . 
Madame Bovary examined them . 
`` I do not require anything , '' she said . 
Then Monsieur Lheureux delicately exhibited three Algerian scarves , several packets of English needles , a pair of straw slippers , and finally , four eggcups in cocoanut wood , carved in open work by convicts . 
Then , with both hands on the table , his neck stretched out , his figure bent forward , open-mouthed , he watched Emma 's look , who was walking up and down undecided amid these goods . 
From time to time , as if to remove some dust , he filliped with his nail the silk of the scarves spread out at full length , and they rustled with a little noise , making in the green twilight the gold spangles of their tissue scintillate like little stars . 
`` How much are they ? '' 
`` A mere nothing , '' he replied , `` a mere nothing . 
But there 's no hurry ; whenever it 's convenient . 
We are not Jews . '' 
She reflected for a few moments , and ended by again declining Monsieur Lheureux 's offer . 
He replied quite unconcernedly -- `` Very well . 
We shall understand one another by and by . 
I have always got on with ladies -- if I did n't with my own ! '' 
Emma smiled . 
`` I wanted to tell you , '' he went on good-naturedly , after his joke , `` that it is n't the money I should trouble about . 
Why , I could give you some , if need be . '' 
She made a gesture of surprise . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said he quickly and in a low voice , `` I should n't have to go far to find you some , rely on that . '' 
