A profound , and only too profound knowledge of the Holy Scriptures . '' 
-LRB- Julien had just started speaking to him , without being questioned on the point , about the real time when Genesis , the Pentateuch , etc. , has been written -RRB- . 
`` To what does this never-ending reasoning over the Holy Scriptures lead to ? '' 
thought the abbé Pirard , `` if not to self-examination , that is to say , the most awful Protestantism . 
And by the side of this imprudent knowledge , nothing about the Fathers to compensate for that tendency . '' 
But the astonishment of the director of the seminary was quite unbounded when having questioned Julien about the authority of the Pope , and expecting to hear the maxims of the ancient Gallican Church , the young man recited to him the whole book of M. de Maistre `` Strange man , that Chélan , '' thought the abbé Pirard . 
`` Did he show him the book simply to teach him to make fun of it ? '' 
It was in vain that he questioned Julien and endeavoured to guess if he seriously believed in the doctrine of M. de Maistre . 
The young man only answered what he had learnt by heart . 
From this moment Julien was really happy . 
He felt that he was master of himself . 
After a very long examination , it seemed to him that M. Pirard 's severity towards him was only affected . 
Indeed , the director of the seminary would have embraced Julien in the name of logic , for he found so much clearness , precision and lucidity in his answers , had it not been for the principles of austere gravity towards his theology pupils which he had inculcated in himself for the last fifteen years . 
`` Here we have a bold and healthy mind , '' he said to himself , `` but corpus debile '' -LRB- the body is weak -RRB- . 
`` Do you often fall like that ? '' 
he said to Julien in French , pointing with his finger to the floor . 
`` It 's the first time in my life . 
The porter 's face unnerved me , '' added Julien , blushing like a child . 
The abbé Pirard almost smiled . 
`` That 's the result of vain worldly pomp . 
You are apparently accustomed to smiling faces , those veritable theatres of falsehood . 
Truth is austere , Monsieur , but is not our task down here also austere ? 
You must be careful that your conscience guards against that weakness of yours , too much sensibility to vain external graces . '' 
`` If you had not been recommended to me , '' said the abbé Pirard , resuming the Latin language with an obvious pleasure , `` If you had not been recommended by a man , by the abbé Chélan , I would talk to you the vain language of that world , to which it would appear you are only too well accustomed . 
I would tell you that the full stipend which you solicit is the most difficult thing in the world to obtain . 
But the fifty-six years which the abbé Chélan has spent in apostolic work have stood him in poor stead if he can not dispose of a stipend at the seminary . '' 
After these words , the abbé Pirard recommended Julien not to enter any secret society or congregation without his consent . 
`` I give you my word of honour , '' said Julien , with all an honest man 's expansion of heart . 
The director of the seminary smiled for the first time . 
`` That expression is not used here , '' he said to him . 
`` It is too reminiscent of that vain honour of worldly people , which leads them to so many errors and often to so many crimes . 
You owe me obedience by virtue of paragraph seventeen of the bull Unam Eccesiam of St. Pius the Fifth . 
I am your ecclesiastical superior . 
To hear in this house , my dear son , is to obey . 
How much money , have you ? '' 
-LRB- `` So here we are , '' said Julien to himself , `` that was the reason of the ` my very dear son ' -RRB- . '' 
`` Thirty-five francs , my father . '' 
`` Write out carefully how you use that money . 
You will have to give me an account of it . '' 
This painful audience had lasted three hours . 
Julien summoned the porter . 
`` Go and install Julien Sorel in cell No. 103 , '' said the abbé Pirard to the man . 
As a great favour he let Julien have a place all to himself . 
`` Carry his box there , '' he added . 
Julien lowered his eyes , and recognised his box just in front of him . 
He had been looking at it for three hours and had not recognised it . 
As he arrived at No. 103 , which was a little room eight feet square on the top story of the house , Julien noticed that it looked out on to the ramparts , and he perceived beyond them the pretty plain which the Doubs divides from the town . 
`` What a charming view ! '' 
exclaimed Julien . 
In speaking like this he did not feel what the words actually expressed . 
The violent sensations which he had experienced during the short time that he had been at Besançon had absolutely exhausted his strength . 
He sat down near the window on the one wooden chair in the cell , and fell at once into a profound sleep . 
He did not hear either the supper bell or the bell for benediction . 
They had forgotten him . 
When the first rays of the sun woke him up the following morning , he found himself lying on the floor . 
I am alone in the world . 
No one deigns to spare me a thought . 
All those whom I see make their fortune , have an insolence and hardness of heart which I do not feel in myself . 
They hate me by reason of kindness and good-humour . 
Oh , I shall die soon , either from starvation or the unhappiness of seeing men so hard of heart . 
-- Young . 
He hastened to brush his clothes and run down . 
He was late . 
Instead of trying to justify himself Julien crossed his arms over his breast . 
`` Peccavi pater optime -LRB- I have sinned , I confess my fault , oh , my father -RRB- , '' he said with a contrite air . 
This first speech was a great success . 
The clever ones among the seminarists saw that they had to deal with a man who knew something about the elements of the profession . 
The recreation hour arrived , and Julien saw that he was the object of general curiosity , but he only manifested reserved silence . 
Following the maxims he had laid down for himself , he considered his three hundred and twenty-one comrades as enemies . 
The most dangerous of all in his eyes was the abbé Pirard . 
A few days afterwards Julien had to choose a confessor , and was given a list . 
`` Great heavens ! 
what do they take me for ? '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Do they think I do n't understand what 's what ? '' 
Then he chose the abbé Pirard . 
This step proved decisive without his suspecting it . 
A little seminarist , who was quite young and a native of Verrières , and who had declared himself his friend since the first day , informed him that he would probably have acted more prudently if he had chosen M. Castanède , the sub-director of the seminary . 
`` The abbé Castanède is the enemy of Pirard , who is suspected of Jansenism , '' added the little seminarist in a whisper . 
All the first steps of our hero were , in spite of the prudence on which he plumed himself , as much mistakes as his choice of a confessor . 
Misled as he was by all the self-confidence of a man of imagination , he took his projects for facts , and believed that he was a consummate hypocrite . 
His folly went so far as to reproach himself for his success in this kind of weakness . 
`` Alas , it is my only weapon , '' he said to himself . 
`` At another period I should have earned my livelihood by eloquent deeds in the face of the enemy . '' 
Satisfied as he was with his own conduct , Julien looked around him . 
He found everywhere the appearance of the purest virtue . 
Eight or ten seminarists lived in the odour of sanctity , and had visions like Saint Theresa , and Saint Francis , when he received his stigmata on Mount Vernia in the Appenines . 
But it was a great secret and their friends concealed it . 
These poor young people who had visions were always in the infirmary . 
A hundred others combined an indefatigable application to a robust faith . 
They worked till they fell ill , but without learning much . 
Two or three were distinguished by a real talent , amongst others a student of the name of Chazel , but both they and Julien felt mutually unsympathetic . 
The rest of these three hundred and twenty-one seminarists consisted exclusively of coarse persons , who were by no means sure of understanding the Latin words which they kept on repeating the livelong day . 
Nearly all were the sons of peasants , and they preferred to gain their livelihood by reciting some Latin words than by ploughing the earth . 
It was after this examination of his colleagues that Julien , during the first few days , promised himself a speedy success . 
`` Intelligent people are needed in every service , '' he said to himself , `` for , after all , there is work to be done . 
I should have been a sergeant under Napoleon . 
I shall be a grand vicar among these future curés . '' 
`` All these poor devils , '' he added , `` manual labourers as they have been since their childhood , have lived on curded milk and black bread up till they arrived here . 
They would only eat meat five or six times a year in their hovels . 
Like the Roman soldiers who used to find war the time of rest , these poor peasants are enchanted with the delights of the seminary . '' 
Julien could never read anything in their gloomy eyes but the satisfaction of physical craving after dinner , and the expectation of sensual pleasure before the meal . 
Such were the people among whom Julien had to distinguish himself ; but the fact which he did not know , and which they refrained from telling him , was that coming out first in the different courses of dogma , ecclesiastical history , etc. , etc. , which are taken at the seminary , constituted in their eyes , neither more nor less than a splendid sin . 
Since the time of Voltaire and two-chamber Government , which is at bottom simply distrust and personal self-examination , and gives the popular mind that bad habit of being suspicious , the Church of France seems to have realised that books are its real enemies . 
It is the submissive heart which counts for everything in its eyes . 
It suspects , and rightly so , any success in studies , even sacred ones . 
What is to prevent a superior man from crossing over to the opposite side like Sièyes or Gregory . 
The trembling Church clings on to the Pope as its one chance of safety . 
The Pope alone is in a position to attempt to paralyse all personal self-examination , and to make an impression by means of the pompous piety of his court ceremonial on the bored and morbid spirit of fashionable society . 
Julien , as he began to get some glimpse of these various truths , which are none the less in total contradiction to all the official pronouncements of any seminary , fell into a profound melancholy . 
He worked a great deal and rapidly succeeded in learning things which were extremely useful to a priest , extremely false in his own eyes , and devoid of the slightest interest for him . 
He felt there was nothing else to do . 
`` Am I then forgotten by the whole world , '' he thought . 
He did not know that M. Pirard had received and thrown into the fire several letters with the Dijon stamp in which the most lively passion would pierce through the most formal conventionalism of style . 
`` This love seems to be fought by great attacks of remorse . 
All the better , '' thought the abbé Pirard . 
`` At any rate this lad has not loved an infidel woman . '' 
One day the abbé Pirard opened a letter which seemed half-blotted out by tears . 
It was an adieu for ever . 
`` At last , '' said the writer to Julien , `` Heaven has granted me the grace of hating , not the author of my fall , but my fall itself . 
The sacrifice has been made , dear one , not without tears as you see . 
The safety of those to whom I must devote my life , and whom you love so much , is the decisive factor . 
A just but terrible God will no longer see His way to avenge on them their mother 's crimes . 
Adieu , Julien . 
Be just towards all men . '' 
The end of the letter was nearly entirely illegible . 
The writer gave an address at Dijon , but at the same time expressed the hope that Julien would not answer , or at any rate would employ language which a reformed woman could read without blushing . 
Julien 's melancholy , aggravated by the mediocre nourishment which the contractor who gave dinners at thirteen centimes per head supplied to the seminary , began to affect his health , when Fouqué suddenly appeared in his room one morning . 
`` I have been able to get in at last . 
I have duly been five times to Besançon in order to see you . 
Could never get in . 
I put someone by the door to watch . 
Why the devil do n't you ever go out ? '' 
`` It is a test which I have imposed on myself . '' 
`` I find you greatly changed , but here you are again . 
I have just learned from a couple of good five franc pieces that I was only a fool not to have offered them on my first journey . '' 
The conversation of the two friends went on for ever . 
Julien changed colour when Fouqué said to him , `` Do you know , by the by , that your pupils ' mother has become positively devout . '' 
And he began to talk in that off-hand manner which makes so singular an impression on the passionate soul , whose dearest interests are being destroyed without the speaker having the faintest suspicion of it . 
`` Yes , my friend , the most exalted devoutness . 
She is said to make pilgrimages . 
But to the eternal shame of the abbé Maslon , who has played the spy so long on that poor M. Chélan , Madame de Rênal would have nothing to do with him . 
She goes to confession to Dijon or Besançon . '' 
`` She goes to Besançon , '' said Julien , flushing all over his forehead . 
`` Pretty often , '' said Fouqué in a questioning manner . 
`` Have you got any Constitutionnels on you ? '' 
`` What do you say ? '' 
replied Fouqué . 
`` I 'm asking if you 've got any Constitutionnels ? '' 
went on Julien in the quietest tone imaginable . 
`` They cost thirty sous a number here . '' 
`` What ! '' 
exclaimed Fouqué . 
`` Liberals even in the seminary ! 
Poor France , '' he added , assuming the abbé Maslon 's hypocritical voice and sugary tone . 
This visit would have made a deep impression on our hero , if he had not been put on the track of an important discovery by some words addressed to him the following day by the little seminarist from Verrières . 
Julien 's conduct since he had been at the seminary had been nothing but a series of false steps . 
He began to make bitter fun of himself . 
In point of fact the important actions in his life had been cleverly managed , but he was careless about details , and cleverness in a seminary consists in attention to details . 
Consequently , he had already the reputation among his comrades of being a strong-minded person . 
He had been betrayed by a number of little actions . 
He had been convicted in their eyes of this enormity , he thought and judged for himself instead of blindly following authority and example . 
The abbé Pirard had been no help to him . 
He had not spoken to him on a single occasion apart from the confessional , and even there he listened more than he spoke . 
Matters would have been very different if he had chosen the abbé Castanède . 
The moment that Julien realised his folly , he ceased to be bored . 
He wished to know the whole extent of the evil , and to effect this emerged a little from that haughty obstinate silence with which he had scrupulously rebuffed his comrades . 
It was now that they took their revenge on him . 
His advances were welcomed by a contempt verging on derision . 
He realised that there had not been one single hour from the time of his entry into the seminary , particularly during recreation time , which had not resulted in affecting him one way or another , which had not increased the number of his enemies , or won for him the goodwill of some seminarist who was either sincerely virtuous or of a fibre slightly less coarse than that of the others . 
The evil to repair was infinite , and the task very difficult . 
Henceforth , Julien 's attention was always on guard . 
The problem before him was to map out a new character for himself . 
The moving of his eyes for example , occasioned him a great deal of trouble . 
It is with good reason that they are carried lowered in these places . 
`` How presumptuous I was at Verrières , '' said Julien to himself . 
`` I thought I lived ; I was only preparing for life , and here I am at last in the world such as I shall find it , until my part comes to an end , surrounded by real enemies . 
What immense difficulties , '' he added , `` are involved in keeping up this hypocrisy every single minute . 
It is enough to put the labours of Hercules into the shade . 
The Hercules of modern times is the Pope Sixtus Quintus , who deceived by his modesty fifteen years on end forty Cardinals who had seen the liveliness and haughtiness of his whole youth . 
`` So knowledge is nothing here , '' he said to himself with disgust . 
`` Progress in doctrine , in sacred history , etc. , only seem to count . 
Everything said on those subjects is only intended to entrap fools like me . 
Alas my only merit consists in my rapid progress , and in the way in which I grasp all their nonsense . 
Do they really value those things at their true worth ? 
Do they judge them like I do . 
And I had the stupidity to be proud of my quickness . 
The only result of my coming out top has been to give me inveterate enemies . 
Chazel , who really knows more than I do , always throws some blunder in his compositions which gets him put back to the fiftieth place . 
If he comes out first , it is only because he is absent-minded . 
O how useful would one word , just one word , of M. Pirard , have been to me . '' 
As soon as Julien was disillusioned , the long exercises in ascetic piety , such as the attendances in the chapel five times a week , the intonation of hymns at the chapel of the Sacré Cœur , etc. , etc. , which had previously seemed to him so deadly boring , became his most interesting opportunities for action . 
Thanks to a severe introspection , and above all , by trying not to overdo his methods , Julien did not attempt at the outset to perform significant actions -LRB- that is to say , actions which are proof of a certain Christian perfection -RRB- like those seminarists who served as a model to the rest . 
Seminarists have a special way , even of eating a poached egg , which betokens progress in the devout life . 
The reader who smiles at this will perhaps be good enough to remember all the mistakes which the abbé Delille made over the eating of an egg when he was invited to breakfast with a lady of the Court of Louis XVI . 
Julien first tried to arrive at the state of non culpa , that is to say the state of the young seminarist whose demeanour and manner of moving his arms , eyes , etc. while in fact without any trace of worldliness , do not yet indicate that the person is entirely absorbed by the conception of the other world , and the idea of the pure nothingness of this one . 
Julien incessantly found such phrases as these charcoaled on the walls of the corridors . 
`` What are sixty years of ordeals balanced against an eternity of delights or any eternity of boiling oil in hell ? '' 
He despised them no longer . 
He realised that it was necessary to have them incessantly before his eyes . 
`` What am I going to do all my life , '' he said to himself . 
`` I shall sell to the faithful a place in heaven . 
How am I going to make that place visible to their eyes ? 
By the difference between my appearance and that of a layman . '' 
After several months of absolutely unremitting application , Julien still had the appearance of thinking . 
The way in which he would move his eyes and hold his mouth did not betoken that implicit faith which is ready to believe everything and undergo everything , even at the cost of martyrdom . 
Julien saw with anger that he was surpassed in this by the coarsest peasants . 
There was good reason for their not appearing full of thought . 
What pains did he not take to acquire that facial expression of blindly fervent faith which is found so frequently in the Italian convents , and of which Le Guerchin has left such perfect models in his Church pictures for the benefit of us laymen . 
On feast-days , the seminarists were regaled with sausages and cabbage . 
Julien 's table neighbours observed that he did not appreciate this happiness . 
That was looked upon as one of his paramount crimes . 
His comrades saw in this a most odious trait , and the most foolish hypocrisy . 
Nothing made him more enemies . 
`` Look at this bourgeois , look at this stuck-up person , '' they would say , `` who pretends to despise the best rations there are , sausages and cabbage , shame on the villain ! 
The haughty wretch , he is damned for ever . '' 
`` Alas , these young peasants , who are my comrades , find their ignorance an immense advantage , '' Julien would exclaim in his moments of discouragement . 
`` The professor has not got to deliver them on their arrival at the seminary from that awful number of worldly ideas which I brought into it , and which they read on my face whatever I do . '' 
Julien watched with an attention bordering on envy the coarsest of the little peasants who arrived at the seminary . 
From the moment when they were made to doff their shabby jackets to don the black robe , their education consisted of an immense and limitless respect for hard liquid cash as they say in Franche-Comté . 
That is the consecrated and heroic way of expressing the sublime idea of current money . 
These seminarists , like the heroes in Voltaire 's novels , found their happiness in dining well . 
Julien discovered in nearly all of them an innate respect for the man who wears a suit of good cloth . 
This sentiment appreciates the distributive justice , which is given us at our courts , at its value or even above its true value . 
`` What can one gain , '' they would often repeat among themselves , `` by having a law suit with ' a big man ? ' '' 
That is the expression current in the valleys of the Jura to express a rich man . 
One can judge of their respect for the richest entity of all -- the government . 
Failure to smile deferentially at the mere name of M. the Prefect is regarded as an imprudence in the eyes of the Franche-Comté peasant , and imprudence in poor people is quickly punished by lack of bread . 
After having been almost suffocated at first by his feeling of contempt , Julien eventually experienced a feeling of pity ; it often happened that the fathers of most of his comrades would enter their hovel in winter evenings and fail to find there either bread , chestnuts or potatoes . 
`` What is there astonishing then ? '' 
Julien would say to himself , `` if in their eyes the happy man is in the first place the one who has just had a good dinner , and in the second place the one who possesses a good suit ? 
My comrades have a lasting vocation , that is to say , they see in the ecclesiastical calling a long continuance of the happiness of dining well and having a warm suit . '' 
Julien happened to hear a young imaginative seminarist say to his companion . 
`` Why should n't I become Pope like Sixtus Quintus who kept pigs ? '' 
`` They only make Italians Popes , '' answered his friend . 
`` But they will certainly draw lots amongst us for the great vicarships , canonries and perhaps bishoprics . 
M. P -- Bishop of Châlons , is the son of a cooper . 
That 's what my father is . '' 
One day , in the middle of a theology lesson , the Abbé Pirard summoned Julien to him . 
The young fellow was delighted to leave the dark , moral atmosphere in which he had been plunged . 
Julien received from the director the same welcome which had frightened him so much on the first day of his entry . 
`` Explain to me what is written on this playing card ? '' 
he said , looking at him in a way calculated to make him sink into the earth . 
Julien read : `` Amanda Binet of the Giraffe Café before eight o'clock . 
Say you 're from Genlis , and my mother 's cousin . '' 
Julien realised the immense danger . 
The spies of the abbé Castanède had stolen the address . 
`` I was trembling with fear the day I came here , '' he answered , looking at the abbé Pirard 's forehead , for he could not endure that terrible gaze . 
`` M. Chélan told me that this is a place of informers and mischief-makers of all kinds , and that spying and tale-bearing by one comrade on another was encouraged by the authorities . 
Heaven wishes it to be so , so as to show life such as it is to the young priests , and fill them with disgust for the world and all its pomps . '' 
`` And it 's to me that you make these fine speeches , '' said the abbé Pirard furiously . 
`` You young villain . '' 
`` My brothers used to beat me at Verrières , '' answered Julien coldly , `` When they had occasion to be jealous of me . '' 
`` Indeed , indeed , '' exclaimed M. Pirard , almost beside himself . 
Julien went on with his story without being in the least intimidated : -- `` The day of my arrival at Besançon I was hungry , and I entered a café . 
My spirit was full of revulsion for so profane a place , but I thought that my breakfast would cost me less than at an inn . 
A lady , who seemed to be the mistress of the establishment , took pity on my inexperience . 
` Besançon is full of bad characters , ' she said to me . ' 
I fear something will happen to you , sir . 
If some mishap should occur to you , have recourse to me and send to my house before eight o'clock . 
If the porters of the seminary refuse to execute your errand , say you are my cousin and a native of Genlis . ' '' 
`` I will have all this chatter verified , '' exclaimed the abbé Pirard , unable to stand still , and walking about the room . 
`` Back to the cell . '' 
The abbé followed Julien and locked him in . 
The latter immediately began to examine his trunk , at the bottom of which the fatal cards had been so carefully hidden . 
Nothing was missing in the trunk , but several things had been disarranged . 
Nevertheless , he had never been without the key . 
What luck that , during the whole time of my blindness , said Julien to himself , I never availed myself of the permission to go out that Monsieur Castanède would offer me so frequently , with a kindness which I now understand . 
Perhaps I should have had the weakness to have changed my clothes and gone to see the fair Amanda , and then I should have been ruined . 
When they gave up hope of exploiting that piece of information for the accomplishment of his ruin , they had used it to inform against him . 
Two hours afterwards the director summoned him . 
`` You did not lie , '' he said to him , with a less severe look , `` but keeping an address like that is an indiscretion of a gravity which you are unable to realise . 
Unhappy child ! 
It may perhaps do you harm in ten years ' time . '' 
The present time , Great God ! 
is the ark of the Lord ; cursed be he who touches it . 
-- Diderot . 
The reader will kindly excuse us if we give very few clear and definite facts concerning this period of Julien 's life . 
It is not that we lack facts ; quite the contrary . 
But it may be that what he saw in the seminary is too black for the medium colour which the author has endeavoured to preserve throughout these pages . 
Those of our contemporaries who have suffered from certain things can not remember them without a horror which paralyses every other pleasure , even that of reading a tale . 
Julien achieved scant success in his essays at hypocritical gestures . 
He experienced moments of disgust , and even of complete discouragement . 
He was not a success , even in a a vile career . 
The slightest help from outside would have sufficed to have given him heart again , for the difficulty to overcome was not very great , but he was alone , like a derelict ship in the middle of the ocean . 
`` And when I do succeed , '' he would say to himself , `` think of having to pass a whole lifetime in such awful company , gluttons who have no thought but for the large omelette which they will guzzle at dinner-time , or persons like the abbé Castanède , who finds no crime too black ! 
They will attain power , but , great heavens ! 
at what cost . 
`` The will of man is powerful , I read it everywhere , but is it enough to overcome so great a disgust ? 
The task of all the great men was easy by comparison . 
However terrible was the danger , they found it fine , and who can realise , except myself , the ugliness of my surroundings ? '' 
This moment was the most trying in his whole life . 
It would have been so easy for him to have enlisted in one of the fine regiments at the garrison of Besançon . 
He could have become a Latin master . 
He needed so little for his subsistence , but in that case no more career , no more future for his imagination . 
It was equivalent to death . 
Here is one of his sad days in detail : `` I have so often presumed to congratulate myself on being different from the other young peasants ! 
Well , I have lived enough to realise that difference engenders hate , '' he said to himself one morning . 
This great truth had just been borne in upon him by one of his most irritating failures . 
He had been working for eight days at teaching a pupil who lived in an odour of sanctity . 
He used to go out with him into the courtyard and listen submissively to pieces of fatuity enough to send one to sleep standing . 
Suddenly the weather turned stormy . 
The thunder growled , and the holy pupil exclaimed as he roughly pushed him away . 
`` Listen ! 
Everyone for himself in this world . 
I do n't want to be burned by the thunder . 
God may strike you with lightning like a blasphemer , like a Voltaire . '' 
`` I deserve to be drowned if I go to sleep during the storm , '' exclaimed Julien , with his teeth clenched with rage , and with his eyes opened towards the sky now furrowed by the lightning . 
`` Let us try the conquest of some other rogue . '' 
The bell rang for the abbé Castanède 's course of sacred history . 
That day the abbé Castanède was teaching those young peasants already so frightened by their father 's hardships and poverty , that the Government , that entity so terrible in their eyes , possessed no real and legitimate power except by virtue of the delegation of God 's vicar on earth . 
`` Render yourselves worthy , by the holiness of your life and by your obedience , of the benevolence of the Pope . 
Be like a stick in his hands , '' he added , `` and you will obtain a superb position , where you will be far from all control , and enjoy the King 's commands , a position from which you can not be removed , and where one-third of the salary is paid by the Government , while the faithful who are moulded by your preaching pay the other two-thirds . '' 
Castanède stopped in the courtyard after he left the lesson-room . 
`` It is particularly appropriate to say of a curé , '' he said to the pupils who formed a ring round him , `` that the place is worth as much as the man is worth . 
I myself have known parishes in the mountains where the surplice fees were worth more than that of many town livings . 
There was quite as much money , without counting the fat capons , the eggs , fresh butter , and a thousand and one pleasant details , and there the curé is indisputably the first man . 
There is not a good meal to which he is not invited , fêted , etc. '' Castanède had scarcely gone back to his room before the pupils split up into knots . 
Julien did not form part of any of them ; he was left out like a black sheep . 
He saw in every knot a pupil tossing a coin in the air , and if he managed to guess right in this game of heads or tails , his comrades would decide that he would soon have one of those fat livings . 
Anecdotes ensued . 
A certain young priest , who had scarcely been ordained a year , had given a tame rabbit to the maidservant of an old curé , and had succeeded in being asked to be his curate . 
In a few months afterwards , for the curé had quickly died , he had replaced him in that excellent living . 
Another had succeeded in getting himself designated as a successor to a very rich town living , by being present at all the meals of an old , paralytic curé , and by dexterously carving his poultry . 
The seminarists , like all young people , exaggerated the effect of those little devices , which have an element of originality , and which strike the imagination . 
`` I must take part in these conversations , '' said Julien to himself . 
When they did not talk about sausages and good livings , the conversation ran on the worldly aspect of ecclesiastical doctrine , on the differences of bishops and prefects , of mayors and curés . 
Julien caught sight of the conception of a second god , but of a god who was much more formidable and much more powerful than the other one . 
That second god was the Pope . 
They said among themselves , in a low voice , however , and when they were quite sure that they would not be heard by Pirard , that the reason for the Pope not taking the trouble of nominating all the prefects and mayors of France , was that he had entrusted that duty to the King of France by entitling him a senior son of the Church . 
It was about this time that Julien thought he could exploit , for the benefit of his own reputation , his knowledge of De Maistre 's book on the Pope . 
In point of fact , he did astonish his comrades , but it was only another misfortune . 
He displeased them by expounding their own opinions better than they could themselves . 
Chélan had acted as imprudently for Julien as he had for himself . 
He had given him the habit of reasoning correctly , and of not being put off by empty words , but he had neglected to tell him that this habit was a crime in the person of no importance , since every piece of logical reasoning is offensive . 
Julien 's command of language added consequently a new crime to his score . 
By dint of thinking about him , his colleagues succeeded in expressing the horror with which he would inspire them by a single expression ; they nicknamed him Martin Luther , `` particularly , '' they said , `` because of that infernal logic which makes him so proud . '' 
Several young seminarists had a fresher complexion than Julien , and could pass as better-looking , but he had white hands , and was unable to conceal certain refined habits of personal cleanliness . 
This advantage proved a disadvantage in the gloomy house in which chance had cast him . 
The dirty peasants among whom he lived asserted that he had very abandoned morals . 
We fear that we may weary our reader by a narration of the thousand and one misfortunes of our hero . 
The most vigorous of his comrades , for example , wanted to start the custom of beating him . 
He was obliged to arm himself with an iron compass , and to indicate , though by signs , that he would make use of it . 
Signs can not figure in a spy 's report to such good advantage as words . 
All hearts were moved . 
The presence of God seemed to have descended into these narrow Gothic streets that stretched in every direction , and were sanded by the care of the faithful . 
-- Young . 
It was in vain that Julien pretended to be petty and stupid . 
He could not please ; he was too different . 
Yet all these professors , he said to himself , are very clever people , men in a thousand . 
Why do they not like my humility ? 
Only one seemed to take advantage of his readiness to believe everything , and apparently to swallow everything . 
This was the abbé Chas-Bernard , the director of the ceremonies of the cathedral , where , for the last fifteen years , he had been given occasion to hope for a canonry . 
While waiting , he taught homiletics at the seminary . 
During the period of Julien 's blindness , this class was one of those in which he most frequently came out top . 
The abbé Chas had used this as an opportunity to manifest some friendship to him , and when the class broke up , he would be glad to take him by the arm for some turns in the garden . 
`` What is he getting at , '' Julien would say to himself . 
He noticed with astonishment that , for hours on end , the abbé would talk to him about the ornaments possessed by the cathedral . 
It had seventeen lace chasubles , besides the mourning vestments . 
A lot was hoped from the old wife of the judge de Rubempré . 
This lady , who was ninety years of age , had kept for at least seventy years her wedding dress of superb Lyons material , embroidered with gold . 
`` Imagine , my friend , '' the abbé Chas would say , stopping abruptly , and staring with amazement , `` that this material keeps quite stiff . 
There is so much gold in it . 
It is generally thought in Besançon that the will of the judge 's wife will result in the cathedral treasure being increased by more than ten chasubles , without counting four or five capes for the great feast . 
I will go further , '' said the abbé Chas , lowering his voice , `` I have reasons for thinking the judge 's wife will leave us her magnificent silver gilt candlesticks , supposed to have been bought in Italy by Charles the Bold , Duke of Burgundy , whose favourite minister was one of the good lady 's ancestors . '' 
`` But what is the fellow getting at with all this old clothes business , '' thought Julien . 
`` These adroit preliminaries have been going on for centuries , and nothing comes of them . 
He must be very suspicious of me . 
He is cleverer than all the others , whose secret aim can be guessed so easily in a fortnight . 
I understand . 
He must have been suffering for fifteen years from mortified ambition . '' 
Julien was summoned one evening in the middle of the fencing lesson to the abbé Pirard , who said to him . 
`` To-morrow is the feast of Corpus Domini -LRB- the Fête Dieu -RRB- the abbé Chas-Bernard needs you to help him to decorate the cathedral . 
Go and obey . '' 
The abbé Pirard called him back and added sympathetically . 
`` It depends on you whether you will utilise the occasion to go into the town . '' 
`` Incedo per ignes , '' answered Julien . 
-LRB- I have secret enemies -RRB- . 
Julien went to the cathedral next morning with downcast eyes . 
The sight of the streets and the activity which was beginning to prevail in the town did him good . 
In all quarters they were extending the fronts of the houses for the procession . 
All the time that he had passed in the seminary seemed to him no more than a moment . 
His thoughts were of Vergy , and of the pretty Amanda whom he might perhaps meet , for her café was not very far off . 
He saw in the distance the abbé Chas-Bernard on the threshold of his beloved cathedral . 
He was a big man with a jovial face and a frank air . 
To-day he looked triumphant . 
`` I was expecting you , my dear son , '' he cried as soon as he saw Julien in the distance . 
`` Be welcome . 
This day 's duty will be protracted and arduous . 
Let us fortify ourselves by a first breakfast . 
We will have the second at ten o'clock during high mass . '' 
`` I do not wish , sir , '' said Julien to him gravely , `` to be alone for a single instant . 
Deign to observe , '' he added , showing him the clock over their heads , `` that I have arrived at one minute to five . '' 
`` So those little rascals at the seminary frightened you . 
It is very good of you to think of them , '' said the abbé . 
`` But is the road less beautiful because there are thorns in the hedges which border it . 
Travellers go on their way , and leave the wicked thorns to wait in vain where they are . 
And now to work my dear friend , to work . '' 
The abbé Chas was right in saying that the task would be arduous . 
There had been a great funeral ceremony at the cathedral the previous day . 
