After all , he is only a child who is full of respect for me . 
This madness will be fleeting . 
In what way do the sentiments which I may have for this young man concern my husband ? 
M. de Rênal would be bored by the conversations which I have with Julien on imaginative subjects . 
As for him , he simply thinks of his business . 
I am not taking anything away from him to give to Julien . '' 
No hypocrisy had sullied the purity of that naïve soul , now swept away by a passion such as it had never felt before . 
She deceived herself , but without knowing it . 
But none the less , a certain instinct of virtue was alarmed . 
Such were the combats which were agitating her when Julien appeared in the garden . 
She heard him speak and almost at the same moment she saw him sit down by her side . 
Her soul was as it were transported by this charming happiness which had for the last fortnight surprised her even more than it had allured . 
Everything was novel for her . 
None the less , she said to herself after some moments , `` the mere presence of Julien is quite enough to blot out all his wrongs . '' 
She was frightened ; it was then that she took away her hand . 
His passionate kisses , the like of which she had never received before , made her forget that perhaps he loved another woman . 
Soon he was no longer guilty in her eyes . 
The cessation of that poignant pain which suspicion had engendered and the presence of a happiness that she had never even dreamt of , gave her ecstasies of love and of mad gaiety . 
The evening was charming for everyone , except the mayor of Verrières , who was unable to forget his parvenu manufacturers . 
Julien left off thinking about his black ambition , or about those plans of his which were so difficult to accomplish . 
For the first time in his life he was led away by the power of beauty . 
Lost in a sweetly vague reverie , quite alien to his character , and softly pressing that hand , which he thought ideally pretty , he half listened to the rustle of the leaves of the pine trees , swept by the light night breeze , and to the dogs of the mill on the Doubs , who barked in the distance . 
But this emotion was one of pleasure and not passion . 
As he entered his room , he only thought of one happiness , that of taking up again his favourite book . 
When one is twenty the idea of the world and the figure to be cut in it dominate everything . 
He soon , however , laid down the book . 
As the result of thinking of the victories of Napoleon , he had seen a new element in his own victory . 
`` Yes , '' he said to himself , `` I have won a battle . 
I must exploit it . 
I must crush the pride of that proud gentleman while he is in retreat . 
That would be real Napoleon . 
I must ask him for three days ' holiday to go and see my friend Fouqué . 
If he refuses me I will threaten to give him notice , but he will yield the point . '' 
Madame de Rênal could not sleep a wink . 
It seemed as though , until this moment , she had never lived . 
She was unable to distract her thoughts from the happiness of feeling Julian cover her hand with his burning kisses . 
Suddenly the awful word adultery came into her mind . 
All the loathesomeness with which the vilest debauchery can invest sensual love presented itself to her imagination . 
These ideas essayed to pollute the divinely tender image which she was fashioning of Julien , and of the happiness of loving him . 
The future began to be painted in terrible colours . 
She began to regard herself as contemptible . 
That moment was awful . 
Her soul was arriving in unknown countries . 
During the evening she had tasted a novel happiness . 
Now she found herself suddenly plunged in an atrocious unhappiness . 
She had never had any idea of such sufferings ; they troubled her reason . 
She thought for a moment of confessing to her husband that she was apprehensive of loving Julien . 
It would be an opportunity of speaking of him . 
Fortunately her memory threw up a maxim which her aunt had once given her on the eve of her marriage . 
The maxim dealt with the danger of making confidences to a husband , for a husband is after all a master . 
She wrung her hands in the excess of her grief . 
She was driven this way and that by clashing and painful ideas . 
At one moment she feared that she was not loved . 
The next the awful idea of crime tortured her , as much as if she had to be exposed in the pillory on the following day in the public square of Verrières , with a placard to explain her adultery to the populace . 
Madame de Rênal had no experience of life . 
Even in the full possession of her faculties , and when fully exercising her reason , she would never have appreciated any distinction between being guilty in the eyes of God , and finding herself publicly overwhelmed with the crudest marks of universal contempt . 
When the awful idea of adultery , and of all the disgrace which in her view that crime brought in its train , left her some rest , she began to dream of the sweetness of living innocently with Julien as in the days that had gone by . 
She found herself confronted with the horrible idea that Julien loved another woman . 
She still saw his pallor when he had feared to lose her portrait , or to compromise her by exposing it to view . 
For the first time she had caught fear on that tranquil and noble visage . 
He had never shewn such emotion to her or her children . 
This additional anguish reached the maximum of unhappiness which the human soul is capable of enduring . 
Unconsciously , Madame de Rênal uttered cries which woke up her maid . 
Suddenly she saw the brightness of a light appear near her bed , and recognized Elisa . 
`` Is it you he loves ? '' 
she exclaimed in her delirium . 
Fortunately , the maid was so astonished by the terrible trouble in which she found her mistress that she paid no attention to this singular expression . 
Madame de Rênal appreciated her imprudence . 
`` I have the fever , '' she said to her , `` and I think I am a little delirious . '' 
Completely woken up by the necessity of controlling herself , she became less unhappy . 
Reason regained that supreme control which the semi-somnolent state had taken away . 
To free herself from her maid 's continual stare , she ordered her maid to read the paper , and it was as she listened to the monotonous voice of this girl , reading a long article from the Quotidienne that Madame de Rênal made the virtuous resolution to treat Julien with absolute coldness when she saw him again . 
Elegant people are to be found in Paris . 
People of character may exist in the provinces . 
-- Sièyes At five o'clock the following day , before Madame de Rênal was visible , Julien obtained a three days ' holiday from her husband . 
Contrary to his expectation Julien found himself desirous of seeing her again . 
He kept thinking of that pretty hand of hers . 
He went down into the garden , but Madame de Rênal kept him waiting for a long time . 
But if Julien had loved her , he would have seen her forehead glued to the pane behind the half-closed blinds on the first floor . 
She was looking at him . 
Finally , in spite of her resolutions , she decided to go into the garden . 
Her habitual pallor had been succeeded by more lively hues . 
This woman , simple as she was , was manifestly agitated ; a sentiment of constraint , and even of anger , altered that expression of profound serenity which seemed , as it were , to be above all the vulgar interests of life and gave so much charm to that divine face . 
Julien approached her with eagerness , admiring those beautiful arms which were just visible through a hastily donned shawl . 
The freshness of the morning air seemed to accentuate still more the brilliance of her complexion which the agitation of the past night rendered all the more susceptible to all impressions . 
This demure and pathetic beauty , which was , at the same time , full of thoughts which are never found in the inferior classes , seemed to reveal to Julien a faculty in his own soul which he had never before realised . 
Engrossed in his admiration of the charms on which his his greedy gaze was riveted , Julien took for granted the friendly welcome which he was expecting to receive . 
He was all the more astonished at the icy coldness which she endeavoured to manifest to him , and through which he thought he could even distinguish the intention of putting him in his place . 
The smile of pleasure died away from his lips as he remembered his rank in society , especially from the point of view of a rich and noble heiress . 
In a single moment his face exhibited nothing but haughtiness and anger against himself . 
He felt violently disgusted that he could have put off his departure for more than an hour , simply to receive so humiliating a welcome . 
`` It is only a fool , '' he said to himself , `` who is angry with others ; a stone falls because it is heavy . 
Am I going to be a child all my life ? 
How on earth is it that I manage to contract the charming habit of showing my real self to those people simply in return for their money ? 
If I want to win their respect and that of my own self , I must shew them that it is simply a business transaction between my poverty and their wealth , but that my heart is a thousand leagues away from their insolence , and is situated in too high a sphere to be affected by their petty marks of favour or disdain . '' 
While these feelings were crowding the soul of the young tutor , his mobile features assumed an expression of ferocity and injured pride . 
Madame de Rênal was extremely troubled . 
The virtuous coldness that she had meant to put into her welcome was succeeded by an expression of interest -- an interest animated by all the surprise brought about by the sudden change which she had just seen . 
The empty morning platitudes about their health and the fineness of the day suddenly dried up . 
Julien 's judgment was disturbed by no passion , and he soon found a means of manifesting to Madame de Rênal how light was the friendly relationship that he considered existed between them . 
He said nothing to her about the little journey that he was going to make ; saluted her , and went away . 
As she watched him go , she was overwhelmed by the sombre haughtiness which she read in that look which had been so gracious the previous evening . 
Her eldest son ran up from the bottom of the garden , and said as he kissed her , `` We have a holiday , M. Julien is going on a journey . '' 
At these words , Madame de Rênal felt seized by a deadly coldness . 
She was unhappy by reason of her virtue , and even more unhappy by reason of her weakness . 
This new event engrossed her imagination , and she was transported far beyond the good resolutions which she owed to the awful night she had just passed . 
It was not now a question of resisting that charming lover , but of losing him for ever . 
It was necessary to appear at breakfast . 
To complete her anguish , M. de Rênal and Madame Derville talked of nothing but Julien 's departure . 
The mayor of Verrières had noticed something unusual in the firm tone in which he had asked for a holiday . 
`` That little peasant has no doubt got somebody else 's offer up his sleeve , but that somebody else , even though it 's M. Valenod , is bound to be a little discouraged by the sum of six hundred francs , which the annual salary now tots up to . 
He must have asked yesterday at Verrières for a period of three days to think it over , and our little gentleman runs off to the mountains this morning so as not to be obliged to give me an answer . 
Think of having to reckon with a wretched workman who puts on airs , but that 's what we 've come to . '' 
`` If my husband , who does not know how deeply he has wounded Julien , thinks that he will leave us , what can I think myself ? '' 
said Madame de Rênal to herself . 
`` Yes , that is all decided . '' 
In order to be able at any rate to be free to cry , and to avoid answering Madame Derville 's questions , she pleaded an awful headache , and went to bed . 
`` That 's what women are , '' repeated M. de Rênal , `` there is always something out of order in those complicated machines , '' and he went off jeering . 
While Madame de Rênal was a prey to all the poignancy of the terrible passion in which chance had involved her , Julien went merrily on his way , surrounded by the most beautiful views that mountain scenery can offer . 
He had to cross the great chain north of Vergy . 
The path which he followed rose gradually among the big beech woods , and ran into infinite spirals on the slope of the high mountain which forms the northern boundary of the Doubs valley . 
Soon the traveller 's view , as he passed over the lower slopes bounding the course of the Doubs towards the south , extends as far as the fertile plains of Burgundy and Beaujolais . 
However insensible was the soul of this ambitious youth to this kind of beauty , he could not help stopping from time to time to look at a spectacle at once so vast and so impressive . 
Finally , he reached the summit of the great mountain , near which he had to pass in order to arrive by this cross-country route at the solitary valley where lived his friend Fouqué , the young wood merchant . 
Julien was in no hurry to see him ; either him , or any other human being . 
Hidden like a bird of prey amid the bare rocks which crowned the great mountain , he could see a long way off anyone coming near him . 
He discovered a little grotto in the middle of the almost vertical slope of one of the rocks . 
He found a way to it , and was soon ensconced in this retreat . 
`` Here , '' he said , `` with eyes brilliant with joy , men can not hurt me . '' 
It occurred to him to indulge in the pleasure of writing down those thoughts of his which were so dangerous to him everywhere else . 
A square stone served him for a desk ; his pen flew . 
He saw nothing of what was around him . 
He noticed at last that the sun was setting behind the distant mountains of Beaujolais . 
`` Why should n't I pass the night here ? '' 
he said to himself . 
`` I have bread , and I am free . '' 
He felt a spiritual exultation at the sound of that great word . 
The necessity of playing the hypocrite resulted in his not being free , even at Fouqué 's . 
Leaning his head on his two hands , Julien stayed in the grotto , more happy than he had ever been in his life , thrilled by his dreams , and by the bliss of his freedom . 
Without realising it , he saw all the rays of the twilight become successively extinguished . 
Surrounded by this immense obscurity , his soul wandered into the contemplation of what he imagined that he would one day meet in Paris . 
First it was a woman , much more beautiful and possessed of a much more refined temperament than anything he could have found in the provinces . 
He loved with passion , and was loved . 
If he separated from her for some instants , it was only to cover himself with glory , and to deserve to be loved still more . 
A young man brought up in the environment of the sad truths of Paris society , would , on reaching this point in his romance , even if we assume him possessed of Julien 's imagination , have been brought back to himself by the cold irony of the situation . 
Great deeds would have disappeared from out his ken together with hope of achieving them and have been succeeded by the platitude . 
`` If one leave one 's mistress one runs alas ! 
the risk of being deceived two or three times a day . '' 
But the young peasant saw nothing but the lack of opportunity between himself and the most heroic feats . 
But a deep night had succeeded the day , and there were still two leagues to walk before he could descend to the cabin in which Fouqué lived . 
Before leaving the little cave , Julien made a light and carefully burnt all that he had written . 
He quite astonished his friend when he knocked at his door at one o'clock in the morning . 
He found Fouqué engaged in making up his accounts . 
He was a young man of high stature , rather badly made , with big , hard features , a never-ending nose , and a large fund of good nature concealed beneath this repulsive appearance . 
`` Have you quarelled with M. de Rênal then that you turn up unexpectedly like this ? '' 
Julien told him , but in a suitable way , the events of the previous day . 
`` Stay with me , '' said Fouqué to him . 
`` I see that you know M. de Rênal , M. Valenod , the sub-prefect Maugron , the curé Chélan . 
You have understood the subtleties of the character of those people . 
So there you are then , quite qualified to attend auctions . 
You know arithmetic better than I do ; you will keep my accounts ; I make a lot in my business . 
The impossibility of doing everything myself , and the fear of taking a rascal for my partner prevents me daily from undertaking excellent business . 
It 's scarcely a month since I put Michaud de Saint-Amand , whom I have n't seen for six years , and whom I ran across at the sale at Pontarlier in the way of making six thousand francs . 
Why should n't it have been you who made those six thousand francs , or at any rate three thousand . 
For if I had had you with me that day , I would have raised the bidding for that lot of timber and everybody else would soon have run away . 
Be my partner . '' 
This offer upset Julien . 
It spoilt the train of his mad dreams . 
Fouqué showed his accounts to Julien during the whole of the supper -- which the two friends prepared themselves like the Homeric heroes -LRB- for Fouqué lived alone -RRB- and proved to him all the advantages offered by his timber business . 
Fouqué had the highest opinion of the gifts and character of Julien . 
When , finally , the latter was alone in his little room of pinewood , he said to himself : `` It is true I can make some thousands of francs here and then take up with advantage the profession of a soldier , or of a priest , according to the fashion then prevalent in France . 
The little hoard that I shall have amassed will remove all petty difficulties . 
In the solitude of this mountain I shall have dissipated to some extent my awful ignorance of so many of the things which make up the life of all those men of fashion . 
But Fouqué has given up all thoughts of marriage , and at the same time keeps telling me that solitude makes him unhappy . 
It is clear that if he takes a partner who has no capital to put into his business , he does so in the hopes of getting a companion who will never leave him . '' 
`` Shall I deceive my friend , '' exclaimed Julien petulantly . 
This being who found hypocrisy and complete callousness his ordinary means of self-preservation could not , on this occasion , endure the idea of the slightest lack of delicate feeling towards a man whom he loved . 
But suddenly Julien was happy . 
He had a reason for a refusal . 
What ! 
Shall I be coward enough to waste seven or eight years . 
I shall get to twenty-eight in that way ! 
But at that age Bonaparte had achieved his greatest feats . 
When I shall have made in obscurity a little money by frequenting timber sales , and earning the good graces of some rascally under-strappers who will guarantee that I shall still have the sacred fire with which one makes a name for oneself ? 
The following morning , Julien with considerable sangfroid , said in answer to the good Fouqué , who regarded the matter of the partnership as settled , that his vocation for the holy ministry of the altars would not permit him to accept it . 
Fouqué did not return to the subject . 
`` But just think , '' he repeated to him , `` I 'll make you my partner , or if you prefer it , I 'll give you four thousand francs a year , and you want to return to that M. de Rênal of yours , who despises you like the mud on his shoes . 
When you have got two hundred louis in front of you , what is to prevent you from entering the seminary ? 
I 'll go further : I will undertake to procure for you the best living in the district , for , '' added Fouqué , lowering his voice , I supply firewood to M. le -- , M. le -- , M. -- . 
I provide them with first quality oak , but they only pay me for plain wood , but never was money better invested . 
Nothing could conquer Julien 's vocation . 
Fouqué finished by thinking him a little mad . 
The third day , in the early morning , Julien left his friend , and passed the day amongst the rocks of the great mountain . 
He found his little cave again , but he had no longer peace of mind . 
His friend 's offers had robbed him of it . 
He found himself , not between vice and virtue , like Hercules , but between mediocrity coupled with an assured prosperity , and all the heroic dreams of his youth . 
`` So I have not got real determination after all , '' he said to himself , and it was his doubt on this score which pained him the most . 
`` I am not of the stuff of which great men are made , because I fear that eight years spent in earning a livelihood will deprive me of that sublime energy which inspires the accomplishment of extraordinary feats . '' 
A novel : a mirror which one takes out on one 's walk along the high road . 
-- Saint-Réal . 
When Julien perceived the picturesque ruins of the old church at Vergy , he noticed that he had not given a single thought to Madame de Rênal since the day before yesterday . 
The other day , when I took my leave , that woman made me realise the infinite distance which separated us ; she treated me like a labourer 's son . 
No doubt she wished to signify her repentance for having allowed me to hold her hand the evening before . 
... It is , however very pretty , is that hand . 
What a charm , what a nobility is there in that woman 's expression ! 
The possibility of making a fortune with Fouqué gave a certain facility to Julien 's logic . 
It was not spoilt quite so frequently by the irritation and the keen consciousness of his poverty and low estate in the eyes of the world . 
Placed as it were on a high promontory , he was able to exercise his judgment , and had a commanding view , so to speak , of both extreme poverty and that competence which he still called wealth . 
He was far from judging his position really philosophically , but he had enough penetration to feel different after this little journey into the mountain . 
He was struck with the extreme uneasiness with which Madame de Rênal listened to the brief account which she had asked for of his journey . 
Fouqué had had plans of marriage , and unhappy love affairs , and long confidences on this subject had formed the staple of the two friends ' conversation . 
Having found happiness too soon , Fouqué had realised that he was not the only one who was loved . 
All these accounts had astonished Julien . 
He had learnt many new things . 
His solitary life of imagination and suspicion had kept him remote from anything which could enlighten him . 
During his absence , life had been nothing for Madame de Rênal but a series of tortures , which , though different , were all unbearable . 
She was really ill . 
`` Now mind , '' said Madame Derville to her when she saw Julien arrive , `` you do n't go into the garden this evening in your weak state ; the damp air will make your complaint twice as bad . '' 
Madame Derville was surprised to see that her friend , who was always scolded by M. de Rênal by reason of the excessive simplicity of her dress , had just got some open-work stockings and some charming little shoes which had come from Paris . 
For three days Madame de Rênal 's only distraction had been to cut out a summer dress of a pretty little material which was very fashionable , and get it made with express speed by Elisa . 
This dress could scarcely have been finished a few moments before Julien 's arrival , but Madame de Rênal put it on immediately . 
Her friend had no longer any doubt . 
`` She loves , '' unhappy woman , said Madame Derville to herself . 
She understood all the strange symptoms of the malady . 
She saw her speak to Julien . 
The most violent blush was succeeded by pallor . 
Anxiety was depicted in her eyes , which were riveted on those of the young tutor . 
Madame de Rênal expected every minute that he would give an explanation of his conduct , and announce that he was either going to leave the house or stay there . 
Julien carefully avoided that subject , and did not even think of it . 
After terrible struggles , Madame de Rênal eventually dared to say to him in a trembling voice that mirrored all her passion : `` Are you going to leave your pupils to take another place ? '' 
Julien was struck by Madame de Rênal 's hesitating voice and look . 
`` That woman loves me , '' he said to himself ! 
`` But after this temporary moment of weakness , for which her pride is no doubt reproaching her , and as soon as she has ceased fearing that I shall leave , she will be as haughty as ever . '' 
This view of their mutual position passed through Julien 's mind as rapidly as a flash of lightning . 
He answered with some hesitation , `` I shall be extremely distressed to leave children who are so nice and so well-born , but perhaps it will be necessary . 
One has duties to oneself as well . '' 
As he pronounced the expression , `` well-born '' -LRB- it was one of those aristocratic phrases which Julien had recently learnt -RRB- , he became animated by a profound feeling of antipathy . 
`` I am not well-born , '' he said to himself , `` in that woman 's eyes . '' 
As Madame de Rênal listened to him , she admired his genius and his beauty , and the hinted possibility of his departure pierced her heart . 
All her friends at Verrières who had come to dine at Vergy during Julien 's absence had complimented her almost jealously on the astonishing man whom her husband had had the good fortune to unearth . 
It was not that they understood anything about the progress of children . 
The feat of knowing his Bible by heart , and what is more , of knowing it in Latin , had struck the inhabitants of Verrières with an admiration which will last perhaps a century . 
Julien , who never spoke to anyone , was ignorant of all this . 
If Madame de Rênal had possessed the slightest presence of mind , she would have complimented him on the reputation which he had won , and Julien 's pride , once satisfied , he would have been sweet and amiable towards her , especially as he thought her new dress charming . 
Madame de Rênal was also pleased with her pretty dress , and with what Julien had said to her about it , and wanted to walk round the garden . 
But she soon confessed that she was incapable of walking . 
She had taken the traveller 's arm , and the contact of that arm , far from increasing her strength , deprived her of it completely . 
It was night . 
They had scarcely sat down before Julien , availing himself of his old privilege , dared to bring his lips near his pretty neighbour 's arm , and to take her hand . 
He kept thinking of the boldness which Fouqué had exhibited with his mistresses and not of Madame de Rênal ; the word `` well-born '' was still heavy on his heart . 
He felt his hand pressed , but experienced no pleasure . 
So far from his being proud , or even grateful for the sentiment that Madame de Rênal was betraying that evening by only too evident signs , he was almost insensible to her beauty , her elegance , and her freshness . 
Purity of soul , and the absence of all hateful emotion , doubtless prolong the duration of youth . 
It is the face which ages first with the majority of women . 
Julien sulked all the evening . 
Up to the present he had only been angry with the social order , but from that time that Fouqué had offered him an ignoble means of obtaining a competency , he was irritated with himself . 
Julien was so engrossed in his thoughts , that , although from time to time he said a few words to the ladies , he eventually let go Madame de Rênal 's hand without noticing it . 
This action overwhelmed the soul of the poor woman . 
She saw in it her whole fate . 
If she had been certain of Julien 's affection , her virtue would possibly have found strength to resist him . 
But trembling lest she should lose him for ever , she was distracted by her passion to the point of taking again Julien 's hand , which he had left in his absent-mindedness leaning on the back of the chair . 
This action woke up this ambitious youth ; he would have liked to have had for witnesses all those proud nobles who had regarded him at meals , when he was at the bottom of the table with the children , with so condescending a smile . 
`` That woman can not despise me ; in that case , '' he said to himself . 
`` I ought to shew my appreciation of her beauty . 
I owe it to myself to be her lover . '' 
That idea would not have occurred to him before the naive confidences which his friend had made . 
The sudden resolution which he had just made formed an agreeable distraction . 
He kept saying to himself , `` I must have one of those two women ; '' he realised that he would have very much preferred to have paid court to Madame Derville . 
It was not that she was more agreeable , but that she had always seen him as the tutor distinguished by his knowledge , and not as the journeyman carpenter with his cloth jacket folded under his arm as he had first appeared to Madame de Rênal . 
It was precisely as a young workman , blushing up to the whites of his eyes , standing by the door of the house and not daring to ring , that he made the most alluring appeal to Madame de Rênal 's imagination . 
As he went on reviewing his position , Julien saw that the conquest of Madame Derville , who had probably noticed the taste which Madame de Rênal was manifesting for him , was out of the question . 
He was thus brought back to the latter lady . 
`` What do I know of the character of that woman ? '' 
said Julien to himself . 
`` Only this : before my journey , I used to take her hand , and she used to take it away . 
To-day , I take my hand away , and she seizes and presses it . 
A fine opportunity to pay her back all the contempt she had had for me . 
God knows how many lovers she has had , probably she is only deciding in my favour by reason of the easiness of assignations . '' 
Such , alas , is the misfortune of an excessive civilisation . 
The soul of a young man of twenty , possessed of any education , is a thousand leagues away from that abandon without which love is frequently but the most tedious of duties . 
`` I owe it all the more to myself , '' went on the petty vanity of Julien , `` to succeed with that woman , by reason of the fact that if I ever make a fortune , and I am reproached by anyone with my menial position as a tutor , I shall then be able to give out that it was love which got me the post . '' 
Julien again took his hand away from Madame de Rênal , and then took her hand again and pressed it . 
As they went back to the drawing-room about midnight , Madame de Rênal said to him in a whisper . 
`` You are leaving us , you are going ? '' 
Julien answered with a sigh . 
`` I absolutely must leave , for I love you passionately . 
It is wrong ... how wrong indeed for a young priest ? '' 
Madame de Rênal leant upon his arm , and with so much abandon that her cheek felt the warmth of Julien 's . 
The nights of these two persons were quite different . 
Madame de Rênal was exalted by the ecstacies of the highest moral pleasure . 
A coquettish young girl , who loves early in life , gets habituated to the trouble of love , and when she reaches the age of real passion , finds the charm of novelty lacking . 
As Madame de Rênal had never read any novels , all the refinements of her happiness were new to her . 
No mournful truth came to chill her , not even the spectre of the future . 
She imagined herself as happy in ten years ' time as she was at the present moment . 
Even the idea of virtue and of her sworn fidelity to M. de Rênal , which had agitated her some days past , now presented itself in vain , and was sent about its business like an importunate visitor . 
`` I will never grant anything to Julien , '' said Madame de Rênal ; `` we will live in the future like we have been living for the last month . 
He shall be a friend . '' 
A young girl of sixteen had a pink complexion , and yet used red rouge . 
-- Polidori . 
Fouqué 's offer had , as a matter of fact , taken away all Julien 's happiness ; he could not make up his mind to any definite course . 
`` Alas ! 
perhaps I am lacking in character . 
I should have been a bad soldier of Napoleon . 
At least , '' he added , `` my little intrigue with the mistress of the house will distract me a little . '' 
Happily for him , even in this little subordinate incident , his inner emotions quite failed to correspond with his flippant words . 
He was frightened of Madame de Rênal because of her pretty dress . 
In his eyes , that dress was a vanguard of Paris . 
His pride refused to leave anything to chance and the inspiration of the moment . 
He made himself a very minute plan of campaign , moulded on the confidences of Fouqué , and a little that he had read about love in the Bible . 
As he was very nervous , though he did not admit it to himself , he wrote down this plan . 
Madame de Rênal was alone with him for a moment in the drawing-room on the following morning . 
`` Have you no other name except Julien , '' she said . 
Our hero was at a loss to answer so nattering a question . 
This circumstance had not been anticipated in his plan . 
If he had not been stupid enough to have made a plan , Julien 's quick wit would have served him well , and the surprise would only have intensified the quickness of his perception . 
He was clumsy , and exaggerated his clumsiness , Madame de Rênal quickly forgave him . 
She attributed it to a charming frankness . 
And an air of frankness was the very thing which in her view was just lacking in this man who was acknowledged to have so much genius . 
`` That little tutor of yours inspires me with a great deal of suspicion , '' said Madame Derville to her sometimes . 
`` I think he looks as if he were always thinking , and he never acts without calculation . 
He is a sly fox . '' 
Julien remained profoundly humiliated by the misfortune of not having known what answer to make to Madame de Rênal . 
`` A man like I am ought to make up for this check ! '' 
and seizing the moment when they were passing from one room to another , he thought it was his duty to give Madame de Rênal a kiss . 
Nothing could have been less tactful , nothing less agreeable , and nothing more imprudent both for him and for her . 
They were within an inch of being noticed . 
Madame de Rênal thought him mad . 
She was frightened , and above all , shocked . 
This stupidity reminded her of M. Valenod . 
`` What would happen to me , '' she said to herself , `` if I were alone with him ? '' 
All her virtue returned , because her love was waning . 
She so arranged it that one of her children always remained with her . 
Julien found the day very tedious , and passed it entirely in clumsily putting into operation his plan of seduction . 
He did not look at Madame de Rênal on a single occasion without that look having a reason , but nevertheless he was not sufficiently stupid to fail to see that he was not succeeding at all in being amiable , and was succeeding even less in being fascinating . 
Madame de Rênal did not recover from her astonishment at finding him so awkward and at the same time so bold . 
`` It is the timidity of love in men of intellect , '' she said to herself with an inexpressible joy . 
`` Could it be possible that he had never been loved by my rival ? '' 
After breakfast Madame de Rênal went back to the drawing-room to receive the visit of M. Charcot de Maugiron , the sub-prefect of Bray . 
She was working at a little frame of fancy-work some distance from the ground . 
Madame Derville was at her side ; that was how she was placed when our hero thought it suitable to advance his boot in the full light and press the pretty foot of Madame de Rênal , whose open-work stockings , and pretty Paris shoe were evidently attracting the looks of the gallant sub-prefect . 
Madame de Rênal was very much afraid , and let fall her scissors , her ball of wool and her needles , so that Julien 's movement could be passed for a clumsy effort , intended to prevent the fall of the scissors , which presumably he had seen slide . 
Fortunately , these little scissors of English steel were broken , and Madame de Rênal did not spare her regrets that Julien had not succeeded in getting nearer to her . 
`` You noticed them falling before I did -- you could have prevented it , instead , all your zealousness only succeeding in giving me a very big kick . '' 
All this took in the sub-perfect , but not Madame Derville . 
`` That pretty boy has very silly manners , '' she thought . 
The social code of a provincial capital never forgives this kind of lapse . 
Madame de Rênal found an opportunity of saying to Julien , `` Be prudent , I order you . '' 
Julien appreciated his own clumsiness . 
He was upset . 
He deliberated with himself for a long time , in order to ascertain whether or not he ought to be angry at the expression `` I order you . '' 
He was silly enough to think she might have said `` I order you , '' if it were some question concerning the children 's education , but in answering my love she puts me on an equality . 
It is impossible to love without equality ... and all his mind ran riot in making common-places on equality . 
He angrily repeated to himself that verse of Corneille which Madame Derville had taught him some days before . 
`` L'amour les égalités , et ne les cherche pas . '' 
Julien who had never had a mistress in his whole life , but yet insisted on playing the rôle of a Don Juan , made a shocking fool of himself all day . 
He had only one sensible idea . 
Bored with himself and Madame de Rênal , he viewed with apprehension the advance of the evening when he would have to sit by her side in the darkness of the garden . 
He told M. de Rênal that he was going to Verrières to see the curé . 
He left after dinner , and only came back in the night . 
At Verrières Julien found M. Chélan occupied in moving . 
He had just been deprived of his living ; the curate Maslon was replacing him . 
Julien helped the good curé , and it occurred to him to write to Fouqué that the irresistible mission which he felt for the holy ministry had previously prevented him from accepting his kind offer , but that he had just seen an instance of injustice , and that perhaps it would be safer not to enter into Holy Orders . 
Julien congratulated himself on his subtlety in exploiting the dismissal of the curé of Verrières so as to leave himself a loop-hole for returning to commerce in the event of a gloomy prudence routing the spirit of heroism from his mind . 
Amour en latin faict amour ; Or done provient d'amour la mart , Et , par avant , souley qui moreq , Deuil , plours , pieges , forfailz , remord . 
BLASON D'AMOUR . 
If Julien had possessed a little of that adroitness on which he so gratuitously plumed himself , he could have congratulated himself the following day on the effect produced by his journey to Verrières . 
His absence had caused his clumsiness to be forgotten . 
But on that day also he was rather sulky . 
He had a ludicrous idea in the evening , and with singular courage he communicated it to Madame de Rênal . 
They had scarcely sat down in the garden before Julien brought his mouth near Madame de Rênal 's ear without waiting till it was sufficiently dark and at the risk of compromising her terribly , said to her , `` Madame , to-night , at two o'clock , I shall go into your room , I must tell you something . '' 
Julien trembled lest his request should be granted . 
His rakish pose weighed him down so terribly that if he could have followed his own inclination he would have returned to his room for several days and refrained from seeing the ladies any more . 
He realised that he had spoiled by his clever conduct of last evening all the bright prospects of the day that had just passed , and was at his wits ' end what to do . 
Madame de Rênal answered the impertinent declaration which Julien had dared to make to her with indignation which was real and in no way exaggerated . 
He thought he could see contempt in her curt reply . 
The expression `` for shame , '' had certainly occurred in that whispered answer . 
Julien went to the children 's room under the pretext of having something to say to them , and on his return he placed himself beside Madame Derville and very far from Madame de Rênal . 
He thus deprived himself of all possibility of taking her hand . 
The conversation was serious , and Julien acquitted himself very well , apart from a few moments of silence during which he was cudgelling his brains . 
`` Why ca n't I invent some pretty manœuvre , '' he said to himself which will force Madame de Rênal to vouchsafe to me those unambiguous signs of tenderness which a few days ago made me think that she was mine . 
Julien was extremely disconcerted by the almost desperate plight to which he had brought his affairs . 
Nothing , however , would have embarrassed him more than success . 
When they separated at midnight , his pessimism made him think that he enjoyed Madame Derville 's contempt , and that probably he stood no better with Madame de Rênal . 
Feeling in a very bad temper and very humiliated , Julien did not sleep . 
He was leagues away from the idea of giving up all intriguing and planning , and of living from day to day with Madame de Rênal , and of being contented like a child with the happiness brought by every day . 
He racked his brains inventing clever manœuvres , which an instant afterwards he found absurd , and , to put it shortly , was very unhappy when two o'clock rang from the castle clock . 
The noise woke him up like the cock 's crow woke up St. Peter . 
The most painful episode was now timed to begin -- he had not given a thought to his impertinent proposition , since the moment when he had made it and it had been so badly received . 
`` I have told her that I will go to her at two o'clock , '' he said to himself as he got up , `` I may be inexperienced and coarse , as the son of a peasant naturally would be . 
Madame Derville has given me to understand as much , but at any rate , I will not be weak . '' 
Julien had reason to congratulate himself on his courage , for he had never put his self-control to so painful a test . 
As he opened his door , he was trembling to such an extent that his knees gave way under him , and he was forced to lean against the wall . 
He was without shoes ; he went and listened at M. de Rênal 's door , and could hear his snoring . 
He was disconsolate , he had no longer any excuse for not going to her room . 
But , Great Heaven ! 
What was he to do there ? 
He had no plan , and even if he had had one , he felt himself so nervous that he would have been incapable of carrying it out . 
Eventually , suffering a thousand times more than if he had been walking to his death , he entered the little corridor that led to Madame de Rênal 's room . 
He opened the door with a trembling hand and made a frightful noise . 
There was light ; a night light was burning on the mantelpiece . 
