I inform you of this detail so that you may not be under any illusions as to what awaits you in your career as a priest . 
If you think of paying court to the men who enjoy power , your eternal damnation is assured . 
You may make your fortune , but you will have to do harm to the poor , flatter the sub-prefect , the mayor , the man who enjoys prestige , and pander to his passion ; this conduct , which in the world is called knowledge of life , is not absolutely incompatible with salvation so far as a layman is concerned ; but in our career we have to make a choice ; it is a question of making one 's fortune either in this world or the next ; there is no middle course . 
Come , my dear friend , reflect , and come back in three days with a definite answer . 
I am pained to detect that there is at the bottom of your character a sombre passion which is far from indicating to me that moderation and that perfect renunciation of earthly advantages so necessary for a priest ; I augur well of your intellect , but allow me to tell you , '' added the good curé with tears in his eyes , `` I tremble for your salvation in your career as a priest . '' 
Julien was ashamed of his emotion ; he found himself loved for the first time in his life ; he wept with delight ; and went to hide his tears in the great woods behind Verrières . 
`` Why am I in this position ? '' 
he said to himself at last , `` I feel that I would give my life a hundred times over for this good curé Chélan , and he has just proved to me that I am nothing more than a fool . 
It is especially necessary for me to deceive him , and he manages to find me out . 
The secret ardour which he refers to is my plan of making my fortune . 
He thinks I am unworthy of being a priest , that too , just when I was imagining that my sacrifice of fifty louis would give him the very highest idea of my piety and devotion to my mission . '' 
`` In future , '' continued Julien , `` I will only reckon on those elements in my character which I have tested . 
Who could have told me that I should find any pleasure in shedding tears ? 
How I should like some one to convince me that I am simply a fool ! '' 
Three days later , Julien found the excuse with which he ought to have been prepared on the first day ; the excuse was a piece of calumny , but what did it matter ? 
He confessed to the curé , with a great deal of hesitation , that he had been persuaded from the suggested union by a reason he could not explain , inasmuch as it tended to damage a third party . 
This was equivalent to impeaching Elisa 's conduct . 
M. Chélan found that his manner betrayed a certain worldly fire which was very different from that which ought to have animated a young acolyte . 
`` My friend , '' he said to him again , `` be a good country citizen , respected and educated , rather than a priest without a true mission . '' 
So far as words were concerned , Julien answered these new remonstrances very well . 
He managed to find the words which a young and ardent seminarist would have employed , but the tone in which he pronounced them , together with the thinly concealed fire which blazed in his eye , alarmed M. Chélan . 
You must not have too bad an opinion of Julien 's prospects . 
He invented with correctness all the words suitable to a prudent and cunning hypocrisy . 
It was not bad for his age . 
As for his tone and his gestures , he had spent his life with country people ; he had never been given an opportunity of seeing great models . 
Consequently , as soon as he was given a chance of getting near such gentlemen , his gestures became as admirable as his words . 
Madame de Rênal was astonished that her maid 's new fortune did not make her more happy . 
She saw her repeatedly going to the curé and coming back with tears in her eyes . 
At last Elisa talked to her of her marriage . 
Madame de Rênal thought she was ill . 
A kind of fever prevented her from sleeping . 
She only lived when either her maid or Julien were in sight . 
She was unable to think of anything except them and the happiness which they would find in their home . 
Her imagination depicted in the most fascinating colours the poverty of the little house , where they were to live on their income of fifty louis a year . 
Julien could quite well become an advocate at Bray , the sub-prefecture , two leagues from Verrières . 
In that case she would see him sometimes . 
Madame de Rênal sincerely believed she would go mad . 
She said so to her husband and finally fell ill . 
That very evening when her maid was attending her , she noticed that the girl was crying . 
She abhorred Elisa at that moment , and started to scold her ; she then begged her pardon . 
Elisa 's tears redoubled . 
She said if her mistress would allow her , she would tell her all her unhappiness . 
`` Tell me , '' answered Madame de Rênal . 
`` Well , Madame , he refuses me , some wicked people must have spoken badly about me . 
He believes them . '' 
`` Who refuses you ? '' 
said Madame de Rênal , scarcely breathing . 
`` Who else , Madame , but M. Julien , '' answered the maid sobbing . 
`` M. the curé had been unable to overcome his resistance , for M. the curé thinks that he ought not to refuse an honest girl on the pretext that she has been a maid . 
After all , M. Julien 's father is nothing more than a carpenter , and how did he himself earn his living before he was at Madame 's ? '' 
Madame de Rênal stopped listening ; her excessive happiness had almost deprived her of her reason . 
She made the girl repeat several times the assurance that Julien had refused her , with a positiveness which shut the door on the possibility of his coming round to a more prudent decision . 
`` I will make a last attempt , '' she said to her maid . 
`` I will speak to M. Julien . '' 
The following day , after breakfast , Madame de Rênal indulged in the delightful luxury of pleading her rival 's cause , and of seeing Elisa 's hand and fortune stubbornly refused for a whole hour . 
Julien gradually emerged from his cautiously worded answers , and finished by answering with spirit Madame de Rênal 's good advice . 
She could not help being overcome by the torrent of happiness which , after so many days of despair , now inundated her soul . 
She felt quite ill . 
When she had recovered and was comfortably in her own room she sent everyone away . 
She was profoundly astonished . 
`` Can I be in love with Julien ? '' 
she finally said to herself . 
This discovery , which at any other time would have plunged her into remorse and the deepest agitation , now only produced the effect of a singular , but as it were , indifferent spectacle . 
Her soul was exhausted by all that she had just gone through , and had no more sensibility to passion left . 
Madame de Rênal tried to work , and fell into a deep sleep ; when she woke up she did not frighten herself so much as she ought to have . 
She was too happy to be able to see anything wrong in anything . 
Naive and innocent as she was , this worthy provincial woman had never tortured her soul in her endeavours to extract from it a little sensibility to some new shade of sentiment or unhappiness . 
Entirely absorbed as she had been before Julien 's arrival with that mass of work which falls to the lot of a good mistress of a household away from Paris , Madame de Rênal thought of passion in the same way in which we think of a lottery : a certain deception , a happiness sought after by fools . 
The dinner bell rang . 
Madame de Rênal blushed violently . 
She heard the voice of Julien who was bringing in the children . 
Having grown somewhat adroit since her falling in love , she complained of an awful headache in order to explain her redness . 
`` That 's just like what all women are , '' answered M. de Rênal with a coarse laugh . 
`` Those machines have always got something or other to be put right . '' 
Although she was accustomed to this type of wit , Madame de Rênal was shocked by the tone of voice . 
In order to distract herself , she looked at Julien 's physiognomy ; he would have pleased her at this particular moment , even if he had been the ugliest man imaginable . 
M. de Rênal , who always made a point of copying the habits of the gentry of the court , established himself at Vergy in the first fine days of the spring ; this is the village rendered celebrated by the tragic adventure of Gabrielle . 
A hundred paces from the picturesque ruin of the old Gothic church , M. de Rênal owns an old château with its four towers and a garden designed like the one in the Tuileries with a great many edging verges of box and avenues of chestnut trees which are cut twice in the year . 
An adjacent field , crowded with apple trees , served for a promenade . 
Eight or ten magnificent walnut trees were at the end of the orchard . 
Their immense foliage went as high as perhaps eighty feet . 
`` Each of these cursed walnut trees , '' M. de Rênal was in the habit of saying , whenever his wife admired them , `` costs me the harvest of at least half an acre ; corn can not grow under their shade . '' 
Madame de Rênal found the sight of the country novel : her admiration reached the point of enthusiasm . 
The sentiment by which she was animated gave her both ideas and resolution . 
M. de Rênal had returned to the town , for mayoral business , two days after their arrival in Vergy . 
But Madame de Rênal engaged workmen at her own expense . 
Julien had given her the idea of a little sanded path which was to go round the orchard and under the big walnut trees , and render it possible for the children to take their walk in the very earliest hours of the morning without getting their feet wet from the dew . 
This idea was put into execution within twenty-four hours of its being conceived . 
Madame de Rênal gaily spent the whole day with Julien in supervising the workmen . 
When the Mayor of Verrières came back from the town he was very surprised to find the avenue completed . 
His arrival surprised Madame de Rênal as well . 
She had forgotten his existence . 
For two months he talked with irritation about the boldness involved in making so important a repair without consulting him , but Madame de Rênal had had it executed at her own expense , a fact which somewhat consoled him . 
She spent her days in running about the orchard with her children , and in catching butterflies . 
They had made big hoods of clear gauze with which they caught the poor lepidoptera . 
This is the barbarous name which Julien taught Madame de Rênal . 
For she had had M. Godart 's fine work ordered from Besançon , and Julien used to tell her about the strange habits of the creatures . 
They ruthlessly transfixed them by means of pins in a great cardboard box which Julien had prepared . 
Madame de Rênal and Julien had at last a topic of conversation ; he was no longer exposed to the awful torture that had been occasioned by their moments of silence . 
They talked incessantly and with extreme interest , though always about very innocent matters . 
This gay , full , active life , pleased the fancy of everyone , except Mademoiselle Elisa who found herself overworked . 
Madame had never taken so much trouble with her dress , even at carnival time , when there is a ball at Verrières , she would say ; she changes her gowns two or three times a day . 
As it is not our intention to flatter anyone , we do not propose to deny that Madame de Rênal , who had a superb skin , arranged her gowns in such a way as to leave her arms and her bosom very exposed . 
She was extremely well made , and this style of dress suited her delightfully . 
`` You have never been so young , Madame , '' her Verrières friends would say to her , when they came to dinner at Vergy -LRB- this is one of the local expressions -RRB- . 
It is a singular thing , and one which few amongst us will believe , but Madame de Rênal had no specific object in taking so much trouble . 
She found pleasure in it and spent all the time which she did not pass in hunting butterflies with the children and Julien , in working with Elisa at making gowns , without giving the matter a further thought . 
Her only expedition to Verrières was caused by her desire to buy some new summer gowns which had just come from Mulhouse . 
She brought back to Vergy a young woman who was a relative of hers . 
Since her marriage , Madame de Rênal had gradually become attached to Madame Derville , who had once been her school mate at the Sacré Cœur . 
Madame Derville laughed a great deal at what she called her cousin 's mad ideas : `` I would never have thought of them alone , '' she said . 
When Madame de Rênal was with her husband , she was ashamed of those sudden ideas , which , are called sallies in Paris , and thought them quite silly : but Madame Derville 's presence gave her courage . 
She would start to telling her her thoughts in a timid voice , but after the ladies had been alone for a long time , Madame de Rênal 's brain became more animated , and a long morning spent together by the two friends passed like a second , and left them in the best of spirits . 
On this particular journey , however , the acute Madame Derville thought her cousin much less merry , but much more happy than usual . 
Julien , on his side , had since coming to the country lived like an absolute child , and been as happy as his pupils in running after the butterflies . 
After so long a period of constraint and wary diplomacy , he was at last alone and far from human observation ; he was instinctively free from any apprehension on the score of Madame de Rênal , and abandoned himself to the sheer pleasure of being alive , which is so keen at so young an age , especially among the most beautiful mountains in the world . 
Ever since Madame Derville 's arrival , Julien thought that she was his friend ; he took the first opportunity of showing her the view from the end of the new avenue , under the walnut tree ; as a matter of fact it is equal , if not superior , to the most wonderful views that Switzerland and the Italian lakes can offer . 
If you ascend the steep slope which commences some paces from there , you soon arrive at great precipices fringed by oak forests , which almost jut on to the river . 
It was to the peaked summits of these rocks that Julien , who was now happy , free , and king of the household into the bargain , would take the two friends , and enjoy their admiration these sublime views . 
`` To me it 's like Mozart 's music , '' Madame Derville would say . 
The country around Verrières had been spoilt for Julien by the jealousy of his brothers and the presence of a tyranous and angry father . 
He was free from these bitter memories at Vergy ; for the first time in his life , he failed to see an enemy . 
When , as frequently happened , M. de Rênal was in town , he ventured to read ; soon , instead of reading at night time , a procedure , moreover , which involved carefully hiding his lamp at the bottom of a flower-pot turned upside down , he was able to indulge in sleep ; in the day , however , in the intervals between the children 's lessons , he would come among these rocks with that book which was the one guide of his conduct and object of his enthusiasm . 
He found in it simultaneously happiness , ecstasy and consolation for his moments of discouragement . 
Certain remarks of Napoleon about women , several discussions about the merits of the novels which were fashionable in his reign , furnished him now for the first time with some ideas which any other young man of his age would have had for a long time . 
The dog days arrived . 
They started the habit of spending the evenings under an immense pine tree some yards from the house . 
The darkness was profound . 
One evening , Julien was speaking and gesticulating , enjoying to the full the pleasure of being at his best when talking to young women ; in one of his gestures , he touched the hand of Madame de Rênal which was leaning on the back of one of those chairs of painted wood , which are so frequently to be seen in gardens . 
The hand was quickly removed , but Julien thought it a point of duty to secure that that hand should not be removed when he touched it . 
The idea of a duty to be performed and the consciousness of his stultification , or rather of his social inferiority , if he should fail in achieving it , immediately banished all pleasure from his heart . 
M. Guérin 's Dido , a charming sketch ! 
-- Strombeck . 
His expression was singular when he saw Madame de Rênal the next day ; he watched her like an enemy with whom he would have to fight a duel . 
These looks , which were so different from those of the previous evening , made Madame de Rênal lose her head ; she had been kind to him and he appeared angry . 
She could not take her eyes off his . 
Madame Derville 's presence allowed Julien to devote less time to conversation , and more time to thinking about what he had in his mind . 
His one object all this day was to fortify himself by reading the inspired book that gave strength to his soul . 
He considerably curtailed the children 's lessons , and when Madame de Rênal 's presence had effectually brought him back to the pursuit of his ambition , he decided that she absolutely must allow her hand to rest in his that evening . 
The setting of the sun which brought the crucial moment nearer and nearer made Julien 's heart beat in a strange way . 
Night came . 
He noticed with a joy , which took an immense weight off his heart , that it was going to be very dark . 
The sky , which was laden with big clouds that had been brought along by a sultry wind , seemed to herald a storm . 
The two friends went for their walk very late . 
All they did that night struck Julien as strange . 
They were enjoying that hour which seems to give certain refined souls an increased pleasure in loving . 
At last they sat down , Madame de Rênal beside Julien , and Madame Derville near her friend . 
Engrossed as he was by the attempt which he was going to make , Julien could think of nothing to say . 
The conversation languished . 
`` Shall I be as nervous and miserable over my first duel ? '' 
said Julien to himself ; for he was too suspicious both of himself and of others , not to realise his own mental state . 
In his mortal anguish , he would have preferred any danger whatsoever . 
How many times did he not wish some matter to crop up which would necessitate Madame de Rênal going into the house and leaving the garden ! 
The violent strain on Julien 's nerves was too great for his voice not to be considerably changed ; soon Madame de Rênal 's voice became nervous as well , but Julien did not notice it . 
The awful battle raging between duty and timidity was too painful , for him to be in a position to observe anything outside himself . 
A quarter to ten had just struck on the château clock without his having ventured anything . 
Julien was indignant at his own cowardice , and said to himself , `` at the exact moment when ten o'clock strikes , I will perform what I have resolved to do all through the day , or I will go up to my room and blow out my brains . '' 
After a final moment of expectation and anxiety , during which Julien was rendered almost beside himself by his excessive emotion , ten o'clock struck from the clock over his head . 
Each stroke of the fatal clock reverberated in his bosom , and caused an almost physical pang . 
Finally , when the last stroke of ten was still reverberating , he stretched out his hand and took Madame de Rênal 's , who immediately withdrew it . 
Julien , scarcely knowing what he was doing , seized it again . 
In spite of his own excitement , he could not help being struck by the icy coldness of the hand which he was taking ; he pressed it convulsively ; a last effort was made to take it away , but in the end the hand remained in his . 
His soul was inundated with happiness , not that he loved Madame de Rênal , but an awful torture had just ended . 
He thought it necessary to say something , to avoid Madame Derville noticing anything . 
His voice was now strong and ringing . 
Madame de Rênal 's , on the contrary , betrayed so much emotion that her friend thought she was ill , and suggested her going in . 
Julien scented danger , `` if Madame de Rênal goes back to the salon , I shall relapse into the awful state in which I have been all day . 
I have held the hand far too short a time for it really to count as the scoring of an actual advantage . '' 
At the moment when Madame Derville was repeating her suggestion to go back to the salon , Julien squeezed vigorously the hand that was abandoned to him . 
Madame de Rênal , who had started to get up , sat down again and said in a faint voice , `` I feel a little ill , as a matter of fact , but the open air is doing me good . '' 
These words confirmed Julien 's happiness , which at the present moment was extreme ; he spoke , he forgot to pose , and appeared the most charming man in the world to the two friends who were listening to him . 
Nevertheless , there was a slight lack of courage in all this eloquence which had suddenly come upon him . 
He was mortally afraid that Madame Derville would get tired of the wind before the storm , which was beginning to rise , and want to go back alone into the salon . 
He would then have remained tête-à-tête with Madame de Rênal . 
He had had , almost by accident that blind courage which is sufficient for action ; but he felt that it was out of his power to speak the simplest word to Madame de Rênal . 
He was certain that , however slight her reproaches might be , he would nevertheless be worsted , and that the advantage he had just won would be destroyed . 
Luckily for him on this evening , his moving and emphatic speeches found favour with Madame Derville , who very often found him as clumsy as a child and not at all amusing . 
As for Madame de Rênal , with her hand in Julien 's , she did not have a thought ; she simply allowed herself to go on living . 
The hours spent under this great pine tree , planted by by Charles the Bold according to the local tradition , were a real period of happiness . 
She listened with delight to the soughing of the wind in the thick foliage of the pine tree and to the noise of some stray drops which were beginning to fall upon the leaves which were lowest down . 
Julien failed to notice one circumstance which , if he had , would have quickly reassured him ; Madame de Rênal , who had been obliged to take away her hand , because she had got up to help her cousin to pick up a flower-pot which the wind had knocked over at her feet , had scarcely sat down again before she gave him her hand with scarcely any difficulty and as though it had already been a pre-arranged thing between them . 
Midnight had struck a long time ago ; it was at last necessary to leave the garden ; they separated . 
Madame de Rênal swept away as she was , by the happiness of loving , was so completely ignorant of the world that she scarcely reproached herself at all . 
Her happiness deprived her of her sleep . 
A leaden sleep overwhelmed Julien who was mortally fatigued by the battle which timidity and pride had waged in his heart all through the day . 
He was called at five o'clock on the following day and scarcely gave Madame de Rênal a single thought . 
He had accomplished his duty , and a heroic duty too . 
The consciousness of this filled him with happiness ; he locked himself in his room , and abandoned himself with quite a new pleasure to reading exploits of his hero . 
When the breakfast bell sounded , the reading of the Bulletins of the Great Army had made him forget all his advantages of the previous day . 
He said to himself flippantly , as he went down to the salon , `` I must tell that woman that I am in love with her . '' 
Instead of those looks brimful of pleasure which he was expecting to meet , he found the stern visage of M. de Rênal , who had arrived from Verrières two hours ago , and did not conceal his dissatisfaction at Julien 's having passed the whole morning without attending to the children . 
Nothing could have been more sordid than this self-important man when he was in a bad temper and thought that he could safely show it . 
Each harsh word of her husband pierced Madame de Rênal 's heart . 
As for Julien , he was so plunged in his ecstasy , and still so engrossed by the great events which had been passing before his eyes for several hours , that he had some difficulty at first in bringing his attention sufficiently down to listen to the harsh remarks which M. de Rênal was addressing to him . 
He said to him at last , rather abruptly , `` I was ill . '' 
The tone of this answer would have stung a much less sensitive man than the mayor of Verrières . 
He half thought of answering Julien by turning him out of the house straight away . 
He was only restrained by the maxim which he had prescribed for himself , of never hurrying unduly in business matters . 
`` The young fool , '' he said to himself shortly afterwards , `` has won a kind of reputation in my house . 
That man Valenod may take him into his family , or he may quite well marry Elisa , and in either case , he will be able to have the laugh of me in his heart . '' 
In spite of the wisdom of these reflections , M. de Rênal 's dissatisfaction did not fail to vent itself any the less by a string of coarse insults which gradually irritated Julien . 
Madame de Rênal was on the point of bursting into tears . 
Breakfast was scarcely over , when she asked Julien to give her his arm for a walk . 
She leaned on him affectionately . 
Julien could only answer all that Madame de Rênal said to him by whispering . '' 
That 's what rich people are like ! '' 
M. de Rênal was walking quite close to them ; his presence increased Julien 's anger . 
He suddenly noticed that Madame de Rênal was leaning on his arm in a manner which was somewhat marked . 
This horrified him , and he pushed her violently away and disengaged his arm . 
Luckily , M. de Rênal did not see this new piece of impertinence ; it was only noticed by Madame Derville . 
Her friend burst into tears . 
M. de Rênal now started to chase away by a shower of stones a little peasant girl who had taken a private path crossing a corner of the orchard . 
`` Monsieur Julien , restrain yourself , I pray you . 
Remember that we all have our moments of temper , '' said madame Derville rapidly . 
Julien looked at her coldly with eyes in which the most supreme contempt was depicted . 
This look astonished Madame Derville , and it would have surprised her even more if she had appreciated its real expression ; she would have read in it something like a vague hope of the most atrocious vengeance . 
It is , no doubt , such moments of humiliation which have made Robespierres . 
`` Your Julien is very violent ; he frightens me , '' said Madame Derville to her friend , in a low voice . 
`` He is right to be angry , '' she answered . 
`` What does it matter if he does pass a morning without speaking to the children , after the astonishing progress which he has made them make . 
One must admit that men are very hard . '' 
For the first time in her life Madame de Rênal experienced a kind of desire for vengeance against her husband . 
The extreme hatred of the rich by which Julien was animated was on the point of exploding . 
Luckily , M. de Rênal called his gardener , and remained occupied with him in barring by faggots of thorns the private road through the orchard . 
Julien did not vouchsafe any answer to the kindly consideration of which he was the object during all the rest of the walk . 
M. de Rênal had scarcely gone away before the two friends made the excuse of being fatigued , and each asked him for an arm . 
Walking as he did between these two women whose extreme nervousness filled their cheeks with a blushing embarrassment , the haughty pallor and sombre , resolute air of Julien formed a strange contrast . 
He despised these women and all tender sentiments . 
`` What ! '' 
he said to himself , `` not even an income of five hundred francs to finish my studies ! 
Ah ! 
how I should like to send them packing . '' 
And absorbed as he was by these stern ideas , such few courteous words of his two friends as he deigned to take the trouble to understand , displeased him as devoid of sense , silly , feeble , in a word -- feminine . 
As the result of speaking for the sake of speaking and of endeavouring to keep the conversation alive , it came about that Madame de Rênal mentioned that her husband had come from Verrières because he had made a bargain for the May straw with one of his farmers . 
-LRB- In this district it is the May straw with which the bed mattresses are filled -RRB- . 
`` My husband will not rejoin us , '' added Madame de Rênal ; `` he will occupy himself with finishing the re-stuffing of the house mattresses with the help of the gardener and his valet . 
He has put the May straw this morning in all the beds on the first storey ; he is now at the second . '' 
Julien changed colour . 
He looked at Madame de Rênal in a singular way , and soon managed somehow to take her on one side , doubling his pace . 
Madame Derville allowed them to get ahead . 
`` Save my life , '' said Julien to Madame de Rênal ; `` only you can do it , for you know that the valet hates me desperately . 
I must confess to you , madame , that I have a portrait . 
I have hidden it in the mattress of my bed . '' 
At these words Madame de Rênal in her turn became pale . 
`` Only you , Madame , are able at this moment to go into my room , feel about without their noticing in the corner of the mattress ; it is nearest the window . 
You will find a small , round box of black cardboard , very glossy . '' 
`` Does it contain a portrait ? '' 
said Madame de Rênal , scarcely able to hold herself upright . 
Julien noticed her air of discouragement , and at once proceeded to exploit it . 
`` I have a second favour to ask you , madame . 
I entreat you not to look at that portrait ; it is my secret . '' 
`` It is a secret , '' repeated Madame de Rênal in a faint voice . 
But though she had been brought up among people who are proud of their fortune and appreciative of nothing except money , love had already instilled generosity into her soul . 
Truly wounded as she was , it was with an air of the most simple devotion that Madame de Rênal asked Julien the questions necessary to enable her to fulfil her commission . 
`` So '' she said to him as she went away , `` it is a little round box of black cardboard , very glossy . '' 
`` Yes , Madame , '' answered Julien , with that hardness which danger gives to men . 
She ascended the second storey of the château as pale as though she had been going to her death . 
Her misery was completed by the sensation that she was on the verge of falling ill , but the necessity of doing Julien a service restored her strength . 
`` I must have that box , '' she said to herself , as she doubled her pace . 
She heard her husband speaking to the valet in Julien 's very room . 
Happily , they passed into the children 's room . 
She lifted up the mattress , and plunged her hand into the stuffing so violently that she bruised her fingers . 
But , though she was very sensitive to slight pain of this kind , she was not conscious of it now , for she felt almost simultaneously the smooth surface of the cardboard box . 
She seized it and disappeared . 
She had scarcely recovered from the fear of being surprised by her husband than the horror with which this box inspired her came within an ace of positively making her feel ill . 
`` So Julien is in love , and I hold here the portrait of the woman whom he loves ! '' 
Seated on the chair in the ante-chamber of his apartment , Madame de Rênal fell a prey to all the horrors of jealousy . 
Her extreme ignorance , moreover , was useful to her at this juncture ; her astonishment mitigated her grief . 
Julien seized the box without thanking her or saying a single word , and ran into his room , where he lit a fire and immediately burnt it . 
He was pale and in a state of collapse . 
He exaggerated the extent of the danger which he had undergone . 
`` Finding Napoleon 's portrait , '' he said to himself , `` in the possession of a man who professes so great a hate for the usurper ! 
Found , too , by M. de Rênal , who is so great an ultra , and is now in a state of irritation , and , to complete my imprudence , lines written in my own handwriting on the white cardboard behind the portrait , lines , too , which can leave no doubt on the score of my excessive admiration . 
And each of these transports of love is dated . 
There was one the day before yesterday . '' 
`` All my reputation collapsed and shattered in a moment , '' said Julien to himself as he watched the box burn , `` and my reputation is my only asset . 
It is all I have to live by -- and what a life to , by heaven ! '' 
An hour afterwards , this fatigue , together with the pity which he felt for himself made him inclined to be more tender . 
He met Madame de Rênal and took her hand , which he kissed with more sincerity than he had ever done before . 
She blushed with happiness and almost simultaneously rebuffed Julien with all the anger of jealousy . 
Julien 's pride which had been so recently wounded made him act foolishly at this juncture . 
He saw in Madame de Rênal nothing but a rich woman , he disdainfully let her hand fall and went away . 
He went and walked about meditatively in the garden . 
Soon a bitter smile appeared on his lips . 
`` Here I am walking about as serenely as a man who is master of his own time . 
I am not bothering about the children ! 
I am exposing myself to M. de Rênal 's humiliating remarks , and he will be quite right . '' 
He ran to the children 's room . 
The caresses of the youngest child , whom he loved very much , somewhat calmed his agony . 
`` He does not despise me yet , '' thought Julien . 
But he soon reproached himself for this alleviation of his agony as though it were a new weakness . 
The children caress me just in the same way in which they would caress the young hunting-hound which was bought yesterday . 
But passion most disembles , yet betrays , Even by its darkness , as the blackest sky Foretells the heaviest tempest . 
Don Juan , c. 4 , st. 75 . 
M. De Rênal was going through all the rooms in the château , and he came back into the children 's room with the servants who were bringing back the stuffings of the mattresses . 
The sudden entry of this man had the effect on Julien of the drop of water which makes the pot overflow . 
Looking paler and more sinister than usual , he rushed towards him . 
M. de Rênal stopped and looked at his servants . 
`` Monsieur , '' said Julien to him , `` Do you think your children would have made the progress they have made with me with any other tutor ? 
If you answer ` No , ' '' continued Julien so quickly that M. de Rênal did not have time to speak , `` how dare you reproach me with neglecting them ? '' 
M. de Rênal , who had scarcely recovered from his fright , concluded from the strange tone he saw this little peasant assume , that he had some advantageous offer in his pocket , and that he was going to leave him . 
The more he spoke the more Julien 's anger increased , `` I can live without you , Monsieur , '' he added . 
`` I am really sorry to see you so upset , '' answered M. de Rênal shuddering a little . 
The servants were ten yards off engaged in making the beds . 
`` That is not what I mean , Monsieur , '' replied Julien quite beside himself . 
`` Think of the infamous words that you have addressed to me , and before women too . '' 
M. de Rênal understood only too well what Julien was asking , and a painful conflict tore his soul . 
It happened that Julien , who was really mad with rage , cried out , `` I know where to go , Monsieur , when I leave your house . '' 
At these words M. de Rênal saw Julien installed with M. Valenod . 
`` Well , sir , '' he said at last with a sigh , just as though he had called in a surgeon to perform the most painful operation , `` I accede to your request . 
I will give you fifty francs a month . 
Starting from the day after to-morrow which is the first of the month . '' 
Julien wanted to laugh , and stood there dumbfounded . 
All his anger had vanished . 
`` I do not despise the brute enough , '' he said to himself . 
`` I have no doubt that that is the greatest apology that so base a soul can make . '' 
The children who had listened to this scene with gaping mouths , ran into the garden to tell their mother that M. Julien was very angry , but that he was going to have fifty francs a month . 
Julien followed them as a matter of habit without even looking at M. de Rênal whom he left in a considerable state of irritation . 
`` That makes one hundred and sixty-eight francs , '' said the mayor to himself , `` that M. Valenod has cost me . 
I must absolutely speak a few strong words to him about his contract to provide for the foundlings . '' 
A minute afterwards Julien found himself opposite M. de Rênal . 
`` I want to speak to M. Chélan on a matter of conscience . 
I have the honour to inform you that I shall be absent some hours . '' 
`` Why , my dear Julien , '' said M. de Rênal smiling with the falsest expression possible , `` take the whole day , and to-morrow too if you like , my good friend . 
Take the gardener 's horse to go to Verrières . '' 
`` He is on the very point , '' said M. de Rênal to himself , `` of giving an answer to Valenod . 
He has promised me nothing , but I must let this hot-headed young man have time to cool down . '' 
Julien quickly went away , and went up into the great forest , through which one can manage to get from Vergy to Verrières . 
He did not wish to arrive at M. Chélan 's at once . 
Far from wishing to cramp himself in a new pose of hypocrisy he needed to see clear in his own soul , and to give audience to the crowd of sentiments which were agitating him . 
`` I have won a battle , '' he said to himself , as soon as he saw that he was well in the forest , and far from all human gaze . 
`` So I have won a battle . '' 
This expression shed a rosy light on his situation , and restored him to some serenity . 
`` Here I am with a salary of fifty francs a month , M. de Rênal must be precious afraid , but what of ? '' 
This meditation about what could have put fear into the heart of that happy , powerful man against whom he had been boiling with rage only an hour back , completed the restoration to serenity of Julien 's soul . 
He was almost able to enjoy for a moment the delightful beauty of the woods amidst which he was walking . 
Enormous blocks of bare rocks had fallen down long ago in the middle of the forest by the mountain side . 
Great cedars towered almost as high as these rocks whose shade caused a delicious freshness within three yards of places where the heat of the sun 's rays would have made it impossible to rest . 
Julien took breath for a moment in the shade of these great rocks , and then he began again to climb . 
Traversing a narrow path that was scarcely marked , and was only used by the goat herds , he soon found himself standing upon an immense rock with the complete certainty of being far away from all mankind . 
This physical position made him smile . 
It symbolised to him the position he was burning to attain in the moral sphere . 
The pure air of these lovely mountains filled his soul with serenity and even with joy . 
The mayor of Verrières still continued to typify in his eyes all the wealth and all the arrogance of the earth ; but Julien felt that the hatred that had just thrilled him had nothing personal about it in spite of all the violence which he had manifested . 
If he had left off seeing M. de Rênal he would in eight days have forgotten him , his castle , his dogs , his children and all his family . 
`` I forced him , I do n't know how , to make the greatest sacrifice . 
What ? 
more than fifty crowns a year , and only a minute before I managed to extricate myself from the greatest danger ; so there are two victories in one day . 
The second one is devoid of merit , I must find out the why and the wherefore . 
But these laborious researches are for to-morrow . '' 
Standing up on his great rock , Julien looked at the sky which was all afire with an August sun . 
The grasshoppers sang in the field about the rock ; when they held their peace there was universal silence around him . 
He saw twenty leagues of country at his feet . 
He noticed from time to time some hawk , which launching off from the great rocks over his head was describing in silence its immense circles . 
Julien 's eye followed the bird of prey mechanically . 
Its tranquil powerful movements struck him . 
He envied that strength , that isolation . 
`` Would Napoleon 's destiny be one day his ? '' 
Yet Julia 's very coldness still was kind , And tremulously gently her small hand Withdrew itself from his , but left behind A little pressure , thrilling , and so bland , And slight , so very slight that to the mind , 'T was but a doubt . 
Don Juan , c. I. st , 71 . 
It was necessary , however , to put in an appearance at Verrières . 
As Julien left the curé house he was fortunate enough to meet M. Valenod , whom he hastened to tell of the increase in his salary . 
On returning to Vergy , Julien waited till night had fallen before going down into the garden . 
His soul was fatigued by the great number of violent emotions which had agitated him during the day . 
`` What shall I say to them ? '' 
he reflected anxiously , as he thought about the ladies . 
He was far from realising that his soul was just in a mood to discuss those trivial circumstances which usually monopolise all feminine interests . 
Julien was often unintelligible to Madame Derville , and even to her friend , and he in his turn only half understood all that they said to him . 
Such was the effect of the force and , if I may venture to use such language , the greatness of the transports of passion which overwhelmed the soul of this ambitious youth . 
In this singular being it was storm nearly every day . 
As he entered the garden this evening , Julien was inclined to take an interest in what the pretty cousins were thinking . 
They were waiting for him impatiently . 
He took his accustomed seat next to Madame de Rênal . 
The darkness soon became profound . 
He attempted to take hold of a white hand which he had seen some time near him , as it leant on the back of a chair . 
Some hesitation was shewn , but eventually the hand was withdrawn in a manner which indicated displeasure . 
Julien was inclined to give up the attempt as a bad job , and to continue his conversation quite gaily , when he heard M. de Rênal approaching . 
The coarse words he had uttered in the morning were still ringing in Julien 's ears . 
`` Would not taking possession of his wife 's hand in his very presence , '' he said to himself , `` be a good way of scoring off that creature who has all that life can give him . 
Yes ! 
I will do it . 
I , the very man for whom he has evidenced so great a contempt . '' 
From that moment the tranquillity which was so alien to Julien 's real character quickly disappeared . 
He was obsessed by an anxious desire that Madame de Rênal should abandon her hand to him . 
M. de Rênal was talking politics with vehemence ; two or three commercial men in Verrières had been growing distinctly richer than he was , and were going to annoy him over the elections . 
Madame Derville was listening to him . 
Irritated by these tirades , Julien brought his chair nearer Madame de Rênal . 
All his movements were concealed by the darkness . 
He dared to put his hand very near to the pretty arm which was left uncovered by the dress . 
He was troubled and had lost control of his mind . 
He brought his face near to that pretty arm and dared to put his lips on it . 
Madame de Rênal shuddered . 
Her husband was four paces away . 
She hastened to give her hand to Julien , and at the same time to push him back a little . 
As M. de Rênal was continuing his insults against those ne'er - do-wells and Jacobins who were growing so rich , Julien covered the hand which had been abandoned to him with kisses , which were either really passionate or at any rate seemed so to Madame de Rênal . 
But the poor woman had already had the proofs on that same fatal day that the man whom she adored , without owning it to herself , loved another ! 
During the whole time Julien had been absent she had been the prey to an extreme unhappiness which had made her reflect . 
`` What , '' she said to herself , `` Am I going to love , am I going to be in love ? 
Am I , a married woman , going to fall in love ? 
But , '' she said to herself , `` I have never felt for my husband this dark madness , which never permits of my keeping Julien out of my thoughts . 
