He had not expected this new misfortune . 
As she saw him enter , Madame de Rênal got quickly out of bed . 
`` Wretch , '' she cried . 
There was a little confusion . 
Julien forgot his useless plans , and turned to his natural role . 
To fail to please so charming a woman appeared to him the greatest of misfortunes . 
His only answer to her reproaches was to throw himself at her feet while he kissed her knees . 
As she was speaking to him with extreme harshness , he burst into tears . 
When Julien came out of Madame de Rênal 's room some hours afterwards , one could have said , adopting the conventional language of the novel , that there was nothing left to be desired . 
In fact , he owed to the love he had inspired , and to the unexpected impression which her alluring charms had produced upon him , a victory to which his own clumsy tactics would never have led him . 
But victim that he was of a distorted pride , he pretended even in the sweetest moments to play the role of a man accustomed to the subjugation of women : he made incredible but deliberate efforts to spoil his natural charm . 
Instead of watching the transports which he was bringing into existence , and those pangs of remorse which only set their keenness into fuller relief , the idea of duty was continually before his eyes . 
He feared a frightful remorse , and eternal ridicule , if he departed from the ideal model he proposed to follow . 
In a word , the very quality which made Julien into a superior being was precisely that which prevented him from savouring the happiness which was placed within his grasp . 
It 's like the case of a young girl of sixteen with a charming complexion who is mad enough to put on rouge before going to a ball . 
Mortally terrified by the apparition of Julien , Madame de Rênal was soon a prey to the most cruel alarm . 
The prayers and despair of Julien troubled her keenly . 
Even when there was nothing left for her to refuse him she pushed Julien away from her with a genuine indignation , and straightway threw herself into his arms . 
There was no plan apparent in all this conduct . 
She thought herself eternally damned , and tried to hide from herself the sight of hell by loading Julien with the wildest caresses . 
In a word , nothing would have been lacking in our hero 's happiness , not even an ardent sensibility in the woman whom he had just captured , if he had only known how to enjoy it . 
Julien 's departure did not in any way bring to an end those ecstacies which thrilled her in spite of herself , and those troubles of remorse which lacerated her . 
`` My God ! 
being happy -- being loved , is that all it comes to ? '' 
This was Julien 's first thought as he entered his room . 
He was a prey to the astonishment and nervous anxiety of the man who has just obtained what he has long desired . 
He has been accustomed to desire , and has no longer anything to desire , and nevertheless has no memories . 
Like a soldier coming back from parade . 
Julien was absorbed in rehearsing the details of his conduct . 
`` Have I failed in nothing which I owe to myself ? 
Have I played my part well ? '' 
And what a part ! 
the part of a man accustomed to be brilliant with women . 
He turned his lips to hers and with his hand Called back the tangles of her wandering hair . 
Don Juan , c. I , st. 170 . 
Happily for Julien 's fame , Madame de Rênal had been too agitated and too astonished to appreciate the stupidity of the man who had in a single moment become the whole to world her . 
`` Oh , my God ! '' 
she said to herself , as she pressed him to retire when she saw the dawn break , `` if my husband has heard the noise , I am lost . '' 
Julien , who had had the time to make up some phrases , remembered this one , `` Would you regret your life ? '' 
`` Oh , very much at a moment like this , but I should not regret having known you . '' 
Julien thought it incumbent on his dignity to go back to his room in broad daylight and with deliberate imprudence . 
The continuous attention with which he kept on studying his slightest actions with the absurd idea of appearing a man of experience had only one advantage . 
When he saw Madame de Rênal again at breakfast his conduct was a masterpiece of prudence . 
As for her , she could not look at him without blushing up to the eyes , and could not live a moment without looking at him . 
She realised her own nervousness , and her efforts to hide it redoubled . 
Julien only lifted his eyes towards her once . 
At first Madame de Rênal admired his prudence : soon seeing that this single look was not repealed , she became alarmed . 
`` Could it be that he does not love me ? '' 
she said to herself . 
`` Alas ! 
I am quite old for him . 
I am ten years older than he is . '' 
As she passed from the dining-room to the garden , she pressed Julien 's hand . 
In the surprise caused by so singular a mark of love , he regarded her with passion , for he had thought her very pretty over breakfast , and while keeping his eyes downcast he had passed his time in thinking of the details of her charms . 
This look consoled Madame de Rênal . 
It did not take away all her anxiety , but her anxiety tended to take away nearly completely all her remorse towards her husband . 
The husband had noticed nothing at breakfast . 
It was not so with Madame Derville . 
She thought she saw Madame de Rênal on the point of succumbing . 
During the whole day her bold and incisive friendship regaled her cousin with those innuendoes which were intended to paint in hideous colours the dangers she was running . 
Madame de Rênal was burning to find herself alone with Julien . 
She wished to ask him if he still loved her . 
In spite of the unalterable sweetness of her character , she was several times on the point of notifying her friend how officious she was . 
Madame Derville arranged things so adroitly that evening in the garden , that she found herself placed between Madame de Rênal and Julien . 
Madame de Rênal , who had thought in her imagination how delicious it would be to press Julien 's hand and carry it to her lips , was not able to address a single word to him . 
This hitch increased her agitation . 
She was devoured by one pang of remorse . 
She had so scolded Julien for his imprudence in coming to her room on the preceding night , that she trembled lest he should not come to-night . 
She left the garden early and went and ensconced herself in her room , but not being able to control her impatience , she went and glued her ear to Julien 's door . 
In spite of the uncertainty and passion which devoured her , she did not dare to enter . 
This action seemed to her the greatest possible meanness , for it forms the basis of a provincial proverb . 
The servants had not yet all gone to bed . 
Prudence at last compelled her to return to her room . 
Two hours of waiting were two centuries of torture . 
Julien was too faithful to what he called his duty to fail to accomplish stage by stage what he had mapped out for himself . 
As one o'clock struck , he escaped softly from his room , assured himself that the master of the house was soundly asleep , and appeared in Madame de Rênal 's room . 
To-night he experienced more happiness by the side of his love , for he thought less constantly about the part he had to play . 
He had eyes to see , and ears to hear . 
What Madame de Rênal said to him about his age contributed to give him some assurance . 
`` Alas ! 
I am ten years older than you . 
How can you love me ? '' 
she repeated vaguely , because the idea oppressed her . 
Julien could not realise her happiness , but he saw that it was genuine and he forgot almost entirely his own fear of being ridiculous . 
The foolish thought that he was regarded as an inferior , by reason of his obscure birth , disappeared also . 
As Julien 's transports reassured his timid mistress , she regained a little of her happiness , and of her power to judge her lover . 
Happily , he had not , on this occasion , that artificial air which had made the assignation of the previous night a triumph rather than a pleasure . 
If she had realised his concentration on playing a part that melancholy discovery would have taken away all her happiness for ever . 
She could only have seen in it the result of the difference in their ages . 
Although Madame de Rênal had never thought of the theories of love , difference in age is next to difference in fortune , one of the great commonplaces of provincial witticisms , whenever love is the topic of conversation . 
In a few days Julien surrendered himself with all the ardour of his age , and was desperately in love . 
`` One must own , '' he said to himself , `` that she has an angelic kindness of soul , and no one in the world is prettier . '' 
He had almost completely given up playing a part . 
In a moment of abandon , he even confessed to her all his nervousness . 
This confidence raised the passion which he was inspiring to its zenith . 
`` And I have no lucky rival after all , '' said Madame de Rênal to herself with delight . 
She ventured to question him on the portrait in which he used to be so interested . 
Julien swore to her that it was that of a man . 
When Madame de Rênal had enough presence of mind left to reflect , she did not recover from her astonishment that so great a happiness could exist ; and that she had never had anything of . 
`` Oh , '' she said to herself , `` if I had only known Julien ten years ago when I was still considered pretty . '' 
Julien was far from having thoughts like these . 
His love was still akin to ambition . 
It was the joy of possessing , poor , unfortunate and despised as he was , so beautiful a woman . 
His acts of devotion , and his ecstacies at the sight of his mistress 's charms finished by reassuring her a little with regard to the difference of age . 
If she had possessed a little of that knowledge of life which the woman of thirty has enjoyed in the more civilised of countries for quite a long time , she would have trembled for the duration of a love , which only seemed to thrive on novelty and the intoxication of a young man 's vanity . 
In those moments when he forgot his ambition , Julien admired ecstatically even the hats and even the dresses of Madame de Rênal . 
He could not sate himself with the pleasure of smelling their perfume . 
He would open her mirrored cupboard , and remain hours on end admiring the beauty and the order of everything that he found there . 
His love leaned on him and looked at him . 
He was looking at those jewels and those dresses which had had been her wedding presents . 
`` I might have married a man like that , '' thought Madame de Rênal sometimes . 
`` What a fiery soul ! 
What a delightful life one would have with him ? '' 
As for Julien , he had never been so near to those terrible instruments of feminine artillery . 
`` It is impossible , '' he said to himself `` for there to be anything more beautiful in Paris . '' 
He could find no flaw in his happiness . 
The sincere admiration and ecstacies of his mistress would frequently make him forget that silly pose which had rendered him so stiff and almost ridiculous during the first moments of the intrigue . 
There were moments where , in spite of his habitual hypocrisy , he found an extreme delight in confessing to this great lady who admired him , his ignorance of a crowd of little usages . 
His mistress 's rank seemed to lift him above himself . 
Madame de Rênal , on her side , would find the sweetest thrill of intellectual voluptuousness in thus instructing in a number of little things this young man who was so full of genius , and who was looked upon by everyone as destined one day to go so far . 
Even the sub-prefect and M. Valenod could not help admiring him . 
She thought it made them less foolish . 
As for Madame Derville , she was very far from being in a position to express the same sentiments . 
Rendered desperate by what she thought she divined , and seeing that her good advice was becoming offensive to a woman who had literally lost her head , she left Vergy without giving the explanation , which her friend carefully refrained from asking . 
Madame de Rênal shed a few tears for her , and soon found her happiness greater than ever . 
As a result of her departure , she found herself alone with her lover nearly the whole day . 
Julien abandoned himself all the more to the delightful society of his sweetheart , since , whenever he was alone , Fouqué 's fatal proposition still continued to agitate him . 
During the first days of his novel life there were moments when the man who had never loved , who had never been loved by anyone , would find so delicious a pleasure in being sincere , that he was on the point of confessing to Madame de Rênal that ambition which up to then had been the very essence of his existence . 
He would have liked to have been able to consult her on the strange temptation which Fouqué 's offer held out to him , but a little episode rendered any frankness impossible . 
Oh , how this spring of love resembleth The uncertain glory of an April day , Which now shows all the beauty of the sun , And by and by a cloud takes all away . 
Two Gentlemen of Verona . 
One evening when the sun was setting , and he was sitting near his love , at the bottom of the orchard , far from all intruders , he meditated deeply . 
`` Will such sweet moments '' he said to himself `` last for ever ? '' 
His soul was engrossed in the difficulty of deciding on a calling . 
He lamented that great attack of unhappiness which comes at the end of childhood and spoils the first years of youth in those who are not rich . 
`` Ah ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` was not Napoleon the heaven-sent saviour for young Frenchmen ? 
Who is to replace him ? 
What will those unfortunate youths do without him , who , even though they are richer than I am , have only just the few crowns necessary to procure an education for themselves , but have not at the age of twenty enough money to buy a man and advance themselves in their career . '' 
`` Whatever one does , '' he added , with a deep sigh , `` this fatal memory will always prevent our being happy . '' 
He suddenly saw Madame de Rênal frown . 
She assumed a cold and disdainful air . 
She thought his way of looking at things typical of a servant . 
Brought up as she was with the idea that she was very rich , she took it for granted that Julien was so also . 
She loved him a thousand times more than life and set no store by money . 
Julien was far from guessing these ideas , but that frown brought him back to earth . 
He had sufficient presence of mind to manipulate his phrases , and to give the noble lady who was sitting so near him on the grass seat to understand that the words he had just repeated had been heard by him during his journey to his friend the wood merchant . 
It was the logic of infidels . 
`` Well , have nothing to do with those people , '' said Madame de Rênal , still keeping a little of that icy air which had suddenly succeeded an expression of the warmest tenderness . 
This frown , or rather his remorse for his own imprudence , was the first check to the illusion which was transporting Julien . 
He said to himself , `` She is good and sweet , she has a great fancy for me , but she has been brought up in the enemy 's camp . 
They must be particularly afraid of that class of men of spirit who , after a good education , have not enough money to take up a career . 
What would become of those nobles if we had an opportunity of fighting them with equal arms . 
Suppose me , for example , mayor of Verrières , and as well meaning and honest as M. de Rênal is at bottom . 
What short shrift I should make of the vicaire , M. Valenod and all their jobberies ! 
How justice would triumph in Verrières . 
It is not their talents which would stop me . 
They are always fumbling about . '' 
That day Julien 's happiness almost became permanent . 
Our hero lacked the power of daring to be sincere . 
He ought to have had the courage to have given battle , and on the spot ; Madame de Rênal had been astonished by Julien 's phrase , because the men in her circle kept on repeating that the return of Robespierre was essentially possible by reason of those over-educated young persons of the lower classes . 
Madame de Rênal 's coldness lasted a longish time , and struck Julien as marked . 
The reason was that the fear that she had said something in some way or other disagreeable to him , succeeded her annoyance for his own breach of taste . 
This unhappiness was vividly reflected in those features which looked so pure and so naïve when she was happy and away from intruders . 
Julien no longer dared to surrender himself to his dreams . 
Growing calmer and less infatuated , he considered that it was imprudent to go and see Madame de Rênal in her room . 
It was better for her to come to him . 
If a servant noticed her going about the house , a dozen different excuses could explain it . 
But this arrangement had also its inconveniences . 
Julien had received from Fouqué some books , which he , as a theology student would never have dared to ask for in a bookshop . 
He only dared to open them at night . 
He would often have found it much more convenient not to be interrupted by a visit , the very waiting for which had even on the evening before the little scene in the orchard completely destroyed his mood for reading . 
He had Madame de Rênal to thank for understanding books in quite a new way . 
He had dared to question her on a number of little things , the ignorance of which cuts quite short the intellectual progress of any young man born out of society , however much natural genius one may choose to ascribe to him . 
This education given through sheer love by a woman who was extremely ignorant , was a piece of luck . 
Julien managed to get a clear insight into society such as it is to-day . 
His mind was not bewildered by the narration of what it had been once , two thousand years ago , or even sixty years ago , in the time of Voltaire and Louis XV . 
The scales fell from his eyes to his inexpressible joy , and he understood at last what was going on in Verrières . 
In the first place there were the very complicated intrigues which had been woven for the last two years around the prefect of Besançon . 
They were backed up by letters from Paris , written by the cream of the aristocracy . 
The scheme was to make M. de Moirod -LRB- he was the most devout man in the district -RRB- the first and not the second deputy of the mayor of Verrières . 
He had for a competitor a very rich manufacturer whom it was essential to push back into the place of second deputy . 
Julien understood at last the innuendoes which he had surprised , when the high society of the locality used to come and dine at M. de Rênal 's . 
This privileged society was deeply concerned with the choice of a first deputy , while the rest of the town , and above all , the Liberals , did not even suspect its possibility . 
The factor which made the matter important was that , as everybody knows , the east side of the main street of Verrières has to be put more than nine feet back since that street has become a royal route . 
Now if M. de Moirod , who had three houses liable to have their frontage put back , succeeded in becoming first deputy and consequently mayor in the event of M. de Rênal being elected to the chamber , he would shut his eyes , and it would be possible to make little imperceptible repairs in the houses projecting on to the public road , as the result of which they would last a hundred years . 
In spite of the great piety and proved integrity of M. de Moirod , everyone was certain that he would prove amenable , because he had a great many children . 
Among the houses liable to have their frontage put back nine belonged to the cream of Verrières society . 
In Julien 's eyes this intrigue was much more important than the history of the battle of Fontenoy , whose name he now came across for the first time in one of the books which Fouqué had sent him . 
There had been many things which had astonished Julien since the time five years ago when he had started going to the curé 's in the evening . 
But discretion and humility of spirit being the primary qualities of a theological student , it had always been impossible for him to put questions . 
One day Madame de Rênal was giving an order to her husband 's valet who was Julien 's enemy . 
`` But , Madame , to-day is the last Friday in the month , '' the man answered in a rather strange manner . 
`` Go , '' said Madame de Rênal . 
`` Well , '' said Julien , `` I suppose he 's going to go to that corn shop which was once a church , and has recently been restored to religion , but what is he going to do there ? 
That 's one of the mysteries which I have never been able to fathom . '' 
`` It 's a very literary institution , but a very curious one , '' answered Madame de Rênal . 
`` Women are not admitted to it . 
All I know is , that everybody uses the second person singular . 
This servant , for instance , will go and meet M. Valenod there , and the haughty prig will not be a bit offended at hearing himself addressed by Saint-Jean in that familiar way , and will answer him in the same way . 
If you are keen on knowing what takes place , I will ask M. de Maugiron and M. Valenod for details . 
We pay twenty francs for each servant , to prevent their cutting our throats one fine day . '' 
Time flew . 
The memory of his mistress 's charms distracted Julien from his black ambition . 
The necessity of refraining from mentioning gloomy or intellectual topics since they both belonged to opposing parties , added , without his suspecting it , to the happiness which he owed her , and to the dominion which she acquired over him . 
On the occasions when the presence of the precocious children reduced them to speaking the language of cold reason , Julien looking at her with eyes sparkling with love , would listen with complete docility to her explanations of the world as it is . 
Frequently , in the middle of an account of some cunning piece of jobbery , with reference to a road or a contract , Madame de Rênal 's mind would suddenly wander to the very point of delirium . 
Julien found it necessary to scold her . 
She indulged when with him in the same intimate gestures which she used with her own children . 
The fact was that there were days when she deceived herself that she loved him like her own child . 
Had she not repeatedly to answer his naïve questions about a thousand simple things that a well-born child of fifteen knows quite well ? 
An instant afterwards she would admire him like her master . 
His genius would even go so far as to frighten her . 
She thought she should see more clearly every day the future great man in this young abbé . 
She saw him Pope ; she saw him first minister like Richelieu . 
`` Shall I live long enough to see you in your glory ? '' 
she said to Julien . 
`` There is room for a great man ; church and state have need of one . '' 
Do you not deserve to be thrown aside like a plebeian corpse which has no soul and whose blood flows no longer in its veins . 
Sermon of the Bishop at the Chapel of Saint Clement . 
On the 3rd of September at ten o'clock in the evening , a gendarme woke up the whole of Verrières by galloping up the main street . 
He brought the news that His Majesty the King of -- would arrive the following Sunday , and it was already Tuesday . 
The prefect authorised , that is to say , demanded the forming of a guard of honour . 
They were to exhibit all possible pomp . 
An express messenger was sent to Vergy . 
M. de Rênal arrived during the night and found the town in a commotion . 
Each individual had his own pretensions ; those who were less busy hired balconies to see the King . 
Who was to command the Guard of Honour ? 
M. de Rênal at once realised how essential it was in the interests of the houses liable to have their frontage put back that M. de Moirod should have the command . 
That might entitle him to the post of first deputy-mayor . 
There was nothing to say against the devoutness of M. de Moirod . 
It brooked no comparison , but he had never sat on a horse . 
He was a man of thirty-six , timid in every way , and equally frightened of falling and of looking ridiculous . 
The mayor had summoned him as early as five o'clock in the morning . 
`` You see , monsieur , I ask your advice , as though you already occupy that post to which all the people on the right side want to carry you . 
In this unhappy town , manufacturers are prospering , the Liberal party is becoming possessed of millions , it aspires to power ; it will manage to exploit everything to its own ends . 
Let us consult the interests of the king , the interest of the monarchy , and above all , the interest of our holy religion . 
Who do you think , monsieur , could be entrusted with the command of the guard of honour ? '' 
In spite of the terrible fear with which horses inspired him , M. de Moirod finished by accepting this honour like a martyr . 
`` I shall know how to take the right tone , '' he said to the mayor . 
There was scarcely time enough to get ready the uniforms which had served seven years ago on the occasion of the passage of a prince of the blood . 
At seven o'clock , Madame de Rênal arrived at Vergy with Julien and the children . 
She found her drawing room filled with Liberal ladies who preached the union of all parties and had come to beg her to urge her husband to grant a place to theirs in the guard of honour . 
One of them actually asserted that if her husband was not chosen he would go bankrupt out of chagrin . 
Madame de Rênal quickly got rid of all these people . 
She seemed very engrossed . 
Julien was astonished , and what was more , angry that she should make a mystery of what was disturbing her , `` I had anticipated it , '' he said bitterly to himself . 
`` Her love is being over-shadowed by the happiness of receiving a King in her house . 
All this hubbub overcomes her . 
She will love me once more when the ideas of her caste no longer trouble her brain . '' 
An astonishing fact , he only loved her the more . 
The decorators began to fill the house . 
He watched a long time for the opportunity to exchange a few words . 
He eventually found her as she was coming out of his own room , carrying one of his suits . 
They were alone . 
He tried to speak to her . 
She ran away , refusing to listen to him . 
`` I am an absolute fool to love a woman like that , whose ambition renders her as mad as her husband . '' 
She was madder . 
One of her great wishes which she had never confessed to Julien for fear of shocking him , was to see him leave off , if only for one day , his gloomy black suit . 
With an adroitness which was truly admirable in so ingenuous a woman , she secured first from M. de Moirod , and subsequently , from M. the sub-perfect de Maugiron , an assurance that Julien should be nominated a guard of honour in preference to five or six young people , the sons of very well-off manufacturers , of whom two at least , were models of piety . 
M. de Valenod , who reckoned on lending his carriage to the prettiest women in the town , and on showing off his fine Norman steeds , consented to let Julien -LRB- the being he hated most in the whole world -RRB- have one of his horses . 
But all the guards of honour , either possessed or had borrowed , one of those pretty sky-blue uniforms , with two silver colonel epaulettes , which had shone seven years ago . 
Madame de Rênal wanted a new uniform , and she only had four days in which to send to Besançon and get from there the uniform , the arms , the hat , etc. , everything necessary for a Guard of Honour . 
The most delightful part of it was that she thought it imprudent to get Julien 's uniform made at Verrières . 
She wanted to surprise both him and the town . 
Having settled the questions of the guards of honour , and of the public welcome finished , the mayor had now to organise a great religious ceremony . 
The King of -- did not wish to pass through Verrières without visiting the famous relic of St. Clement , which is kept at Bray-le-Haut barely a league from the town . 
The authorities wanted to have a numerous attendance of the clergy , but this matter was the most difficult to arrange . 
M. Maslon , the new curé , wanted to avoid at any price the presence of M. Chélan . 
It was in vain that M. de Rênal tried to represent to him that it would be imprudent to do so . 
M. the Marquis de La Mole whose ancestors had been governors of the province for so many generations , had been chosen to accompany the King of -- . 
He had known the abbé Chélan for thirty years . 
He would certainly ask news of him when he arrived at Verrières , and if he found him disgraced he was the very man to go and route him out in the little house to which he had retired , accompanied by all the escort that he had at his disposition . 
What a rebuff that would be ? 
`` I shall be disgraced both here and at Besançon , '' answered the abbé Maslon , `` if he appears among my clergy . 
A Jansenist , by the Lord . '' 
`` Whatever you can say , my dear abbé , '' replied M. de Rênal , `` I 'll never expose the administration of Verrières to receiving such an affront from M. de la Mole . 
You do not know him . 
He is orthodox enough at Court , but here in the provinces , he is a satirical wit and cynic , whose only object is to make people uncomfortable . 
He is capable of covering us with ridicule in the eyes of the Liberals , simply in order to amuse himself . '' 
It was only on the night between the Saturday and the Sunday , after three whole days of negotiations that the pride of the abbé Maslon bent before the fear of the mayor , which was now changing into courage . 
It was necessary to write a honeyed letter to the abbé Chélan , begging him to be present at the ceremony in connection with the relic of Bray-le-Haut , if of course , his great age and his infirmity allowed him to do so . 
M. Chélan asked for and obtained a letter of invitation for Julien , who was to accompany him as his sub-deacon . 
From the beginning of the Sunday morning , thousands of peasants began to arrive from the neighbouring mountains , and to inundate the streets of Verrières . 
It was the finest sunshine . 
Finally , about three o'clock , a thrill swept through all this crowd . 
A great fire had been perceived on a rock two leagues from Verrières . 
This signal announced that the king had just entered the territory of the department . 
At the same time , the sound of all the bells and the repeated volleys from an old Spanish cannon which belonged to the town , testified to its joy at this great event . 
Half the population climbed on to the roofs . 
All the women were on the balconies . 
The guard of honour started to march , The brilliant uniforms were universally admired ; everybody recognised a relative or a friend . 
They made fun of the timidity of M. de Moirod , whose prudent hand was ready every single minute to catch hold of his saddle-bow . 
But one remark resulted in all the others being forgotten ; the first cavalier in the ninth line was a very pretty , slim boy , who was not recognised at first . 
He soon created a general sensation , as some uttered a cry of indignation , and others were dumbfounded with astonishment . 
They recognised in this young man , who was sitting one of the Norman horses of M. Valenod , little Sorel , the carpenter 's son . 
There was a unanimous out-cry against the mayor , above all on the part of the Liberals . 
What , because this little labourer , who masqueraded as an abbé , was tutor to his brats , he had the audacity to nominate him guard of honour to the prejudice of rich manufacturers like so-and-so and so-and-so ! 
`` Those gentlemen , '' said a banker 's wife , `` ought to put that insolent gutter-boy in his proper place . '' 
`` He is cunning and carries a sabre , '' answered her neighbour . 
`` He would be dastardly enough to slash them in the face . '' 
The conversation of aristocratic society was more dangerous . 
The ladies began to ask each other if the mayor alone was responsible for this grave impropriety . 
Speaking generally , they did justice to his contempt for lack of birth . 
Julien was the happiest of men , while he was the subject of so much conversation . 
Bold by nature , he sat a horse better than the majority of the young men of this mountain town . 
He saw that , in the eyes of the women , he was the topic of interest . 
His epaulettes were more brilliant than those of the others , because they were new . 
His horse pranced at every moment . 
He reached the zenith of joy . 
His happiness was unbounded when , as they passed by the old rampart , the noise of the little cannon made his horse prance outside the line . 
By a great piece of luck he did not fall ; from that moment he felt himself a hero . 
He was one of Napoleon 's officers of artillery , and was charging a battery . 
One person was happier than he . 
She had first seen him pass from one of the folding windows in the Hôtel de Ville . 
Then taking her carriage and rapidly making a long detour , she arrived in time to shudder when his horse took him outside the line . 
Finally she put her carriage to the gallop , left by another gate of the town , succeeded in rejoining the route by which the King was to pass , and was able to follow the Guard of Honour at twenty paces distance in the midst of a noble dust . 
Six thousand peasants cried `` Long live the King , '' when the mayor had the honour to harangue his Majesty . 
An hour afterwards , when all the speeches had been listened to , and the King was going to enter the town , the little cannon began again to discharge its spasmodic volleys . 
But an accident ensued , the victim being , not one of the cannoneers who had proved their mettle at Leipsic and at Montreuil , but the future deputy-mayor , M. de Moirod . 
His horse gently laid him in the one heap of mud on the high road , a somewhat scandalous circumstance , inasmuch as it was necessary to extricate him to allow the King to pass . 
His Majesty alighted at the fine new church , which was decked out to-day with all its crimson curtains . 
The King was due to dine , and then afterwards take his carriage again and go and pay his respects to the celebrated relic of Saint Clement . 
Scarcely was the King in the church than Julien galloped towards the house of M. de Rênal . 
Once there he doffed with a sigh his fine sky-blue uniform , his sabre and his epaulettes , to put on again his shabby little black suit . 
He mounted his horse again , and in a few moments was at Bray-le-Haut , which was on the summit of a very pretty hill . 
`` Enthusiasm is responsible for these numbers of peasants , '' thought Julien . 
It was impossible to move a step at Verrières , and here there were more than ten thousand round this ancient abbey . 
Half ruined by the vandalism of the Revolution , it had been magnificently restored since the Restoration , and people were already beginning to talk of miracles . 
Julien rejoined the abbé Chélan , who scolded him roundly and gave him a cassock and a surplice . 
He dressed quickly and followed M. Chélan , who was going to pay a call on the young bishop of Agde . 
He was a nephew of M. de la Mole , who had been recently nominated , and had been charged with the duty of showing the relic to the King . 
But the bishop was not to be found . 
The clergy began to get impatient . 
It was awaiting its chief in the sombre Gothic cloister of the ancient abbey . 
Twenty-four curés had been brought together so as to represent the ancient chapter of Bray-le-Haut , which before 1789 consisted of twenty-four canons . 
The curés , having deplored the bishop 's youth for three-quarters of an hour , thought it fitting for their senior to visit Monseigneur to apprise him that the King was on the point of arriving , and that it was time to betake himself to the choir . 
The great age of M. Chélan gave him the seniority . 
In spite of the bad temper which he was manifesting to Julien , he signed him to follow . 
Julien was wearing his surplice with distinction . 
By means of some trick or other of ecclesiastical dress , he had made his fine curling hair very flat , but by a forgetfulness , which redoubled the anger of M. Chélan , the spurs of the Guard of Honour could be seen below the long folds of his cassock . 
When they arrived at the bishop 's apartment , the tall lackeys with their lace-frills scarcely deigned to answer the old curé to the effect that Monseigneur was not receiving . 
They made fun of him when he tried to explain that in his capacity of senior member of the chapter of Bray-le-Haut , he had the privilege of being admitted at any time to the officiating bishop . 
Julien 's haughty temper was shocked by the lackeys ' insolence . 
He started to traverse the corridors of the ancient abbey , and to shake all the doors which he found . 
A very small one yielded to his efforts , and he found himself in a cell in the midst of Monseigneur 's valets , who were dressed in black suits with chains on their necks . 
His hurried manner made these gentlemen think that he had been sent by the bishop , and they let him pass . 
He went some steps further on , and found himself in an immense Gothic hall , which was extremely dark , and completely wainscotted in black oak . 
The ogive windows had all been walled in with brick except one . 
There was nothing to disguise the coarseness of this masonry , which offered a melancholy contrast to the ancient magnificence of the woodwork . 
The two great sides of this hall , so celebrated among Burgundian antiquaries , and built by the Duke , Charles the Bold , about 1470 in expiation of some sin , were adorned with richly sculptured wooden stalls . 
All the mysteries of the Apocalypse were to be seen portrayed in wood of different colours . 
This melancholy magnificence , debased as it was by the sight of the bare bricks and the plaster -LRB- which was still quite white -RRB- affected Julien . 
He stopped in silence . 
He saw at the other extremity of the hall , near the one window which let in the daylight , a movable mahogany mirror . 
A young man in a violet robe and a lace surplice , but with his head bare , was standing still three paces from the glass . 
This piece of furniture seemed strange in a place like this , and had doubtless been only brought there on the previous day . 
Julien thought that the young man had the appearance of being irritated . 
He was solemnly giving benedictions with his right hand close to the mirror . 
`` What can this mean , '' he thought . 
`` Is this young priest performing some preliminary ceremony ? 
Perhaps he is the bishop 's secretary . 
He will be as insolent as the lackeys . 
Never mind though ! 
Let us try . '' 
He advanced and traversed somewhat slowly the length of the hall , with his gaze fixed all the time on the one window , and looking at the young man who continued without any intermission bestowing slowly an infinite number of blessings . 
The nearer he approached the better he could distinguish his angry manner . 
The richness of the lace surplice stopped Julien in spite of himself some paces in front of the mirror . 
`` It is my duty to speak , '' he said to himself at last . 
But the beauty of the hall had moved him , and he was already upset by the harsh words he anticipated . 
The young man saw him in the mirror , turned round , and suddenly discarding his angry manner , said to him in the gentlest tone , `` Well , Monsieur , has it been arranged at last ? '' 
Julien was dumbfounded . 
As the young man began to turn towards him , Julien saw the pectoral cross on his breast . 
It was the bishop of Agde . 
`` As young as that , '' thought Julien . 
`` At most six or eight years older than I am ! '' 
He was ashamed of his spurs . 
`` Monseigneur , '' he said at last , `` I am sent by M. Chélan , the senior of the chapter . '' 
`` Ah , he has been well recommended to me , '' said the bishop in a polished tone which doubled Julien 's delight , `` But I beg your pardon , Monsieur , I mistook you for the person who was to bring me my mitre . 
It was badly packed at Paris . 
The silver cloth towards the top has been terribly spoiled . 
It will look awful , '' ended the young bishop sadly , `` And besides , I am being kept waiting . '' 
`` Monseigneur , I will go and fetch the mitre if your grace will let me . '' 
Julien 's fine eyes did their work . 
`` Go , Monsieur , '' answered the bishop , with charming politeness . 
`` I need it immediately . 
I am grieved to keep the gentlemen of the chapter waiting . '' 
When Julien reached the centre of the hall , he turned round towards the bishop , and saw that he had again commenced giving benedictions . 
`` What can it be ? '' 
Julien asked himself . 
`` No doubt it is a necessary ecclesiastical preliminary for the ceremony which is to take place . '' 
When he reached the cell in which the valets were congregated , he saw the mitre in their hands . 
These gentlemen succumbed in spite of themselves to his imperious look , and gave him Monseigneur 's mitre . 
He felt proud to carry it . 
As he crossed the hall he walked slowly . 
He held it with reverence . 
He found the bishop seated before the glass , but from time to time , his right hand , although fatigued , still gave a blessing . 
Julien helped him to adjust his mitre . 
The bishop shook his head . 
