It comprised all that was required of the servant , from eight in the morning , exactly at which hour Phileas Fogg rose , till half-past eleven , when he left the house for the Reform Club -- all the details of service , the tea and toast at twenty-three minutes past eight , the shaving-water at thirty-seven minutes past nine , and the toilet at twenty minutes before ten . 
Everything was regulated and foreseen that was to be done from half-past eleven a.m. till midnight , the hour at which the methodical gentleman retired . 
Mr. Fogg 's wardrobe was amply supplied and in the best taste . 
Each pair of trousers , coat , and vest bore a number , indicating the time of year and season at which they were in turn to be laid out for wearing ; and the same system was applied to the master 's shoes . 
In short , the house in Saville Row , which must have been a very temple of disorder and unrest under the illustrious but dissipated Sheridan , was cosiness , comfort , and method idealised . 
There was no study , nor were there books , which would have been quite useless to Mr. Fogg ; for at the Reform two libraries , one of general literature and the other of law and politics , were at his service . 
A moderate-sized safe stood in his bedroom , constructed so as to defy fire as well as burglars ; but Passepartout found neither arms nor hunting weapons anywhere ; everything betrayed the most tranquil and peaceable habits . 
Having scrutinised the house from top to bottom , he rubbed his hands , a broad smile overspread his features , and he said joyfully , `` This is just what I wanted ! 
Ah , we shall get on together , Mr. Fogg and I ! 
What a domestic and regular gentleman ! 
A real machine ; well , I do n't mind serving a machine . '' 
IN WHICH A CONVERSATION TAKES PLACE WHICH SEEMS LIKELY TO COST PHILEAS FOGG DEAR Phileas Fogg , having shut the door of his house at half-past eleven , and having put his right foot before his left five hundred and seventy-five times , and his left foot before his right five hundred and seventy-six times , reached the Reform Club , an imposing edifice in Pall Mall , which could not have cost less than three millions . 
He repaired at once to the dining-room , the nine windows of which open upon a tasteful garden , where the trees were already gilded with an autumn colouring ; and took his place at the habitual table , the cover of which had already been laid for him . 
His breakfast consisted of a side-dish , a broiled fish with Reading sauce , a scarlet slice of roast beef garnished with mushrooms , a rhubarb and gooseberry tart , and a morsel of Cheshire cheese , the whole being washed down with several cups of tea , for which the Reform is famous . 
He rose at thirteen minutes to one , and directed his steps towards the large hall , a sumptuous apartment adorned with lavishly-framed paintings . 
A flunkey handed him an uncut Times , which he proceeded to cut with a skill which betrayed familiarity with this delicate operation . 
The perusal of this paper absorbed Phileas Fogg until a quarter before four , whilst the Standard , his next task , occupied him till the dinner hour . 
Dinner passed as breakfast had done , and Mr. Fogg re-appeared in the reading-room and sat down to the Pall Mall at twenty minutes before six . 
Half an hour later several members of the Reform came in and drew up to the fireplace , where a coal fire was steadily burning . 
They were Mr. Fogg 's usual partners at whist : Andrew Stuart , an engineer ; John Sullivan and Samuel Fallentin , bankers ; Thomas Flanagan , a brewer ; and Gauthier Ralph , one of the Directors of the Bank of England -- all rich and highly respectable personages , even in a club which comprises the princes of English trade and finance . 
`` Well , Ralph , '' said Thomas Flanagan , `` what about that robbery ? '' 
`` Oh , '' replied Stuart , `` the Bank will lose the money . '' 
`` On the contrary , '' broke in Ralph , `` I hope we may put our hands on the robber . 
Skilful detectives have been sent to all the principal ports of America and the Continent , and he 'll be a clever fellow if he slips through their fingers . '' 
`` But have you got the robber 's description ? '' 
asked Stuart . 
`` In the first place , he is no robber at all , '' returned Ralph , positively . 
`` What ! 
a fellow who makes off with fifty-five thousand pounds , no robber ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Perhaps he 's a manufacturer , then . '' 
`` The Daily Telegraph says that he is a gentleman . '' 
It was Phileas Fogg , whose head now emerged from behind his newspapers , who made this remark . 
He bowed to his friends , and entered into the conversation . 
The affair which formed its subject , and which was town talk , had occurred three days before at the Bank of England . 
A package of banknotes , to the value of fifty-five thousand pounds , had been taken from the principal cashier 's table , that functionary being at the moment engaged in registering the receipt of three shillings and sixpence . 
Of course , he could not have his eyes everywhere . 
Let it be observed that the Bank of England reposes a touching confidence in the honesty of the public . 
There are neither guards nor gratings to protect its treasures ; gold , silver , banknotes are freely exposed , at the mercy of the first comer . 
A keen observer of English customs relates that , being in one of the rooms of the Bank one day , he had the curiosity to examine a gold ingot weighing some seven or eight pounds . 
He took it up , scrutinised it , passed it to his neighbour , he to the next man , and so on until the ingot , going from hand to hand , was transferred to the end of a dark entry ; nor did it return to its place for half an hour . 
Meanwhile , the cashier had not so much as raised his head . 
But in the present instance things had not gone so smoothly . 
The package of notes not being found when five o'clock sounded from the ponderous clock in the `` drawing office , '' the amount was passed to the account of profit and loss . 
As soon as the robbery was discovered , picked detectives hastened off to Liverpool , Glasgow , Havre , Suez , Brindisi , New York , and other ports , inspired by the proffered reward of two thousand pounds , and five per cent . 
on the sum that might be recovered . 
Detectives were also charged with narrowly watching those who arrived at or left London by rail , and a judicial examination was at once entered upon . 
There were real grounds for supposing , as the Daily Telegraph said , that the thief did not belong to a professional band . 
On the day of the robbery a well-dressed gentleman of polished manners , and with a well-to-do air , had been observed going to and fro in the paying room where the crime was committed . 
A description of him was easily procured and sent to the detectives ; and some hopeful spirits , of whom Ralph was one , did not despair of his apprehension . 
