It was Passepartout ; and what had happened to him was as follows : Shortly after Fix left the opium den , two waiters had lifted the unconscious Passepartout , and had carried him to the bed reserved for the smokers . 
Three hours later , pursued even in his dreams by a fixed idea , the poor fellow awoke , and struggled against the stupefying influence of the narcotic . 
The thought of a duty unfulfilled shook off his torpor , and he hurried from the abode of drunkenness . 
Staggering and holding himself up by keeping against the walls , falling down and creeping up again , and irresistibly impelled by a kind of instinct , he kept crying out , `` The Carnatic ! 
the Carnatic ! '' 
The steamer lay puffing alongside the quay , on the point of starting . 
Passepartout had but few steps to go ; and , rushing upon the plank , he crossed it , and fell unconscious on the deck , just as the Carnatic was moving off . 
Several sailors , who were evidently accustomed to this sort of scene , carried the poor Frenchman down into the second cabin , and Passepartout did not wake until they were one hundred and fifty miles away from China . 
Thus he found himself the next morning on the deck of the Carnatic , and eagerly inhaling the exhilarating sea-breeze . 
The pure air sobered him . 
He began to collect his sense , which he found a difficult task ; but at last he recalled the events of the evening before , Fix 's revelation , and the opium-house . 
`` It is evident , '' said he to himself , `` that I have been abominably drunk ! 
What will Mr. Fogg say ? 
At least I have not missed the steamer , which is the most important thing . '' 
Then , as Fix occurred to him : `` As for that rascal , I hope we are well rid of him , and that he has not dared , as he proposed , to follow us on board the Carnatic . 
A detective on the track of Mr. Fogg , accused of robbing the Bank of England ! 
Pshaw ! 
Mr. Fogg is no more a robber than I am a murderer . '' 
Should he divulge Fix 's real errand to his master ? 
Would it do to tell the part the detective was playing . 
Would it not be better to wait until Mr. Fogg reached London again , and then impart to him that an agent of the metropolitan police had been following him round the world , and have a good laugh over it ? 
No doubt ; at least , it was worth considering . 
The first thing to do was to find Mr. Fogg , and apologise for his singular behaviour . 
Passepartout got up and proceeded , as well as he could with the rolling of the steamer , to the after-deck . 
He saw no one who resembled either his master or Aouda . 
`` Good ! '' 
muttered he ; `` Aouda has not got up yet , and Mr. Fogg has probably found some partners at whist . '' 
He descended to the saloon . 
Mr. Fogg was not there . 
Passepartout had only , however , to ask the purser the number of his master 's state-room . 
The purser replied that he did not know any passenger by the name of Fogg . 
`` I beg your pardon , '' said Passepartout persistently . 
`` He is a tall gentleman , quiet , and not very talkative , and has with him a young lady -- '' `` There is no young lady on board , '' interrupted the purser . 
`` Here is a list of the passengers ; you may see for yourself . '' 
Passepartout scanned the list , but his master 's name was not upon it . 
All at once an idea struck him . 
`` Ah ! 
am I on the Carnatic ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` On the way to Yokohama ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
Passepartout had for an instant feared that he was on the wrong boat ; but , though he was really on the Carnatic , his master was not there . 
He fell thunderstruck on a seat . 
He saw it all now . 
He remembered that the time of sailing had been changed , that he should have informed his master of that fact , and that he had not done so . 
It was his fault , then , that Mr. Fogg and Aouda had missed the steamer . 
Yes , but it was still more the fault of the traitor who , in order to separate him from his master , and detain the latter at Hong Kong , had inveigled him into getting drunk ! 
He now saw the detective 's trick ; and at this moment Mr. Fogg was certainly ruined , his bet was lost , and he himself perhaps arrested and imprisoned ! 
At this thought Passepartout tore his hair . 
Ah , if Fix ever came within his reach , what a settling of accounts there would be ! 
