`` Then you know India ? '' 
`` Why yes , '' replied Fix , who spoke cautiously . 
`` A curious place , this India ? '' 
`` Oh , very curious . 
Mosques , minarets , temples , fakirs , pagodas , tigers , snakes , elephants ! 
I hope you will have ample time to see the sights . '' 
`` I hope so , Monsieur Fix . 
You see , a man of sound sense ought not to spend his life jumping from a steamer upon a railway train , and from a railway train upon a steamer again , pretending to make the tour of the world in eighty days ! 
No ; all these gymnastics , you may be sure , will cease at Bombay . '' 
`` And Mr. Fogg is getting on well ? '' 
asked Fix , in the most natural tone in the world . 
`` Quite well , and I too . 
I eat like a famished ogre ; it 's the sea air . 
`` But I never see your master on deck . '' 
`` Never ; he has n't the least curiosity . '' 
`` Do you know , Mr. Passepartout , that this pretended tour in eighty days may conceal some secret errand -- perhaps a diplomatic mission ? '' 
`` Faith , Monsieur Fix , I assure you I know nothing about it , nor would I give half a crown to find out . '' 
After this meeting , Passepartout and Fix got into the habit of chatting together , the latter making it a point to gain the worthy man 's confidence . 
He frequently offered him a glass of whiskey or pale ale in the steamer bar-room , which Passepartout never failed to accept with graceful alacrity , mentally pronouncing Fix the best of good fellows . 
Meanwhile the Mongolia was pushing forward rapidly ; on the 13th , Mocha , surrounded by its ruined walls whereon date-trees were growing , was sighted , and on the mountains beyond were espied vast coffee-fields . 
Passepartout was ravished to behold this celebrated place , and thought that , with its circular walls and dismantled fort , it looked like an immense coffee-cup and saucer . 
The following night they passed through the Strait of Bab-el-Mandeb , which means in Arabic The Bridge of Tears , and the next day they put in at Steamer Point , north-west of Aden harbour , to take in coal . 
This matter of fuelling steamers is a serious one at such distances from the coal-mines ; it costs the Peninsular Company some eight hundred thousand pounds a year . 
In these distant seas , coal is worth three or four pounds sterling a ton . 
The Mongolia had still sixteen hundred and fifty miles to traverse before reaching Bombay , and was obliged to remain four hours at Steamer Point to coal up . 
But this delay , as it was foreseen , did not affect Phileas Fogg 's programme ; besides , the Mongolia , instead of reaching Aden on the morning of the 15th , when she was due , arrived there on the evening of the 14th , a gain of fifteen hours . 
Mr. Fogg and his servant went ashore at Aden to have the passport again visaed ; Fix , unobserved , followed them . 
The visa procured , Mr. Fogg returned on board to resume his former habits ; while Passepartout , according to custom , sauntered about among the mixed population of Somanlis , Banyans , Parsees , Jews , Arabs , and Europeans who comprise the twenty-five thousand inhabitants of Aden . 
He gazed with wonder upon the fortifications which make this place the Gibraltar of the Indian Ocean , and the vast cisterns where the English engineers were still at work , two thousand years after the engineers of Solomon . 
`` Very curious , very curious , '' said Passepartout to himself , on returning to the steamer . 
`` I see that it is by no means useless to travel , if a man wants to see something new . '' 
At six p.m. the Mongolia slowly moved out of the roadstead , and was soon once more on the Indian Ocean . 
She had a hundred and sixty-eight hours in which to reach Bombay , and the sea was favourable , the wind being in the north-west , and all sails aiding the engine . 
The steamer rolled but little , the ladies , in fresh toilets , reappeared on deck , and the singing and dancing were resumed . 
The trip was being accomplished most successfully , and Passepartout was enchanted with the congenial companion which chance had secured him in the person of the delightful Fix . 
On Sunday , October 20th , towards noon , they came in sight of the Indian coast : two hours later the pilot came on board . 
A range of hills lay against the sky in the horizon , and soon the rows of palms which adorn Bombay came distinctly into view . 
The steamer entered the road formed by the islands in the bay , and at half-past four she hauled up at the quays of Bombay . 
Phileas Fogg was in the act of finishing the thirty-third rubber of the voyage , and his partner and himself having , by a bold stroke , captured all thirteen of the tricks , concluded this fine campaign with a brilliant victory . 
The Mongolia was due at Bombay on the 22nd ; she arrived on the 20th . 
This was a gain to Phileas Fogg of two days since his departure from London , and he calmly entered the fact in the itinerary , in the column of gains . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS ONLY TOO GLAD TO GET OFF WITH THE LOSS OF HIS SHOES Everybody knows that the great reversed triangle of land , with its base in the north and its apex in the south , which is called India , embraces fourteen hundred thousand square miles , upon which is spread unequally a population of one hundred and eighty millions of souls . 
The British Crown exercises a real and despotic dominion over the larger portion of this vast country , and has a governor-general stationed at Calcutta , governors at Madras , Bombay , and in Bengal , and a lieutenant-governor at Agra . 
But British India , properly so called , only embraces seven hundred thousand square miles , and a population of from one hundred to one hundred and ten millions of inhabitants . 
A considerable portion of India is still free from British authority ; and there are certain ferocious rajahs in the interior who are absolutely independent . 
The celebrated East India Company was all-powerful from 1756 , when the English first gained a foothold on the spot where now stands the city of Madras , down to the time of the great Sepoy insurrection . 
It gradually annexed province after province , purchasing them of the native chiefs , whom it seldom paid , and appointed the governor-general and his subordinates , civil and military . 
But the East India Company has now passed away , leaving the British possessions in India directly under the control of the Crown . 
The aspect of the country , as well as the manners and distinctions of race , is daily changing . 
Formerly one was obliged to travel in India by the old cumbrous methods of going on foot or on horseback , in palanquins or unwieldly coaches ; now fast steamboats ply on the Indus and the Ganges , and a great railway , with branch lines joining the main line at many points on its route , traverses the peninsula from Bombay to Calcutta in three days . 
