Fix thought over these probabilities during the long hours which he spent in his cabin , and kept repeating to himself , `` Now , either the warrant will be at Hong Kong , in which case I shall arrest my man , or it will not be there ; and this time it is absolutely necessary that I should delay his departure . 
I have failed at Bombay , and I have failed at Calcutta ; if I fail at Hong Kong , my reputation is lost : Cost what it may , I must succeed ! 
But how shall I prevent his departure , if that should turn out to be my last resource ? '' 
Fix made up his mind that , if worst came to worst , he would make a confidant of Passepartout , and tell him what kind of a fellow his master really was . 
That Passepartout was not Fogg 's accomplice , he was very certain . 
The servant , enlightened by his disclosure , and afraid of being himself implicated in the crime , would doubtless become an ally of the detective . 
But this method was a dangerous one , only to be employed when everything else had failed . 
A word from Passepartout to his master would ruin all . 
The detective was therefore in a sore strait . 
But suddenly a new idea struck him . 
The presence of Aouda on the Rangoon , in company with Phileas Fogg , gave him new material for reflection . 
Who was this woman ? 
What combination of events had made her Fogg 's travelling companion ? 
They had evidently met somewhere between Bombay and Calcutta ; but where ? 
Had they met accidentally , or had Fogg gone into the interior purposely in quest of this charming damsel ? 
Fix was fairly puzzled . 
He asked himself whether there had not been a wicked elopement ; and this idea so impressed itself upon his mind that he determined to make use of the supposed intrigue . 
Whether the young woman were married or not , he would be able to create such difficulties for Mr. Fogg at Hong Kong that he could not escape by paying any amount of money . 
But could he even wait till they reached Hong Kong ? 
Fogg had an abominable way of jumping from one boat to another , and , before anything could be effected , might get full under way again for Yokohama . 
Fix decided that he must warn the English authorities , and signal the Rangoon before her arrival . 
This was easy to do , since the steamer stopped at Singapore , whence there is a telegraphic wire to Hong Kong . 
He finally resolved , moreover , before acting more positively , to question Passepartout . 
It would not be difficult to make him talk ; and , as there was no time to lose , Fix prepared to make himself known . 
It was now the 30th of October , and on the following day the Rangoon was due at Singapore . 
Fix emerged from his cabin and went on deck . 
Passepartout was promenading up and down in the forward part of the steamer . 
The detective rushed forward with every appearance of extreme surprise , and exclaimed , `` You here , on the Rangoon ? '' 
`` What , Monsieur Fix , are you on board ? '' 
returned the really astonished Passepartout , recognising his crony of the Mongolia . 
`` Why , I left you at Bombay , and here you are , on the way to Hong Kong ! 
Are you going round the world too ? '' 
`` No , no , '' replied Fix ; `` I shall stop at Hong Kong -- at least for some days . '' 
`` Hum ! '' 
said Passepartout , who seemed for an instant perplexed . 
`` But how is it I have not seen you on board since we left Calcutta ? '' 
`` Oh , a trifle of sea-sickness -- I 've been staying in my berth . 
The Gulf of Bengal does not agree with me as well as the Indian Ocean . 
And how is Mr. Fogg ? '' 
`` As well and as punctual as ever , not a day behind time ! 
But , Monsieur Fix , you do n't know that we have a young lady with us . '' 
`` A young lady ? '' 
replied the detective , not seeming to comprehend what was said . 
Passepartout thereupon recounted Aouda 's history , the affair at the Bombay pagoda , the purchase of the elephant for two thousand pounds , the rescue , the arrest , and sentence of the Calcutta court , and the restoration of Mr. Fogg and himself to liberty on bail . 
Fix , who was familiar with the last events , seemed to be equally ignorant of all that Passepartout related ; and the later was charmed to find so interested a listener . 
`` But does your master propose to carry this young woman to Europe ? '' 
`` Not at all . 
We are simply going to place her under the protection of one of her relatives , a rich merchant at Hong Kong . '' 
`` Nothing to be done there , '' said Fix to himself , concealing his disappointment . 
`` A glass of gin , Mr. Passepartout ? '' 
