I do n't believe a word of it . '' 
`` You 're a sly dog ! '' 
said Passepartout , winking at him . 
This expression rather disturbed Fix , without his knowing why . 
Had the Frenchman guessed his real purpose ? 
He knew not what to think . 
But how could Passepartout have discovered that he was a detective ? 
Yet , in speaking as he did , the man evidently meant more than he expressed . 
Passepartout went still further the next day ; he could not hold his tongue . 
`` Mr. Fix , '' said he , in a bantering tone , `` shall we be so unfortunate as to lose you when we get to Hong Kong ? '' 
`` Why , '' responded Fix , a little embarrassed , `` I do n't know ; perhaps -- '' `` Ah , if you would only go on with us ! 
An agent of the Peninsular Company , you know , ca n't stop on the way ! 
You were only going to Bombay , and here you are in China . 
America is not far off , and from America to Europe is only a step . '' 
Fix looked intently at his companion , whose countenance was as serene as possible , and laughed with him . 
But Passepartout persisted in chaffing him by asking him if he made much by his present occupation . 
`` Yes , and no , '' returned Fix ; `` there is good and bad luck in such things . 
But you must understand that I do n't travel at my own expense . '' 
`` Oh , I am quite sure of that ! '' 
cried Passepartout , laughing heartily . 
Fix , fairly puzzled , descended to his cabin and gave himself up to his reflections . 
He was evidently suspected ; somehow or other the Frenchman had found out that he was a detective . 
But had he told his master ? 
What part was he playing in all this : was he an accomplice or not ? 
Was the game , then , up ? 
Fix spent several hours turning these things over in his mind , sometimes thinking that all was lost , then persuading himself that Fogg was ignorant of his presence , and then undecided what course it was best to take . 
Nevertheless , he preserved his coolness of mind , and at last resolved to deal plainly with Passepartout . 
If he did not find it practicable to arrest Fogg at Hong Kong , and if Fogg made preparations to leave that last foothold of English territory , he , Fix , would tell Passepartout all . 
Either the servant was the accomplice of his master , and in this case the master knew of his operations , and he should fail ; or else the servant knew nothing about the robbery , and then his interest would be to abandon the robber . 
Such was the situation between Fix and Passepartout . 
Meanwhile Phileas Fogg moved about above them in the most majestic and unconscious indifference . 
He was passing methodically in his orbit around the world , regardless of the lesser stars which gravitated around him . 
Yet there was near by what the astronomers would call a disturbing star , which might have produced an agitation in this gentleman 's heart . 
But no ! 
the charms of Aouda failed to act , to Passepartout 's great surprise ; and the disturbances , if they existed , would have been more difficult to calculate than those of Uranus which led to the discovery of Neptune . 
It was every day an increasing wonder to Passepartout , who read in Aouda 's eyes the depths of her gratitude to his master . 
Phileas Fogg , though brave and gallant , must be , he thought , quite heartless . 
As to the sentiment which this journey might have awakened in him , there was clearly no trace of such a thing ; while poor Passepartout existed in perpetual reveries . 
One day he was leaning on the railing of the engine-room , and was observing the engine , when a sudden pitch of the steamer threw the screw out of the water . 
The steam came hissing out of the valves ; and this made Passepartout indignant . 
`` The valves are not sufficiently charged ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` We are not going . 
Oh , these English ! 
If this was an American craft , we should blow up , perhaps , but we should at all events go faster ! '' 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG , PASSEPARTOUT , AND FIX GO EACH ABOUT HIS BUSINESS The weather was bad during the latter days of the voyage . 
The wind , obstinately remaining in the north-west , blew a gale , and retarded the steamer . 
The Rangoon rolled heavily and the passengers became impatient of the long , monstrous waves which the wind raised before their path . 
A sort of tempest arose on the 3rd of November , the squall knocking the vessel about with fury , and the waves running high . 
The Rangoon reefed all her sails , and even the rigging proved too much , whistling and shaking amid the squall . 
