But the door was locked , and the window heavily barred with iron rods . 
He sat down again , and drew his journal from his pocket . 
On the line where these words were written , `` 21st December , Saturday , Liverpool , '' he added , `` 80th day , 11.40 a.m. , '' and waited . 
The Custom House clock struck one . 
Mr. Fogg observed that his watch was two hours too fast . 
Two hours ! 
Admitting that he was at this moment taking an express train , he could reach London and the Reform Club by a quarter before nine , p.m. His forehead slightly wrinkled . 
At thirty-three minutes past two he heard a singular noise outside , then a hasty opening of doors . 
Passepartout 's voice was audible , and immediately after that of Fix . 
Phileas Fogg 's eyes brightened for an instant . 
The door swung open , and he saw Passepartout , Aouda , and Fix , who hurried towards him . 
Fix was out of breath , and his hair was in disorder . 
He could not speak . 
`` Sir , '' he stammered , `` sir -- forgive me -- most -- unfortunate resemblance -- robber arrested three days ago -- you are free ! '' 
Phileas Fogg was free ! 
He walked to the detective , looked him steadily in the face , and with the only rapid motion he had ever made in his life , or which he ever would make , drew back his arms , and with the precision of a machine knocked Fix down . 
`` Well hit ! '' 
cried Passepartout , `` Parbleu ! 
that 's what you might call a good application of English fists ! '' 
Fix , who found himself on the floor , did not utter a word . 
He had only received his deserts . 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout left the Custom House without delay , got into a cab , and in a few moments descended at the station . 
Phileas Fogg asked if there was an express train about to leave for London . 
It was forty minutes past two . 
The express train had left thirty-five minutes before . 
Phileas Fogg then ordered a special train . 
There were several rapid locomotives on hand ; but the railway arrangements did not permit the special train to leave until three o'clock . 
At that hour Phileas Fogg , having stimulated the engineer by the offer of a generous reward , at last set out towards London with Aouda and his faithful servant . 
It was necessary to make the journey in five hours and a half ; and this would have been easy on a clear road throughout . 
But there were forced delays , and when Mr. Fogg stepped from the train at the terminus , all the clocks in London were striking ten minutes before nine . '' 
Having made the tour of the world , he was behind-hand five minutes . 
He had lost the wager ! 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DOES NOT HAVE TO REPEAT HIS ORDERS TO PASSEPARTOUT TWICE The dwellers in Saville Row would have been surprised the next day , if they had been told that Phileas Fogg had returned home . 
His doors and windows were still closed , no appearance of change was visible . 
After leaving the station , Mr. Fogg gave Passepartout instructions to purchase some provisions , and quietly went to his domicile . 
He bore his misfortune with his habitual tranquillity . 
Ruined ! 
And by the blundering of the detective ! 
After having steadily traversed that long journey , overcome a hundred obstacles , braved many dangers , and still found time to do some good on his way , to fail near the goal by a sudden event which he could not have foreseen , and against which he was unarmed ; it was terrible ! 
But a few pounds were left of the large sum he had carried with him . 
There only remained of his fortune the twenty thousand pounds deposited at Barings , and this amount he owed to his friends of the Reform Club . 
So great had been the expense of his tour that , even had he won , it would not have enriched him ; and it is probable that he had not sought to enrich himself , being a man who rather laid wagers for honour 's sake than for the stake proposed . 
But this wager totally ruined him . 
Mr. Fogg 's course , however , was fully decided upon ; he knew what remained for him to do . 
A room in the house in Saville Row was set apart for Aouda , who was overwhelmed with grief at her protector 's misfortune . 
From the words which Mr. Fogg dropped , she saw that he was meditating some serious project . 
Knowing that Englishmen governed by a fixed idea sometimes resort to the desperate expedient of suicide , Passepartout kept a narrow watch upon his master , though he carefully concealed the appearance of so doing . 
First of all , the worthy fellow had gone up to his room , and had extinguished the gas burner , which had been burning for eighty days . 
He had found in the letter-box a bill from the gas company , and he thought it more than time to put a stop to this expense , which he had been doomed to bear . 
The night passed . 
