The crowd swayed back , the banners and flags wavered , disappeared an instant , then reappeared in tatters . 
The undulations of the human surge reached the steps , while all the heads floundered on the surface like a sea agitated by a squall . 
Many of the black hats disappeared , and the greater part of the crowd seemed to have diminished in height . 
`` It is evidently a meeting , '' said Fix , `` and its object must be an exciting one . 
I should not wonder if it were about the Alabama , despite the fact that that question is settled . '' 
`` Perhaps , '' replied Mr. Fogg , simply . 
`` At least , there are two champions in presence of each other , the Honourable Mr. Camerfield and the Honourable Mr. Mandiboy . '' 
Aouda , leaning upon Mr. Fogg 's arm , observed the tumultuous scene with surprise , while Fix asked a man near him what the cause of it all was . 
Before the man could reply , a fresh agitation arose ; hurrahs and excited shouts were heard ; the staffs of the banners began to be used as offensive weapons ; and fists flew about in every direction . 
Thumps were exchanged from the tops of the carriages and omnibuses which had been blocked up in the crowd . 
Boots and shoes went whirling through the air , and Mr. Fogg thought he even heard the crack of revolvers mingling in the din , the rout approached the stairway , and flowed over the lower step . 
One of the parties had evidently been repulsed ; but the mere lookers-on could not tell whether Mandiboy or Camerfield had gained the upper hand . 
`` It would be prudent for us to retire , '' said Fix , who was anxious that Mr. Fogg should not receive any injury , at least until they got back to London . 
`` If there is any question about England in all this , and we were recognised , I fear it would go hard with us . '' 
`` An English subject -- '' began Mr. Fogg . 
He did not finish his sentence ; for a terrific hubbub now arose on the terrace behind the flight of steps where they stood , and there were frantic shouts of , `` Hurrah for Mandiboy ! 
Hip , hip , hurrah ! '' 
It was a band of voters coming to the rescue of their allies , and taking the Camerfield forces in flank . 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Fix found themselves between two fires ; it was too late to escape . 
The torrent of men , armed with loaded canes and sticks , was irresistible . 
Phileas Fogg and Fix were roughly hustled in their attempts to protect their fair companion ; the former , as cool as ever , tried to defend himself with the weapons which nature has placed at the end of every Englishman 's arm , but in vain . 
A big brawny fellow with a red beard , flushed face , and broad shoulders , who seemed to be the chief of the band , raised his clenched fist to strike Mr. Fogg , whom he would have given a crushing blow , had not Fix rushed in and received it in his stead . 
An enormous bruise immediately made its appearance under the detective 's silk hat , which was completely smashed in . 
`` Yankee ! '' 
exclaimed Mr. Fogg , darting a contemptuous look at the ruffian . 
`` Englishman ! '' 
returned the other . 
`` We will meet again ! '' 
`` When you please . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Phileas Fogg . 
And yours ? '' 
`` Colonel Stamp Proctor . '' 
The human tide now swept by , after overturning Fix , who speedily got upon his feet again , though with tattered clothes . 
Happily , he was not seriously hurt . 
His travelling overcoat was divided into two unequal parts , and his trousers resembled those of certain Indians , which fit less compactly than they are easy to put on . 
Aouda had escaped unharmed , and Fix alone bore marks of the fray in his black and blue bruise . 
`` Thanks , '' said Mr. Fogg to the detective , as soon as they were out of the crowd . 
`` No thanks are necessary , '' replied . 
Fix ; `` but let us go . '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` To a tailor 's . '' 
Such a visit was , indeed , opportune . 
The clothing of both Mr. Fogg and Fix was in rags , as if they had themselves been actively engaged in the contest between Camerfield and Mandiboy . 
An hour after , they were once more suitably attired , and with Aouda returned to the International Hotel . 
Passepartout was waiting for his master , armed with half a dozen six-barrelled revolvers . 
When he perceived Fix , he knit his brows ; but Aouda having , in a few words , told him of their adventure , his countenance resumed its placid expression . 
Fix evidently was no longer an enemy , but an ally ; he was faithfully keeping his word . 
Dinner over , the coach which was to convey the passengers and their luggage to the station drew up to the door . 
As he was getting in , Mr. Fogg said to Fix , `` You have not seen this Colonel Proctor again ? '' 
