` Cisco was reached at seven in the morning ; and an hour later the dormitory was transformed into an ordinary car , and the travellers could observe the picturesque beauties of the mountain region through which they were steaming . 
The railway track wound in and out among the passes , now approaching the mountain-sides , now suspended over precipices , avoiding abrupt angles by bold curves , plunging into narrow defiles , which seemed to have no outlet . 
The locomotive , its great funnel emitting a weird light , with its sharp bell , and its cow-catcher extended like a spur , mingled its shrieks and bellowings with the noise of torrents and cascades , and twined its smoke among the branches of the gigantic pines . 
There were few or no bridges or tunnels on the route . 
The railway turned around the sides of the mountains , and did not attempt to violate nature by taking the shortest cut from one point to another . 
The train entered the State of Nevada through the Carson Valley about nine o'clock , going always northeasterly ; and at midday reached Reno , where there was a delay of twenty minutes for breakfast . 
From this point the road , running along Humboldt River , passed northward for several miles by its banks ; then it turned eastward , and kept by the river until it reached the Humboldt Range , nearly at the extreme eastern limit of Nevada . 
Having breakfasted , Mr. Fogg and his companions resumed their places in the car , and observed the varied landscape which unfolded itself as they passed along the vast prairies , the mountains lining the horizon , and the creeks , with their frothy , foaming streams . 
Sometimes a great herd of buffaloes , massing together in the distance , seemed like a moveable dam . 
These innumerable multitudes of ruminating beasts often form an insurmountable obstacle to the passage of the trains ; thousands of them have been seen passing over the track for hours together , in compact ranks . 
The locomotive is then forced to stop and wait till the road is once more clear . 
This happened , indeed , to the train in which Mr. Fogg was travelling . 
About twelve o'clock a troop of ten or twelve thousand head of buffalo encumbered the track . 
The locomotive , slackening its speed , tried to clear the way with its cow-catcher ; but the mass of animals was too great . 
The buffaloes marched along with a tranquil gait , uttering now and then deafening bellowings . 
There was no use of interrupting them , for , having taken a particular direction , nothing can moderate and change their course ; it is a torrent of living flesh which no dam could contain . 
The travellers gazed on this curious spectacle from the platforms ; but Phileas Fogg , who had the most reason of all to be in a hurry , remained in his seat , and waited philosophically until it should please the buffaloes to get out of the way . 
Passepartout was furious at the delay they occasioned , and longed to discharge his arsenal of revolvers upon them . 
`` What a country ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Mere cattle stop the trains , and go by in a procession , just as if they were not impeding travel ! 
Parbleu ! 
I should like to know if Mr. Fogg foresaw this mishap in his programme ! 
And here 's an engineer who does n't dare to run the locomotive into this herd of beasts ! '' 
The engineer did not try to overcome the obstacle , and he was wise . 
He would have crushed the first buffaloes , no doubt , with the cow-catcher ; but the locomotive , however powerful , would soon have been checked , the train would inevitably have been thrown off the track , and would then have been helpless . 
The best course was to wait patiently , and regain the lost time by greater speed when the obstacle was removed . 
The procession of buffaloes lasted three full hours , and it was night before the track was clear . 
The last ranks of the herd were now passing over the rails , while the first had already disappeared below the southern horizon . 
It was eight o'clock when the train passed through the defiles of the Humboldt Range , and half-past nine when it penetrated Utah , the region of the Great Salt Lake , the singular colony of the Mormons . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT UNDERGOES , AT A SPEED OF TWENTY MILES AN HOUR , A COURSE OF MORMON HISTORY During the night of the 5th of December , the train ran south-easterly for about fifty miles ; then rose an equal distance in a north-easterly direction , towards the Great Salt Lake . 
Passepartout , about nine o'clock , went out upon the platform to take the air . 
The weather was cold , the heavens grey , but it was not snowing . 
The sun 's disc , enlarged by the mist , seemed an enormous ring of gold , and Passepartout was amusing himself by calculating its value in pounds sterling , when he was diverted from this interesting study by a strange-looking personage who made his appearance on the platform . 
This personage , who had taken the train at Elko , was tall and dark , with black moustache , black stockings , a black silk hat , a black waistcoat , black trousers , a white cravat , and dogskin gloves . 
He might have been taken for a clergyman . 
He went from one end of the train to the other , and affixed to the door of each car a notice written in manuscript . 
Passepartout approached and read one of these notices , which stated that Elder William Hitch , Mormon missionary , taking advantage of his presence on train No. 48 , would deliver a lecture on Mormonism in car No. 117 , from eleven to twelve o'clock ; and that he invited all who were desirous of being instructed concerning the mysteries of the religion of the `` Latter Day Saints '' to attend . 
`` I 'll go , '' said Passepartout to himself . 
He knew nothing of Mormonism except the custom of polygamy , which is its foundation . 
The news quickly spread through the train , which contained about one hundred passengers , thirty of whom , at most , attracted by the notice , ensconced themselves in car No. 117 . 
Passepartout took one of the front seats . 
Neither Mr. Fogg nor Fix cared to attend . 
At the appointed hour Elder William Hitch rose , and , in an irritated voice , as if he had already been contradicted , said , `` I tell you that Joe Smith is a martyr , that his brother Hiram is a martyr , and that the persecutions of the United States Government against the prophets will also make a martyr of Brigham Young . 
Who dares to say the contrary ? '' 
No one ventured to gainsay the missionary , whose excited tone contrasted curiously with his naturally calm visage . 
No doubt his anger arose from the hardships to which the Mormons were actually subjected . 
The government had just succeeded , with some difficulty , in reducing these independent fanatics to its rule . 
It had made itself master of Utah , and subjected that territory to the laws of the Union , after imprisoning Brigham Young on a charge of rebellion and polygamy . 
The disciples of the prophet had since redoubled their efforts , and resisted , by words at least , the authority of Congress . 
