Then I got to be a professor of gymnastics , so as to make better use of my talents ; and then I was a sergeant fireman at Paris , and assisted at many a big fire . 
But I quitted France five years ago , and , wishing to taste the sweets of domestic life , took service as a valet here in England . 
Finding myself out of place , and hearing that Monsieur Phileas Fogg was the most exact and settled gentleman in the United Kingdom , I have come to monsieur in the hope of living with him a tranquil life , and forgetting even the name of Passepartout . '' 
`` Passepartout suits me , '' responded Mr. Fogg . 
`` You are well recommended to me ; I hear a good report of you . 
You know my conditions ? '' 
`` Yes , monsieur . '' 
`` Good ! 
What time is it ? '' 
`` Twenty-two minutes after eleven , '' returned Passepartout , drawing an enormous silver watch from the depths of his pocket . 
`` You are too slow , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
`` Pardon me , monsieur , it is impossible -- '' `` You are four minutes too slow . 
No matter ; it 's enough to mention the error . 
Now from this moment , twenty-nine minutes after eleven , a.m. , this Wednesday , 2nd October , you are in my service . '' 
Phileas Fogg got up , took his hat in his left hand , put it on his head with an automatic motion , and went off without a word . 
Passepartout heard the street door shut once ; it was his new master going out . 
He heard it shut again ; it was his predecessor , James Forster , departing in his turn . 
Passepartout remained alone in the house in Saville Row . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS CONVINCED THAT HE HAS AT LAST FOUND HIS IDEAL `` Faith , '' muttered Passepartout , somewhat flurried , `` I 've seen people at Madame Tussaud 's as lively as my new master ! '' 
Madame Tussaud 's `` people , '' let it be said , are of wax , and are much visited in London ; speech is all that is wanting to make them human . 
During his brief interview with Mr. Fogg , Passepartout had been carefully observing him . 
He appeared to be a man about forty years of age , with fine , handsome features , and a tall , well-shaped figure ; his hair and whiskers were light , his forehead compact and unwrinkled , his face rather pale , his teeth magnificent . 
His countenance possessed in the highest degree what physiognomists call `` repose in action , '' a quality of those who act rather than talk . 
Calm and phlegmatic , with a clear eye , Mr. Fogg seemed a perfect type of that English composure which Angelica Kauffmann has so skilfully represented on canvas . 
Seen in the various phases of his daily life , he gave the idea of being perfectly well-balanced , as exactly regulated as a Leroy chronometer . 
Phileas Fogg was , indeed , exactitude personified , and this was betrayed even in the expression of his very hands and feet ; for in men , as well as in animals , the limbs themselves are expressive of the passions . 
He was so exact that he was never in a hurry , was always ready , and was economical alike of his steps and his motions . 
He never took one step too many , and always went to his destination by the shortest cut ; he made no superfluous gestures , and was never seen to be moved or agitated . 
He was the most deliberate person in the world , yet always reached his destination at the exact moment . 
He lived alone , and , so to speak , outside of every social relation ; and as he knew that in this world account must be taken of friction , and that friction retards , he never rubbed against anybody . 
As for Passepartout , he was a true Parisian of Paris . 
Since he had abandoned his own country for England , taking service as a valet , he had in vain searched for a master after his own heart . 
Passepartout was by no means one of those pert dunces depicted by Moliere with a bold gaze and a nose held high in the air ; he was an honest fellow , with a pleasant face , lips a trifle protruding , soft-mannered and serviceable , with a good round head , such as one likes to see on the shoulders of a friend . 
His eyes were blue , his complexion rubicund , his figure almost portly and well-built , his body muscular , and his physical powers fully developed by the exercises of his younger days . 
His brown hair was somewhat tumbled ; for , while the ancient sculptors are said to have known eighteen methods of arranging Minerva 's tresses , Passepartout was familiar with but one of dressing his own : three strokes of a large-tooth comb completed his toilet . 
It would be rash to predict how Passepartout 's lively nature would agree with Mr. Fogg . 
It was impossible to tell whether the new servant would turn out as absolutely methodical as his master required ; experience alone could solve the question . 
Passepartout had been a sort of vagrant in his early years , and now yearned for repose ; but so far he had failed to find it , though he had already served in ten English houses . 
But he could not take root in any of these ; with chagrin , he found his masters invariably whimsical and irregular , constantly running about the country , or on the look-out for adventure . 
His last master , young Lord Longferry , Member of Parliament , after passing his nights in the Haymarket taverns , was too often brought home in the morning on policemen 's shoulders . 
Passepartout , desirous of respecting the gentleman whom he served , ventured a mild remonstrance on such conduct ; which , being ill-received , he took his leave . 
Hearing that Mr. Phileas Fogg was looking for a servant , and that his life was one of unbroken regularity , that he neither travelled nor stayed from home overnight , he felt sure that this would be the place he was after . 
He presented himself , and was accepted , as has been seen . 
At half-past eleven , then , Passepartout found himself alone in the house in Saville Row . 
He begun its inspection without delay , scouring it from cellar to garret . 
So clean , well-arranged , solemn a mansion pleased him ; it seemed to him like a snail 's shell , lighted and warmed by gas , which sufficed for both these purposes . 
When Passepartout reached the second story he recognised at once the room which he was to inhabit , and he was well satisfied with it . 
Electric bells and speaking-tubes afforded communication with the lower stories ; while on the mantel stood an electric clock , precisely like that in Mr. Fogg 's bedchamber , both beating the same second at the same instant . 
`` That 's good , that 'll do , '' said Passepartout to himself . 
He suddenly observed , hung over the clock , a card which , upon inspection , proved to be a programme of the daily routine of the house . 
