Passepartout , revolver in hand , held himself ready to fire on those which came too near . 
Had an accident then happened to the sledge , the travellers , attacked by these beasts , would have been in the most terrible danger ; but it held on its even course , soon gained on the wolves , and ere long left the howling band at a safe distance behind . 
About noon Mudge perceived by certain landmarks that he was crossing the Platte River . 
He said nothing , but he felt certain that he was now within twenty miles of Omaha . 
In less than an hour he left the rudder and furled his sails , whilst the sledge , carried forward by the great impetus the wind had given it , went on half a mile further with its sails unspread . 
It stopped at last , and Mudge , pointing to a mass of roofs white with snow , said : `` We have got there ! '' 
Arrived ! 
Arrived at the station which is in daily communication , by numerous trains , with the Atlantic seaboard ! 
Passepartout and Fix jumped off , stretched their stiffened limbs , and aided Mr. Fogg and the young woman to descend from the sledge . 
Phileas Fogg generously rewarded Mudge , whose hand Passepartout warmly grasped , and the party directed their steps to the Omaha railway station . 
The Pacific Railroad proper finds its terminus at this important Nebraska town . 
Omaha is connected with Chicago by the Chicago and Rock Island Railroad , which runs directly east , and passes fifty stations . 
A train was ready to start when Mr. Fogg and his party reached the station , and they only had time to get into the cars . 
They had seen nothing of Omaha ; but Passepartout confessed to himself that this was not to be regretted , as they were not travelling to see the sights . 
The train passed rapidly across the State of Iowa , by Council Bluffs , Des Moines , and Iowa City . 
During the night it crossed the Mississippi at Davenport , and by Rock Island entered Illinois . 
The next day , which was the 10th , at four o'clock in the evening , it reached Chicago , already risen from its ruins , and more proudly seated than ever on the borders of its beautiful Lake Michigan . 
Nine hundred miles separated Chicago from New York ; but trains are not wanting at Chicago . 
Mr. Fogg passed at once from one to the other , and the locomotive of the Pittsburgh , Fort Wayne , and Chicago Railway left at full speed , as if it fully comprehended that that gentleman had no time to lose . 
It traversed Indiana , Ohio , Pennsylvania , and New Jersey like a flash , rushing through towns with antique names , some of which had streets and car-tracks , but as yet no houses . 
At last the Hudson came into view ; and , at a quarter-past eleven in the evening of the 11th , the train stopped in the station on the right bank of the river , before the very pier of the Cunard line . 
The China , for Liverpool , had started three-quarters of an hour before ! 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ENGAGES IN A DIRECT STRUGGLE WITH BAD FORTUNE The China , in leaving , seemed to have carried off Phileas Fogg 's last hope . 
None of the other steamers were able to serve his projects . 
The Pereire , of the French Transatlantic Company , whose admirable steamers are equal to any in speed and comfort , did not leave until the 14th ; the Hamburg boats did not go directly to Liverpool or London , but to Havre ; and the additional trip from Havre to Southampton would render Phileas Fogg 's last efforts of no avail . 
The Inman steamer did not depart till the next day , and could not cross the Atlantic in time to save the wager . 
Mr. Fogg learned all this in consulting his Bradshaw , which gave him the daily movements of the trans-Atlantic steamers . 
Passepartout was crushed ; it overwhelmed him to lose the boat by three-quarters of an hour . 
It was his fault , for , instead of helping his master , he had not ceased putting obstacles in his path ! 
And when he recalled all the incidents of the tour , when he counted up the sums expended in pure loss and on his own account , when he thought that the immense stake , added to the heavy charges of this useless journey , would completely ruin Mr. Fogg , he overwhelmed himself with bitter self-accusations . 
Mr. Fogg , however , did not reproach him ; and , on leaving the Cunard pier , only said : `` We will consult about what is best to-morrow . 
Come . '' 
The party crossed the Hudson in the Jersey City ferryboat , and drove in a carriage to the St. Nicholas Hotel , on Broadway . 
Rooms were engaged , and the night passed , briefly to Phileas Fogg , who slept profoundly , but very long to Aouda and the others , whose agitation did not permit them to rest . 
The next day was the 12th of December . 
From seven in the morning of the 12th to a quarter before nine in the evening of the 21st there were nine days , thirteen hours , and forty-five minutes . 
If Phileas Fogg had left in the China , one of the fastest steamers on the Atlantic , he would have reached Liverpool , and then London , within the period agreed upon . 
Mr. Fogg left the hotel alone , after giving Passepartout instructions to await his return , and inform Aouda to be ready at an instant 's notice . 
He proceeded to the banks of the Hudson , and looked about among the vessels moored or anchored in the river , for any that were about to depart . 
Several had departure signals , and were preparing to put to sea at morning tide ; for in this immense and admirable port there is not one day in a hundred that vessels do not set out for every quarter of the globe . 
But they were mostly sailing vessels , of which , of course , Phileas Fogg could make no use . 
He seemed about to give up all hope , when he espied , anchored at the Battery , a cable 's length off at most , a trading vessel , with a screw , well-shaped , whose funnel , puffing a cloud of smoke , indicated that she was getting ready for departure . 
Phileas Fogg hailed a boat , got into it , and soon found himself on board the Henrietta , iron-hulled , wood-built above . 
He ascended to the deck , and asked for the captain , who forthwith presented himself . 
He was a man of fifty , a sort of sea-wolf , with big eyes , a complexion of oxidised copper , red hair and thick neck , and a growling voice . 
`` The captain ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` I am the captain . '' 
`` I am Phileas Fogg , of London . '' 
`` And I am Andrew Speedy , of Cardiff . '' 
