What would Mr. Fogg do with the elephant when he got to Allahabad ? 
Would he carry him on with him ? 
Impossible ! 
The cost of transporting him would make him ruinously expensive . 
Would he sell him , or set him free ? 
The estimable beast certainly deserved some consideration . 
Should Mr. Fogg choose to make him , Passepartout , a present of Kiouni , he would be very much embarrassed ; and these thoughts did not cease worrying him for a long time . 
The principal chain of the Vindhias was crossed by eight in the evening , and another halt was made on the northern slope , in a ruined bungalow . 
They had gone nearly twenty-five miles that day , and an equal distance still separated them from the station of Allahabad . 
The night was cold . 
The Parsee lit a fire in the bungalow with a few dry branches , and the warmth was very grateful , provisions purchased at Kholby sufficed for supper , and the travellers ate ravenously . 
The conversation , beginning with a few disconnected phrases , soon gave place to loud and steady snores . 
The guide watched Kiouni , who slept standing , bolstering himself against the trunk of a large tree . 
Nothing occurred during the night to disturb the slumberers , although occasional growls front panthers and chatterings of monkeys broke the silence ; the more formidable beasts made no cries or hostile demonstration against the occupants of the bungalow . 
Sir Francis slept heavily , like an honest soldier overcome with fatigue . 
Passepartout was wrapped in uneasy dreams of the bouncing of the day before . 
As for Mr. Fogg , he slumbered as peacefully as if he had been in his serene mansion in Saville Row . 
The journey was resumed at six in the morning ; the guide hoped to reach Allahabad by evening . 
In that case , Mr. Fogg would only lose a part of the forty-eight hours saved since the beginning of the tour . 
Kiouni , resuming his rapid gait , soon descended the lower spurs of the Vindhias , and towards noon they passed by the village of Kallenger , on the Cani , one of the branches of the Ganges . 
The guide avoided inhabited places , thinking it safer to keep the open country , which lies along the first depressions of the basin of the great river . 
Allahabad was now only twelve miles to the north-east . 
They stopped under a clump of bananas , the fruit of which , as healthy as bread and as succulent as cream , was amply partaken of and appreciated . 
At two o'clock the guide entered a thick forest which extended several miles ; he preferred to travel under cover of the woods . 
They had not as yet had any unpleasant encounters , and the journey seemed on the point of being successfully accomplished , when the elephant , becoming restless , suddenly stopped . 
It was then four o'clock . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
asked Sir Francis , putting out his head . 
`` I do n't know , officer , '' replied the Parsee , listening attentively to a confused murmur which came through the thick branches . 
The murmur soon became more distinct ; it now seemed like a distant concert of human voices accompanied by brass instruments . 
Passepartout was all eyes and ears . 
Mr. Fogg patiently waited without a word . 
The Parsee jumped to the ground , fastened the elephant to a tree , and plunged into the thicket . 
He soon returned , saying : `` A procession of Brahmins is coming this way . 
We must prevent their seeing us , if possible . '' 
The guide unloosed the elephant and led him into a thicket , at the same time asking the travellers not to stir . 
He held himself ready to bestride the animal at a moment 's notice , should flight become necessary ; but he evidently thought that the procession of the faithful would pass without perceiving them amid the thick foliage , in which they were wholly concealed . 
The discordant tones of the voices and instruments drew nearer , and now droning songs mingled with the sound of the tambourines and cymbals . 
The head of the procession soon appeared beneath the trees , a hundred paces away ; and the strange figures who performed the religious ceremony were easily distinguished through the branches . 
First came the priests , with mitres on their heads , and clothed in long lace robes . 
They were surrounded by men , women , and children , who sang a kind of lugubrious psalm , interrupted at regular intervals by the tambourines and cymbals ; while behind them was drawn a car with large wheels , the spokes of which represented serpents entwined with each other . 
Upon the car , which was drawn by four richly caparisoned zebus , stood a hideous statue with four arms , the body coloured a dull red , with haggard eyes , dishevelled hair , protruding tongue , and lips tinted with betel . 
It stood upright upon the figure of a prostrate and headless giant . 
Sir Francis , recognising the statue , whispered , `` The goddess Kali ; the goddess of love and death . '' 
`` Of death , perhaps , '' muttered back Passepartout , `` but of love -- that ugly old hag ? 
Never ! '' 
The Parsee made a motion to keep silence . 
A group of old fakirs were capering and making a wild ado round the statue ; these were striped with ochre , and covered with cuts whence their blood issued drop by drop -- stupid fanatics , who , in the great Indian ceremonies , still throw themselves under the wheels of Juggernaut . 
Some Brahmins , clad in all the sumptuousness of Oriental apparel , and leading a woman who faltered at every step , followed . 
This woman was young , and as fair as a European . 
