`` Stay , '' replied Mr. Fogg calmly , without betraying in his features that by a supreme inspiration he was about to attempt once more to conquer ill-fortune . 
Queenstown is the Irish port at which the trans-Atlantic steamers stop to put off the mails . 
These mails are carried to Dublin by express trains always held in readiness to start ; from Dublin they are sent on to Liverpool by the most rapid boats , and thus gain twelve hours on the Atlantic steamers . 
Phileas Fogg counted on gaining twelve hours in the same way . 
Instead of arriving at Liverpool the next evening by the Henrietta , he would be there by noon , and would therefore have time to reach London before a quarter before nine in the evening . 
The Henrietta entered Queenstown Harbour at one o'clock in the morning , it then being high tide ; and Phileas Fogg , after being grasped heartily by the hand by Captain Speedy , left that gentleman on the levelled hulk of his craft , which was still worth half what he had sold it for . 
The party went on shore at once . 
Fix was greatly tempted to arrest Mr. Fogg on the spot ; but he did not . 
Why ? 
What struggle was going on within him ? 
Had he changed his mind about `` his man '' ? 
Did he understand that he had made a grave mistake ? 
He did not , however , abandon Mr. Fogg . 
They all got upon the train , which was just ready to start , at half-past one ; at dawn of day they were in Dublin ; and they lost no time in embarking on a steamer which , disdaining to rise upon the waves , invariably cut through them . 
Phileas Fogg at last disembarked on the Liverpool quay , at twenty minutes before twelve , 21st December . 
He was only six hours distant from London . 
But at this moment Fix came up , put his hand upon Mr. Fogg 's shoulder , and , showing his warrant , said , `` You are really Phileas Fogg ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
`` I arrest you in the Queen 's name ! '' 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AT LAST REACHES LONDON Phileas Fogg was in prison . 
He had been shut up in the Custom House , and he was to be transferred to London the next day . 
Passepartout , when he saw his master arrested , would have fallen upon Fix had he not been held back by some policemen . 
Aouda was thunderstruck at the suddenness of an event which she could not understand . 
Passepartout explained to her how it was that the honest and courageous Fogg was arrested as a robber . 
The young woman 's heart revolted against so heinous a charge , and when she saw that she could attempt to do nothing to save her protector , she wept bitterly . 
As for Fix , he had arrested Mr. Fogg because it was his duty , whether Mr. Fogg were guilty or not . 
The thought then struck Passepartout , that he was the cause of this new misfortune ! 
Had he not concealed Fix 's errand from his master ? 
When Fix revealed his true character and purpose , why had he not told Mr. Fogg ? 
If the latter had been warned , he would no doubt have given Fix proof of his innocence , and satisfied him of his mistake ; at least , Fix would not have continued his journey at the expense and on the heels of his master , only to arrest him the moment he set foot on English soil . 
Passepartout wept till he was blind , and felt like blowing his brains out . 
Aouda and he had remained , despite the cold , under the portico of the Custom House . 
Neither wished to leave the place ; both were anxious to see Mr. Fogg again . 
That gentleman was really ruined , and that at the moment when he was about to attain his end . 
This arrest was fatal . 
Having arrived at Liverpool at twenty minutes before twelve on the 21st of December , he had till a quarter before nine that evening to reach the Reform Club , that is , nine hours and a quarter ; the journey from Liverpool to London was six hours . 
If anyone , at this moment , had entered the Custom House , he would have found Mr. Fogg seated , motionless , calm , and without apparent anger , upon a wooden bench . 
He was not , it is true , resigned ; but this last blow failed to force him into an outward betrayal of any emotion . 
Was he being devoured by one of those secret rages , all the more terrible because contained , and which only burst forth , with an irresistible force , at the last moment ? 
No one could tell . 
There he sat , calmly waiting -- for what ? 
Did he still cherish hope ? 
Did he still believe , now that the door of this prison was closed upon him , that he would succeed ? 
However that may have been , Mr. Fogg carefully put his watch upon the table , and observed its advancing hands . 
Not a word escaped his lips , but his look was singularly set and stern . 
The situation , in any event , was a terrible one , and might be thus stated : if Phileas Fogg was honest he was ruined ; if he was a knave , he was caught . 
Did escape occur to him ? 
Did he examine to see if there were any practicable outlet from his prison ? 
Did he think of escaping from it ? 
Possibly ; for once he walked slowly around the room . 
