Late in the day they passed through the capricious channels of Hong Kong , and the Tankadere , impelled by favourable winds , conducted herself admirably . 
`` I do not need , pilot , '' said Phileas Fogg , when they got into the open sea , `` to advise you to use all possible speed . '' 
`` Trust me , your honour . 
We are carrying all the sail the wind will let us . 
The poles would add nothing , and are only used when we are going into port . '' 
`` Its your trade , not mine , pilot , and I confide in you . '' 
Phileas Fogg , with body erect and legs wide apart , standing like a sailor , gazed without staggering at the swelling waters . 
The young woman , who was seated aft , was profoundly affected as she looked out upon the ocean , darkening now with the twilight , on which she had ventured in so frail a vessel . 
Above her head rustled the white sails , which seemed like great white wings . 
The boat , carried forward by the wind , seemed to be flying in the air . 
Night came . 
The moon was entering her first quarter , and her insufficient light would soon die out in the mist on the horizon . 
Clouds were rising from the east , and already overcast a part of the heavens . 
The pilot had hung out his lights , which was very necessary in these seas crowded with vessels bound landward ; for collisions are not uncommon occurrences , and , at the speed she was going , the least shock would shatter the gallant little craft . 
Fix , seated in the bow , gave himself up to meditation . 
He kept apart from his fellow-travellers , knowing Mr. Fogg 's taciturn tastes ; besides , he did not quite like to talk to the man whose favours he had accepted . 
He was thinking , too , of the future . 
It seemed certain that Fogg would not stop at Yokohama , but would at once take the boat for San Francisco ; and the vast extent of America would ensure him impunity and safety . 
Fogg 's plan appeared to him the simplest in the world . 
Instead of sailing directly from England to the United States , like a common villain , he had traversed three quarters of the globe , so as to gain the American continent more surely ; and there , after throwing the police off his track , he would quietly enjoy himself with the fortune stolen from the bank . 
But , once in the United States , what should he , Fix , do ? 
Should he abandon this man ? 
No , a hundred times no ! 
Until he had secured his extradition , he would not lose sight of him for an hour . 
It was his duty , and he would fulfil it to the end . 
At all events , there was one thing to be thankful for ; Passepartout was not with his master ; and it was above all important , after the confidences Fix had imparted to him , that the servant should never have speech with his master . 
Phileas Fogg was also thinking of Passepartout , who had so strangely disappeared . 
Looking at the matter from every point of view , it did not seem to him impossible that , by some mistake , the man might have embarked on the Carnatic at the last moment ; and this was also Aouda 's opinion , who regretted very much the loss of the worthy fellow to whom she owed so much . 
They might then find him at Yokohama ; for , if the Carnatic was carrying him thither , it would be easy to ascertain if he had been on board . 
A brisk breeze arose about ten o'clock ; but , though it might have been prudent to take in a reef , the pilot , after carefully examining the heavens , let the craft remain rigged as before . 
The Tankadere bore sail admirably , as she drew a great deal of water , and everything was prepared for high speed in case of a gale . 
Mr. Fogg and Aouda descended into the cabin at midnight , having been already preceded by Fix , who had lain down on one of the cots . 
The pilot and crew remained on deck all night . 
At sunrise the next day , which was 8th November , the boat had made more than one hundred miles . 
The log indicated a mean speed of between eight and nine miles . 
The Tankadere still carried all sail , and was accomplishing her greatest capacity of speed . 
If the wind held as it was , the chances would be in her favour . 
During the day she kept along the coast , where the currents were favourable ; the coast , irregular in profile , and visible sometimes across the clearings , was at most five miles distant . 
The sea was less boisterous , since the wind came off land -- a fortunate circumstance for the boat , which would suffer , owing to its small tonnage , by a heavy surge on the sea . 
The breeze subsided a little towards noon , and set in from the south-west . 
The pilot put up his poles , but took them down again within two hours , as the wind freshened up anew . 
Mr. Fogg and Aouda , happily unaffected by the roughness of the sea , ate with a good appetite , Fix being invited to share their repast , which he accepted with secret chagrin . 
To travel at this man 's expense and live upon his provisions was not palatable to him . 
Still , he was obliged to eat , and so he ate . 
When the meal was over , he took Mr. Fogg apart , and said , `` sir '' -- this `` sir '' scorched his lips , and he had to control himself to avoid collaring this `` gentleman '' -- `` sir , you have been very kind to give me a passage on this boat . 
But , though my means will not admit of my expending them as freely as you , I must ask to pay my share -- '' `` Let us not speak of that , sir , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` But , if I insist -- '' `` No , sir , '' repeated Mr. Fogg , in a tone which did not admit of a reply . 
`` This enters into my general expenses . '' 
Fix , as he bowed , had a stifled feeling , and , going forward , where he ensconced himself , did not open his mouth for the rest of the day . 
Meanwhile they were progressing famously , and John Bunsby was in high hope . 
