He rushed along the track , jumped on the rear platform of the train , and fell , exhausted , into one of the seats . 
Passepartout , who had been anxiously watching this amateur gymnast , approached him with lively interest , and learned that he had taken flight after an unpleasant domestic scene . 
When the Mormon had recovered his breath , Passepartout ventured to ask him politely how many wives he had ; for , from the manner in which he had decamped , it might be thought that he had twenty at least . 
`` One , sir , '' replied the Mormon , raising his arms heavenward -- `` one , and that was enough ! '' 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT DOES NOT SUCCEED IN MAKING ANYBODY LISTEN TO REASON The train , on leaving Great Salt Lake at Ogden , passed northward for an hour as far as Weber River , having completed nearly nine hundred miles from San Francisco . 
From this point it took an easterly direction towards the jagged Wahsatch Mountains . 
It was in the section included between this range and the Rocky Mountains that the American engineers found the most formidable difficulties in laying the road , and that the government granted a subsidy of forty-eight thousand dollars per mile , instead of sixteen thousand allowed for the work done on the plains . 
But the engineers , instead of violating nature , avoided its difficulties by winding around , instead of penetrating the rocks . 
One tunnel only , fourteen thousand feet in length , was pierced in order to arrive at the great basin . 
The track up to this time had reached its highest elevation at the Great Salt Lake . 
From this point it described a long curve , descending towards Bitter Creek Valley , to rise again to the dividing ridge of the waters between the Atlantic and the Pacific . 
There were many creeks in this mountainous region , and it was necessary to cross Muddy Creek , Green Creek , and others , upon culverts . 
Passepartout grew more and more impatient as they went on , while Fix longed to get out of this difficult region , and was more anxious than Phileas Fogg himself to be beyond the danger of delays and accidents , and set foot on English soil . 
At ten o'clock at night the train stopped at Fort Bridger station , and twenty minutes later entered Wyoming Territory , following the valley of Bitter Creek throughout . 
The next day , 7th December , they stopped for a quarter of an hour at Green River station . 
Snow had fallen abundantly during the night , but , being mixed with rain , it had half melted , and did not interrupt their progress . 
The bad weather , however , annoyed Passepartout ; for the accumulation of snow , by blocking the wheels of the cars , would certainly have been fatal to Mr. Fogg 's tour . 
`` What an idea ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Why did my master make this journey in winter ? 
Could n't he have waited for the good season to increase his chances ? '' 
While the worthy Frenchman was absorbed in the state of the sky and the depression of the temperature , Aouda was experiencing fears from a totally different cause . 
Several passengers had got off at Green River , and were walking up and down the platforms ; and among these Aouda recognised Colonel Stamp Proctor , the same who had so grossly insulted Phileas Fogg at the San Francisco meeting . 
Not wishing to be recognised , the young woman drew back from the window , feeling much alarm at her discovery . 
She was attached to the man who , however coldly , gave her daily evidences of the most absolute devotion . 
She did not comprehend , perhaps , the depth of the sentiment with which her protector inspired her , which she called gratitude , but which , though she was unconscious of it , was really more than that . 
Her heart sank within her when she recognised the man whom Mr. Fogg desired , sooner or later , to call to account for his conduct . 
Chance alone , it was clear , had brought Colonel Proctor on this train ; but there he was , and it was necessary , at all hazards , that Phileas Fogg should not perceive his adversary . 
Aouda seized a moment when Mr. Fogg was asleep to tell Fix and Passepartout whom she had seen . 
`` That Proctor on this train ! '' 
cried Fix . 
`` Well , reassure yourself , madam ; before he settles with Mr. Fogg ; he has got to deal with me ! 
It seems to me that I was the more insulted of the two . '' 
`` And , besides , '' added Passepartout , `` I 'll take charge of him , colonel as he is . '' 
`` Mr. Fix , '' resumed Aouda , `` Mr. Fogg will allow no one to avenge him . 
He said that he would come back to America to find this man . 
Should he perceive Colonel Proctor , we could not prevent a collision which might have terrible results . 
He must not see him . '' 
`` You are right , madam , '' replied Fix ; `` a meeting between them might ruin all . 
Whether he were victorious or beaten , Mr. Fogg would be delayed , and -- '' `` And , '' added Passepartout , `` that would play the game of the gentlemen of the Reform Club . 
In four days we shall be in New York . 
Well , if my master does not leave this car during those four days , we may hope that chance will not bring him face to face with this confounded American . 
We must , if possible , prevent his stirring out of it . '' 
The conversation dropped . 
Mr. Fogg had just woke up , and was looking out of the window . 
Soon after Passepartout , without being heard by his master or Aouda , whispered to the detective , `` Would you really fight for him ? '' 
`` I would do anything , '' replied Fix , in a tone which betrayed determined will , `` to get him back living to Europe ! '' 
Passepartout felt something like a shudder shoot through his frame , but his confidence in his master remained unbroken . 
Was there any means of detaining Mr. Fogg in the car , to avoid a meeting between him and the colonel ? 
It ought not to be a difficult task , since that gentleman was naturally sedentary and little curious . 
