`` At once , madam . '' 
`` But the prisoners , our unfortunate fellow-travellers -- '' `` I can not interrupt the trip , '' replied the conductor . 
`` We are already three hours behind time . '' 
`` And when will another train pass here from San Francisco ? '' 
`` To-morrow evening , madam . '' 
`` To-morrow evening ! 
But then it will be too late ! 
We must wait -- '' `` It is impossible , '' responded the conductor . 
`` If you wish to go , please get in . '' 
`` I will not go , '' said Aouda . 
Fix had heard this conversation . 
A little while before , when there was no prospect of proceeding on the journey , he had made up his mind to leave Fort Kearney ; but now that the train was there , ready to start , and he had only to take his seat in the car , an irresistible influence held him back . 
The station platform burned his feet , and he could not stir . 
The conflict in his mind again began ; anger and failure stifled him . 
He wished to struggle on to the end . 
Meanwhile the passengers and some of the wounded , among them Colonel Proctor , whose injuries were serious , had taken their places in the train . 
The buzzing of the over-heated boiler was heard , and the steam was escaping from the valves . 
The engineer whistled , the train started , and soon disappeared , mingling its white smoke with the eddies of the densely falling snow . 
The detective had remained behind . 
Several hours passed . 
The weather was dismal , and it was very cold . 
Fix sat motionless on a bench in the station ; he might have been thought asleep . 
Aouda , despite the storm , kept coming out of the waiting-room , going to the end of the platform , and peering through the tempest of snow , as if to pierce the mist which narrowed the horizon around her , and to hear , if possible , some welcome sound . 
She heard and saw nothing . 
Then she would return , chilled through , to issue out again after the lapse of a few moments , but always in vain . 
Evening came , and the little band had not returned . 
Where could they be ? 
Had they found the Indians , and were they having a conflict with them , or were they still wandering amid the mist ? 
The commander of the fort was anxious , though he tried to conceal his apprehensions . 
As night approached , the snow fell less plentifully , but it became intensely cold . 
Absolute silence rested on the plains . 
Neither flight of bird nor passing of beast troubled the perfect calm . 
Throughout the night Aouda , full of sad forebodings , her heart stifled with anguish , wandered about on the verge of the plains . 
Her imagination carried her far off , and showed her innumerable dangers . 
What she suffered through the long hours it would be impossible to describe . 
Fix remained stationary in the same place , but did not sleep . 
Once a man approached and spoke to him , and the detective merely replied by shaking his head . 
Thus the night passed . 
At dawn , the half-extinguished disc of the sun rose above a misty horizon ; but it was now possible to recognise objects two miles off . 
Phileas Fogg and the squad had gone southward ; in the south all was still vacancy . 
It was then seven o'clock . 
The captain , who was really alarmed , did not know what course to take . 
Should he send another detachment to the rescue of the first ? 
Should he sacrifice more men , with so few chances of saving those already sacrificed ? 
His hesitation did not last long , however . 
Calling one of his lieutenants , he was on the point of ordering a reconnaissance , when gunshots were heard . 
Was it a signal ? 
The soldiers rushed out of the fort , and half a mile off they perceived a little band returning in good order . 
Mr. Fogg was marching at their head , and just behind him were Passepartout and the other two travellers , rescued from the Sioux . 
They had met and fought the Indians ten miles south of Fort Kearney . 
