But if Fix had been able to explain this purely physical effect , Passepartout would not have admitted , even if he had comprehended it . 
Moreover , if the detective had been on board at that moment , Passepartout would have joined issue with him on a quite different subject , and in an entirely different manner . 
Where was Fix at that moment ? 
He was actually on board the General Grant . 
On reaching Yokohama , the detective , leaving Mr. Fogg , whom he expected to meet again during the day , had repaired at once to the English consulate , where he at last found the warrant of arrest . 
It had followed him from Bombay , and had come by the Carnatic , on which steamer he himself was supposed to be . 
Fix 's disappointment may be imagined when he reflected that the warrant was now useless . 
Mr. Fogg had left English ground , and it was now necessary to procure his extradition ! 
`` Well , '' thought Fix , after a moment of anger , `` my warrant is not good here , but it will be in England . 
The rogue evidently intends to return to his own country , thinking he has thrown the police off his track . 
Good ! 
I will follow him across the Atlantic . 
As for the money , heaven grant there may be some left ! 
But the fellow has already spent in travelling , rewards , trials , bail , elephants , and all sorts of charges , more than five thousand pounds . 
Yet , after all , the Bank is rich ! '' 
His course decided on , he went on board the General Grant , and was there when Mr. Fogg and Aouda arrived . 
To his utter amazement , he recognised Passepartout , despite his theatrical disguise . 
He quickly concealed himself in his cabin , to avoid an awkward explanation , and hoped -- thanks to the number of passengers -- to remain unperceived by Mr. Fogg 's servant . 
On that very day , however , he met Passepartout face to face on the forward deck . 
The latter , without a word , made a rush for him , grasped him by the throat , and , much to the amusement of a group of Americans , who immediately began to bet on him , administered to the detective a perfect volley of blows , which proved the great superiority of French over English pugilistic skill . 
When Passepartout had finished , he found himself relieved and comforted . 
Fix got up in a somewhat rumpled condition , and , looking at his adversary , coldly said , `` Have you done ? '' 
`` For this time -- yes . '' 
`` Then let me have a word with you . '' 
`` But I -- '' `` In your master 's interests . '' 
Passepartout seemed to be vanquished by Fix 's coolness , for he quietly followed him , and they sat down aside from the rest of the passengers . 
`` You have given me a thrashing , '' said Fix . 
`` Good , I expected it . 
Now , listen to me . 
Up to this time I have been Mr. Fogg 's adversary . 
I am now in his game . '' 
`` Aha ! '' 
cried Passepartout ; `` you are convinced he is an honest man ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Fix coldly , `` I think him a rascal . 
Sh ! 
do n't budge , and let me speak . 
As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground , it was for my interest to detain him there until my warrant of arrest arrived . 
I did everything I could to keep him back . 
I sent the Bombay priests after him , I got you intoxicated at Hong Kong , I separated you from him , and I made him miss the Yokohama steamer . '' 
Passepartout listened , with closed fists . 
`` Now , '' resumed Fix , `` Mr. Fogg seems to be going back to England . 
Well , I will follow him there . 
But hereafter I will do as much to keep obstacles out of his way as I have done up to this time to put them in his path . 
I 've changed my game , you see , and simply because it was for my interest to change it . 
Your interest is the same as mine ; for it is only in England that you will ascertain whether you are in the service of a criminal or an honest man . '' 
Passepartout listened very attentively to Fix , and was convinced that he spoke with entire good faith . 
`` Are we friends ? '' 
asked the detective . 
`` Friends ? 
-- no , '' replied Passepartout ; `` but allies , perhaps . 
