The detective , at least , seemed to have found a way ; for , after a few moments , he said to Mr. Fogg , `` These are long and slow hours , sir , that we are passing on the railway . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Mr. Fogg ; `` but they pass . '' 
`` You were in the habit of playing whist , '' resumed Fix , `` on the steamers . '' 
`` Yes ; but it would be difficult to do so here . 
I have neither cards nor partners . '' 
`` Oh , but we can easily buy some cards , for they are sold on all the American trains . 
And as for partners , if madam plays -- '' `` Certainly , sir , '' Aouda quickly replied ; `` I understand whist . 
It is part of an English education . '' 
`` I myself have some pretensions to playing a good game . 
Well , here are three of us , and a dummy -- '' `` As you please , sir , '' replied Phileas Fogg , heartily glad to resume his favourite pastime even on the railway . 
Passepartout was dispatched in search of the steward , and soon returned with two packs of cards , some pins , counters , and a shelf covered with cloth . 
The game commenced . 
Aouda understood whist sufficiently well , and even received some compliments on her playing from Mr. Fogg . 
As for the detective , he was simply an adept , and worthy of being matched against his present opponent . 
`` Now , '' thought Passepartout , `` we 've got him . 
He wo n't budge . '' 
At eleven in the morning the train had reached the dividing ridge of the waters at Bridger Pass , seven thousand five hundred and twenty-four feet above the level of the sea , one of the highest points attained by the track in crossing the Rocky Mountains . 
After going about two hundred miles , the travellers at last found themselves on one of those vast plains which extend to the Atlantic , and which nature has made so propitious for laying the iron road . 
On the declivity of the Atlantic basin the first streams , branches of the North Platte River , already appeared . 
The whole northern and eastern horizon was bounded by the immense semi-circular curtain which is formed by the southern portion of the Rocky Mountains , the highest being Laramie Peak . 
Between this and the railway extended vast plains , plentifully irrigated . 
On the right rose the lower spurs of the mountainous mass which extends southward to the sources of the Arkansas River , one of the great tributaries of the Missouri . 
At half-past twelve the travellers caught sight for an instant of Fort Halleck , which commands that section ; and in a few more hours the Rocky Mountains were crossed . 
There was reason to hope , then , that no accident would mark the journey through this difficult country . 
The snow had ceased falling , and the air became crisp and cold . 
Large birds , frightened by the locomotive , rose and flew off in the distance . 
No wild beast appeared on the plain . 
It was a desert in its vast nakedness . 
After a comfortable breakfast , served in the car , Mr. Fogg and his partners had just resumed whist , when a violent whistling was heard , and the train stopped . 
Passepartout put his head out of the door , but saw nothing to cause the delay ; no station was in view . 
Aouda and Fix feared that Mr. Fogg might take it into his head to get out ; but that gentleman contented himself with saying to his servant , `` See what is the matter . '' 
Passepartout rushed out of the car . 
Thirty or forty passengers had already descended , amongst them Colonel Stamp Proctor . 
The train had stopped before a red signal which blocked the way . 
The engineer and conductor were talking excitedly with a signal-man , whom the station-master at Medicine Bow , the next stopping place , had sent on before . 
The passengers drew around and took part in the discussion , in which Colonel Proctor , with his insolent manner , was conspicuous . 
Passepartout , joining the group , heard the signal-man say , `` No ! 
you ca n't pass . 
The bridge at Medicine Bow is shaky , and would not bear the weight of the train . '' 
This was a suspension-bridge thrown over some rapids , about a mile from the place where they now were . 
According to the signal-man , it was in a ruinous condition , several of the iron wires being broken ; and it was impossible to risk the passage . 
He did not in any way exaggerate the condition of the bridge . 
It may be taken for granted that , rash as the Americans usually are , when they are prudent there is good reason for it . 
Passepartout , not daring to apprise his master of what he heard , listened with set teeth , immovable as a statue . 
`` Hum ! '' 
cried Colonel Proctor ; `` but we are not going to stay here , I imagine , and take root in the snow ? '' 
`` Colonel , '' replied the conductor , `` we have telegraphed to Omaha for a train , but it is not likely that it will reach Medicine Bow is less than six hours . '' 
`` Six hours ! '' 
cried Passepartout . 
`` Certainly , '' returned the conductor , `` besides , it will take us as long as that to reach Medicine Bow on foot . '' 
