`` 6 . 
My pictures and statues , which are said to be of great value , and which are sufficiently numerous to fatigue the sight . 
`` 7 . 
My library , consisting of six thousand volumes , quite new , and have never been opened . 
`` 8 . 
My silver plate , which is perhaps a little worn , but which ought to weigh from a thousand to twelve hundred pounds , for I had great trouble in lifting the coffer that contained it and could not carry it more than six times round my chamber . 
`` 9 . 
All these objects , in addition to the table and house linen , are divided in the residences I liked the best . '' 
Here the reader stopped to take breath . 
Every one sighed , coughed , and redoubled his attention . 
The procureur resumed : `` I have lived without having any children , and it is probable I never shall have any , which to me is a cutting grief . 
And yet I am mistaken , for I have a son , in common with my other friends ; that is , M. Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , the true son of M. le Comte de la Fere . 
`` This young nobleman appears to me extremely worthy to succeed the valiant gentleman of whom I am the friend and very humble servant . '' 
Here a sharp sound interrupted the reader . 
It was D'Artagnan 's sword , which , slipping from his baldric , had fallen on the sonorous flooring . 
Every one turned his eyes that way , and saw that a large tear had rolled from the thick lid of D'Artagnan , half-way down to his aquiline nose , the luminous edge of which shone like a little crescent moon . 
`` This is why , '' continued the procureur , `` I have left all my property , movable , or immovable , comprised in the above enumerations , to M. le Vicomte Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , son of M. le Comte de la Fere , to console him for the grief he seems to suffer , and enable him to add more luster to his already glorious name . '' 
A vague murmur ran through the auditory . 
The procureur continued , seconded by the flashing eye of D'Artagnan , which , glancing over the assembly , quickly restored the interrupted silence : `` On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do give to M. le Chevalier d'Artagnan , captain of the king 's musketeers , whatever the said Chevalier d'Artagnan may demand of my property . 
On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do pay a good pension to M. le Chevalier d'Herblay , my friend , if he should need it in exile . 
I leave to my intendant Mousqueton all of my clothes , of city , war , or chase , to the number of forty-seven suits , in the assurance that he will wear them till they are worn out , for the love of and in remembrance of his master . 
Moreover , I bequeath to M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne my old servant and faithful friend Mousqueton , already named , providing that the said vicomte shall so act that Mousqueton shall declare , when dying , he has never ceased to be happy . '' 
On hearing these words , Mousqueton bowed , pale and trembling ; his shoulders shook convulsively ; his countenance , compressed by a frightful grief , appeared from between his icy hands , and the spectators saw him stagger and hesitate , as if , though wishing to leave the hall , he did not know the way . 
`` Mousqueton , my good friend , '' said D'Artagnan , `` go and make your preparations . 
I will take you with me to Athos 's house , whither I shall go on leaving Pierrefonds . '' 
Mousqueton made no reply . 
He scarcely breathed , as if everything in that hall would from that time be foreign . 
He opened the door , and slowly disappeared . 
The procureur finished his reading , after which the greater part of those who had come to hear the last will of Porthos dispersed by degrees , many disappointed , but all penetrated with respect . 
As for D'Artagnan , thus left alone , after having received the formal compliments of the procureur , he was lost in admiration of the wisdom of the testator , who had so judiciously bestowed his wealth upon the most necessitous and the most worthy , with a delicacy that neither nobleman nor courtier could have displayed more kindly . 
When Porthos enjoined Raoul de Bragelonne to give D'Artagnan all that he would ask , he knew well , our worthy Porthos , that D'Artagnan would ask or take nothing ; and in case he did demand anything , none but himself could say what . 
Porthos left a pension to Aramis , who , if he should be inclined to ask too much , was checked by the example of D'Artagnan ; and that word exile , thrown out by the testator , without apparent intention , was it not the mildest , most exquisite criticism upon that conduct of Aramis which had brought about the death of Porthos ? 
But there was no mention of Athos in the testament of the dead . 
Could the latter for a moment suppose that the son would not offer the best part to the father ? 
The rough mind of Porthos had fathomed all these causes , seized all these shades more clearly than law , better than custom , with more propriety than taste . 
`` Porthos had indeed a heart , '' said D'Artagnan to himself with a sigh . 
As he made this reflection , he fancied he hard a groan in the room above him ; and he thought immediately of poor Mousqueton , whom he felt it was a pleasing duty to divert from his grief . 
For this purpose he left the hall hastily to seek the worthy intendant , as he had not returned . 
He ascended the staircase leading to the first story , and perceived , in Porthos 's own chamber , a heap of clothes of all colors and materials , upon which Mousqueton had laid himself down after heaping them all on the floor together . 
It was the legacy of the faithful friend . 
Those clothes were truly his own ; they had been given to him ; the hand of Mousqueton was stretched over these relics , which he was kissing with his lips , with all his face , and covered with his body . 
D'Artagnan approached to console the poor fellow . 
`` My God ! '' 
said he , `` he does not stir - he has fainted ! '' 
But D'Artagnan was mistaken . 
Mousqueton was dead ! 
Dead , like the dog who , having lost his master , crawls back to die upon his cloak . 
: The Old Age of Athos . 
While these affairs were separating forever the four musketeers , formerly bound together in a manner that seemed indissoluble , Athos , left alone after the departure of Raoul , began to pay his tribute to that foretaste of death which is called the absence of those we love . 
Back in his house at Blois , no longer having even Grimaud to receive a poor smile as he passed through the parterre , Athos daily felt the decline of vigor of a nature which for so long a time had seemed impregnable . 
Age , which had been kept back by the presence of the beloved object , arrived with that cortege of pains and inconveniences , which grows by geometrical accretion . 
Athos had no longer his son to induce him to walk firmly , with head erect , as a good example ; he had no longer , in those brilliant eyes of the young man , an ever-ardent focus at which to kindle anew the fire of his looks . 
And then , must it be said , that nature , exquisite in tenderness and reserve , no longer finding anything to understand its feelings , gave itself up to grief with all the warmth of common natures when they yield to joy . 
The Comte de la Fere , who had remained a young man to his sixty-second year ; the warrior who had preserved his strength in spite of fatigue ; his freshness of mind in spite of misfortune , his mild serenity of soul and body in spite of Milady , in spite of Mazarin , in spite of La Valliere ; Athos had become an old man in a week , from the moment at which he lost the comfort of his later youth . 
Still handsome , though bent , noble , but sad , he sought , since his solitude , the deeper glades where sunshine scarcely penetrated . 
He discontinued all the mighty exercises he had enjoyed through life , when Raoul was no longer with him . 
The servants , accustomed to see him stirring with the dawn at all seasons , were astonished to hear seven o'clock strike before their master quitted his bed . 
Athos remained in bed with a book under his pillow - but he did not sleep , neither did he read . 
Remaining in bed that he might no longer have to carry his body , he allowed his soul and spirit to wander from their envelope and return to his son , or to God . 
-LRB- 6 -RRB- His people were sometimes terrified to see him , for hours together , absorbed in silent reverie , mute and insensible ; he no longer heard the timid step of the servant who came to the door of his chamber to watch the sleeping or waking of his master . 
It often occurred that he forgot the day had half passed away , that the hours for the two first meals were gone by . 
Then he was awakened . 
He rose , descended to his shady walk , then came out a little into the sun , as though to partake of its warmth for a minute in memory of his absent child . 
And then the dismal monotonous walk recommenced , until , exhausted , he regained the chamber and his bed , his domicile by choice . 
For several days the comte did not speak a single word . 
He refused to receive the visits that were paid him , and during the night he was seen to relight his lamp and pass long hours in writing , or examining parchments . 
Athos wrote one of these letters to Vannes , another to Fontainebleau ; they remained without answers . 
We know why : Aramis had quitted France , and D'Artagnan was traveling from Nantes to Paris , from Paris to Pierrefonds . 
His valet de chambre observed that he shortened his walk every day by several turns . 
The great alley of limes soon became too long for feet that used to traverse it formerly a hundred times a day . 
The comte walked feebly as far as the middle trees , seated himself upon a mossy bank that sloped towards a sidewalk , and there waited the return of his strength , or rather the return of night . 
Very shortly a hundred steps exhausted him . 
At length Athos refused to rise at all ; he declined all nourishment , and his terrified people , although he did not complain , although he wore a smile upon his lips , although he continued to speak with his sweet voice - his people went to Blois in search of the ancient physician of the late Monsieur , and brought him to the Comte de la Fere in such a fashion that he could see the comte without being himself seen . 
For this purpose , they placed him in a closet adjoining the chamber of the patient , and implored him not to show himself , for fear of displeasing their master , who had not asked for a physician . 
The doctor obeyed . 
Athos was a sort of model for the gentlemen of the country ; the Blaisois boasted of possessing this sacred relic of French glory . 
Athos was a great seigneur compared with such nobles as the king improvised by touching with his artificial scepter the parched-up trunks of the heraldic trees of the province . 
People respected Athos , we say , and they loved him . 
The physician could not bear to see his people weep , to see flock round him the poor of the canton , to whom Athos had so often given life and consolation by his kind words and his charities . 
He examined , therefore , from the depths of his hiding-place , the nature of that mysterious malady which bent and aged more mortally every day a man but lately so full of life and a desire to live . 
He remarked upon the cheeks of Athos the hectic hue of fever , which feeds upon itself ; slow fever , pitiless , born in a fold of the heart , sheltering itself behind that rampart , growing from the suffering it engenders , at once cause and effect of a perilous situation . 
The comte spoke to nobody ; he did not even talk to himself . 
His thought feared noise ; it approached to that degree of over-excitement which borders upon ecstasy . 
Man thus absorbed , though he does not yet belong to God , already appertains no longer to the earth . 
The doctor remained for several hours studying this painful struggle of the will against superior power ; he was terrified at seeing those eyes always fixed , ever directed on some invisible object ; was terrified at the monotonous beating of that heart from which never a sigh arose to vary the melancholy state ; for often pain becomes the hope of the physician . 
Half a day passed away thus . 
The doctor formed his resolution like a brave man ; he issued suddenly from his place of retreat , and went straight up to Athos , who beheld him without evincing more surprise than if he had understood nothing of the apparition . 
`` Monsieur le comte , I crave your pardon , '' said the doctor , coming up to the patient with open arms ; `` but I have a reproach to make you - you shall hear me . '' 
And he seated himself by the pillow of Athos , who had great trouble in rousing himself from his preoccupation . 
`` What is the matter , doctor ? '' 
asked the comte , after a silence . 
`` The matter is , you are ill , monsieur , and have had no advice . '' 
`` I ! 
ill ! '' 
said Athos , smiling . 
`` Fever , consumption , weakness , decay , monsieur le comte ! '' 
`` Weakness ! '' 
replied Athos ; `` is it possible ? 
I do not get up . '' 
`` Come , come ! 
monsieur le comte , no subterfuges ; you are a good Christian ? '' 
`` I hope so , '' said Athos . 
`` Is it your wish to kill yourself ? '' 
`` Never , doctor . '' 
`` Well ! 
monsieur , you are in a fair way of doing so . 
Thus to remain is suicide . 
Get well ! 
monsieur le comte , get well ! '' 
`` Of what ? 
Find the disease first . 
For my part , I never knew myself better ; never did the sky appear more blue to me ; never did I take more care of my flowers . '' 
`` You have a hidden grief . '' 
`` Concealed ! 
- not at all ; the absence of my son , doctor ; that is my malady , and I do not conceal it . '' 
`` Monsieur le comte , your son lives , he is strong , he has all the future before him - the future of men of merit , of his race ; live for him - '' `` But I do live , doctor ; oh ! 
be satisfied of that , '' added he , with a melancholy smile ; `` for as long as Raoul lives , it will be plainly known , for as long as he lives , I shall live . '' 
`` What do you say ? '' 
`` A very simple thing . 
At this moment , doctor , I leave life suspended within me . 
A forgetful , dissipated , indifferent life would be beyond my strength , now I have no longer Raoul with me . 
You do not ask the lamp to burn when the match has not illumed the flame ; do not ask me to live amidst noise and merriment . 
I vegetate , I prepare myself , I wait . 
Look , doctor ; remember those soldiers we have so often seen together at the ports , where they were waiting to embark ; lying down , indifferent , half on one element , half on the other ; they were neither at the place where the sea was going to carry them , nor at the place the earth was going to lose them ; baggage prepared , minds on the stretch , arms stacked - they waited . 
I repeat it , the word is the one which paints my present life . 
Lying down like the soldiers , my ear on the stretch for the report that may reach me , I wish to be ready to set out at the first summons . 
Who will make me that summons ? 
life or death ? 
God or Raoul ? 
My baggage is packed , my soul is prepared , I await the signal - I wait , doctor , I wait ! '' 
The doctor knew the temper of that mind ; he appreciated the strength of that body ; he reflected for the moment , told himself that words were useless , remedies absurd , and left the chateau , exhorting Athos 's servants not to quit him for a moment . 
The doctor being gone , Athos evinced neither anger nor vexation at having been disturbed . 
He did not even desire that all letters that came should be brought to him directly . 
He knew very well that every distraction which should arise would be a joy , a hope , which his servants would have paid with their blood to procure him . 
Sleep had become rare . 
By intense thinking , Athos forgot himself , for a few hours at most , in a reverie most profound , more obscure than other people would have called a dream . 
The momentary repose which this forgetfulness thus gave the body , still further fatigued the soul , for Athos lived a double life during these wanderings of his understanding . 
One night , he dreamt that Raoul was dressing himself in a tent , to go upon an expedition commanded by M. de Beaufort in person . 
The young man was sad ; he clasped his cuirass slowly , and slowly he girded on his sword . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked his father , tenderly . 
`` What afflicts me is the death of Porthos , ever so dear a friend , '' replied Raoul . 
`` I suffer here the grief you soon will feel at home . '' 
And the vision disappeared with the slumber of Athos . 
At daybreak one of his servants entered his master 's apartment , and gave him a letter which came from Spain . 
`` The writing of Aramis , '' thought the comte ; and he read . 
`` Porthos is dead ! '' 
cried he , after the first lines . 
`` Oh ! 
Raoul , Raoul ! 
thanks ! 
thou keepest thy promise , thou warnest me ! '' 
And Athos , seized with a mortal sweat , fainted in his bed , without any other cause than weakness . 
: Athos 's Vision . 
When this fainting of Athos had ceased , the comte , almost ashamed of having given way before this superior natural event , dressed himself and ordered his horse , determined to ride to Blois , to open more certain correspondences with either Africa , D'Artagnan , or Aramis . 
In fact , this letter from Aramis informed the Comte de la Fere of the bad success of the expedition of Belle-Isle . 
It gave him sufficient details of the death of Porthos to move the tender and devoted heart of Athos to its innermost fibers . 
Athos wished to go and pay his friend Porthos a last visit . 
To render this honor to his companion in arms , he meant to send to D'Artagnan , to prevail upon him to recommence the painful voyage to Belle-Isle , to accomplish in his company that sad pilgrimage to the tomb of the giant he had so much loved , then to return to his dwelling to obey that secret influence which was conducting him to eternity by a mysterious road . 
But scarcely had his joyous servants dressed their master , whom they saw with pleasure preparing for a journey which might dissipate his melancholy ; scarcely had the comte 's gentlest horse been saddled and brought to the door , when the father of Raoul felt his head become confused , his legs give way , and he clearly perceived the impossibility of going one step further . 
He ordered himself to be carried into the sun ; they laid him upon his bed of moss where he passed a full hour before he could recover his spirits . 
Nothing could be more natural than this weakness after then inert repose of the latter days . 
Athos took a bouillon , to give him strength , and bathed his dried lips in a glassful of the wine he loved the best - that old Anjou wine mentioned by Porthos in his admirable will . 
Then , refreshed , free in mind , he had his horse brought again ; but only with the aid of his servants was he able painfully to climb into the saddle . 
He did not go a hundred paces ; a shivering seized him again at the turning of the road . 
`` This is very strange ! '' 
said he to his valet de chambre , who accompanied him . 
`` Let us stop , monsieur - I conjure you ! '' 
replied the faithful servant ; `` how pale you are getting ! '' 
`` That will not prevent my pursuing my route , now I have once started , '' replied the comte . 
And he gave his horse his head again . 
But suddenly , the animal , instead of obeying the thought of his master , stopped . 
A movement , of which Athos was unconscious , had checked the bit . 
`` Something , '' said Athos , `` wills that I should go no further . 
Support me , '' added he , stretching out his arms ; `` quick ! 
come closer ! 
I feel my muscles relax - I shall fall from my horse . '' 
The valet had seen the movement made by his master at the moment he received the order . 
He went up to him quickly , received the comte in his arms , and as they were not yet sufficiently distant from the house for the servants , who had remained at the door to watch their master 's departure , not to perceive the disorder in the usually regular proceeding of the comte , the valet called his comrades by gestures and voice , and all hastened to his assistance . 
Athos had gone but a few steps on his return , when he felt himself better again . 
His strength seemed to revive and with it the desire to go to Blois . 
He made his horse turn round : but , at the animal 's first steps , he sunk again into a state of torpor and anguish . 
`` Well ! 
decidedly , '' said he , `` it is willed that I should stay at home . '' 
His people flocked around him ; they lifted him from his horse , and carried him as quickly as possible into the house . 
Everything was prepared in his chamber , and they put him to bed . 
`` You will be sure to remember , '' said he , disposing himself to sleep , `` that I expect letters from Africa this very day . '' 
`` Monsieur will no doubt hear with pleasure that Blaisois 's son is gone on horseback , to gain an hour over the courier of Blois , '' replied his valet de chambre . 
`` Thank you , '' replied Athos , with his placid smile . 
The comte fell asleep , but his disturbed slumber resembled torture rather than repose . 
The servant who watched him saw several times the expression of internal suffering shadowed on his features . 
Perhaps Athos was dreaming . 
The day passed away . 
Blaisois 's son returned ; the courier had brought no news . 
The comte reckoned the minutes with despair ; he shuddered when those minutes made an hour . 
The idea that he was forgotten seized him once , and brought on a fearful pang of the heart . 
Everybody in the house had given up all hopes of the courier - his hour had long passed . 
Four times the express sent to Blois had repeated his journey , and there was nothing to the address of the comte . 
Athos knew that the courier only arrived once a week . 
Here , then , was a delay of eight mortal days to be endured . 
He commenced the night in this painful persuasion . 
All that a sick man , irritated by suffering , can add of melancholy suppositions to probabilities already gloomy , Athos heaped up during the early hours of this dismal night . 
The fever rose : it invaded the chest , where the fire soon caught , according to the expression of the physician , who had been brought back from Blois by Blaisois at his last journey . 
Soon it gained the head . 
The physician made two successive bleedings , which dislodged it for the time , but left the patient very weak , and without power of action in anything but his brain . 
And yet this redoubtable fever had ceased . 
It besieged with its last palpitations the tense extremities ; it ended by yielding as midnight struck . 
The physician , seeing the incontestable improvement , returned to Blois , after having ordered some prescriptions , and declared that the comte was saved . 
Then commenced for Athos a strange , indefinable state . 
Free to think , his mind turned towards Raoul , that beloved son . 
His imagination penetrated the fields of Africa in the environs of Gigelli , where M. de Beaufort must have landed with his army . 
A waste of gray rocks , rendered green in certain parts by the waters of the sea , when it lashed the shore in storms and tempest . 
Beyond , the shore , strewed over with these rocks like gravestones , ascended , in form of an amphitheater among mastic-trees and cactus , a sort of small town , full of smoke , confused noises , and terrified movements . 
All of a sudden , from the bosom of this smoke arose a flame , which succeeded , creeping along the houses , in covering the entire surface of the town , and increased by degrees , uniting in its red and angry vortices tears , screams , and supplicating arms outstretched to Heaven . 
There was , for a moment , a frightful pele-mele of timbers falling to pieces , of swords broken , of stones calcined , trees burnt and disappearing . 
It was a strange thing that in this chaos , in which Athos distinguished raised arms , in which he heard cries , sobs , and groans , he did not see one human figure . 
The cannon thundered at a distance , musketry madly barked , the sea moaned , flocks made their escape , bounding over the verdant slope . 
But not a soldier to apply the match to the batteries of cannon , not a sailor to assist in maneuvering the fleet , not a shepherd in charge of the flocks . 
After the ruin of the village , the destruction of the forts which dominated it , a ruin and destruction magically wrought without the co-operation of a single human being , the flames were extinguished , the smoke began to subside , then diminished in intensity , paled and disappeared entirely . 
Night then came over the scene ; night dark upon the earth , brilliant in the firmament . 
The large blazing stars which spangled the African sky glittered and gleamed without illuminating anything . 
A long silence ensued , which gave , for a moment , repose to the troubled imagination of Athos ; and as he felt that that which he saw was not terminated , he applied more attentively the eyes of his understanding on the strange spectacle which his imagination had presented . 
This spectacle was soon continued for him . 
A mild pale moon rose behind the declivities of the coast , streaking at first the undulating ripples of the sea , which appeared to have calmed after the roaring it had sent forth during the vision of Athos - the moon , we say , shed its diamonds and opals upon the briers and bushes of the hills . 
The gray rocks , so many silent and attentive phantoms , appeared to raise their heads to examine likewise the field of battle by the light of the moon , and Athos perceived that the field , empty during the combat , was now strewn with fallen bodies . 
An inexpressible shudder of fear and horror seized his soul as he recognized the white and blue uniforms of the soldiers of Picardy , with their long pikes and blue handles , and muskets marked with the fleur-de - lis on the butts . 
When he saw all the gaping wounds , looking up to the bright heavens as if to demand back of them the souls to which they had opened a passage , - when he saw the slaughtered horses , stiff , their tongues hanging out at one side of their mouths , sleeping in the shiny blood congealed around them , staining their furniture and their manes , - when he saw the white horse of M. de Beaufort , with his head beaten to pieces , in the first ranks of the dead , Athos passed a cold hand over his brow , which he was astonished not to find burning . 
He was convinced by this touch that he was present , as a spectator , without delirium 's dreadful aid , the day after the battle fought upon the shores of Gigelli by the army of the expedition , which he had seen leave the coast of France and disappear upon the dim horizon , and of which he had saluted with thought and gesture the last cannon-shot fired by the duke as a signal of farewell to his country . 
Who can paint the mortal agony with which his soul followed , like a vigilant eye , these effigies of clay-cold soldiers , and examined them , one after the other , to see if Raoul slept among them ? 
Who can express the intoxication of joy with which Athos bowed before God , and thanked Him for not having seen him he sought with so much fear among the dead ? 
In fact , fallen in their ranks , stiff , icy , the dead , still recognizable with ease , seemed to turn with complacency towards the Comte de la Fere , to be the better seen by him , during his sad review . 
But yet , he was astonished , while viewing all these bodies , not to perceive the survivors . 
To such a point did the illusion extend , that this vision was for him a real voyage made by the father into Africa , to obtain more exact information respecting his son . 
Fatigued , therefore , with having traversed seas and continents , he sought repose under one of the tents sheltered behind a rock , on the top of which floated the white fleur-de-lised pennon . 
He looked for a soldier to conduct him to the tent of M. de Beaufort . 
Then , while his eye was wandering over the plain , turning on all sides , he saw a white form appear behind the scented myrtles . 
This figure was clothed in the costume of an officer ; it held in its hand a broken sword ; it advanced slowly towards Athos , who , stopping short and fixing his eyes upon it , neither spoke nor moved , but wished to open his arms , because in this silent officer he had already recognized Raoul . 
The comte attempted to utter a cry , but it was stifled in his throat . 
Raoul , with a gesture , directed him to be silent , placing his finger on his lips and drawing back by degrees , without Athos being able to see his legs move . 
The comte , still paler than Raoul , followed his son , painfully traversing briers and bushes , stones and ditches , Raoul not appearing to touch the earth , no obstacle seeming to impede the lightness of his march . 
The comte , whom the inequalities of the path fatigued , soon stopped , exhausted . 
Raoul still continued to beckon him to follow him . 
The tender father , to whom love restored strength , made a last effort , and climbed the mountain after the young man , who attracted him by gesture and by smile . 
At length he gained the crest of the hill , and saw , thrown out in black , upon the horizon whitened by the moon , the aerial form of Raoul . 
Athos reached forth his hand to get closer to his beloved son upon the plateau , and the latter also stretched out his ; but suddenly , as if the young man had been drawn away in his own despite , still retreating , he left the earth , and Athos saw the clear blue sky shine between the feet of his child and the ground of the hill . 
Raoul rose insensibly into the void , smiling , still calling with gesture : - he departed towards heaven . 
Athos uttered a cry of tenderness and terror . 
He looked below again . 
He saw a camp destroyed , and all those white bodies of the royal army , like so many motionless atoms . 
And , then , raising his head , he saw the figure of his son still beckoning him to climb the mystic void . 
: The Angel of Death . 
Athos was at this part of his marvelous vision , when the charm was suddenly broken by a great noise rising from the outer gates . 
A horse was heard galloping over the hard gravel of the great alley , and the sound of noisy and animated conversations ascended to the chamber in which the comte was dreaming . 
Athos did not stir from the place he occupied ; he scarcely turned his head towards the door to ascertain the sooner what these noises could be . 
A heavy step ascended the stairs ; the horse , which had recently galloped , departed slowly towards the stables . 
Great hesitation appeared in the steps , which by degrees approached the chamber . 
A door was opened , and Athos , turning a little towards the part of the room the noise came from , cried , in a weak voice : `` It is a courier from Africa , is it not ? '' 
`` No , monsieur le comte , '' replied a voice which made the father of Raoul start upright in his bed . 
`` Grimaud ! '' 
murmured he . 
And the sweat began to pour down his face . 
Grimaud appeared in the doorway . 
It was no longer the Grimaud we have seen , still young with courage and devotion , when he jumped the first into the boat destined to convey Raoul de Bragelonne to the vessels of the royal fleet . 
'T was now a stern and pale old man , his clothes covered with dust , and hair whitened by old age . 
He trembled whilst leaning against the door-frame , and was near falling on seeing , by the light of the lamps , the countenance of his master . 
These two men who had lived so long together in a community of intelligence , and whose eyes , accustomed to economize expressions , knew how to say so many things silently - these two old friends , one as noble as the other in heart , if they were unequal in fortune and birth , remained tongue-tied whilst looking at each other . 
By the exchange of a single glance they had just read to the bottom of each other 's hearts . 
The old servitor bore upon his countenance the impression of a grief already old , the outward token of a grim familiarity with woe . 
He appeared to have no longer in use more than a single version of his thoughts . 
As formerly he was accustomed not to speak much , he was now accustomed not to smile at all . 
Athos read at a glance all these shades upon the visage of his faithful servant , and in the same tone he would have employed to speak to Raoul in his dream : `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` Raoul is dead . 
Is it not so ? '' 
Behind Grimaud the other servants listened breathlessly , with their eyes fixed upon the bed of their sick master . 
They heard the terrible question , and a heart-breaking silence followed . 
`` Yes , '' replied the old man , heaving the monosyllable from his chest with a hoarse , broken sigh . 
Then arose voices of lamentation , which groaned without measure , and filled with regrets and prayers the chamber where the agonized father sought with his eyes the portrait of his son . 
This was for Athos like the transition which led to his dream . 
Without uttering a cry , without shedding a tear , patient , mild , resigned as a martyr , he raised his eyes towards Heaven , in order there to see again , rising above the mountain of Gigelli , the beloved shade that was leaving him at the moment of Grimaud 's arrival . 
Without doubt , while looking towards the heavens , resuming his marvelous dream , he repassed by the same road by which the vision , at once so terrible and sweet , had led him before ; for after having gently closed his eyes , he reopened them and began to smile : he had just seen Raoul , who had smiled upon him . 
With his hands joined upon his breast , his face turned towards the window , bathed by the fresh air of night , which brought upon its wings the aroma of the flowers and the woods , Athos entered , never again to come out of it , into the contemplation of that paradise which the living never see . 
God willed , no doubt , to open to this elect the treasures of eternal beatitude , at this hour when other men tremble with the idea of being severely received by the Lord , and cling to this life they know , in the dread of the other life of which they get but merest glimpses by the dismal murky torch of death . 
Athos was spirit-guided by the pure serene soul of his son , which aspired to be like the paternal soul . 
Everything for this just man was melody and perfume in the rough road souls take to return to the celestial country . 
After an hour of this ecstasy , Athos softly raised his hands as white as wax ; the smile did not quit his lips , and he murmured low , so low as scarcely to be audible , these three words addressed to God or to Raoul : `` HERE I AM ! '' 
And his hands fell slowly , as though he himself had laid them on the bed . 
Death had been kind and mild to this noble creature . 
It had spared him the tortures of the agony , convulsions of the last departure ; had opened with an indulgent finger the gates of eternity to that noble soul . 
God had no doubt ordered it thus that the pious remembrance of this death should remain in the hearts of those present , and in the memory of other men - a death which caused to be loved the passage from this life to the other by those whose existence upon this earth leads them not to dread the last judgment . 
Athos preserved , even in the eternal sleep , that placid and sincere smile - an ornament which was to accompany him to the tomb . 
The quietude and calm of his fine features made his servants for a long time doubt whether he had really quitted life . 
The comte 's people wished to remove Grimaud , who , from a distance , devoured the face now quickly growing marble-pale , and did not approach , from pious fear of bringing to him the breath of death . 
But Grimaud , fatigued as he was , refused to leave the room . 
He sat himself down upon the threshold , watching his master with the vigilance of a sentinel , jealous to receive either his first waking look or his last dying sigh . 
The noises all were quiet in the house - every one respected the slumber of their lord . 
But Grimaud , by anxiously listening , perceived that the comte no longer breathed . 
He raised himself with his hands leaning on the ground , looked to see if there did not appear some motion in the body of his master . 
Nothing ! 
Fear seized him ; he rose completely up , and , at the very moment , heard some one coming up the stairs . 
A noise of spurs knocking against a sword - a warlike sound familiar to his ears - stopped him as he was going towards the bed of Athos . 
A voice more sonorous than brass or steel resounded within three paces of him . 
`` Athos ! 
Athos ! 
my friend ! '' 
cried this voice , agitated even to tears . 
`` Monsieur le Chevalier d'Artagnan , '' faltered out Grimaud . 
`` Where is he ? 
Where is he ? '' 
continued the musketeer . 
Grimaud seized his arm in his bony fingers , and pointed to the bed , upon the sheets of which the livid tints of death already showed . 
A choked respiration , the opposite to a sharp cry , swelled the throat of D'Artagnan . 
He advanced on tip-toe , trembling , frightened at the noise his feet made on the floor , his heart rent by a nameless agony . 
He placed his ear to the breast of Athos , his face to the comte 's mouth . 
Neither noise , nor breath ! 
D'Artagnan drew back . 
Grimaud , who had followed him with his eyes , and for whom each of his movements had been a revelation , came timidly ; seated himself at the foot of the bed , and glued his lips to the sheet which was raised by the stiffened feet of his master . 
Then large drops began to flow from his red eyes . 
This old man in invincible despair , who wept , bent doubled without uttering a word , presented the most touching spectacle that D'Artagnan , in a life so filled with emotion , had ever met with . 
The captain resumed standing in contemplation before that smiling dead man , who seemed to have burnished his last thought , to give his best friend , the man he had loved next to Raoul , a gracious welcome even beyond life . 
And for reply to that exalted flattery of hospitality , D'Artagnan went and kissed Athos fervently on the brow , and with his trembling fingers closed his eyes . 
Then he seated himself by the pillow without dread of that dead man , who had been so kind and affectionate to him for five and thirty years . 
He was feeding his soul with the remembrances the noble visage of the comte brought to his mind in crowds - some blooming and charming as that smile - some dark , dismal , and icy as that visage with its eyes now closed to all eternity . 
All at once the bitter flood which mounted from minute to minute invaded his heart , and swelled his breast almost to bursting . 
Incapable of mastering his emotion , he arose , and tearing himself violently from the chamber where he had just found dead him to whom he came to report the news of the death of Porthos , he uttered sobs so heart-rending that the servants , who seemed only to wait for an explosion of grief , answered to it by their lugubrious clamors , and the dogs of the late comte by their lamentable howlings . 
Grimaud was the only one who did not lift up his voice . 
Even in the paroxysm of his grief he would not have dared to profane the dead , or for the first time disturb the slumber of his master . 
Had not Athos always bidden him be dumb ? 
At daybreak D'Artagnan , who had wandered about the lower hall , biting his fingers to stifle his sighs - D'Artagnan went up once more ; and watching the moments when Grimaud turned his head towards him , he made him a sign to come to him , which the faithful servant obeyed without making more noise than a shadow . 
D'Artagnan went down again , followed by Grimaud ; and when he had gained the vestibule , taking the old man 's hands , `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` I have seen how the father died ; now let me know about the son . '' 
Grimaud drew from his breast a large letter , upon the envelope of which was traced the address of Athos . 
He recognized the writing of M. de Beaufort , broke the seal , and began to read , while walking about in the first steel-chill rays of dawn , in the dark alley of old limes , marked by the still visible footsteps of the comte who had just died . 
: The Bulletin . 
The Duc de Beaufort wrote to Athos . 
The letter destined for the living only reached the dead . 
God had changed the address . 
`` MY DEAR COMTE , '' wrote the prince , in his large , school-boy 's hand , - `` a great misfortune has struck us amidst a great triumph . 
The king loses one of the bravest of soldiers . 
I lose a friend . 
You lose M. de Bragelonne . 
He has died gloriously , so gloriously that I have not the strength to weep as I could wish . 
Receive my sad compliments , my dear comte . 
Heaven distributes trials according to the greatness of our hearts . 
This is an immense one , but not above your courage . 
Your good friend , `` LE DUC DE BEAUFORT . '' 
The letter contained a relation written by one of the prince 's secretaries . 
It was the most touching recital , and the most true , of that dismal episode which unraveled two existences . 
D'Artagnan , accustomed to battle emotions , and with a heart armed against tenderness , could not help starting on reading the name of Raoul , the name of that beloved boy who had become a shade now - like his father . 
`` In the morning , '' said the prince 's secretary , `` monseigneur commanded the attack . 
Normandy and Picardy had taken positions in the rocks dominated by the heights of the mountain , upon the declivity of which were raised the bastions of Gigelli . 
`` The cannon opened the action ; the regiments marched full of resolution ; the pikemen with pikes elevated , the musket-bearers with their weapons ready . 
The prince followed attentively the march and movements of the troops , so as to be able to sustain them with a strong reserve . 
With monseigneur were the oldest captains and his aides-de-camp . 
M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne had received orders not to leave his highness . 
In the meantime the enemy 's cannon , which at first thundered with little success against the masses , began to regulate their fire , and the balls , better directed , killed several men near the prince . 
The regiments formed in column , and , advancing against the ramparts , were rather roughly handled . 
There was a sort of hesitation in our troops , who found themselves ill-seconded by the artillery . 
In fact , the batteries which had been established the evening before had but a weak and uncertain aim , on account of their position . 
The upward direction of the aim lessened the justness of the shots as well as their range . 
`` Monseigneur , comprehending the bad effect of this position on the siege artillery , commanded the frigates moored in the little road to commence a regular fire against the place . 
M. de Bragelonne offered himself at once to carry this order . 
But monseigneur refused to acquiesce in the vicomte 's request . 
Monseigneur was right , for he loved and wished to spare the young nobleman . 
He was quite right , and the event took upon itself to justify his foresight and refusal ; for scarcely had the sergeant charged with the message solicited by M. de Bragelonne gained the seashore , when two shots from long carbines issued from the enemy 's ranks and laid him low . 
The sergeant fell , dyeing the sand with his blood ; observing which , M. de Bragelonne smiled at monseigneur , who said to him , ` You see , vicomte , I have saved your life . 
Report that , some day , to M. le Comte de la Fere , in order that , learning it from you , he may thank me . ' 
The young nobleman smiled sadly , and replied to the duke , ` It is true , monseigneur , that but for your kindness I should have been killed , where the poor sergeant has fallen , and should be at rest . ' 
M. de Bragelonne made this reply in such a tone that monseigneur answered him warmly , ` Vrai Dieu ! 
Young man , one would say that your mouth waters for death ; but , by the soul of Henry IV. , I have promised your father to bring you back alive ; and , please the Lord , I mean to keep my word . ' 
`` Monseigneur de Bragelonne colored , and replied , in a lower voice , ` Monseigneur , pardon me , I beseech you . 
I have always had a desire to meet good opportunities ; and it is so delightful to distinguish ourselves before our general , particularly when that general is M. le Duc de Beaufort . ' 
`` Monseigneur was a little softened by this ; and , turning to the officers who surrounded him , gave different orders . 
The grenadiers of the two regiments got near enough to the ditches and intrenchments to launch their grenades , which had but small effect . 
In the meanwhile , M. d'Estrees , who commanded the fleet , having seen the attempt of the sergeant to approach the vessels , understood that he must act without orders , and opened fire . 
Then the Arabs , finding themselves seriously injured by the balls from the fleet , and beholding the destruction and the ruin of their walls , uttered the most fearful cries . 
Their horsemen descended the mountain at a gallop , bent over their saddles , and rushed full tilt upon the columns of infantry , which , crossing their pikes , stopped this mad assault . 
Repulsed by the firm attitude of the battalion , the Arabs threw themselves with fury towards the etat-major , which was not on its guard at that moment . 
`` The danger was great ; monseigneur drew his sword ; his secretaries and people imitated him ; the officers of the suite engaged in combat with the furious Arabs . 
It was then M. de Bragelonne was able to satisfy the inclination he had so clearly shown from the commencement of the action . 
He fought near the prince with the valor of a Roman , and killed three Arabs with his small sword . 
But it was evident that his bravery did not arise from that sentiment of pride so natural to all who fight . 
It was impetuous , affected , even forced ; he sought to glut , intoxicate himself with strife and carnage . 
He excited himself to such a degree that monseigneur called to him to stop . 
He must have heard the voice of monseigneur , because we who were close to him heard it . 
He did not , however , stop , but continued his course to the intrenchments . 
As M. de Bragelonne was a well-disciplined officer , this disobedience to the orders of monseigneur very much surprised everybody , and M. de Beaufort redoubled his earnestness , crying , ` Stop , Bragelonne ! 
Where are you going ? 
Stop , ' repeated monseigneur , ' I command you ! ' 
`` We all , imitating the gesture of M. le duc , we all raised our hands . 
We expected that the cavalier would turn bridle ; but M. de Bragelonne continued to ride towards the palisades . '' 
` Stop , Bragelonne ! ' 
repeated the prince , in a very loud voice , ` stop ! 
in the name of your father ! ' 
`` At these words M. de Bragelonne turned round ; his countenance expressed a lively grief , but he did not stop ; we then concluded that his horse must have run away with him . 
When M. le duc saw cause to conclude that the vicomte was no longer master of his horse , and had watched him precede the first grenadiers , his highness cried , ` Musketeers , kill his horse ! 
A hundred pistoles for the man who kills his horse ! ' 
But who could expect to hit the beast without at least wounding his rider ? 
No one dared the attempt . 
At length one presented himself ; he was a sharp - shooter of the regiment of Picardy , named Luzerne , who took aim at the animal , fired , and hit him in the quarters , for we saw the blood redden the hair of the horse . 
Instead of falling , the cursed jennet was irritated , and carried him on more furiously than ever . 
Every Picard who saw this unfortunate young man rushing on to meet certain death , shouted in the loudest manner , ` Throw yourself off , monsieur le vicomte ! 
- off ! 
- off ! 
throw yourself off ! ' 
M. de Bragelonne was an officer much beloved in the army . 
Already had the vicomte arrived within pistol-shot of the ramparts , when a discharge was poured upon him that enshrouded him in fire and smoke . 
We lost sight of him ; the smoke dispersed ; he was on foot , upright ; his horse was killed . 
`` The vicomte was summoned to surrender by the Arabs , but he made them a negative sign with his head , and continued to march towards the palisades . 
This was a mortal imprudence . 
Nevertheless the entire army was pleased that he would not retreat , since ill-chance had led him so near . 
He marched a few paces further , and the two regiments clapped their hands . 
It was at this moment the second discharge shook the walls , and the Vicomte de Bragelonne again disappeared in the smoke ; but this time the smoke dispersed in vain ; we no longer saw him standing . 
He was down , with his head lower than his legs , among the bushes , and the Arabs began to think of leaving their intrenchments to come and cut off his head or take his body - as is the custom with the infidels . 
But Monseigneur le Duc de Beaufort had followed all this with his eyes , and the sad spectacle drew from him many painful sighs . 
He then cried aloud , seeing the Arabs running like white phantoms among the mastic-trees , ` Grenadiers ! 
lancers ! 
will you let them take that noble body ? ' 
`` Saying these words and waving his sword , he himself rode towards the enemy . 
The regiments , rushing in his steps , ran in their turn , uttering cries as terrible as those of the Arabs were wild . 
`` The combat commenced over the body of M. de Bragelonne , and with such inveteracy was it fought that a hundred and sixty Arabs were left upon the field , by the side of at least fifty of our troops . 
It was a lieutenant from Normandy who took the body of the vicomte on his shoulders and carried it back to the lines . 
The advantage was , however , pursued , the regiments took the reserve with them , and the enemy 's palisades were utterly destroyed . 
At three o'clock the fire of the Arabs ceased ; the hand-to-hand fight lasted two hours ; it was a massacre . 
At five o'clock we were victorious at all points ; the enemy had abandoned his positions , and M. le duc ordered the white flag to be planted on the summit of the little mountain . 
It was then we had time to think of M. de Bragelonne , who had eight large wounds in his body , through which almost all his blood had welled away . 
Still , however , he had breathed , which afforded inexpressible joy to monseigneur , who insisted on being present at the first dressing of the wounds and the consultation of the surgeons . 
There were two among them who declared M. de Bragelonne would live . 
Monseigneur threw his arms around their necks , and promised them a thousand louis each if they could save him . 
`` The vicomte heard these transports of joy , and whether he was in despair , or whether he suffered much from his wounds , he expressed by his countenance a contradiction , which gave rise to reflection , particularly in one of the secretaries when he had heard what follows . 
The third surgeon was the brother of Sylvain de Saint-Cosme , the most learned of them all . 
He probed the wounds in his turn , and said nothing . 
M. de Bragelonne fixed his eyes steadily upon the skillful surgeon , and seemed to interrogate his every movement . 
The latter , upon being questioned by monseigneur , replied that he saw plainly three mortal wounds out of eight , but so strong was the constitution of the wounded , so rich was he in youth , and so merciful was the goodness of God , that perhaps M. de Bragelonne might recover , particularly if he did not move in the slightest manner . 
Frere Sylvain added , turning towards his assistants , ` Above everything , do not allow him to move , even a finger , or you will kill him ; ' and we all left the tent in very low spirits . 
That secretary I have mentioned , on leaving the tent , thought he perceived a faint and sad smile glide over the lips of M. de Bragelonne when the duke said to him , in a cheerful , kind voice , ` We will save you , vicomte , we will save you yet . ' 
`` In the evening , when it was believed the wounded youth had taken some repose , one of the assistants entered his tent , but rushed out again immediately , uttering loud cries . 
We all ran up in disorder , M. le duc with us , and the assistant pointed to the body of M. de Bragelonne upon the ground , at the foot of his bed , bathed in the remainder of his blood . 
It appeared that he had suffered some convulsion , some delirium , and that he had fallen ; that the fall had accelerated his end , according to the prognosis of Frere Sylvain . 
We raised the vicomte ; he was cold and dead . 
He held a lock of fair hair in his right hand , and that hand was tightly pressed upon his heart . '' 
Then followed the details of the expedition , and of the victory obtained over the Arabs . 
D'Artagnan stopped at the account of the death of poor Raoul . 
`` Oh ! '' 
murmured he , `` unhappy boy ! 
a suicide ! '' 
And turning his eyes towards the chamber of the chateau , in which Athos slept in eternal sleep , `` They kept their words with each other , '' said he , in a low voice ; `` now I believe them to be happy ; they must be reunited . '' 
And he returned through the parterre with slow and melancholy steps . 
All the village - all the neighborhood - were filled with grieving neighbors relating to each other the double catastrophe , and making preparations for the funeral . 
: The Last Canto of the Poem . 
On the morrow , all the noblesse of the provinces , of the environs , and wherever messengers had carried the news , might have been seen arriving in detachments . 
D'Artagnan had shut himself up , without being willing to speak to anybody . 
Two such heavy deaths falling upon the captain , so closely after the death of Porthos , for a long time oppressed that spirit which had hitherto been so indefatigable and invulnerable . 
Except Grimaud , who entered his chamber once , the musketeer saw neither servants nor guests . 
He supposed , from the noises in the house , and the continual coming and going , that preparations were being made for the funeral of the comte . 
He wrote to the king to ask for an extension of his leave of absence . 
Grimaud , as we have said , had entered D'Artagnan 's apartment , had seated himself upon a joint-stool near the door , like a man who meditates profoundly ; then , rising , he made a sign to D'Artagnan to follow him . 
The latter obeyed in silence . 
Grimaud descended to the comte 's bed-chamber , showed the captain with his finger the place of the empty bed , and raised his eyes eloquently towards Heaven . 
`` Yes , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` yes , good Grimaud - now with the son he loved so much ! '' 
Grimaud left the chamber , and led the way to the hall , where , according to the custom of the province , the body was laid out , previously to being put away forever . 
D'Artagnan was struck at seeing two open coffins in the hall . 
In reply to the mute invitation of Grimaud , he approached , and saw in one of them Athos , still handsome in death , and , in the other , Raoul with his eyes closed , his cheeks pearly as those of the Palls of Virgil , with a smile on his violet lips . 
He shuddered at seeing the father and son , those two departed souls , represented on earth by two silent , melancholy bodies , incapable of touching each other , however close they might be . 
`` Raoul here ! '' 
murmured he . 
`` Oh ! 
Grimaud , why did you not tell me this ? '' 
Grimaud shook his head , and made no reply ; but taking D'Artagnan by the hand , he led him to the coffin , and showed him , under the thin winding - sheet , the black wounds by which life had escaped . 
The captain turned away his eyes , and , judging it was useless to question Grimaud , who would not answer , he recollected that M. de Beaufort 's secretary had written more than he , D'Artagnan , had had the courage to read . 
Taking up the recital of the affair which had cost Raoul his life , he found these words , which ended the concluding paragraph of the letter : `` Monseigneur le duc has ordered that the body of monsieur le vicomte should be embalmed , after the manner practiced by the Arabs when they wish their dead to be carried to their native land ; and monsieur le duc has appointed relays , so that the same confidential servant who brought up the young man might take back his remains to M. le Comte de la Fere . '' 
`` And so , '' thought D'Artagnan , `` I shall follow thy funeral , my dear boy - I , already old - I , who am of no value on earth - and I shall scatter dust upon that brow I kissed but two months since . 
God has willed it to be so . 
Thou hast willed it to be so , thyself . 
I have no longer the right even to weep . 
Thou hast chosen death ; it seemed to thee a preferable gift to life . '' 
At length arrived the moment when the chill remains of these two gentlemen were to be given back to mother earth . 
There was such an affluence of military and other people that up to the place of the sepulture , which was a little chapel on the plain , the road from the city was filled with horsemen and pedestrians in mourning . 
Athos had chosen for his resting-place the little inclosure of a chapel erected by himself near the boundary of his estates . 
He had had the stones , cut in 1550 , brought from an old Gothic manor-house in Berry , which had sheltered his early youth . 
The chapel , thus rebuilt , transported , was pleasing to the eye beneath its leafy curtains of poplars and sycamores . 
It was ministered in every Sunday , by the cure of the neighboring bourg , to whom Athos paid an allowance of two hundred francs for this service ; and all the vassals of his domain , with their families , came thither to hear mass , without having any occasion to go to the city . 
Behind the chapel extended , surrounded by two high hedges of hazel , elder and white thorn , and a deep ditch , the little inclosure - uncultivated , though gay in its sterility ; because the mosses there grew thick , wild heliotrope and ravenelles there mingled perfumes , while from beneath an ancient chestnut issued a crystal spring , a prisoner in its marble cistern , and on the thyme all around alighted thousands of bees from the neighboring plants , whilst chaffinches and redthroats sang cheerfully among the flower-spangled hedges . 
It was to this place the somber coffins were carried , attended by a silent and respectful crowd . 
The office of the dead being celebrated , the last adieux paid to the noble departed , the assembly dispersed , talking , along the roads , of the virtues and mild death of the father , of the hopes the son had given , and of his melancholy end upon the arid coast of Africa . 
Little by little , all noises were extinguished , like the lamps illuminating the humble nave . 
The minister bowed for the last time to the altar and the still fresh graves ; then , followed by his assistant , he slowly took the road back to the presbytery . 
D'Artagnan , left alone , perceived that night was coming on . 
He had forgotten the hour , thinking only of the dead . 
He arose from the oaken bench on which he was seated in the chapel , and wished , as the priest had done , to go and bid a last adieu to the double grave which contained his two lost friends . 
A woman was praying , kneeling on the moist earth . 
D'Artagnan stopped at the door of the chapel , to avoid disturbing her , and also to endeavor to find out who was the pious friend who performed this sacred duty with so much zeal and perseverance . 
The unknown had hidden her face in her hands , which were white as alabaster . 
From the noble simplicity of her costume , she must be a woman of distinction . 
Outside the inclosure were several horses mounted by servants ; a travelling carriage was in waiting for this lady . 
D'Artagnan in vain sought to make out what caused her delay . 
She continued praying , and frequently pressed her handkerchief to her face , by which D'Artagnan perceived she was weeping . 
He beheld her strike her breast with the compunction of a Christian woman . 
He heard her several times exclaim as from a wounded heart : `` Pardon ! 
pardon ! '' 
And as she appeared to abandon herself entirely to her grief , as she threw herself down , almost fainting , exhausted by complaints and prayers , D'Artagnan , touched by this love for his so much regretted friends , made a few steps towards the grave , in order to interrupt the melancholy colloquy of the penitent with the dead . 
But as soon as his step sounded on the gravel , the unknown raised her head , revealing to D'Artagnan a face aflood with tears , a well-known face . 
It was Mademoiselle de la Valliere ! 
