`` Ten are dead . 
Biscarrat is in the cavern , and we are five . '' 
`` Biscarrat is a prisoner ? '' 
`` Probably . '' 
`` No , for here he is - look . '' 
In fact , Biscarrat appeared at the opening of the grotto . 
`` He is making a sign to come on , '' said the officer . 
`` Come on ! '' 
`` Come on ! '' 
cried all the troop . 
And they advanced to meet Biscarrat . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the captain , addressing Biscarrat , `` I am assured that you know who the men are in that grotto , and who make such a desperate defense . 
In the king 's name I command you to declare what you know . '' 
`` Captain , '' said Biscarrat , `` you have no need to command me . 
My word has been restored to me this very instant ; and I came in the name of these men . '' 
`` To tell me who they are ? '' 
`` To tell you they are determined to defend themselves to the death , unless you grant them satisfactory terms . '' 
`` How many are there of them , then ? '' 
`` There are two , '' said Biscarrat . 
`` There are two - and want to impose conditions upon us ? '' 
`` There are two , and they have already killed ten of our men . '' 
`` What sort of people are they - giants ? '' 
`` Worse than that . 
Do you remember the history of the Bastion Saint - Gervais , captain ? '' 
`` Yes ; where four musketeers held out against an army . '' 
`` Well , these are two of those same musketeers . '' 
`` And their names ? '' 
`` At that period they were called Porthos and Aramis . 
Now they are styled M. d'Herblay and M. du Vallon . '' 
`` And what interest have they in all this ? '' 
`` It is they who were holding Bell-Isle for M. Fouquet . '' 
A murmur ran through the ranks of the soldiers on hearing the two words `` Porthos and Aramis . '' 
`` The musketeers ! 
the musketeers ! '' 
repeated they . 
And among all these brave men , the idea that they were going to have a struggle against two of the oldest glories of the French army , made a shiver , half enthusiasm , two-thirds terror , run through them . 
In fact , those four names - D'Artagnan , Athos , Porthos , and Aramis - were venerated among all who wore a sword ; as , in antiquity , the names of Hercules , Theseus , Castor , and Pollux were venerated . 
`` Two men - and they have killed ten in two discharges ! 
It is impossible , Monsieur Biscarrat ! '' 
`` Eh ! 
captain , '' replied the latter , `` I do not tell you that they have not with them two or three men , as the musketeers of the Bastion Saint - Gervais had two or three lackeys ; but , believe me , captain , I have seen these men , I have been taken prisoner by them - I know they themselves alone are all-sufficient to destroy an army . '' 
`` That we shall see , '' said the captain , `` and that in a moment , too . 
Gentlemen , attention ! '' 
At this reply , no one stirred , and all prepared to obey . 
Biscarrat alone risked a last attempt . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , in a low voice , `` be persuaded by me ; let us pass on our way . 
Those two men , those two lions you are going to attack , will defend themselves to the death . 
They have already killed ten of our men ; they will kill double the number , and end by killing themselves rather than surrender . 
What shall we gain by fighting them ? '' 
`` We shall gain the consciousness , monsieur , of not having allowed eighty of the king 's guards to retire before two rebels . 
If I listened to your advice , monsieur , I should be a dishonored man ; and by dishonoring myself I should dishonor the army . 
Forward , my men ! '' 
And he marched first as far as the opening of the grotto . 
There he halted . 
The object of this halt was to give Biscarrat and his companions time to describe to him the interior of the grotto . 
Then , when he believed he had a sufficient acquaintance with the place , he divided his company into three bodies , which were to enter successively , keeping up a sustained fire in all directions . 
No doubt , in this attack they would lose five more , perhaps ten ; but , certainly , they must end by taking the rebels , since there was no issue ; and , at any rate , two men could not kill eighty . 
`` Captain , '' said Biscarrat , `` I beg to be allowed to march at the head of the first platoon . '' 
`` So be it , '' replied the captain ; `` you have all the honor . 
I make you a present of it . '' 
`` Thanks ! '' 
replied the young man , with all the firmness of his race . 
`` Take your sword , then . '' 
`` I shall go as I am , captain , '' said Biscarrat , `` for I do not go to kill , I go to be killed . '' 
And placing himself at the head of the first platoon , with head uncovered and arms crossed , - `` March , gentlemen , '' said he . 
: An Homeric Song . 
It is time to pass to the other camp , and to describe at once the combatants and the field of battle . 
Aramis and Porthos had gone to the grotto of Locmaria with the expectation of finding there their canoe ready armed , as well as the three Bretons , their assistants ; and they at first hoped to make the bark pass through the little issue of the cavern , concealing in that fashion both their labors and their flight . 
The arrival of the fox and dogs obliged them to remain concealed . 
The grotto extended the space of about a hundred toises , to that little slope dominating a creek . 
Formerly a temple of the Celtic divinities , when Belle-Isle was still called Kalonese , this grotto had beheld more than one human sacrifice accomplished in its mystic depths . 
The first entrance to the cavern was by a moderate descent , above which distorted rocks formed a weird arcade ; the interior , very uneven and dangerous from the inequalities of the vault , was subdivided into several compartments , which communicated with each other by means of rough and jagged steps , fixed right and left , in uncouth natural pillars . 
At the third compartment the vault was so low , the passage so narrow , that the bark would scarcely have passed without touching the side ; nevertheless , in moments of despair , wood softens and stone grows flexible beneath the human will . 
Such was the thought of Aramis , when , after having fought the fight , he decided upon flight - a flight most dangerous , since all the assailants were not dead ; and that , admitting the possibility of putting the bark to sea , they would have to fly in open day , before the conquered , so interested on recognizing their small number , in pursuing their conquerors . 
When the two discharges had killed ten men , Aramis , familiar with the windings of the cavern , went to reconnoiter them one by one , and counted them , for the smoke prevented seeing outside ; and he immediately commanded that the canoe should be rolled as far as the great stone , the closure of the liberating issue . 
Porthos collected all his strength , took the canoe in his arms , and raised it up , whilst the Bretons made it run rapidly along the rollers . 
They had descended into the third compartment ; they had arrived at the stone which walled the outlet . 
Porthos seized this gigantic stone at its base , applied his robust shoulder , and gave a heave which made the wall crack . 
A cloud of dust fell from the vault , with the ashes of ten thousand generations of sea birds , whose nests stuck like cement to the rock . 
At the third shock the stone gave way , and oscillated for a minute . 
Porthos , placing his back against the neighboring rock , made an arch with his foot , which drove the block out of the calcareous masses which served for hinges and cramps . 
The stone fell , and daylight was visible , brilliant , radiant , flooding the cavern through the opening , and the blue sea appeared to the delighted Bretons . 
They began to lift the bark over the barricade . 
Twenty more toises , and it would glide into the ocean . 
It was during this time that the company arrived , was drawn up by the captain , and disposed for either an escalade or an assault . 
Aramis watched over everything , to favor the labors of his friends . 
He saw the reinforcements , counted the men , and convinced himself at a single glance of the insurmountable peril to which fresh combat would expose them . 
To escape by sea , at the moment the cavern was about to be invaded , was impossible . 
In fact , the daylight which had just been admitted to the last compartments had exposed to the soldiers the bark being rolled towards the sea , the two rebels within musket-shot ; and one of their discharges would riddle the boat if it did not kill the navigators . 
Besides , allowing everything , - if the bark escaped with the men on board of it , how could the alarm be suppressed - how could notice to the royal lighters be prevented ? 
What could hinder the poor canoe , followed by sea and watched from the shore , from succumbing before the end of the day ? 
Aramis , digging his hands into his gray hair with rage , invoked the assistance of God and the assistance of the demons . 
Calling to Porthos , who was doing more work than all the rollers - whether of flesh or wood - `` My friend , '' said he , `` our adversaries have just received a reinforcement . '' 
`` Ah , ah ! '' 
said Porthos , quietly , `` what is to be done , then ? '' 
`` To recommence the combat , '' said Aramis , `` is hazardous . '' 
`` Yes , '' said Porthos , `` for it is difficult to suppose that out of two , one should not be killed ; and certainly , if one of us was killed , the other would get himself killed also . '' 
Porthos spoke these words with that heroic nature which , with him , grew grander with necessity . 
Aramis felt it like a spur to his heart . 
`` We shall neither of us be killed if you do what I tell you , friend Porthos . '' 
`` Tell me what ? '' 
`` These people are coming down into the grotto . '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` We could kill about fifteen of them , but no more . '' 
`` How many are there in all ? '' 
asked Porthos . 
`` They have received a reinforcement of seventy-five men . '' 
`` Seventy-five and five , eighty . 
Ah ! '' 
sighed Porthos . 
`` If they fire all at once they will riddle us with balls . '' 
`` Certainly they will . '' 
`` Without reckoning , '' added Aramis , `` that the detonation might occasion a collapse of the cavern . '' 
`` Ay , '' said Porthos , `` a piece of falling rock just now grazed my shoulder . '' 
`` You see , then ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
it is nothing . '' 
`` We must determine upon something quickly . 
Our Bretons are going to continue to roll the canoe towards the sea . '' 
`` Very well . '' 
`` We two will keep the powder , the balls , and the muskets here . '' 
`` But only two , my dear Aramis - we shall never fire three shots together , '' said Porthos , innocently , `` the defense by musketry is a bad one . '' 
`` Find a better , then . '' 
`` I have found one , '' said the giant , eagerly ; `` I will place myself in ambuscade behind the pillar with this iron bar , and invisible , unattackable , if they come in floods , I can let my bar fall upon their skulls , thirty times in a minute . 
Hein ! 
what do you think of the project ? 
You smile ! '' 
`` Excellent , dear friend , perfect ! 
I approve it greatly ; only you will frighten them , and half of them will remain outside to take us by famine . 
What we want , my good friend , is the entire destruction of the troop . 
A single survivor encompasses our ruin . '' 
`` You are right , my friend , but how can we attract them , pray ? '' 
`` By not stirring , my good Porthos . '' 
`` Well ! 
we wo n't stir , then ; but when they are all together - '' `` Then leave it to me , I have an idea . '' 
`` If it is so , and your idea proves a good one - and your idea is most likely to be good - I am satisfied . '' 
`` To your ambuscade , Porthos , and count how many enter . '' 
`` But you , what will you do ? '' 
`` Do n't trouble yourself about me ; I have a task to perform . '' 
`` I think I hear shouts . '' 
`` It is they ! 
To your post . 
Keep within reach of my voice and hand . '' 
Porthos took refuge in the second compartment , which was in darkness , absolutely black . 
Aramis glided into the third ; the giant held in his hand an iron bar of about fifty pounds weight . 
Porthos handled this lever , which had been used in rolling the bark , with marvelous facility . 
During this time , the Bretons had pushed the bark to the beach . 
In the further and lighter compartment , Aramis , stooping and concealed , was busy with some mysterious maneuver . 
A command was given in a loud voice . 
It was the last order of the captain commandant . 
Twenty-five men jumped from the upper rocks into the first compartment of the grotto , and having taken their ground , began to fire . 
The echoes shrieked and barked , the hissing balls seemed actually to rarefy the air , and then opaque smoke filled the vault . 
`` To the left ! 
to the left ! '' 
cried Biscarrat , who , in his first assault , had seen the passage to the second chamber , and who , animated by the smell of powder , wished to guide his soldiers in that direction . 
The troop , accordingly , precipitated themselves to the left - the passage gradually growing narrower . 
Biscarrat , with his hands stretched forward , devoted to death , marched in advance of the muskets . 
`` Come on ! 
come on ! '' 
exclaimed he , `` I see daylight ! '' 
`` Strike , Porthos ! '' 
cried the sepulchral voice of Aramis . 
Porthos breathed a heavy sigh - but he obeyed . 
The iron bar fell full and direct upon the head of Biscarrat , who was dead before he had ended his cry . 
Then the formidable lever rose ten times in ten seconds , and made ten corpses . 
The soldiers could see nothing ; they heard sighs and groans ; they stumbled over dead bodies , but as they had no conception of the cause of all this , they came forward jostling each other . 
The implacable bar , still falling , annihilated the first platoon , without a single sound to warn the second , which was quietly advancing ; only , commanded by the captain , the men had stripped a fir , growing on the shore , and , with its resinous branches twisted together , the captain had made a flambeau . 
On arriving at the compartment where Porthos , like the exterminating angel , had destroyed all he touched , the first rank drew back in terror . 
No firing had replied to that of the guards , and yet their way was stopped by a heap of dead bodies - they literally walked in blood . 
Porthos was still behind his pillar . 
The captain , illumining with trembling pine-torch this frightful carnage , of which he in vain sought the cause , drew back towards the pillar behind which Porthos was concealed . 
Then a gigantic hand issued from the shade , and fastened on the throat of the captain , who uttered a stifle rattle ; his stretched-out arms beating the air , the torch fell and was extinguished in blood . 
A second after , the corpse of the captain dropped close to the extinguished torch , and added another body to the heap of dead which blocked up the passage . 
All this was effected as mysteriously as though by magic . 
At hearing the rattling in the throat of the captain , the soldiers who accompanied him had turned round , caught a glimpse of his extended arms , his eyes starting from their sockets , and then the torch fell and they were left in darkness . 
From an unreflective , instinctive , mechanical feeling , the lieutenant cried : `` Fire ! '' 
Immediately a volley of musketry flamed , thundered , roared in the cavern , bringing down enormous fragments from the vaults . 
The cavern was lighted for an instant by this discharge , and then immediately returned to pitchy darkness rendered thicker by the smoke . 
To this succeeded a profound silence , broken only by the steps of the third brigade , now entering the cavern . 
: The Death of a Titan . 
At the moment when Porthos , more accustomed to the darkness than these men , coming from open daylight , was looking round him to see if through this artificial midnight Aramis were not making him some signal , he felt his arm gently touched , and a voice low as a breath murmured in his ear , `` Come . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Porthos . 
`` Hush ! '' 
said Aramis , if possible , yet more softly . 
And amidst the noise of the third brigade , which continued to advance , the imprecations of the guards still left alive , the muffled groans of the dying , Aramis and Porthos glided unseen along the granite walls of the cavern . 
Aramis led Porthos into the last but one compartment , and showed him , in a hollow of the rocky wall , a barrel of powder weighing from seventy to eighty pounds , to which he had just attached a fuse . 
`` My friend , '' said he to Porthos , `` you will take this barrel , the match of which I am going to set fire to , and throw it amidst our enemies ; can you do so ? '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
replied Porthos ; and he lifted the barrel with one hand . 
`` Light it ! '' 
`` Stop , '' said Aramis , `` till they are all massed together , and then , my Jupiter , hurl your thunderbolt among them . '' 
`` Light it , '' repeated Porthos . 
`` On my part , '' continued Aramis , `` I will join our Bretons , and help them to get the canoe to the sea . 
I will wait for you on the shore ; launch it strongly , and hasten to us . '' 
`` Light it , '' said Porthos , a third time . 
`` But do you understand me ? '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
said Porthos again , with laughter that he did not even attempt to restrain , `` when a thing is explained to me I understand it ; begone , and give me the light . '' 
Aramis gave the burning match to Porthos , who held out his arm to him , his hands being engaged . 
Aramis pressed the arm of Porthos with both his hands , and fell back to the outlet of the cavern where the three rowers awaited him . 
Porthos , left alone , applied the spark bravely to the match . 
The spark - a feeble spark , first principle of conflagration - shone in the darkness like a glow-worm , then was deadened against the match which it set fire to , Porthos enlivening the flame with his breath . 
The smoke was a little dispersed , and by the light of the sparkling match objects might , for two seconds , be distinguished . 
It was a brief but splendid spectacle , that of this giant , pale , bloody , his countenance lighted by the fire of the match burning in surrounding darkness ! 
The soldiers saw him , they saw the barrel he held in his hand - they at once understood what was going to happen . 
Then , these men , already choked with horror at the sight of what had been accomplished , filled with terror at thought of what was about to be accomplished , gave out a simultaneous shriek of agony . 
Some endeavored to fly , but they encountered the third brigade , which barred their passage ; others mechanically took aim and attempted to fire their discharged muskets ; others fell instinctively upon their knees . 
Two or three officers cried out to Porthos to promise him his liberty if he would spare their lives . 
The lieutenant of the third brigade commanded his men to fire ; but the guards had before them their terrified companions , who served as a living rampart for Porthos . 
We have said that the light produced by the spark and the match did not last more than two seconds ; but during these two seconds this is what it illumined : in the first place , the giant , enlarged in the darkness ; then , at ten paces off , a heap of bleeding bodies , crushed , mutilated , in the midst of which some still heaved in the last agony , lifting the mass as a last respiration inflating the sides of some old monster dying in the night . 
Every breath of Porthos , thus vivifying the match , sent towards this heap of bodies a phosphorescent aura , mingled with streaks of purple . 
In addition to this principal group scattered about the grotto , as the chances of death or surprise had stretched them , isolated bodies seemed to be making ghastly exhibitions of their gaping wounds . 
Above ground , bedded in pools of blood , rose , heavy and sparkling , the short , thick pillars of the cavern , of which the strongly marked shades threw out the luminous particles . 
And all this was seen by the tremulous light of a match attached to a barrel of powder , that is to say , a torch which , whilst throwing a light on the dead past , showed death to come . 
As I have said , this spectacle did not last above two seconds . 
During this short space of time an officer of the third brigade got together eight men armed with muskets , and , through an opening , ordered them to fire upon Porthos . 
But they who received the order to fire trembled so that three guards fell by the discharge , and the five remaining balls hissed on to splinter the vault , plow the ground , or indent the pillars of the cavern . 
A burst of laughter replied to this volley ; then the arm of the giant swung round ; then was seen whirling through the air , like a falling star , the train of fire . 
The barrel , hurled a distance of thirty feet , cleared the barricade of dead bodies , and fell amidst a group of shrieking soldiers , who threw themselves on their faces . 
The officer had followed the brilliant train in the air ; he endeavored to precipitate himself upon the barrel and tear out the match before it reached the powder it contained . 
Useless ! 
The air had made the flame attached to the conductor more active ; the match , which at rest might have burnt five minutes , was consumed in thirty seconds , and the infernal work exploded . 
Furious vortices of sulphur and nitre , devouring shoals of fire which caught every object , the terrible thunder of the explosion , this is what the second which followed disclosed in that cavern of horrors . 
The rocks split like planks of deal beneath the axe . 
A jet of fire , smoke , and debris sprang from the middle of the grotto , enlarging as it mounted . 
The large walls of silex tottered and fell upon the sand , and the sand itself , an instrument of pain when launched from its hard bed , riddled the faces with its myriad cutting atoms . 
Shrieks , imprecations , human life , dead bodies - all were engulfed in one terrific crash . 
The three first compartments became one sepulchral sink into which fell grimly back , in the order of their weight , every vegetable , mineral , or human fragment . 
Then the lighter sand and ash came down in turn , stretching like a winding sheet and smoking over the dismal scene . 
And now , in this burning tomb , this subterranean volcano , seek the king 's guards with their blue coats laced with silver . 
Seek the officers , brilliant in gold , seek for the arms upon which they depended for their defense . 
One single man has made of all of those things a chaos more confused , more shapeless , more terrible than the chaos which existed before the creation of the world . 
There remained nothing of the three compartments - nothing by which God could have recognized His handiwork . 
As for Porthos , after having hurled the barrel of powder amidst his enemies , he had fled , as Aramis had directed him to do , and had gained the last compartment , into which air , light , and sunshine penetrated through the opening . 
Scarcely had he turned the angle which separated the third compartment from the fourth when he perceived at a hundred paces from him the bark dancing on the waves . 
There were his friends , there liberty , there life and victory . 
Six more of his formidable strides , and he would be out of the vault ; out of the vault ! 
a dozen of his vigorous leaps and he would reach the canoe . 
Suddenly he felt his knees give way ; his knees seemed powerless , his legs to yield beneath him . 
`` Oh ! 
oh ! '' 
murmured he , `` there is my weakness seizing me again ! 
I can walk no further ! 
What is this ? '' 
Aramis perceived him through the opening , and unable to conceive what could induce him to stop thus - `` Come on , Porthos ! 
come on , '' he cried ; `` come quickly ! '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
replied the giant , making an effort that contorted every muscle of his body - `` oh ! 
but I can not . '' 
While saying these words , he fell upon his knees , but with his mighty hands he clung to the rocks , and raised himself up again . 
`` Quick ! 
quick ! '' 
repeated Aramis , bending forward towards the shore , as if to draw Porthos towards him with his arms . 
`` Here I am , '' stammered Porthos , collecting all his strength to make one step more . 
`` In the name of Heaven ! 
Porthos , make haste ! 
the barrel will blow up ! '' 
`` Make haste , monseigneur ! '' 
shouted the Bretons to Porthos , who was floundering as in a dream . 
But there was no time ; the explosion thundered , earth gaped , the smoke which hurled through the clefts obscured the sky ; the sea flowed back as though driven by the blast of flame which darted from the grotto as if from the jaws of some gigantic fiery chimera ; the reflux took the bark out twenty toises ; the solid rocks cracked to their base , and separated like blocks beneath the operation of the wedge ; a portion of the vault was carried up towards heaven , as if it had been built of cardboard ; the green and blue and topaz conflagration and black lava of liquefactions clashed and combated an instant beneath a majestic dome of smoke ; then oscillated , declined , and fell successively the mighty monoliths of rock which the violence of the explosion had not been able to uproot from the bed of ages ; they bowed to each other like grave and stiff old men , then prostrating themselves , lay down forever in their dusty tomb . 
This frightful shock seemed to restore Porthos the strength that he had lost ; he arose , a giant among granite giants . 
But at the moment he was flying between the double hedge of granite phantoms , these latter , which were no longer supported by the corresponding links , began to roll and totter round our Titan , who looked as if precipitated from heaven amidst rocks which he had just been launching . 
Porthos felt the very earth beneath his feet becoming jelly-tremulous . 
He stretched both hands to repulse the falling rocks . 
A gigantic block was held back by each of his extended arms . 
He bent his head , and a third granite mass sank between his shoulders . 
For an instant the power of Porthos seemed about to fail him , but this new Hercules united all his force , and the two walls of the prison in which he was buried fell back slowly and gave him place . 
For an instant he appeared , in this frame of granite , like the angel of chaos , but in pushing back the lateral rocks , he lost his point of support , for the monolith which weighed upon his shoulders , and the boulder , pressing upon him with all its weight , brought the giant down upon his knees . 
The lateral rocks , for an instant pushed back , drew together again , and added their weight to the ponderous mass which would have been sufficient to crush ten men . 
The hero fell without a groan - he fell while answering Aramis with words of encouragement and hope , for , thanks to the powerful arch of his hands , for an instant he believed that , like Enceladus , he would succeed in shaking off the triple load . 
But by degrees Aramis beheld the block sink ; the hands , strung for an instant , the arms stiffened for a last effort , gave way , the extended shoulders sank , wounded and torn , and the rocks continued to gradually collapse . 
`` Porthos ! 
Porthos ! '' 
cried Aramis , tearing his hair . 
`` Porthos ! 
where are you ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Here , here , '' murmured Porthos , with a voice growing evidently weaker , `` patience ! 
patience ! '' 
Scarcely had he pronounced these words , when the impulse of the fall augmented the weight ; the enormous rock sank down , pressed by those others which sank in from the sides , and , as it were , swallowed up Porthos in a sepulcher of badly jointed stones . 
On hearing the dying voice of his friend , Aramis had sprung to land . 
Two of the Bretons followed him , with each a lever in his hand - one being sufficient to take care of the bark . 
The dying rattle of the valiant gladiator guided them amidst the ruins . 
Aramis , animated , active and young as at twenty , sprang towards the triple mass , and with his hands , delicate as those of a woman , raised by a miracle of strength the corner-stone of this great granite grave . 
Then he caught a glimpse , through the darkness of that charnel-house , of the still brilliant eye of his friend , to whom the momentary lifting of the mass restored a momentary respiration . 
The two men came rushing up , grasped their iron levers , united their triple strength , not merely to raise it , but sustain it . 
All was useless . 
They gave way with cries of grief , and the rough voice of Porthos , seeing them exhaust themselves in a useless struggle , murmured in an almost cheerful tone those supreme words which came to his lips with the last respiration , `` Too heavy ! '' 
After which his eyes darkened and closed , his face grew ashy pale , the hands whitened , and the colossus sank quite down , breathing his last sigh . 
With him sank the rock , which , even in his dying agony he had still held up . 
The three men dropped the levers , which rolled upon the tumulary stone . 
Then , breathless , pale , his brow covered with sweat , Aramis listened , his breast oppressed , his heart ready to break . 
Nothing more . 
The giant slept the eternal sleep , in the sepulcher which God had built about him to his measure . 
: Porthos 's Epitaph . 
Aramis , silent and sad as ice , trembling like a timid child , arose shivering from the stone . 
A Christian does not walk on tombs . 
But , though capable of standing , he was not capable of walking . 
It might be said that something of dead Porthos had just died within him . 
His Bretons surrounded him ; Aramis yielded to their kind exertions , and the three sailors , lifting him up , carried him to the canoe . 
Then , having laid him down upon the bench near the rudder , they took to their oars , preferring this to hoisting sail , which might betray them . 
On all that leveled surface of the ancient grotto of Locmaria , one single hillock attracted their eyes . 
Aramis never removed his from it ; and , at a distance out in the sea , in proportion as the shore receded , that menacing proud mass of rock seemed to draw itself up , as formerly Porthos used to draw himself up , raising a smiling , yet invincible head towards heaven , like that of his dear old honest valiant friend , the strongest of the four , yet the first dead . 
Strange destiny of these men of brass ! 
The most simple of heart allied to the most crafty ; strength of body guided by subtlety of mind ; and in the decisive moment , when vigor alone could save mind and body , a stone , a rock , a vile material weight , triumphed over manly strength , and falling upon the body , drove out the mind . 
Worthy Porthos ! 
born to help other men , always ready to sacrifice himself for the safety of the weak , as if God had only given him strength for that purpose ; when dying he only thought he was carrying out the conditions of his compact with Aramis , a compact , however , which Aramis alone had drawn up , and which Porthos had only known to suffer by its terrible solidarity . 
Noble Porthos ! 
of what good now are thy chateaux overflowing with sumptuous furniture , forests overflowing with game , lakes overflowing with fish , cellars overflowing with wealth ! 
Of what service to thee now thy lackeys in brilliant liveries , and in the midst of them Mousqueton , proud of the power delegated by thee ! 
Oh , noble Porthos ! 
careful heaper-up of treasure , was it worth while to labor to sweeten and gild life , to come upon a desert shore , surrounded by the cries of seagulls , and lay thyself , with broken bones , beneath a torpid stone ? 
Was it worth while , in short , noble Porthos , to heap so much gold , and not have even the distich of a poor poet engraven upon thy monument ? 
Valiant Porthos ! 
he still , without doubt , sleeps , lost , forgotten , beneath the rock the shepherds of the heath take for the gigantic abode of a dolmen . 
And so many twining branches , so many mosses , bent by the bitter wind of ocean , so many lichens solder thy sepulcher to earth , that no passers-by will imagine such a block of granite could ever have been supported by the shoulders of one man . 
Aramis , still pale , still icy-cold , his heart upon his lips , looked , even till , with the last ray of daylight , the shore faded on the horizon . 
Not a word escaped him , not a sigh rose from his deep breast . 
The superstitious Bretons looked upon him , trembling . 
Such silence was not that of a man , it was the silence of a statue . 
In the meantime , with the first gray lines that lighted up the heavens , the canoe hoisted its little sail , which , swelling with the kisses of the breeze , and carrying them rapidly from the coast , made bravest way towards Spain , across the dreaded Gulf of Gascony , so rife with storms . 
But scarcely half an hour after the sail had been hoisted , the rowers became inactive , reclining on their benches , and , making an eye-shade with their hands , pointed out to each other a white spot which appeared on the horizon as motionless as a gull rocked by the viewless respiration of the waves . 
But that which might have appeared motionless to ordinary eyes was moving at a quick rate to the experienced eye of the sailor ; that which appeared stationary upon the ocean was cutting a rapid way through it . 
For some time , seeing the profound torpor in which their master was plunged , they did not dare to rouse him , and satisfied themselves with exchanging their conjectures in whispers . 
Aramis , in fact , so vigilant , so active - Aramis , whose eye , like that of the lynx , watched without ceasing , and saw better by night than by day - Aramis seemed to sleep in this despair of soul . 
An hour passed thus , during which daylight gradually disappeared , but during which also the sail in view gained so swiftly on the bark , that Goenne , one of the three sailors , ventured to say aloud : `` Monseigneur , we are being chased ! '' 
Aramis made no reply ; the ship still gained upon them . 
Then , of their own accord , two of the sailors , by the direction of the patron Yves , lowered the sail , in order that that single point upon the surface of the waters should cease to be a guide to the eye of the enemy pursuing them . 
On the part of the ship in sight , on the contrary , two more small sails were run up at the extremities of the masts . 
Unfortunately , it was the time of the finest and longest days of the year , and the moon , in all her brilliancy , succeeded inauspicious daylight . 
The balancelle , which was pursuing the little bark before the wind , had then still half an hour of twilight , and a whole night almost as light as day . 
`` Monseigneur ! 
monseigneur ! 
we are lost ! '' 
said the captain . 
`` Look ! 
they see us plainly , though we have lowered sail . '' 
`` That is not to be wondered at , '' murmured one of the sailors , `` since they say that , by the aid of the devil , the Paris-folk have fabricated instruments with which they see as well at a distance as near , by night as well as by day . '' 
Aramis took a telescope from the bottom of the boat , focussed it silently , and passing it to the sailor , `` Here , '' said he , `` look ! '' 
The sailor hesitated . 
`` Do n't be alarmed , '' said the bishop , `` there is no sin in it ; and if there is any sin , I will take it on myself . '' 
The sailor lifted the glass to his eye , and uttered a cry . 
He believed that the vessel , which appeared to be distant about cannon-shot , had at a single bound cleared the whole distance . 
But , on withdrawing the instrument from his eye , he saw that , except the way which the balancelle had been able to make during that brief instant , it was still at the same distance . 
`` So , '' murmured the sailor , `` they can see us as we see them . '' 
`` They see us , '' said Aramis , and sank again into impassibility . 
`` What ! 
- they see us ! '' 
said Yves . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
`` Well , captain , look yourself , '' said the sailor . 
And he passed him the glass . 
`` Monseigneur assures me that the devil has nothing to do with this ? '' 
asked Yves . 
Aramis shrugged his shoulders . 
The skipper lifted the glass to his eye . 
`` Oh ! 
monseigneur , '' said he , `` it is a miracle - there they are ; it seems as if I were going to touch them . 
Twenty-five men at least ! 
Ah ! 
I see the captain forward . 
He holds a glass like this , and is looking at us . 
Ah ! 
he turns round , and gives an order ; they are rolling a piece of cannon forward - they are loading it - pointing it . 
Misericorde ! 
they are firing at us ! '' 
And by a mechanical movement , the skipper put aside the telescope , and the pursuing ship , relegated to the horizon , appeared again in its true aspect . 
The vessel was still at the distance of nearly a league , but the maneuver sighted thus was not less real . 
A light cloud of smoke appeared beneath the sails , more blue than they , and spreading like a flower opening ; then , at about a mile from the little canoe , they saw the ball take the crown off two or three waves , dig a white furrow in the sea , and disappear at the end of it , as inoffensive as the stone with which , in play , a boy makes ducks and drakes . 
It was at once a menace and a warning . 
`` What is to be done ? '' 
asked the patron . 
`` They will sink us ! '' 
said Goenne , `` give us absolution , monseigneur ! '' 
And the sailors fell on their knees before him . 
`` You forget that they can see you , '' said he . 
`` That is true ! '' 
said the sailors , ashamed of their weakness . 
`` Give us your orders , monseigneur , we are prepared to die for you . '' 
`` Let us wait , '' said Aramis . 
`` How - let us wait ? '' 
`` Yes ; do you not see , as you just now said , that if we endeavor to fly , they will sink us ? '' 
`` But , perhaps , '' the patron ventured to say , `` perhaps under cover of night , we could escape them . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Aramis , `` they have , no doubt , Greek fire with which to lighten their own course and ours likewise . '' 
At the same moment , as if the vessel was responsive to the appeal of Aramis , a second cloud of smoke mounted slowly to the heavens , and from the bosom of that cloud sparkled an arrow of flame , which described a parabola like a rainbow , and fell into the sea , where it continued to burn , illuminating a space of a quarter of a league in diameter . 
The Bretons looked at each other in terror . 
`` You see plainly , '' said Aramis , `` it will be better to wait for them . '' 
The oars dropped from the hands of the sailors , and the bark , ceasing to make way , rocked motionless upon the summits of the waves . 
Night came on , but still the ship drew nearer . 
It might be imagined it redoubled its speed with darkness . 
From time to time , as a vulture rears its head out of its nest , the formidable Greek fire darted from its sides , and cast its flame upon the ocean like an incandescent snowfall . 
At last it came within musket-shot . 
All the men were on deck , arms in hand ; the cannoniers were at their guns , the matches burning . 
It might be thought they were about to board a frigate and to fight a crew superior in number to their own , not to attempt the capture of a canoe manned by four people . 
`` Surrender ! '' 
cried the commander of the balancelle , with the aid of his speaking-trumpet . 
The sailors looked at Aramis . 
Aramis made a sign with his head . 
Yves waved a white cloth at the end of a gaff . 
This was like striking their flag . 
The pursuer came on like a race-horse . 
It launched a fresh Greek fire , which fell within twenty paces of the little canoe , and threw a light upon them as white as sunshine . 
`` At the first sign of resistance , '' cried the commander of the balancelle , `` fire ! '' 
The soldiers brought their muskets to the present . 
`` Did we not say we surrendered ? '' 
said Yves . 
`` Alive , alive , captain ! '' 
cried one excited soldier , `` they must be taken alive . '' 
`` Well , yes - living , '' said the captain . 
Then turning towards the Bretons , `` Your lives are safe , my friends ! '' 
cried he , `` all but the Chevalier d'Herblay . '' 
Aramis stared imperceptibly . 
For an instant his eye was fixed upon the depths of the ocean , illumined by the last flashes of the Greek fire , which ran along the sides of the waves , played on the crests like plumes , and rendered still darker and more terrible the gulfs they covered . 
`` Do you hear , monseigneur ? '' 
said the sailors . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` What are your orders ? '' 
`` Accept ! '' 
`` But you , monseigneur ? '' 
Aramis leaned still more forward , and dipped the ends of his long white fingers in the green limpid waters of the sea , to which he turned with smiles as to a friend . 
`` Accept ! '' 
repeated he . 
`` We accept , '' repeated the sailors ; `` but what security have we ? '' 
`` The word of a gentleman , '' said the officer . 
`` By my rank and by my name I swear that all except M. le Chevalier d'Herblay shall have their lives spared . 
I am lieutenant of the king 's frigate the ` Pomona , ' and my name is Louis Constant de Pressigny . '' 
With a rapid gesture , Aramis - already bent over the side of the bark towards the sea - drew himself up , and with a flashing eye , and a smile upon his lips , `` Throw out the ladder , messieurs , '' said he , as if the command had belonged to him . 
He was obeyed . 
When Aramis , seizing the rope ladder , walked straight up to the commander , with a firm step , looked at him earnestly , made a sign to him with his hand , a mysterious and unknown sign at sight of which the officer turned pale , trembled , and bowed his head , the sailors were profoundly astonished . 
Without a word Aramis then raised his hand to the eyes of the commander and showed him the collet of a ring he wore on the ring-finger of his left hand . 
And while making this sign Aramis , draped in cold and haughty majesty , had the air of an emperor giving his hand to be kissed . 
The commandant , who for a moment had raised his head , bowed a second time with marks of the most profound respect . 
Then stretching his hand out , in his turn , towards the poop , that is to say , towards his own cabin , he drew back to allow Aramis to go first . 
The three Bretons , who had come on board after their bishop , looked at each other , stupefied . 
The crew were awed to silence . 
Five minutes after , the commander called the second lieutenant , who returned immediately , ordering the head to be put towards Corunna . 
Whilst this order was being executed , Aramis reappeared upon the deck , and took a seat near the bastingage . 
Night had fallen ; the moon had not yet risen , yet Aramis looked incessantly towards Belle-Isle . 
Yves then approached the captain , who had returned to take his post in the stern , and said , in a low and humble voice , `` What course are we to follow , captain ? '' 
`` We take what course monseigneur pleases , '' replied the officer . 
Aramis passed the night leaning upon the bastingage . 
Yves , on approaching him next morning , remarked that `` the night must have been a very damp one , for the wood on which the bishop 's head had rested was soaked with dew . '' 
Who knows ? 
- that dew was , it may be , the first tears that had ever fallen from the eyes of Aramis ! 
What epitaph would have been worth that , good Porthos ? 
: M. de Gesvres 's Round . 
D'Artagnan was little used to resistance like that he had just experienced . 
He returned , profoundly irritated , to Nantes . 
Irritation , with this vigorous man , usually vented itself in impetuous attack , which few people , hitherto , were they king , were they giants , had been able to resist . 
Trembling with rage , he went straight to the castle , and asked an audience with the king . 
It might be about seven o'clock in the morning , and , since his arrival at Nantes , the king had been an early riser . 
But on arriving at the corridor with which we are acquainted , D'Artagnan found M. de Gesvres , who stopped him politely , telling him not to speak too loud and disturb the king . 
`` Is the king asleep ? '' 
said D'Artagnan . 
`` Well , I will let him sleep . 
But about what o'clock do you suppose he will rise ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
in about two hours ; his majesty has been up all night . '' 
D'Artagnan took his hat again , bowed to M. de Gesvres , and returned to his own apartments . 
He came back at half-past nine , and was told that the king was at breakfast . 
`` That will just suit me , '' said D'Artagnan . 
`` I will talk to the king while he is eating . '' 
M. de Brienne reminded D'Artagnan that the king would not see any one at meal-time . 
`` But , '' said D'Artagnan , looking askant at Brienne , `` you do not know , perhaps , monsieur , that I have the privilege of entree anywhere - and at any hour . '' 
Brienne took the captain 's hand kindly , and said , `` Not at Nantes , dear Monsieur d'Artagnan . 
The king , in this journey , has changed everything . '' 
D'Artagnan , a little softened , asked about what o'clock the king would have finished his breakfast . 
`` We do n't know . '' 
`` Eh ? 
- do n't know ! 
What does that mean ? 
You do n't know how much time the king devotes to eating ? 
It is generally an hour ; and , if we admit that the air of the Loire gives an additional appetite , we will extend it to an hour and a half ; that is enough , I think . 
I will wait where I am . '' 
`` Oh ! 
dear Monsieur d'Artagnan , the order of the day is not to allow any person to remain in this corridor ; I am on guard for that particular purpose . '' 
D'Artagnan felt his anger mounting to his brain a second time . 
He went out quickly , for fear of complicating the affair by a display of premature ill-humor . 
As soon as he was out he began to reflect . 
`` The king , '' said he , `` will not receive me , that is evident . 
The young man is angry ; he is afraid , beforehand , of the words that I may speak to him . 
Yes ; but in the meantime Belle-Isle is besieged , and my two friends by now probably taken or killed . 
Poor Porthos ! 
As to Master Aramis , he is always full of resources , and I am easy on his account . 
But , no , no ; Porthos is not yet an invalid , nor is Aramis in his dotage . 
The one with his arm , the other with his imagination , will find work for his majesty 's soldiers . 
Who knows if these brave men may not get up for the edification of his most Christian majesty a little bastion of Saint - Gervais ! 
I do n't despair of it . 
They have cannon and a garrison . 
And yet , '' continued D'Artagnan , `` I do n't know whether it would not be better to stop the combat . 
For myself alone I will not put up with either surly looks or insults from the king ; but for my friends I must put up with everything . 
Shall I go to M. Colbert ? 
Now , there is a man I must acquire the habit of terrifying . 
I will go to M. Colbert . '' 
And D'Artagnan set forward bravely to find M. Colbert , but was informed that he was working with the king , at the castle of Nantes . 
`` Good ! '' 
cried he , `` the times have come again in which I measured my steps from De Treville to the cardinal , from the cardinal to the queen , from the queen to Louis XIII . 
Truly is it said that men , in growing old , become children again ! 
