replied Hortensius . 
`` A spoiled child ... an orphan ; no father , no mother ! 
As her mere tutor , I ca n't well deny her anything . '' 
`` I see , I see . '' 
The lawyer was no longer listening ; he was thinking about himself . 
`` My dear fellows , I feel -- '' `` What -- what 's the matter ? '' 
asked several voices anxiously . 
`` I 'm feeling -- I fancy -- a draught ... '' `` We 'll shut the shutters , '' proposed the host . 
`` No , we should be stifled ! 
But I 've so worn out my voice to-day ... . 
And I have to make another defence to-morrow . 
Give me a carpet under my feet , and my wrapper ; I 'm afraid of catching cold in the night chill . '' 
And Hephæstion , the friend of Publius and pupil of Lampridius , rushed away to get Mamertinus ' wrapper . 
It was a piece of soft woollen stuff , daintily embroidered . 
The lawyer carried it everywhere to safeguard his precious throat from the faintest risk of cold . 
Mamertinus nursed his own health like a lover , with so simple a grace , such a passion of self-solicitude , that his friends were instinctively constrained to think of nothing but nursing him too . 
`` This wrapper was embroidered for me by the venerable Fabiola , '' he informed them with a smile . 
`` Wife of the senator ? '' 
asked Hortensius . 
`` Yes ! 
I 'll tell you a little story about her . 
One day I wrote a note -- a graceful trifle , but really a mere trifle -- just five lines in Greek to another lady -LRB- also one of my admirers -RRB- , who had sent me a basket of the most charming cherries . 
I thanked her in a frolicsome imitation of Pliny . 
But just imagine , my friends , Fabiola was seized with so violent a desire to read that letter and to copy it for her collection , that she sent two of her slaves to lie in wait for my messenger . 
So , brought to a halt in the middle of the night , not a soul in sight , he thought , of course , that brigands were about to strip him of lock , stock , and barrel . 
But they did him no harm , gave him money , and only took from him my letter , so that Fabiola might have the first reading of it . 
She actually learnt it by heart ! '' 
`` You do n't mean it ? 
Ah , I know her ! 
She is a most remarkable woman , '' continued Lampridius . 
`` I have seen myself that she keeps all your letters enclosed in a lemon-wood casket like so many jewels . 
She learns them by heart and declares that they are superior to any poetry . 
Fabiola argues , and argues rightly : ` Since Alexander the Great used to keep the poems of Homer in a cedar-wood coffer , why should n't I keep the letters of Mamertinus in a jewel-casket ? ' '' 
`` This foie gras with saffron sauce is the height of perfection ! 
I advise you to taste it . '' 
`` Who made it , Hortensius ? '' 
`` My head-cook , Dædalus . '' 
`` All honour to him ! 
... he 's a poet . '' 
`` Do n't let a goose 's liver run away with you , my dear Garguillus ! 
A cook , a poet ? 
You will offend the divine muses , our protectresses ! '' 
`` I affirm ! 
and I shall always maintain ! 
that cooking is an art as lofty as any other . 
It 's time to fling prejudices to the winds , Lampridius ! '' 
Garguillus , the head of the Imperial chancery , was a man of enormous body , extremely fat , his triple chin scrupulously shaved and perfumed , and his grey hair closely cropped . 
His face was intelligent and noble ; for many years he had been considered the indispensable guest at every supper of Athenian men of letters . 
Garguillus loved only two things in the world , a good table and a good style . 
Gastronomy and literature blended for him into a double bliss . 
`` Suppose now I take an oyster , '' he was declaring while his delicate fingers , loaded with amethysts and rubies , brought the mollusc towards his mouth ; `` I take an oyster , and I swallow it '' -- and in fact he swallowed it , shutting his eyes , with a sucking and clucking noise of his upper lip , which was curiously greedy , and even rapacious , in its appearance . 
It was prominent , trussed into a point , oddly twisted , and vaguely resembled a small elephant 's trunk . 
When repeating a sonorous verse of Anacreon or Moschus he would move about this upper lip with as much sensuousness as when tasting at supper some sauce of nightingales ' tongues . 
`` I swallow it , and I am immediately aware , '' went on Garguillus solemnly -- `` I am immediately aware that the oyster comes from the coast of Britain and not from the south or from Tarentum . 
Would you like me to prove it ? 
Shall I close my eyes and say from what sea the fish comes ? '' 
`` But what in the world has that to do with poetry ? '' 
asked Mamertinus impatiently . 
He could not bear that any but himself should receive general attention . 
`` Imagine for yourselves , my dear friends , '' continued the gastronomist imperturbably , `` that for years I have not been to the shores of the ocean , which I love and am always regretting . 
I assure you that a good oyster has such a fresh and salty relish of the sea , that to swallow it is immediately to be a thousand miles hence on the immense seashore . 
I close my eyes , I see the waves , I see the rocks , I feel the breeze of ` foggy ocean , ' as Homer calls it ! 
... No ! 
tell me frankly what verse of the Odyssey can wake in me as clearly the sense of sea poetry as the smell of a fresh oyster ? 
Or when I divide a peach and inhale the odour of its juice , why , tell me , are the perfume of the violet and the rose more essentially poetical ? 
Poets describe form , colour , sound . 
Why can taste be not perfect as these ? 
All is stupid prejudice , my dear fellows ! 
Taste is an immense and hitherto unexplored boon from the gods . 
The assemblage of tastes forms a harmony as fine as any orchestration of sounds . 
I affirm , therefore , that there is a tenth muse , the muse of Gastronomy ! '' 
`` Let oysters and peaches be admitted . 
But what harmony , what beauty can you discover in a goose liver dressed with saffron sauce ? '' 
`` You are ready to allow , Lampridius , that there is beauty not only in the idylls of Theocritus , but even in the coarsest comedies of Plautus ? '' 
`` I admit that . '' 
`` Well , my friend , for me there is a gastronomic poesy in foie gras ; in fact I am prepared to crown Dædalus with laurels for this dish , just as I would crown an Olympic ode of Pindar ! '' 
Two new guests appeared on the threshold ; they were Julian and the poet Publius . 
Hortensius yielded the place of honour to Julian , while Publius devoured the innumerable dishes with his eyes . 
To judge by his new chlamys the rich widow must have departed this life , and the happy heirs paid for the epitaph in no niggardly fashion . 
The general conversation went on . 
Lampridius told a story of how one day , moved by curiosity , he had been to hear a Christian preacher thundering against pagan grammarians . 
`` The grammarians , '' assevered the preacher , `` do not rank men for their worth , but for their literary style , thinking it less criminal to kill a man than to pronounce the word homo with a wrong aspiration ! '' 
Lampridius suspected that if these Christian preachers hated the style of the rhetoricians to such a degree , it was because , conscious that they themselves could write and speak only like barbarians , they made ignorance the badge of moral worth , so that for them a good speaker became a suspicious character . 
`` The day on which eloquence perishes will see the end of Hellas , the end of Rome ! 
People will turn into dumb animals , and it is to make them so that Christian preachers use their barbarous jargon . '' 
`` Who knows , '' murmured Mamertinus pensively , `` perhaps style is more important than virtue , since slaves , barbarians , and nincompoops can all be virtuous ! '' 
Hephæstion meanwhile was explaining to his neighbour the exact meaning of Cicero 's advice -- '' Causam mendaciunculis adspergere . '' '' 
Mendaciunculis , that 's to say , little lies . 
Cicero , in fact , advises you to sow little inventions all over your speech ; he admits falsehood if decorative . '' 
Then followed a general discussion on the methods of beginning a speech : should the beginning be anapæstic or dactylic ? 
Julian became bored . 
He confessed heartily that he had never considered the matter , and that in his opinion the speaker ought rather to preoccupy himself with the fundamental idea of his speech than with the making style out of a mosaic of peccadilloes . 
Mamertinus -- then Lampridius and Hephæstion -- waxed wroth . 
According to them the subject of a speech was a matter of no moment . 
To an orator it should be absolutely indifferent whether he undertook to attack or to defend a case . 
Even meaning had no interest for him . 
The principal thing was the orchestration of verbal sounds -- the melody , the musical assonance of letters -- permitting even a barbarian , witless of Greek , to feel the sheer beauty of language . 
`` I 'll just give you an example , two Latin verses of Propertius , '' said Garguillus . 
`` Notice the power of the sounds and the emptiness of the meaning . 
Listen -- '' ' Et Veneris dominæ volucres , mea turba columbæ , Tingunt Gorgonio punica rostra lacu . ' '' 
What pure delight ! 
Every letter sings ! 
What does the meaning matter ? 
All the beauty consists in the sound , in the assemblage of vowels and consonants . 
For that utterance I would give all the civic virtue of Juvenal and the philosophy of Lucretius ! 
No ! 
Just hear again ! 
What sweetness there is in that murmur -- '' ' Et Veneris dominæ volucres , mea turba columbæ ! ' '' 
and he wagged that upper lip with a smack of delight . 
Everybody repeated the lines of Propertius , unwearying of their charm , and embarking on a veritable orgy of quotation . 
`` Just listen , '' murmured Mamertinus in his Æolian voice -- '' ' Tingunt Gorgonio ... ' '' '' Tingunt Gorgonio , '' repeated the master of chancery . 
`` By Pallas ! 
-- why , it delights one 's very palate . 
It 's like swallowing a warm mouthful of wine mingled with Attic honey -- '' ' Tingunt Gorgonio ... ' '' Note how the ` g 's ' follow each other , and then farther on -- '' ' ... punica rostra lacu . ' '' 
`` Astounding ! 
inimitable ! '' 
murmured Lampridius , shutting his eyes . 
Julian was ashamed and amused at this verbal intoxication . 
`` Words should be , to a certain extent , devoid of meaning , '' continued Lampridius gravely ; `` they should flow , roar , chant , without ever bringing up short either the ear or the emotion . 
Then only real enjoyment of their beauty is possible . '' 
On the threshold of the door , from which the gaze of Julian had seldom departed , there now appeared , quietly as a shadow , a white and haughty figure . 
The open shutters allowed the moonlight to fall in , mingling with the ruddy shine of torches on the mosaic of the mirror-smooth floor , and on the wall frescoes , portraying Endymion asleep under the caresses of Selene . 
The apparition kept still as a statue . 
The antique Greek peplum of soft white wool fell in long folds , cinctured high under the breast . 
Moonlight illumined the robe , but the face remained in shadow . 
The new-comer looked at Julian and Julian looked at her . 
They smiled at each other , knowing that nobody observed them , and finger on lip she listened to the anecdotes of the guests . 
Suddenly Mamertinus , who was discussing with Lampridius grammatical peculiarities of the first and second aorist , exclaimed -- `` Arsinoë ! 
At last ! 
So you 've made up your mind to abandon physics and modelling for our company ? '' 
She came in and deigned a smile to everyone . 
She was the same disk-thrower whom a month before Julian had seen in the abandoned wrestling-ground . 
The poet Publius , knowing everybody and everything in Athens , had sought the acquaintance of Hortensius and Arsinoë , and had introduced Julian to the house . 
Arsinoë 's father , an old Roman senator , Helvidius Priscus , had died during the last years of Constantine the Great , bequeathing Arsinoë and Myrrha , his two daughters by a Goth woman-prisoner , to Hortensius , whom he respected on account of his love for antique Rome and hatred for Christianity . 
A distant relative of Arsinoë , owner of factories of purple at Sidon , had left his incalculable wealth to the young girl . 
To Arsinoë , Christian virtues and the patriarchal customs of Rome seemed equally contemptible . 
The figures of independent women , Aspasia , Cleopatra , and Sappho , alone captivated her girlish imagination . 
Had she not declared naïvely one day , to the horror of Hortensius , that she would rather become a beautiful and free courtesan , than be transformed into the mother of a family , slave of a husband , `` like everybody else '' ? 
Those three words , `` like everybody else , '' filled her with melancholy disgust . 
At one time Arsinoë was attracted by natural science , and had worked with illustrious men of science at the museum in Alexandria . 
Then the atomic theories of Epicurus , Democrates , and Lucretius had enthralled her . 
She loved a study which should deliver her soul from the `` terror of the gods . '' 
With the same almost morbid intensity , she had afterwards applied herself to sculpture , and had come to Athens in order to study the best works , the masterpieces of Phidias , Scopas , and Praxiteles . 
`` You are still discussing grammar ? '' 
asked the daughter of Helvidius Priscus of the guests , as she came into the dining-hall . 
She continued ironically : `` Do n't trouble yourselves ; go on . 
I wo n't argue or complain , because I 'm too hungry after my day 's work . 
Slave , some wine ! 
... '' `` My friends , '' continued Arsinoë when seated , `` you 'll ruin your minds with quotations from Demosthenes and your rules from Quintilian ! 
... Take care ! 
Rhetoric will ruin you ... . 
I want to see a man who does n't care a fig for Homer or for Cicero , who speaks without thinking of the aspirates , of syntax , or of the conjunction of letters . 
Julian , let us go down to the beach after supper ; I am disinclined for discussions on dactyls and anapæsts . '' 
`` Precisely my own mood , Arsinoë , '' stammered Garguillus , who had eaten too much foie gras and who almost always , at the end of dinner , felt an aversion for literature proportionate to the weight upon his stomach . '' 
Litterarum intemperantia laboramus , '' as Seneca used to say . 
`` We are suffering from literary indigestion . 
We are simply poisoning ourselves ! '' 
and he thoughtfully took a tooth-pick from a pocket . 
His large face expressed weariness and disgust . 
Together the pair went down the alley of cypresses leading to the sea . 
The moon-path of sensitive silver on the waters ran up to the horizon , and waves were breaking against a chalk cliff . 
At the end of the alley there was a semicircular seat . 
Above it the huntress Artemis , in short tunic , with crescented hair , quiver on shoulder , and two deer-hounds at her feet , looked down on the two young people . 
They sat down together . 
Arsinoë pointed out the hill of the Acropolis , so distant that the columns of the Parthenon could hardly be distinguished ; and took up the thread of conversations started at their former meetings -- `` See how beautiful it is ! 
... And you would destroy that , Julian ? '' 
Making no reply , he stared on the ground . 
`` I have thought much over what you said to me the last time we met , concerning this humility of yours , '' continued Arsinoë gently . 
`` Was Alexander son of Philip of Macedon humble ? 
And nevertheless is he not great and splendid ? '' 
Julian said nothing . 
`` And Brutus , Brutus the stabber of Cæsar ! 
Had Brutus turned the left cheek when struck on the right , do you think he would have been more sublime ? 
Or , indeed , perhaps you consider him a criminal , you Galileans ? 
Why can I not help thinking sometimes , Julian , that you are a hypocrite ; and that these black habiliments are not your body 's true raiment ? '' 
She turned brusquely towards his moon-lit face and regarded him steadfastly . 
`` Arsinoë , what do you want of me ? '' 
murmured Julian , whose cheek was very pale . 
`` I want you to be frankly my foe ! '' 
exclaimed the young girl . 
`` You must not pass by like this , without telling me what you are . 
Sometimes I dream that it would be better if Rome and Athens were utterly ruined ! 
Better burn a corpse than leave it unburied ! 
And all our friends here -- grammarians , rhetoricians -- poets who write Imperial eulogies -- all these are the rotting body of Greece and Rome . 
In their company one grows afraid , as among the shroudless dead ... . 
Oh , you may triumph , Galileans ! 
Soon corpses and ruins are all that will remain on earth ! 
... And you , Julian ... . 
But no ! 
... It is impossible ! 
I do not believe that you are with them and against Hellas -- against me ! 
... '' Julian sprang up before her , pale and mute , longing to burst away . 
She held him back . 
`` Tell me that you are my enemy , '' she said with heart-broken challenge in her voice . 
`` Arsinoë ! 
... Why -- '' `` Tell me all ! 
... I must know . 
Do you not feel how near we are ? 
Or are you indeed afraid to speak ? '' 
`` In two days I leave Athens , '' murmured Julian . 
`` Why ? 
-- Where are you going ? '' 
`` The Emperor has recalled me to Court -- to die perhaps . 
I may now be looking at you for the last time . '' 
`` Julian , you do not believe in Him ? '' 
cried Arsinoë , seeking to read the eyes of the monk . 
`` Speak lower ! '' 
He rose , and striding round cautiously explored the dusty road silvered by the moon , the bushes , and even the sea , as if afraid to see sudden-rising spies from the Emperor . 
Reassured , he returned and sat down . 
Leaning one hand heavily on the marble he brought his lips close to the ear of Arsinoë -- so near that she felt his warm breath -- muttering rapidly -- `` Believe in Him ? 
... Listen , girl ! 
I say to you now what I have never dared to say even to myself . 
I hate the Galilean ! 
... But I have lied as long as I can remember . 
Lying has soaked into my soul , or clung to it , as this black vestment clings to my body . 
You remember the poisoned shirt of Nessus ; Hercules snatched it off with pieces of his own flesh and it slew him , all the same . 
I -- I too shall perish wearing this Galilean lie ! '' 
He pronounced each word with painful effort . 
Arsinoë gazed at him . 
His face , changed by suffering and hatred , became the face of a stranger . 
`` Be calm , friend ! '' 
she murmured . 
`` Tell me all . 
I shall understand you better than anyone else . '' 
`` I should like to be able to speak , but speech is a power I have lost , '' sneered Julian . 
`` I have kept silence too long . 
Do you understand , Arsinoë ? 
It is all over with him who has once fallen into their clutches ! 
These good and humble men deform him to such a degree -- teach him so thoroughly to lie and to dissimulate -- that it becomes impossible ever to stand erect and manful again ! '' 
The blood rushed to his forehead , swelling the veins , and through clenched teeth he muttered -- `` Cowardice ! 
Foul Galilean cowardice ! 
this -- to hate your enemy as I hate Constantius , and to pardon him , to crouch at his feet , cringe like a serpent , to supplicate him in the humble Christian manner : ' A year , grant your weak-witted slave , Julian , another year ; and then do with him as it may please you and your counsellors , O well-beloved of God ! ' 
What baseness ! '' 
`` No , Julian , '' protested Arsinoë , `` you will conquer ! 
Deception is your strength ... . 
Julian , do you remember Æsop 's fable , The Ass in the Lion 's Skin ? 
In this affair of yours the story is reversed ; the lion is in the ass 's skin , and the hero in a monkish habit ! 
And how they will shrink affrighted when you suddenly show your talons ! 
What joy and what terror ! 
Tell me , you long for power ? '' 
`` Power ! '' 
cried Julian , intoxicated at the sound of the word and inhaling with deep breaths the fresh air of night -- `` power ! 
... oh , only for a year , a few months , a few days ! 
And I would teach them , I would teach all these crawling and venomous creatures what means their Master 's word , ` Render unto Cæsar the things that are Cæsar 's ' ; I swear by the Sun-god they should render to Cæsar what is his ! '' 
He raised his head , his eyes flashing with rage and pride and renewed youth . 
Arsinoë gazed on him with a smile . 
But his head soon fell . 
He sank back on the bench and crossing his arms on his breast in monkish fashion he faltered -- `` No , no ; why nurse empty dreams ? 
That can never be . 
I shall perish . 
Anger will stifle me . 
Listen ; every night after passing the day on my knees in churches , bowed over relics , I go home broken with fatigue ; I fling myself on the bed and sob ; yes , bite my own flesh , to avoid crying out with pain . 
Oh , you can not know yet , Arsinoë , this Galilean horror and infection in which I have agonised for twenty years without escaping by death . 
We Christians take a deal of killing , -- worms that live on even when cut in pieces ! 
At first I used to seek consolation in the teachings of the diviners and philosophers . 
It was hopeless . 
I follow neither the one nor the other . 
I am wicked and I wish to be wickeder still . 
To be strong and terrible as the Demon , my only brother ... . 
But why , why can I not forget that there is beauty in the world ; why , O cruel one , did you dawn upon my life ? '' 
With a quick spontaneous movement Arsinoë flung her bare arms round Julian 's neck , drew him to her so strongly , so closely , that he felt the whole freshness of her body , murmuring -- `` And if I did come towards you , O young man , what if it were as a sibyl to prophesy you glory ? 
You alone are alive among the dead ! 
Splendour is yours ! 
What matters it to me that your wings are no swan 's wings , but wings of the black and lost , your talons , talons of a bird of prey ? 
My love is for all the revolted , the reprobate , the rejected -- you understand me , Julian ? 
I love the proud and solitary eagles better than any stainless swan . 
Only ... be prouder yet , be wickeder yet ! 
Dare up to the height of your ambition ! 
Lie without shame ; better lie than be humiliated . 
Fear not hate ; it is the impetus of your wings . 
Come , shall we make an alliance ? 
You shall give me power , I will give you beauty . 
Are you willing , Julian ? '' 
Again through the light folds of her antique peplum , as once in the palæstra , he saw the breathing image of the huntress Artemis ; it seemed that divine body shone through , golden and tender . 
His head reeled in the lunar shadow enveloping them . 
Those haughty lips laughingly approached his own . 
For the last time he mused . 
`` I must tear myself away . 
She does not love me . 
She will never love me . 
Her love is only for power . '' 
But immediately he added to himself , with a faint smile : `` Well , let it be so ! 
I consent to be duped ! '' 
The chill of the strange and insatiate kiss of Arsinoë shot to his heart like the chill of death . 
It seemed as if Artemis herself , in the translucence of the moon , had descended towards him , embraced him , and mocked him , and like a beam of moonlight fled away . 
* * * * * On the following morning Basil of Cæsarea and Gregory of Nazianzen came across Julian in a basilica in Athens . 
He was kneeling in prayer . 
The two friends gazed at him , surprised . 
Never had they seen upon his features such an expression of rapt serenity . 
`` Brother , '' murmured Basil to Gregory , `` we have sinned ; he whom we inwardly accused is a righteous man . '' 
Gregory shook his head . 
`` May the Lord pardon me if I am deceived , '' he said slowly , his piercing eye still on Julian . 
`` But remember , Basil , how often the Devil himself , the father of lying , has appeared to men in guise of an angel ! '' 
On the base of a dolphin-shaped lamp were ranged the curling irons of a barber . 
The lamp-light was growing pale , for rays of morning , falling through silken window-curtains , were gradually filling the sleeping chamber with deep violet hues . 
The curtains were dyed in the richest hyacinthine purple of Tyre . '' 
` Hypostasis , ' ` hypostasis ' ? 
What is the meaning of the divine hypostasis , or essence , or personality , of the Trinity ? 
No human being can form any conception . 
I myself have n't slept a wink in thinking over it the whole night . 
I arrived at no conclusion but an atrocious headache . 
Boy , give me towels and soap ! '' 
So spoke a personage with a tall headdress like a mitre and the pontifical aspect of a high-priest or Asiatic tyrant . 
He was chief barber and wig-maker in attendance on the sacred person of Constantius . 
The razor in his skilful hands was flitting , with an incomparable grace and lightness , over the Imperial chin . 
He was engaged upon a sacred mystery . 
In attendance on each side were innumerable cubicularii , slaves holding vases , essences , oils , and napkins , and two youths bearing fans . 
Supervising all these , Eusebius , grand chamberlain of the private apartments , stood by . 
He was the most powerful man in the Empire . 
During the ceremony of barbification , as an emperor 's shaving must be called , the two youths refreshed the illustrious patient by means of great fans , each six-winged like the seraphim , or the ripides with which deacons fan away flies from a sacramental chalice , during the intoning of the liturgy . 
The barber had scarcely finished the Emperor 's right cheek and was beginning the left , which had been anointed with an Arabian essence named `` the foam of Aphrodite . '' 
Leaning to the ear of Constantius he whispered cautiously : `` Ah ! 
Well-beloved of God , your universal intelligence alone can determine what this hypostasis , this mysterious personality of Father , Son , and Holy Ghost may mean . 
Do n't listen to the bishops ! 
Act as pleases yourself , and not as it may please them . 
But Athanasius , that patriarch of Alexandria , must be punished as a blasphemous rebel . 
Almighty God , the Creator Himself , will instruct your Holiness as to what , and in what manner , your subjects ought to believe . 
In my humble opinion the Arians are perfectly right in asserting that there was a time when the ` Son ' did not exist . 
And so consubstantiality ... '' But at this moment Constantius was staring at himself in the great polished silver mirror , and rubbing his hand over the silky new shaven region on his right cheek . 
He interrupted -- `` I do n't think that 's very smooth ! 
-- eh ! 
I think you might go over it again . 
What were you saying to me about consubstantiality ? '' 
The barber , who had received a talent of gold from the Court bishops Ursatius and Valentine to prepare the Emperor for the new profession of faith , was murmuring insinuatingly in the ear of Constantius and wielding his razor with the most persuasive delicacy , when at this moment the chief of the silentiarii , Paul , surnamed Catena , approached the Emperor . 
He was so called because his infamous system of reports enwound any chosen victim in chains well-nigh indissoluble . 
His effeminate face was beardless and handsome , and judged by externals he seemed the angel of humility . 
His dark eyes were full of languor ; his walk , a noiselessly graceful feline motion . 
He wore crosswise over the shoulder a wide dark blue ribbon -- sign of special Imperial favour . 
Paul Catena with a subtle and authoritative gesture waved the barber away , and whispered in the ear of Constantius -- `` A letter from Julian ! 
Intercepted to-night . 
Deign to read it . '' 
Constantius greedily snatched the letter from the hands of Paul , opened it , and read . 
Disappointed , he muttered -- `` Mere trash -- trifles ; he sends a present of a hundred grapes to a sophist and writes the praises of the fruit and of the number ' a hundred . ' '' 
`` Ah ! 
a ruse ! '' 
said Catena . 
`` Really ? '' 
asked Constantius ; `` what proofs are there ? '' 
`` None . '' 
`` Then he 's either exceedingly cunning or indeed -- '' `` What does your Eternity mean ? '' 
`` Or , in fact , he is innocent . '' 
`` As your Majesty pleases , '' stammered Paul . '' 
As I please ? 
I desire to be just , simply just . 
Are you not aware of that ? 
I must have proofs ... '' `` Wait ; we shall find them . '' 
Another informer came near , a young Persian named Mercurius , court-pantler , little more than a lad . 
He was feared not less than Paul Catena and had been pleasantly nicknamed `` Chief Diviner of Dreams . '' 
If the prophetic dream could be twisted into any meaning even remotely unfavourable for the person of the Emperor , Mercurius would make careful notes of it and hasten to make a report . 
Many a victim had paid with their goods and their prospects for the imprudence of dreaming what they had no business to dream ; and , aware of this , prudent courtiers would declare themselves martyrs to insomnia , enviers of the legendary dwellers in Atlantis , who , according to Plato , are lapt in slumber without visions . 
The Persian signed to a distance two Ethiopian eunuchs who were knotting the laces of the Emperor 's green and gilt shoes . 
He kissed the feet of the sovereign , and as it were basked a moment in his eyes , like a dog who affectionately gazes up for his master 's orders . 
`` May your Eternity forgive me , '' whispered little Mercury , `` I could not refrain from running to your presence . 
Gaudentius has had a bad dream ! 
You appeared to him in a torn chlamys and crowned with blasted ears of corn ... '' `` What does that mean ? '' 
`` The blasted ears announce famine , and the torn chlamys ... I dare not ... '' `` Sickness ? '' 
`` Worse still , I 'm afraid , if possible . 
Gaudentius ' wife confessed to me that he had consulted the augurs . 
God knows what they told him ! '' 
`` Well , well ! 
We will discuss it . 
Come again this evening . '' 
`` No ! 
I will come this afternoon . 
Permit me to mention a slight matter , something not so grievous ... . 
There is also the matter of the table-cloths ... '' `` What table-cloths ? '' 
`` Have you forgotten ? 
At a supper in Aquitaine the table was spread with two table-covers with purple borders -- borders as wide as those on the Imperial chlamys ! '' 
`` Do you mean to say they were more than two fingers wide ? 
Remember , I 've authorised the width of two fingers . '' 
`` Ah , much , much wider I fear ! 
It was a regular Imperial chlamys . 
Can such sacrilege be permitted ? '' 
Mercury did not succeed however in reciting all his reports : `` At Delphi a monster has been born -- four ears , four eyes , two snouts , all covered with hair . 
The augurs say it is a bad omen -- that the Holy Empire will be split up ... '' `` We shall see ! 
we shall see ! 
Write it all down in due order and submit it to me . '' 
The Emperor went on with his morning toilet . 
He consulted his mirror again , and with a fine camel 's - hair brush took up a morsel of rouge from the casket of filigree silver , shaped like a reliquary and crowned by a little cross , at his elbow . 
Constantius was devoutly religious ; enamelled crosses and the monogram of Christ adorned every trinket in his private rooms . 
Exquisite and expensive paint called purpurissima , extracted from the scum on the purple mollusc while in a state of ebullition , was specially prepared for him . 
Constantius adroitly spread a faint flush of this over his withered brown cheek . 
From the room called Porphyria , where the regal vestments were kept in a pentagonal wardrobe , eunuchs bore forth the Imperial dalmatic . 
It was stiff , heavy with gold , encrusted with precious stones , and with lions and dragons embroidered on its amethystine purples . 
In the main hall of the palace on that day was to be held the great Arian council . 
The Emperor slowly took his way thither along a gallery of pierced and fretted marble . 
Palace guards , or palatines , two-deep formed a long lane , mute as statues and holding lances fourteen cubits long crossed above the head of their master , as he paced in state between them . 
Constantine 's banner of cloth of gold , the Labarum , surmounted by the monogram of Christ , shone rustling behind , borne by the officer of the Imperial largesses -LRB- comes sacrarum largitionum -RRB- . 
Mute body-guards -LRB- silentiarii -RRB- heralded the procession , imposing silence on everyone they met . 
In the gallery the Emperor encountered the Empress Eusebia Aurelia . 
She was a mature woman with a pale and weary face , delicate and noble features , a mischievous raillery sometimes kindling her keen eyes . 
Crossing her hands on the omophorium covered with sapphires and heart-shaped rubies , the Empress bowed profoundly and pronounced the habitual morning salutation : `` I am come for the joy of beholding you , O spouse well-beloved of the Lord ! 
How has your Holiness deigned to sleep ? '' 
Then , at a sign from her , the attendant maids of honour drew to a distance and she murmured sweetly , in a simpler and sincerer tone -- `` Julian is to be received by you to-day . 
Receive him kindly ! 
Do n't believe these spying reports . 
He is a poor innocent boy . 
God will repay you , sire , if you grant him favour . '' 
`` You ask favour to him as a favour to yourself ? '' 
The husband and wife exchanged a rapid glance . 
