Alyosha muttered in great astonishment . 
His face at once looked anxious . 
`` Oh , it 's all to do with Dmitri Fyodorovitch and -- what has happened lately , '' the mother explained hurriedly . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has made up her mind , but she must see you about it ... . 
Why , of course , I ca n't say . 
But she wants to see you at once . 
And you will go to her , of course . 
It is a Christian duty . '' 
`` I have only seen her once , '' Alyosha protested with the same perplexity . 
`` Oh , she is such a lofty , incomparable creature ! 
If only for her suffering ... . 
Think what she has gone through , what she is enduring now ! 
Think what awaits her ! 
It 's all terrible , terrible ! '' 
`` Very well , I will come , '' Alyosha decided , after rapidly scanning the brief , enigmatic note , which consisted of an urgent entreaty that he would come , without any sort of explanation . 
`` Oh , how sweet and generous that would be of you ! '' 
cried Lise with sudden animation . 
`` I told mamma you 'd be sure not to go . 
I said you were saving your soul . 
How splendid you are ! 
I 've always thought you were splendid . 
How glad I am to tell you so ! '' 
`` Lise ! '' 
said her mother impressively , though she smiled after she had said it . 
`` You have quite forgotten us , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she said ; `` you never come to see us . 
Yet Lise has told me twice that she is never happy except with you . '' 
Alyosha raised his downcast eyes and again flushed , and again smiled without knowing why . 
But the elder was no longer watching him . 
He had begun talking to a monk who , as mentioned before , had been awaiting his entrance by Lise 's chair . 
He was evidently a monk of the humblest , that is of the peasant , class , of a narrow outlook , but a true believer , and , in his own way , a stubborn one . 
He announced that he had come from the far north , from Obdorsk , from Saint Sylvester , and was a member of a poor monastery , consisting of only ten monks . 
The elder gave him his blessing and invited him to come to his cell whenever he liked . 
`` How can you presume to do such deeds ? '' 
the monk asked suddenly , pointing solemnly and significantly at Lise . 
He was referring to her `` healing . '' 
`` It 's too early , of course , to speak of that . 
Relief is not complete cure , and may proceed from different causes . 
But if there has been any healing , it is by no power but God 's will . 
It 's all from God . 
Visit me , Father , '' he added to the monk . 
`` It 's not often I can see visitors . 
I am ill , and I know that my days are numbered . '' 
`` Oh , no , no ! 
God will not take you from us . 
You will live a long , long time yet , '' cried the lady . 
`` And in what way are you ill ? 
You look so well , so gay and happy . '' 
`` I am extraordinarily better to‐day . 
But I know that it 's only for a moment . 
I understand my disease now thoroughly . 
If I seem so happy to you , you could never say anything that would please me so much . 
For men are made for happiness , and any one who is completely happy has a right to say to himself , ` I am doing God 's will on earth . ' 
All the righteous , all the saints , all the holy martyrs were happy . '' 
`` Oh , how you speak ! 
What bold and lofty words ! '' 
cried the lady . 
`` You seem to pierce with your words . 
And yet -- happiness , happiness -- where is it ? 
Who can say of himself that he is happy ? 
Oh , since you have been so good as to let us see you once more to‐day , let me tell you what I could not utter last time , what I dared not say , all I am suffering and have been for so long ! 
I am suffering ! 
Forgive me ! 
I am suffering ! '' 
And in a rush of fervent feeling she clasped her hands before him . 
`` From what specially ? '' 
`` I suffer ... from lack of faith . '' 
`` Lack of faith in God ? '' 
`` Oh , no , no ! 
I dare not even think of that . 
But the future life -- it is such an enigma ! 
And no one , no one can solve it . 
Listen ! 
You are a healer , you are deeply versed in the human soul , and of course I dare not expect you to believe me entirely , but I assure you on my word of honor that I am not speaking lightly now . 
The thought of the life beyond the grave distracts me to anguish , to terror . 
And I do n't know to whom to appeal , and have not dared to all my life . 
And now I am so bold as to ask you . 
Oh , God ! 
What will you think of me now ? '' 
She clasped her hands . 
`` Do n't distress yourself about my opinion of you , '' said the elder . 
`` I quite believe in the sincerity of your suffering . '' 
`` Oh , how thankful I am to you ! 
You see , I shut my eyes and ask myself if every one has faith , where did it come from ? 
And then they do say that it all comes from terror at the menacing phenomena of nature , and that none of it 's real . 
And I say to myself , ` What if I 've been believing all my life , and when I come to die there 's nothing but the burdocks growing on my grave ? ' 
as I read in some author . 
It 's awful ! 
How -- how can I get back my faith ? 
But I only believed when I was a little child , mechanically , without thinking of anything . 
How , how is one to prove it ? 
I have come now to lay my soul before you and to ask you about it . 
If I let this chance slip , no one all my life will answer me . 
How can I prove it ? 
How can I convince myself ? 
Oh , how unhappy I am ! 
I stand and look about me and see that scarcely any one else cares ; no one troubles his head about it , and I 'm the only one who ca n't stand it . 
It 's deadly -- deadly ! '' 
`` No doubt . 
But there 's no proving it , though you can be convinced of it . '' 
`` How ? '' 
`` By the experience of active love . 
Strive to love your neighbor actively and indefatigably . 
In as far as you advance in love you will grow surer of the reality of God and of the immortality of your soul . 
If you attain to perfect self‐forgetfulness in the love of your neighbor , then you will believe without doubt , and no doubt can possibly enter your soul . 
This has been tried . 
This is certain . '' 
`` In active love ? 
There 's another question -- and such a question ! 
You see , I so love humanity that -- would you believe it ? 
-- I often dream of forsaking all that I have , leaving Lise , and becoming a sister of mercy . 
I close my eyes and think and dream , and at that moment I feel full of strength to overcome all obstacles . 
No wounds , no festering sores could at that moment frighten me . 
I would bind them up and wash them with my own hands . 
I would nurse the afflicted . 
I would be ready to kiss such wounds . '' 
`` It is much , and well that your mind is full of such dreams and not others . 
Sometime , unawares , you may do a good deed in reality . '' 
`` Yes . 
But could I endure such a life for long ? '' 
the lady went on fervently , almost frantically . 
`` That 's the chief question -- that 's my most agonizing question . 
I shut my eyes and ask myself , ` Would you persevere long on that path ? 
And if the patient whose wounds you are washing did not meet you with gratitude , but worried you with his whims , without valuing or remarking your charitable services , began abusing you and rudely commanding you , and complaining to the superior authorities of you -LRB- which often happens when people are in great suffering -RRB- -- what then ? 
Would you persevere in your love , or not ? ' 
And do you know , I came with horror to the conclusion that , if anything could dissipate my love to humanity , it would be ingratitude . 
In short , I am a hired servant , I expect my payment at once -- that is , praise , and the repayment of love with love . 
Otherwise I am incapable of loving any one . '' 
She was in a very paroxysm of self‐castigation , and , concluding , she looked with defiant resolution at the elder . 
`` It 's just the same story as a doctor once told me , '' observed the elder . 
`` He was a man getting on in years , and undoubtedly clever . 
He spoke as frankly as you , though in jest , in bitter jest . 
` I love humanity , ' he said , ` but I wonder at myself . 
The more I love humanity in general , the less I love man in particular . 
In my dreams , ' he said , ` I have often come to making enthusiastic schemes for the service of humanity , and perhaps I might actually have faced crucifixion if it had been suddenly necessary ; and yet I am incapable of living in the same room with any one for two days together , as I know by experience . 
As soon as any one is near me , his personality disturbs my self‐complacency and restricts my freedom . 
In twenty‐four hours I begin to hate the best of men : one because he 's too long over his dinner ; another because he has a cold and keeps on blowing his nose . 
I become hostile to people the moment they come close to me . 
But it has always happened that the more I detest men individually the more ardent becomes my love for humanity . ' '' 
`` But what 's to be done ? 
What can one do in such a case ? 
Must one despair ? '' 
`` No . 
It is enough that you are distressed at it . 
Do what you can , and it will be reckoned unto you . 
Much is done already in you since you can so deeply and sincerely know yourself . 
If you have been talking to me so sincerely , simply to gain approbation for your frankness , as you did from me just now , then of course you will not attain to anything in the achievement of real love ; it will all get no further than dreams , and your whole life will slip away like a phantom . 
In that case you will naturally cease to think of the future life too , and will of yourself grow calmer after a fashion in the end . '' 
`` You have crushed me ! 
Only now , as you speak , I understand that I was really only seeking your approbation for my sincerity when I told you I could not endure ingratitude . 
You have revealed me to myself . 
You have seen through me and explained me to myself ! '' 
`` Are you speaking the truth ? 
Well , now , after such a confession , I believe that you are sincere and good at heart . 
If you do not attain happiness , always remember that you are on the right road , and try not to leave it . 
Above all , avoid falsehood , every kind of falsehood , especially falseness to yourself . 
Watch over your own deceitfulness and look into it every hour , every minute . 
Avoid being scornful , both to others and to yourself . 
What seems to you bad within you will grow purer from the very fact of your observing it in yourself . 
Avoid fear , too , though fear is only the consequence of every sort of falsehood . 
Never be frightened at your own faint‐heartedness in attaining love . 
Do n't be frightened overmuch even at your evil actions . 
I am sorry I can say nothing more consoling to you , for love in action is a harsh and dreadful thing compared with love in dreams . 
Love in dreams is greedy for immediate action , rapidly performed and in the sight of all . 
Men will even give their lives if only the ordeal does not last long but is soon over , with all looking on and applauding as though on the stage . 
But active love is labor and fortitude , and for some people too , perhaps , a complete science . 
But I predict that just when you see with horror that in spite of all your efforts you are getting farther from your goal instead of nearer to it -- at that very moment I predict that you will reach it and behold clearly the miraculous power of the Lord who has been all the time loving and mysteriously guiding you . 
Forgive me for not being able to stay longer with you . 
They are waiting for me . 
Good‐by . '' 
The lady was weeping . 
`` Lise , Lise ! 
Bless her -- bless her ! '' 
she cried , starting up suddenly . 
`` She does not deserve to be loved . 
I have seen her naughtiness all along , '' the elder said jestingly . 
`` Why have you been laughing at Alexey ? '' 
Lise had in fact been occupied in mocking at him all the time . 
She had noticed before that Alyosha was shy and tried not to look at her , and she found this extremely amusing . 
She waited intently to catch his eye . 
Alyosha , unable to endure her persistent stare , was irresistibly and suddenly drawn to glance at her , and at once she smiled triumphantly in his face . 
Alyosha was even more disconcerted and vexed . 
At last he turned away from her altogether and hid behind the elder 's back . 
After a few minutes , drawn by the same irresistible force , he turned again to see whether he was being looked at or not , and found Lise almost hanging out of her chair to peep sideways at him , eagerly waiting for him to look . 
Catching his eye , she laughed so that the elder could not help saying , `` Why do you make fun of him like that , naughty girl ? '' 
Lise suddenly and quite unexpectedly blushed . 
Her eyes flashed and her face became quite serious . 
She began speaking quickly and nervously in a warm and resentful voice : `` Why has he forgotten everything , then ? 
He used to carry me about when I was little . 
We used to play together . 
He used to come to teach me to read , do you know . 
Two years ago , when he went away , he said that he would never forget me , that we were friends for ever , for ever , for ever ! 
And now he 's afraid of me all at once . 
Am I going to eat him ? 
Why does n't he want to come near me ? 
Why does n't he talk ? 
Why wo n't he come and see us ? 
It 's not that you wo n't let him . 
We know that he goes everywhere . 
It 's not good manners for me to invite him . 
He ought to have thought of it first , if he has n't forgotten me . 
No , now he 's saving his soul ! 
Why have you put that long gown on him ? 
If he runs he 'll fall . '' 
And suddenly she hid her face in her hand and went off into irresistible , prolonged , nervous , inaudible laughter . 
The elder listened to her with a smile , and blessed her tenderly . 
As she kissed his hand she suddenly pressed it to her eyes and began crying . 
`` Do n't be angry with me . 
I 'm silly and good for nothing ... and perhaps Alyosha 's right , quite right , in not wanting to come and see such a ridiculous girl . '' 
`` I will certainly send him , '' said the elder . 
The elder 's absence from his cell had lasted for about twenty‐five minutes . 
It was more than half‐past twelve , but Dmitri , on whose account they had all met there , had still not appeared . 
But he seemed almost to be forgotten , and when the elder entered the cell again , he found his guests engaged in eager conversation . 
Ivan and the two monks took the leading share in it . 
Miüsov , too , was trying to take a part , and apparently very eagerly , in the conversation . 
But he was unsuccessful in this also . 
He was evidently in the background , and his remarks were treated with neglect , which increased his irritability . 
He had had intellectual encounters with Ivan before and he could not endure a certain carelessness Ivan showed him . 
`` Hitherto at least I have stood in the front ranks of all that is progressive in Europe , and here the new generation positively ignores us , '' he thought . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , who had given his word to sit still and be quiet , had actually been quiet for some time , but he watched his neighbor Miüsov with an ironical little smile , obviously enjoying his discomfiture . 
He had been waiting for some time to pay off old scores , and now he could not let the opportunity slip . 
Bending over his shoulder he began teasing him again in a whisper . 
`` Why did n't you go away just now , after the ` courteously kissing ' ? 
Why did you consent to remain in such unseemly company ? 
It was because you felt insulted and aggrieved , and you remained to vindicate yourself by showing off your intelligence . 
Now you wo n't go till you 've displayed your intellect to them . '' 
`` You again ? 
... On the contrary , I 'm just going . '' 
`` You 'll be the last , the last of all to go ! '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch delivered him another thrust , almost at the moment of Father Zossima 's return . 
The discussion died down for a moment , but the elder , seating himself in his former place , looked at them all as though cordially inviting them to go on . 
Alyosha , who knew every expression of his face , saw that he was fearfully exhausted and making a great effort . 
Of late he had been liable to fainting fits from exhaustion . 
His face had the pallor that was common before such attacks , and his lips were white . 
But he evidently did not want to break up the party . 
He seemed to have some special object of his own in keeping them . 
What object ? 
Alyosha watched him intently . 
`` We are discussing this gentleman 's most interesting article , '' said Father Iosif , the librarian , addressing the elder , and indicating Ivan . 
`` He brings forward much that is new , but I think the argument cuts both ways . 
It is an article written in answer to a book by an ecclesiastical authority on the question of the ecclesiastical court , and the scope of its jurisdiction . '' 
`` I 'm sorry I have not read your article , but I 've heard of it , '' said the elder , looking keenly and intently at Ivan . 
`` He takes up a most interesting position , '' continued the Father Librarian . 
`` As far as Church jurisdiction is concerned he is apparently quite opposed to the separation of Church from State . '' 
`` That 's interesting . 
But in what sense ? '' 
Father Zossima asked Ivan . 
The latter , at last , answered him , not condescendingly , as Alyosha had feared , but with modesty and reserve , with evident goodwill and apparently without the slightest arrière‐pensée . 
`` I start from the position that this confusion of elements , that is , of the essential principles of Church and State , will , of course , go on for ever , in spite of the fact that it is impossible for them to mingle , and that the confusion of these elements can not lead to any consistent or even normal results , for there is falsity at the very foundation of it . 
Compromise between the Church and State in such questions as , for instance , jurisdiction , is , to my thinking , impossible in any real sense . 
My clerical opponent maintains that the Church holds a precise and defined position in the State . 
I maintain , on the contrary , that the Church ought to include the whole State , and not simply to occupy a corner in it , and , if this is , for some reason , impossible at present , then it ought , in reality , to be set up as the direct and chief aim of the future development of Christian society ! '' 
`` Perfectly true , '' Father Païssy , the silent and learned monk , assented with fervor and decision . 
`` The purest Ultramontanism ! '' 
cried Miüsov impatiently , crossing and recrossing his legs . 
`` Oh , well , we have no mountains , '' cried Father Iosif , and turning to the elder he continued : `` Observe the answer he makes to the following ` fundamental and essential ' propositions of his opponent , who is , you must note , an ecclesiastic . 
First , that ` no social organization can or ought to arrogate to itself power to dispose of the civic and political rights of its members . ' 
Secondly , that ` criminal and civil jurisdiction ought not to belong to the Church , and is inconsistent with its nature , both as a divine institution and as an organization of men for religious objects , ' and , finally , in the third place , ` the Church is a kingdom not of this world . ' '' 
`` A most unworthy play upon words for an ecclesiastic ! '' 
Father Païssy could not refrain from breaking in again . 
`` I have read the book which you have answered , '' he added , addressing Ivan , `` and was astounded at the words ` the Church is a kingdom not of this world . ' 
If it is not of this world , then it can not exist on earth at all . 
In the Gospel , the words ` not of this world ' are not used in that sense . 
To play with such words is indefensible . 
Our Lord Jesus Christ came to set up the Church upon earth . 
The Kingdom of Heaven , of course , is not of this world , but in Heaven ; but it is only entered through the Church which has been founded and established upon earth . 
And so a frivolous play upon words in such a connection is unpardonable and improper . 
The Church is , in truth , a kingdom and ordained to rule , and in the end must undoubtedly become the kingdom ruling over all the earth . 
For that we have the divine promise . '' 
He ceased speaking suddenly , as though checking himself . 
After listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on , addressing the elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality : `` The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and was nothing but the Church . 
When the pagan Roman Empire desired to become Christian , it inevitably happened that , by becoming Christian , it included the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments . 
In reality this was bound to happen . 
But Rome as a State retained too much of the pagan civilization and culture , as , for example , in the very objects and fundamental principles of the State . 
The Christian Church entering into the State could , of course , surrender no part of its fundamental principles -- the rock on which it stands -- and could pursue no other aims than those which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself , and among them that of drawing the whole world , and therefore the ancient pagan State itself , into the Church . 
In that way -LRB- that is , with a view to the future -RRB- it is not the Church that should seek a definite position in the State , like ` every social organization , ' or as ` an organization of men for religious purposes ' -LRB- as my opponent calls the Church -RRB- , but , on the contrary , every earthly State should be , in the end , completely transformed into the Church and should become nothing else but a Church , rejecting every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church . 
All this will not degrade it in any way or take from its honor and glory as a great State , nor from the glory of its rulers , but only turns it from a false , still pagan , and mistaken path to the true and rightful path , which alone leads to the eternal goal . 
This is why the author of the book On the Foundations of Church Jurisdiction would have judged correctly if , in seeking and laying down those foundations , he had looked upon them as a temporary compromise inevitable in our sinful and imperfect days . 
But as soon as the author ventures to declare that the foundations which he predicates now , part of which Father Iosif just enumerated , are the permanent , essential , and eternal foundations , he is going directly against the Church and its sacred and eternal vocation . 
That is the gist of my article . '' 
`` That is , in brief , '' Father Païssy began again , laying stress on each word , `` according to certain theories only too clearly formulated in the nineteenth century , the Church ought to be transformed into the State , as though this would be an advance from a lower to a higher form , so as to disappear into it , making way for science , for the spirit of the age , and civilization . 
And if the Church resists and is unwilling , some corner will be set apart for her in the State , and even that under control -- and this will be so everywhere in all modern European countries . 
But Russian hopes and conceptions demand not that the Church should pass as from a lower into a higher type into the State , but , on the contrary , that the State should end by being worthy to become only the Church and nothing else . 
So be it ! 
So be it ! '' 
`` Well , I confess you 've reassured me somewhat , '' Miüsov said smiling , again crossing his legs . 
`` So far as I understand , then , the realization of such an ideal is infinitely remote , at the second coming of Christ . 
That 's as you please . 
It 's a beautiful Utopian dream of the abolition of war , diplomacy , banks , and so on -- something after the fashion of socialism , indeed . 
But I imagined that it was all meant seriously , and that the Church might be now going to try criminals , and sentence them to beating , prison , and even death . '' 
`` But if there were none but the ecclesiastical court , the Church would not even now sentence a criminal to prison or to death . 
Crime and the way of regarding it would inevitably change , not all at once of course , but fairly soon , '' Ivan replied calmly , without flinching . 
`` Are you serious ? '' 
Miüsov glanced keenly at him . 
`` If everything became the Church , the Church would exclude all the criminal and disobedient , and would not cut off their heads , '' Ivan went on . 
`` I ask you , what would become of the excluded ? 
He would be cut off then not only from men , as now , but from Christ . 
By his crime he would have transgressed not only against men but against the Church of Christ . 
This is so even now , of course , strictly speaking , but it is not clearly enunciated , and very , very often the criminal of to‐day compromises with his conscience : ` I steal , ' he says , ` but I do n't go against the Church . 
I 'm not an enemy of Christ . ' 
That 's what the criminal of to‐day is continually saying to himself , but when the Church takes the place of the State it will be difficult for him , in opposition to the Church all over the world , to say : ` All men are mistaken , all in error , all mankind are the false Church . 
I , a thief and murderer , am the only true Christian Church . ' 
It will be very difficult to say this to himself ; it requires a rare combination of unusual circumstances . 
Now , on the other side , take the Church 's own view of crime : is it not bound to renounce the present almost pagan attitude , and to change from a mechanical cutting off of its tainted member for the preservation of society , as at present , into completely and honestly adopting the idea of the regeneration of the man , of his reformation and salvation ? '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
I fail to understand again , '' Miüsov interrupted . 
`` Some sort of dream again . 
Something shapeless and even incomprehensible . 
What is excommunication ? 
What sort of exclusion ? 
I suspect you are simply amusing yourself , Ivan Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` Yes , but you know , in reality it is so now , '' said the elder suddenly , and all turned to him at once . 
`` If it were not for the Church of Christ there would be nothing to restrain the criminal from evil‐doing , no real chastisement for it afterwards ; none , that is , but the mechanical punishment spoken of just now , which in the majority of cases only embitters the heart ; and not the real punishment , the only effectual one , the only deterrent and softening one , which lies in the recognition of sin by conscience . '' 
`` How is that , may one inquire ? '' 
asked Miüsov , with lively curiosity . 
`` Why , '' began the elder , `` all these sentences to exile with hard labor , and formerly with flogging also , reform no one , and what 's more , deter hardly a single criminal , and the number of crimes does not diminish but is continually on the increase . 
You must admit that . 
Consequently the security of society is not preserved , for , although the obnoxious member is mechanically cut off and sent far away out of sight , another criminal always comes to take his place at once , and often two of them . 
If anything does preserve society , even in our time , and does regenerate and transform the criminal , it is only the law of Christ speaking in his conscience . 
It is only by recognizing his wrong‐doing as a son of a Christian society -- that is , of the Church -- that he recognizes his sin against society -- that is , against the Church . 
So that it is only against the Church , and not against the State , that the criminal of to‐day can recognize that he has sinned . 
If society , as a Church , had jurisdiction , then it would know when to bring back from exclusion and to reunite to itself . 
Now the Church having no real jurisdiction , but only the power of moral condemnation , withdraws of her own accord from punishing the criminal actively . 
She does not excommunicate him but simply persists in motherly exhortation of him . 
What is more , the Church even tries to preserve all Christian communion with the criminal . 
She admits him to church services , to the holy sacrament , gives him alms , and treats him more as a captive than as a convict . 
And what would become of the criminal , O Lord , if even the Christian society -- that is , the Church -- were to reject him even as the civil law rejects him and cuts him off ? 
What would become of him if the Church punished him with her excommunication as the direct consequence of the secular law ? 
There could be no more terrible despair , at least for a Russian criminal , for Russian criminals still have faith . 
Though , who knows , perhaps then a fearful thing would happen , perhaps the despairing heart of the criminal would lose its faith and then what would become of him ? 
But the Church , like a tender , loving mother , holds aloof from active punishment herself , as the sinner is too severely punished already by the civil law , and there must be at least some one to have pity on him . 
The Church holds aloof , above all , because its judgment is the only one that contains the truth , and therefore can not practically and morally be united to any other judgment even as a temporary compromise . 
She can enter into no compact about that . 
The foreign criminal , they say , rarely repents , for the very doctrines of to‐day confirm him in the idea that his crime is not a crime , but only a reaction against an unjustly oppressive force . 
Society cuts him off completely by a force that triumphs over him mechanically and -LRB- so at least they say of themselves in Europe -RRB- accompanies this exclusion with hatred , forgetfulness , and the most profound indifference as to the ultimate fate of the erring brother . 
In this way , it all takes place without the compassionate intervention of the Church , for in many cases there are no churches there at all , for though ecclesiastics and splendid church buildings remain , the churches themselves have long ago striven to pass from Church into State and to disappear in it completely . 
So it seems at least in Lutheran countries . 
As for Rome , it was proclaimed a State instead of a Church a thousand years ago . 
And so the criminal is no longer conscious of being a member of the Church and sinks into despair . 
If he returns to society , often it is with such hatred that society itself instinctively cuts him off . 
You can judge for yourself how it must end . 
In many cases it would seem to be the same with us , but the difference is that besides the established law courts we have the Church too , which always keeps up relations with the criminal as a dear and still precious son . 
And besides that , there is still preserved , though only in thought , the judgment of the Church , which though no longer existing in practice is still living as a dream for the future , and is , no doubt , instinctively recognized by the criminal in his soul . 
What was said here just now is true too , that is , that if the jurisdiction of the Church were introduced in practice in its full force , that is , if the whole of the society were changed into the Church , not only the judgment of the Church would have influence on the reformation of the criminal such as it never has now , but possibly also the crimes themselves would be incredibly diminished . 
And there can be no doubt that the Church would look upon the criminal and the crime of the future in many cases quite differently and would succeed in restoring the excluded , in restraining those who plan evil , and in regenerating the fallen . 
It is true , '' said Father Zossima , with a smile , `` the Christian society now is not ready and is only resting on some seven righteous men , but as they are never lacking , it will continue still unshaken in expectation of its complete transformation from a society almost heathen in character into a single universal and all‐powerful Church . 
So be it , so be it ! 
Even though at the end of the ages , for it is ordained to come to pass ! 
And there is no need to be troubled about times and seasons , for the secret of the times and seasons is in the wisdom of God , in His foresight , and His love . 
And what in human reckoning seems still afar off , may by the Divine ordinance be close at hand , on the eve of its appearance . 
And so be it , so be it ! '' 
`` So be it , so be it ! '' 
Father Païssy repeated austerely and reverently . 
`` Strange , extremely strange ! '' 
Miüsov pronounced , not so much with heat as with latent indignation . 
`` What strikes you as so strange ? '' 
Father Iosif inquired cautiously . 
`` Why , it 's beyond anything ! '' 
cried Miüsov , suddenly breaking out ; `` the State is eliminated and the Church is raised to the position of the State . 
It 's not simply Ultramontanism , it 's arch‐Ultramontanism ! 
It 's beyond the dreams of Pope Gregory the Seventh ! '' 
`` You are completely misunderstanding it , '' said Father Païssy sternly . 
`` Understand , the Church is not to be transformed into the State . 
That is Rome and its dream . 
That is the third temptation of the devil . 
On the contrary , the State is transformed into the Church , will ascend and become a Church over the whole world -- which is the complete opposite of Ultramontanism and Rome , and your interpretation , and is only the glorious destiny ordained for the Orthodox Church . 
This star will arise in the east ! '' 
Miüsov was significantly silent . 
His whole figure expressed extraordinary personal dignity . 
A supercilious and condescending smile played on his lips . 
Alyosha watched it all with a throbbing heart . 
The whole conversation stirred him profoundly . 
He glanced casually at Rakitin , who was standing immovable in his place by the door listening and watching intently though with downcast eyes . 
But from the color in his cheeks Alyosha guessed that Rakitin was probably no less excited , and he knew what caused his excitement . 
`` Allow me to tell you one little anecdote , gentlemen , '' Miüsov said impressively , with a peculiarly majestic air . 
`` Some years ago , soon after the coup d'état of December , I happened to be calling in Paris on an extremely influential personage in the Government , and I met a very interesting man in his house . 
This individual was not precisely a detective but was a sort of superintendent of a whole regiment of political detectives -- a rather powerful position in its own way . 
I was prompted by curiosity to seize the opportunity of conversation with him . 
And as he had not come as a visitor but as a subordinate official bringing a special report , and as he saw the reception given me by his chief , he deigned to speak with some openness , to a certain extent only , of course . 
He was rather courteous than open , as Frenchmen know how to be courteous , especially to a foreigner . 
But I thoroughly understood him . 
The subject was the socialist revolutionaries who were at that time persecuted . 
I will quote only one most curious remark dropped by this person . 
` We are not particularly afraid , ' said he , ` of all these socialists , anarchists , infidels , and revolutionists ; we keep watch on them and know all their goings on . 
But there are a few peculiar men among them who believe in God and are Christians , but at the same time are socialists . 
These are the people we are most afraid of . 
They are dreadful people ! 
The socialist who is a Christian is more to be dreaded than a socialist who is an atheist . ' 
The words struck me at the time , and now they have suddenly come back to me here , gentlemen . '' 
`` You apply them to us , and look upon us as socialists ? '' 
Father Païssy asked directly , without beating about the bush . 
But before Pyotr Alexandrovitch could think what to answer , the door opened , and the guest so long expected , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , came in . 
They had , in fact , given up expecting him , and his sudden appearance caused some surprise for a moment . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , a young man of eight and twenty , of medium height and agreeable countenance , looked older than his years . 
He was muscular , and showed signs of considerable physical strength . 
Yet there was something not healthy in his face . 
It was rather thin , his cheeks were hollow , and there was an unhealthy sallowness in their color . 
His rather large , prominent , dark eyes had an expression of firm determination , and yet there was a vague look in them , too . 
Even when he was excited and talking irritably , his eyes somehow did not follow his mood , but betrayed something else , sometimes quite incongruous with what was passing . 
`` It 's hard to tell what he 's thinking , '' those who talked to him sometimes declared . 
People who saw something pensive and sullen in his eyes were startled by his sudden laugh , which bore witness to mirthful and light hearted thoughts at the very time when his eyes were so gloomy . 
