Brooding on these things he may have come to us perhaps only to see whether here he could sacrifice all or only `` two roubles , '' and in the monastery he met this elder . 
I must digress to explain what an `` elder '' is in Russian monasteries , and I am sorry that I do not feel very competent to do so . 
I will try , however , to give a superficial account of it in a few words . 
Authorities on the subject assert that the institution of `` elders '' is of recent date , not more than a hundred years old in our monasteries , though in the orthodox East , especially in Sinai and Athos , it has existed over a thousand years . 
It is maintained that it existed in ancient times in Russia also , but through the calamities which overtook Russia -- the Tartars , civil war , the interruption of relations with the East after the destruction of Constantinople -- this institution fell into oblivion . 
It was revived among us towards the end of last century by one of the great `` ascetics , '' as they called him , Païssy Velitchkovsky , and his disciples . 
But to this day it exists in few monasteries only , and has sometimes been almost persecuted as an innovation in Russia . 
It flourished especially in the celebrated Kozelski Optin Monastery . 
When and how it was introduced into our monastery I can not say . 
There had already been three such elders and Zossima was the last of them . 
But he was almost dying of weakness and disease , and they had no one to take his place . 
The question for our monastery was an important one , for it had not been distinguished by anything in particular till then : they had neither relics of saints , nor wonder‐working ikons , nor glorious traditions , nor historical exploits . 
It had flourished and been glorious all over Russia through its elders , to see and hear whom pilgrims had flocked for thousands of miles from all parts . 
What was such an elder ? 
An elder was one who took your soul , your will , into his soul and his will . 
When you choose an elder , you renounce your own will and yield it to him in complete submission , complete self abnegation . 
This novitiate , this terrible school of abnegation , is undertaken voluntarily , in the hope of self‐conquest , of self‐mastery , in order , after a life of obedience , to attain perfect freedom , that is , from self ; to escape the lot of those who have lived their whole life without finding their true selves in themselves . 
This institution of elders is not founded on theory , but was established in the East from the practice of a thousand years . 
The obligations due to an elder are not the ordinary `` obedience '' which has always existed in our Russian monasteries . 
The obligation involves confession to the elder by all who have submitted themselves to him , and to the indissoluble bond between him and them . 
The story is told , for instance , that in the early days of Christianity one such novice , failing to fulfill some command laid upon him by his elder , left his monastery in Syria and went to Egypt . 
There , after great exploits , he was found worthy at last to suffer torture and a martyr 's death for the faith . 
When the Church , regarding him as a saint , was burying him , suddenly , at the deacon 's exhortation , `` Depart all ye unbaptized , '' the coffin containing the martyr 's body left its place and was cast forth from the church , and this took place three times . 
And only at last they learnt that this holy man had broken his vow of obedience and left his elder , and , therefore , could not be forgiven without the elder 's absolution in spite of his great deeds . 
Only after this could the funeral take place . 
This , of course , is only an old legend . 
But here is a recent instance . 
A monk was suddenly commanded by his elder to quit Athos , which he loved as a sacred place and a haven of refuge , and to go first to Jerusalem to do homage to the Holy Places and then to go to the north to Siberia : `` There is the place for thee and not here . '' 
The monk , overwhelmed with sorrow , went to the Œcumenical Patriarch at Constantinople and besought him to release him from his obedience . 
But the Patriarch replied that not only was he unable to release him , but there was not and could not be on earth a power which could release him except the elder who had himself laid that duty upon him . 
In this way the elders are endowed in certain cases with unbounded and inexplicable authority . 
That is why in many of our monasteries the institution was at first resisted almost to persecution . 
Meantime the elders immediately began to be highly esteemed among the people . 
Masses of the ignorant people as well as men of distinction flocked , for instance , to the elders of our monastery to confess their doubts , their sins , and their sufferings , and ask for counsel and admonition . 
Seeing this , the opponents of the elders declared that the sacrament of confession was being arbitrarily and frivolously degraded , though the continual opening of the heart to the elder by the monk or the layman had nothing of the character of the sacrament . 
In the end , however , the institution of elders has been retained and is becoming established in Russian monasteries . 
It is true , perhaps , that this instrument which had stood the test of a thousand years for the moral regeneration of a man from slavery to freedom and to moral perfectibility may be a two‐edged weapon and it may lead some not to humility and complete self‐control but to the most Satanic pride , that is , to bondage and not to freedom . 
The elder Zossima was sixty‐five . 
He came of a family of landowners , had been in the army in early youth , and served in the Caucasus as an officer . 
He had , no doubt , impressed Alyosha by some peculiar quality of his soul . 
Alyosha lived in the cell of the elder , who was very fond of him and let him wait upon him . 
It must be noted that Alyosha was bound by no obligation and could go where he pleased and be absent for whole days . 
Though he wore the monastic dress it was voluntarily , not to be different from others . 
No doubt he liked to do so . 
Possibly his youthful imagination was deeply stirred by the power and fame of his elder . 
It was said that so many people had for years past come to confess their sins to Father Zossima and to entreat him for words of advice and healing , that he had acquired the keenest intuition and could tell from an unknown face what a new‐comer wanted , and what was the suffering on his conscience . 
He sometimes astounded and almost alarmed his visitors by his knowledge of their secrets before they had spoken a word . 
Alyosha noticed that many , almost all , went in to the elder for the first time with apprehension and uneasiness , but came out with bright and happy faces . 
Alyosha was particularly struck by the fact that Father Zossima was not at all stern . 
On the contrary , he was always almost gay . 
The monks used to say that he was more drawn to those who were more sinful , and the greater the sinner the more he loved him . 
There were , no doubt , up to the end of his life , among the monks some who hated and envied him , but they were few in number and they were silent , though among them were some of great dignity in the monastery , one , for instance , of the older monks distinguished for his strict keeping of fasts and vows of silence . 
But the majority were on Father Zossima 's side and very many of them loved him with all their hearts , warmly and sincerely . 
Some were almost fanatically devoted to him , and declared , though not quite aloud , that he was a saint , that there could be no doubt of it , and , seeing that his end was near , they anticipated miracles and great glory to the monastery in the immediate future from his relics . 
Alyosha had unquestioning faith in the miraculous power of the elder , just as he had unquestioning faith in the story of the coffin that flew out of the church . 
He saw many who came with sick children or relatives and besought the elder to lay hands on them and to pray over them , return shortly after -- some the next day -- and , falling in tears at the elder 's feet , thank him for healing their sick . 
Whether they had really been healed or were simply better in the natural course of the disease was a question which did not exist for Alyosha , for he fully believed in the spiritual power of his teacher and rejoiced in his fame , in his glory , as though it were his own triumph . 
His heart throbbed , and he beamed , as it were , all over when the elder came out to the gates of the hermitage into the waiting crowd of pilgrims of the humbler class who had flocked from all parts of Russia on purpose to see the elder and obtain his blessing . 
They fell down before him , wept , kissed his feet , kissed the earth on which he stood , and wailed , while the women held up their children to him and brought him the sick `` possessed with devils . '' 
The elder spoke to them , read a brief prayer over them , blessed them , and dismissed them . 
Of late he had become so weak through attacks of illness that he was sometimes unable to leave his cell , and the pilgrims waited for him to come out for several days . 
Alyosha did not wonder why they loved him so , why they fell down before him and wept with emotion merely at seeing his face . 
Oh ! 
he understood that for the humble soul of the Russian peasant , worn out by grief and toil , and still more by the everlasting injustice and everlasting sin , his own and the world 's , it was the greatest need and comfort to find some one or something holy to fall down before and worship . 
`` Among us there is sin , injustice , and temptation , but yet , somewhere on earth there is some one holy and exalted . 
He has the truth ; he knows the truth ; so it is not dead upon the earth ; so it will come one day to us , too , and rule over all the earth according to the promise . '' 
Alyosha knew that this was just how the people felt and even reasoned . 
He understood it , but that the elder Zossima was this saint and custodian of God 's truth -- of that he had no more doubt than the weeping peasants and the sick women who held out their children to the elder . 
The conviction that after his death the elder would bring extraordinary glory to the monastery was even stronger in Alyosha than in any one there , and , of late , a kind of deep flame of inner ecstasy burnt more and more strongly in his heart . 
He was not at all troubled at this elder 's standing as a solitary example before him . 
`` No matter . 
He is holy . 
He carries in his heart the secret of renewal for all : that power which will , at last , establish truth on the earth , and all men will be holy and love one another , and there will be no more rich nor poor , no exalted nor humbled , but all will be as the children of God , and the true Kingdom of Christ will come . '' 
That was the dream in Alyosha 's heart . 
The arrival of his two brothers , whom he had not known till then , seemed to make a great impression on Alyosha . 
He more quickly made friends with his half‐brother Dmitri -LRB- though he arrived later -RRB- than with his own brother Ivan . 
He was extremely interested in his brother Ivan , but when the latter had been two months in the town , though they had met fairly often , they were still not intimate . 
Alyosha was naturally silent , and he seemed to be expecting something , ashamed about something , while his brother Ivan , though Alyosha noticed at first that he looked long and curiously at him , seemed soon to have left off thinking of him . 
Alyosha noticed it with some embarrassment . 
He ascribed his brother 's indifference at first to the disparity of their age and education . 
But he also wondered whether the absence of curiosity and sympathy in Ivan might be due to some other cause entirely unknown to him . 
He kept fancying that Ivan was absorbed in something -- something inward and important -- that he was striving towards some goal , perhaps very hard to attain , and that that was why he had no thought for him . 
Alyosha wondered , too , whether there was not some contempt on the part of the learned atheist for him -- a foolish novice . 
He knew for certain that his brother was an atheist . 
He could not take offense at this contempt , if it existed ; yet , with an uneasy embarrassment which he did not himself understand , he waited for his brother to come nearer to him . 
Dmitri used to speak of Ivan with the deepest respect and with a peculiar earnestness . 
From him Alyosha learnt all the details of the important affair which had of late formed such a close and remarkable bond between the two elder brothers . 
Dmitri 's enthusiastic references to Ivan were the more striking in Alyosha 's eyes since Dmitri was , compared with Ivan , almost uneducated , and the two brothers were such a contrast in personality and character that it would be difficult to find two men more unlike . 
It was at this time that the meeting , or , rather gathering of the members of this inharmonious family took place in the cell of the elder who had such an extraordinary influence on Alyosha . 
The pretext for this gathering was a false one . 
It was at this time that the discord between Dmitri and his father seemed at its acutest stage and their relations had become insufferably strained . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch seems to have been the first to suggest , apparently in joke , that they should all meet in Father Zossima 's cell , and that , without appealing to his direct intervention , they might more decently come to an understanding under the conciliating influence of the elder 's presence . 
Dmitri , who had never seen the elder , naturally supposed that his father was trying to intimidate him , but , as he secretly blamed himself for his outbursts of temper with his father on several recent occasions , he accepted the challenge . 
It must be noted that he was not , like Ivan , staying with his father , but living apart at the other end of the town . 
It happened that Pyotr Alexandrovitch Miüsov , who was staying in the district at the time , caught eagerly at the idea . 
A Liberal of the forties and fifties , a freethinker and atheist , he may have been led on by boredom or the hope of frivolous diversion . 
He was suddenly seized with the desire to see the monastery and the holy man . 
As his lawsuit with the monastery still dragged on , he made it the pretext for seeing the Superior , in order to attempt to settle it amicably . 
A visitor coming with such laudable intentions might be received with more attention and consideration than if he came from simple curiosity . 
Influences from within the monastery were brought to bear on the elder , who of late had scarcely left his cell , and had been forced by illness to deny even his ordinary visitors . 
In the end he consented to see them , and the day was fixed . 
`` Who has made me a judge over them ? '' 
was all he said , smilingly , to Alyosha . 
Alyosha was much perturbed when he heard of the proposed visit . 
Of all the wrangling , quarrelsome party , Dmitri was the only one who could regard the interview seriously . 
All the others would come from frivolous motives , perhaps insulting to the elder . 
Alyosha was well aware of that . 
Ivan and Miüsov would come from curiosity , perhaps of the coarsest kind , while his father might be contemplating some piece of buffoonery . 
Though he said nothing , Alyosha thoroughly understood his father . 
The boy , I repeat , was far from being so simple as every one thought him . 
He awaited the day with a heavy heart . 
No doubt he was always pondering in his mind how the family discord could be ended . 
But his chief anxiety concerned the elder . 
He trembled for him , for his glory , and dreaded any affront to him , especially the refined , courteous irony of Miüsov and the supercilious half‐utterances of the highly educated Ivan . 
He even wanted to venture on warning the elder , telling him something about them , but , on second thoughts , said nothing . 
He only sent word the day before , through a friend , to his brother Dmitri , that he loved him and expected him to keep his promise . 
Dmitri wondered , for he could not remember what he had promised , but he answered by letter that he would do his utmost not to let himself be provoked `` by vileness , '' but that , although he had a deep respect for the elder and for his brother Ivan , he was convinced that the meeting was either a trap for him or an unworthy farce . 
`` Nevertheless I would rather bite out my tongue than be lacking in respect to the sainted man whom you reverence so highly , '' he wrote in conclusion . 
Alyosha was not greatly cheered by the letter . 
It was a warm , bright day at the end of August . 
The interview with the elder had been fixed for half‐past eleven , immediately after late mass . 
Our visitors did not take part in the service , but arrived just as it was over . 
First an elegant open carriage , drawn by two valuable horses , drove up with Miüsov and a distant relative of his , a young man of twenty , called Pyotr Fomitch Kalganov . 
This young man was preparing to enter the university . 
Miüsov , with whom he was staying for the time , was trying to persuade him to go abroad to the university of Zurich or Jena . 
The young man was still undecided . 
He was thoughtful and absent‐minded . 
He was nice looking , strongly built , and rather tall . 
There was a strange fixity in his gaze at times . 
Like all very absent‐minded people he would sometimes stare at a person without seeing him . 
He was silent and rather awkward , but sometimes , when he was alone with any one , he became talkative and effusive , and would laugh at anything or nothing . 
But his animation vanished as quickly as it appeared . 
He was always well and even elaborately dressed ; he had already some independent fortune and expectations of much more . 
He was a friend of Alyosha 's . 
In an ancient , jolting , but roomy , hired carriage , with a pair of old pinkish‐gray horses , a long way behind Miüsov 's carriage , came Fyodor Pavlovitch , with his son Ivan . 
Dmitri was late , though he had been informed of the time the evening before . 
The visitors left their carriage at the hotel , outside the precincts , and went to the gates of the monastery on foot . 
Except Fyodor Pavlovitch , none of the party had ever seen the monastery , and Miüsov had probably not even been to church for thirty years . 
He looked about him with curiosity , together with assumed ease . 
But , except the church and the domestic buildings , though these too were ordinary enough , he found nothing of interest in the interior of the monastery . 
The last of the worshippers were coming out of the church , bareheaded and crossing themselves . 
Among the humbler people were a few of higher rank -- two or three ladies and a very old general . 
They were all staying at the hotel . 
Our visitors were at once surrounded by beggars , but none of them gave them anything , except young Kalganov , who took a ten copeck piece out of his purse , and , nervous and embarrassed -- God knows why ! 
-- hurriedly gave it to an old woman , saying : `` Divide it equally . '' 
None of his companions made any remark upon it , so that he had no reason to be embarrassed ; but , perceiving this , he was even more overcome . 
It was strange that their arrival did not seem expected , and that they were not received with special honor , though one of them had recently made a donation of a thousand roubles , while another was a very wealthy and highly cultured landowner , upon whom all in the monastery were in a sense dependent , as a decision of the lawsuit might at any moment put their fishing rights in his hands . 
Yet no official personage met them . 
Miüsov looked absent‐mindedly at the tombstones round the church , and was on the point of saying that the dead buried here must have paid a pretty penny for the right of lying in this `` holy place , '' but refrained . 
His liberal irony was rapidly changing almost into anger . 
`` Who the devil is there to ask in this imbecile place ? 
We must find out , for time is passing , '' he observed suddenly , as though speaking to himself . 
All at once there came up a bald‐headed , elderly man with ingratiating little eyes , wearing a full , summer overcoat . 
Lifting his hat , he introduced himself with a honeyed lisp as Maximov , a landowner of Tula . 
He at once entered into our visitors ' difficulty . 
`` Father Zossima lives in the hermitage , apart , four hundred paces from the monastery , the other side of the copse . '' 
`` I know it 's the other side of the copse , '' observed Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` but we do n't remember the way . 
It is a long time since we 've been here . '' 
`` This way , by this gate , and straight across the copse ... the copse . 
Come with me , wo n't you ? 
I 'll show you . 
I have to go ... . 
I am going myself . 
This way , this way . '' 
They came out of the gate and turned towards the copse . 
Maximov , a man of sixty , ran rather than walked , turning sideways to stare at them all , with an incredible degree of nervous curiosity . 
His eyes looked starting out of his head . 
`` You see , we have come to the elder upon business of our own , '' observed Miüsov severely . 
`` That personage has granted us an audience , so to speak , and so , though we thank you for showing us the way , we can not ask you to accompany us . '' 
`` I 've been there . 
I 've been already ; un chevalier parfait , '' and Maximov snapped his fingers in the air . 
`` Who is a chevalier ? '' 
asked Miüsov . 
`` The elder , the splendid elder , the elder ! 
The honor and glory of the monastery , Zossima . 
Such an elder ! '' 
But his incoherent talk was cut short by a very pale , wan‐looking monk of medium height , wearing a monk 's cap , who overtook them . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch and Miüsov stopped . 
The monk , with an extremely courteous , profound bow , announced : `` The Father Superior invites all of you gentlemen to dine with him after your visit to the hermitage . 
At one o'clock , not later . 
And you also , '' he added , addressing Maximov . 
`` That I certainly will , without fail , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , hugely delighted at the invitation . 
`` And , believe me , we 've all given our word to behave properly here ... . 
And you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , will you go , too ? '' 
`` Yes , of course . 
What have I come for but to study all the customs here ? 
The only obstacle to me is your company ... '' `` Yes , Dmitri Fyodorovitch is non‐existent as yet . '' 
`` It would be a capital thing if he did n't turn up . 
Do you suppose I like all this business , and in your company , too ? 
So we will come to dinner . 
Thank the Father Superior , '' he said to the monk . 
`` No , it is my duty now to conduct you to the elder , '' answered the monk . 
`` If so I 'll go straight to the Father Superior -- to the Father Superior , '' babbled Maximov . 
`` The Father Superior is engaged just now . 
But as you please -- '' the monk hesitated . 
`` Impertinent old man ! '' 
Miüsov observed aloud , while Maximov ran back to the monastery . 
`` He 's like von Sohn , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said suddenly . 
`` Is that all you can think of ? 
... In what way is he like von Sohn ? 
Have you ever seen von Sohn ? '' 
`` I 've seen his portrait . 
It 's not the features , but something indefinable . 
He 's a second von Sohn . 
I can always tell from the physiognomy . '' 
`` Ah , I dare say you are a connoisseur in that . 
But , look here , Fyodor Pavlovitch , you said just now that we had given our word to behave properly . 
Remember it . 
I advise you to control yourself . 
But , if you begin to play the fool I do n't intend to be associated with you here ... . 
You see what a man he is '' -- he turned to the monk -- `` I 'm afraid to go among decent people with him . '' 
A fine smile , not without a certain slyness , came on to the pale , bloodless lips of the monk , but he made no reply , and was evidently silent from a sense of his own dignity . 
Miüsov frowned more than ever . 
`` Oh , devil take them all ! 
An outer show elaborated through centuries , and nothing but charlatanism and nonsense underneath , '' flashed through Miüsov 's mind . 
`` Here 's the hermitage . 
We 've arrived , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` The gates are shut . '' 
And he repeatedly made the sign of the cross to the saints painted above and on the sides of the gates . 
`` When you go to Rome you must do as the Romans do . 
Here in this hermitage there are twenty‐five saints being saved . 
They look at one another , and eat cabbages . 
And not one woman goes in at this gate . 
That 's what is remarkable . 
And that really is so . 
But I did hear that the elder receives ladies , '' he remarked suddenly to the monk . 
`` Women of the people are here too now , lying in the portico there waiting . 
But for ladies of higher rank two rooms have been built adjoining the portico , but outside the precincts -- you can see the windows -- and the elder goes out to them by an inner passage when he is well enough . 
They are always outside the precincts . 
There is a Harkov lady , Madame Hohlakov , waiting there now with her sick daughter . 
Probably he has promised to come out to her , though of late he has been so weak that he has hardly shown himself even to the people . '' 
`` So then there are loopholes , after all , to creep out of the hermitage to the ladies . 
Do n't suppose , holy father , that I mean any harm . 
But do you know that at Athos not only the visits of women are not allowed , but no creature of the female sex -- no hens , nor turkey‐hens , nor cows . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , I warn you I shall go back and leave you here . 
They 'll turn you out when I 'm gone . '' 
`` But I 'm not interfering with you , Pyotr Alexandrovitch . 
Look , '' he cried suddenly , stepping within the precincts , `` what a vale of roses they live in ! '' 
Though there were no roses now , there were numbers of rare and beautiful autumn flowers growing wherever there was space for them , and evidently tended by a skillful hand ; there were flower‐beds round the church , and between the tombs ; and the one‐storied wooden house where the elder lived was also surrounded with flowers . 
`` And was it like this in the time of the last elder , Varsonofy ? 
He did n't care for such elegance . 
They say he used to jump up and thrash even ladies with a stick , '' observed Fyodor Pavlovitch , as he went up the steps . 
`` The elder Varsonofy did sometimes seem rather strange , but a great deal that 's told is foolishness . 
He never thrashed any one , '' answered the monk . 
`` Now , gentlemen , if you will wait a minute I will announce you . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , for the last time , your compact , do you hear ? 
Behave properly or I will pay you out ! '' 
Miüsov had time to mutter again . 
`` I ca n't think why you are so agitated , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch observed sarcastically . 
`` Are you uneasy about your sins ? 
They say he can tell by one 's eyes what one has come about . 
And what a lot you think of their opinion ! 
you , a Parisian , and so advanced . 
I 'm surprised at you . '' 
But Miüsov had no time to reply to this sarcasm . 
They were asked to come in . 
He walked in , somewhat irritated . 
`` Now , I know myself , I am annoyed , I shall lose my temper and begin to quarrel -- and lower myself and my ideas , '' he reflected . 
They entered the room almost at the same moment that the elder came in from his bedroom . 
There were already in the cell , awaiting the elder , two monks of the hermitage , one the Father Librarian , and the other Father Païssy , a very learned man , so they said , in delicate health , though not old . 
There was also a tall young man , who looked about two and twenty , standing in the corner throughout the interview . 
He had a broad , fresh face , and clever , observant , narrow brown eyes , and was wearing ordinary dress . 
He was a divinity student , living under the protection of the monastery . 
His expression was one of unquestioning , but self‐respecting , reverence . 
Being in a subordinate and dependent position , and so not on an equality with the guests , he did not greet them with a bow . 
Father Zossima was accompanied by a novice , and by Alyosha . 
The two monks rose and greeted him with a very deep bow , touching the ground with their fingers ; then kissed his hand . 
Blessing them , the elder replied with as deep a reverence to them , and asked their blessing . 
The whole ceremony was performed very seriously and with an appearance of feeling , not like an everyday rite . 
But Miüsov fancied that it was all done with intentional impressiveness . 
He stood in front of the other visitors . 
He ought -- he had reflected upon it the evening before -- from simple politeness , since it was the custom here , to have gone up to receive the elder 's blessing , even if he did not kiss his hand . 
But when he saw all this bowing and kissing on the part of the monks he instantly changed his mind . 
With dignified gravity he made a rather deep , conventional bow , and moved away to a chair . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did the same , mimicking Miüsov like an ape . 
Ivan bowed with great dignity and courtesy , but he too kept his hands at his sides , while Kalganov was so confused that he did not bow at all . 
The elder let fall the hand raised to bless them , and bowing to them again , asked them all to sit down . 
The blood rushed to Alyosha 's cheeks . 
He was ashamed . 
His forebodings were coming true . 
Father Zossima sat down on a very old‐fashioned mahogany sofa , covered with leather , and made his visitors sit down in a row along the opposite wall on four mahogany chairs , covered with shabby black leather . 
The monks sat , one at the door and the other at the window . 
The divinity student , the novice , and Alyosha remained standing . 
The cell was not very large and had a faded look . 
It contained nothing but the most necessary furniture , of coarse and poor quality . 
There were two pots of flowers in the window , and a number of holy pictures in the corner . 
Before one huge ancient ikon of the Virgin a lamp was burning . 
Near it were two other holy pictures in shining settings , and , next them , carved cherubims , china eggs , a Catholic cross of ivory , with a Mater Dolorosa embracing it , and several foreign engravings from the great Italian artists of past centuries . 
Next to these costly and artistic engravings were several of the roughest Russian prints of saints and martyrs , such as are sold for a few farthings at all the fairs . 
On the other walls were portraits of Russian bishops , past and present . 
Miüsov took a cursory glance at all these `` conventional '' surroundings and bent an intent look upon the elder . 
He had a high opinion of his own insight , a weakness excusable in him as he was fifty , an age at which a clever man of the world of established position can hardly help taking himself rather seriously . 
At the first moment he did not like Zossima . 
There was , indeed , something in the elder 's face which many people besides Miüsov might not have liked . 
He was a short , bent , little man , with very weak legs , and though he was only sixty‐five , he looked at least ten years older . 
His face was very thin and covered with a network of fine wrinkles , particularly numerous about his eyes , which were small , light‐colored , quick , and shining like two bright points . 
He had a sprinkling of gray hair about his temples . 
His pointed beard was small and scanty , and his lips , which smiled frequently , were as thin as two threads . 
His nose was not long , but sharp , like a bird 's beak . 
`` To all appearances a malicious soul , full of petty pride , '' thought Miüsov . 
He felt altogether dissatisfied with his position . 
A cheap little clock on the wall struck twelve hurriedly , and served to begin the conversation . 
`` Precisely to our time , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , `` but no sign of my son , Dmitri . 
I apologize for him , sacred elder ! '' 
-LRB- Alyosha shuddered all over at `` sacred elder . '' -RRB- 
`` I am always punctual myself , minute for minute , remembering that punctuality is the courtesy of kings ... '' `` But you are not a king , anyway , '' Miüsov muttered , losing his self restraint at once . 
`` Yes ; that 's true . 
I 'm not a king , and , would you believe it , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , I was aware of that myself . 
But , there ! 
I always say the wrong thing . 
Your reverence , '' he cried , with sudden pathos , `` you behold before you a buffoon in earnest ! 
I introduce myself as such . 
It 's an old habit , alas ! 
And if I sometimes talk nonsense out of place it 's with an object , with the object of amusing people and making myself agreeable . 
One must be agreeable , must n't one ? 
I was seven years ago in a little town where I had business , and I made friends with some merchants there . 
We went to the captain of police because we had to see him about something , and to ask him to dine with us . 
He was a tall , fat , fair , sulky man , the most dangerous type in such cases . 
It 's their liver . 
I went straight up to him , and with the ease of a man of the world , you know , ` Mr. Ispravnik , ' said I , ` be our Napravnik . ' 
` What do you mean by Napravnik ? ' 
said he . 
I saw , at the first half‐second , that it had missed fire . 
He stood there so glum . 
` I wanted to make a joke , ' said I , ` for the general diversion , as Mr. Napravnik is our well‐known Russian orchestra conductor and what we need for the harmony of our undertaking is some one of that sort . ' 
And I explained my comparison very reasonably , did n't I ? 
` Excuse me , ' said he , ` I am an Ispravnik , and I do not allow puns to be made on my calling . ' 
He turned and walked away . 
I followed him , shouting , ` Yes , yes , you are an Ispravnik , not a Napravnik . ' 
` No , ' he said , ` since you called me a Napravnik I am one . ' 
And would you believe it , it ruined our business ! 
And I 'm always like that , always like that . 
Always injuring myself with my politeness . 
Once , many years ago , I said to an influential person : ` Your wife is a ticklish lady , ' in an honorable sense , of the moral qualities , so to speak . 
But he asked me , ` Why , have you tickled her ? ' 
I thought I 'd be polite , so I could n't help saying , ` Yes , ' and he gave me a fine tickling on the spot . 
Only that happened long ago , so I 'm not ashamed to tell the story . 
I 'm always injuring myself like that . '' 
`` You 're doing it now , '' muttered Miüsov , with disgust . 
Father Zossima scrutinized them both in silence . 
`` Am I ? 
Would you believe it , I was aware of that , too , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , and let me tell you , indeed , I foresaw I should as soon as I began to speak . 
And do you know I foresaw , too , that you 'd be the first to remark on it . 
The minute I see my joke is n't coming off , your reverence , both my cheeks feel as though they were drawn down to the lower jaw and there is almost a spasm in them . 
That 's been so since I was young , when I had to make jokes for my living in noblemen 's families . 
I am an inveterate buffoon , and have been from birth up , your reverence , it 's as though it were a craze in me . 
I dare say it 's a devil within me . 
But only a little one . 
A more serious one would have chosen another lodging . 
But not your soul , Pyotr Alexandrovitch ; you 're not a lodging worth having either . 
But I do believe -- I believe in God , though I have had doubts of late . 
But now I sit and await words of wisdom . 
I 'm like the philosopher , Diderot , your reverence . 
Did you ever hear , most Holy Father , how Diderot went to see the Metropolitan Platon , in the time of the Empress Catherine ? 
He went in and said straight out , ` There is no God . ' 
To which the great bishop lifted up his finger and answered , ` The fool hath said in his heart there is no God . ' 
And he fell down at his feet on the spot . 
` I believe , ' he cried , ` and will be christened . ' 
And so he was . 
Princess Dashkov was his godmother , and Potyomkin his godfather . '' 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch , this is unbearable ! 
You know you 're telling lies and that that stupid anecdote is n't true . 
Why are you playing the fool ? '' 
cried Miüsov in a shaking voice . 
`` I suspected all my life that it was n't true , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cried with conviction . 
`` But I 'll tell you the whole truth , gentlemen . 
Great elder ! 
Forgive me , the last thing about Diderot 's christening I made up just now . 
I never thought of it before . 
I made it up to add piquancy . 
I play the fool , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , to make myself agreeable . 
Though I really do n't know myself , sometimes , what I do it for . 
And as for Diderot , I heard as far as ` the fool hath said in his heart ' twenty times from the gentry about here when I was young . 
I heard your aunt , Pyotr Alexandrovitch , tell the story . 
They all believe to this day that the infidel Diderot came to dispute about God with the Metropolitan Platon ... '' Miüsov got up , forgetting himself in his impatience . 
He was furious , and conscious of being ridiculous . 
What was taking place in the cell was really incredible . 
For forty or fifty years past , from the times of former elders , no visitors had entered that cell without feelings of the profoundest veneration . 
Almost every one admitted to the cell felt that a great favor was being shown him . 
Many remained kneeling during the whole visit . 
Of those visitors , many had been men of high rank and learning , some even freethinkers , attracted by curiosity , but all without exception had shown the profoundest reverence and delicacy , for here there was no question of money , but only , on the one side love and kindness , and on the other penitence and eager desire to decide some spiritual problem or crisis . 
So that such buffoonery amazed and bewildered the spectators , or at least some of them . 
The monks , with unchanged countenances , waited , with earnest attention , to hear what the elder would say , but seemed on the point of standing up , like Miüsov . 
Alyosha stood , with hanging head , on the verge of tears . 
What seemed to him strangest of all was that his brother Ivan , on whom alone he had rested his hopes , and who alone had such influence on his father that he could have stopped him , sat now quite unmoved , with downcast eyes , apparently waiting with interest to see how it would end , as though he had nothing to do with it . 
Alyosha did not dare to look at Rakitin , the divinity student , whom he knew almost intimately . 
He alone in the monastery knew Rakitin 's thoughts . 
`` Forgive me , '' began Miüsov , addressing Father Zossima , `` for perhaps I seem to be taking part in this shameful foolery . 
I made a mistake in believing that even a man like Fyodor Pavlovitch would understand what was due on a visit to so honored a personage . 
I did not suppose I should have to apologize simply for having come with him ... '' Pyotr Alexandrovitch could say no more , and was about to leave the room , overwhelmed with confusion . 
`` Do n't distress yourself , I beg . '' 
The elder got on to his feeble legs , and taking Pyotr Alexandrovitch by both hands , made him sit down again . 
`` I beg you not to disturb yourself . 
I particularly beg you to be my guest . '' 
And with a bow he went back and sat down again on his little sofa . 
`` Great elder , speak ! 
Do I annoy you by my vivacity ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch cried suddenly , clutching the arms of his chair in both hands , as though ready to leap up from it if the answer were unfavorable . 
`` I earnestly beg you , too , not to disturb yourself , and not to be uneasy , '' the elder said impressively . 
`` Do not trouble . 
