ABOUT sixty years ago , when fortunes of millions had been made on the Volga with fairy-tale rapidity , Ignat Gordyeeff , a young fellow , was working as water-pumper on one of the barges of the wealthy merchant Zayev . 
Built like a giant , handsome and not at all stupid , he was one of those people whom luck always follows everywhere -- not because they are gifted and industrious , but rather because , having an enormous stock of energy at their command , they can not stop to think over the choice of means when on their way toward their aims , and , excepting their own will , they know no law . 
Sometimes they speak of their conscience with fear , sometimes they really torture themselves struggling with it , but conscience is an unconquerable power to the faint-hearted only ; the strong master it quickly and make it a slave to their desires , for they unconsciously feel that , given room and freedom , conscience would fracture life . 
They sacrifice days to it ; and if it should happen that conscience conquered their souls , they are never wrecked , even in defeat -- they are just as healthy and strong under its sway as when they lived without conscience . 
At the age of forty Ignat Gordyeeff was himself the owner of three steamers and ten barges . 
On the Volga he was respected as a rich and clever man , but was nicknamed `` Frantic , '' because his life did not flow along a straight channel , like that of other people of his kind , but now and again , boiling up turbulently , ran out of its rut , away from gain -- the prime aim of his existence . 
It looked as though there were three Gordyeeffs in him , or as though there were three souls in Ignat 's body . 
One of them , the mightiest , was only greedy , and when Ignat lived according to its commands , he was merely a man seized with untamable passion for work . 
This passion burned in him by day and by night , he was completely absorbed by it , and , grabbing everywhere hundreds and thousands of roubles , it seemed as if he could never have enough of the jingle and sound of money . 
He worked about up and down the Volga , building and fastening nets in which he caught gold : he bought up grain in the villages , floated it to Rybinsk on his barges ; he plundered , cheated , sometimes not noticing it , sometimes noticing , and , triumphant , be openly laughed at by his victims ; and in the senselessness of his thirst for money , he rose to the heights of poetry . 
But , giving up so much strength to this hunt after the rouble , he was not greedy in the narrow sense , and sometimes he even betrayed an inconceivable but sincere indifference to his property . 
Once , when the ice was drifting down the Volga , he stood on the shore , and , seeing that the ice was breaking his new barge , having crushed it against the bluff shore , he ejaculated : `` That 's it . 
Again . 
Crush it ! 
Now , once more ! 
Try ! '' 
`` Well , Ignat , '' asked his friend Mayakin , coming up to him , `` the ice is crushing about ten thousand out of your purse , eh ? '' 
`` That 's nothing ! 
I 'll make another hundred . 
But look how the Volga is working ! 
Eh ? 
Fine ? 
She can split the whole world , like curd , with a knife . 
Look , look ! 
There you have my ` Boyarinya ! ' 
She floated but once . 
Well , we 'll have mass said for the dead . '' 
The barge was crushed into splinters . 
Ignat and the godfather , sitting in the tavern on the shore , drank vodka and looked out of the window , watching the fragments of the `` Boyarinya '' drifting down the river together with the ice . 
`` Are you sorry for the vessel , Ignat ? '' 
asked Mayakin . 
`` Why should I be sorry for it ? 
The Volga gave it to me , and the Volga has taken it back . 
It did not tear off my hand . '' 
`` Nevertheless . '' 
`` What -- nevertheless ? 
It is good at least that I saw how it was all done . 
It 's a lesson for the future . 
But when my ` Volgar ' was burned -- I was really sorry -- I did n't see it . 
How beautiful it must have looked when such a woodpile was blazing on the water in the dark night ! 
Eh ? 
It was an enormous steamer . '' 
`` Were n't you sorry for that either ? '' 
`` For the steamer ? 
It is true , I did feel sorry for the steamer . 
But then it is mere foolishness to feel sorry ! 
What 's the use ? 
I might have cried ; tears can not extinguish fire . 
Let the steamers burn . 
And even though everything be burned down , I 'd spit upon it ! 
If the soul is but burning to work , everything will be erected anew . 
Is n't it so ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Mayakin , smiling . 
`` These are strong words you say . 
And whoever speaks that way , even though he loses all , will nevertheless be rich . '' 
Regarding losses of thousands of roubles so philosophically , Ignat knew the value of every kopeika ; he gave to the poor very seldom , and only to those that were altogether unable to work . 
When a more or less healthy man asked him for alms , Ignat would say , sternly : `` Get away ! 
You can work yet . 
Go to my dvornik and help him to remove the dung . 
I 'll pay you for it . '' 
Whenever he had been carried away by his work he regarded people morosely and piteously , nor did he give himself rest while hunting for roubles . 
And suddenly -- it usually happened in spring , when everything on earth became so bewitchingly beautiful and something reproachfully wild was breathed down into the soul from the clear sky -- Ignat Gordyeeff would feel that he was not the master of his business , but its low slave . 
He would lose himself in thought and , inquisitively looking about himself from under his thick , knitted eyebrows , walk about for days , angry and morose , as though silently asking something , which he feared to ask aloud . 
They awakened his other soul , the turbulent and lustful soul of a hungry beast . 
Insolent and cynical , he drank , led a depraved life , and made drunkards of other people . 
He went into ecstasy , and something like a volcano of filth boiled within him . 
It looked as though he was madly tearing the chains which he himself had forged and carried , and was not strong enough to tear them . 
Excited and very dirty , his face swollen from drunkenness and sleeplessness , his eyes wandering madly , and roaring in a hoarse voice , he tramped about the town from one tavern to another , threw away money without counting it , cried and danced to the sad tunes of the folk songs , or fought , but found no rest anywhere -- in anything . 
It happened one day that a degraded priest , a short , stout little bald-headed man in a torn cassock , chanced on Ignat , and stuck to him , just as a piece of mud will stick to a shoe . 
An impersonal , deformed and nasty creature , he played the part of a buffoon : they smeared his bald head with mustard , made him go upon all-fours , drink mixtures of different brandies and dance comical dances ; he did all this in silence , an idiotic smile on his wrinkled face , and having done what he was told to do , he invariably said , outstretching his hand with his palm upward : `` Give me a rouble . '' 
They laughed at him and sometimes gave him twenty kopeiks , sometimes gave him nothing , but it sometimes happened that they threw him a ten-rouble bill and even more . 
`` You abominable fellow , '' cried Ignat to him one day . 
`` Say , who are you ? '' 
The priest was frightened by the call , and bowing low to Ignat , was silent . 
`` Who ? 
Speak ! '' 
roared Ignat . 
`` I am a man -- to be abused , '' answered the priest , and the company burst out laughing at his words . 
`` Are you a rascal ? '' 
asked Ignat , sternly . 
`` A rascal ? 
Because of need and the weakness of my soul ? '' 
`` Come here ! '' 
Ignat called him . 
`` Come and sit down by my side . '' 
Trembling with fear , the priest walked up to the intoxicated merchant with timid steps and remained standing opposite him . 
`` Sit down beside me ! '' 
said Ignat , taking the frightened priest by the hand and seating him next to himself . 
`` You are a very near man to me . 
I am also a rascal ! 
You , because of need ; I , because of wantonness . 
I am a rascal because of grief ! 
Understand ? '' 
`` I understand , '' said the priest , softly . 
All the company were giggling . 
`` Do you know now what I am ? '' 
`` I do . '' 
`` Well , say , ` You are a rascal , Ignat ! ' '' 
The priest could not do it . 
He looked with terror at the huge figure of Ignat and shook his head negatively . 
The company 's laughter was now like the rattling of thunder . 
Ignat could not make the priest abuse him . 
Then he asked him : `` Shall I give you money ? '' 
`` Yes , '' quickly answered the priest . 
`` And what do you need it for ? '' 
He did not care to answer . 
Then Ignat seized him by the collar , and shook out of his dirty lips the following speech , which he spoke almost in a whisper , trembling with fear : `` I have a daughter sixteen years old in the seminary . 
I save for her , because when she comes out there wo n't be anything with which to cover her nakedness . '' 
`` Ah , '' said Ignat , and let go the priest 's collar . 
Then he sat for a long time gloomy and lost in thought , and now and again stared at the priest . 
Suddenly his eyes began to laugh , and he said : `` Are n't you a liar , drunkard ? '' 
The priest silently made the sign of the cross and lowered his head on his breast . 
`` It is the truth ! '' 
said one of the company , confirming the priest 's words . 
`` True ? 
Very well ! '' 
shouted Ignat , and , striking the table with his fist , he addressed himself to the priest : `` Eh , you ! 
Sell me your daughter ! 
How much will you take ? '' 
The priest shook his head and shrank back . 
`` One thousand ! '' 
The company giggled , seeing that the priest was shrinking as though cold water was being poured on him . 
`` Two ! '' 
roared Ignat , with flashing eyes . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? 
How is it ? '' 
muttered the priest , stretching out both hands to Ignat . 
`` Three ! '' 
`` Ignat Matveyich ! '' 
cried the priest , in a thin , ringing voice . 
`` For God 's sake ! 
For Christ 's sake ! 
Enough ! 
I 'll sell her ! 
For her own sake I 'll sell her ! '' 
In his sickly , sharp voice was heard a threat to someone , and his eyes , unnoticed by anybody before , flashed like coals . 
But the intoxicated crowd only laughed at him foolishly . 
`` Silence ! '' 
cried Ignat , sternly , straightening himself to his full length and flashing his eyes . 
`` Do n't you understand , devils , what 's going on here ? 
It 's enough to make one cry , while you giggle . '' 
He walked up to the priest , went down on his knees before him , and said to him firmly : `` Father now you see what a rascal I am . 
Well , spit into my face ! '' 
Something ugly and ridiculous took place . 
The priest too , knelt before Ignat , and like a huge turtle , crept around near his feet , kissed his knees and muttered something , sobbing . 
Ignat bent over him , lifted him from the floor and cried to him , commanding and begging : `` Spit ! 
Spit right into my shameless eyes ! '' 
The company , stupefied for a moment by Ignat 's stern voice , laughed again so that the panes rattled in the tavern windows . 
`` I 'll give you a hundred roubles . 
Spit ! '' 
And the priest crept over the floor and sobbed for fear , or for happiness , to hear that this man was begging him to do something degrading to himself . 
Finally Ignat arose from the floor , kicked the priest , and , flinging at him a package of money , said morosely , with a smile : `` Rabble ! 
Can a man repent before such people ? 
Some are afraid to hear of repentance , others laugh at a sinner . 
I was about to unburden myself completely ; the heart trembled . 
Let me , I thought . 
No , I did n't think at all . 
Just so ! 
Get out of here ! 
And see that you never show yourself to me again . 
Do you hear ? '' 
`` Oh , a queer fellow ! '' 
said the crowd , somewhat moved . 
Legends were composed about his drinking bouts in town ; everybody censured him strictly , but no one ever declined his invitation to those drinking bouts . 
Thus he lived for weeks . 
And unexpectedly he used to come home , not yet altogether freed from the odour of the kabaks , but already crestfallen and quiet . 
With humbly downcast eyes , in which shame was burning now , he silently listened to his wife 's reproaches , and , humble and meek as a lamb , went away to his room and locked himself in . 
For many hours in succession he knelt before the cross , lowering his head on his breast ; his hands hung helplessly , his back was bent , and he was silent , as though he dared not pray . 
His wife used to come up to the door on tiptoe and listen . 
Deep sighs were heard from behind the door -- like the breathing of a tired and sickly horse . 
`` God ! 
You see , '' whispered Ignat in a muffled voice , firmly pressing the palms of his hands to his broad breast . 
During the days of repentance he drank nothing but water and ate only rye bread . 
In the morning his wife placed at the door of his room a big bottle of water , about a pound and a half of bread , and salt . 
He opened the door , took in these victuals and locked himself in again . 
During this time he was not disturbed in any way ; everybody tried to avoid him . 
A few days later he again appeared on the exchange , jested , laughed , made contracts to furnish corn as sharp-sighted as a bird of prey , a rare expert at anything concerning his affairs . 
But in all the moods of Ignat 's life there was one passionate desire that never left him -- the desire to have a son ; and the older he grew the greater was this desire . 
Very often such conversation as this took place between him and his wife . 
In the morning , at her tea , or at noon during dinner hour he gloomily glared at his wife , a stout , well-fed woman , with a red face and sleepy eyes , and asked her : `` Well , do n't you feel anything ? '' 
She knew what he meant , but she invariably replied : `` How can I help feeling ? 
Your fists are like dumb-bells . '' 
`` You know what I 'm talking about , you fool . '' 
`` Can one become pregnant from such blows ? '' 
`` It 's not on account of the blows that you do n't bear any children ; it 's because you eat too much . 
You fill your stomach with all sorts of food -- and there 's no room for the child to engender . '' 
`` As if I did n't bear you any children ? '' 
`` Those were girls , '' said Ignat , reproachfully . 
`` I want a son ! 
Do you understand ? 
A son , an heir ! 
To whom shall I give my capital after my death ? 
Who shall pray for my sins ? 
Shall I give it to a cloister ? 
I have given them enough ! 
Or shall I leave it to you ? 
What a fine pilgrim you are ! 
Even in church you think only of fish pies . 
If I die , you 'll marry again , and my money will be turned over to some fool . 
Do you think this is what I am working for ? '' 
And he was seized with sardonic anguish , for he felt that his life was aimless if he should have no son to follow him . 
During the nine years of their married life his wife had borne him four daughters , all of whom had passed away . 
While Ignat had awaited their birth tremblingly , he mourned their death but little -- at any rate they were unnecessary to him . 
He began to beat his wife during the second year of their married life ; at first he did it while being intoxicated and without animosity , but just according to the proverb : `` Love your wife like your soul and shake her like a pear-tree ; '' but after each confinement , deceived in his expectation , his hatred for his wife grew stronger , and he began to beat her with pleasure , in revenge for not bearing him a son . 
Once while on business in the province of Samarsk , he received a telegram from relatives at home , informing him of his wife 's death . 
He made the sign of the cross , thought awhile and wrote to his friend Mayakin : `` Bury her in my absence ; look after my property . '' 
Then he went to the church to serve the mass for the dead , and , having prayed for the repose of the late Aquilina 's soul , he began to think that it was necessary for him to marry as soon as possible . 
He was then forty-three years old , tall , broad-shouldered , with a heavy bass voice , like an arch-deacon ; his large eyes looked bold and wise from under his dark eyebrows ; in his sunburnt face , overgrown with a thick , black beard , and in all his mighty figure there was much truly Russian , crude and healthy beauty ; in his easy motions as well as in his slow , proud walk , a consciousness of power was evident -- a firm confidence in himself . 
He was liked by women and did not avoid them . 
Ere six months had passed after the death of his wife , he courted the daughter of an Ural Cossack . 
The father of the bride , notwithstanding that Ignat was known even in Ural as a `` pranky '' man , gave him his daughter in marriage , and toward autumn Ignat Gordyeeff came home with a young Cossack-wife . 
Her name was Natalya . 
Tall , well-built , with large blue eyes and with a long chestnut braid , she was a worthy match for the handsome Ignat . 
He was happy and proud of his wife and loved her with the passionate love of a healthy man , but he soon began to contemplate her thoughtfully , with a vigilant eye . 
Seldom did a smile cross the oval , demure face of his wife -- she was always thinking of something foreign to life , and in her calm blue eyes something dark and misanthropic was flashing at times . 
Whenever she was free from household duties she seated herself in the most spacious room by the window , and sat there silently for two or three hours . 
Her face was turned toward the street , but the look of her eyes was so indifferent to everything that lived and moved there beyond the window , and at the same time it was so fixedly deep , as though she were looking into her very soul . 
And her walk , too , was queer . 
Natalya moved about the spacious room slowly and carefully , as if something invisible restrained the freedom of her movements . 
Their house was filled with heavy and coarsely boastful luxury ; everything there was resplendent , screaming of the proprietor 's wealth , but the Cossack-wife walked past the costly furniture and the silverware in a shy and somewhat frightened manner , as though fearing lest they might seize and choke her . 
Evidently , the noisy life of the big commercial town did not interest this silent woman , and whenever she went out driving with her husband , her eyes were fixed on the back of the driver . 
When her husband took her visiting she went and behaved there just as queerly as at home ; when guests came to her house , she zealously served them refreshments , taking no interest whatever in what was said , and showing preference toward none . 
Only Mayakin , a witty , droll man , at times called forth on her face a smile , as vague as a shadow . 
He used to say of her : `` It 's a tree -- not a woman ! 
But life is like an inextinguishable wood-pile , and every one of us blazes up sometimes . 
She , too , will take fire ; wait , give her time . 
Then we shall see how she will bloom . '' 
`` Eh ! '' 
Ignat used to say to her jestingly . 
`` What are you thinking about ? 
Are you homesick ? 
Brighten up a bit ! '' 
She would remain silent , calmly looking at him . 
`` You go entirely too often to the church . 
You should wait . 
You have plenty of time to pray for your sins . 
Commit the sins first . 
You know , if you do n't sin you do n't repent ; if you do n't repent , you do n't work out your salvation . 
You better sin while you are young . 
Shall we go out for a drive ? '' 
`` I do n't feel like going out . '' 
He used to sit down beside her and embrace her . 
She was cold , returning his caresses but sparingly . 
Looking straight into her eyes , he used to say : `` Natalya ! 
Tell me -- why are you so sad ? 
Do you feel lonesome here with me ? '' 
`` No , '' she replied shortly . 
`` What then is it ? 
Are you longing for your people ? '' 
`` No , it 's nothing . '' 
`` What are you thinking about ? '' 
`` I am not thinking . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` Oh , nothing ! '' 
Once he managed to get from her a more complete answer : `` There is something confused in my heart . 
And also in my eyes . 
And it always seems to me that all this is not real . '' 
She waved her hand around her , pointing at the walls , the furniture and everything . 
Ignat did not reflect on her words , and , laughing , said to her : `` That 's to no purpose ! 
Everything here is genuine . 
All these are costly , solid things . 
If you do n't want these , I 'll burn them , I 'll sell them , I 'll give them away -- and I 'll get new ones ! 
Do you want me to ? '' 
`` What for ? '' 
said she calmly . 
He wondered , at last , how one so young and healthy could live as though she were sleeping all the time , caring for nothing , going nowhere , except to the church , and shunning everybody . 
And he used to console her : `` Just wait . 
You 'll bear a son , and then an altogether different life will commence . 
You are so sad because you have so little anxiety , and he will give you trouble . 
You 'll bear me a son , will you not ? 
`` If it pleases God , '' she answered , lowering her head . 
Then her mood began to irritate him . 
`` Well , why do you wear such a long face ? 
You walk as though on glass . 
You look as if you had ruined somebody 's soul ! 
Eh ! 
You are such a succulent woman , and yet you have no taste for anything . 
Fool ! '' 
Coming home intoxicated one day , he began to ply her with caresses , while she turned away from him . 
Then he grew angry , and exclaimed : `` Natalya ! 
Do n't play the fool , look out ! '' 
She turned her face to him and asked calmly : `` What then ? '' 
Ignat became enraged at these words and at her fearless look . 
`` What ? '' 
he roared , coming up close to her . 
`` Do you wish to kill me ? '' 
asked she , not moving from her place , nor winking an eye . 
Ignat was accustomed to seeing people tremble before his wrath , and it was strange and offensive to him to see her calm . 
`` There , '' he cried , lifting his hand to strike her . 
Slowly , but in time , she eluded the blow ; then she seized his hand , pushed it away from her , and said in the same tone : `` Do n't you dare to touch me . 
I will not allow you to come near me ! '' 
Her eyes became smaller and their sharp , metallic glitter sobered Ignat . 
He understood by her face that she , too , was a strong beast , and if she chose to she would n't admit him to her , even though she were to lose her life . 
`` Oh , '' he growled , and went away . 
But having retreated once , he would not do it again : he could not bear that a woman , and his wife at that , should not bow before him -- this would have degraded him . 
He then began to realise that henceforth his wife would never yield to him in any matter , and that an obstinate strife for predominance must start between them . 
`` Very well ! 
We 'll see who will conquer , '' he thought the next day , watching his wife with stern curiosity ; and in his soul a strong desire was already raging to start the strife , that he might enjoy his victory the sooner . 
But about four days later , Natalya Fominichna announced to her husband that she was pregnant . 
Ignat trembled for joy , embraced her firmly , and said in a dull voice : `` You 're a fine fellow , Natalya ! 
Natasha , if it should be a son ! 
If you bear me a son I 'll enrich you ! 
I tell you plainly , I 'll be your slave ! 
By God ! 
I 'll lie down at your feet , and you may trample upon me , if you like ! '' 
`` This is not within our power ; it 's the will of the Lord , '' said she in a low voice . 
`` Yes , the Lord 's ! '' 
exclaimed Ignat with bitterness and drooped his head sadly . 
From that moment he began to look after his wife as though she were a little child . 
`` Why do you sit near the window ? 
Look out . 
You 'll catch cold in your side ; you may take sick , '' he used to say to her , both sternly and mildly . 
`` Why do you skip on the staircase ? 
You may hurt yourself . 
And you had better eat more , eat for two , that he may have enough . '' 
And the pregnancy made Natalya more morose and silent , as though she were looking still deeper into herself , absorbed in the throbbing of new life within her . 
But the smile on her lips became clearer , and in her eyes flashed at times something new , weak and timid , like the first ray of the dawn . 
When , at last , the time of confinement came , it was early on an autumn morning . 
At the first cry of pain she uttered , Ignat turned pale and started to say something , but only waved his hand and left the bedroom , where his wife was shrinking convulsively , and went down to the little room which had served his late mother as a chapel . 
He ordered vodka , seated himself by the table and began to drink sternly , listening to the alarm in the house and to the moans of his wife that came from above . 
In the corner of the room , the images of the ikons , indifferent and dark , stood out confusedly , dimly illumined by the glimmering light of the image lamp . 
There was a stamping and scraping of feet over his head , something heavy was moved from one side of the floor to the other , there was a clattering of dishes , people were bustling hurriedly , up and down the staircase . 
Everything was being done in haste , yet time was creeping slowly . 
Ignat could hear a muffled voice from above , `` As it seems , she can not be delivered that way . 
We had better send to the church to open the gates of the Lord . '' 
Vassushka , one of the hangers-on in his house , entered the room next to Ignat 's and began to pray in a loud whisper : `` God , our Lord , descend from the skies in Thy benevolence , born of the Holy Virgin . 
Thou dost divine the helplessness of human creatures . 
Forgive Thy servant . '' 
And suddenly drowning all other sounds , a superhuman , soul-rending cry rang out , and a continuous moan floated softly over the room and died out in the corners , which were filled now with the twilight . 
Ignat cast stern glances at the ikons , heaved a deep sigh and thought : `` Is it possible that it 's again a daughter ? '' 
At times he arose , stupidly stood in the middle of the room , and crossed himself in silence , bowing before the ikons ; then he went back to the table , drank the vodka , which had not made him dizzy during these hours , dozed off , and thus passed the whole night and following morning until noon . 
And then , at last , the midwife came down hastily , crying to him in a thin , joyous voice . 
`` I congratulate you with a son , Ignat Matveyich ! '' 
`` You lie ! '' 
said he in a dull voice . 
`` What 's the matter with you , batushka ! '' 
Heaving a sigh with all the strength of his massive chest , Ignat went down on his knees , and clasping his hands firmly to his breast , muttered in a trembling voice : `` Thank God ! 
Evidently Thou didst not want that my stem should be checked ! 
My sins before Thee shall not remain without repentance . 
I thank Thee , Oh Lord . 
Oh ! '' 
and , rising to his feet , he immediately began to command noisily : `` Eh ! 
Let someone go to St. Nicholas for a priest . 
Tell him that Ignat Matveyich asked him to come ! 
Let him come to make a prayer for the woman . '' 
The chambermaid appeared and said to him with alarm : `` Ignat Matveyich , Natalya Fominichna is calling you . 
She is feeling bad . '' 
`` Why bad ? 
It 'll pass ! '' 
he roared , his eyes flashing cheerfully . 
`` Tell her I 'll be there immediately ! 
Tell her she 's a fine fellow ! 
I 'll just get a present for her and I 'll come ! 
Hold on ! 
Prepare something to eat for the priest . 
Send somebody after Mayakin ! '' 
His enormous figure looked as though it had grown bigger , and intoxicated with joy , he stupidly tossed about the room ; he was smiling , rubbing his hands and casting fervent glances at the images ; he crossed himself swinging his hand wide . 
At last he went up to his wife . 
His eyes first of all caught a glimpse of the little red body , which the midwife was bathing in a tub . 
Noticing him , Ignat stood up on tiptoes , and , folding his hands behind his back , walked up to him , stepping carefully and comically putting forth his lips . 
The little one was whimpering and sprawling in the water , naked , impotent and pitiful . 
`` Look out there ! 
Handle him more carefully ! 
He has n't got any bones yet , '' said Ignat to the midwife , softly . 
She began to laugh , opening her toothless mouth , and cleverly throwing the child over from one hand to the other . 
`` You better go to your wife . '' 
He obediently moved toward the bed and asked on his way : `` Well , how is it , Natalya ? '' 
Then , on reaching her , he drew back the bed curtain , which had thrown a shadow over the bed . 
`` I 'll not survive this , '' said she in a low , hoarse voice . 
Ignat was silent , fixedly staring at his wife 's face , sunk in the white pillow , over which her dark locks were spread out like dead snakes . 
Yellow , lifeless , with black circles around her large , wide-open eyes -- her face was strange to him . 
And the glance of those terrible eyes , motionlessly fixed somewhere in the distance through the wall -- that , too , was unfamiliar to Ignat . 
His heart , compressed by a painful foreboding , slackened its joyous throbbing . 
`` That 's nothing . 
That 's nothing . 
It 's always like this , '' said he softly , bending over his wife to give her a kiss . 
But she moaned right into his face : `` I 'll not survive this . '' 
Her lips were gray and cold , and when he touched them with his own he understood that death was already within her . 
`` Oh , Lord ! '' 
he uttered , in an alarmed whisper , feeling that fright was choking his throat and suppressing his breath . 
`` Natasha ? 
What will become of him ? 
He must be nursed ! 
What is the matter with you ? '' 
He almost began to cry at his wife . 
The midwife was bustling about him ; shaking the crying child in the air . 
She spoke to him reassuringly , but he heard nothing -- he could not turn his eyes away from the frightful face of his wife . 
Her lips were moving , and he heard words spoken in a low voice , but could not understand them . 
Sitting on the edge of the bed , he spoke in a dull and timid voice : `` Just think of it ! 
He can not do without you ; he 's an infant ! 
Gather strength ! 
Drive this thought away from you ! 
Drive it away . '' 
He talked , yet he understood he was speaking useless words . 
Tears welled up within him , and in his breast there came a feeling heavy as stone and cold as ice . 
`` Forgive me . 
Goodbye ! 
Take care . 
Look out . 
Do n't drink , '' whispered Natalya , soundlessly . 
