When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he determined to make him his cook , and sent him to Moscow to be trained . 
He spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in appearance . 
He looked extraordinarily old for his age . 
His face had grown wrinkled , yellow , and strangely emasculate . 
In character he seemed almost exactly the same as before he went away . 
He was just as unsociable , and showed not the slightest inclination for any companionship . 
In Moscow , too , as we heard afterwards , he had always been silent . 
Moscow itself had little interest for him ; he saw very little there , and took scarcely any notice of anything . 
He went once to the theater , but returned silent and displeased with it . 
On the other hand , he came back to us from Moscow well dressed , in a clean coat and clean linen . 
He brushed his clothes most scrupulously twice a day invariably , and was very fond of cleaning his smart calf boots with a special English polish , so that they shone like mirrors . 
He turned out a first‐rate cook . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a salary , almost the whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes , pomade , perfumes , and such things . 
But he seemed to have as much contempt for the female sex as for men ; he was discreet , almost unapproachable , with them . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently . 
His fits were becoming more frequent , and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked , which did not suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all . 
`` Why are your fits getting worse ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , looking askance at his new cook . 
`` Would you like to get married ? 
Shall I find you a wife ? '' 
But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger , and made no reply . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture . 
The great thing was that he had absolute confidence in his honesty . 
It happened once , when Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk , that he dropped in the muddy courtyard three hundred‐rouble notes which he had only just received . 
He only missed them next day , and was just hastening to search his pockets when he saw the notes lying on the table . 
Where had they come from ? 
Smerdyakov had picked them up and brought them in the day before . 
`` Well , my lad , I 've never met any one like you , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said shortly , and gave him ten roubles . 
We may add that he not only believed in his honesty , but had , for some reason , a liking for him , although the young man looked as morosely at him as at every one and was always silent . 
He rarely spoke . 
If it had occurred to any one to wonder at the time what the young man was interested in , and what was in his mind , it would have been impossible to tell by looking at him . 
Yet he used sometimes to stop suddenly in the house , or even in the yard or street , and would stand still for ten minutes , lost in thought . 
A physiognomist studying his face would have said that there was no thought in it , no reflection , but only a sort of contemplation . 
There is a remarkable picture by the painter Kramskoy , called `` Contemplation . '' 
There is a forest in winter , and on a roadway through the forest , in absolute solitude , stands a peasant in a torn kaftan and bark shoes . 
He stands , as it were , lost in thought . 
Yet he is not thinking ; he is `` contemplating . '' 
If any one touched him he would start and look at one as though awakening and bewildered . 
It 's true he would come to himself immediately ; but if he were asked what he had been thinking about , he would remember nothing . 
Yet probably he has , hidden within himself , the impression which had dominated him during the period of contemplation . 
Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoards them imperceptibly , and even unconsciously . 
How and why , of course , he does not know either . 
He may suddenly , after hoarding impressions for many years , abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for his soul 's salvation , or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his native village , and perhaps do both . 
There are a good many `` contemplatives '' among the peasantry . 
Well , Smerdyakov was probably one of them , and he probably was greedily hoarding up his impressions , hardly knowing why . 
But Balaam 's ass had suddenly spoken . 
The subject was a strange one . 
Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases , and had heard from the shopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had appeared in the newspaper of that day . 
This soldier had been taken prisoner in some remote part of Asia , and was threatened with an immediate agonizing death if he did not renounce Christianity and follow Islam . 
He refused to deny his faith , and was tortured , flayed alive , and died , praising and glorifying Christ . 
Grigory had related the story at table . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch always liked , over the dessert after dinner , to laugh and talk , if only with Grigory . 
This afternoon he was in a particularly good‐humored and expansive mood . 
Sipping his brandy and listening to the story , he observed that they ought to make a saint of a soldier like that , and to take his skin to some monastery . 
`` That would make the people flock , and bring the money in . '' 
Grigory frowned , seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched , but , as usual , was beginning to scoff . 
At that moment Smerdyakov , who was standing by the door , smiled . 
Smerdyakov often waited at table towards the end of dinner , and since Ivan 's arrival in our town he had done so every day . 
`` What are you grinning at ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , catching the smile instantly , and knowing that it referred to Grigory . 
`` Well , my opinion is , '' Smerdyakov began suddenly and unexpectedly in a loud voice , `` that if that laudable soldier 's exploit was so very great there would have been , to my thinking , no sin in it if he had on such an emergency renounced , so to speak , the name of Christ and his own christening , to save by that same his life , for good deeds , by which , in the course of years to expiate his cowardice . '' 
`` How could it not be a sin ? 
You 're talking nonsense . 
For that you 'll go straight to hell and be roasted there like mutton , '' put in Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
It was at this point that Alyosha came in , and Fyodor Pavlovitch , as we have seen , was highly delighted at his appearance . 
`` We 're on your subject , your subject , '' he chuckled gleefully , making Alyosha sit down to listen . 
`` As for mutton , that 's not so , and there 'll be nothing there for this , and there should n't be either , if it 's according to justice , '' Smerdyakov maintained stoutly . 
`` How do you mean ` according to justice ' ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch cried still more gayly , nudging Alyosha with his knee . 
`` He 's a rascal , that 's what he is ! '' 
burst from Grigory . 
He looked Smerdyakov wrathfully in the face . 
`` As for being a rascal , wait a little , Grigory Vassilyevitch , '' answered Smerdyakov with perfect composure . 
`` You 'd better consider yourself that , once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race , and they demand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my holy christening , I am fully entitled to act by my own reason , since there would be no sin in it . '' 
`` But you 've said that before . 
Do n't waste words . 
Prove it , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` Soup‐maker ! '' 
muttered Grigory contemptuously . 
`` As for being a soup‐maker , wait a bit , too , and consider for yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , without abusing me . 
For as soon as I say to those enemies , ` No , I 'm not a Christian , and I curse my true God , ' then at once , by God 's high judgment , I become immediately and specially anathema accursed , and am cut off from the Holy Church , exactly as though I were a heathen , so that at that very instant , not only when I say it aloud , but when I think of saying it , before a quarter of a second has passed , I am cut off . 
Is that so or not , Grigory Vassilyevitch ? '' 
He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction , though he was really answering Fyodor Pavlovitch 's questions , and was well aware of it , and intentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions . 
`` Ivan , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly , `` stoop down for me to whisper . 
He 's got this all up for your benefit . 
He wants you to praise him . 
Praise him . '' 
Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father 's excited whisper . 
`` Stay , Smerdyakov , be quiet a minute , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once more . 
`` Ivan , your ear again . '' 
Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face . 
`` I love you as I do Alyosha . 
Do n't think I do n't love you . 
Some brandy ? '' 
`` Yes . 
-- But you 're rather drunk yourself , '' thought Ivan , looking steadily at his father . 
He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity . 
`` You 're anathema accursed , as it is , '' Grigory suddenly burst out , `` and how dare you argue , you rascal , after that , if -- '' `` Do n't scold him , Grigory , do n't scold him , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cut him short . 
`` You should wait , Grigory Vassilyevitch , if only a short time , and listen , for I have n't finished all I had to say . 
For at the very moment I become accursed , at that same highest moment , I become exactly like a heathen , and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail . 
Is n't that so ? '' 
`` Make haste and finish , my boy , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him , sipping from his wine‐glass with relish . 
`` And if I 've ceased to be a Christian , then I told no lie to the enemy when they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian , seeing I had already been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason of the thought alone , before I had time to utter a word to the enemy . 
And if I have already been discharged , in what manner and with what sort of justice can I be held responsible as a Christian in the other world for having denied Christ , when , through the very thought alone , before denying Him I had been relieved from my christening ? 
If I 'm no longer a Christian , then I ca n't renounce Christ , for I 've nothing then to renounce . 
Who will hold an unclean Tatar responsible , Grigory Vassilyevitch , even in heaven , for not having been born a Christian ? 
And who would punish him for that , considering that you ca n't take two skins off one ox ? 
For God Almighty Himself , even if He did make the Tatar responsible , when he dies would give him the smallest possible punishment , I imagine -LRB- since he must be punished -RRB- , judging that he is not to blame if he has come into the world an unclean heathen , from heathen parents . 
The Lord God ca n't surely take a Tatar and say he was a Christian ? 
That would mean that the Almighty would tell a real untruth . 
And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie , even in one word ? '' 
Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator , his eyes nearly starting out of his head . 
Though he did not clearly understand what was said , he had caught something in this rigmarole , and stood , looking like a man who has just hit his head against a wall . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch emptied his glass and went off into his shrill laugh . 
`` Alyosha ! 
Alyosha ! 
What do you say to that ! 
Ah , you casuist ! 
He must have been with the Jesuits , somewhere , Ivan . 
Oh , you stinking Jesuit , who taught you ? 
But you 're talking nonsense , you casuist , nonsense , nonsense , nonsense . 
Do n't cry , Grigory , we 'll reduce him to smoke and ashes in a moment . 
Tell me this , O ass ; you may be right before your enemies , but you have renounced your faith all the same in your own heart , and you say yourself that in that very hour you became anathema accursed . 
And if once you 're anathema they wo n't pat you on the head for it in hell . 
What do you say to that , my fine Jesuit ? '' 
`` There is no doubt that I have renounced it in my own heart , but there was no special sin in that . 
Or if there was sin , it was the most ordinary . '' 
`` How 's that the most ordinary ? '' 
`` You lie , accursed one ! '' 
hissed Grigory . 
`` Consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , '' Smerdyakov went on , staid and unruffled , conscious of his triumph , but , as it were , generous to the vanquished foe . 
`` Consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch ; it is said in the Scripture that if you have faith , even as a mustard seed , and bid a mountain move into the sea , it will move without the least delay at your bidding . 
Well , Grigory Vassilyevitch , if I 'm without faith and you have so great a faith that you are continually swearing at me , you try yourself telling this mountain , not to move into the sea for that 's a long way off , but even to our stinking little river which runs at the bottom of the garden . 
You 'll see for yourself that it wo n't budge , but will remain just where it is however much you shout at it , and that shows , Grigory Vassilyevitch , that you have n't faith in the proper manner , and only abuse others about it . 
Again , taking into consideration that no one in our day , not only you , but actually no one , from the highest person to the lowest peasant , can shove mountains into the sea -- except perhaps some one man in the world , or , at most , two , and they most likely are saving their souls in secret somewhere in the Egyptian desert , so you would n't find them -- if so it be , if all the rest have no faith , will God curse all the rest ? 
that is , the population of the whole earth , except about two hermits in the desert , and in His well‐known mercy will He not forgive one of them ? 
And so I 'm persuaded that though I may once have doubted I shall be forgiven if I shed tears of repentance . '' 
`` Stay ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , in a transport of delight . 
`` So you do suppose there are two who can move mountains ? 
Ivan , make a note of it , write it down . 
There you have the Russian all over ! '' 
`` You 're quite right in saying it 's characteristic of the people 's faith , '' Ivan assented , with an approving smile . 
`` You agree . 
Then it must be so , if you agree . 
It 's true , is n't it , Alyosha ? 
That 's the Russian faith all over , is n't it ? '' 
`` No , Smerdyakov has not the Russian faith at all , '' said Alyosha firmly and gravely . 
`` I 'm not talking about his faith . 
I mean those two in the desert , only that idea . 
Surely that 's Russian , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes , that 's purely Russian , '' said Alyosha smiling . 
`` Your words are worth a gold piece , O ass , and I 'll give it to you to‐day . 
But as to the rest you talk nonsense , nonsense , nonsense . 
Let me tell you , stupid , that we here are all of little faith , only from carelessness , because we have n't time ; things are too much for us , and , in the second place , the Lord God has given us so little time , only twenty‐four hours in the day , so that one has n't even time to get sleep enough , much less to repent of one 's sins . 
While you have denied your faith to your enemies when you 'd nothing else to think about but to show your faith ! 
So I consider , brother , that it constitutes a sin . '' 
`` Constitute a sin it may , but consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , that it only extenuates it , if it does constitute . 
If I had believed then in very truth , as I ought to have believed , then it really would have been sinful if I had not faced tortures for my faith , and had gone over to the pagan Mohammedan faith . 
But , of course , it would n't have come to torture then , because I should only have had to say at that instant to the mountain , ` Move and crush the tormentor , ' and it would have moved and at the very instant have crushed him like a black‐beetle , and I should have walked away as though nothing had happened , praising and glorifying God . 
But , suppose at that very moment I had tried all that , and cried to that mountain , ` Crush these tormentors , ' and it had n't crushed them , how could I have helped doubting , pray , at such a time , and at such a dread hour of mortal terror ? 
And apart from that , I should know already that I could not attain to the fullness of the Kingdom of Heaven -LRB- for since the mountain had not moved at my word , they could not think very much of my faith up aloft , and there could be no very great reward awaiting me in the world to come -RRB- . 
So why should I let them flay the skin off me as well , and to no good purpose ? 
For , even though they had flayed my skin half off my back , even then the mountain would not have moved at my word or at my cry . 
And at such a moment not only doubt might come over one but one might lose one 's reason from fear , so that one would not be able to think at all . 
And , therefore , how should I be particularly to blame if not seeing my advantage or reward there or here , I should , at least , save my skin . 
And so trusting fully in the grace of the Lord I should cherish the hope that I might be altogether forgiven . '' 
The controversy was over . 
But , strange to say , Fyodor Pavlovitch , who had been so gay , suddenly began frowning . 
He frowned and gulped brandy , and it was already a glass too much . 
`` Get along with you , Jesuits ! '' 
he cried to the servants . 
`` Go away , Smerdyakov . 
I 'll send you the gold piece I promised you to‐day , but be off ! 
Do n't cry , Grigory . 
Go to Marfa . 
She 'll comfort you and put you to bed . 
The rascals wo n't let us sit in peace after dinner , '' he snapped peevishly , as the servants promptly withdrew at his word . 
`` Smerdyakov always pokes himself in now , after dinner . 
It 's you he 's so interested in . 
What have you done to fascinate him ? '' 
he added to Ivan . 
`` Nothing whatever , '' answered Ivan . 
`` He 's pleased to have a high opinion of me ; he 's a lackey and a mean soul . 
Raw material for revolution , however , when the time comes . '' 
`` For revolution ? '' 
`` There will be others and better ones . 
But there will be some like him as well . 
His kind will come first , and better ones after . '' 
`` And when will the time come ? '' 
`` The rocket will go off and fizzle out , perhaps . 
The peasants are not very fond of listening to these soup‐makers , so far . '' 
`` Ah , brother , but a Balaam 's ass like that thinks and thinks , and the devil knows where he gets to . '' 
`` He 's storing up ideas , '' said Ivan , smiling . 
`` You see , I know he ca n't bear me , nor any one else , even you , though you fancy that he has a high opinion of you . 
Worse still with Alyosha , he despises Alyosha . 
But he does n't steal , that 's one thing , and he 's not a gossip , he holds his tongue , and does n't wash our dirty linen in public . 
He makes capital fish pasties too . 
But , damn him , is he worth talking about so much ? '' 
`` Of course he is n't . '' 
`` And as for the ideas he may be hatching , the Russian peasant , generally speaking , needs thrashing . 
That I 've always maintained . 
Our peasants are swindlers , and do n't deserve to be pitied , and it 's a good thing they 're still flogged sometimes . 
Russia is rich in birches . 
If they destroyed the forests , it would be the ruin of Russia . 
I stand up for the clever people . 
We 've left off thrashing the peasants , we 've grown so clever , but they go on thrashing themselves . 
And a good thing too . 
` For with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again , ' or how does it go ? 
Anyhow , it will be measured . 
But Russia 's all swinishness . 
My dear , if you only knew how I hate Russia ... . 
That is , not Russia , but all this vice ! 
But maybe I mean Russia . 
Tout cela c’est de la cochonnerie ... . 
Do you know what I like ? 
I like wit . '' 
`` You 've had another glass . 
That 's enough . '' 
`` Wait a bit . 
I 'll have one more , and then another , and then I 'll stop . 
No , stay , you interrupted me . 
At Mokroe I was talking to an old man , and he told me : ` There 's nothing we like so much as sentencing girls to be thrashed , and we always give the lads the job of thrashing them . 
And the girl he has thrashed to‐day , the young man will ask in marriage to‐morrow . 
So it quite suits the girls , too , ' he said . 
There 's a set of de Sades for you ! 
But it 's clever , anyway . 
Shall we go over and have a look at it , eh ? 
Alyosha , are you blushing ? 
Do n't be bashful , child . 
I 'm sorry I did n't stay to dinner at the Superior 's and tell the monks about the girls at Mokroe . 
Alyosha , do n't be angry that I offended your Superior this morning . 
I lost my temper . 
If there is a God , if He exists , then , of course , I 'm to blame , and I shall have to answer for it . 
But if there is n't a God at all , what do they deserve , your fathers ? 
It 's not enough to cut their heads off , for they keep back progress . 
Would you believe it , Ivan , that that lacerates my sentiments ? 
No , you do n't believe it as I see from your eyes . 
You believe what people say , that I 'm nothing but a buffoon . 
Alyosha , do you believe that I 'm nothing but a buffoon ? '' 
`` No , I do n't believe it . '' 
`` And I believe you do n't , and that you speak the truth . 
You look sincere and you speak sincerely . 
But not Ivan . 
Ivan 's supercilious ... . 
I 'd make an end of your monks , though , all the same . 
I 'd take all that mystic stuff and suppress it , once for all , all over Russia , so as to bring all the fools to reason . 
And the gold and the silver that would flow into the mint ! '' 
`` But why suppress it ? '' 
asked Ivan . 
`` That Truth may prevail . 
That 's why . '' 
`` Well , if Truth were to prevail , you know , you 'd be the first to be robbed and suppressed . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I dare say you 're right . 
Ah , I 'm an ass ! '' 
burst out Fyodor Pavlovitch , striking himself lightly on the forehead . 
`` Well , your monastery may stand then , Alyosha , if that 's how it is . 
And we clever people will sit snug and enjoy our brandy . 
You know , Ivan , it must have been so ordained by the Almighty Himself . 
Ivan , speak , is there a God or not ? 
Stay , speak the truth , speak seriously . 
Why are you laughing again ? '' 
`` I 'm laughing that you should have made a clever remark just now about Smerdyakov 's belief in the existence of two saints who could move mountains . '' 
`` Why , am I like him now , then ? '' 
`` Very much . '' 
`` Well , that shows I 'm a Russian , too , and I have a Russian characteristic . 
And you may be caught in the same way , though you are a philosopher . 
Shall I catch you ? 
What do you bet that I 'll catch you to‐morrow . 
Speak , all the same , is there a God , or not ? 
Only , be serious . 
I want you to be serious now . '' 
`` No , there is no God . '' 
`` Alyosha , is there a God ? '' 
`` There is . '' 
`` Ivan , and is there immortality of some sort , just a little , just a tiny bit ? '' 
`` There is no immortality either . '' 
`` None at all ? '' 
`` None at all . '' 
`` There 's absolute nothingness then . 
Perhaps there is just something ? 
Anything is better than nothing ! '' 
`` Absolute nothingness . '' 
`` Alyosha , is there immortality ? '' 
`` There is . '' 
`` God and immortality ? '' 
`` God and immortality . 
In God is immortality . '' 
`` H 'm ! 
It 's more likely Ivan 's right . 
Good Lord ! 
to think what faith , what force of all kinds , man has lavished for nothing , on that dream , and for how many thousand years . 
Who is it laughing at man ? 
Ivan ! 
For the last time , once for all , is there a God or not ? 
I ask for the last time ! '' 
`` And for the last time there is not . '' 
`` Who is laughing at mankind , Ivan ? '' 
`` It must be the devil , '' said Ivan , smiling . 
`` And the devil ? 
Does he exist ? '' 
`` No , there 's no devil either . '' 
`` It 's a pity . 
Damn it all , what would n't I do to the man who first invented God ! 
Hanging on a bitter aspen tree would be too good for him . '' 
`` There would have been no civilization if they had n't invented God . '' 
`` Would n't there have been ? 
Without God ? '' 
`` No . 
And there would have been no brandy either . 
But I must take your brandy away from you , anyway . '' 
`` Stop , stop , stop , dear boy , one more little glass . 
I 've hurt Alyosha 's feelings . 
You 're not angry with me , Alyosha ? 
My dear little Alexey ! '' 
`` No , I am not angry . 
I know your thoughts . 
Your heart is better than your head . '' 
`` My heart better than my head , is it ? 
Oh , Lord ! 
And that from you . 
Ivan , do you love Alyosha ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You must love him '' -LRB- Fyodor Pavlovitch was by this time very drunk -RRB- . 
`` Listen , Alyosha , I was rude to your elder this morning . 
But I was excited . 
But there 's wit in that elder , do n't you think , Ivan ? '' 
`` Very likely . '' 
`` There is , there is . 
Il y a du Piron là‐dedans . 
He 's a Jesuit , a Russian one , that is . 
As he 's an honorable person there 's a hidden indignation boiling within him at having to pretend and affect holiness . '' 
`` But , of course , he believes in God . '' 
`` Not a bit of it . 
Did n't you know ? 
Why , he tells every one so , himself . 
That is , not every one , but all the clever people who come to him . 
He said straight out to Governor Schultz not long ago : ` Credo , but I do n't know in what . ' '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` He really did . 
But I respect him . 
There 's something of Mephistopheles about him , or rather of ` The hero of our time ' ... Arbenin , or what 's his name ? 
... You see , he 's a sensualist . 
He 's such a sensualist that I should be afraid for my daughter or my wife if she went to confess to him . 
You know , when he begins telling stories ... . 
The year before last he invited us to tea , tea with liqueur -LRB- the ladies send him liqueur -RRB- , and began telling us about old times till we nearly split our sides ... . 
Especially how he once cured a paralyzed woman . 
` If my legs were not bad I know a dance I could dance you , ' he said . 
What do you say to that ? 
` I 've plenty of tricks in my time , ' said he . 
He did Dernidov , the merchant , out of sixty thousand . '' 
`` What , he stole it ? '' 
`` He brought him the money as a man he could trust , saying , ` Take care of it for me , friend , there 'll be a police search at my place to‐morrow . ' 
And he kept it . 
` You have given it to the Church , ' he declared . 
I said to him : ` You 're a scoundrel , ' I said . 
` No , ' said he , ` I 'm not a scoundrel , but I 'm broad‐minded . ' 
But that was n't he , that was some one else . 
I 've muddled him with some one else ... without noticing it . 
Come , another glass and that 's enough . 
Take away the bottle , Ivan . 
I 've been telling lies . 
Why did n't you stop me , Ivan , and tell me I was lying ? '' 
`` I knew you 'd stop of yourself . '' 
`` That 's a lie . 
You did it from spite , from simple spite against me . 
You despise me . 
You have come to me and despised me in my own house . '' 
`` Well , I 'm going away . 
You 've had too much brandy . '' 
`` I 've begged you for Christ 's sake to go to Tchermashnya for a day or two , and you do n't go . '' 
`` I 'll go to‐morrow if you 're so set upon it . '' 
`` You wo n't go . 
You want to keep an eye on me . 
That 's what you want , spiteful fellow . 
That 's why you wo n't go . '' 
The old man persisted . 
He had reached that state of drunkenness when the drunkard who has till then been inoffensive tries to pick a quarrel and to assert himself . 
`` Why are you looking at me ? 
Why do you look like that ? 
Your eyes look at me and say , ` You ugly drunkard ! ' 
Your eyes are mistrustful . 
They 're contemptuous ... . 
You 've come here with some design . 
Alyosha , here , looks at me and his eyes shine . 
Alyosha does n't despise me . 
Alexey , you must n't love Ivan . '' 
`` Do n't be ill‐tempered with my brother . 
Leave off attacking him , '' Alyosha said emphatically . 
`` Oh , all right . 
Ugh , my head aches . 
Take away the brandy , Ivan . 
It 's the third time I 've told you . '' 
He mused , and suddenly a slow , cunning grin spread over his face . 
`` Do n't be angry with a feeble old man , Ivan . 
I know you do n't love me , but do n't be angry all the same . 
You 've nothing to love me for . 
You go to Tchermashnya . 
I 'll come to you myself and bring you a present . 
