`` Why are those two whispering together ? 
Look at them -- they must be pagans ... . 
Now then old man , hurry up , bring wood ! '' 
cried out a ragged rascal in a triumphant tone . 
Iamblicus whispered into Julian 's ear -- `` Let us despise it all , and in contempt resign ourselves . 
Human stupidity can never hurt the gods ! '' 
So saying the `` Divine '' Iamblicus took an enormous faggot from the hands of the Christian and cast it into the fire . 
At first Julian could scarcely believe his eyes . 
The now-smiling spies stared at him , with a curious fixity . 
Then weakness , and his own habitual hypocrisy for his own sake and for the sake of others , won the day . 
He went to the heap of wood , chose the largest log , and , after Iamblicus , threw it into the blaze in which the mutilated body of the goddess was already melting . 
He clearly saw drops of silver rolling on her face as in a death-sweat , and the lips still keeping their invincible smile . 
`` Look at those fellows dressed in black , Julian ! 
They are shadows of night-fall , shadows of death . 
Soon there will not be a single ancient white robe left , nor a single sun-steeped piece of marble ... . 
All is over ! '' 
So spoke the young sophist , Antoninus , son of the prophetess Sospitra and of Ædesius , the Neo-Platonist . 
He was standing with Julian on the terrace of the temple of Pergamos , in bright sunshine , under a sky of cloudless blue . 
Along the foot of the balustrade was carven the revolt of the Titans . 
The gods were triumphing ; and the hoofs of the winged horses crushing the serpent bodies of the antique giants . 
Antoninus pointed to the carving -- `` Ah ! 
Julian , the Olympians conquered the Titans , but now the Olympians in their turn will be beaten by barbaric gods . 
These temples will become tombs ... '' Antoninus was a handsome youth , straight-limbed as one of the old statues , but his health had been broken for years by an incurable malady , and his face had become yellow , lean , and melancholy . 
`` I pray the gods , '' went on Antoninus , `` I entreat the gods not to suffer me to see that night -- that I may die before it comes . 
Rhetoricians , sophists , poets , sages , artists , none of us are wanted any more . 
We are born in too late a day ... . 
All is over for us ! '' 
`` And suppose you are mistaken ? '' 
hazarded Julian . 
`` No , all 's over ! 
We are not as our forefathers ! 
We are sick , strength fails us . '' 
Julian 's face seemed as worn and haggard as that of Antoninus . 
The projecting lower lip gave him an expression of taciturn arrogance . 
The thick eyebrows were knitted in bitter obstinacy ; precocious wrinkles already furrowed his cheeks . 
The long nose had grown longer than ever ; and his always strange eyes were now burning with a dry , feverish , disagreeable fire . 
He still wore the monkish habit . 
During the day he still attended church , as hitherto ; worshipped relics ; read the gospels in public , and was preparing to take orders . 
Sometimes all this hypocrisy seemed to him worse than useless . 
He foresaw that Gallus would not escape a premature death , and knew that he himself might expect it at any moment . 
But his nights Julian was wont to pass in the great library of Pergamos , where he was studying the works of the great foe of Christianity , Libanius . 
He attended the lectures of the Greek sophists , Ædesius of Pergamos , Chrisantius of Sardinia , Priscius of Thesephros , Eusebius of Minos , Proeres , and Nymphidian . 
These taught him much about what he had already heard from Iamblicus , of the triad of the Neo-Platonists , and of the `` divine ecstasy . '' 
He said to himself -- `` All that is not what I am seeking ; they are hiding something from me ! '' 
Priscius , imitating Pythagoras , had passed five years in silence , keeping to a vegetarian diet , and using neither raiment of wool nor sandal of leather . 
He wore a cloak of pure white linen and sandals of palm leaves stitched together . 
`` In our age , '' he used to say , `` the thing of moment is to be able to hold one 's tongue , and to meditate on dying worthily . '' 
Thus Priscius , despising all things , awaited what he called the catastrophe , that is to say , the complete victory of Christianity over the Hellenists . 
The wily and prudent Chrisantius , when the subject of the gods was touched on , would cast his eyes to heaven , avowing that he dared not talk about them , knowing nothing , and having forgotten what he had learnt on the subject . 
And he advised others to follow his own example . 
As for magic , miracles , and phantasms , he would hear nothing about them , declaring that they were criminal deceptions , forbidden by the Imperial laws . 
Julian had no appetite , slept ill ; his blood was boiling with passion and impatience . 
Every morning on awaking he would wonder -- `` Is it to be to-day ? '' 
He would worry the poor sages with ceaseless questions concerning mysteries and miracles . 
Some of them he shocked , especially Chrisantius , who was in the habit of acquiescence in all the opinions which seemed to him most foolish . 
On one occasion Ædesius , a timid and learned old man , pitying Julian , said to him -- `` My boy , I want to die quietly ; you are young yet . 
Leave me alone . 
Address yourself to my disciples ; they will reveal to you everything I have taught . 
Yes , there are many things about which we are afraid to speak , and when you shall have been initiated into the greater mysteries , you will perhaps be ashamed at having been born a mere mortal , and of having remained one up till now . '' 
Euthemus of Minda , a disciple of Ædesius , and a jealous and malicious fellow , declared to Julian : `` There are no more such things as miracles . 
Do n't expect any . 
Men have badgered the gods too long . 
Magic is a lie , and those who believe in it are idiots . 
But if you are still hungry for wisdom , and absolutely must have illusions , go to Maximus . 
He despises our dialectical philosophy , and yet himself ... . 
But I do n't like speaking ill of my friends . 
Just hear , however , what happened lately in a temple of Hecate whither Maximus had conducted us to prove his art . 
When we had gone in and adored the goddess , he said to us : ` Sit down , and you shall see a miracle . ' 
We sat down . 
He threw on the altar a phimian-seed , muttering something , -- a hymn I suppose , -- and then we saw the statue of Hecate smile at us ! 
Maximus said to us : ` Fear nothing when you shall see the two torches held by the goddess kindle of themselves . 
Behold ! ' 
Before he had finished the sentence the lamps were alight , self-kindled ! '' 
`` The miracle , in fact , was accomplished ! '' 
cried Julian . 
`` Yes ; our emotion was so great that we prostrated ourselves . 
But when I came out of the temple I asked myself , ` Is what Maximus does worthy of true philosophy ? ' 
Read Pythagoras , Plato -- there shall you find wisdom . 
By divine dialectic to lift the heart of man -- is not that finer than any miracle ? '' 
But Julian was listening no more ; his eyes sparkled as he gazed at the surly face of Euthemus , and he murmured as he went forth from the school -- `` Keep your books and your dialectics ! 
I seek life and faith ! 
Can they exist without miracles ? 
I thank thee , Euthemus , thou hast pointed me to the man I have sought for long . '' 
With a bitter smile the sophist answered -- `` Nephew of Constantine , you have not improved upon your ancestors . 
Miracles were not necessary to the faith of Socrates ! '' 
At the stroke of midnight , in the vestibule leading to the great hall of the mysteries , Julian flung off his novice 's robe . 
The sacrificial mystagogues , initiators into the pagan ceremonial , then clothed him anew in their own priestly tunic , woven of threads of papyrus . 
A palm-branch was put into his hand , and his feet were left bare . 
He was then led up a long low hall , the vaults of which were supported by a double row of bronze Corinthian columns . 
Each column , formed of two serpents entwined , bore two incense-burners on lofty and slender branching stands , whence rose thin tongues of flame . 
Dense vapour filled the hall . 
At its end glittered two winged golden bulls , propping a splendid throne , on which was seated , arrayed in a long black tunic powdered thick with emeralds and carbuncles , and in demeanour like a god , the greatest hierophant of all , Maximus of Ephesus . 
The slow reverberant voice of a temple slave announced the opening of the mysteries -- `` If any impious , or Christian , or Epicurean be present in this assembly , let him go forth ! '' 
Instructed in advance as to the necessary responses , Julian pronounced the words -- `` Let the Christians go forth ! '' 
The choir of temple slaves , hidden in obscurity , took up the burden -- `` To the doors ! 
To the doors ! 
Let the Christians go forth ! 
Let the impious go forth ! '' 
Then twenty-four lads , entirely naked , each holding a silver sistrum , like a crescent-moon , came forth from the shadow . 
In perfect unison they raised the vibrating instruments above their heads , and with one graceful gesture struck the resonant strings , which gave forth a long and plaintive note . 
Maximus made a sign . 
Someone tightly bandaged Julian 's eyes from behind and said to him earnestly -- `` Go forward ! 
Fear neither Water , Fire , Spirits ; nor Bodies , nor Life , nor Death . '' 
He felt himself dragged forward ; an iron door opened on creaking hinges . 
He was pushed through it ; a stifling atmosphere beat on his face while his feet groped down slippery and twisted steps . 
Feeling his way down this endless stair , amidst sepulchral silence , it seemed at last that he must be a great distance underground . 
He proceeded along a narrow passage -- so narrow that his hands , held stiffly to his sides , rubbed along the walls . 
Suddenly his bare feet struck moisture ; he heard water flowing ; a stream covered his ankles . 
He kept on , but at every step the water rose , reaching first his calves , then his knees , and finally his loins . 
His teeth began to chatter with cold . 
The flood rose breast high . 
He wondered -- `` Perhaps this is a trap ; it is some device of Maximus for killing me , to do the Emperor pleasure . '' 
But he held stoutly on , forging slowly through the water . 
Finally it seemed to lessen , till at last it completely ebbed away . 
A suffocating heat , as from the mouth of a furnace , gradually enveloped him , so that the ground scorched his feet . 
Julian thought he must be walking straight into an oven ; blood throbbed in his temples ; sometimes the heat was so intense that it licked his cheek like a flame . 
But the lad never wavered . 
In its turn the heat diminished . 
But sickening odours next choked his breath . 
Time after time he stumbled against round objects , and recognised bones and dead men 's skulls . 
Suddenly he felt someone walking by his side , gliding along noiselessly like a shadow ; an ice-cold hand seized his own . 
He uttered an involuntary cry . 
Two hands were gently pulling at his clothes , the fleshless bones piercing their withered skin . 
The grip of these hands became playful movements , repulsive caresses like those of debauched women . 
Julian felt a breath on his cheek tainted with fusty rottenness and moisture , and then became aware of a rapid murmur at his ear , like the rustle of leaves on a night in autumn -- `` It is I ! 
It is I ! 
-- I ! 
-- do you not know me again ? 
It is I ! 
-- I ! '' 
`` And who , who art thou ? '' 
stammered Julian . 
But immediately he recollected his promise of absolute silence . 
`` It is I ! 
Shall I strip the bandage from your eyes so that you may know me again , may meet me again ? '' 
And the bony fingers , with the same hideous eagerness , fluttered over his face as if seeking to drag off the bandage . 
A deadly chill penetrated Julian to the heart , and , through habit , he thrice crossed himself involuntarily , as in childhood at some bad dream . 
A clap of thunder ! 
The ground heaved under his feet ! 
He felt himself falling into the unknown ; and lost consciousness . 
When he regained his senses he was no longer blindfold but lay on cushions in a huge twilit grotto . 
A cloth , soaked in penetrating perfumes , was being held to his nostrils . 
Opposite Julian stood a lean man with a coppery skin ; it was the gymnosophist -- the naked sage -- assistant of Maximus . 
He was holding high above his head a motionless metallic disc . 
A voice said to Julian . 
`` Look ! '' 
Julian gazed at the dazzling circle . 
Its brilliancy was almost painful to the eyes . 
Looking at it fixedly and long , gradually all things melted and lost their sharper outline . 
A pleasant weakness breathed through his being . 
The luminous disc no longer shone in the void , but in his own mind ; his eyelids descended ; a sleepy smile of weariness played upon his submissive lips . 
He felt a hand stroking his head , and a voice asked -- `` Are you asleep ? '' 
`` Yes ... '' `` Look me in the eyes ! '' 
Julian obeyed with effort and perceived Maximus stooping over him . 
He was a man of about seventy years old , bearded to the girdle . 
Thick hair , with a yellow glitter in it , fell thick over his shoulders . 
Deep wrinkles , furrowed by thought and will , and not by suffering , marked cheek and brow . 
His smile was like the smile of women who are at once witty , mendacious , and enchanting . 
But it was the eyes of Maximus that gave Julian most pleasure . 
Under thick eyebrows they shone mocking , and tender , yet piercing to the quick . 
Maximus asked -- `` Do you wish to see the most famous of the Titans ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Watch then . '' 
The magician pointed to the depth of the cave where stood a tripod of Corinthian bronze , vomiting smoke . 
A tempestuous noise filled the cavern -- `` Hercules ! 
Hercules ! 
Deliver me ! '' 
The smoke vanished ; blue sky appeared . 
Julian lay stretched motionless and pale , watching through half-shut eyelids the rapid visions unfolded before him . 
It was as if someone commanded him to see them . 
He beheld clouds and snow-clad mountains , and heard the breaking of distant waves . 
Slowly he perceived an enormous body , chained hand and foot to crags . 
A kite was devouring the liver of the Titan , drops of black blood trickled down his side ; the great chains rattled , and the whole body shuddered with pain . 
`` Deliver me , Hercules ! '' 
And the Titan raised his shaggy head ; his eyes met those of the youth entranced -- `` Who art thou ? 
Whom dost thou summon ? '' 
asked Julian , speaking heavily in his dream . 
`` I call on thee ! '' 
`` I am but a mortal , and helpless . '' 
`` Thou art my brother ; set me free ! '' 
`` Who has chained thee up anew ? '' 
`` The humble , the gentle , -- who through cowardice forgive their enemies . 
Slaves ! 
slaves ! 
... O deliver me ! '' 
`` How can I deliver thee ? '' 
`` Be even as I am . '' 
The smoke of the tripod obscured the apparition . 
Julian woke for a moment and the great hierophant , the teacher of rites , asked -- `` Do you wish to see the ruined Archangel ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Behold him ! '' 
In the white smoke appeared faintly a head between two gigantic wings . 
The feathers of the wings swept out , drooping like branches of yew , and a bluish tint as of some lost sky trembled upon the melancholy plumes . 
Someone cried to Julian from afar off -- `` Julian ! 
Julian ! 
Deny the Galilean in my name ! '' 
Julian held his peace . 
Maximus muttered at his ear -- `` If you wish to see the great Angel you must make this renunciation . '' 
And Julian pronounced the words -- `` I deny Him ! '' 
Above the head of the apparition suddenly glittered the morning star -- the star of dawn -- and the Angel repeated -- `` Julian , deny the Galilean in my name ! '' 
A third time the Angel repeated , -- and his voice sounded exultant and close by : `` Renounce Him ! '' 
And Julian answered -- `` I renounce Him ! '' 
The Angel said -- `` Thou mayest approach . '' 
`` Who art thou ? '' 
`` I am Lucifer , I am Light , I am the East , I am the Morning Star ! '' 
`` How beautiful thou art ! '' 
`` Be thou as I am . '' 
`` What melancholy dwells in thine eyes ! '' 
`` I suffer for all living . 
Birth must cease , death must cease . 
Come to me ; I am the Shadow , I am Repose , I am Liberty . '' 
`` How art thou named among men ? '' 
`` Evil . '' 
`` Thou ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I turned in revolt . '' 
`` Against whom ? '' 
`` Against Him whose peer I am . 
He willed to be alone , but we are two , and equals . '' 
`` Make me in thine image ! '' 
`` Revolt also ! 
I will give thee the thews for rebellion . '' 
`` Teach me ! '' 
`` Violate the law , love thyself , curse Him , and be as I am ! '' 
The Angel disappeared ; the wind in circling gusts rekindled the flame on the tripod . 
The flame blew over the brim of the vessel and ran along the ground . 
The tripod itself was overset , and the flame went out . 
In the darkness came a rushing noise of numberless steps , with cries and groanings , as if an invisible army , fleeing before an enemy , were in passage through the cave . 
Julian , in terror , fell face downward to the earth , while the long black robe of the hierophant , stretched over him , struggled with the wind . 
`` Flee , flee ! '' 
groaned indistinct voices . 
`` The gates of Hell are opening ; it is He , He , the Conqueror ! '' 
The wind hissed in Julian 's ears ; legions upon legions seemed passing over him ; suddenly there fell a dead calm ; a heavenly breath filled the vast cavern and a voice murmured -- `` Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ? '' 
It seemed to Julian that he had heard that voice before , in some far time of childhood . 
Gently it came again -- `` Saul , Saul , why persecutest thou me ? '' 
And the sound faded away into the distance , so that there came at last but an imperceptible whisper : `` Why , why , persecutest thou me ? '' 
When Julian awoke and raised his prostrate face he saw one of the initiating priests lighting a lamp . 
He felt giddy , but remembered exactly everything that had taken place . 
His eyes were blindfolded and , strengthened with spiced wine , he was enabled to climb the staircase , his hand gripped this time by the strong hand of Maximus . 
He felt as if an invisible force was lifting him on wings . 
The teacher of rites said to the lad -- `` Now ask what you will ! '' 
`` Did you summon Him ? '' 
inquired Julian . 
`` No . 
But when one chord of the lyre vibrates , another chord responds . 
Opposite answers opposite . '' 
`` Why is there such potency in His words if His words are only lies ? '' 
`` His words are truth . '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
Then it is the Titan and the Angel who lied ? '' 
`` They also are the truth . '' 
`` Do you mean that there are two truths ? '' 
`` Two truths . '' 
`` Ah ! 
You are tempting me ! 
... '' `` Not I , but the wholeness of the truth . 
If you are afraid , be silent . '' 
`` I am afraid of nothing . 
Say on ; tell all ! 
Are the Galileans right ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Why then should I have renounced them ? '' 
`` There is , beside theirs , another truth . '' 
`` One higher ? '' 
`` No , equal . '' 
`` But in what is one to believe ? 
Where is the God whom I seek ? '' 
`` Both here and yonder . 
Serve Ahriman , -- serve Ormuzd , whichever pleases you ! 
But forget not that both are equal , -- the kingdom of Lucifer and the kingdom of God . '' 
`` Which way should I choose ? '' 
`` Choose one of the two roads , and halt no more ! '' 
`` But which ? '' 
`` If you believe in Him , take up the cross . 
Follow Him according to His command ; be humble , chaste . 
Be the lamb that was dumb between the hands of the shearers . 
Flee into the desert for salvation ; give Him body , soul , and reason ! 
Believe ! 
... that is one way . 
And the Galilean martyrs attain the same liberty that Prometheus and Lucifer have attained . '' 
`` That way I can not choose . '' 
`` Choose then the other path . 
Be puissant as your ancestors of old , the heroes -- proud , pitiless , and haughty . 
No compassion ! 
No love ! 
No pardon ! 
Arise and conquer all things ! 
Let your body become hard as marble out of which the demigods are hewn ! 
Take and give not ! 
Taste of the forbidden fruit and repent not ! 
Believe not , doubt not , and the world shall be thine ! 
Thou shalt be the Titan -- an angel revolted against God . '' 
`` But I can never forget that the words of the Galilean contain truth also . 
I can not admit two beliefs . '' 
`` Then thou shalt be like all common mortals and hadst better never been born ; but thou canst choose . 
Make the venture ! 
... Thou shalt be emperor ! '' 
`` I ? 
Emperor ? '' 
`` Thou shalt have between thy hands what Alexander never had . '' 
Julian felt that they were issuing from the bowels of the earth , felt the morning sea-breeze bathing him . 
The hierophant unknotted the bandage over his eyes , and lo ! 
they were standing on a high marble tower , the astronomical observatory of the great seer , built after the model of the ancient Chaldean towers , but upon a crag above the sea . 
Below stretched luxurious gardens , palaces , and cloisters , recalling the colonnades of Persepolis . 
In the distance the Artemision and Ephesus stood in clear relief against the mountains over which the sun was about to rise . 
Julian 's head almost gave way at the extent of the view ; he had to lean upon the arm of Maximus ; but then with a smile the youth closed his eyes , and the beams of the rising sun flushed his white vestments with rose-colour . 
The seer stretched out his arm . 
`` Behold ! 
all this is thine ! '' 
`` Can I sustain it , Master ? 
Assassination may strike me at any moment . 
I am weak and ill . '' 
`` The sun , the god Mithra , is crowning you with his purples -- the purple of the Roman Empire . 
All this is thine . 
Dare ! '' 
`` And what is it all to me , since truth unified does not exist , and since I can not find the God for whom I seek ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
if thou canst make one the truth of the Titan and the truth of the Galilean , thou wilt be greater than any that have been born of women ! 
... '' * * * * * Maximus of Ephesus was the owner of marvellous libraries , quiet marble chambers , and spacious anatomical laboratories crowded with scientific apparatus . 
In one of the latter the young physicist , Oribazius , a doctor of the school of Alexandria , was vivisecting , scalpel in hand , a rare animal sent to Maximus from the Indies . 
The hall was circular and the walls loaded with rows of tin vessels , chafing dishes , retorts , apparatus like that of Archimedes , and fire machines like those of Ktesius and Geron . 
In the silence of the adjoining library drop after drop fell plashing from the water-clock , an invention of Apollonius . 
Globes were there also , geographical charts in metal , and models of the celestial spheres wrought by Hipparchus and Eratosthenes . 
In the clear and serene light falling through the glass ceiling , Maximus , clothed as a simple philosopher , was scrutinising the still-warm organs of the animal laid on the marble . 
Oribazius stooping over the liver of the animal was saying -- `` How can Maximus , the great philosopher , believe in these ridiculous miracles ? '' 
`` I believe in them and I believe in them not , '' answered the magian . 
`` This Nature which you and I are studying , is not she most miraculous ? 
Are not these blood-vessels , this nervous system , the admirable combination of organs which we are examining like augurs -- are not these the most splendid of mysteries ? '' 
`` You know my meaning , '' interrupted the young doctor . 
`` Why have you deceived this young man ? '' 
`` Julian ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` He himself desired to be deceived . '' 
The brows of Oribazius knitted into a frown . 
`` Master , if you love me , tell me who you are . 
How can you endure lies like these ? 
Do I not understand what magic means ? 
You attach luminous fish-scales to the ceiling of a darkened chamber , and the pupil to be initiated believes that the skies are descending on him at the word of the hierophant . 
You manufacture with skin and wax a death 's head , into which you fit a stork 's neck ; and through it you pronounce your predictions from beneath the floor . 
The pupil imagines that the skull uncurtains to him the secrets of the tomb ; and when it is necessary that the head should vanish , you bring a chafing dish near it , the wax melts and the skull collapses . 
By skilful rays of coloured light playing on odorous smoke , you make the innocent believe that they have verily seen the gods ! 
You display under water in a basin , of which the walls are stone and the bottom glass , a living Apollo -LRB- acted by an obliging slave -RRB- , while some vulgar prostitute is played off as Aphrodite . 
This -- this , you call the holy mysteries ! '' 
His habitual equivocal smile wandered over the compressed lips of the teacher , who answered -- `` Ah ! 
our mysteries are deeper and finer than you suppose . 
Men have absolute need of enthusiasm . 
For him who has faith the harlot is Aphrodite really , and the luminous scales are the stars of heaven . 
You say that people weep and pray before semblances produced by a lamp and coloured glasses ? 
Oribazius , Oribazius ! 
... but this Nature which makes your science marvel , is she not herself a mirage , produced by senses as deceptive as the wizard 's lantern ? 
Wherein does truth consist ? 
Where does falsehood begin ? 
You believe and you know , and I neither wish to believe nor am skilled to know . 
Truth dwells for me in the same shrine as falsehood . '' 
`` Would Julian thank you , if he knew that you were deceiving him ? '' 
`` He saw what he desired to see . 
I have given him enthusiasm , strength , and audacity . 
You say that I have deceived him . 
If that had been necessary I would have done so -- I would have tempted him . 
I love the falsehood that contains a truth . 
I love temptation . 
Till I die I will never abandon Julian and shall allow him to taste all forbidden fruits . 
He is young ; I shall live on a second life in him . 
I will unveil for him the mystery and charm even of crime ; and perhaps through me he shall become great ! '' 
`` Master , I do not understand you . '' 
`` And that is precisely why I speak thus to you , '' responded Maximus , fixing on Oribazius his penetrating and impassive eyes . 
Julian had an interview with his brother Gallus while the latter was on his way to Constantinople . 
He had found him surrounded by a troop of traitors in the pay of Constantius : the quæstor Leontinus , a wily courtier , famous for skill in eavesdropping and cross-examining servants ; the tribune Baïnobadois , a taciturn barbarian , who gave the impression of an over-tragic actor playing the part of a headsman ; the Emperor 's haughty Master of Ceremonies , comes domesticorum , Lucilian ; and finally Marcus Scuda , the former tribune of Cæsarea in Cappadocia , who , thanks to the protection of certain old ladies , had attained the post he longed for . 
Gallus , now , as always , gay and giddy , had offered Julian an excellent supper , of which the chief feature was a plump pheasant stuffed with fresh Theban dates . 
He laughed like a child , and was calling up all sorts of reminiscences of old days together at Macellum , when suddenly Julian spoke to him about his wife Constantia . 
The face of Gallus fell ; his eyes filled with tears , and he laid down on his plate the succulent piece of pheasant which he had been on the point of putting into his mouth . 
`` Do n't you know , Julian , that Constantia is dead ? 
She died unexpectedly after an attack of tertian ague , on the very journey to the Emperor which she had undertaken to absolve me from blame in his eyes . 
I wept for two whole nights when I heard that news . '' 
He cast a timid glance at the door , put his hand on Julian 's shoulder , and whispered confidentially -- `` Since then , I have let things go to the devil ! 
She alone might have saved me . 
Ah ! 
she was an astonishing woman . 
Without her I am ruined . 
I can do , and I can learn , nothing ... ` They ' do with me just as they please . '' 
He tossed off a cup of wine at a gulp . 
Julian remembered Constantia , the sister of Constantius , a widow of ripe age , the evil genius of her brother , her who had incited him to commit numberless crimes , crimes which were frequently mere fatuous stupidities . 
Amazed , he asked , anxious to know by what quality this woman had tamed his brother -- `` She was beautiful ? '' 
`` It is clear you never saw her . '' 
`` No . 
Was she ugly ? '' 
`` Yes , very ugly . 
She was short , brown , thin , and had bad teeth , which I ca n't bear in women . 
Nevertheless , being aware of this defect , she never laughed . 
People used to say she deceived me , that in disguise she used to go to the circus , as Messalina did , on visits to a young and handsome groom . 
Well , what of it ? 
Did not I on my side deceive her ? 
She never bothered me , and I used to take care in return never to worry her about these trifles . 
Folk used to say she was cruel ! 
By God , Julian , she knew how to govern ! 
Of course she did n't like the authors of epigrams on her bad manners , comparing her to some kitchen-slave dressed as Cæsar 's wife ! 
She loved revenge , admiration ! 
And what a mind , what a mind , Julian ! 
Why , I was as much at ease sheltered behind her , as behind a granite wall . 
Ah , the mad things we used to do together ! 
