`` Whose is he ? '' 
`` A guard 's son . '' 
`` Mm ! 
Bold did you say ? '' 
`` Dreadfully bold ! '' 
`` Well , let him be ! 
And the other ? '' 
`` The other one is red-headed . 
Smolin . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Evidently Mitry Ivanovitch 's son . 
Stick to him , he 's good company . 
Mitry is a clever peasant . 
If the son takes after his father it is all right . 
But that other one -- you know , Foma , you had better invite them to our house on Sunday . 
I 'll buy some presents and you can treat them . 
We 'll see what sort of boys they are . '' 
`` Smolin asked me to come to him this Sunday , '' said Foma , looking up at his father questioningly . 
`` So . 
Well , you may go ! 
That 's all right , go . 
Observe what kind of people there are in the world . 
You can not pass your life alone , without friendship . 
Your godfather and I , for instance , have been friends for more than twenty years , and I have profited a great deal by his common sense . 
So you , too , try to be friendly with those that are better and wiser than you . 
Rub against a good man , like a copper coin against silver , and you may then pass for a silver coin yourself . '' 
And , bursting into laughter at his comparison , Ignat added seriously : `` I was only jesting . 
Try to be , not artificial , but genuine . 
And have some common sense , no matter how little , but your own . 
Have you many lessons to do ? '' 
`` Many ! '' 
sighed the boy , and to his sigh , like an echo , his aunt answered with a heavy sigh . 
`` Well , study . 
Do n't be worse than others at school . 
Although , I 'll tell you , even if there were twenty-five classes in your school , they could never teach you there anything save reading , writing and arithmetic . 
You may also learn some naughty things , but God protect you ! 
I shall give you a terrible spanking if you do . 
If you smoke tobacco I 'll cut your lips off . '' 
`` Remember God , Fomushka , '' said the aunt . 
`` See that you do n't forget our Lord . '' 
`` That 's true ! 
Honour God and your father . 
But I wish to tell you that school books are but a trivial matter . 
You need these as a carpenter needs an adze and a pointer . 
They are tools , but the tools can not teach you how to make use of them . 
Understand ? 
Let us see : Suppose an adze were handed to a carpenter for him to square a beam with it . 
It 's not enough to have hands and an adze ; it is also necessary for him to know how to strike the wood so as not to hit his foot instead . 
To you the knowledge of reading and writing is given , and you must regulate your life with it . 
Thus it follows that books alone are but a trifle in this matter ; it is necessary to be able to take advantage of them . 
And it is this ability that is more cunning than any books , and yet nothing about it is written in the books . 
This , Foma , you must learn from Life itself . 
A book is a dead thing , you may take it as you please , you may tear it , break it -- it will not cry out . 
While should you but make a single wrong step in life , or wrongly occupy a place in it , Life will start to bawl at you in a thousand voices ; it will deal you a blow , felling you to the ground . '' 
Foma , his elbows leaning on the table , attentively listened to his father , and under the sound of his powerful voice he pictured to himself now the carpenter squaring a beam , now himself , his hands outstretched , carefully and stealthily approaching some colossal and living thing , and desiring to grasp that terrible something . 
`` A man must preserve himself for his work and must be thoroughly acquainted with the road to it . 
A man , dear , is like the pilot on a ship . 
In youth , as at high tide , go straight ! 
A way is open to you everywhere . 
But you must know when it is time to steer . 
The waters recede -- here you see a sandbank , there , a rock ; it is necessary to know all this and to slip off in time , in order to reach the harbour safe and sound . '' 
`` I will reach it ! '' 
said the boy , looking at his father proudly and with confidence . 
`` Eh ? 
You speak courageously ! '' 
Ignat burst into laughter . 
And the aunt also began to laugh kindly . 
Since his trip with his father on the Volga , Foma became more lively and talkative at home , with his father , with his aunt and with Mayakin . 
But on the street , in a new place , or in the presence of strangers , he was always gloomy , always looking about him with suspicion , as though he felt something hostile to him everywhere , something hidden from him spying on him . 
At nights he sometimes awoke of a sudden and listened for a long time to the silence about him , fixedly staring into the dark with wide-open eyes . 
And then his father 's stories were transformed before him into images and pictures . 
Without being aware of it , he mixed up those stories with his aunt 's fairy-tales , thus creating for himself a chaos of adventures wherein the bright colours of fantasy were whimsically intertwined with the stern shades of reality . 
This resulted in something colossal , incomprehensible ; the boy closed his eyes and drove it all away from him and tried to check the play of his imagination , which frightened him . 
In vain he attempted to fall asleep , and the chamber became more and more crowded with dark images . 
Then he quietly roused his aunt . 
`` Auntie ! 
Auntie ! '' 
`` What ? 
Christ be with you . '' 
`` I 'll come to you , '' whispered Foma . 
`` Why ? 
Sleep , darling , sleep . '' 
`` I am afraid , '' confessed the boy . 
`` You better say to yourself , ` And the Lord will rise again , ' then you wo n't be afraid . '' 
Foma lies with his eyes open and says the prayer . 
The silence of the night pictures itself before him in the form of an endless expanse of perfectly calm , dark water , which has overflowed everything and congealed ; there is not a ripple on it , not a shadow of a motion , and neither is there anything within it , although it is bottomlessly deep . 
It is very terrible for one to look down from the dark at this dead water . 
But now the sound of the night watchman 's mallet is heard , and the boy sees that the surface of the water is beginning to tremble , and , covering the surface with ripples , light little balls are dancing upon it . 
The sound of the bell on the steeple , with one mighty swing , brings all the water in agitation and it is slightly trembling from that sound ; a big spot of light is also trembling , spreading light upon the water , radiating from its centre into the dark distance , there growing paler and dying out . 
Again there is weary and deathlike repose in this dark desert . 
`` Auntie , '' whispers Foma , beseechingly . 
`` Dearest ? '' 
`` I am coming to you . '' 
`` Come , then , come , my darling . '' 
Going over into auntie 's bed , he presses close to her , begging : `` Tell me something . '' 
`` At night ? '' 
protests auntie , sleepily . 
`` Please . '' 
He does not have to ask her long . 
Yawning , her eyes closed , the old woman begins slowly in a voice grown heavy with sleep : `` Well , my dear sir , in a certain kingdom , in a certain empire , there lived a man and his wife , and they were very poor . 
They were so unfortunate that they had nothing to eat . 
They would go around begging , somebody would give them a crust of stale bread and that would keep them for awhile . 
And it came to pass that the wife begot a child -- a child was born -- it was necessary to christen it , but , being poor , they could not entertain the godparents and the guests , so nobody came to christen the child . 
They tried this and they tried that -- yet nobody came . 
And they began to pray to the Lord , ` Oh Lord ! 
Oh Lord ! ' '' 
Foma knew this awful story about God 's godchild . 
He had heard it more than once and was already picturing to himself this godchild riding on a white horse to his godfather and godmother ; he was riding in the darkness , over the desert , and he saw there all the unbearable miseries to which sinners are condemned . 
And he heard their faint moans and requests : `` Oh ! 
Man ! 
Ask the Lord yet how long are we to suffer here ! '' 
Then it appeared to Foma that it was he who was riding at night on the white horse , and that the moans and the implorings were addressed to him . 
His heart contracts with some incomprehensible desire ; sorrow compressed his breast and tears gathered in his eyes , which he had firmly closed and now feared to open . 
He is tossing about in his bed restlessly . 
`` Sleep , my child . 
Christ be with you ! '' 
says the old woman , interrupting her tale of men suffering for their sins . 
But in the morning after such a night Foma rose sound and cheerful , washed himself hastily , drank his tea in haste and ran off to school , provided with sweet cakes , which were awaited by the always hungry little Yozhov , who greedily subsisted on his rich friend 's generosity . 
`` Got anything to eat ? '' 
he accosted Foma , turning up his sharp-pointed nose . 
`` Let me have it , for I left the house without eating anything . 
I slept too long , devil take it ! 
I studied up to two o'clock last night . 
Have you solved your problems ? '' 
`` No , I have n't . '' 
`` Eh , you lazy bones ! 
Well , I 'll dash them off for you directly ! '' 
Driving his small , thin teeth into the cakes , he purred something like a kitten , stamped his left foot , beating time , and at the same time solved the problem , rattling off short phrases to Foma : `` See ? 
Eight bucketfuls leaked out in one hour . 
And how many hours did it leak -- six ? 
Eh , what good things they eat in your house ! 
Consequently , we must multiply six by eight . 
Do you like cake with green onions ? 
Oh , how I like it ! 
So that in six hours forty-eight bucketfuls leaked out of the first gauge-cock . 
And altogether the tub contained ninety . 
Do you understand the rest ? '' 
Foma liked Yozhov better than Smolin , but he was more friendly with Smolin . 
He wondered at the ability and the sprightliness of the little fellow . 
He saw that Yozhov was more clever and better than himself ; he envied him , and felt offended on that account , and at the same time he pitied him with the condescending compassion of a satisfied man for a hungry one . 
Perhaps it was this very compassion that prevented him from preferring this bright boy to the boring red-headed Smolin . 
Yozhov , fond of having a laugh at the expense of his well-fed friends , told them quite often : `` Eh , you are little trunks full of cakes ! '' 
Foma was angry with him for his sneers , and one day , touched to the quick , said wickedly and with contempt : `` And you are a beggar -- a pauper ! '' 
Yozhov 's yellow face became overcast , and he replied slowly : `` Very well , so be it ! 
I shall never prompt you again -- and you 'll be like a log of wood ! '' 
And they did not speak to each other for about three days , very much to the regret of the teacher , who during these days had to give the lowest markings to the son of the esteemed Ignat Matveyich . 
Yozhov knew everything : he related at school how the procurator 's chambermaid gave birth to a child , and that for this the procurator 's wife poured hot coffee over her husband ; he could tell where and when it was best to catch perch ; he knew how to make traps and cages for birds ; he could give a detailed account of how the soldier had hanged himself in the garret of the armoury , and knew from which of the pupils ' parents the teacher had received a present that day and precisely what sort of a present it was . 
The sphere of Smolin 's knowledge and interests was confined to the merchant 's mode of life , and , above all , the red-headed boy was fond of judging whether this man was richer than that , valuing and pricing their houses , their vessels and their horses . 
All this he knew to perfection , and spoke of it with enthusiasm . 
Like Foma , he regarded Yozhov with the same condescending pity , but more as a friend and equal . 
Whenever Gordyeeff quarrelled with Yozhov , Smolin hastened to reconcile them , and he said to Foma one day , on their way home : `` Why do you always quarrel with Yozhov ? '' 
`` Well , why is he so self-conceited ? '' 
said Foma , angrily . 
`` He is proud because you never know your lessons , and he always helps you out . 
He is clever . 
And because he is poor -- is he to blame for that ? 
He can learn anything he wants to , and he will be rich , too . '' 
`` He is like a mosquito , '' said Foma , disdainfully ; `` he will buzz and buzz , and then of a sudden will bite . '' 
But there was something in the life of these boys that united them all ; there were hours when the consciousness of difference in their natures and positions was entirely lost . 
On Sundays they all gathered at Smolin 's , and , getting up on the roof of the wing , where they had an enormous pigeon-house , they let the pigeons loose . 
The beautiful , well-fed birds , ruffling their snow-white wings , darted out of the pigeon-house one by one , and , seating themselves in a row on the ridge of the roof , and , illumined by the sun , cooing , flaunted before the boys . 
`` Scare them ! '' 
implored Yozhov , trembling for impatience . 
Smolin swung a pole with a bast-wisp fastened to its end , and whistled . 
The frightened pigeons rushed into the air , filling it with the hurried flapping of their wings . 
And now , outlining big circles , they easily soar upwards , into the blue depths of the sky ; they float higher and higher , their silver and snow-white feathers flashing . 
Some of them are striving to reach the dome of the skies with the light soaring of the falcon , their wings outstretched wide and almost motionless ; others play , turn over in the air , now dropping downward in a snowy lump , now darting up like an arrow . 
Now the entire flock seems as though hanging motionless in the desert of the sky , and , growing smaller and smaller , seems to sink in it . 
With heads thrown back , the boys admire the birds in silence , without taking their eyes from them -- their tired eyes , so radiant with calm joy , not altogether free from envying these winged creatures , which so freely took flight from earth up into the pure and calm atmosphere full of the glitter of the sun . 
The small group of scarcely visible dots , now mere specks in the azure of the sky , leads on the imagination of the children , and Yozhov expresses their common feeling when , in a low voice , he says thoughtfully : `` That 's the way we ought to fly , friends . '' 
While Foma , knowing that human souls , soaring heavenward , oftentimes assume the form of pigeons , felt in his breast the rising of a burning , powerful desire . 
Unified by their joy , attentively and mutely awaiting the return of their birds from the depths of the sky , the boys , pressing close to one another , drifted far away from the breath of life , even as their pigeons were far from earth ; at this moment they are merely children , knowing neither envy nor anger ; free from everything , they are near to one another , they are mute , judging their feelings by the light in their eyes -- and they feel as happy as the birds in the sky . 
But now the pigeons come down on the roof again , and , tired out by their flight , are easily driven into the pigeon-house . 
`` Friends , let 's go for apples ? '' 
suggests Yozhov , the instigator of all games and adventures . 
His call drives out of the children 's souls the peacefulness brought into them by the pigeons , and then , like plunderers , carefully listening for each and every sound , they steal quietly across the back yards toward the neighbouring garden . 
The fear of being caught is balanced by the hope of stealing with impunity . 
But stealing is work and dangerous work at that , and everything that is earned by your own labour is so sweet ! 
And the more effort required to gain it , the sweeter it is . 
Carefully the boys climb over the fence of the garden , and , bending down , crawl toward the apple trees and , full of fright , look around vigilantly . 
Their hearts tremble and their throbbing slackens at the faintest rustle . 
They are alike afraid of being caught , and , if noticed , of being recognised , but in case they should only see them and yell at them , they would be satisfied . 
They would separate , each going in a different direction , and then , meeting again , their eyes aglow with joy and boldness , would laughingly tell one another how they felt when they heard some one giving chase to them , and what happened to them when they ran so quickly through the garden , as though the ground were burning under their feet . 
Such invasions were more to Foma 's liking than all other adventures and games , and his behaviour during these invasions was marked with a boldness that at once astounded and angered his companions . 
He was intentionally careless in other people 's gardens : he spoke loud , noisily broke the branches of apple trees , and , tearing off a worm-eaten apple , threw it in the direction of the proprietor 's house . 
The danger of being caught in the act did not frighten him ; it rather encouraged him -- his eyes would turn darker , his teeth would clench , and his face would assume an expression of anger and pride . 
Smolin , distorting his big mouth contemptibly , would say to him : `` You are making entirely too much fuss about yourself . '' 
`` I am not a coward anyway ! '' 
replied Foma . 
`` I know that you are not a coward , but why do you boast of it ? 
One may do a thing as well without boasting . '' 
Yozhov blamed him from a different point of view : `` If you thrust yourself into their hands willingly you can go to the devil ! 
I am not your friend . 
They 'll catch you and bring you to your father -- he would n't do anything to you , while I would get such a spanking that all my bones would be skinned . '' 
`` Coward ! '' 
Foma persisted , stubbornly . 
And it came to pass one day that Foma was caught by the second captain , Chumakov , a thin little old man . 
Noiselessly approaching the boy , who was hiding away in his bosom the stolen apples , the old man seized him by the shoulders and cried in a threatening voice : `` Now I have you , little rogue ! 
Aha ! '' 
Foma was then about fifteen years old , and he cleverly slipped out of the old man 's hands . 
Yet he did not run from him , but , knitting his brow and clenching his fist , he said threateningly : `` You dare to touch me ! '' 
`` I would n't touch you . 
I 'll just turn you over to the police ! 
Whose son are you ? '' 
Foma did not expect this , and all his boldness and spitefulness suddenly left him . 
The trip to the police station seemed to him something which his father would never forgive him . 
He shuddered and said confusedly : `` Gordyeeff . '' 
`` Ignat Gordyeeff 's ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Now the second captain was taken aback . 
He straightened himself , expanded his chest and for some reason or other cleared his throat impressively . 
Then his shoulders sank and he said to the boy in a fatherly tone : `` It 's a shame ! 
The son of such a well-known and respected man ! 
It is unbecoming your position . 
You may go . 
But should this happen again ! 
Hm ! 
I should be compelled to notify your father , to whom , by the way , I have the honour of presenting my respects . '' 
Foma watched the play of the old man 's physiognomy and understood that he was afraid of his father . 
Like a young wolf , he looked askance at Chumakov ; while the old man , with comical seriousness , twisted his gray moustache , hesitating before the boy , who did not go away , notwithstanding the given permission . 
`` You may go , '' repeated the old man , pointing at the road leading to his house . 
`` And how about the police ? '' 
asked Foma , sternly , and was immediately frightened at the possible answer . 
`` I was but jesting , '' smiled the old man . 
`` I just wanted to frighten you . '' 
`` You are afraid of my father yourself , '' said Foma , and , turning his back to the old man , walked off into the depth of the garden . 
`` I am afraid ? 
Ah ! 
Very well ! '' 
exclaimed Chumakov after him , and Foma knew by the sound of his voice that he had offended the old man . 
He felt sad and ashamed ; he passed the afternoon in walking , and , coming home , he was met by his father 's stern question : `` Foma ! 
Did you go to Chumakov 's garden ? '' 
`` Yes , I did , '' said the boy , calmly , looking into his father 's eyes . 
Evidently Ignat did not expect such an answer and he was silent for awhile , stroking his beard . 
`` Fool ! 
Why did you do it ? 
Have you not enough of your own apples ? '' 
Foma cast down his eyes and was silent , standing before his father . 
`` See , you are shamed ! 
Yozhishka must have incited you to this ! 
I 'll give it to him when he comes , or I 'll make an end of your friendship altogether . '' 
`` I did it myself , '' said Foma , firmly . 
`` From bad to worse ! '' 
exclaimed Ignat . 
`` But why did you do it ? '' 
`` Because . '' 
`` Because ! '' 
mocked the father . 
`` Well , if you did it you ought to be able to explain to yourself and to others the reason for so doing . 
Come here ! '' 
Foma walked up to his father , who was sitting on a chair , and placed himself between his knees . 
Ignat put his hand on the boy 's shoulders , and , smiling , looked into his eyes . 
`` Are you ashamed ? '' 
`` I am ashamed , '' sighed Foma . 
`` There you have it , fool ! 
You have disgraced me and yourself . '' 
Pressing his son 's head to his breast , he stroked his hair and asked again : `` Why should you do such a thing -- stealing other people 's apples ? '' 
`` I -- I do n't know , '' said Foma , confusedly . 
`` Perhaps because it is so lonesome . 
I play and play the same thing day after day . 
I am growing tired of it ! 
While this is dangerous . '' 
`` Exciting ? '' 
asked the father , smiling . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Mm , perhaps it is so . 
But , nevertheless , Foma , look out -- drop this , or I shall deal with you severely . '' 
`` I 'll never climb anywhere again , '' said the boy with confidence . 
`` And that you take all the blame on yourself -- that is good . 
What will become of you in the future , only God knows , but meanwhile -- it is pretty good . 
It is not a trifle if a man is willing to pay for his deeds with his own skin . 
Someone else in your place would have blamed his friends , while you say : ' I did it myself . ' 
That 's the proper way , Foma . 
You commit the sin , but you also account for it . 
Did n't Chumakov strike you ? '' 
asked Ignat , pausing as he spoke . 
`` I would have struck him back , '' declared Foma , calmly . 
`` Mm , '' roared his father , significantly . 
`` I told him that he was afraid of you . 
That is why he complained . 
Otherwise he was not going to say anything to you about it . '' 
`` Is that so ? '' '' 
` By God ! 
Present my respects to your father , ' he said . '' 
`` Did he ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Ah ! 
the dog ! 
See what kind of people there are ; he is robbed and yet he makes a bow and presents his respects ! 
Ha , ha ! 
It is true it might have been worth no more than a kopeck , but a kopeck is to him what a rouble is to me . 
And it is n't the kopeck , but since it is mine , no one dares touch it unless I throw it away myself . 
Eh ! 
The devil take them ! 
Well , tell me -- where have you been , what have you seen ? '' 
The boy sat down beside his father and told him in detail all the impressions of that day . 
Ignat listened , fixedly watching the animated face of his son , and the eyebrows of the big man contracted pensively . 
`` You are still but floating on the surface , dear . 
You are still but a child . 
Eh ! 
Eh ! '' 
`` We scared an owl in the ravine , '' related the boy . 
`` That was fun ! 
It began to fly about and struck against a tree -- bang ! 
It even began to squeak so pitifully . 
And we scared it again ; again it rose and flew about here and there , and again it struck against something , so that its feathers were coming out . 
It flew about in the ravine and at last hid itself somewhere with difficulty . 
We did not try to look for it , we felt sorry it was all bruised . 
Papa , is an owl entirely blind in daytime ? '' 
`` Blind ! '' 
said Ignat ; `` some men will toss about in life even as this owl in daytime . 
Ever searching for his place , he strives and strives -- only feathers fly from him , but all to no purpose . 
He is bruised , sickened , stripped of everything , and then with all his might he thrusts himself anywhere , just to find repose from his restlessness . 
Woe to such people . 
Woe to them , dear ! '' 
`` How painful is it to them ? '' 
said Foma in a low voice . 
`` Just as painful as to that owl . '' 
`` And why is it so ? '' 
`` Why ? 
It is hard to tell . 
Someone suffers because he is darkened by his pride -- he desires much , but has but little strength . 
Another because of his foolishness . 
But then there are a thousand and one other reasons , which you can not understand . '' 
`` Come in and have some tea , '' Anfisa called to them . 
She had been standing in the doorway for quite a long while , and , folding her hands , lovingly admired the enormous figure of her brother , who bent over Foma with such friendliness , and the pensive pose of the boy , who clung to his father 's shoulder . 
Thus day by day Foma 's life developed slowly -- a quiet , peaceful life , not at all brimful of emotions . 
Powerful impressions , rousing the boy 's soul for an hour or for a day , sometimes stood out strikingly against the general background of this monotonous life , but these were soon obliterated . 
The boy 's soul was as yet but a calm lake -- a lake hidden from the stormy winds of life , and all that touched the surface of the lake either sank to the bottom , stirring the placid water for a moment , or gliding over the smooth surface , swam apart in big circles and disappeared . 
Having stayed at the district school for five years , Foma passed four classes tolerably well and came out a brave , dark-haired fellow , with a swarthy face , heavy eyebrows and dark down on the upper lip . 
His big dark eyes had a naive and pensive look , and his lips were like a child 's , half-open ; but when meeting with opposition to his desires or when irritated by something else , the pupils of his eyes would grow wide , his lips press tight , and his whole face assume a stubborn and resolute expression . 
His godfather , smiling sceptically , would often say to him : `` To women , Foma , you 'll be sweeter than honey , but as yet not much common sense can be seen in you . '' 
Ignat would heave a sigh at these words . 
`` You had better start out your son as soon as possible . '' 
`` There 's time yet , wait . '' 
`` Why wait ? 
He 'll go about the Volga for two or three years and then we 'll have him married . 
There 's my Lubov . '' 
Lubov Mayakina was now studying in the fifth class of some boarding school . 
Foma often met her on the street at which meeting she always bowed condescendingly , her fair head in a fashionable cap . 
Foma liked her , but her rosy cheeks , her cheerful brown eyes and crimson lips could not smooth the impression of offence given to him by her condescending bows . 
She was acquainted with some Gymnasium students , and although Yozhov , his old friend , was among them , Foma felt no inclination to be with them , and their company embarrassed him . 
It seemed to him that they were all boasting of their learning before him and that they were mocking his ignorance . 
Gathered together in Lubov 's house they would read some books , and whenever he found them reading or loudly arguing , they became silent at his sight . 
All this removed them further from him . 
One day when he was at Mayakin 's , Luba called him to go for a walk in the garden , and there , walking by his side , asked him with a grimace on her face : `` Why are you so unsociable ? 
You never talk about anything . '' 
`` What shall I talk about , since I know nothing ! '' 
said Foma , plainly . 
`` Study -- read books . '' 
`` I do n't feel like doing it . '' 
`` You see , the Gymnasium students know everything , and know how to talk about everything . 
Take Yozhov , for instance . '' 
`` I know Yozhov -- a chatterbox . '' 
`` You simply envy him . 
He is very clever -- yes . 
He will soon graduate from the Gymnasium -- and then he 'll go to Moscow to study in the University . '' 
`` Well , what of it ? '' 
said Foma , indifferently . 
`` And you 'll remain just an ignorant man . '' 
`` Well , be it so . '' 
`` That will be nice ! '' 
exclaimed Luba , ironically . 
`` I shall hold my ground without science , '' said Foma , sarcastically . 
`` And I 'll have a laugh at all the learned people . 
Let the hungry study . 
I do n't need it . '' 
`` Pshaw , how stupid you are , bad , disgusting ! '' 
said the girl with contempt and went away , leaving him alone in the garden . 
Offended and gloomy , he looked after her , moved his eyebrows and lowering his head , slowly walked off into the depth of the garden . 
He already began to recognise the beauty of solitude and the sweet poison of contemplation . 
Oftentimes , during summer evenings , when everything was coloured by the fiery tints of sunset , kindling the imagination , an uneasy longing for something incomprehensible penetrated his breast . 
Sitting somewhere in a dark corner of the garden or lying in bed , he conjured up before him the images of the fairy-tale princesses -- they appeared with the face of Luba and of other young ladies of his acquaintance , noiselessly floating before him in the twilight and staring into his eyes with enigmatic looks . 
At times these visions awakened in him a mighty energy , as though intoxicating him -- he would rise and , straightening his shoulders , inhale the perfumed air with a full chest ; but sometimes these same visions brought to him a feeling of sadness -- he felt like crying , but ashamed of shedding tears , he restrained himself and never wept in silence . 
Or suddenly his heart began to tremble with the desire to express his gratitude to God , to bow before Him ; the words of the prayer flashed through his memory , and beholding the sky , he whispered them for a long time , one by one , and his heart grew lighter , breathing into prayer the excess of his power . 
The father patiently and carefully introduced him into commercial circles , took him on the Exchange , told him about his contracts and enterprises , about his co-associates , described to him how they had made their way , what fortunes they now possessed , what natures were theirs . 
Foma soon mastered it , regarding everything seriously and thoughtfully . 
`` Our bud is blooming into a blood-red cup-rose ! '' 
Mayakin smiled , winking to Ignat . 
And yet , even when Foma was nineteen years old , there was something childish in him , something naive which distinguished him from the boys of his age . 
They were laughing at him , considering him stupid ; he kept away from them , offended by their relations toward him . 
As for his father and Mayakin , who were watching him vigilantly , this uncertainty of Foma 's character inspired them with serious apprehensions . 
`` I can not understand him ! '' 
Ignat would say with contrite heart . 
`` He does not lead a dissipated life , he does not seem to run after the women , treats me and you with respect , listens to everything -- he is more like a pretty girl than a fellow ! 
And yet he does not seem to be stupid ! '' 
`` No , there 's nothing particularly stupid about him , '' said Mayakin . 
`` It looks as though he were waiting for something -- as though some kind of shroud were covering his eyes . 
His late mother groped on earth in the same way . 
`` Just look , there 's Afrikanka Smolin , but two years older than my boy -- what a man he has become ! 
That is , it is difficult to tell whether he is his father 's head or his father his . 
He wants to go to some factory to study . 
He swears : '' ` Eh , ' says he , ` papa , you have not taught me enough . ' 
Yes . 
While mine does not express himself at all . 
Oh Lord ! '' 
`` Look here , '' Mayakin advised him , `` you had better push him head foremost into some active business ! 
I assure you ! 
Gold is tested in fire . 
We 'll see what his inclinations are when at liberty . 
