The priest came , and , covering her face with something , and sighing , began to read gentle , beseeching words : `` Oh God , Almighty Lord , who cureth every disease , cure also Thy servant Natalya , who has just given birth to a child ; and restore her from the bed on which she now lies , for in the words of David , ` We indulge in lawlessness and are wicked in Thine eyes . '' ' 
The old man 's voice was interrupted now and then , his thin face was stern and from his clothes came the odour of rock-rose . 
`` Guard the infant born of her , guard him from all possible temptation , from all possible cruelty , from all possible storms , from evil spirits , night and day . '' 
Ignat listened to the prayer , and wept silently . 
His big , hot tears fell on the bare hand of his wife . 
But the hand , evidently , did not feel that the tears were dropping upon it : it remained motionless , and the skin did not tremble from the fall of the tears . 
After the prayer Natalya became unconscious and a day later she died , without saying another word -- she died just as quietly as she had lived . 
Having arranged a pompous funeral , Ignat christened his son , named him Foma , and unwillingly gave his boy into the family of the godfather , his old friend Mayakin , whose wife , too , had given birth to a child not long before . 
The death of his wife had sown many gray hairs in Ignat 's dark beard , but in the stern glitter of his eyes appeared a new expression , gentle , clear and mild . 
MAYAKIN lived in an enormous two-story house near a big palisade , where sturdy , old spreading linden trees were growing magnificently . 
The rank branches covered the windows with a dense , dark embroidery , and the sun in broken rays peeped into the small rooms , which were closely crowded with miscellaneous furniture and big trunks , wherefore a stern and melancholy semi-darkness always reigned there supreme . 
The family was devout -- the odour of wax , of rock-rose and of image-lamp oil filled the house , and penitent sighs and prayers soared about in the air . 
Religious ceremonials were performed infallibly , with pleasure , absorbing all the free power of the souls of the dwellers of the house . 
Feminine figures almost noiselessly moved about the rooms in the half-dark , stifling , heavy atmosphere . 
They were dressed in black , wore soft slippers on their feet , and always had a penitent look on their faces . 
The family of Yakov Tarazovich Mayakin consisted of himself , his wife , a daughter and five kinswomen , the youngest of whom was thirty-four years old . 
These were alike devout and impersonal , and subordinate to Antonina Ivanovna , the mistress of the house . 
She was a tall , thin woman , with a dark face and with stern gray eyes , which had an imperious and intelligent expression . 
Mayakin also had a son Taras , but his name was never mentioned in the house ; acquaintances knew that since the nineteen-year-old Taras had gone to study in Moscow -- he married there three years later , against his father 's will -- Yakov disowned him . 
Taras disappeared without leaving any trace . 
It was rumoured that he had been sent to Siberia for something . 
Yakov Mayakin was very queerly built . 
Short , thin , lively , with a little red beard , sly greenish eyes , he looked as though he said to each and every one : `` Never mind , sir , do n't be uneasy . 
Even though I know you for what you are , if you do n't annoy me I will not give you away . '' 
His beard resembled an egg in shape and was monstrously big . 
His high forehead , covered with wrinkles , joined his bald crown , and it seemed as though he really had two faces -- one an open , penetrating and intellectual face , with a long gristle nose , and above this face another one , eyeless and mouthless , covered with wrinkles , behind which Mayakin seemed to hide his eyes and his lips until a certain time ; and when that time had arrived , he would look at the world with different eyes and smile a different smile . 
He was the owner of a rope-yard and kept a store in town near the harbour . 
In this store , filled up to the ceiling with rope , twine , hemp and tow , he had a small room with a creaking glass door . 
In this room stood a big , old , dilapidated table , and near it a deep armchair , covered with oilcloth , in which Mayakin sat all day long , sipping tea and always reading the same `` Moskovskiya Vedomosty , '' to which he subscribed , year in and year out , all his life . 
Among merchants he enjoyed the respect and reputation of a `` brainy '' man , and he was very fond of boasting of the antiquity of his race , saying in a hoarse voice : `` We , the Mayakins , were merchants during the reign of ` Mother ' Catherine , consequently I am a pure-blooded man . '' 
In this family Ignat Gordyeeff 's son lived for six years . 
By the time he was seven years old Foma was a big-headed , broad-shouldered boy , seemingly older that his years , both in his size and in the serious look of his dark , almond-shaped eyes . 
Quiet , silent and persistent in his childish desires , he spent all his days over his playthings , with Mayakin 's daughter , Luba , quietly looked after by one of the kinswomen , a stout , pock-marked old maid , who was , for some reason or other , nicknamed `` Buzya . '' 
She was a dull , somewhat timid creature ; and even to the children she spoke in a low voice , in words of monosyllables . 
Having devoted her time to learning prayers , she had no stories to tell Foma . 
Foma was on friendly terms with the little girl , but when she angered or teased him he turned pale , his nostrils became distended , his eyes stared comically and he beat her audaciously . 
She cried , ran to her mother and complained to her , but Antonina loved Foma and she paid but little attention to her daughter 's complaints , which strengthened the friendship between the children still more . 
Foma 's day was long and uniform . 
Getting out of bed and washing himself , he used to place himself before the image , and under the whispering of the pock-marked Buzya he recited long prayers . 
Then they drank tea and ate many biscuits , cakes and pies . 
After tea -- during the summer -- the children went to the big palisade , which ran down to a ravine , whose bottom always looked dark and damp , filling them with terror . 
The children were not allowed to go even to the edge of the ravine , and this inspired in them a fear of it . 
In winter , from tea time to dinner , they played in the house when it was very cold outside , or went out in the yard to slide down the big ice hill . 
They had dinner at noon , `` in Russian style , '' as Mayakin said . 
At first a big bowl of fat , sour cabbage soup was served with rye biscuits in , but without meat , then the same soup was eaten with meat cut into small pieces ; then they ate roast meat -- pork , goose , veal or rennet , with gruel -- then again a bowl of soup with vermicelli , and all this was usually followed by dessert . 
They drank kvass made of red bilberries , juniper-berries , or of bread -- Antonina Ivanovna always carried a stock of different kinds of kvass . 
They ate in silence , only now and then uttering a sigh of fatigue ; the children each ate out of a separate bowl , the adults eating out of one bowl . 
Stupefied by such a dinner , they went to sleep ; and for two or three hours Mayakin 's house was filled with snoring and with drowsy sighs . 
Awaking from sleep , they drank tea and talked about local news , the choristers , the deacons , weddings , or the dishonourable conduct of this or that merchant . 
After tea Mayakin used to say to his wife : `` Well , mother , hand me the Bible . '' 
Yakov Tarasovich used to read the Book of Job more often than anything else . 
Putting his heavy , silver-framed spectacles on his big , ravenous nose , he looked around at his listeners to see whether all were in their places . 
They were all seated where he was accustomed to see them and on their faces was a familiar , dull and timid expression of piety . 
`` There was a man in the land of Uz , '' began Mayakin , in a hoarse voice , and Foma , sitting beside Luba on the lounge in the corner of the room , knew beforehand that soon his godfather would become silent and pat his bald head with his hand . 
He sat and , listening , pictured to himself this man from the land of Uz . 
The man was tall and bare , his eyes were enormously large , like those of the image of the Saviour , and his voice was like a big brass trumpet on which the soldiers played in the camps . 
The man was constantly growing bigger and bigger ; and , reaching the sky , he thrust his dark hands into the clouds , and , tearing them asunder , cried out in a terrible voice : `` Why is light given to a man whose way is hid , and whom God hath hedged in ? '' 
Dread fell on Foma , and he trembled , slumber fled from his eyes , he heard the voice of his godfather , who said , with a light smile , now and then pinching his beard : `` See how audacious he was ! '' 
The boy knew that his godfather spoke of the man from the land of Uz , and the godfather 's smile soothed the child . 
So the man would not break the sky ; he would not rend it asunder with his terrible arms . 
And then Foma sees the man again -- he sits on the ground , `` his flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust , his skin is broken . '' 
But now he is small and wretched , he is like a beggar at the church porch . 
Here he says : `` What is man , that he should be clean ? 
And he which is born of woman , that he should be righteous ? '' 
-LSB- These words attributed by Mayakin to Job are from Eliphaz the Temanite 's reply -- Translator 's Note . -RSB- 
`` He says this to God , '' explained Mayakin , inspired . 
`` How , says he , can I be righteous , since I am made of flesh ? 
That 's a question asked of God . 
How is that ? '' 
And the reader , triumphantly and interrogatively looks around at his listeners . 
`` He merited it , the righteous man , '' they replied with a sigh . 
Yakov Mayakin eyes them with a smile , and says : `` Fools ! 
You better put the children to sleep . '' 
Ignat visited the Mayakins every day , brought playthings for his son , caught him up into his arms and hugged him , but sometimes dissatisfied he said to him with ill-concealed uneasiness : `` Why are you such a bugbear ? 
Oh ! 
Why do you laugh so little ? '' 
And he would complain to the lad 's godfather : `` I am afraid that he may turn out to be like his mother . 
His eyes are cheerless . '' 
`` You disturb yourself rather too soon , '' Mayakin smilingly replied . 
He , too , loved his godson , and when Ignat announced to him one day that he would take Foma to his own house , Mayakin was very much grieved . 
`` Leave him here , '' he begged . 
`` See , the child is used to us ; there ! 
he 's crying . '' 
`` He 'll cease crying . 
I did not beget him for you . 
The air of the place is disagreeable . 
It is as tedious here as in an old believer 's hermitage . 
This is harmful to the child . 
And without him I am lonesome . 
I come home -- it is empty . 
I can see nothing there . 
It would not do for me to remove to your house for his sake . 
I am not for him , he is for me . 
So . 
And now that my sister has come to my house there will be somebody to look after him . '' 
And the boy was brought to his father 's house . 
There he was met by a comical old woman , with a long , hook-like nose and with a mouth devoid of teeth . 
Tall , stooping , dressed in gray , with gray hair , covered by a black silk cap , she did not please the boy at first ; she even frightened him . 
But when he noticed on the wrinkled face her black eyes , which beamed so tenderly on him , he at once pressed his head close to her knees in confidence . 
`` My sickly little orphan ! '' 
she said in a velvet-like voice that trembled from the fulness of sound , and quietly patted his face with her hand , `` stay close to me , my dear child ! '' 
There was something particularly sweet and soft in her caresses , something altogether new to Foma , and he stared into the old woman 's eyes with curiosity and expectation on his face . 
This old woman led him into a new world , hitherto unknown to him . 
The very first day , having put him to bed , she seated herself by his side , and , bending over the child , asked him : `` Shall I tell you a story , Fomushka ? '' 
And after that Foma always fell asleep amid the velvet-like sounds of the old woman 's voice , which painted before him a magic life . 
Giants defeating monsters , wise princesses , fools who turned out to be wise -- troops of new and wonderful people were passing before the boy 's bewitched imagination , and his soul was nourished by the wholesome beauty of the national creative power . 
Inexhaustible were the treasures of the memory and the fantasy of this old woman , who oftentimes , in slumber , appeared to the boy -- now like the witch of the fairy-tales -- only a kind and amiable old witch -- now like the beautiful , all-wise Vasilisa . 
His eyes wide open , holding his breath , the boy looked into the darkness that filled his chamber and watched it as it slowly trembled in the light of the little lamp that was burning before the image . 
And Foma filled this darkness with wonderful pictures of fairy-tale life . 
Silent , yet living shadows , were creeping over the walls and across the floor ; it was both pleasant and terrible to him to watch their life ; to deal out unto them forms and colours , and , having endowed them with life , instantly to destroy them all with a single twinkle of the eyelashes . 
Something new appeared in his dark eyes , something more childish and naive , less grave ; the loneliness and the darkness , awaking in him a painful feeling of expectation , stirred his curiosity , compelled him to go out to the dark corner and see what was hidden there beyond the thick veils of darkness . 
He went and found nothing , but he lost no hope of finding it out . 
He feared his father and respected him . 
Ignat 's enormous size , his harsh , trumpet-like voice , his bearded face , his gray-haired head , his powerful , long arms and his flashing eyes -- all these gave to Ignat the resemblance of the fairy-tale robbers . 
Foma shuddered whenever he heard his voice or his heavy , firm steps ; but when the father , smiling kind-heartedly , and talking playfully in a loud voice , took him upon his knees or threw him high up in the air with his big hands the boy 's fear vanished . 
Once , when the boy was about eight years old , he asked his father , who had returned from a long journey : `` Papa , where were you ? '' 
`` On the Volga . '' 
`` Were you robbing there ? '' 
asked Foma , softly . 
`` Wha-at ? '' 
Ignat drawled out , and his eyebrows contracted . 
`` Are n't you a robber , papa ? 
I know it , '' said Foma , winking his eyes slyly , satisfied that he had already read the secret of his father 's life . 
`` I am a merchant ! '' 
said Ignat , sternly , but after a moment 's thought he smiled kind-heartedly and added : `` And you are a little fool ! 
I deal in corn , I run a line of steamers . 
Have you seen the ` Yermak ' ? 
Well , that is my steamer . 
And yours , too . '' 
`` It is a very big one , '' said Foma with a sigh . 
`` Well , I 'll buy you a small one while you are small yourself . 
Shall I ? '' 
`` Very well , '' Foma assented , but after a thoughtful silence he again drawled out regretfully : `` But I thought you were a robber or a giant . '' 
`` I tell you I am a merchant ! '' 
repeated Ignat , insinuatingly , and there was something discontented and almost timorous in his glance at the disenchanted face of his son . 
`` Like Grandpa Fedor , the Kalatch baker ? '' 
asked Foma , having thought awhile . 
`` Well , yes , like him . 
Only I am richer than he . 
I have more money than Fedor . '' 
`` Have you much money ? '' 
`` Well , some people have still more . '' 
`` How many barrels do you have ? '' 
`` Of what ? '' 
`` Of money , I mean . '' 
`` Fool ! 
Is money counted by the barrel ? '' 
`` How else ? '' 
exclaimed Foma , enthusiastically , and , turning his face toward his father , began to tell him quickly : `` Maksimka , the robber , came once to a certain town and filled up twelve barrels with money belonging to some rich man there . 
And he took different silverware and robbed a church . 
And cut up a man with his sword and threw him down the steeple because he tried to sound an alarm . '' 
`` Did your aunt tell you that ? '' 
asked Ignat admiring his son 's enthusiasm . 
`` Yes ! 
Why ? '' 
`` Nothing ! '' 
said Ignat , laughing . 
`` So you thought your father was a robber . '' 
`` And perhaps you were a robber long ago ? '' 
Foma again returned to his theme , and it was evident on his face that he would be very glad to hear an affirmative answer . 
`` I was never a robber . 
Let that end it . '' 
`` Never ? '' 
`` I tell you I was not ! 
What a queer little boy you are ! 
Is it good to be a robber ? 
They are all sinners , the robbers . 
They do n't believe in God -- they rob churches . 
They are all cursed in the churches . 
Yes . 
Look here , my son , you 'll have to start to study soon . 
It is time ; you 'll soon be nine years old . 
Start with the help of God . 
You 'll study during the winter and in spring I 'll take you along with me on the Volga . '' 
`` Will I go to school ? '' 
asked Foma , timidly . 
`` First you 'll study at home with auntie . '' 
Soon after the boy would sit down near the table in the morning and , fingering the Slavonic alphabet , repeat after his aunt : `` Az , Buky , Vedy . '' 
When they reached `` bra , vra , gra , dra '' for a long time the boy could not read these syllables without laughter . 
Foma succeeded easily in gaining knowledge , almost without any effort , and soon he was reading the first psalm of the first section of the psalter : `` Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly . '' 
`` That 's it , my darling ! 
So , Fomushka , that 's right ! '' 
chimed in his aunt with emotion , enraptured by his progress . 
`` You 're a fine fellow , Foma ! '' 
Ignat would approvingly say when informed of his son 's progress . 
`` We 'll go to Astrakhan for fish in the spring , and toward autumn I 'll send you to school ! '' 
The boy 's life rolled onward , like a ball downhill . 
Being his teacher , his aunt was his playmate as well . 
Luba Mayakin used to come , and when with them , the old woman readily became one of them . 
They played at `` hide and seek '' and `` blind man 's buff ; '' the children were pleased and amused at seeing Anfisa , her eyes covered with a handkerchief , her arms outstretched , walking about the room carefully , and yet striking against chairs and tables , or looking for them in each and every commodious corner , saying : `` Eh , little rascals . 
Eh , rogues . 
Where have they hidden themselves ? 
Eh ? '' 
And the sun shone cheerfully and playfully upon the old worn-out body , which yet retained a youthful soul , and upon the old life , that was adorning , according to its strength and abilities , the life-path of two children . 
Ignat used to go to the Exchange early in the morning and sometimes stayed away until evening ; in the evening he used to go to the town council or visiting or elsewhere . 
Sometimes he returned home intoxicated . 
At first Foma , on such occasions , ran from him and hid himself , then he became accustomed to it , and learned that his father was better when drunk than sober : he was kinder and plainer and was somewhat comical . 
If it happened at night , the boy was usually awakened by his trumpet-like voice : `` Anfisa ! 
Dear sister ! 
Let me in to my son ; let me in to my successor ! '' 
And auntie answered him in a crying and reproachful voice : `` Go on . 
You better go to sleep , you cursed devil ! 
Drunk again , eh ? 
You are gray already ? '' 
`` Anfisa ! 
May I see my son , with one eye ? '' 
Foma knew that Anfisa would not let him in , and he again fell asleep in spite of the noise of their voices . 
But when Ignat came home intoxicated during the day he immediately seized his son with his enormous paws and carried him about the rooms , asking him with an intoxicated , happy laughter : `` Fomka ! 
What do you wish ? 
Speak ! 
Presents ? 
Playthings ? 
Ask ! 
Because you must know there 's nothing in this world that I would n't buy for you . 
I have a million ! 
Ha , ha , ha ! 
And I 'll have still more ! 
Understand ? 
All 's yours ! 
Ha , ha ! '' 
And suddenly his enthusiasm was extinguished like a candle put out by a violent puff of the wind . 
His flushed face began to shake , his eyes , burning red , filled with tears , and his lips expanded into a sad and frightened smile . 
`` Anfisa , in case he should die , what am I to do then ? '' 
And immediately after these words he was seized with fury . 
`` I 'd burn everything ! '' 
he roared , staring wildly into some dark corner of the room . 
`` I 'd destroy everything ! 
I 'd blow it up with dynamite ! '' 
`` Enough , you ugly brute ! 
Do you wish to frighten the child ? 
Or do you want him to take sick ? '' 
interposed Anfisa , and that was sufficient for Ignat to rush off hastily , muttering : `` Well , well , well ! 
I am going , I am going , but do n't cry ! 
Do n't make any noise . 
Do n't frighten him . '' 
And when Foma was somewhat sick , his father , casting everything aside , did not leave the house for a moment , but bothered his sister and his son with stupid questions and advice ; gloomy , sighing , and with fear in his eyes , he walked about the house quite out of sorts . 
`` Why do you vex the Lord ? '' 
said Anfisa . 
`` Beware , your grumblings will reach Him , and He will punish you for your complaints against His graces . '' 
`` Eh , sister ! '' 
sighed Ignat . 
`` And if it should happen ? 
My entire life is crumbling away ! 
Wherefore have I lived ? 
No one knows . '' 
Similar scenes and the striking transitions of his father from one mood to another frightened the child at first , but he soon became accustomed to all this , and when he noticed through the window that his father , on coming home , was hardly able to get out of the sledge , Foma said indifferently : `` Auntie , papa came home drunk again . '' 
... . 
Spring came , and , fulfilling his promise , Ignat took his son along on one of his steamers , and here a new life , abounding in impressions , was opened before Foma 's eyes . 
The beautiful and mighty `` Yermak , '' Gordyeeff 's steam tow-boat , was rapidly floating down the current , and on each side the shores of the powerful and beautiful Volga were slowly moving past him -- the left side , all bathed in sunshine , stretching itself to the very end of the sky like a pompous carpet of verdure ; the right shore , its high banks overgrown with woods , swung skyward , sinking in stern repose . 
The broad-bosomed river stretched itself majestically between the shores ; noiselessly , solemnly and slowly flowed its waters , conscious of their invincible power ; the mountainous shore is reflected in the water in a black shadow , while on the left side it is adorned with gold and with verdant velvet by a border of sand and the wide meadows . 
Here and there villages appear on mountain and on meadow , the sun shines bright on the window-panes of the huts and on the yellow roofs of straw , the church crosses sparkle amid the verdure of the trees , gray wind-mill wings revolve lazily in the air , smoke from the factory chimney rises skyward in thick , black curling clouds . 
Crowds of children in blue , red or white shirts , standing on the banks , shouted loudly at the sight of the steamer , which had disturbed the quiet of the river , and from under the steamer 's wheels the cheerful waves are rushing toward the feet of the children and splash against the bank . 
Now a crowd of children , seated in a boat , rowed toward the middle of the river to rock there on the waves as in a cradle . 
Trees stood out above the water ; sometimes many of them are drowned in the overflow of the banks , and these stand in the water like islands . 
From the shore a melancholy song is heard : `` Oh , o-o-o , once more ! '' 
The steamer passes many rafts , splashing them with waves . 
The beams are in continual motion under the blows of the waves ; the men on the rafts in blue shirts , staggering , look at the steamer and laugh and shout something . 
The big , beautiful vessel goes sidewise on the river ; the yellow scantlings with which it is loaded sparkle like gold and are dimly reflected in the muddy , vernal water . 
A passenger steamer comes from the opposite side and whistles -- the resounding echo of the whistle loses itself in the woods , in the gorges of the mountainous bank , and dies away there . 
In the middle of the river the waves stirred up by the two vessels strike against one another and splash against the steamers ' sides , and the vessels are rocked upon the water . 
On the slope of the mountainous bank are verdant carpets of winter corn , brown strips of fallow ground and black strips of ground tilled for spring corn . 
Birds , like little dots , soar over them , and are clearly seen in the blue canopy of the sky ; nearby a flock is grazing ; in the distance they look like children 's toys ; the small figure of the shepherd stands leaning on a staff , and looks at the river . 
The glare of the water -- freedom and liberty are everywhere , the meadows are cheerfully verdant and the blue sky is tenderly clear ; a restrained power is felt in the quiet motion of the water ; above it the generous May sun is shining , the air is filled with the exquisite odour of fir trees and of fresh foliage . 
And the banks keep on meeting them , caressing the eyes and the soul with their beauty , as new pictures constantly unfold themselves . 
Everything surrounding them bears the stamp of some kind of tardiness : all -- nature as well as men -- live there clumsily , lazily ; but in that laziness there is an odd gracefulness , and it seems as though beyond the laziness a colossal power were concealed ; an invincible power , but as yet deprived of consciousness , as yet without any definite desires and aims . 
And the absence of consciousness in this half-slumbering life throws shades of sadness over all the beautiful slope . 
Submissive patience , silent hope for something new and more inspiriting are heard even in the cry of the cuckoo , wafted to the river by the wind from the shore . 
The melancholy songs sound as though imploring someone for help . 
And at times there is in them a ring of despair . 
The river answers the songs with sighs . 
And the tree-tops shake , lost in meditation . 
Silence . 
Foma spent all day long on the captain 's bridge beside his father . 
Without uttering a word , he stared wide-eyed at the endless panorama of the banks , and it seemed to him he was moving along a broad silver path in those wonderful kingdoms inhabited by the sorcerers and giants of his familiar fairy-tales . 
At times he would load his father with questions about everything that passed before them . 
Ignat answered him willingly and concisely , but the boy was not pleased with his answers ; they contained nothing interesting and intelligible to him , and he did not hear what he longed to hear . 
Once he told his father with a sigh : `` Auntie Anfisa knows better than you . '' 
`` What does she know ? '' 
asked Ignat , smiling . 
`` Everything , '' replied the boy , convincedly . 
No wonderful kingdom appeared before him . 
But often cities appeared on the banks of the river , just such cities as the one where Foma lived . 
Some of them were larger , some smaller , but the people , and the houses , and the churches -- all were the same as in his own city . 
Foma examined them in company with his father , but was still unsatisfied and returned to the steamer gloomy and fatigued . 
`` Tomorrow we shall be in Astrakhan , '' said Ignat one day . 
`` And is it just the same as the other cities ? '' 
`` Of course . 
How else should it be ? '' 
`` And what is beyond Astrakhan ? '' 
`` The sea . 
The Caspian Sea it is called . '' 
`` And what is there ? '' 
`` Fishes , queer fellow ! 
What else can there be in the water ? '' 
`` There 's the city Kitezh standing in the water . '' 
`` That 's a different thing ! 
That 's Kitezh . 
Only righteous people live there . '' 
`` And are there no righteous cities on the sea ? '' 
`` No , '' said Ignat , and , after a moment 's silence , added : `` The sea water is bitter and nobody can drink it . '' 
`` And is there more land beyond the sea ? '' 
`` Certainly , the sea must have an end . 
It is like a cup . '' 
`` And are there cities there too ? '' 
`` Again cities . 
Of course ! 
Only that land is not ours , it belongs to Persia . 
Did you see the Persians selling pistachio-nuts and apricots in the market ? '' 
`` Yes , I saw them , '' replied Foma , and became pensive . 
One day he asked his father : `` Is there much more land left ? '' 
`` The earth is very big , my dear ! 
If you should go on foot , you could n't go around it even in ten years . '' 
Ignat talked for a long time with his son about the size of the earth , and said at length : `` And yet no one knows for certain how big it really is , nor where it ends . '' 
`` And is everything alike on earth ? '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` The cities and all ? '' 
`` Well , of course , the cities are like cities . 
There are houses , streets -- and everything that is necessary . '' 
After many similar conversations the boy no longer stared so often into the distance with the interrogative look of his black eyes . 
The crew of the steamer loved him , and he , too , loved those fine , sun-burnt and weather-beaten fellows , who laughingly played with him . 
They made fishing tackles for him , and little boats out of bark , played with him and rowed him about the anchoring place , when Ignat went to town on business . 
The boy often heard the men talking about his father , but he paid no attention to what they said , and never told his father what he heard about him . 
But one day , in Astrakhan , while the steamer was taking in a cargo of fuel , Foma heard the voice of Petrovich , the machinist : `` He ordered such a lot of wood to be taken in . 
What an absurd man ! 
First he loads the steamer up to the very deck , and then he roars . 
` You break the machinery too often , ' he says . 
` You pour oil , ' he says , ` at random . ' '' 
The voice of the gray and stern pilot replied : `` It 's all his exorbitant greediness . 
Fuel is cheaper here , so he is taking all he can . 
He is greedy , the devil ! '' 
`` Oh , how greedy ! '' 
This word , repeated many times in succession , fixed itself in Foma 's memory , and in the evening , at supper , he suddenly asked his father : `` Papa ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Are you greedy ? '' 
In reply to his father 's questions Foma told him of the conversation between the pilot and the machinist . 
Ignat 's face became gloomy , and his eyes began to flash angrily . 
`` That 's how it is , '' ejaculated Ignat , shaking his head . 
`` Well , you -- do n't you listen to them . 
They are not your equals ; do n't have so much to do with them . 
You are their master , they are your servants , understand that . 
If we choose to , we can put every one of them ashore . 
They are cheap and they can be found everywhere like dogs . 
Understand ? 
They may say many bad things about me . 
But they say them , because I am their master . 
The whole thing arises because I am fortunate and rich , and the rich are always envied . 
A happy man is everybody 's enemy . '' 
About two days later there was a new pilot and another machinist on the steamer . 
`` And where is Yakov ? '' 
asked the boy . 
`` I discharged him . 
I ordered him away . '' 
`` For that ? '' 
queried Foma . 
`` Yes , for that very thing . '' 
`` And Petrovich , too ? '' 
`` Yes , I sent him the same way . '' 
Foma was pleased with the fact that his father was able to change the men so quickly . 
He smiled to his father , and , coming out on the deck , walked up to a sailor , who sat on the floor , untwisting a piece of rope and making a swab . 
`` We have a new pilot here , '' announced Foma . 
`` I know . 
Good health to you , Foma Ignatich ! 
How did you sleep ? '' 
`` And a new machinist , too . '' 
`` And a new machinist . 
Are you sorry for Petrovich ? '' 
`` Really ? 
And he was so good to you . '' 
`` Well , why did he abuse my father ? '' 
`` Oh ? 
Did he abuse him ? '' 
`` Of course he did . 
I heard it myself . '' 
`` Mm -- and your father heard it , too ? '' 
`` No , I told him . '' 
`` You -- so '' -- drawled the sailor and became silent , taking up his work again . 
`` And papa says to me : ` You , ' he says , ` you are master here -- you can drive them all away if you wish . ' '' 
`` So , '' said the sailor , gloomily looking at the boy , who was so enthusiastically boasting to him of his supreme power . 
From that day on Foma noticed that the crew did not regard him as before . 
Some became more obliging and kind , others did not care to speak to him , and when they did speak to him , it was done angrily , and not at all entertainingly , as before . 
Foma liked to watch while the deck was being washed : their trousers rolled up to their knees , or sometimes taken off altogether , the sailors , with swabs and brushes in their hands , cleverly ran about the deck , emptying pails of water on it , besprinkling one another , laughing , shouting , falling . 
Streams of water ran in every direction , and the lively noise of the men intermingled with the gray splash of the water . 
Before , the boy never bothered the sailors in this playful and light work ; nay , he took an active part , besprinkling them with water and laughingly running away , when they threatened to pour water over him . 
But after Yakov and Petrovich had been discharged , he felt that he was in everybody 's way , that no one cared to play with him and that no one regarded him kindly . 
Surprised and melancholy , he left the deck , walked up to the wheel , sat down there , and , offended , he thoughtfully began to stare at the distant green bank and the dented strip of woods upon it . 
And below , on the deck , the water was splashing playfully , and the sailors were gaily laughing . 
He yearned to go down to them , but something held him back . 
`` Keep away from them as much as possible , '' he recalled his father 's words ; `` you are their master . '' 
Then he felt like shouting at the sailors -- something harsh and authoritative , so his father would scold them . 
He thought a long time what to say , but could not think of anything . 
Another two , three days passed , and it became perfectly clear to him that the crew no longer liked him . 
He began to feel lonesome on the steamer , and amid the parti-coloured mist of new impressions , still more often there came up before Foma the image of his kind and gentle Aunt Anfisa , with her stories , and smiles , and soft , ringing laughter , which filled the boy 's soul with a joyous warmth . 
He still lived in the world of fairy-tales , but the invisible and pitiless hand of reality was already at work tearing the beautiful , fine web of the wonderful , through which the boy had looked at everything about him . 
The incident with the machinist and the pilot directed his attention to his surroundings ; Foma 's eyes became more sharp-sighted . 
A conscious searchfulness appeared in them and in his questions to his father rang a yearning to understand which threads and springs were managing the deeds of men . 
One day a scene took place before him : the sailors were carrying wood , and one of them , the young , curly-haired and gay Yefim , passing the deck of the ship with hand-barrows , said loudly and angrily : `` No , he has no conscience whatever ! 
There was no agreement that I should carry wood . 
A sailor -- well , one 's business is clear -- but to carry wood into the bargain -- thank you ! 
That means for me to take off the skin I have not sold . 
He is without conscience ! 
