But his relations to her were changed when he noticed her one day in a carriage beside a stout man in a gray hat and with long hair falling over his shoulders . 
His face was like a bladder -- red and bloated ; he had neither moustache nor beard , and altogether he looked like a woman in disguise . 
Foma was told that this was her husband . 
Then dark and contradicting feelings sprang up within him : he felt like insulting the architect , and at the same time he envied and respected him . 
Medinskaya now seemed to him less beautiful and more accessible ; he began to feel sorry for her , and yet he thought malignantly : `` She must surely feel disgusted when he kisses her . '' 
And after all this he sometimes perceived in himself some bottomless and oppressive emptiness , which could not be filled up by anything -- neither by the impressions of the day just gone by nor by the recollection of the past ; and the Exchange , and his affairs , and his thoughts of Medinskaya -- all were swallowed up by this emptiness . 
It alarmed him : in the dark depth of this emptiness he suspected some hidden existence of a hostile power , as yet formless but already carefully and persistently striving to become incarnate . 
In the meantime Ignat , changing but little outwardly , was growing ever more restless and querulous and was complaining more often of being ill . 
`` I lost my sleep . 
It used to be so sound that even though you had torn off my skin , I would not have felt it . 
While now I toss about from side to side , and I fall asleep only toward morning . 
And every now and then I awaken . 
My heart beats unevenly , now , though tired out ; often thus : tuk-tuk-tuk . 
And sometimes it sinks of a sudden -- and it seems as though it would soon tear itself away and fall somewhere into the deep ; into the bosom . 
Oh Lord , have pity upon me through Thy great mercy . '' 
And heaving a penitent sigh , he would lift heavenward his stern eyes , grown dim now , devoid of their bright , sparkling glitter . 
`` Death keeps an eye on me somewhere close by , '' he said one day morosely , but humbly . 
And indeed , it soon felled his big , sturdy body to the ground . 
This happened in August , early in the morning . 
Foma was sound asleep when suddenly he felt somebody shaking him by the shoulder , and a hoarse voice called at his ear : `` Get up . '' 
He opened his eyes and saw that his father was seated in a chair near his bed , monotonously repeating in a dull voice : `` Get up , get up . '' 
The sun had just risen , and its light , falling on Ignat 's white linen shirt , had not yet lost its rosy tints . 
`` It 's early , '' said Foma , stretching himself . 
`` Well , you 'll sleep enough later . '' 
Lazily muffling himself in the blanket , Foma asked : `` Why do you need me ? '' 
`` Get up , dear , will you , please ? '' 
exclaimed Ignat , adding , somewhat offended : `` It must be necessary , since I am waking you . '' 
When Foma looked closely at his father 's face , he noticed that it was gray and weary . 
`` Are you ill ? '' 
`` Slightly . '' 
`` Shall we send for a doctor ? '' 
`` The devil take him ! '' 
Ignat waved his hand . 
`` I am not a young man any longer . 
I know it as well without him . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Oh , I know it ! '' 
said the old man , mysteriously , casting a strange glance around the room . 
Foma was dressing himself , and his father , with lowered head , spoke slowly : `` I am afraid to breathe . 
Something tells me that if I should now heave a deep sigh , my heart would burst . 
Today is Sunday ! 
After the morning mass is over , send for the priest . '' 
`` What are you talking about , papa ? '' 
Foma smiled . 
`` Nothing . 
Wash yourself and go into the garden . 
I ordered the samovar to be brought there . 
We 'll drink our tea in the morning coolness . 
I feel like drinking now hot , strong tea . 
Be quicker . '' 
The old man rose with difficulty from the chair , and , bent and barefooted , left the room in a staggering gait . 
Foma looked at his father , and a shooting chill of fear made his heart shrink . 
He washed himself in haste , and hurried out into the garden . 
There , under an old , spreading apple-tree sat Ignat in a big oaken armchair . 
The light of the sun fell in thin stripes through the branches of the trees upon the white figure of the old man clad in his night-garments . 
There was such a profound silence in the garden that even the rustle of a branch , accidentally touched by Foma 's clothes , seemed to him like a loud sound and he shuddered . 
On the table , before his father , stood the samovar , purring like a well-fed tom-cat and exhaling a stream of steam into the air . 
Amid the silence and the fresh verdure of the garden , which had been washed by abundant rains the day before , this bright spot of the boldly shining , loud brass seemed to Foma as something unnecessary , as something which suited neither the time nor the place -- nor the feeling that sprang up within him at the sight of the sickly , bent old man , who was dressed in white , and who sat alone underneath the mute , motionless , dark-green foliage , wherein red apples were modestly peeping . 
`` Be seated , '' said Ignat . 
`` We ought to send for a doctor . '' 
Foma advised him irresolutely , seating himself opposite him . 
`` It is n't necessary . 
It 's a little better now in the open air . 
And now I 'll sip some tea and perhaps that will do me more good , '' said Ignat , pouring out tea into the glasses , and Foma noticed that the teapot was trembling in his father 's hand . 
`` Drink . '' 
Silently moving up one glass for himself , Foma bent over it , blowing the foam off the surface of the tea , and with pain in his heart , hearing the loud , heavy breathing of his father . 
Suddenly something struck against the table with such force that the dishes began to rattle . 
Foma shuddered , threw up his head and met the frightened , almost senseless look of his father 's eyes . 
Ignat stared at his son and whispered hoarsely : `` An apple fell down -LRB- the devil take it ! -RRB- . 
It sounded like the firing of a gun . '' 
`` Wo n't you have some cognac in your tea ? '' 
Foma suggested . 
`` It is good enough without it . '' 
They became silent . 
A flight of finches winged past over the garden , scattering a provokingly cheerful twittering in the air . 
And again the ripe beauty of the garden was bathed in solemn silence . 
The fright was still in Ignat 's eyes . 
`` Oh Lord , Jesus Christ ! '' 
said he in a low voice , making the sign of the cross . 
`` Yes . 
There it is -- the last hour of my life . '' 
`` Stop , papa ! '' 
whispered Foma . 
`` Why stop ? 
We 'll have our tea , and then send for the priest , and for Mayakin . '' 
`` I 'd rather send for them now . '' 
`` They 'll soon toll for the mass -- the priest is n't home -- and then there 's no hurry , it may pass soon . '' 
And he noisily started to sip the tea out of the saucer . 
`` I should live another year or two . 
You are young , and I am very much afraid for you . 
Live honestly and firmly ; do not covet what belongs to other people , take good care of your own . '' 
It was hard for him to speak , he stopped short and rubbed his chest with his hand . 
`` Do not rely upon others ; expect but little from them . 
We all live in order to take , not to give . 
Oh Lord ! 
Have mercy on the sinner ! '' 
Somewhere in the distance the deep sound of the bell fell on the silence of the morning . 
Ignat and Foma crossed themselves three times . 
After the first sound of the bell-tone came another , then a third , and soon the air was filled with sounds of the church-bells , coming from all sides -- flowing , measured , calling aloud . 
`` There , they are tolling for the mass , '' said Ignat , listening to the echo of the bell-metal . 
`` Can you tell the bells by their sounds ? '' 
`` No , '' answered Foma . 
`` Just listen . 
This one now -- do you hear ? 
the bass -- this is from the Nikola Church . 
It was presented by Peter Mitrich Vyagin -- and this , the hoarse one -- this is at the church of Praskeva Pyatnitza . '' 
The singing waves of the bell-tones agitated the air , which was filled with them , and they died away in the clear blue of the sky . 
Foma stared thoughtfully at his father 's face and saw that the alarm was disappearing from his eyes , and that they were now brighter . 
But suddenly the old man 's face turned very red , his eyes distended and rolled out of their orbits , his mouth opened with fright , and from it issued a strange , hissing sound : `` F-F-A-A-ch . '' 
Immediately after this Ignat 's head fell back on his shoulder , and his heavy body slowly slipped down from the chair to the ground as if the earth had dragged him imperiously unto itself . 
Foma was motionless and silent for awhile , then he rushed up to Ignat , lifted his head from the ground and looked into his face . 
The face was dark , motionless , and the wide-open eyes expressed nothing -- neither pain , nor fear , nor joy . 
Foma looked around him . 
As before , nobody was in the garden , and the resounding chatter of the bells was still roaring in the air . 
Foma 's hands began to tremble , he let go his father 's head , and it struck heavily against the ground . 
Dark , thick blood began to gush in a narrow stream from his open mouth across his blue cheek . 
Foma struck his breast with both hands , and kneeling before the dead body , he wildly cried aloud . 
He was trembling with fright , and with eyes like those of a madman he was searching for someone in the verdure of the garden . 
HIS father 's death stupefied Foma and filled him with a strange sensation ; quiet was poured into his soul -- a painful , immovable quiet , which absorbed all the sounds of life without accounting for it . 
All sorts of acquaintances were bustling about him ; they appeared , disappeared , said something to him -- his replies to them were untimely , and their words called forth no images in him , drowning , without leaving any trace , in the bottomless depths of the death-like silence which filled his soul . 
He neither cried , nor grieved , nor thought of anything ; pale and gloomy , with knitted brow , he was attentively listening to this quiet , which had forced out all his feelings , benumbed his heart and tightly clutched his brains . 
He was conscious but of the purely physical sensation of heaviness in all his frame and particularly in his breast , and then it also seemed to him that it was always twilight , and even though the sun was still high in the sky -- everything on earth looked dark and melancholy . 
The funeral was arranged by Mayakin . 
Hastily and briskly he was bustling about in the rooms , making much clatter with the heels of his boots ; he cried at the household help imperiously , clapped his godson on the shoulder , consoling him : `` And why are you petrified ? 
Roar and you will feel relieved . 
Your father was old -- old in body . 
Death is prepared for all of us , you can not escape it -- consequently you must not be prematurely torpid . 
You can not bring him to life again with your sorrow , and your grief is unnecessary to him , for it is said : ` When the body is robbed of the soul by the terrible angels , the soul forgets all relatives and acquaintances , ' which means that you are of no consequence to him now , whether you cry or laugh . 
But the living must care for the living . 
You had better cry , for this is human . 
It brings much relief to the heart . '' 
But neither did these words provoke anything in Foma 's head or in his heart . 
He came to himself , however , on the day of the funeral , thanks to the persistence of his godfather , who was assiduously and oddly trying to rouse his sad soul . 
The day of the funeral was cloudy and dreary . 
Amid a heavy cloud of dust an enormous crowd of people , winding like a black ribbon , followed the coffin of Ignat Gordyeeff . 
Here and there flashed the gold of the priest 's robes , and the dull noise of the slow movement of the crowd blended in harmony with the solemn music of the choir , composed of the bishop 's choristers . 
Foma was pushed from behind and from the sides ; he walked , seeing nothing but the gray head of his father , and the mournful singing resounded in his heart like a melancholy echo . 
And Mayakin , walking beside him , kept on intrusively whispering in his ears : `` Look , what a crowd -- thousands ! 
The governor himself came out to accompany your father to the church , the mayor , and almost the entire city council . 
And behind you -- just turn around ! 
There goes Sophya Pavlovna . 
The town pays its respects to Ignat . '' 
At first Foma did not listen to his godfather 's whisper , but when he mentioned Medinskaya , he involuntarily looked back and noticed the governor . 
A little drop of something pleasant fell into his heart at the sight of this important personage , with a bright ribbon across his shoulder , with orders on his breast , pacing after the coffin , an expression of sorrow on his stern countenance . 
`` Blessed is the road where this soul goeth today , '' Yakov Tarasovich hummed softly , moving his nose , and he again whispered in his godson 's ear : `` Seventy-five thousand roubles is such a sum that you can demand so many escorts for it . 
Have you heard that Sonka is making arrangements for the laying of the corner-stone on the fifteenth ? 
Just forty days after the death of your father . '' 
Foma again turned back , and his eyes met the eyes of Medinskaya . 
He heaved a deep sigh at her caressing glance , and felt relieved at once , as if a warm ray of light penetrated his soul and something melted there . 
And then and there he considered that it was unbecoming him to turn his head from side to side . 
At church Foma 's head began to ache , and it seemed to him that everything around and underneath him was shaking . 
In the stifling air , filled with dust , with the breathing of the people and the smoke of the incense , the flames of the candles were timidly trembling . 
The meek image of Christ looked down at him from the big ikon , and the flames of the candles , reflected in the tarnished gold of the crown over the Saviour 's brow , reminded him of drops of blood . 
Foma 's awakened soul was greedily feeding itself on the solemn , gloomy poetry of the liturgy , and when the touching citation was heard , `` Come , let us give him the last kiss , '' a loud , wailing sob escaped from Foma 's chest , and the crowd in church was stirred to agitation by this outburst of grief . 
Having uttered the sob , Foma staggered . 
His godfather immediately caught him by his arms and began to push him forward to the coffin , singing quite loudly and with some anger : `` Kiss him who was but lately with us . 
Kiss , Foma , kiss him -- he is given over to the grave , covered with a stone . 
He is settling down in darkness , and is buried with the dead . '' 
Foma touched his father 's forehead with his lips and sprang back from the coffin with horror . 
`` Hold your peace ! 
You nearly knocked me down , '' Mayakin remarked to him , in a low voice , and these simple , calm words supported Foma better than his godfather 's hands . 
`` Ye that behold me mute and lifeless before you , weep for me , brethren and friends , '' begged Ignat through the mouth of the Church . 
But his son was not crying any longer ; his horror was called forth by the black , swollen face of his father , and this horror somewhat sobered his soul , which had been intoxicated by the mournful music of the Church 's lament for its sinful son . 
He was surrounded by acquaintances , who were kindly consoling him ; he listened to them and understood that they all felt sorry for him and that he became dear to them . 
And his godfather whispered in his ear : `` See , how they all fawn upon you . 
The tom-cats have smelt the fat . '' 
These words were unpleasant to Foma , but they were useful to him , as they caused him to answer at all events . 
At the cemetery , when they sang for Ignat 's eternal memory , he cried again bitterly and loud . 
His godfather immediately seized him by the arms and led him away from the grave , speaking to him earnestly : `` What a faint-hearted fellow you are ! 
Do I not feel sorry for him ? 
I have known his real value , while you were but his son . 
And yet , I do not cry . 
For more than thirty years we lived together in perfect harmony -- how much had been spoken , how much thought -- how much sorrow drunk . 
You are young ; it is not for you to grieve ! 
Your life is before you , and you will be rich in all sorts of friendship ; while I am old , and now that I buried my only friend , I am like a pauper . 
I can no longer make a bosom friend ! '' 
The old man 's voice began to jar and squeak queerly . 
His face was distorted , his lips were stretched into a big grimace and were quivering , and from his small eyes frequent tears were running over the now contracted wrinkles of his face . 
He looked so pitiful and so unlike himself , that Foma stopped short , pressed him close to his body with the tenderness of a strong man and cried with alarm : `` Do n't cry , father -- darling ! 
Do n't cry . '' 
`` There you have it ! '' 
said Mayakin , faintly , and , heaving a deep sigh , he suddenly turned again into a firm and clever old man . 
`` You must not cry , '' said he , mysteriously , seating himself in the carriage beside his godson . 
`` You are now the commander-in-chief in the war and you must command your soldiers bravely . 
Your soldiers are the roubles , and you have a great army of these . 
Make war incessantly ! '' 
Surprised at the quickness of his transformation , Foma listened to his words and for some reason or other they reminded him of those clods of earth , which the people threw into Ignat 's grave upon his coffin . 
`` On whom am I to make war ? '' 
said Foma with a sigh . 
`` I 'll teach you that ! 
Did your father tell you that I was a clever old man and that you should mind me ? '' 
`` He did . '' 
`` Then do mind me ! 
If my mind should be added to your youthful strength , a good victory might be won . 
Your father was a great man , but he did not look far before him and he could not take my advice . 
He gained success in life not with his mind , but more with his head . 
Oh , what will become of you ? 
You had better move into my house , for you will feel lonesome in yours . '' 
`` Aunt is there . '' 
`` Aunt ? 
She is sick . 
She will not live long . '' 
`` Do not speak of it , '' begged Foma in a low voice . 
`` And I will speak of it . 
You need not fear death -- you are not an old woman on the oven . 
Live fearlessly and do what you were appointed to do . 
Man is appointed for the organisation of life on earth . 
Man is capital -- like a rouble , he is made up of trashy copper groshes and copecks . 
From the dust of the earth , as it is said ; and even as he has intercourse with the world , he absorbs grease and oil , sweat and tears -- a soul and a mind form themselves in him . 
And from this he starts to grow upward and downward . 
Now , you see his price is a grosh , now a fifteen copeck silver piece , now a hundred roubles , and sometimes he is above any price . 
He is put into circulation and he must bring interests to life . 
Life knows the value of each of us and will not check our course before time . 
Nobody , dear , works to his own detriment , if he is wise . 
And life has saved up much wisdom . 
Are you listening ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
`` And what do you understand ? '' 
`` Everything . '' 
`` You are probably lying ? '' 
Mayakin doubted . 
`` But , why must we die ? '' 
asked Foma in a low voice . 
Mayakin looked into his face with regret , smacked his lips and said : `` A wise man would never ask such a question . 
A wise man knows for himself that if it is a river , it must be flowing somewhere , and if it were standing in one place , it would be a swamp . '' 
`` You 're simply mocking me at random , '' said Foma , sternly . 
`` The sea is not flowing anywhere . '' 
`` The sea receives all rivers into itself , and then , powerful storms rage in it at times . 
Then the sea of life also submits on agitation , stirred up by men , and death renovates the waters of the sea of life , that they might not become spoiled . 
No matter how many people are dying , they are nevertheless forever growing in number . '' 
`` What of it ? 
But my father is dead . '' 
`` You will die as well . '' 
`` Then what have I to do with the fact that people are growing in number ? '' 
Foma smiled sadly . 
`` Eh , he , he ! '' 
sighed Mayakin . 
`` That , indeed , concerns none of us . 
There , your trousers probably reason in the same way : what have we to do with the fact that there are all sorts of stuff in the world ? 
But you do not mind them -- you wear them out and throw them away . '' 
Foma glanced at his godfather reproachfully , and noticing that the old man was smiling , he was astonished and he asked respectfully : `` Can it be true , father , that you do not fear death ? '' 
`` Most of all I fear foolishness , my child , '' replied Mayakin with humble bitterness . 
`` My opinion is this : if a fool give you honey , spit upon it ; if a wise man give you poison , drink it ! 
And I will tell you that the perch has a weak soul since his fins do not stand on end . '' 
The old man 's mocking words offended and angered Foma . 
He turned aside and said : `` You can never speak without these subterfuges . '' 
`` I can not ! '' 
exclaimed Mayakin , and his eyes began to sparkle with alarm . 
`` Each man uses the very same tongue he has . 
Do I seem to be stern ? 
Do I ? '' 
Foma was silent . 
`` Eh , you . 
Know this -- he loves who teaches . 
Remember this well . 
And as to death , do not think of it . 
It is foolish , dear , for a live man to think of death . 
` Ecclesiastes ' reflected on death better than anybody else reflected on it , and said that a living dog is better than a dead lion . '' 
They came home . 
The street near the house was crowded with carriages , and from the open windows came loud sounds of talk . 
As soon as Foma appeared in the hall , he was seized by the arms and led away to the table and there was urged to drink and eat something . 
A marketplace noise smote the air ; the hall was crowded and suffocating . 
Silently , Foma drank a glass of vodka , then another , and a third . 
Around him they were munching and smacking their lips ; the vodka poured out from the bottles was gurgling , the wine-glasses were tinkling . 
They were speaking of dried sturgeon and of the bass of the soloist of the bishop 's choir , and then again of the dried sturgeon , and then they said that the mayor also wished to make a speech , but did not venture to do so after the bishop had spoken , fearing lest he should not speak so well as the bishop . 
Someone was telling with feeling : `` The deceased one used to do thus : he would cut off a slice of salmon , pepper it thickly , cover it with another slice of salmon , and then send it down immediately after a drink . '' 
`` Let us follow his example , '' roared a thick basso . 
Offended to the quick , Foma looked with a frown at the fat lips and at the jaws chewing the tasty food , and he felt like crying out and driving away all these people , whose sedateness had but lately inspired him with respect for them . 
`` You had better be more kind , more sociable , '' said Mayakin in a low voice , coming up to him . 
`` Why are they gobbling here ? 
Is this a tavern ? '' 
cried Foma , angrily . 
`` Hush , '' Mayakin remarked with fright and hastily turned to look around with a kind smile on his face . 
But it was too late ; his smile was of no avail . 
Foma 's words had been overheard , the noise and the talk was subsiding , some of the guests began to bustle about hurriedly , others , offended , frowned , put down their forks and knives and walked away from the table , all looking at Foma askance . 
Silent and angry , he met these glances without lowering his eyes . 
`` I ask you to come up to the table ! '' 
cried Mayakin , gleaming amid the crowd of people like an ember amid ashes . 
`` Be seated , pray ! 
They 're soon serving pancakes . '' 
Foma shrugged his shoulders and walked off toward the door , saying aloud : `` I shall not eat . '' 
He heard a hostile rumbling behind him and his godfather 's wheedling voice saying to somebody : `` It 's for grief . 
Ignat was at once father and mother to him . '' 
Foma came out in the garden and sat down on the same place where his father had died . 
The feeling of loneliness and grief oppressed his heart . 
He unbuttoned the collar of his shirt to make his breathing easier , rested his elbows on the table , and with his head tightly pressed between his hands , he sat motionless . 
It was drizzling and the leaves of the apple-tree were rustling mournfully under the drops of the rain . 
He sat there for a long time alone , motionless , watching how the small drops were falling from the apple-tree . 
His head was heavy from the vodka , and in his heart there was a growing grudge against men . 
Some indefinite , impersonal feelings and thoughts were springing up and vanishing within him ; before him flashed the bald skull of his godfather with a little crown of silver hair and with a dark face , which resembled the faces of the ancient ikons . 
This face with the toothless mouth and the malicious smile , rousing in Foma hatred and fear , augmented in him the consciousness of solitude . 
Then he recalled the kind eyes of Medinskaya and her small , graceful figure ; and beside her arose the tall , robust , and rosy-cheeked Lubov Mayakina with smiling eyes and with a big light golden-coloured braid . 
`` Do not rely upon men , expect but little at their hands '' -- his father 's words began to ring in his memory . 
He sighed sadly and cast a glance around him . 
The tree leaves were fluttering from the rain , and the air was full of mournful sounds . 
The gray sky seemed as though weeping , and on the trees cold tears were trembling . 
And Foma 's soul was dry , dark ; it was filled with a painful feeling of orphanhood . 
But this feeling gave birth to the question : `` How shall I live now that I am alone ? '' 
The rain drenched his clothes , and when he felt that he was shivering with cold he arose and went into the house . 
Life was tugging him from all sides , giving him no chance to be concentrated in thinking of and grieving for his father , and on the fortieth day after Ignat 's death Foma , attired in holiday clothes , with a pleasant feeling in his heart , went to the ceremony of the corner-stone laying of the lodging-asylum . 
Medinskaya notified him in a letter the day before , that he had been elected as a member of the building committee and also as honorary member of the society of which she was president . 
This pleased him and he was greatly agitated by the part he was to play today at the laying of the corner-stone . 
On his way he thought of how everything would be and how he should behave in order not to be confused before the people . 
`` Eh , eh ! 
Hold on ! '' 
He turned around . 
Mayakin came hastening to him from the sidewalk . 
He was in a frock-coat that reached his heels , in a high cap , and he carried a huge umbrella in his hand . 
`` Come on , take me up there , '' said the old man , cleverly jumping into the carriage like a monkey . 
`` To tell the truth , I was waiting for you . 
I was looking around , thinking it was time for you to go . '' 
`` Are you going there ? '' 
asked Foma . 
`` Of course ! 
I must see how they will bury my friend 's money in the ground . '' 
Foma looked at him askance and was silent . 
`` Why do you frown upon me ? 
Do n't fear , you will also start out as a benefactor among men . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
asked Foma , reservedly . 
`` I 've read in the newspaper this morning that you were elected as a member of the building committee and also as an honorary member of Sophya 's society . '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` This membership will eat into your pocket ! '' 
sighed Mayakin . 
`` That would n't ruin me . '' 
`` I do n't know it , '' observed the old man , maliciously . 
`` I speak of this more because there is altogether very little wisdom in this charity business , and I may even say that it is n't a business at all , but simply harmful nonsense . '' 
`` Is it harmful to aid people ? '' 
asked Foma , hotly . 
`` Eh , you cabbage head ! '' 
said Mayakin with a smile . 
`` You had better come up to my house , I 'll open your eyes in regard to this . 
I must teach you ! 
Will you come ? '' 
`` Very well , I will come ! '' 
replied Foma . 
`` So . 
And in the meantime , hold yourself proud at the laying of the corner-stone . 
Stand in view of everybody . 
If I do n't tell this to you , you might hide yourself behind somebody 's back . '' 
`` Why should I hide myself ? '' 
said Foma , displeased . 
`` That 's just what I say : there is no reason why . 
For the money was donated by your father and you are entitled to the honour as his heir . 
Honour is just the same as money . 
With honour a business man will get credit everywhere , and everywhere there is a way open to him . 
Then come forward , so that everybody may see you and that if you do five copecks ' worth of work , you should get a rouble in return for it . 
And if you will hide yourself -- nothing but foolishness will be the result . '' 
They arrived at their destination , where all the important people had gathered already , and an enormous crowd of people surrounded the piles of wood , bricks and earth . 
The bishop , the governor , the representatives of the city 's aristocracy and the administration formed , together with the splendidly dressed ladies , a big bright group and looked at the efforts of the two stonemasons , who were preparing the bricks and the lime . 
Mayakin and his godson wended their way toward this group . 
He whispered to Foma : `` Lose no courage , these people have robbed their bellies to cover themselves with silk . '' 
And he greeted the governor before the bishop , in a respectfully cheerful voice . 
`` How do you do , your Excellency ? 
Give me your blessing , your Holiness ! '' 
`` Ah , Yakov Tarasovich ! '' 
exclaimed the governor with a friendly smile , shaking and squeezing Mayakin 's hand , while the old man was at the same time kissing the bishop 's hand . 
`` How are you , deathless old man ? '' 
`` I thank you humbly , your Excellency ! 
My respects to Sophya Pavlovna ! '' 
Mayakin spoke fast , whirling like a peg-top amid the crowd of people . 
In a minute he managed to shake hands with the presiding justice of the court , with the prosecutor , with the mayor -- in a word , with all those people whom he considered it necessary to greet first ; such as these , however , were few . 
He jested , smiled and at once attracted everybody 's attention to his little figure , and Foma with downcast head stood behind him , looking askance at these people wrapped in costly stuffs , embroidered with gold ; he envied the old man 's adroitness and lost his courage , and feeling that he was losing his courage -- he grew still more timid . 
But now Mayakin seized him by the hand and drew him up to himself . 
`` There , your Excellency , this is my godson , Foma , the late Ignat 's only son . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the governor in his basso , `` I 'm very pleased . 
I sympathise with you in your misfortune , young man ! '' 
he said , shaking Foma 's hand , and became silent ; then he added resolutely and confidently : `` To lose a father , that is a very painful misfortune . '' 
And , having waited about two seconds for Foma 's answer , he turned away from him , addressing Mayakin approvingly : `` I am delighted with the speech you made yesterday in the city hall ! 
Beautiful , clever , Yakov Tarasovich . 
Proposing to use the money for this public club , they do not understand the real needs of the population . '' 
`` And then , your Excellency , a small capital means that the city will have to add its own money . '' 
`` Perfectly true ! 
Perfectly true ! '' 
`` Temperance , I say , is good ! 
Would to God that all were sober ! 
I do n't drink , either , but what is the use of these performances , libraries and all that , since the people can not even read ? '' 
The governor replied approvingly . 
`` Here , I say , you better use this money for a technical institution . 
If it should be established on a small plan , this money alone will suffice , and in case it should n't , we can ask for more in St. Petersburg -- they 'll give it to us . 
Then the city would n't have to add of its own money , and the whole affair would be more sensible . '' 
`` Precisely ! 
I fully agree with you ! 
But how the liberals began to cry at you ! 
Eh ? 
Ha , ha ! '' 
`` That has always been their business , to cry . '' 
The deep cough of the archdeacon of the cathedral announced the beginning of the divine service . 
Sophya Pavlovna came up to Foma , greeted him and said in a sad , low voice : `` I looked at your face on the day of the funeral , and my heart saddened . 
My God , I thought , how he must suffer ! '' 
And Foma listened to her and felt as though he was drinking honey . 
`` These cries of yours , they shook my soul , my poor child ! 
I may speak to you this way , for I am an old woman already . '' 
`` You ! '' 
exclaimed Foma , softly . 
`` Is n't that so ? '' 
she asked , naively looking into his face . 
Foma was silent , his head bent on his breast . 
`` Do n't you believe that I am an old woman ? '' 
