Eutropius is looking for you to go to church with him . '' 
The boy shivered , and nimbly hid his handiwork inside the altar of Pan . 
He smoothed his hair , shook his clothes , and when he came out of the grotto had resumed an expression of impenetrable Christian hypocrisy . 
Eutropius , holding Julian 's hand in his bony one , conducted him to church . 
The Arian basilica of St. Maurice was built almost entirely of blocks taken from the ruined temple of Apollo . 
The sacred court , the atrium , was surrounded by colonnades . 
In the middle of this court murmured a fountain , placed there for the ablutions of the faithful . 
Under one of the side porticoes lay an ancient oaken tomb darkened with age ; and in this tomb were the wonder-working bones of St. Mamas , for which Eutropius had obliged Julian and Gallus themselves to build a stone-work shrine . 
The task of Gallus , who took to it as to a game , went rapidly forward , while the wall of Julian frequently crumbled and proved oddly unsatisfactory ; a phenomenon which Eutropius explained by remarking that St. Mamas refused the offering of children possessed by the demon of pride . 
The halt , the maimed , the sick , and the blind , expectant of miracle , thronged near the tomb . 
Julian understood why they stationed themselves here . 
One of the monks used to hold a pair of balances ; the pilgrims -- some of them come from hamlets many leagues away -- weighed with scrupulous care pieces of linen , woollen stuff , or silk ; and having laid them on the tomb of St. Mamas , would fall to praying all night . 
At daylight the stuff was weighed over again , and the weight compared with the weight on the previous day . 
If the texture proved heavier , it was declared that the prayer had been answered , that the divine mercy , like dew , had soaked into the stuff and rendered it capable of producing all manner of marvellous cures . 
But frequently the prayer was in vain . 
The stuff weighed just what it did before ; and pilgrims would pass whole days , weeks , even months , waiting at the sepulchre . 
Among the latter there was an old woman named Theodula . 
Some called her demented ; others counted her a saint . 
For years she had not quitted the tomb of St. Mamas . 
The daughter for whose restoration she had come to pray had now been a long while dead . 
But Theodula continued kneeling ceaselessly before her faded and ravelled fragment of cloth . 
From the outer court three doors led into the basilica -- one for women , one for men , and the third , in the centre , for monks and the lower clergy . 
With Eutropius and Gallus , Julian went in through this last door , being anagnost or reader of the lessons for the day . 
Clothed in a long black robe with white sleeves , his hair anointed , and bound back by a fillet that it might not fall into his eyes while reading aloud , Julian passed through the midst of the faithful , his eyes fixed humbly on the ground . 
His pale face assumed almost involuntarily the inevitable and hypocritical expression of submissiveness . 
He ascended the high rood-loft . 
The frescoes of the wall to the right depicted the martyrdom of St. Euthymus , in which one executioner seized the sufferer 's head , while another , wrenching open his mouth with pincers , brought the cup of molten lead to his lips . 
In another scene the executioner with an instrument of torture was flaying the childish and bleeding limbs of St. Euthymus , hanging from a tree by his hands . 
Beneath these frescoes ran the inscription , `` With the blood of the martyrs , O Lord , Thy church is arrayed as in purple and fine linen . '' 
On the opposite wall sinners were burning in the fire of the pit , and above them rose Paradise and the saints . 
One of the saints was plucking the fruits of the tree of Eden ; another playing the psaltery ; and a third , couched on a cloud , contemplated with a beatific smile the tortures of the damned . 
Beneath were written the words , `` Behold ! 
there shall be tears and gnashing of teeth ! '' 
The adorers of St. Mamas entered the church like a procession of all human maladies . 
The bandy-legged , the blind , the armless , the anæmic , children tottering along like old men , epileptics , idiots with pale faces and inflamed eyelids -- all bore the mark of a dull and desperate submission . 
When the choir ceased , there could be heard the contrite sighings of the `` widows of the church , '' black-robed nuns of the order of St. Basil , and the jingling of the chains of old Pamphilus , who for many a long year had addressed no word to the living , muttering only , `` Lord , Lord , give me tears ! 
-- grant me mercy ! 
-- give me an end to remembrance ! '' 
The atmosphere was that of a warm sepulchral chamber , thick , loaded with incense and the smell of melting wax , hot oil , and the breath of all these sick persons . 
Now it was Julian 's lot on that day to read aloud part of the Apocalypse . 
The terrifying pictures of the Revelation were unfolded , the white horse of Death soared through space above the peoples of the earth , as they knelt weeping at the nearness of the world 's end . '' 
The sun becomes dark as pitch , and the moon red as blood . 
Men say to the mountains , Fall on us and hide us from the throne of God and from the wrath of the Lamb , for the great day of His anger is come , and who can resist it ? '' 
Over and over again came the prophecy : '' Men shall seek death and shall not find it ; they shall desire death and it shall flee from them . '' 
Lamentation arose : '' Thrice happy are the dead ! '' 
and '' Then came the bloody destruction of all peoples , and the angel cast his sickle into the earth and gathered the vintage of the earth and cast it into the great wine-press of the wrath of God , and the wine-press was trodden without the city ; and there came out blood from the wine-press even unto the bridles of the horses , as far as a thousand and six hundred furlongs , '' and men cursed the God of heaven for their plagues , and they did not repent them of their sins ; and the angel sang : '' He Who worships the Beast and his image shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God , prepared in the cup of His anger , and shall be tormented in fire and sulphur before the holy angels and the Lamb , and the smoke of his torture shall rise in the night of ages . 
For he who shall adore the Beast and his image shall rest no more . '' 
Julian ended . 
A profound hush succeeded in the church . 
Painful sighs rose from the terrified crowd ; and the noise of foreheads struck against the earth and the clank of the fetters of Pamphilus , accompanying his perpetual murmur : `` Lord , Lord , give me tears ! 
-- grant me mercy ! 
-- give me an end of remembrance ! '' 
The child raised his eyes towards the spandril of mosaic between the columns of the arcade , representing the Arian image of Christ ; a sombre , terrible figure , its wasted face aureoled in gold , and diademed in the fashion of the Byzantine emperors . 
It was the face of an old man , with a long thin nose and lips severely shut . 
With his right hand he was blessing the world ; in the left he held a book in which was written , `` Peace be with you ; I am the Light of the World . '' 
He was seated on a splendid throne , and a Roman emperor -LRB- Julian imagined that it must be Constantius -RRB- was in the act of kissing his feet . 
In the penumbral shadow below this image , lighted by a single lamp , could be discerned a bas-relief on a sarcophagus , dating from the earliest Christian times . 
It displayed sea-nymphs , leopards , gay tritons blowing their horns , and among them Moses , Jonah and his whale , Orpheus charming the beasts with his lyre , an olive-branch , and a dove ; the whole sculpture a symbol of pure and childlike faith . 
In the midst stood the Good Shepherd bearing on his shoulder the sheep that had gone astray , the soul of the sinner . 
This barefooted youthful figure , with beardless face , had the joyous and simple bearing of a poor peasant , and his smile something of a heavenly sweetness . 
Julian imagined that nobody nowadays knew or saw that Good Shepherd ; and this little picture of old times was somehow connected in his mind with a dream of his childhood which he tried in vain to recover . 
And , gazing at this youth , who seemed as if mysteriously reproaching him , he murmured the name picked up from Mardonius , `` Galilean ! '' 
At that moment slanting rays of the sun through the windows trembled , above , in a cloud of incense , which , aflame with reflections from the gilded aureole , seemed to upheave the sombre and terrible image of the Arian Christ . 
The choir chanted , '' Let all human flesh be dumb and bow down , fearful and trembling , thinking no more of the things of the earth ; for the Emperor of emperors , the Lord of lords , has given Himself afresh as a pledge and a food to His faithful ; even He who is surrounded by the hosts of angels , by all powers and dominions , by cherubim with innumerable eyes , and by the six-winged seraphim , veiling their faces and singing , ` Alleluia ! 
Alleluia ! 
Alleluia ! ' '' 
Like a tempest the psalm swept over the bowed heads of the pilgrims . 
The figure of the Good Shepherd faded into the distance ; but its youthful gaze remained steadily fixed upon Julian , a gaze full of reproach . 
The heart of the child was moved , not by a sense of worship , but by an intolerable fear ; a fear before that mystery which was for him to remain for ever insoluble . 
From the Arian basilica Julian returned to Macellum , and got out his little galley which he had prepared for this special occasion ; and learning that Eutropius , after the Mass , had gone a journey of several days , the boy slipped through the barred gates of the fortress , and ran to the temple of Aphrodite , close to the church of St. Maurice . 
The sacred wood of the goddess bordered the Christian cemetery . 
Endless hostilities , debates , wranglings , and even lawsuits , were kept up between these two temples . 
The Christians begged for the destruction of the Pagan shrine ; Olympiodorus , the sacrificing priest , on the other hand , complained that the custodians of the basilica by night would secretly cut down ancient cypresses in the sacred wood , and dig graves for Christians in the soil belonging to Aphrodite . 
Into the wood Julian wound his way ; a warm breeze blew softly on his cheek . 
In the afternoon heat the grey and fibrous bark of the cypresses trickled with thick resinous tears . 
To Julian the dusk seemed perfumed by the very breath of the goddess . 
The white bodies of statues stood up in sharp relief against the rich shadow of trees . 
An Eros there had been maimed by some custodian of the basilica , who had rudely smashed off its marble bow . 
The weapon of the little winged Love-god , together with his hands , lay in deep grass at the foot of the pedestal . 
But although one-armed , the mischievous boy continued to take aim , and a mad smile of malice still fluttered on his lips . 
Julian entered the house of the priest , Olympiodorus . 
Its rooms were small but comfortable , and rather bare than luxurious . 
There was neither carpet nor silver dish to be seen ; the floors and furniture were of wood , and the vessels of clay . 
But everything bore the stamp of taste . 
The handle of the kitchen lamp was a marvellous little work of art representing Neptune with his trident ; the bold outlines of earthen jars , full of olive oil , won the admiration of Julian ; and along the walls ran light frescoes , water nymphs mounted on sea-unicorns ; and dancing women , clothed in the long robe of votaries of Pallas Athene , hovered along in graceful scroll-work . 
The little house stood all smiling in its bath of sunshine . 
Nereids , dancers , sea-unicorns , the Neptune on the lamp , and the inmates of the house , all seemed folk cheerful by nature , guiltless of ugliness , of malice or spleen . 
A couple of dozen olives , some white bread , a bunch of grapes , some wine and water , these were enough to turn the little meal into a feast , and Diophane , the wife of Olympiodorus , had in fact tied a wreath of laurel to the door to mark that very day a feast-day . 
Julian went into the little garden of the atrium . 
Under the blue sky a jet of water pulsed into the air , and in the midst of narcissus , acanthus-blossom , tulips , and myrrh , rose a bronze Hermes , winged and smiling like the rest of the cottage , and poised in the act of taking flight . 
Above the flowers , butterflies and bees playing in the sunshine chased each other , and in the shade of the porch Olympiodorus and his daughter Amaryllis , a pretty girl of some seventeen springs , were playing the Greek game of kottabos . 
On a slender column fixed in the earth , and oscillating like the scale of a balance , lay a little beam , which bore , slung from each end , a cup ; under each cup stood an amphora full of water , crowned by a statuette in metal . 
The game consisted in throwing from a certain distance a few drops of wine , in as high a curve as possible , into one of the little cups , which , thus suddenly weighted , would descend and strike the statuette . 
`` Play , play ; it is your turn ! '' 
cried Amaryllis . 
`` One , two , three ! '' 
Olympiodorus threw the contents of his goblet , and missed . 
He burst out into a boyish laugh . 
It was strange to see the tall grey-headed man so wholly absorbed in his game . 
The young girl , with a charming movement of her bare arm , threw back her mauve tunic and in her turn flung the liquid . 
The little cup of the kottabos rang upon the statuette . 
Amaryllis began laughing and clapping her hands . 
Suddenly , on the threshold they saw Julian , and both rushed to welcome him . 
Amaryllis cried -- `` Diophane ! 
where art thou ? 
Come and see what guest we 've got to-day . 
Quick , quick ! '' 
Diophane ran from the kitchen . 
`` Julian , my darling child ! 
... Do n't you think he is grown thinner ? 
How long it is since we have seen you ! 
... '' And she added , radiant with good humour -- `` You may well be merry , children , for this evening we shall have a real feast . 
I 'm going to prepare crowns of fresh roses ; I shall fry three perch , and make you cakes of gingerbread ! '' 
At this moment a young slave accosted Olympiodorus and whispered in his ear that a rich patrician lady of Cæsarea wished to see him , having something to discuss with the priest of Aphrodite . 
Olympiodorus followed the slave . 
Julian and Amaryllis went on with the game of kottabos . 
Presently a little twelve-year-old girl came shyly up to them . 
It was Psyche , the pale fair-haired and youngest child of Olympiodorus . 
She had great sad blue eyes , and , alone in the house , seemed a stranger to the cult of Aphrodite , and apart from the general gaiety . 
Keeping aloof from the rest , she would remain musing while others were laughing , and nobody knew what made her sad , or what gave her pleasure . 
Her father pitied her as one incurably sick , ruined by the evil eye or by the witchcrafts of his eternal enemies the Galileans , who had carried off the soul of his child in revenge . 
The dark Amaryllis was the favourite daughter of Olympiodorus : but the mother secretly spoiled Psyche , and loved with jealous passion the delicate child whose inner life was hidden from her . 
Psyche , unknown to her father , and in despite of the caresses , prayers , and even the threats of her mother , used to attend the basilican church of St. Maurice . 
Anguished on discovering this , the priest of Venus had renounced Psyche ; and when her name was mentioned , his brow would cloud over with a bitter expression . 
He was sure that it was by reason of the impiety of his child that the vine , once blessed by Aphrodite , produced fewer fruits than of yore ; he believed that the little golden crucifix worn on the child 's neck had profaned the temple of the indignant goddess . 
`` Why do you go to that church ? '' 
Julian asked her one day . 
`` I do n't know ; it is comfortable there . 
Have you seen the Good Shepherd ? '' 
`` Yes , the Galilean ! 
How did you know about Him ? '' 
`` Old Theodula told me . 
Ever since then I have gone to church ; and , tell me , Julian , why do they all hate the Good Shepherd ? '' 
At this moment Olympiodorus returned in triumph and narrated his interview with the patrician lady , a young girl whom her betrothed had abandoned . 
She believed him bewitched by the amulets of a rival . 
Many a time had she gone to the Christian church and besought St. Mamas with an aching heart , but neither fasts nor prostrations had snapped the evil charm . 
`` As if the Christians could console her ! '' 
Olympiodorus contemptuously concluded , throwing a keen glance at the attentive Psyche . 
`` This Christian girl has now sought my help , and Aphrodite will heal her ! '' 
He produced the two white pigeons , bound together , which the Christian had begged him to offer as a sacrifice to the goddess of love . 
Amaryllis took the little creatures in her hand , and kissed their rosy beaks , declaring that it would be a thousand pities to kill them . 
`` Father , we will offer them to the goddess without spilling a drop of blood ! '' 
`` How ? 
There can be no sacrifice without bloodshed . '' 
`` We will give them liberty . 
They shall fly away clean into heaven , straight to the footstool of Aphrodite . 
Is she not in the sky ? 
She will accept them . 
Let me do this , darling father , I beg of you ! '' 
Olympiodorus had not the heart to deny this entreaty ; and the young girl , unbinding the pigeons tossed them back to liberty . 
They fled away into the sky with a delirious beating of white wings , making for the footstool of Aphrodite . 
Shading his eyes with his hands the priest watched the offering of the convert disappear into the clouds , while Amaryllis danced with joy , crying -- `` Aphrodite , Aphrodite , receive the gift ! '' 
Olympiodorus went out . 
Julian , solemn-faced and timorous , approached Amaryllis ; his cheeks grew red , and his voice trembled as he pronounced the name of the young girl . 
`` Amaryllis , I have brought you -- '' `` Ah ! 
I have long been going to ask you what it could be . '' 
`` It is a galley with three banks of oars ! '' 
`` A galley ! 
What do you mean ? '' 
`` A real Liburnian galley . '' 
He immediately began to unroll his present , but suddenly aware that Amaryllis was watching him , he felt ineffable shame , became confused , and with an imploring look at the damsel , slid the ship into the basin of the fountain . 
`` You see , Amaryllis ... it is a trireme ... a real trireme , with -- with -- sails ... and ... its rudder ... . 
Look how well it gets under way ! '' 
But Amaryllis laughed heartily . 
`` What an odd boy you are ! 
What in the world should I do with your trireme ? 
I fear it would n't take me very far . 
It 's a ship for mice and flies . 
Make a present of it to Psyche ; she will be delighted with it . '' 
Julian , though deeply hurt , assumed indifference , while tears choked his speech . 
Controlling himself , he said disdainfully , but with trembling lips -- `` I see that you do n't understand anything ... about art . '' 
Amaryllis laughed yet more heartily . 
To add insult to injury , a summons came for her to receive her betrothed , a rich merchant from Samos , who dressed badly , perfumed his person , and spoke vile grammar . 
Julian hated him , and when he learnt of the arrival of the Samian , the charm of the house vanished so far as he was concerned . 
From the neighbouring room he could hear the distracting chatter of Amaryllis and the voice of her lover . 
Without uttering a word , and filled with cold hatred , Julian seized his cherished trireme -- the real Liburnian trireme which had cost him such endless pains -- and before the startled eyes of Psyche , snapped the mast , tore down the sails , tangled the rigging , and stamped the toy into atoms with his feet . 
Amaryllis returned . 
Her face bore traces of a strange happiness , of that superfluity of life and love-joy which awakens in young girls an imperious need to embrace and to kiss those near them . 
`` Julian ... forgive me ... I have pained you . 
Forgive me , dear ! 
you know well that I love you . '' 
And before he had time to make up his mind , Amaryllis , throwing back her tunic , imprisoned his head in her fresh bare arms . 
A delightful dread stopped the beating of Julian 's heart ; he saw her great dark dewy eyes so close to him , the sweet odour of her body so overwhelmed him , and she locked him so close against her breast , that the boy grew giddy . 
He closed his eyes and felt a kiss long , too long , pressed upon his lips . 
The voice of the Samian broke the enchantment -- `` Amaryllis , Amaryllis ! 
where art thou ? '' 
Julian putting forth all his strength pushed the girl away , his heart overflowed with pain and hatred , and crying , `` Let me go , let me go ! '' 
snatched himself free and fled . 
Deaf and heedless he escaped from the house through the vineyards and the cypress wood ; nor halted till he reached the temple of Aphrodite . 
Now and again he heard his name called , and the gay voice of Diophane , announcing that the cakes of gingerbread were ready ; but he made no reply . 
Search was made for him . 
He lay in hiding in the thicket of laurels at the feet of Eros . 
Accustomed to his fits of moroseness , they gave up the search , satisfied that he had returned to Macellum . 
When all around was restored again to silence , Julian came out from his hiding-place and gazed at the temple of the goddess of love , lodged upon a gentle hill , and bare to view on all sides . 
The Ionic marble columns , flooded with sunshine , were softly steeped in the warmth of azure , receiving its ardent embraces with the cold purity of snow . 
Each corner of the façade was surmounted by pedestalled griffins , with lifted talons , beaks gaping , and woman-shaped breasts , standing out , proud and austere , against the deep blue of the sky . 
Julian went up the steps into the portico , pushed open the bronze doors and penetrated the interior of the temple up to the very shrine , the naos . 
Silence and coolness surrounded him . 
The setting sun overhead still fell on the capitals of the columns , and their fine illumined scroll-work , contrasted with the penumbral shadow on the floor of the temple , seemed soft and bright as tresses of gold . 
A tripod , still burning , diffused the odour of myrrh . 
Julian , leaning against the wall , lifted his eyes in fear , restraining his breath till it almost died upon his lips . 
She , the goddess herself , was before him . 
Under the open sky , in the midst of the temple , stood , cold and white , new-born of the sea-foam , Aphrodite Anadyomene . 
With a smile she contemplated the heavens and the sea , wondering at their charm ; as if unwitting still that their beauty was her own beauty , glassed in the eternal mirrors of the azure and the waters . 
No raiment profaned her divine body . 
Naked and chaste she rose , as the clear sky soaring above her . 
Julian gazed on with an insatiate gaze , and felt quick thrills of adoration sweep over his frame . 
The child , in his black monkish habit , knelt before Aphrodite , his face upturned , his hands pressed to his palpitating little heart . 
Then still aloof , still timorous , he sat at the foot of the column . 
He leant his cheek against the marble . 
Peace sank slowly into his soul . 
He fell asleep . 
But , even through that slumber , he was conscious of her presence . 
She came down towards him , nearer , nearer ... . 
Her delicate white hands stole round his neck . 
The boy with a smile submitted to these passionless endearments ; the cold of the marble chilled his very heart . 
That divine embrace bore no likeness to the wild clasp of Amaryllis . 
The soul of Julian , freeing itself from earthly love , entered depths of repose , as into some ambrosial night of Homer , or the sweet rest of the dead . 
* * * * * When Julian awoke it was night . 
Over the roofless quadrilateral stars were shining , and the crescent moon shedding her silver upon the head of the statue . 
Julian arose . 
Olympiodorus must have meanwhile been tending the temple , although he had either not observed or had refrained from waking the child ; for now , on the bronze tripod , fresh charcoal was glowing , and a fillet of odorous smoke arising towards the goddess . 
Julian smiling approached , and from the chrysolite cup , between the feet of the tripod , took a few grains of incense and flung them on the coals . 
Smoke rose more thickly , and the ruddy glow of the fire , like a pale flush of life , came over the face of the statue , contending with the soft new-born shine of the moon . 
Julian bowed down and kissed the marble feet , and watered them with his tears , exclaiming -- `` Aphrodite ! 
Aphrodite ! 
thou shalt be my everlasting love ! '' 
In one of the foul and dirty quarters of the Syrian Seleucia , the port for Antioch on the shores of the Inner Sea , narrow and tortuous alleys debouched into a market-place lying along the quays . 
The sea-horizon was invisible , so thick was the throng of masts and the tangle of rigging . 
The houses were a mass of miserable little shells , whitewashed within and encumbered with furniture . 
Their fronts were garnished with tattered carpets , dirty fragments of cloth , and ravelled matting . 
In every nook and hovel and crowded court , along kennels and gutters of dirty fever-stricken water from laundries and baths of the poor , there lay seething in its penury and hunger a populace strangely cosmopolitan . 
The sun , after thoroughly baking the earth , had just descended below the horizon ; wide-winged twilight was settling slowly down ; a stifling heat of dust and fog still weighed on the spirits of the city . 
From the market square breathed a suffocating atmosphere of flesh and vegetables , becoming rotten through lying all day in the blaze of the sun . 
Half-naked slaves were carrying bales of merchandise from the ships . 
Their heads were close-shaven ; through their rags could be seen horrible blotches on the skin ; and the greater number bore on their faces , in brandings by red-hot iron , the Latin letters C. F. , that is to say Cave Furem -LRB- ` ware thief ! -RRB- . 
Braziers were being slowly lighted . 
But notwithstanding the approach of night , traffic and discussion gave no sign of ceasing in the network of alleys . 
From a neighbouring forge piercing blows of the hammer resounded on bars of iron , and flames shot up the sooty draught-hole . 
Hard by , slaves of a bakery , naked , covered from head to foot in flour-dust , and with eyelids inflamed by heat , were putting loaves into an oven . 
A shoemaker sat in his open-air stall , amid an insupportable smell of cobbler 's glue and leather , stitching shoes by the light of a smoky lamp . 
He was squatting on his heels , and chanting desert songs at the top of his voice . 
Two old hags like witches , with hair streaming in the wind , were slowly passing across the little square in front of a row of hovels . 
They were yelling at each other , wrangling and threatening each other with fists and stones . 
The subject of dispute was the ownership of a cord on which to dry linen . 
A huckster , from a distant village , was hurrying along to be in time for the morning market . 
He was mounted on an old mare , flanked with wicker paniers , each heaped with rotting fish ; the fetid smell of his load made passers-by edge off to a distance . 
A loutish urchin , with red hair and skin , was solacing his soul by beating on a great pan , while other children , a sickly multitude coming into the world and leaving it by hundreds daily , marched amidst this scene of poverty , grunting like pigs , round the pools of the quay . 
The water was full of orange-peel and egg-shells . 
In yet more villainous passages , inhabited by thieves , the smell of sour wine came from wine-shops , and sailors from every beach of the world marched along arm in arm , shouting drunken songs . 
Surrounding all that noise , that filth and spilth of human misery , there murmured , sighed , and grumbled , the infinite , distant , and invisible sea . 
Directly over against the subterranean kitchen windows of a Phoenician dealer , ragged gamblers were playing at knuckle-bones , and gossiping . 
From the kitchen warm gusts of boiling gravy , game , and spices ascended , greedily snuffed-up , with closed eyes , by the hungry gamesters . 
A certain Christian , a dyer of purple , dismissed for theft from a rich factory at Tyre , was murmuring , as he hungrily sucked a mallow-leaf thrown away by the cook , -- `` And at Antioch , my friends , what 's going on there makes one shiver at nights , just to think of it . 
Why , a few days ago the hungry folk tore in pieces the Prefect Theophilus -- and for what reason ? 
Nobody knows ! 
When the thing was done they remembered too late that the poor wretch was a good sort of fellow and a respectable man . 
I suggested that perhaps the Emperor had pointed him out for punishment . '' 
A consumptive old man , a very skilful cardsharper , replied -- `` I have seen the Cæsar , and I like him . 
Quite young , fair as flax , with a good-natured , fat face . 
But , as you say , what crimes are committed nowadays ! 
what crimes indeed ! 
Why one ca n't put one 's nose outside the door without danger . '' 
`` Ah , that 's nothing to do with Cæsar ! 
it 's his wife , Constantia , the old witch , that does it ! '' 
But strange personages came near the knot of talkers and thrust themselves forward , as if desiring to take part in the conversation . 
If the kitchen firelight had been brighter , it would have been noticed that their faces were begrimed and their clothes fouled and torn like those of stage-beggars ; and notwithstanding their raggedness the hands of these persons were fine and white , and their nails pared and crimsoned . 
One of them whispered in his comrade 's ear -- `` Listen , Agamemnon ; here also they 're talking about Cæsar . '' 
He whom they called Agamemnon appeared to be drunk . 
He wore a beard , which was too thick and long to be natural , and gave him the aspect of a fantastic brigand . 
His eyes were debonair , almost boyish , and of a bright blue . 
His friends frequently pulled him back , muttering -- `` Now then be careful ! '' 
The consumptive old man went on in a whining tone -- `` Now tell me plainly , my friends , is it just ? 
The price of bread is going up every day . 
People dying like flies . 
And , suddenly , guess what happens ? 
Lately a great ship came from Egypt ; everybody 's happy , thinking that it brings bread . 
The word goes round that Cæsar has made the ship come to feed the people . 
And what do you think it was , my friends ? 
Powder , Alexandrian powder , if you please ! 
a special pink Libyan powder to rub down the wrestlers ! 
-- powder for the Emperor 's gladiators -- powder instead of bread ! 
... Eh ? 
... Now is that justice ? '' 
Agamemnon nudged his companion 's elbow . 
`` Ask his name , quick -- ask ! '' 
`` Gently , wait a bit ... '' A leather dresser remarked -- `` Here in Seleucia the town is quiet , but up at Antioch there are nothing but traitors , spies , and informers . '' 
The dyer , licking the mallow-leaf for the last time , growled and mumbled -- `` Yes , unless God comes down to help us , soon flesh and blood will be going a deal cheaper than bread and wine ! '' 
The currier , a philosophic tippler , sighed -- `` Ah ! 
ah ! 
ah ! 
we 're all poor creatures ! 
The gods of Olympus play at ball with us ! 
Men weep and the gods laugh ! '' 
The companion of Agamemnon meanwhile had succeeded in joining the conversation , and with nonchalant adroitness acertained the names of the talkers . 
He had intercepted the news , conveyed by the cobbler to the leather-dresser , about a plot hatched against Cæsar 's life by the soldiers of the Pretorian guard . 
Then , strolling on a few paces , he had written down the names of the talkers with a jewelled stilus on tablets of soft wax , where many other names were inscribed already . 
At this moment hoarse sounds like the roarings of some subterranean monster came from the market square . 
They were the notes , now plaintive , now lively , of a hydraulic organ . 
At the entrance to a showman 's travelling booth , a blind slave , for four obols a day , was pumping up the water which produced this extraordinary harmony . 
Agamemnon dragged his companion towards the booth , a great tent with blue awnings sprinkled with silver tinsel . 
A lantern lighted the black-board on which the order of the programme was chalked up , in Syriac and Greek . 
An oppressive atmosphere of garlic and lamp-oil prevailed inside , where , beside the organ , there struck up the wailing of two harsh flutes , while a negro , rolling the whites of his eyes , thrummed on an Arab drum . 
A dancer was skipping to and fro on a tight-rope , keeping time to the music with his hands , and singing the latest street song : Huc , huc , convenite nunc ... Spatolocinædi ! 
Pedem tendite Cursum addite ... This starveling mountebank was old , impudent , and repulsively cheery . 
Drops of sweat , mixed with paint , were trickling from his shaven face . 
His wrinkles , plastered with white lead , looked like the cracks in a wall when rain has washed off the lime . 
When he withdrew , the flutes and the organ ceased , and on the platform a fifteen-year-old girl appeared . 
She was to perform the Cordax , a celebrated licentious dance adored by the mob . 
Fathers of the Church might anathematise , and Roman laws interdict this dance , but both did so in vain . 
Everywhere the Cordax was danced as before by rich and poor , by street-dancers as well as by wives of senators . 
Agamemnon murmured with enthusiasm : `` What a divinely pretty girl ! '' 
Thanks to jostling by his companions he had reached a place in the front rank of spectators . 
The slender bronze body of the Nubian was only veiled round the hips by a light and transparent rose-coloured scarf . 
Her hair was wound on the top of her head in close fine curls , like those of Ethiopian women . 
Her face was of the severest Egyptian type , recalling that of the Sphinx . 
She began to dance in careless fashion , as if already out-wearied . 
Above her head she swung heavy steel bells , castanets or `` crotals , '' -- swung them lazily and loosely . 
But the movements became more emphatic , and suddenly under long lashes yellow eyes shone out , clear and bright as the eyes of a leopardess . 
She straightened her body . 
The steel crotals shook with such a challenge in their piercing sound that the crowd shivered and became still . 
The damsel whirled rapidly , vivid , slender , supple as a serpent ; her nostrils dilated , a strange cry came crooning from her throat , and at each sharp movement her brown bosom shook and trembled within its almost invisible meshes of fine green silk . 
The crowd howled with enthusiasm . 
Agamemnon struggled with rage because his companions held him back . 
Suddenly the girl stopped . 
A slight shudder ran through her body . 
Deep silence prevailed . 
The head of the Nubian was thrown back as if in a rigid swoon , but above it the crotals still shivered with an extraordinary languor , a dying vibration , quick and tender as the wing-flutterings of a captive butterfly . 
The flashing of the yellow eyes died away , although the eyeball kept its sparkling lights , and the face remained severe ; but upon the dark and sensuous lips of that sphinx-like mouth a smile trembled , faint as the dying sound of the crotals . 
The public shouted and applauded so loudly that the blue tent with its stars and spangles swayed like a sail in a hurricane . 
The showman became apprehensive lest his booth should collapse . 
The companions of Agamemnon at last failed to hold him back ; raising the curtain , he rushed through the scenes into the part reserved for the dancers and actors . 
In vain his friends counselled -- `` Wait ; to-morrow you shall have everything as you wish ! 
now something might ... '' Agamemnon interrupted them -- `` Not to-morrow ; now , at once ! '' 
He approached the owner of the show , the cunning and grey-bearded Greek , Mirmes , and without explanation flung into the skirt of his robe a handful of gold pieces . 
`` Is that dancing-girl your slave ? '' 
`` Yes . 
What does your excellency desire ? '' 
Mirmes , evidently astonished , was staring now at Agamemnon and now at the gold . 
`` What 's your name , girl ? '' 
`` Phyllis . '' 
He bestowed money on her also , without stopping to reckon it . 
The Greek murmured some words in the ear of the smiling Phyllis , who tossed up the pieces and threw sparkling glances at Agamemnon . 
He said -- `` Come with me ! '' 
Phyllis threw over her shoulders a dark cloak and glided with him into the street , asking submissively -- `` Whither ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` To your house ? '' 
`` Impossible . 
I live at Antioch . '' 
`` And as for me , I only arrived in this city this morning . 
What , then , are we to do ? '' 
`` Wait a moment ; I saw just now in a lane near this the temple of Priapus open . 
Let us go there ! '' 
Phyllis led him on hastily , laughing . 
The companions of Agamemnon desired to follow him , but he said to them -- `` It is unnecessary -- remain here . '' 
`` Be careful ! 
At any rate take a weapon , the quarter is dangerous ... '' and drawing from under his dress a dagger with a jewelled hilt , one of the friends of Agamemnon respectfully tendered it to him . 
Groping at every step into thick darkness , Agamemnon and Phyllis made their way up a narrow passage out of the market-place . 
`` Here ! 
here it is ! 
Fear nothing -- go in ! '' 
They found themselves in the vestibule of a little vacant temple , its ancient and massive columns ill-lighted by the flicker of a lamp . 
`` Push-to the door ! '' 
and Phyllis , softly laughing , threw her warm cloak upon the ground . 
When Agamemnon took her into his arms , it seemed to him that round his body had coiled some warm lithe snake , with wide and terrifying eyes . 
At that moment from the interior of the temple came harsh cacklings , and such a gust of beating wings went past that the lamp nearly went out . 
Agamemnon disengaged his arms from Phyllis ' waist and stammered -- `` What in the world was that ? '' 
In the dense darkness white forms were slipping by them like so many ghosts . 
Thoroughly frightened , Agamemnon crossed himself . 
`` What is it ? 
May the Holy Cross protect us ! '' 
Something stoutly nipped his leg . 
He yelled with pain and fear , but seizing one of his unknown enemies by the throat , he poignarded another . 
Deafening cries arose , followed by squeals and repeated battlings of wings . 
The lamp flickered for the last time , and Phyllis cried , laughing -- `` They are the ganders ! 
the holy ganders of Priapus ! 
What a crime you have committed ! '' 
Pale and trembling , the conqueror stood holding in one hand the bloody dagger and in the other two slain ganders . 
A crowd carrying torches burst with shouts into the temple , led by Scabra , the old priestess of Priapus . 
This dame had been peacefully supping in a neighbouring tavern when the trumpeting of the ganders had raised the alarm . 
Gathering a train of nocturnal prowlers she had rushed to the rescue . 
Hook-nosed , with unkempt grey hair , and eyes blazing like two steel points , the old priestess looked nothing less than a fury . 
She shouted -- `` Help ! 
help ! 
The temples are desecrated , and the holy ganders of Priapus slain ! 
And see here , here are the foul Christians ! '' 
Phyllis fled , enveloping her face in the cloak , while the crowd dragged off Agamemnon , so cleanly taken aback that he never thought of relaxing his grip upon the ganders . 
Scabra sent for the clerks of the market , the agoranomes . 
But with every moment the crowd grew larger , and Agamemnon 's companions ran to support him . 
It was too late . 
From dens , wine-shops , alley stalls , a world of loiterers rushed up , attracted by the noise . 
All faces wore the expression of gleeful curiosity peculiar to idlers . 
The blacksmith appeared with hammer over his shoulder ; the two old women had forgotten their quarrel ; the floury baker jostled the lame cobbler , and behind them came the genial red-headed boy , shouting , and beating on his pan , as if calling to arms . 
Meantime Scabra continued screaming , her nails fixed in the clothes of Agamemnon -- `` Ah , just wait ! 
wait a minute ! 
let me get at that cursed beard of yours ! 
I wont leave a hair in it ! 
Out , carrion ! 
food for crows ! 
And you are n't worth the rope you will cost , thief ! '' 
