`` Listen ! '' 
cried he , standing there and addressing those in the room . 
All were silent . 
`` I bet fifty imperials '' -- he spoke French that the Englishman might understand him , but he did not speak it very well -- `` I bet fifty imperials ... or do you wish to make it a hundred ? '' 
added he , addressing the Englishman . 
`` No , fifty , '' replied the latter . 
`` All right . 
Fifty imperials ... that I will drink a whole bottle of rum without taking it from my mouth , sitting outside the window on this spot '' -LRB- he stooped and pointed to the sloping ledge outside the window -RRB- `` and without holding on to anything . 
Is that right ? '' 
`` Quite right , '' said the Englishman . 
Anatole turned to the Englishman and taking him by one of the buttons of his coat and looking down at him -- the Englishman was short -- began repeating the terms of the wager to him in English . 
`` Wait ! '' 
cried Dolokhov , hammering with the bottle on the window sill to attract attention . 
`` Wait a bit , Kuragin . 
Listen ! 
If anyone else does the same , I will pay him a hundred imperials . 
Do you understand ? '' 
The Englishman nodded , but gave no indication whether he intended to accept this challenge or not . 
Anatole did not release him , and though he kept nodding to show that he understood , Anatole went on translating Dolokhov 's words into English . 
A thin young lad , an hussar of the Life Guards , who had been losing that evening , climbed on the window sill , leaned over , and looked down . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
he muttered , looking down from the window at the stones of the pavement . 
`` Shut up ! '' 
cried Dolokhov , pushing him away from the window . 
The lad jumped awkwardly back into the room , tripping over his spurs . 
Placing the bottle on the window sill where he could reach it easily , Dolokhov climbed carefully and slowly through the window and lowered his legs . 
Pressing against both sides of the window , he adjusted himself on his seat , lowered his hands , moved a little to the right and then to the left , and took up the bottle . 
Anatole brought two candles and placed them on the window sill , though it was already quite light . 
Dolokhov 's back in his white shirt , and his curly head , were lit up from both sides . 
Everyone crowded to the window , the Englishman in front . 
Pierre stood smiling but silent . 
One man , older than the others present , suddenly pushed forward with a scared and angry look and wanted to seize hold of Dolokhov 's shirt . 
`` I say , this is folly ! 
He 'll be killed , '' said this more sensible man . 
Anatole stopped him . 
`` Do n't touch him ! 
You 'll startle him and then he 'll be killed . 
Eh ? 
... What then ? 
... Eh ? '' 
Dolokhov turned round and , again holding on with both hands , arranged himself on his seat . 
`` If anyone comes meddling again , '' said he , emitting the words separately through his thin compressed lips , `` I will throw him down there . 
Now then ! '' 
Saying this he again turned round , dropped his hands , took the bottle and lifted it to his lips , threw back his head , and raised his free hand to balance himself . 
One of the footmen who had stooped to pick up some broken glass remained in that position without taking his eyes from the window and from Dolokhov 's back . 
Anatole stood erect with staring eyes . 
The Englishman looked on sideways , pursing up his lips . 
The man who had wished to stop the affair ran to a corner of the room and threw himself on a sofa with his face to the wall . 
Pierre hid his face , from which a faint smile forgot to fade though his features now expressed horror and fear . 
All were still . 
Pierre took his hands from his eyes . 
Dolokhov still sat in the same position , only his head was thrown further back till his curly hair touched his shirt collar , and the hand holding the bottle was lifted higher and higher and trembled with the effort . 
The bottle was emptying perceptibly and rising still higher and his head tilting yet further back . 
`` Why is it so long ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
It seemed to him that more than half an hour had elapsed . 
Suddenly Dolokhov made a backward movement with his spine , and his arm trembled nervously ; this was sufficient to cause his whole body to slip as he sat on the sloping ledge . 
As he began slipping down , his head and arm wavered still more with the strain . 
One hand moved as if to clutch the window sill , but refrained from touching it . 
Pierre again covered his eyes and thought he would never open them again . 
Suddenly he was aware of a stir all around . 
He looked up : Dolokhov was standing on the window sill , with a pale but radiant face . 
`` It 's empty . '' 
He threw the bottle to the Englishman , who caught it neatly . 
Dolokhov jumped down . 
He smelt strongly of rum . 
`` Well done ! 
... Fine fellow ! 
... There 's a bet for you ! 
... Devil take you ! '' 
came from different sides . 
The Englishman took out his purse and began counting out the money . 
Dolokhov stood frowning and did not speak . 
Pierre jumped upon the window sill . 
`` Gentlemen , who wishes to bet with me ? 
I 'll do the same thing ! '' 
he suddenly cried . 
`` Even without a bet , there ! 
Tell them to bring me a bottle . 
I 'll do it ... . 
Bring a bottle ! '' 
`` Let him do it , let him do it , '' said Dolokhov , smiling . 
`` What next ? 
Have you gone mad ? 
... No one would let you ! 
... Why , you go giddy even on a staircase , '' exclaimed several voices . 
`` I 'll drink it ! 
Let 's have a bottle of rum ! '' 
shouted Pierre , banging the table with a determined and drunken gesture and preparing to climb out of the window . 
They seized him by his arms ; but he was so strong that everyone who touched him was sent flying . 
`` No , you 'll never manage him that way , '' said Anatole . 
`` Wait a bit and I 'll get round him ... . 
Listen ! 
I 'll take your bet tomorrow , but now we are all going to -- 's . '' 
`` Come on then , '' cried Pierre . 
`` Come on ! 
... And we 'll take Bruin with us . '' 
And he caught the bear , took it in his arms , lifted it from the ground , and began dancing round the room with it . 
Prince Vasili kept the promise he had given to Princess Drubetskaya who had spoken to him on behalf of her only son Boris on the evening of Anna Pavlovna 's soiree . 
The matter was mentioned to the Emperor , an exception made , and Boris transferred into the regiment of Semenov Guards with the rank of cornet . 
He received , however , no appointment to Kutuzov 's staff despite all Anna Mikhaylovna 's endeavors and entreaties . 
Soon after Anna Pavlovna 's reception Anna Mikhaylovna returned to Moscow and went straight to her rich relations , the Rostovs , with whom she stayed when in the town and where her darling Bory , who had only just entered a regiment of the line and was being at once transferred to the Guards as a cornet , had been educated from childhood and lived for years at a time . 
The Guards had already left Petersburg on the tenth of August , and her son , who had remained in Moscow for his equipment , was to join them on the march to Radzivilov . 
It was St. Natalia 's day and the name day of two of the Rostovs -- the mother and the youngest daughter -- both named Nataly . 
Ever since the morning , carriages with six horses had been coming and going continually , bringing visitors to the Countess Rostova 's big house on the Povarskaya , so well known to all Moscow . 
The countess herself and her handsome eldest daughter were in the drawing-room with the visitors who came to congratulate , and who constantly succeeded one another in relays . 
The countess was a woman of about forty-five , with a thin Oriental type of face , evidently worn out with childbearing -- she had had twelve . 
A languor of motion and speech , resulting from weakness , gave her a distinguished air which inspired respect . 
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna Drubetskaya , who as a member of the household was also seated in the drawing room , helped to receive and entertain the visitors . 
The young people were in one of the inner rooms , not considering it necessary to take part in receiving the visitors . 
The count met the guests and saw them off , inviting them all to dinner . 
`` I am very , very grateful to you , mon cher , '' or `` ma chere '' -- he called everyone without exception and without the slightest variation in his tone , `` my dear , '' whether they were above or below him in rank -- `` I thank you for myself and for our two dear ones whose name day we are keeping . 
But mind you come to dinner or I shall be offended , ma chere ! 
On behalf of the whole family I beg you to come , mon cher ! '' 
These words he repeated to everyone without exception or variation , and with the same expression on his full , cheerful , clean-shaven face , the same firm pressure of the hand and the same quick , repeated bows . 
As soon as he had seen a visitor off he returned to one of those who were still in the drawing room , drew a chair toward him or her , and jauntily spreading out his legs and putting his hands on his knees with the air of a man who enjoys life and knows how to live , he swayed to and fro with dignity , offered surmises about the weather , or touched on questions of health , sometimes in Russian and sometimes in very bad but self-confident French ; then again , like a man weary but unflinching in the fulfillment of duty , he rose to see some visitors off and , stroking his scanty gray hairs over his bald patch , also asked them to dinner . 
Sometimes on his way back from the anteroom he would pass through the conservatory and pantry into the large marble dining hall , where tables were being set out for eighty people ; and looking at the footmen , who were bringing in silver and china , moving tables , and unfolding damask table linen , he would call Dmitri Vasilevich , a man of good family and the manager of all his affairs , and while looking with pleasure at the enormous table would say : `` Well , Dmitri , you 'll see that things are all as they should be ? 
That 's right ! 
The great thing is the serving , that 's it . '' 
And with a complacent sigh he would return to the drawing room . 
`` Marya Lvovna Karagina and her daughter ! '' 
announced the countess ' gigantic footman in his bass voice , entering the drawing room . 
The countess reflected a moment and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with her husband 's portrait on it . 
`` I 'm quite worn out by these callers . 
However , I 'll see her and no more . 
She is so affected . 
Ask her in , '' she said to the footman in a sad voice , as if saying : `` Very well , finish me off . '' 
A tall , stout , and proud-looking woman , with a round-faced smiling daughter , entered the drawing room , their dresses rustling . 
`` Dear Countess , what an age ... She has been laid up , poor child ... at the Razumovski 's ball ... and Countess Apraksina ... I was so delighted ... '' came the sounds of animated feminine voices , interrupting one another and mingling with the rustling of dresses and the scraping of chairs . 
Then one of those conversations began which last out until , at the first pause , the guests rise with a rustle of dresses and say , `` I am so delighted ... Mamma 's health ... and Countess Apraksina ... '' and then , again rustling , pass into the anteroom , put on cloaks or mantles , and drive away . 
The conversation was on the chief topic of the day : the illness of the wealthy and celebrated beau of Catherine 's day , Count Bezukhov , and about his illegitimate son Pierre , the one who had behaved so improperly at Anna Pavlovna 's reception . 
`` I am so sorry for the poor count , '' said the visitor . 
`` He is in such bad health , and now this vexation about his son is enough to kill him ! '' 
`` What is that ? '' 
asked the countess as if she did not know what the visitor alluded to , though she had already heard about the cause of Count Bezukhov 's distress some fifteen times . 
`` That 's what comes of a modern education , '' exclaimed the visitor . 
`` It seems that while he was abroad this young man was allowed to do as he liked , now in Petersburg I hear he has been doing such terrible things that he has been expelled by the police . '' 
`` You do n't say so ! '' 
replied the countess . 
`` He chose his friends badly , '' interposed Anna Mikhaylovna . 
`` Prince Vasili 's son , he , and a certain Dolokhov have , it is said , been up to heaven only knows what ! 
And they have had to suffer for it . 
Dolokhov has been degraded to the ranks and Bezukhov 's son sent back to Moscow . 
Anatole Kuragin 's father managed somehow to get his son 's affair hushed up , but even he was ordered out of Petersburg . '' 
`` But what have they been up to ? '' 
asked the countess . 
`` They are regular brigands , especially Dolokhov , '' replied the visitor . 
`` He is a son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhova , such a worthy woman , but there , just fancy ! 
Those three got hold of a bear somewhere , put it in a carriage , and set off with it to visit some actresses ! 
The police tried to interfere , and what did the young men do ? 
They tied a policeman and the bear back to back and put the bear into the Moyka Canal . 
And there was the bear swimming about with the policeman on his back ! '' 
`` What a nice figure the policeman must have cut , my dear ! '' 
shouted the count , dying with laughter . 
`` Oh , how dreadful ! 
How can you laugh at it , Count ? '' 
Yet the ladies themselves could not help laughing . 
`` It was all they could do to rescue the poor man , '' continued the visitor . 
`` And to think it is Cyril Vladimirovich Bezukhov 's son who amuses himself in this sensible manner ! 
And he was said to be so well educated and clever . 
This is all that his foreign education has done for him ! 
I hope that here in Moscow no one will receive him , in spite of his money . 
They wanted to introduce him to me , but I quite declined : I have my daughters to consider . '' 
`` Why do you say this young man is so rich ? '' 
asked the countess , turning away from the girls , who at once assumed an air of inattention . 
`` His children are all illegitimate . 
I think Pierre also is illegitimate . '' 
The visitor made a gesture with her hand . 
`` I should think he has a score of them . '' 
Princess Anna Mikhaylovna intervened in the conversation , evidently wishing to show her connections and knowledge of what went on in society . 
`` The fact of the matter is , '' said she significantly , and also in a half whisper , `` everyone knows Count Cyril 's reputation ... . 
He has lost count of his children , but this Pierre was his favorite . '' 
`` How handsome the old man still was only a year ago ! '' 
remarked the countess . 
`` I have never seen a handsomer man . '' 
`` He is very much altered now , '' said Anna Mikhaylovna . 
`` Well , as I was saying , Prince Vasili is the next heir through his wife , but the count is very fond of Pierre , looked after his education , and wrote to the Emperor about him ; so that in the case of his death -- and he is so ill that he may die at any moment , and Dr. Lorrain has come from Petersburg - - no one knows who will inherit his immense fortune , Pierre or Prince Vasili . 
Forty thousand serfs and millions of rubles ! 
I know it all very well for Prince Vasili told me himself . 
Besides , Cyril Vladimirovich is my mother 's second cousin . 
He 's also my Bory 's godfather , '' she added , as if she attached no importance at all to the fact . 
`` Prince Vasili arrived in Moscow yesterday . 
I hear he has come on some inspection business , '' remarked the visitor . 
`` Yes , but between ourselves , '' said the princess , `` that is a pretext . 
The fact is he has come to see Count Cyril Vladimirovich , hearing how ill he is . '' 
`` But do you know , my dear , that was a capital joke , '' said the count ; and seeing that the elder visitor was not listening , he turned to the young ladies . 
`` I can just imagine what a funny figure that policeman cut ! '' 
And as he waved his arms to impersonate the policeman , his portly form again shook with a deep ringing laugh , the laugh of one who always eats well and , in particular , drinks well . 
`` So do come and dine with us ! '' 
he said . 
Silence ensued . 
The countess looked at her callers , smiling affably , but not concealing the fact that she would not be distressed if they now rose and took their leave . 
The visitor 's daughter was already smoothing down her dress with an inquiring look at her mother , when suddenly from the next room were heard the footsteps of boys and girls running to the door and the noise of a chair falling over , and a girl of thirteen , hiding something in the folds of her short muslin frock , darted in and stopped short in the middle of the room . 
It was evident that she had not intended her flight to bring her so far . 
Behind her in the doorway appeared a student with a crimson coat collar , an officer of the Guards , a girl of fifteen , and a plump rosy-faced boy in a short jacket . 
The count jumped up and , swaying from side to side , spread his arms wide and threw them round the little girl who had run in . 
`` Ah , here she is ! '' 
he exclaimed laughing . 
`` My pet , whose name day it is . 
My dear pet ! '' 
`` Ma chere , there is a time for everything , '' said the countess with feigned severity . 
`` You spoil her , Ilya , '' she added , turning to her husband . 
`` How do you do , my dear ? 
I wish you many happy returns of your name day , '' said the visitor . 
`` What a charming child , '' she added , addressing the mother . 
This black-eyed , wide-mouthed girl , not pretty but full of life -- with childish bare shoulders which after her run heaved and shook her bodice , with black curls tossed backward , thin bare arms , little legs in lace - frilled drawers , and feet in low slippers -- was just at that charming age when a girl is no longer a child , though the child is not yet a young woman . 
Escaping from her father she ran to hide her flushed face in the lace of her mother 's mantilla -- not paying the least attention to her severe remark -- and began to laugh . 
She laughed , and in fragmentary sentences tried to explain about a doll which she produced from the folds of her frock . 
`` Do you see ? 
... My doll ... Mimi ... You see ... '' was all Natasha managed to utter -LRB- to her everything seemed funny -RRB- . 
She leaned against her mother and burst into such a loud , ringing fit of laughter that even the prim visitor could not help joining in . 
`` Now then , go away and take your monstrosity with you , '' said the mother , pushing away her daughter with pretended sternness , and turning to the visitor she added : `` She is my youngest girl . '' 
Natasha , raising her face for a moment from her mother 's mantilla , glanced up at her through tears of laughter , and again hid her face . 
The visitor , compelled to look on at this family scene , thought it necessary to take some part in it . 
`` Tell me , my dear , '' said she to Natasha , `` is Mimi a relation of yours ? 
A daughter , I suppose ? '' 
Natasha did not like the visitor 's tone of condescension to childish things . 
She did not reply , but looked at her seriously . 
Meanwhile the younger generation : Boris , the officer , Anna Mikhaylovna 's son ; Nicholas , the undergraduate , the count 's eldest son ; Sonya , the count 's fifteen-year-old niece , and little Petya , his youngest boy , had all settled down in the drawing room and were obviously trying to restrain within the bounds of decorum the excitement and mirth that shone in all their faces . 
Evidently in the back rooms , from which they had dashed out so impetuously , the conversation had been more amusing than the drawing-room talk of society scandals , the weather , and Countess Apraksina . 
Now and then they glanced at one another , hardly able to suppress their laughter . 
The two young men , the student and the officer , friends from childhood , were of the same age and both handsome fellows , though not alike . 
Boris was tall and fair , and his calm and handsome face had regular , delicate features . 
Nicholas was short with curly hair and an open expression . 
Dark hairs were already showing on his upper lip , and his whole face expressed impetuosity and enthusiasm . 
Nicholas blushed when he entered the drawing room . 
He evidently tried to find something to say , but failed . 
Boris on the contrary at once found his footing , and related quietly and humorously how he had known that doll Mimi when she was still quite a young lady , before her nose was broken ; how she had aged during the five years he had known her , and how her head had cracked right across the skull . 
Having said this he glanced at Natasha . 
She turned away from him and glanced at her younger brother , who was screwing up his eyes and shaking with suppressed laughter , and unable to control herself any longer , she jumped up and rushed from the room as fast as her nimble little feet would carry her . 
Boris did not laugh . 
`` You were meaning to go out , were n't you , Mamma ? 
Do you want the carriage ? '' 
he asked his mother with a smile . 
`` Yes , yes , go and tell them to get it ready , '' she answered , returning his smile . 
Boris quietly left the room and went in search of Natasha . 
The plump boy ran after them angrily , as if vexed that their program had been disturbed . 
The only young people remaining in the drawing room , not counting the young lady visitor and the countess ' eldest daughter -LRB- who was four years older than her sister and behaved already like a grown-up person -RRB- , were Nicholas and Sonya , the niece . 
Sonya was a slender little brunette with a tender look in her eyes which were veiled by long lashes , thick black plaits coiling twice round her head , and a tawny tint in her complexion and especially in the color of her slender but graceful and muscular arms and neck . 
By the grace of her movements , by the softness and flexibility of her small limbs , and by a certain coyness and reserve of manner , she reminded one of a pretty , half-grown kitten which promises to become a beautiful little cat . 
She evidently considered it proper to show an interest in the general conversation by smiling , but in spite of herself her eyes under their thick long lashes watched her cousin who was going to join the army , with such passionate girlish adoration that her smile could not for a single instant impose upon anyone , and it was clear that the kitten had settled down only to spring up with more energy and again play with her cousin as soon as they too could , like Natasha and Boris , escape from the drawing room . 
`` Ah yes , my dear , '' said the count , addressing the visitor and pointing to Nicholas , `` his friend Boris has become an officer , and so for friendship 's sake he is leaving the university and me , his old father , and entering the military service , my dear . 
And there was a place and everything waiting for him in the Archives Department ! 
Is n't that friendship ? '' 
remarked the count in an inquiring tone . 
`` But they say that war has been declared , '' replied the visitor . 
`` They 've been saying so a long while , '' said the count , `` and they 'll say so again and again , and that will be the end of it . 
My dear , there 's friendship for you , '' he repeated . 
`` He 's joining the hussars . '' 
The visitor , not knowing what to say , shook her head . 
`` It 's not at all from friendship , '' declared Nicholas , flaring up and turning away as if from a shameful aspersion . 
`` It is not from friendship at all ; I simply feel that the army is my vocation . '' 
He glanced at his cousin and the young lady visitor ; and they were both regarding him with a smile of approbation . 
`` Schubert , the colonel of the Pavlograd Hussars , is dining with us today . 
He has been here on leave and is taking Nicholas back with him . 
It ca n't be helped ! '' 
said the count , shrugging his shoulders and speaking playfully of a matter that evidently distressed him . 
`` I have already told you , Papa , '' said his son , `` that if you do n't wish to let me go , I 'll stay . 
But I know I am no use anywhere except in the army ; I am not a diplomat or a government clerk . 
-- I do n't know how to hide what I feel . '' 
As he spoke he kept glancing with the flirtatiousness of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady visitor . 
The little kitten , feasting her eyes on him , seemed ready at any moment to start her gambols again and display her kittenish nature . 
`` All right , all right ! '' 
said the old count . 
`` He always flares up ! 
This Buonaparte has turned all their heads ; they all think of how he rose from an ensign and became Emperor . 
Well , well , God grant it , '' he added , not noticing his visitor 's sarcastic smile . 
The elders began talking about Bonaparte . 
Julie Karagina turned to young Rostov . 
`` What a pity you were n't at the Arkharovs ' on Thursday . 
It was so dull without you , '' said she , giving him a tender smile . 
The young man , flattered , sat down nearer to her with a coquettish smile , and engaged the smiling Julie in a confidential conversation without at all noticing that his involuntary smile had stabbed the heart of Sonya , who blushed and smiled unnaturally . 
In the midst of his talk he glanced round at her . 
She gave him a passionately angry glance , and hardly able to restrain her tears and maintain the artificial smile on her lips , she got up and left the room . 
All Nicholas ' animation vanished . 
He waited for the first pause in the conversation , and then with a distressed face left the room to find Sonya . 
`` How plainly all these young people wear their hearts on their sleeves ! '' 
said Anna Mikhaylovna , pointing to Nicholas as he went out . 
`` Cousinage -- dangereux voisinage ; '' * she added . 
* Cousinhood is a dangerous neighborhood . 
`` Yes , '' said the countess when the brightness these young people had brought into the room had vanished ; and as if answering a question no one had put but which was always in her mind , `` and how much suffering , how much anxiety one has had to go through that we might rejoice in them now ! 
And yet really the anxiety is greater now than the joy . 
One is always , always anxious ! 
Especially just at this age , so dangerous both for girls and boys . '' 
`` It all depends on the bringing up , '' remarked the visitor . 
`` Yes , you 're quite right , '' continued the countess . 
`` Till now I have always , thank God , been my children 's friend and had their full confidence , '' said she , repeating the mistake of so many parents who imagine that their children have no secrets from them . 
`` I know I shall always be my daughters ' first confidante , and that if Nicholas , with his impulsive nature , does get into mischief -LRB- a boy ca n't help it -RRB- , he will all the same never be like those Petersburg young men . '' 
`` Yes , they are splendid , splendid youngsters , '' chimed in the count , who always solved questions that seemed to him perplexing by deciding that everything was splendid . 
`` Just fancy : wants to be an hussar . 
What 's one to do , my dear ? '' 
`` What a charming creature your younger girl is , '' said the visitor ; `` a little volcano ! '' 
`` Yes , a regular volcano , '' said the count . 
`` Takes after me ! 
And what a voice she has ; though she 's my daughter , I tell the truth when I say she 'll be a singer , a second Salomoni ! 
We have engaged an Italian to give her lessons . '' 
`` Is n't she too young ? 
I have heard that it harms the voice to train it at that age . '' 
`` Oh no , not at all too young ! '' 
replied the count . 
`` Why , our mothers used to be married at twelve or thirteen . '' 
`` And she 's in love with Boris already . 
Just fancy ! '' 
said the countess with a gentle smile , looking at Boris and went on , evidently concerned with a thought that always occupied her : `` Now you see if I were to be severe with her and to forbid it ... goodness knows what they might be up to on the sly '' -LRB- she meant that they would be kissing -RRB- , `` but as it is , I know every word she utters . 
She will come running to me of her own accord in the evening and tell me everything . 
Perhaps I spoil her , but really that seems the best plan . 
With her elder sister I was stricter . '' 
`` Yes , I was brought up quite differently , '' remarked the handsome elder daughter , Countess Vera , with a smile . 
But the smile did not enhance Vera 's beauty as smiles generally do ; on the contrary it gave her an unnatural , and therefore unpleasant , expression . 
Vera was good-looking , not at all stupid , quick at learning , was well-brought up , and had a pleasant voice ; what she said was true and appropriate , yet , strange to say , everyone -- the visitors and countess alike -- turned to look at her as if wondering why she had said it , and they all felt awkward . 
`` People are always too clever with their eldest children and try to make something exceptional of them , '' said the visitor . 
`` What 's the good of denying it , my dear ? 
Our dear countess was too clever with Vera , '' said the count . 
`` Well , what of that ? 
She 's turned out splendidly all the same , '' he added , winking at Vera . 
The guests got up and took their leave , promising to return to dinner . 
`` What manners ! 
I thought they would never go , '' said the countess , when she had seen her guests out . 
When Natasha ran out of the drawing room she only went as far as the conservatory . 
There she paused and stood listening to the conversation in the drawing room , waiting for Boris to come out . 
She was already growing impatient , and stamped her foot , ready to cry at his not coming at once , when she heard the young man 's discreet steps approaching neither quickly nor slowly . 
At this Natasha dashed swiftly among the flower tubs and hid there . 
Boris paused in the middle of the room , looked round , brushed a little dust from the sleeve of his uniform , and going up to a mirror examined his handsome face . 
Natasha , very still , peered out from her ambush , waiting to see what he would do . 
He stood a little while before the glass , smiled , and walked toward the other door . 
Natasha was about to call him but changed her mind . 
`` Let him look for me , '' thought she . 
Hardly had Boris gone than Sonya , flushed , in tears , and muttering angrily , came in at the other door . 
Natasha checked her first impulse to run out to her , and remained in her hiding place , watching -- as under an invisible cap -- to see what went on in the world . 
She was experiencing a new and peculiar pleasure . 
Sonya , muttering to herself , kept looking round toward the drawing-room door . 
It opened and Nicholas came in . 
`` Sonya , what is the matter with you ? 
How can you ? '' 
said he , running up to her . 
`` It 's nothing , nothing ; leave me alone ! '' 
sobbed Sonya . 
`` Ah , I know what it is . '' 
`` Well , if you do , so much the better , and you can go back to her ! '' 
`` So-o-onya ! 
Look here ! 
How can you torture me and yourself like that , for a mere fancy ? '' 
said Nicholas taking her hand . 
Sonya did not pull it away , and left off crying . 
Natasha , not stirring and scarcely breathing , watched from her ambush with sparkling eyes . 
`` What will happen now ? '' 
thought she . 
`` Sonya ! 
What is anyone in the world to me ? 
You alone are everything ! '' 
said Nicholas . 
`` And I will prove it to you . '' 
`` I do n't like you to talk like that . '' 
`` Well , then , I wo n't ; only forgive me , Sonya ! '' 
He drew her to him and kissed her . 
`` Oh , how nice , '' thought Natasha ; and when Sonya and Nicholas had gone out of the conservatory she followed and called Boris to her . 
`` Boris , come here , '' said she with a sly and significant look . 
`` I have something to tell you . 
Here , here ! '' 
and she led him into the conservatory to the place among the tubs where she had been hiding . 
Boris followed her , smiling . 
`` What is the something ? '' 
asked he . 
She grew confused , glanced round , and , seeing the doll she had thrown down on one of the tubs , picked it up . 
`` Kiss the doll , '' said she . 
Boris looked attentively and kindly at her eager face , but did not reply . 
`` Do n't you want to ? 
Well , then , come here , '' said she , and went further in among the plants and threw down the doll . 
`` Closer , closer ! '' 
she whispered . 
She caught the young officer by his cuffs , and a look of solemnity and fear appeared on her flushed face . 
`` And me ? 
Would you like to kiss me ? '' 
she whispered almost inaudibly , glancing up at him from under her brows , smiling , and almost crying from excitement . 
Boris blushed . 
`` How funny you are ! '' 
he said , bending down to her and blushing still more , but he waited and did nothing . 
Suddenly she jumped up onto a tub to be higher than he , embraced him so that both her slender bare arms clasped him above his neck , and , tossing back her hair , kissed him full on the lips . 
Then she slipped down among the flowerpots on the other side of the tubs and stood , hanging her head . 
`` Natasha , '' he said , `` you know that I love you , but ... '' `` You are in love with me ? '' 
Natasha broke in . 
`` Yes , I am , but please do n't let us do like that ... . 
In another four years ... then I will ask for your hand . '' 
Natasha considered . 
`` Thirteen , fourteen , fifteen , sixteen , '' she counted on her slender little fingers . 
`` All right ! 
Then it 's settled ? '' 
A smile of joy and satisfaction lit up her eager face . 
`` Settled ! '' 
replied Boris . 
`` Forever ? '' 
said the little girl . 
`` Till death itself ? '' 
She took his arm and with a happy face went with him into the adjoining sitting room . 
After receiving her visitors , the countess was so tired that she gave orders to admit no more , but the porter was told to be sure to invite to dinner all who came `` to congratulate . '' 
The countess wished to have a tête-à-tête talk with the friend of her childhood , Princess Anna Mikhaylovna , whom she had not seen properly since she returned from Petersburg . 
Anna Mikhaylovna , with her tear-worn but pleasant face , drew her chair nearer to that of the countess . 
`` With you I will be quite frank , '' said Anna Mikhaylovna . 
