All right then , sit down . '' 
He took the exercise book containing lessons in geometry written by himself and drew up a chair with his foot . 
`` For tomorrow ! '' 
said he , quickly finding the page and making a scratch from one paragraph to another with his hard nail . 
The princess bent over the exercise book on the table . 
`` Wait a bit , here 's a letter for you , '' said the old man suddenly , taking a letter addressed in a woman 's hand from a bag hanging above the table , onto which he threw it . 
At the sight of the letter red patches showed themselves on the princess ' face . 
She took it quickly and bent her head over it . 
`` From Heloise ? '' 
asked the prince with a cold smile that showed his still sound , yellowish teeth . 
`` Yes , it 's from Julie , '' replied the princess with a timid glance and a timid smile . 
`` I 'll let two more letters pass , but the third I 'll read , '' said the prince sternly ; `` I 'm afraid you write much nonsense . 
I 'll read the third ! '' 
`` Read this if you like , Father , '' said the princess , blushing still more and holding out the letter . 
`` The third , I said the third ! '' 
cried the prince abruptly , pushing the letter away , and leaning his elbows on the table he drew toward him the exercise book containing geometrical figures . 
`` Well , madam , '' he began , stooping over the book close to his daughter and placing an arm on the back of the chair on which she sat , so that she felt herself surrounded on all sides by the acrid scent of old age and tobacco , which she had known so long . 
`` Now , madam , these triangles are equal ; please note that the angle ABC ... '' The princess looked in a scared way at her father 's eyes glittering close to her ; the red patches on her face came and went , and it was plain that she understood nothing and was so frightened that her fear would prevent her understanding any of her father 's further explanations , however clear they might be . 
Whether it was the teacher 's fault or the pupil 's , this same thing happened every day : the princess ' eyes grew dim , she could not see and could not hear anything , but was only conscious of her stern father 's withered face close to her , of his breath and the smell of him , and could think only of how to get away quickly to her own room to make out the problem in peace . 
The old man was beside himself : moved the chair on which he was sitting noisily backward and forward , made efforts to control himself and not become vehement , but almost always did become vehement , scolded , and sometimes flung the exercise book away . 
The princess gave a wrong answer . 
`` Well now , is n't she a fool ! '' 
shouted the prince , pushing the book aside and turning sharply away ; but rising immediately , he paced up and down , lightly touched his daughter 's hair and sat down again . 
He drew up his chair , and continued to explain . 
`` This wo n't do , Princess ; it wo n't do , '' said he , when Princess Mary , having taken and closed the exercise book with the next day 's lesson , was about to leave : `` Mathematics are most important , madam ! 
I do n't want to have you like our silly ladies . 
Get used to it and you 'll like it , '' and he patted her cheek . 
`` It will drive all the nonsense out of your head . '' 
She turned to go , but he stopped her with a gesture and took an uncut book from the high desk . 
`` Here is some sort of Key to the Mysteries that your Heloise has sent you . 
Religious ! 
I do n't interfere with anyone 's belief ... I have looked at it . 
Take it . 
Well , now go . 
Go . '' 
He patted her on the shoulder and himself closed the door after her . 
Princess Mary went back to her room with the sad , scared expression that rarely left her and which made her plain , sickly face yet plainer . 
She sat down at her writing table , on which stood miniature portraits and which was littered with books and papers . 
The princess was as untidy as her father was tidy . 
She put down the geometry book and eagerly broke the seal of her letter . 
It was from her most intimate friend from childhood ; that same Julie Karagina who had been at the Rostovs ' name - day party . 
Julie wrote in French : Dear and precious Friend , How terrible and frightful a thing is separation ! 
Though I tell myself that half my life and half my happiness are wrapped up in you , and that in spite of the distance separating us our hearts are united by indissoluble bonds , my heart rebels against fate and in spite of the pleasures and distractions around me I can not overcome a certain secret sorrow that has been in my heart ever since we parted . 
Why are we not together as we were last summer , in your big study , on the blue sofa , the confidential sofa ? 
Why can not I now , as three months ago , draw fresh moral strength from your look , so gentle , calm , and penetrating , a look I loved so well and seem to see before me as I write ? 
Having read thus far , Princess Mary sighed and glanced into the mirror which stood on her right . 
It reflected a weak , ungraceful figure and thin face . 
Her eyes , always sad , now looked with particular hopelessness at her reflection in the glass . 
`` She flatters me , '' thought the princess , turning away and continuing to read . 
But Julie did not flatter her friend , the princess ' eyes -- large , deep and luminous -LRB- it seemed as if at times there radiated from them shafts of warm light -RRB- -- were so beautiful that very often in spite of the plainness of her face they gave her an attraction more powerful than that of beauty . 
But the princess never saw the beautiful expression of her own eyes -- the look they had when she was not thinking of herself . 
As with everyone , her face assumed a forced unnatural expression as soon as she looked in a glass . 
She went on reading : All Moscow talks of nothing but war . 
One of my two brothers is already abroad , the other is with the Guards , who are starting on their march to the frontier . 
Our dear Emperor has left Petersburg and it is thought intends to expose his precious person to the chances of war . 
God grant that the Corsican monster who is destroying the peace of Europe may be overthrown by the angel whom it has pleased the Almighty , in His goodness , to give us as sovereign ! 
To say nothing of my brothers , this war has deprived me of one of the associations nearest my heart . 
I mean young Nicholas Rostov , who with his enthusiasm could not bear to remain inactive and has left the university to join the army . 
I will confess to you , dear Mary , that in spite of his extreme youth his departure for the army was a great grief to me . 
This young man , of whom I spoke to you last summer , is so noble-minded and full of that real youthfulness which one seldom finds nowadays among our old men of twenty and , particularly , he is so frank and has so much heart . 
He is so pure and poetic that my relations with him , transient as they were , have been one of the sweetest comforts to my poor heart , which has already suffered so much . 
Someday I will tell you about our parting and all that was said then . 
That is still too fresh . 
Ah , dear friend , you are happy not to know these poignant joys and sorrows . 
You are fortunate , for the latter are generally the stronger ! 
I know very well that Count Nicholas is too young ever to be more to me than a friend , but this sweet friendship , this poetic and pure intimacy , were what my heart needed . 
But enough of this ! 
The chief news , about which all Moscow gossips , is the death of old Count Bezukhov , and his inheritance . 
Fancy ! 
The three princesses have received very little , Prince Vasili nothing , and it is Monsieur Pierre who has inherited all the property and has besides been recognized as legitimate ; so that he is now Count Bezukhov and possessor of the finest fortune in Russia . 
It is rumored that Prince Vasili played a very despicable part in this affair and that he returned to Petersburg quite crestfallen . 
I confess I understand very little about all these matters of wills and inheritance ; but I do know that since this young man , whom we all used to know as plain Monsieur Pierre , has become Count Bezukhov and the owner of one of the largest fortunes in Russia , I am much amused to watch the change in the tone and manners of the mammas burdened by marriageable daughters , and of the young ladies themselves , toward him , though , between you and me , he always seemed to me a poor sort of fellow . 
As for the past two years people have amused themselves by finding husbands for me -LRB- most of whom I do n't even know -RRB- , the matchmaking chronicles of Moscow now speak of me as the future Countess Bezukhova . 
But you will understand that I have no desire for the post . 
A propos of marriages : do you know that a while ago that universal auntie Anna Mikhaylovna told me , under the seal of strict secrecy , of a plan of marriage for you . 
It is neither more nor less than with Prince Vasili 's son Anatole , whom they wish to reform by marrying him to someone rich and distinguee , and it is on you that his relations ' choice has fallen . 
I do n't know what you will think of it , but I consider it my duty to let you know of it . 
He is said to be very handsome and a terrible scapegrace . 
That is all I have been able to find out about him . 
But enough of gossip . 
I am at the end of my second sheet of paper , and Mamma has sent for me to go and dine at the Apraksins ' . 
Read the mystical book I am sending you ; it has an enormous success here . 
Though there are things in it difficult for the feeble human mind to grasp , it is an admirable book which calms and elevates the soul . 
Adieu ! 
Give my respects to monsieur your father and my compliments to Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
I embrace you as I love you . 
JULIE P.S. Let me have news of your brother and his charming little wife . 
The princess pondered awhile with a thoughtful smile and her luminous eyes lit up so that her face was entirely transformed . 
Then she suddenly rose and with her heavy tread went up to the table . 
She took a sheet of paper and her hand moved rapidly over it . 
This is the reply she wrote , also in French : Dear and precious Friend , Your letter of the 13th has given me great delight . 
So you still love me , my romantic Julie ? 
Separation , of which you say so much that is bad , does not seem to have had its usual effect on you . 
You complain of our separation . 
What then should I say , if I dared complain , I who am deprived of all who are dear to me ? 
Ah , if we had not religion to console us life would be very sad . 
Why do you suppose that I should look severely on your affection for that young man ? 
On such matters I am only severe with myself . 
I understand such feelings in others , and if never having felt them I can not approve of them , neither do I condemn them . 
Only it seems to me that Christian love , love of one 's neighbor , love of one 's enemy , is worthier , sweeter , and better than the feelings which the beautiful eyes of a young man can inspire in a romantic and loving young girl like yourself . 
The news of Count Bezukhov 's death reached us before your letter and my father was much affected by it . 
He says the count was the last representative but one of the great century , and that it is his own turn now , but that he will do all he can to let his turn come as late as possible . 
God preserve us from that terrible misfortune ! 
I can not agree with you about Pierre , whom I knew as a child . 
He always seemed to me to have an excellent heart , and that is the quality I value most in people . 
As to his inheritance and the part played by Prince Vasili , it is very sad for both . 
Ah , my dear friend , our divine Saviour 's words , that it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich man to enter the Kingdom of God , are terribly true . 
I pity Prince Vasili but am still more sorry for Pierre . 
So young , and burdened with such riches -- to what temptations he will be exposed ! 
If I were asked what I desire most on earth , it would be to be poorer than the poorest beggar . 
A thousand thanks , dear friend , for the volume you have sent me and which has such success in Moscow . 
Yet since you tell me that among some good things it contains others which our weak human understanding can not grasp , it seems to me rather useless to spend time in reading what is unintelligible and can therefore bear no fruit . 
I never could understand the fondness some people have for confusing their minds by dwelling on mystical books that merely awaken their doubts and excite their imagination , giving them a bent for exaggeration quite contrary to Christian simplicity . 
Let us rather read the Epistles and Gospels . 
Let us not seek to penetrate what mysteries they contain ; for how can we , miserable sinners that we are , know the terrible and holy secrets of Providence while we remain in this flesh which forms an impenetrable veil between us and the Eternal ? 
Let us rather confine ourselves to studying those sublime rules which our divine Saviour has left for our guidance here below . 
Let us try to conform to them and follow them , and let us be persuaded that the less we let our feeble human minds roam , the better we shall please God , who rejects all knowledge that does not come from Him ; and the less we seek to fathom what He has been pleased to conceal from us , the sooner will He vouchsafe its revelation to us through His divine Spirit . 
My father has not spoken to me of a suitor , but has only told me that he has received a letter and is expecting a visit from Prince Vasili . 
In regard to this project of marriage for me , I will tell you , dear sweet friend , that I look on marriage as a divine institution to which we must conform . 
However painful it may be to me , should the Almighty lay the duties of wife and mother upon me I shall try to perform them as faithfully as I can , without disquieting myself by examining my feelings toward him whom He may give me for husband . 
I have had a letter from my brother , who announces his speedy arrival at Bald Hills with his wife . 
This pleasure will be but a brief one , however , for he will leave us again to take part in this unhappy war into which we have been drawn , God knows how or why . 
Not only where you are -- at the heart of affairs and of the world -- is the talk all of war , even here amid fieldwork and the calm of nature -- which townsfolk consider characteristic of the country -- rumors of war are heard and painfully felt . 
My father talks of nothing but marches and countermarches , things of which I understand nothing ; and the day before yesterday during my daily walk through the village I witnessed a heartrending scene ... . 
It was a convoy of conscripts enrolled from our people and starting to join the army . 
You should have seen the state of the mothers , wives , and children of the men who were going and should have heard the sobs . 
It seems as though mankind has forgotten the laws of its divine Saviour , Who preached love and forgiveness of injuries -- and that men attribute the greatest merit to skill in killing one another . 
Adieu , dear and kind friend ; may our divine Saviour and His most Holy Mother keep you in their holy and all-powerful care ! 
MARY `` Ah , you are sending off a letter , Princess ? 
I have already dispatched mine . 
I have written to my poor mother , '' said the smiling Mademoiselle Bourienne rapidly , in her pleasant mellow tones and with guttural r 's . 
She brought into Princess Mary 's strenuous , mournful , and gloomy world a quite different atmosphere , careless , lighthearted , and self-satisfied . 
`` Princess , I must warn you , '' she added , lowering her voice and evidently listening to herself with pleasure , and speaking with exaggerated grasseyement , `` the prince has been scolding Michael Ivanovich . 
He is in a very bad humor , very morose . 
Be prepared . '' 
`` Ah , dear friend , '' replied Princess Mary , `` I have asked you never to warn me of the humor my father is in . 
I do not allow myself to judge him and would not have others do so . '' 
The princess glanced at her watch and , seeing that she was five minutes late in starting her practice on the clavichord , went into the sitting room with a look of alarm . 
Between twelve and two o'clock , as the day was mapped out , the prince rested and the princess played the clavichord . 
The gray-haired valet was sitting drowsily listening to the snoring of the prince , who was in his large study . 
From the far side of the house through the closed doors came the sound of difficult passages -- twenty times repeated -- of a sonata by Dussek . 
Just then a closed carriage and another with a hood drove up to the porch . 
Prince Andrew got out of the carriage , helped his little wife to alight , and let her pass into the house before him . 
Old Tikhon , wearing a wig , put his head out of the door of the antechamber , reported in a whisper that the prince was sleeping , and hastily closed the door . 
Tikhon knew that neither the son 's arrival nor any other unusual event must be allowed to disturb the appointed order of the day . 
Prince Andrew apparently knew this as well as Tikhon ; he looked at his watch as if to ascertain whether his father 's habits had changed since he was at home last , and , having assured himself that they had not , he turned to his wife . 
`` He will get up in twenty minutes . 
Let us go across to Mary 's room , '' he said . 
The little princess had grown stouter during this time , but her eyes and her short , downy , smiling lip lifted when she began to speak just as merrily and prettily as ever . 
`` Why , this is a palace ! '' 
she said to her husband , looking around with the expression with which people compliment their host at a ball . 
`` Let 's come , quick , quick ! '' 
And with a glance round , she smiled at Tikhon , at her husband , and at the footman who accompanied them . 
`` Is that Mary practicing ? 
Let 's go quietly and take her by surprise . '' 
Prince Andrew followed her with a courteous but sad expression . 
`` You 've grown older , Tikhon , '' he said in passing to the old man , who kissed his hand . 
Before they reached the room from which the sounds of the clavichord came , the pretty , fair haired Frenchwoman , Mademoiselle Bourienne , rushed out apparently beside herself with delight . 
`` Ah ! 
what joy for the princess ! '' 
exclaimed she : `` At last ! 
I must let her know . '' 
`` No , no , please not ... You are Mademoiselle Bourienne , '' said the little princess , kissing her . 
`` I know you already through my sister-in-law 's friendship for you . 
She was not expecting us ? '' 
They went up to the door of the sitting room from which came the sound of the oft-repeated passage of the sonata . 
Prince Andrew stopped and made a grimace , as if expecting something unpleasant . 
The little princess entered the room . 
The passage broke off in the middle , a cry was heard , then Princess Mary 's heavy tread and the sound of kissing . 
When Prince Andrew went in the two princesses , who had only met once before for a short time at his wedding , were in each other 's arms warmly pressing their lips to whatever place they happened to touch . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne stood near them pressing her hand to her heart , with a beatific smile and obviously equally ready to cry or to laugh . 
Prince Andrew shrugged his shoulders and frowned , as lovers of music do when they hear a false note . 
The two women let go of one another , and then , as if afraid of being too late , seized each other 's hands , kissing them and pulling them away , and again began kissing each other on the face , and then to Prince Andrew 's surprise both began to cry and kissed again . 
Mademoiselle Bourienne also began to cry . 
Prince Andrew evidently felt ill at ease , but to the two women it seemed quite natural that they should cry , and apparently it never entered their heads that it could have been otherwise at this meeting . 
`` Ah ! 
my dear ! 
... Ah ! 
Mary ! '' 
they suddenly exclaimed , and then laughed . 
`` I dreamed last night ... '' -- `` You were not expecting us ? 
... '' `` Ah ! 
Mary , you have got thinner ? 
... '' `` And you have grown stouter ! 
... '' `` I knew the princess at once , '' put in Mademoiselle Bourienne . 
`` And I had no idea ! 
... '' exclaimed Princess Mary . 
`` Ah , Andrew , I did not see you . '' 
Prince Andrew and his sister , hand in hand , kissed one another , and he told her she was still the same crybaby as ever . 
Princess Mary had turned toward her brother , and through her tears the loving , warm , gentle look of her large luminous eyes , very beautiful at that moment , rested on Prince Andrew 's face . 
The little princess talked incessantly , her short , downy upper lip continually and rapidly touching her rosy nether lip when necessary and drawing up again next moment when her face broke into a smile of glittering teeth and sparkling eyes . 
She told of an accident they had had on the Spasski Hill which might have been serious for her in her condition , and immediately after that informed them that she had left all her clothes in Petersburg and that heaven knew what she would have to dress in here ; and that Andrew had quite changed , and that Kitty Odyntsova had married an old man , and that there was a suitor for Mary , a real one , but that they would talk of that later . 
Princess Mary was still looking silently at her brother and her beautiful eyes were full of love and sadness . 
It was plain that she was following a train of thought independent of her sister-in-law 's words . 
In the midst of a description of the last Petersburg fete she addressed her brother : `` So you are really going to the war , Andrew ? '' 
she said sighing . 
Lise sighed too . 
`` Yes , and even tomorrow , '' replied her brother . 
`` He is leaving me here , God knows why , when he might have had promotion ... '' Princess Mary did not listen to the end , but continuing her train of thought turned to her sister-in-law with a tender glance at her figure . 
`` Is it certain ? '' 
she said . 
The face of the little princess changed . 
She sighed and said : `` Yes , quite certain . 
Ah ! 
it is very dreadful ... '' Her lip descended . 
She brought her face close to her sister-in-law 's and unexpectedly again began to cry . 
`` She needs rest , '' said Prince Andrew with a frown . 
`` Do n't you , Lise ? 
Take her to your room and I 'll go to Father . 
How is he ? 
Just the same ? '' 
`` Yes , just the same . 
Though I do n't know what your opinion will be , '' answered the princess joyfully . 
`` And are the hours the same ? 
And the walks in the avenues ? 
And the lathe ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew with a scarcely perceptible smile which showed that , in spite of all his love and respect for his father , he was aware of his weaknesses . 
`` The hours are the same , and the lathe , and also the mathematics and my geometry lessons , '' said Princess Mary gleefully , as if her lessons in geometry were among the greatest delights of her life . 
When the twenty minutes had elapsed and the time had come for the old prince to get up , Tikhon came to call the young prince to his father . 
The old man made a departure from his usual routine in honor of his son 's arrival : he gave orders to admit him to his apartments while he dressed for dinner . 
The old prince always dressed in old-fashioned style , wearing an antique coat and powdered hair ; and when Prince Andrew entered his father 's dressing room -LRB- not with the contemptuous look and manner he wore in drawing rooms , but with the animated face with which he talked to Pierre -RRB- , the old man was sitting on a large leather-covered chair , wrapped in a powdering mantle , entrusting his head to Tikhon . 
`` Ah ! 
here 's the warrior ! 
Wants to vanquish Buonaparte ? '' 
said the old man , shaking his powdered head as much as the tail , which Tikhon was holding fast to plait , would allow . 
`` You at least must tackle him properly , or else if he goes on like this he 'll soon have us , too , for his subjects ! 
How are you ? '' 
And he held out his cheek . 
The old man was in a good temper after his nap before dinner . 
-LRB- He used to say that a nap `` after dinner was silver -- before dinner , golden . '' -RRB- 
He cast happy , sidelong glances at his son from under his thick , bushy eyebrows . 
Prince Andrew went up and kissed his father on the spot indicated to him . 
He made no reply on his father 's favorite topic -- making fun of the military men of the day , and more particularly of Bonaparte . 
`` Yes , Father , I have come to you and brought my wife who is pregnant , '' said Prince Andrew , following every movement of his father 's face with an eager and respectful look . 
`` How is your health ? '' 
`` Only fools and rakes fall ill , my boy . 
You know me : I am busy from morning till night and abstemious , so of course I am well . '' 
`` Thank God , '' said his son smiling . 
`` God has nothing to do with it ! 
Well , go on , '' he continued , returning to his hobby ; `` tell me how the Germans have taught you to fight Bonaparte by this new science you call ` strategy . ' '' 
Prince Andrew smiled . 
`` Give me time to collect my wits , Father , '' said he , with a smile that showed that his father 's foibles did not prevent his son from loving and honoring him . 
`` Why , I have not yet had time to settle down ! '' 
`` Nonsense , nonsense ! '' 
cried the old man , shaking his pigtail to see whether it was firmly plaited , and grasping his by the hand . 
`` The house for your wife is ready . 
Princess Mary will take her there and show her over , and they 'll talk nineteen to the dozen . 
That 's their woman 's way ! 
I am glad to have her . 
Sit down and talk . 
About Mikhelson 's army I understand -- Tolstoy 's too ... a simultaneous expedition ... . 
But what 's the southern army to do ? 
Prussia is neutral ... I know that . 
What about Austria ? '' 
said he , rising from his chair and pacing up and down the room followed by Tikhon , who ran after him , handing him different articles of clothing . 
`` What of Sweden ? 
How will they cross Pomerania ? '' 
Prince Andrew , seeing that his father insisted , began -- at first reluctantly , but gradually with more and more animation , and from habit changing unconsciously from Russian to French as he went on -- to explain the plan of operation for the coming campaign . 
He explained how an army , ninety thousand strong , was to threaten Prussia so as to bring her out of her neutrality and draw her into the war ; how part of that army was to join some Swedish forces at Stralsund ; how two hundred and twenty thousand Austrians , with a hundred thousand Russians , were to operate in Italy and on the Rhine ; how fifty thousand Russians and as many English were to land at Naples , and how a total force of five hundred thousand men was to attack the French from different sides . 
The old prince did not evince the least interest during this explanation , but as if he were not listening to it continued to dress while walking about , and three times unexpectedly interrupted . 
Once he stopped it by shouting : `` The white one , the white one ! '' 
This meant that Tikhon was not handing him the waistcoat he wanted . 
Another time he interrupted , saying : `` And will she soon be confined ? '' 
and shaking his head reproachfully said : `` That 's bad ! 
Go on , go on . '' 
The third interruption came when Prince Andrew was finishing his description . 
The old man began to sing , in the cracked voice of old age : `` Malbrook s ` en va-t-en guerre . 
Dieu sait quand reviendra . '' 
* * `` Marlborough is going to the wars ; God knows when he 'll return . '' 
His son only smiled . 
`` I do n't say it 's a plan I approve of , '' said the son ; `` I am only telling you what it is . 
Napoleon has also formed his plan by now , not worse than this one . '' 
`` Well , you 've told me nothing new , '' and the old man repeated , meditatively and rapidly : `` Dieu sait quand reviendra . 
Go to the dining room . '' 
At the appointed hour the prince , powdered and shaven , entered the dining room where his daughter-in-law , Princess Mary , and Mademoiselle Bourienne were already awaiting him together with his architect , who by a strange caprice of his employer 's was admitted to table though the position of that insignificant individual was such as could certainly not have caused him to expect that honor . 
The prince , who generally kept very strictly to social distinctions and rarely admitted even important government officials to his table , had unexpectedly selected Michael Ivanovich -LRB- who always went into a corner to blow his nose on his checked handkerchief -RRB- to illustrate the theory that all men are equals , and had more than once impressed on his daughter that Michael Ivanovich was `` not a whit worse than you or I. '' At dinner the prince usually spoke to the taciturn Michael Ivanovich more often than to anyone else . 
In the dining room , which like all the rooms in the house was exceedingly lofty , the members of the household and the footmen -- one behind each chair -- stood waiting for the prince to enter . 
The head butler , napkin on arm , was scanning the setting of the table , making signs to the footmen , and anxiously glancing from the clock to the door by which the prince was to enter . 
Prince Andrew was looking at a large gilt frame , new to him , containing the genealogical tree of the Princes Bolkonski , opposite which hung another such frame with a badly painted portrait -LRB- evidently by the hand of the artist belonging to the estate -RRB- of a ruling prince , in a crown -- an alleged descendant of Rurik and ancestor of the Bolkonskis . 
Prince Andrew , looking again at that genealogical tree , shook his head , laughing as a man laughs who looks at a portrait so characteristic of the original as to be amusing . 
`` How thoroughly like him that is ! '' 
he said to Princess Mary , who had come up to him . 
Princess Mary looked at her brother in surprise . 
She did not understand what he was laughing at . 
Everything her father did inspired her with reverence and was beyond question . 
`` Everyone has his Achilles ' heel , '' continued Prince Andrew . 
`` Fancy , with his powerful mind , indulging in such nonsense ! '' 
Princess Mary could not understand the boldness of her brother 's criticism and was about to reply , when the expected footsteps were heard coming from the study . 
The prince walked in quickly and jauntily as was his wont , as if intentionally contrasting the briskness of his manners with the strict formality of his house . 
At that moment the great clock struck two and another with a shrill tone joined in from the drawing room . 
The prince stood still ; his lively glittering eyes from under their thick , bushy eyebrows sternly scanned all present and rested on the little princess . 
She felt , as courtiers do when the Tsar enters , the sensation of fear and respect which the old man inspired in all around him . 
He stroked her hair and then patted her awkwardly on the back of her neck . 
`` I 'm glad , glad , to see you , '' he said , looking attentively into her eyes , and then quickly went to his place and sat down . 
`` Sit down , sit down ! 
Sit down , Michael Ianovich ! '' 
He indicated a place beside him to his daughter-in-law . 
A footman moved the chair for her . 
`` Ho , ho ! '' 
said the old man , casting his eyes on her rounded figure . 
`` You 've been in a hurry . 
That 's bad ! '' 
He laughed in his usual dry , cold , unpleasant way , with his lips only and not with his eyes . 
`` You must walk , walk as much as possible , as much as possible , '' he said . 
The little princess did not , or did not wish to , hear his words . 
She was silent and seemed confused . 
The prince asked her about her father , and she began to smile and talk . 
He asked about mutual acquaintances , and she became still more animated and chattered away giving him greetings from various people and retelling the town gossip . 
`` Countess Apraksina , poor thing , has lost her husband and she has cried her eyes out , '' she said , growing more and more lively . 
As she became animated the prince looked at her more and more sternly , and suddenly , as if he had studied her sufficiently and had formed a definite idea of her , he turned away and addressed Michael Ivanovich . 
`` Well , Michael Ivanovich , our Bonaparte will be having a bad time of it . 
Prince Andrew '' -LRB- he always spoke thus of his son -RRB- `` has been telling me what forces are being collected against him ! 
While you and I never thought much of him . '' 
Michael Ivanovich did not at all know when `` you and I '' had said such things about Bonaparte , but understanding that he was wanted as a peg on which to hang the prince 's favorite topic , he looked inquiringly at the young prince , wondering what would follow . 
`` He is a great tactician ! '' 
said the prince to his son , pointing to the architect . 
And the conversation again turned on the war , on Bonaparte , and the generals and statesmen of the day . 
The old prince seemed convinced not only that all the men of the day were mere babies who did not know the A B C of war or of politics , and that Bonaparte was an insignificant little Frenchy , successful only because there were no longer any Potemkins or Suvorovs left to oppose him ; but he was also convinced that there were no political difficulties in Europe and no real war , but only a sort of puppet show at which the men of the day were playing , pretending to do something real . 
Prince Andrew gaily bore with his father 's ridicule of the new men , and drew him on and listened to him with evident pleasure . 
`` The past always seems good , '' said he , `` but did not Suvorov himself fall into a trap Moreau set him , and from which he did not know how to escape ? '' 
`` Who told you that ? 
Who ? '' 
cried the prince . 
`` Suvorov ! '' 
And he jerked away his plate , which Tikhon briskly caught . 
`` Suvorov ! 
... Consider , Prince Andrew . 
Two ... Frederick and Suvorov ; Moreau ! 
... Moreau would have been a prisoner if Suvorov had had a free hand ; but he had the Hofs-kriegs-wurst-schnapps-Rath on his hands . 
It would have puzzled the devil himself ! 
When you get there you 'll find out what those Hofs - kriegs-wurst-Raths are ! 
Suvorov could n't manage them so what chance has Michael Kutuzov ? 
No , my dear boy , '' he continued , `` you and your generals wo n't get on against Buonaparte ; you 'll have to call in the French , so that birds of a feather may fight together . 
The German , Pahlen , has been sent to New York in America , to fetch the Frenchman , Moreau , '' he said , alluding to the invitation made that year to Moreau to enter the Russian service ... `` Wonderful ! 
... Were the Potemkins , Suvorovs , and Orlovs Germans ? 
No , lad , either you fellows have all lost your wits , or I have outlived mine . 
May God help you , but we 'll see what will happen . 
Buonaparte has become a great commander among them ! 
Hm ! 
... '' `` I do n't at all say that all the plans are good , '' said Prince Andrew , `` I am only surprised at your opinion of Bonaparte . 
You may laugh as much as you like , but all the same Bonaparte is a great general ! '' 
`` Michael Ivanovich ! '' 
cried the old prince to the architect who , busy with his roast meat , hoped he had been forgotten : `` Did n't I tell you Buonaparte was a great tactician ? 
Here , he says the same thing . '' 
`` To be sure , your excellency , '' replied the architect . 
The prince again laughed his frigid laugh . 
`` Buonaparte was born with a silver spoon in his mouth . 
He has got splendid soldiers . 
Besides he began by attacking Germans . 
And only idlers have failed to beat the Germans . 
Since the world began everybody has beaten the Germans . 
They beat no one -- except one another . 
He made his reputation fighting them . '' 
And the prince began explaining all the blunders which , according to him , Bonaparte had made in his campaigns and even in politics . 
His son made no rejoinder , but it was evident that whatever arguments were presented he was as little able as his father to change his opinion . 
He listened , refraining from a reply , and involuntarily wondered how this old man , living alone in the country for so many years , could know and discuss so minutely and acutely all the recent European military and political events . 
`` You think I 'm an old man and do n't understand the present state of affairs ? '' 
concluded his father . 
`` But it troubles me . 
I do n't sleep at night . 
Come now , where has this great commander of yours shown his skill ? '' 
he concluded . 
`` That would take too long to tell , '' answered the son . 
`` Well , then go to your Buonaparte ! 
Mademoiselle Bourienne , here 's another admirer of that powder-monkey emperor of yours , '' he exclaimed in excellent French . 
`` You know , Prince , I am not a Bonapartist ! '' 
`` Dieu sait quand reviendra ... '' hummed the prince out of tune and , with a laugh still more so , he quitted the table . 
The little princess during the whole discussion and the rest of the dinner sat silent , glancing with a frightened look now at her father-in - law and now at Princess Mary . 
When they left the table she took her sister-in-law 's arm and drew her into another room . 
`` What a clever man your father is , '' said she ; `` perhaps that is why I am afraid of him . '' 
`` Oh , he is so kind ! '' 
answered Princess Mary . 
Prince Andrew was to leave next evening . 
The old prince , not altering his routine , retired as usual after dinner . 
The little princess was in her sister-in-law 's room . 
Prince Andrew in a traveling coat without epaulettes had been packing with his valet in the rooms assigned to him . 
After inspecting the carriage himself and seeing the trunks put in , he ordered the horses to be harnessed . 
Only those things he always kept with him remained in his room ; a small box , a large canteen fitted with silver plate , two Turkish pistols and a saber -- a present from his father who had brought it from the siege of Ochakov . 
All these traveling effects of Prince Andrew 's were in very good order : new , clean , and in cloth covers carefully tied with tapes . 
When starting on a journey or changing their mode of life , men capable of reflection are generally in a serious frame of mind . 
At such moments one reviews the past and plans for the future . 
Prince Andrew 's face looked very thoughtful and tender . 
With his hands behind him he paced briskly from corner to corner of the room , looking straight before him and thoughtfully shaking his head . 
Did he fear going to the war , or was he sad at leaving his wife ? 
-- perhaps both , but evidently he did not wish to be seen in that mood , for hearing footsteps in the passage he hurriedly unclasped his hands , stopped at a table as if tying the cover of the small box , and assumed his usual tranquil and impenetrable expression . 
It was the heavy tread of Princess Mary that he heard . 
`` I hear you have given orders to harness , '' she cried , panting -LRB- she had apparently been running -RRB- , `` and I did so wish to have another talk with you alone ! 
God knows how long we may again be parted . 
You are not angry with me for coming ? 
You have changed so , Andrusha , '' she added , as if to explain such a question . 
She smiled as she uttered his pet name , `` Andrusha . '' 
It was obviously strange to her to think that this stern handsome man should be Andrusha - - the slender mischievous boy who had been her playfellow in childhood . 
`` And where is Lise ? '' 
he asked , answering her question only by a smile . 
`` She was so tired that she has fallen asleep on the sofa in my room . 
Oh , Andrew ! 
What a treasure of a wife you have , '' said she , sitting down on the sofa , facing her brother . 
`` She is quite a child : such a dear , merry child . 
I have grown so fond of her . '' 
Prince Andrew was silent , but the princess noticed the ironical and contemptuous look that showed itself on his face . 
