It happened to be the day of a Parsee festival . 
These descendants of the sect of Zoroaster -- the most thrifty , civilised , intelligent , and austere of the East Indians , among whom are counted the richest native merchants of Bombay -- were celebrating a sort of religious carnival , with processions and shows , in the midst of which Indian dancing-girls , clothed in rose-coloured gauze , looped up with gold and silver , danced airily , but with perfect modesty , to the sound of viols and the clanging of tambourines . 
It is needless to say that Passepartout watched these curious ceremonies with staring eyes and gaping mouth , and that his countenance was that of the greenest booby imaginable . 
Unhappily for his master , as well as himself , his curiosity drew him unconsciously farther off than he intended to go . 
At last , having seen the Parsee carnival wind away in the distance , he was turning his steps towards the station , when he happened to espy the splendid pagoda on Malabar Hill , and was seized with an irresistible desire to see its interior . 
He was quite ignorant that it is forbidden to Christians to enter certain Indian temples , and that even the faithful must not go in without first leaving their shoes outside the door . 
It may be said here that the wise policy of the British Government severely punishes a disregard of the practices of the native religions . 
Passepartout , however , thinking no harm , went in like a simple tourist , and was soon lost in admiration of the splendid Brahmin ornamentation which everywhere met his eyes , when of a sudden he found himself sprawling on the sacred flagging . 
He looked up to behold three enraged priests , who forthwith fell upon him ; tore off his shoes , and began to beat him with loud , savage exclamations . 
The agile Frenchman was soon upon his feet again , and lost no time in knocking down two of his long-gowned adversaries with his fists and a vigorous application of his toes ; then , rushing out of the pagoda as fast as his legs could carry him , he soon escaped the third priest by mingling with the crowd in the streets . 
