This was a gain to Phileas Fogg of two days since his departure from London , and he calmly entered the fact in the itinerary , in the column of gains . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT IS ONLY TOO GLAD TO GET OFF WITH THE LOSS OF HIS SHOES Everybody knows that the great reversed triangle of land , with its base in the north and its apex in the south , which is called India , embraces fourteen hundred thousand square miles , upon which is spread unequally a population of one hundred and eighty millions of souls . 
The British Crown exercises a real and despotic dominion over the larger portion of this vast country , and has a governor-general stationed at Calcutta , governors at Madras , Bombay , and in Bengal , and a lieutenant-governor at Agra . 
But British India , properly so called , only embraces seven hundred thousand square miles , and a population of from one hundred to one hundred and ten millions of inhabitants . 
A considerable portion of India is still free from British authority ; and there are certain ferocious rajahs in the interior who are absolutely independent . 
The celebrated East India Company was all-powerful from 1756 , when the English first gained a foothold on the spot where now stands the city of Madras , down to the time of the great Sepoy insurrection . 
It gradually annexed province after province , purchasing them of the native chiefs , whom it seldom paid , and appointed the governor-general and his subordinates , civil and military . 
But the East India Company has now passed away , leaving the British possessions in India directly under the control of the Crown . 
The aspect of the country , as well as the manners and distinctions of race , is daily changing . 
Formerly one was obliged to travel in India by the old cumbrous methods of going on foot or on horseback , in palanquins or unwieldly coaches ; now fast steamboats ply on the Indus and the Ganges , and a great railway , with branch lines joining the main line at many points on its route , traverses the peninsula from Bombay to Calcutta in three days . 
