The influence to which the priests of Pillaji had subjected Aouda began gradually to yield , and she became more herself , so that her fine eyes resumed all their soft Indian expression . 
When the poet-king , Ucaf Uddaul , celebrates the charms of the queen of Ahmehnagara , he speaks thus : `` Her shining tresses , divided in two parts , encircle the harmonious contour of her white and delicate cheeks , brilliant in their glow and freshness . 
Her ebony brows have the form and charm of the bow of Kama , the god of love , and beneath her long silken lashes the purest reflections and a celestial light swim , as in the sacred lakes of Himalaya , in the black pupils of her great clear eyes . 
Her teeth , fine , equal , and white , glitter between her smiling lips like dewdrops in a passion-flower 's half-enveloped breast . 
Her delicately formed ears , her vermilion hands , her little feet , curved and tender as the lotus-bud , glitter with the brilliancy of the loveliest pearls of Ceylon , the most dazzling diamonds of Golconda . 
Her narrow and supple waist , which a hand may clasp around , sets forth the outline of her rounded figure and the beauty of her bosom , where youth in its flower displays the wealth of its treasures ; and beneath the silken folds of her tunic she seems to have been modelled in pure silver by the godlike hand of Vicvarcarma , the immortal sculptor . '' 
It is enough to say , without applying this poetical rhapsody to Aouda , that she was a charming woman , in all the European acceptation of the phrase . 
She spoke English with great purity , and the guide had not exaggerated in saying that the young Parsee had been transformed by her bringing up . 
The train was about to start from Allahabad , and Mr. Fogg proceeded to pay the guide the price agreed upon for his service , and not a farthing more ; which astonished Passepartout , who remembered all that his master owed to the guide 's devotion . 
He had , indeed , risked his life in the adventure at Pillaji , and , if he should be caught afterwards by the Indians , he would with difficulty escape their vengeance . 
