This `` great attraction '' was to close the performance . 
Before three o'clock the large shed was invaded by the spectators , comprising Europeans and natives , Chinese and Japanese , men , women and children , who precipitated themselves upon the narrow benches and into the boxes opposite the stage . 
The musicians took up a position inside , and were vigorously performing on their gongs , tam-tams , flutes , bones , tambourines , and immense drums . 
The performance was much like all acrobatic displays ; but it must be confessed that the Japanese are the first equilibrists in the world . 
One , with a fan and some bits of paper , performed the graceful trick of the butterflies and the flowers ; another traced in the air , with the odorous smoke of his pipe , a series of blue words , which composed a compliment to the audience ; while a third juggled with some lighted candles , which he extinguished successively as they passed his lips , and relit again without interrupting for an instant his juggling . 
Another reproduced the most singular combinations with a spinning-top ; in his hands the revolving tops seemed to be animated with a life of their own in their interminable whirling ; they ran over pipe-stems , the edges of sabres , wires and even hairs stretched across the stage ; they turned around on the edges of large glasses , crossed bamboo ladders , dispersed into all the corners , and produced strange musical effects by the combination of their various pitches of tone . 
The jugglers tossed them in the air , threw them like shuttlecocks with wooden battledores , and yet they kept on spinning ; they put them into their pockets , and took them out still whirling as before . 
It is useless to describe the astonishing performances of the acrobats and gymnasts . 
The turning on ladders , poles , balls , barrels , & c. , was executed with wonderful precision . 
But the principal attraction was the exhibition of the Long Noses , a show to which Europe is as yet a stranger . 
