He remained in this state during the rest of the day , a whirlwind within , a profound tranquillity without . 
He took no `` preservative measures , '' as they may be called . 
Everything was still confused , and jostling together in his brain . 
His trouble was so great that he could not perceive the form of a single idea distinctly , and he could have told nothing about himself , except that he had received a great blow . 
He repaired to Fantine 's bed of suffering , as usual , and prolonged his visit , through a kindly instinct , telling himself that he must behave thus , and recommend her well to the sisters , in case he should be obliged to be absent himself . 
He had a vague feeling that he might be obliged to go to Arras ; and without having the least in the world made up his mind to this trip , he said to himself that being , as he was , beyond the shadow of any suspicion , there could be nothing out of the way in being a witness to what was to take place , and he engaged the tilbury from Scaufflaire in order to be prepared in any event . 
He dined with a good deal of appetite . 
On returning to his room , he communed with himself . 
He examined the situation , and found it unprecedented ; so unprecedented that in the midst of his revery he rose from his chair , moved by some inexplicable impulse of anxiety , and bolted his door . 
He feared lest something more should enter . 
He was barricading himself against possibilities . 
A moment later he extinguished his light ; it embarrassed him . 
lt seemed to him as though he might be seen . 
By whom ? 
Alas ! 
That on which he desired to close the door had already entered ; that which he desired to blind was staring him in the face , -- his conscience . 
His conscience ; that is to say , God . 
Nevertheless , he deluded himself at first ; he had a feeling of security and of solitude ; the bolt once drawn , he thought himself impregnable ; the candle extinguished , he felt himself invisible . 
Then he took possession of himself : he set his elbows on the table , leaned his head on his hand , and began to meditate in the dark . 
`` Where do I stand ? 
Am not I dreaming ? 
What have I heard ? 
Is it really true that I have seen that Javert , and that he spoke to me in that manner ? 
Who can that Champmathieu be ? 
So he resembles me ! 
Is it possible ? 
When I reflect that yesterday I was so tranquil , and so far from suspecting anything ! 
What was I doing yesterday at this hour ? 
What is there in this incident ? 
What will the end be ? 
What is to be done ? '' 
This was the torment in which he found himself . 
His brain had lost its power of retaining ideas ; they passed like waves , and he clutched his brow in both hands to arrest them . 
Nothing but anguish extricated itself from this tumult which overwhelmed his will and his reason , and from which he sought to draw proof and resolution . 
His head was burning . 
He went to the window and threw it wide open . 
There were no stars in the sky . 
He returned and seated himself at the table . 
The first hour passed in this manner . 
Gradually , however , vague outlines began to take form and to fix themselves in his meditation , and he was able to catch a glimpse with precision of the reality , -- not the whole situation , but some of the details . 
He began by recognizing the fact that , critical and extraordinary as was this situation , he was completely master of it . 
This only caused an increase of his stupor . 
Independently of the severe and religious aim which he had assigned to his actions , all that he had made up to that day had been nothing but a hole in which to bury his name . 
That which he had always feared most of all in his hours of self-communion , during his sleepless nights , was to ever hear that name pronounced ; he had said to himself , that that would be the end of all things for him ; that on the day when that name made its reappearance it would cause his new life to vanish from about him , and -- who knows ? 
-- perhaps even his new soul within him , also . 
He shuddered at the very thought that this was possible . 
Assuredly , if any one had said to him at such moments that the hour would come when that name would ring in his ears , when the hideous words , Jean Valjean , would suddenly emerge from the darkness and rise in front of him , when that formidable light , capable of dissipating the mystery in which he had enveloped himself , would suddenly blaze forth above his head , and that that name would not menace him , that that light would but produce an obscurity more dense , that this rent veil would but increase the mystery , that this earthquake would solidify his edifice , that this prodigious incident would have no other result , so far as he was concerned , if so it seemed good to him , than that of rendering his existence at once clearer and more impenetrable , and that , out of his confrontation with the phantom of Jean Valjean , the good and worthy citizen Monsieur Madeleine would emerge more honored , more peaceful , and more respected than ever -- if any one had told him that , he would have tossed his head and regarded the words as those of a madman . 
Well , all this was precisely what had just come to pass ; all that accumulation of impossibilities was a fact , and God had permitted these wild fancies to become real things ! 
His revery continued to grow clearer . 
He came more and more to an understanding of his position . 
It seemed to him that he had but just waked up from some inexplicable dream , and that he found himself slipping down a declivity in the middle of the night , erect , shivering , holding back all in vain , on the very brink of the abyss . 
He distinctly perceived in the darkness a stranger , a man unknown to him , whom destiny had mistaken for him , and whom she was thrusting into the gulf in his stead ; in order that the gulf might close once more , it was necessary that some one , himself or that other man , should fall into it : he had only let things take their course . 
The light became complete , and he acknowledged this to himself : That his place was empty in the galleys ; that do what he would , it was still awaiting him ; that the theft from little Gervais had led him back to it ; that this vacant place would await him , and draw him on until he filled it ; that this was inevitable and fatal ; and then he said to himself , `` that , at this moment , be had a substitute ; that it appeared that a certain Champmathieu had that ill luck , and that , as regards himself , being present in the galleys in the person of that Champmathieu , present in society under the name of M. Madeleine , he had nothing more to fear , provided that he did not prevent men from sealing over the head of that Champmathieu this stone of infamy which , like the stone of the sepulchre , falls once , never to rise again . '' 
All this was so strange and so violent , that there suddenly took place in him that indescribable movement , which no man feels more than two or three times in the course of his life , a sort of convulsion of the conscience which stirs up all that there is doubtful in the heart , which is composed of irony , of joy , and of despair , and which may be called an outburst of inward laughter . 
He hastily relighted his candle . 
`` Well , what then ? '' 
he said to himself ; `` what am I afraid of ? 
What is there in all that for me to think about ? 
I am safe ; all is over . 
I had but one partly open door through which my past might invade my life , and behold that door is walled up forever ! 
That Javert , who has been annoying me so long ; that terrible instinct which seemed to have divined me , which had divined me -- good God ! 
and which followed me everywhere ; that frightful hunting-dog , always making a point at me , is thrown off the scent , engaged elsewhere , absolutely turned from the trail : henceforth he is satisfied ; he will leave me in peace ; he has his Jean Valjean . 
Who knows ? 
it is even probable that he will wish to leave town ! 
And all this has been brought about without any aid from me , and I count for nothing in it ! 
Ah ! 
but where is the misfortune in this ? 
Upon my honor , people would think , to see me , that some catastrophe had happened to me ! 
After all , if it does bring harm to some one , that is not my fault in the least : it is Providence which has done it all ; it is because it wishes it so to be , evidently . 
Have I the right to disarrange what it has arranged ? 
What do I ask now ? 
Why should I meddle ? 
It does not concern me ; what ! 
I am not satisfied : but what more do I want ? 
The goal to which I have aspired for so many years , the dream of my nights , the object of my prayers to Heaven , -- security , -- I have now attained ; it is God who wills it ; I can do nothing against the will of God , and why does God will it ? 
In order that I may continue what I have begun , that I may do good , that I may one day be a grand and encouraging example , that it may be said at last , that a little happiness has been attached to the penance which I have undergone , and to that virtue to which I have returned . 
Really , I do not understand why I was afraid , a little while ago , to enter the house of that good cure , and to ask his advice ; this is evidently what he would have said to me : It is settled ; let things take their course ; let the good God do as he likes ! '' 
Thus did he address himself in the depths of his own conscience , bending over what may be called his own abyss ; he rose from his chair , and began to pace the room : `` Come , '' said he , `` let us think no more about it ; my resolve is taken ! '' 
but he felt no joy . 
Quite the reverse . 
One can no more prevent thought from recurring to an idea than one can the sea from returning to the shore : the sailor calls it the tide ; the guilty man calls it remorse ; God upheaves the soul as he does the ocean . 
After the expiration of a few moments , do what he would , he resumed the gloomy dialogue in which it was he who spoke and he who listened , saying that which he would have preferred to ignore , and listened to that which he would have preferred not to hear , yielding to that mysterious power which said to him : `` Think ! '' 
as it said to another condemned man , two thousand years ago , `` March on ! '' 
Before proceeding further , and in order to make ourselves fully understood , let us insist upon one necessary observation . 
It is certain that people do talk to themselves ; there is no living being who has not done it . 
It may even be said that the word is never a more magnificent mystery than when it goes from thought to conscience within a man , and when it returns from conscience to thought ; it is in this sense only that the words so often employed in this chapter , he said , he exclaimed , must be understood ; one speaks to one 's self , talks to one 's self , exclaims to one 's self without breaking the external silence ; there is a great tumult ; everything about us talks except the mouth . 
The realities of the soul are none the less realities because they are not visible and palpable . 
So he asked himself where he stood . 
He interrogated himself upon that `` settled resolve . '' 
He confessed to himself that all that he had just arranged in his mind was monstrous , that `` to let things take their course , to let the good God do as he liked , '' was simply horrible ; to allow this error of fate and of men to be carried out , not to hinder it , to lend himself to it through his silence , to do nothing , in short , was to do everything ! 
that this was hypocritical baseness in the last degree ! 
that it was a base , cowardly , sneaking , abject , hideous crime ! 
For the first time in eight years , the wretched man had just tasted the bitter savor of an evil thought and of an evil action . 
He spit it out with disgust . 
He continued to question himself . 
He asked himself severely what he had meant by this , `` My object is attained ! '' 
He declared to himself that his life really had an object ; but what object ? 
To conceal his name ? 
To deceive the police ? 
Was it for so petty a thing that he had done all that he had done ? 
Had he not another and a grand object , which was the true one -- to save , not his person , but his soul ; to become honest and good once more ; to be a just man ? 
Was it not that above all , that alone , which he had always desired , which the Bishop had enjoined upon him -- to shut the door on his past ? 
But he was not shutting it ! 
great God ! 
he was re-opening it by committing an infamous action ! 
He was becoming a thief once more , and the most odious of thieves ! 
He was robbing another of his existence , his life , his peace , his place in the sunshine . 
He was becoming an assassin . 
He was murdering , morally murdering , a wretched man . 
He was inflicting on him that frightful living death , that death beneath the open sky , which is called the galleys . 
On the other hand , to surrender himself to save that man , struck down with so melancholy an error , to resume his own name , to become once more , out of duty , the convict Jean Valjean , that was , in truth , to achieve his resurrection , and to close forever that hell whence he had just emerged ; to fall back there in appearance was to escape from it in reality . 
This must be done ! 
He had done nothing if he did not do all this ; his whole life was useless ; all his penitence was wasted . 
There was no longer any need of saying , `` What is the use ? '' 
He felt that the Bishop was there , that the Bishop was present all the more because he was dead , that the Bishop was gazing fixedly at him , that henceforth Mayor Madeleine , with all his virtues , would be abominable to him , and that the convict Jean Valjean would be pure and admirable in his sight ; that men beheld his mask , but that the Bishop saw his face ; that men saw his life , but that the Bishop beheld his conscience . 
So he must go to Arras , deliver the false Jean Valjean , and denounce the real one . 
Alas ! 
that was the greatest of sacrifices , the most poignant of victories , the last step to take ; but it must be done . 
Sad fate ! 
he would enter into sanctity only in the eyes of God when he returned to infamy in the eyes of men . 
`` Well , said he , `` let us decide upon this ; let us do our duty ; let us save this man . '' 
He uttered these words aloud , without perceiving that he was speaking aloud . 
He took his books , verified them , and put them in order . 
He flung in the fire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassed tradesmen . 
He wrote and sealed a letter , and on the envelope it might have been read , had there been any one in his chamber at the moment , To Monsieur Laffitte , Banker , Rue d'Artois , Paris . 
He drew from his secretary a pocket-book which contained several bank-notes and the passport of which he had made use that same year when he went to the elections . 
Any one who had seen him during the execution of these various acts , into which there entered such grave thought , would have had no suspicion of what was going on within him . 
Only occasionally did his lips move ; at other times he raised his head and fixed his gaze upon some point of the wall , as though there existed at that point something which he wished to elucidate or interrogate . 
When he had finished the letter to M. Laffitte , he put it into his pocket , together with the pocket-book , and began his walk once more . 
His revery had not swerved from its course . 
He continued to see his duty clearly , written in luminous letters , which flamed before his eyes and changed its place as he altered the direction of his glance : -- `` Go ! 
Tell your name ! 
Denounce yourself ! '' 
In the same way he beheld , as though they had passed before him in visible forms , the two ideas which had , up to that time , formed the double rule of his soul , -- the concealment of his name , the sanctification of his life . 
For the first time they appeared to him as absolutely distinct , and he perceived the distance which separated them . 
He recognized the fact that one of these ideas was , necessarily , good , while the other might become bad ; that the first was self-devotion , and that the other was personality ; that the one said , my neighbor , and that the other said , myself ; that one emanated from the light , and the other from darkness . 
They were antagonistic . 
He saw them in conflict . 
In proportion as he meditated , they grew before the eyes of his spirit . 
They had now attained colossal statures , and it seemed to him that he beheld within himself , in that infinity of which we were recently speaking , in the midst of the darkness and the lights , a goddess and a giant contending . 
He was filled with terror ; but it seemed to him that the good thought was getting the upper hand . 
He felt that he was on the brink of the second decisive crisis of his conscience and of his destiny ; that the Bishop had marked the first phase of his new life , and that Champmathieu marked the second . 
After the grand crisis , the grand test . 
But the fever , allayed for an instant , gradually resumed possession of him . 
A thousand thoughts traversed his mind , but they continued to fortify him in his resolution . 
One moment he said to himself that he was , perhaps , taking the matter too keenly ; that , after all , this Champmathieu was not interesting , and that he had actually been guilty of theft . 
He answered himself : `` If this man has , indeed , stolen a few apples , that means a month in prison . 
It is a long way from that to the galleys . 
And who knows ? 
Did he steal ? 
Has it been proved ? 
The name of Jean Valjean overwhelms him , and seems to dispense with proofs . 
Do not the attorneys for the Crown always proceed in this manner ? 
He is supposed to be a thief because he is known to be a convict . '' 
In another instant the thought had occurred to him that , when he denounced himself , the heroism of his deed might , perhaps , be taken into consideration , and his honest life for the last seven years , and what he had done for the district , and that they would have mercy on him . 
But this supposition vanished very quickly , and he smiled bitterly as he remembered that the theft of the forty sous from little Gervais put him in the position of a man guilty of a second offence after conviction , that this affair would certainly come up , and , according to the precise terms of the law , would render him liable to penal servitude for life . 
He turned aside from all illusions , detached himself more and more from earth , and sought strength and consolation elsewhere . 
He told himself that he must do his duty ; that perhaps he should not be more unhappy after doing his duty than after having avoided it ; that if he allowed things to take their own course , if he remained at M. sur M. , his consideration , his good name , his good works , the deference and veneration paid to him , his charity , his wealth , his popularity , his virtue , would be seasoned with a crime . 
And what would be the taste of all these holy things when bound up with this hideous thing ? 
while , if he accomplished his sacrifice , a celestial idea would be mingled with the galleys , the post , the iron necklet , the green cap , unceasing toil , and pitiless shame . 
At length he told himself that it must be so , that his destiny was thus allotted , that he had not authority to alter the arrangements made on high , that , in any case , he must make his choice : virtue without and abomination within , or holiness within and infamy without . 
The stirring up of these lugubrious ideas did not cause his courage to fail , but his brain grow weary . 
He began to think of other things , of indifferent matters , in spite of himself . 
The veins in his temples throbbed violently ; he still paced to and fro ; midnight sounded first from the parish church , then from the town-hall ; he counted the twelve strokes of the two clocks , and compared the sounds of the two bells ; he recalled in this connection the fact that , a few days previously , he had seen in an ironmonger 's shop an ancient clock for sale , upon which was written the name , Antoine-Albin de Romainville . 
He was cold ; he lighted a small fire ; it did not occur to him to close the window . 
In the meantime he had relapsed into his stupor ; he was obliged to make a tolerably vigorous effort to recall what had been the subject of his thoughts before midnight had struck ; he finally succeeded in doing this . 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' he said to himself , `` I had resolved to inform against myself . '' 
And then , all of a sudden , he thought of Fantine . 
`` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` and what about that poor woman ? '' 
Here a fresh crisis declared itself . 
Fantine , by appearing thus abruptly in his revery , produced the effect of an unexpected ray of light ; it seemed to him as though everything about him were undergoing a change of aspect : he exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
but I have hitherto considered no one but myself ; it is proper for me to hold my tongue or to denounce myself , to conceal my person or to save my soul , to be a despicable and respected magistrate , or an infamous and venerable convict ; it is I , it is always I and nothing but I : but , good God ! 
all this is egotism ; these are diverse forms of egotism , but it is egotism all the same . 
What if I were to think a little about others ? 
The highest holiness is to think of others ; come , let us examine the matter . 
The I excepted , the I effaced , the I forgotten , what would be the result of all this ? 
What if I denounce myself ? 
I am arrested ; this Champmathieu is released ; I am put back in the galleys ; that is well -- and what then ? 
What is going on here ? 
Ah ! 
here is a country , a town , here are factories , an industry , workers , both men and women , aged grandsires , children , poor people ! 
All this I have created ; all these I provide with their living ; everywhere where there is a smoking chimney , it is I who have placed the brand on the hearth and meat in the pot ; I have created ease , circulation , credit ; before me there was nothing ; I have elevated , vivified , informed with life , fecundated , stimulated , enriched the whole country-side ; lacking me , the soul is lacking ; I take myself off , everything dies : and this woman , who has suffered so much , who possesses so many merits in spite of her fall ; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been ! 
And that child whom I meant to go in search of , whom I have promised to her mother ; do I not also owe something to this woman , in reparation for the evil which I have done her ? 
If I disappear , what happens ? 
The mother dies ; the child becomes what it can ; that is what will take place , if I denounce myself . 
If I do not denounce myself ? 
come , let us see how it will be if I do not denounce myself . '' 
After putting this question to himself , he paused ; he seemed to undergo a momentary hesitation and trepidation ; but it did not last long , and he answered himself calmly : -- `` Well , this man is going to the galleys ; it is true , but what the deuce ! 
he has stolen ! 
There is no use in my saying that he has not been guilty of theft , for he has ! 
I remain here ; I go on : in ten years I shall have made ten millions ; I scatter them over the country ; I have nothing of my own ; what is that to me ? 
It is not for myself that I am doing it ; the prosperity of all goes on augmenting ; industries are aroused and animated ; factories and shops are multiplied ; families , a hundred families , a thousand families , are happy ; the district becomes populated ; villages spring up where there were only farms before ; farms rise where there was nothing ; wretchedness disappears , and with wretchedness debauchery , prostitution , theft , murder ; all vices disappear , all crimes : and this poor mother rears her child ; and behold a whole country rich and honest ! 
Ah ! 
I was a fool ! 
I was absurd ! 
what was that I was saying about denouncing myself ? 
I really must pay attention and not be precipitate about anything . 
What ! 
because it would have pleased me to play the grand and generous ; this is melodrama , after all ; because I should have thought of no one but myself , the idea ! 
for the sake of saving from a punishment , a trifle exaggerated , perhaps , but just at bottom , no one knows whom , a thief , a good-for-nothing , evidently , a whole country-side must perish ! 
a poor woman must die in the hospital ! 
a poor little girl must die in the street ! 
like dogs ; ah , this is abominable ! 
And without the mother even having seen her child once more , almost without the child 's having known her mother ; and all that for the sake of an old wretch of an apple-thief who , most assuredly , has deserved the galleys for something else , if not for that ; fine scruples , indeed , which save a guilty man and sacrifice the innocent , which save an old vagabond who has only a few years to live at most , and who will not be more unhappy in the galleys than in his hovel , and which sacrifice a whole population , mothers , wives , children . 
This poor little Cosette who has no one in the world but me , and who is , no doubt , blue with cold at this moment in the den of those Thenardiers ; those peoples are rascals ; and I was going to neglect my duty towards all these poor creatures ; and I was going off to denounce myself ; and I was about to commit that unspeakable folly ! 
Let us put it at the worst : suppose that there is a wrong action on my part in this , and that my conscience will reproach me for it some day , to accept , for the good of others , these reproaches which weigh only on myself ; this evil action which compromises my soul alone ; in that lies self-sacrifice ; in that alone there is virtue . '' 
He rose and resumed his march ; this time , he seemed to be content . 
Diamonds are found only in the dark places of the earth ; truths are found only in the depths of thought . 
It seemed to him , that , after having descended into these depths , after having long groped among the darkest of these shadows , he had at last found one of these diamonds , one of these truths , and that he now held it in his hand , and he was dazzled as he gazed upon it . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` this is right ; I am on the right road ; I have the solution ; I must end by holding fast to something ; my resolve is taken ; let things take their course ; let us no longer vacillate ; let us no longer hang back ; this is for the interest of all , not for my own ; I am Madeleine , and Madeleine I remain . 
Woe to the man who is Jean Valjean ! 
I am no longer he ; I do not know that man ; I no longer know anything ; it turns out that some one is Jean Valjean at the present moment ; let him look out for himself ; that does not concern me ; it is a fatal name which was floating abroad in the night ; if it halts and descends on a head , so much the worse for that head . '' 
He looked into the little mirror which hung above his chimney-piece , and said : -- `` Hold ! 
it has relieved me to come to a decision ; I am quite another man now . '' 
He proceeded a few paces further , then he stopped short . 
`` Come ! '' 
he said , `` I must not flinch before any of the consequences of the resolution which I have once adopted ; there are still threads which attach me to that Jean Valjean ; they must be broken ; in this very room there are objects which would betray me , dumb things which would bear witness against me ; it is settled ; all these things must disappear . '' 
He fumbled in his pocket , drew out his purse , opened it , and took out a small key ; he inserted the key in a lock whose aperture could hardly be seen , so hidden was it in the most sombre tones of the design which covered the wall-paper ; a secret receptacle opened , a sort of false cupboard constructed in the angle between the wall and the chimney-piece ; in this hiding-place there were some rags -- a blue linen blouse , an old pair of trousers , an old knapsack , and a huge thorn cudgel shod with iron at both ends . 
Those who had seen Jean Valjean at the epoch when he passed through D -- in October , 1815 , could easily have recognized all the pieces of this miserable outfit . 
He had preserved them as he had preserved the silver candlesticks , in order to remind himself continually of his starting-point , but he had concealed all that came from the galleys , and he had allowed the candlesticks which came from the Bishop to be seen . 
He cast a furtive glance towards the door , as though he feared that it would open in spite of the bolt which fastened it ; then , with a quick and abrupt movement , he took the whole in his arms at once , without bestowing so much as a glance on the things which he had so religiously and so perilously preserved for so many years , and flung them all , rags , cudgel , knapsack , into the fire . 
He closed the false cupboard again , and with redoubled precautions , henceforth unnecessary , since it was now empty , he concealed the door behind a heavy piece of furniture , which he pushed in front of it . 
After the lapse of a few seconds , the room and the opposite wall were lighted up with a fierce , red , tremulous glow . 
Everything was on fire ; the thorn cudgel snapped and threw out sparks to the middle of the chamber . 
As the knapsack was consumed , together with the hideous rags which it contained , it revealed something which sparkled in the ashes . 
By bending over , one could have readily recognized a coin , -- no doubt the forty-sou piece stolen from the little Savoyard . 
He did not look at the fire , but paced back and forth with the same step . 
All at once his eye fell on the two silver candlesticks , which shone vaguely on the chimney-piece , through the glow . 
`` Hold ! '' 
he thought ; `` the whole of Jean Valjean is still in them . 
They must be destroyed also . '' 
He seized the two candlesticks . 
There was still fire enough to allow of their being put out of shape , and converted into a sort of unrecognizable bar of metal . 
He bent over the hearth and warmed himself for a moment . 
He felt a sense of real comfort . 
`` How good warmth is ! '' 
said he . 
He stirred the live coals with one of the candlesticks . 
A minute more , and they were both in the fire . 
At that moment it seemed to him that he heard a voice within him shouting : `` Jean Valjean ! 
Jean Valjean ! '' 
His hair rose upright : he became like a man who is listening to some terrible thing . 
`` Yes , that 's it ! 
finish ! '' 
said the voice . 
`` Complete what you are about ! 
Destroy these candlesticks ! 
Annihilate this souvenir ! 
Forget the Bishop ! 
Forget everything ! 
Destroy this Champmathieu , do ! 
That is right ! 
Applaud yourself ! 
So it is settled , resolved , fixed , agreed : here is an old man who does not know what is wanted of him , who has , perhaps , done nothing , an innocent man , whose whole misfortune lies in your name , upon whom your name weighs like a crime , who is about to be taken for you , who will be condemned , who will finish his days in abjectness and horror . 
That is good ! 
Be an honest man yourself ; remain Monsieur le Maire ; remain honorable and honored ; enrich the town ; nourish the indigent ; rear the orphan ; live happy , virtuous , and admired ; and , during this time , while you are here in the midst of joy and light , there will be a man who will wear your red blouse , who will bear your name in ignominy , and who will drag your chain in the galleys . 
Yes , it is well arranged thus . 
Ah , wretch ! '' 
The perspiration streamed from his brow . 
He fixed a haggard eye on the candlesticks . 
But that within him which had spoken had not finished . 
The voice continued : -- `` Jean Valjean , there will be around you many voices , which will make a great noise , which will talk very loud , and which will bless you , and only one which no one will hear , and which will curse you in the dark . 
Well ! 
listen , infamous man ! 
All those benedictions will fall back before they reach heaven , and only the malediction will ascend to God . '' 
This voice , feeble at first , and which had proceeded from the most obscure depths of his conscience , had gradually become startling and formidable , and he now heard it in his very ear . 
It seemed to him that it had detached itself from him , and that it was now speaking outside of him . 
He thought that he heard the last words so distinctly , that he glanced around the room in a sort of terror . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
he demanded aloud , in utter bewilderment . 
Then he resumed , with a laugh which resembled that of an idiot : -- `` How stupid I am ! 
There can be no one ! '' 
There was some one ; but the person who was there was of those whom the human eye can not see . 
He placed the candlesticks on the chimney-piece . 
Then he resumed his monotonous and lugubrious tramp , which troubled the dreams of the sleeping man beneath him , and awoke him with a start . 
This tramping to and fro soothed and at the same time intoxicated him . 
It sometimes seems , on supreme occasions , as though people moved about for the purpose of asking advice of everything that they may encounter by change of place . 
After the lapse of a few minutes he no longer knew his position . 
He now recoiled in equal terror before both the resolutions at which he had arrived in turn . 
The two ideas which counselled him appeared to him equally fatal . 
What a fatality ! 
What conjunction that that Champmathieu should have been taken for him ; to be overwhelmed by precisely the means which Providence seemed to have employed , at first , to strengthen his position ! 
There was a moment when he reflected on the future . 
Denounce himself , great God ! 
Deliver himself up ! 
With immense despair he faced all that he should be obliged to leave , all that he should be obliged to take up once more . 
He should have to bid farewell to that existence which was so good , so pure , so radiant , to the respect of all , to honor , to liberty . 
He should never more stroll in the fields ; he should never more hear the birds sing in the month of May ; he should never more bestow alms on the little children ; he should never more experience the sweetness of having glances of gratitude and love fixed upon him ; he should quit that house which he had built , that little chamber ! 
Everything seemed charming to him at that moment . 
Never again should he read those books ; never more should he write on that little table of white wood ; his old portress , the only servant whom he kept , would never more bring him his coffee in the morning . 
Great God ! 
instead of that , the convict gang , the iron necklet , the red waistcoat , the chain on his ankle , fatigue , the cell , the camp bed all those horrors which he knew so well ! 
At his age , after having been what he was ! 
If he were only young again ! 
but to be addressed in his old age as `` thou '' by any one who pleased ; to be searched by the convict-guard ; to receive the galley-sergeant 's cudgellings ; to wear iron-bound shoes on his bare feet ; to have to stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer of the roundsman who visits the gang ; to submit to the curiosity of strangers , who would be told : `` That man yonder is the famous Jean Valjean , who was mayor of M. sur M. '' ; and at night , dripping with perspiration , overwhelmed with lassitude , their green caps drawn over their eyes , to remount , two by two , the ladder staircase of the galleys beneath the sergeant 's whip . 
Oh , what misery ! 
Can destiny , then , be as malicious as an intelligent being , and become as monstrous as the human heart ? 
And do what he would , he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemma which lay at the foundation of his revery : `` Should he remain in paradise and become a demon ? 
Should he return to hell and become an angel ? '' 
What was to be done ? 
Great God ! 
what was to be done ? 
The torment from which he had escaped with so much difficulty was unchained afresh within him . 
His ideas began to grow confused once more ; they assumed a kind of stupefied and mechanical quality which is peculiar to despair . 
The name of Romainville recurred incessantly to his mind , with the two verses of a song which he had heard in the past . 
He thought that Romainville was a little grove near Paris , where young lovers go to pluck lilacs in the month of April . 
He wavered outwardly as well as inwardly . 
He walked like a little child who is permitted to toddle alone . 
At intervals , as he combated his lassitude , he made an effort to recover the mastery of his mind . 
He tried to put to himself , for the last time , and definitely , the problem over which he had , in a manner , fallen prostrate with fatigue : Ought he to denounce himself ? 
Ought he to hold his peace ? 
He could not manage to see anything distinctly . 
The vague aspects of all the courses of reasoning which had been sketched out by his meditations quivered and vanished , one after the other , into smoke . 
He only felt that , to whatever course of action he made up his mind , something in him must die , and that of necessity , and without his being able to escape the fact ; that he was entering a sepulchre on the right hand as much as on the left ; that he was passing through a death agony , -- the agony of his happiness , or the agony of his virtue . 
Alas ! 
all his resolution had again taken possession of him . 
He was no further advanced than at the beginning . 
Thus did this unhappy soul struggle in its anguish . 
Eighteen hundred years before this unfortunate man , the mysterious Being in whom are summed up all the sanctities and all the sufferings of humanity had also long thrust aside with his hand , while the olive-trees quivered in the wild wind of the infinite , the terrible cup which appeared to Him dripping with darkness and overflowing with shadows in the depths all studded with stars . 
FORMS ASSUMED BY SUFFERING DURING SLEEP Three o'clock in the morning had just struck , and he had been walking thus for five hours , almost uninterruptedly , when he at length allowed himself to drop into his chair . 
There he fell asleep and had a dream . 
This dream , like the majority of dreams , bore no relation to the situation , except by its painful and heart-rending character , but it made an impression on him . 
This nightmare struck him so forcibly that he wrote it down later on . 
It is one of the papers in his own handwriting which he has bequeathed to us . 
We think that we have here reproduced the thing in strict accordance with the text . 
Of whatever nature this dream may be , the history of this night would be incomplete if we were to omit it : it is the gloomy adventure of an ailing soul . 
Here it is . 
On the envelope we find this line inscribed , `` The Dream I had that Night . '' 
`` I was in a plain ; a vast , gloomy plain , where there was no grass . 
It did not seem to me to be daylight nor yet night . 
`` I was walking with my brother , the brother of my childish years , the brother of whom , I must say , I never think , and whom I now hardly remember . 
`` We were conversing and we met some passers-by . 
We were talking of a neighbor of ours in former days , who had always worked with her window open from the time when she came to live on the street . 
As we talked we felt cold because of that open window . 
`` There were no trees in the plain . 
We saw a man passing close to us . 
He was entirely nude , of the hue of ashes , and mounted on a horse which was earth color . 
The man had no hair ; we could see his skull and the veins on it . 
In his hand he held a switch which was as supple as a vine-shoot and as heavy as iron . 
This horseman passed and said nothing to us . 
`` My brother said to me , ` Let us take to the hollow road . ' 
`` There existed a hollow way wherein one saw neither a single shrub nor a spear of moss . 
Everything was dirt-colored , even the sky . 
After proceeding a few paces , I received no reply when I spoke : I perceived that my brother was no longer with me . 
`` I entered a village which I espied . 
I reflected that it must be Romainville . 
-LRB- Why Romainville ? -RRB- 
-LSB- 5 -RSB- -LSB- 5 -RSB- This parenthesis is due to Jean Valjean . 
`` The first street that I entered was deserted . 
I entered a second street . 
Behind the angle formed by the two streets , a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I said to this Man : -- '' ` What country is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man made no reply . 
I saw the door of a house open , and I entered . 
`` The first chamber was deserted . 
I entered the second . 
Behind the door of this chamber a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I inquired of this man , ` Whose house is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man replied not . 
`` The house had a garden . 
I quitted the house and entered the garden . 
The garden was deserted . 
Behind the first tree I found a man standing upright . 
I said to this man , ` What garden is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man did not answer . 
`` I strolled into the village , and perceived that it was a town . 
All the streets were deserted , all the doors were open . 
Not a single living being was passing in the streets , walking through the chambers or strolling in the gardens . 
But behind each angle of the walls , behind each door , behind each tree , stood a silent man . 
Only one was to be seen at a time . 
These men watched me pass . 
`` I left the town and began to ramble about the fields . 
`` After the lapse of some time I turned back and saw a great crowd coming up behind me . 
I recognized all the men whom I had seen in that town . 
They had strange heads . 
They did not seem to be in a hurry , yet they walked faster than I did . 
They made no noise as they walked . 
In an instant this crowd had overtaken and surrounded me . 
The faces of these men were earthen in hue . 
`` Then the first one whom I had seen and questioned on entering the town said to me : -- '' ` Whither are you going ! 
Do you not know that you have been dead this long time ? ' 
`` I opened my mouth to reply , and I perceived that there was no one near me . '' 
He woke . 
He was icy cold . 
A wind which was chill like the breeze of dawn was rattling the leaves of the window , which had been left open on their hinges . 
The fire was out . 
The candle was nearing its end . 
It was still black night . 
He rose , he went to the window . 
There were no stars in the sky even yet . 
From his window the yard of the house and the street were visible . 
A sharp , harsh noise , which made him drop his eyes , resounded from the earth . 
Below him he perceived two red stars , whose rays lengthened and shortened in a singular manner through the darkness . 
As his thoughts were still half immersed in the mists of sleep , `` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` there are no stars in the sky . 
They are on earth now . '' 
But this confusion vanished ; a second sound similar to the first roused him thoroughly ; he looked and recognized the fact that these two stars were the lanterns of a carriage . 
By the light which they cast he was able to distinguish the form of this vehicle . 
It was a tilbury harnessed to a small white horse . 
The noise which he had heard was the trampling of the horse 's hoofs on the pavement . 
`` What vehicle is this ? '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Who is coming here so early in the morning ? '' 
At that moment there came a light tap on the door of his chamber . 
He shuddered from head to foot , and cried in a terrible voice : -- `` Who is there ? '' 
Some one said : -- `` I , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
He recognized the voice of the old woman who was his portress . 
`` Well ! '' 
he replied , `` what is it ? '' 
`` Monsieur le Maire , it is just five o'clock in the morning . '' 
`` What is that to me ? '' 
`` The cabriolet is here , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` What cabriolet ? '' 
`` The tilbury . '' 
`` What tilbury ? '' 
`` Did not Monsieur le Maire order a tilbury ? '' 
`` No , '' said he . 
`` The coachman says that he has come for Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` What coachman ? '' 
`` M. Scaufflaire 's coachman . '' 
`` M. Scaufflaire ? '' 
That name sent a shudder over him , as though a flash of lightning had passed in front of his face . 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' he resumed ; `` M. Scaufflaire ! '' 
If the old woman could have seen him at that moment , she would have been frightened . 
A tolerably long silence ensued . 
He examined the flame of the candle with a stupid air , and from around the wick he took some of the burning wax , which he rolled between his fingers . 
The old woman waited for him . 
She even ventured to uplift her voice once more : -- `` What am I to say , Monsieur le Maire ? '' 
`` Say that it is well , and that I am coming down . '' 
HINDRANCES The posting service from Arras to M. sur M. was still operated at this period by small mail-wagons of the time of the Empire . 
These mail-wagons were two-wheeled cabriolets , upholstered inside with fawn-colored leather , hung on springs , and having but two seats , one for the postboy , the other for the traveller . 
The wheels were armed with those long , offensive axles which keep other vehicles at a distance , and which may still be seen on the road in Germany . 
The despatch box , an immense oblong coffer , was placed behind the vehicle and formed a part of it . 
This coffer was painted black , and the cabriolet yellow . 
These vehicles , which have no counterparts nowadays , had something distorted and hunchbacked about them ; and when one saw them passing in the distance , and climbing up some road to the horizon , they resembled the insects which are called , I think , termites , and which , though with but little corselet , drag a great train behind them . 
But they travelled at a very rapid rate . 
The post-wagon which set out from Arras at one o'clock every night , after the mail from Paris had passed , arrived at M. sur M. a little before five o'clock in the morning . 
That night the wagon which was descending to M. sur M. by the Hesdin road , collided at the corner of a street , just as it was entering the town , with a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse , which was going in the opposite direction , and in which there was but one person , a man enveloped in a mantle . 
The wheel of the tilbury received quite a violent shock . 
The postman shouted to the man to stop , but the traveller paid no heed and pursued his road at full gallop . 
`` That man is in a devilish hurry ! '' 
said the postman . 
The man thus hastening on was the one whom we have just seen struggling in convulsions which are certainly deserving of pity . 
Whither was he going ? 
He could not have told . 
Why was he hastening ? 
He did not know . 
He was driving at random , straight ahead . 
Whither ? 
To Arras , no doubt ; but he might have been going elsewhere as well . 
At times he was conscious of it , and he shuddered . 
He plunged into the night as into a gulf . 
Something urged him forward ; something drew him on . 
No one could have told what was taking place within him ; every one will understand it . 
What man is there who has not entered , at least once in his life , into that obscure cavern of the unknown ? 
However , he had resolved on nothing , decided nothing , formed no plan , done nothing . 
None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive . 
He was , more than ever , as he had been at the first moment . 
Why was he going to Arras ? 
He repeated what he had already said to himself when he had hired Scaufflaire 's cabriolet : that , whatever the result was to be , there was no reason why he should not see with his own eyes , and judge of matters for himself ; that this was even prudent ; that he must know what took place ; that no decision could be arrived at without having observed and scrutinized ; that one made mountains out of everything from a distance ; that , at any rate , when he should have seen that Champmathieu , some wretch , his conscience would probably be greatly relieved to allow him to go to the galleys in his stead ; that Javert would indeed be there ; and that Brevet , that Chenildieu , that Cochepaille , old convicts who had known him ; but they certainly would not recognize him ; -- bah ! 
what an idea ! 
that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the truth ; that all conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu , and that there is nothing so headstrong as suppositions and conjectures ; that accordingly there was no danger . 
That it was , no doubt , a dark moment , but that he should emerge from it ; that , after all , he held his destiny , however bad it might be , in his own hand ; that he was master of it . 
He clung to this thought . 
At bottom , to tell the whole truth , he would have preferred not to go to Arras . 
Nevertheless , he was going thither . 
As he meditated , he whipped up his horse , which was proceeding at that fine , regular , and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a half an hour . 
In proportion as the cabriolet advanced , he felt something within him draw back . 
At daybreak he was in the open country ; the town of M. sur M. lay far behind him . 
He watched the horizon grow white ; he stared at all the chilly figures of a winter 's dawn as they passed before his eyes , but without seeing them . 
The morning has its spectres as well as the evening . 
He did not see them ; but without his being aware of it , and by means of a sort of penetration which was almost physical , these black silhouettes of trees and of hills added some gloomy and sinister quality to the violent state of his soul . 
Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings which sometimes border on the highway , he said to himself , `` And yet there are people there within who are sleeping ! '' 
The trot of the horse , the bells on the harness , the wheels on the road , produced a gentle , monotonous noise . 
These things are charming when one is joyous , and lugubrious when one is sad . 
It was broad daylight when he arrived at Hesdin . 
He halted in front of the inn , to allow the horse a breathing spell , and to have him given some oats . 
The horse belonged , as Scaufflaire had said , to that small race of the Boulonnais , which has too much head , too much belly , and not enough neck and shoulders , but which has a broad chest , a large crupper , thin , fine legs , and solid hoofs -- a homely , but a robust and healthy race . 
The excellent beast had travelled five leagues in two hours , and had not a drop of sweat on his loins . 
He did not get out of the tilbury . 
The stableman who brought the oats suddenly bent down and examined the left wheel . 
`` Are you going far in this condition ? '' 
said the man . 
He replied , with an air of not having roused himself from his revery : -- `` Why ? '' 
`` Have you come from a great distance ? '' 
went on the man . 
`` Five leagues . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
`` Why do you say , ` Ah ? ' '' 
The man bent down once more , was silent for a moment , with his eyes fixed on the wheel ; then he rose erect and said : -- `` Because , though this wheel has travelled five leagues , it certainly will not travel another quarter of a league . '' 
He sprang out of the tilbury . 
`` What is that you say , my friend ? '' 
`` I say that it is a miracle that you should have travelled five leagues without you and your horse rolling into some ditch on the highway . 
Just see here ! '' 
