Each man had his collar , but the chain was for all ; so that if these four and twenty men had occasion to alight from the dray and walk , they were seized with a sort of inexorable unity , and were obliged to wind over the ground with the chain for a backbone , somewhat after the fashion of millepeds . 
In the back and front of each vehicle , two men armed with muskets stood erect , each holding one end of the chain under his foot . 
The iron necklets were square . 
The seventh vehicle , a huge rack-sided baggage wagon , without a hood , had four wheels and six horses , and carried a sonorous pile of iron boilers , cast-iron pots , braziers , and chains , among which were mingled several men who were pinioned and stretched at full length , and who seemed to be ill . 
This wagon , all lattice-work , was garnished with dilapidated hurdles which appeared to have served for former punishments . 
These vehicles kept to the middle of the road . 
On each side marched a double hedge of guards of infamous aspect , wearing three-cornered hats , like the soldiers under the Directory , shabby , covered with spots and holes , muffled in uniforms of veterans and the trousers of undertakers ' men , half gray , half blue , which were almost hanging in rags , with red epaulets , yellow shoulder belts , short sabres , muskets , and cudgels ; they were a species of soldier-blackguards . 
These myrmidons seemed composed of the abjectness of the beggar and the authority of the executioner . 
The one who appeared to be their chief held a postilion 's whip in his hand . 
All these details , blurred by the dimness of dawn , became more and more clearly outlined as the light increased . 
At the head and in the rear of the convoy rode mounted gendarmes , serious and with sword in fist . 
This procession was so long that when the first vehicle reached the barrier , the last was barely debauching from the boulevard . 
A throng , sprung , it is impossible to say whence , and formed in a twinkling , as is frequently the case in Paris , pressed forward from both sides of the road and looked on . 
In the neighboring lanes the shouts of people calling to each other and the wooden shoes of market-gardeners hastening up to gaze were audible . 
The men massed upon the drays allowed themselves to be jolted along in silence . 
They were livid with the chill of morning . 
They all wore linen trousers , and their bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes . 
The rest of their costume was a fantasy of wretchedness . 
Their accoutrements were horribly incongruous ; nothing is more funereal than the harlequin in rags . 
Battered felt hats , tarpaulin caps , hideous woollen nightcaps , and , side by side with a short blouse , a black coat broken at the elbow ; many wore women 's headgear , others had baskets on their heads ; hairy breasts were visible , and through the rent in their garments tattooed designs could be descried ; temples of Love , flaming hearts , Cupids ; eruptions and unhealthy red blotches could also be seen . 
Two or three had a straw rope attached to the cross-bar of the dray , and suspended under them like a stirrup , which supported their feet . 
One of them held in his hand and raised to his mouth something which had the appearance of a black stone and which he seemed to be gnawing ; it was bread which he was eating . 
There were no eyes there which were not either dry , dulled , or flaming with an evil light . 
The escort troop cursed , the men in chains did not utter a syllable ; from time to time the sound of a blow became audible as the cudgels descended on shoulder-blades or skulls ; some of these men were yawning ; their rags were terrible ; their feet hung down , their shoulders oscillated , their heads clashed together , their fetters clanked , their eyes glared ferociously , their fists clenched or fell open inertly like the hands of corpses ; in the rear of the convoy ran a band of children screaming with laughter . 
This file of vehicles , whatever its nature was , was mournful . 
It was evident that to-morrow , that an hour hence , a pouring rain might descend , that it might be followed by another and another , and that their dilapidated garments would be drenched , that once soaked , these men would not get dry again , that once chilled , they would not again get warm , that their linen trousers would be glued to their bones by the downpour , that the water would fill their shoes , that no lashes from the whips would be able to prevent their jaws from chattering , that the chain would continue to bind them by the neck , that their legs would continue to dangle , and it was impossible not to shudder at the sight of these human beings thus bound and passive beneath the cold clouds of autumn , and delivered over to the rain , to the blast , to all the furies of the air , like trees and stones . 
Blows from the cudgel were not omitted even in the case of the sick men , who lay there knotted with ropes and motionless on the seventh wagon , and who appeared to have been tossed there like sacks filled with misery . 
Suddenly , the sun made its appearance ; the immense light of the Orient burst forth , and one would have said that it had set fire to all those ferocious heads . 
Their tongues were unloosed ; a conflagration of grins , oaths , and songs exploded . 
The broad horizontal sheet of light severed the file in two parts , illuminating heads and bodies , leaving feet and wheels in the obscurity . 
Thoughts made their appearance on these faces ; it was a terrible moment ; visible demons with their masks removed , fierce souls laid bare . 
Though lighted up , this wild throng remained in gloom . 
Some , who were gay , had in their mouths quills through which they blew vermin over the crowd , picking out the women ; the dawn accentuated these lamentable profiles with the blackness of its shadows ; there was not one of these creatures who was not deformed by reason of wretchedness ; and the whole was so monstrous that one would have said that the sun 's brilliancy had been changed into the glare of the lightning . 
The wagon-load which headed the line had struck up a song , and were shouting at the top of their voices with a haggard joviality , a potpourri by Desaugiers , then famous , called The Vestal ; the trees shivered mournfully ; in the cross-lanes , countenances of bourgeois listened in an idiotic delight to these coarse strains droned by spectres . 
All sorts of distress met in this procession as in chaos ; here were to be found the facial angles of every sort of beast , old men , youths , bald heads , gray beards , cynical monstrosities , sour resignation , savage grins , senseless attitudes , snouts surmounted by caps , heads like those of young girls with corkscrew curls on the temples , infantile visages , and by reason of that , horrible thin skeleton faces , to which death alone was lacking . 
On the first cart was a negro , who had been a slave , in all probability , and who could make a comparison of his chains . 
The frightful leveller from below , shame , had passed over these brows ; at that degree of abasement , the last transformations were suffered by all in their extremest depths , and ignorance , converted into dulness , was the equal of intelligence converted into despair . 
There was no choice possible between these men who appeared to the eye as the flower of the mud . 
It was evident that the person who had had the ordering of that unclean procession had not classified them . 
These beings had been fettered and coupled pell-mell , in alphabetical disorder , probably , and loaded hap-hazard on those carts . 
Nevertheless , horrors , when grouped together , always end by evolving a result ; all additions of wretched men give a sum total , each chain exhaled a common soul , and each dray-load had its own physiognomy . 
By the side of the one where they were singing , there was one where they were howling ; a third where they were begging ; one could be seen in which they were gnashing their teeth ; another load menaced the spectators , another blasphemed God ; the last was as silent as the tomb . 
Dante would have thought that he beheld his seven circles of hell on the march . 
The march of the damned to their tortures , performed in sinister wise , not on the formidable and flaming chariot of the Apocalypse , but , what was more mournful than that , on the gibbet cart . 
One of the guards , who had a hook on the end of his cudgel , made a pretence from time to time , of stirring up this mass of human filth . 
An old woman in the crowd pointed them out to her little boy five years old , and said to him : `` Rascal , let that be a warning to you ! '' 
As the songs and blasphemies increased , the man who appeared to be the captain of the escort cracked his whip , and at that signal a fearful dull and blind flogging , which produced the sound of hail , fell upon the seven dray-loads ; many roared and foamed at the mouth ; which redoubled the delight of the street urchins who had hastened up , a swarm of flies on these wounds . 
Jean Valjean 's eyes had assumed a frightful expression . 
They were no longer eyes ; they were those deep and glassy objects which replace the glance in the case of certain wretched men , which seem unconscious of reality , and in which flames the reflection of terrors and of catastrophes . 
He was not looking at a spectacle , he was seeing a vision . 
He tried to rise , to flee , to make his escape ; he could not move his feet . 
Sometimes , the things that you see seize upon you and hold you fast . 
He remained nailed to the spot , petrified , stupid , asking himself , athwart confused and inexpressible anguish , what this sepulchral persecution signified , and whence had come that pandemonium which was pursuing him . 
All at once , he raised his hand to his brow , a gesture habitual to those whose memory suddenly returns ; he remembered that this was , in fact , the usual itinerary , that it was customary to make this detour in order to avoid all possibility of encountering royalty on the road to Fontainebleau , and that , five and thirty years before , he had himself passed through that barrier . 
Cosette was no less terrified , but in a different way . 
She did not understand ; what she beheld did not seem to her to be possible ; at length she cried : -- `` Father ! 
What are those men in those carts ? '' 
Jean Valjean replied : `` Convicts . '' 
`` Whither are they going ? '' 
`` To the galleys . '' 
At that moment , the cudgelling , multiplied by a hundred hands , became zealous , blows with the flat of the sword were mingled with it , it was a perfect storm of whips and clubs ; the convicts bent before it , a hideous obedience was evoked by the torture , and all held their peace , darting glances like chained wolves . 
Cosette trembled in every limb ; she resumed : -- `` Father , are they still men ? '' 
`` Sometimes , '' answered the unhappy man . 
It was the chain-gang , in fact , which had set out before daybreak from Bicetre , and had taken the road to Mans in order to avoid Fontainebleau , where the King then was . 
This caused the horrible journey to last three or four days longer ; but torture may surely be prolonged with the object of sparing the royal personage a sight of it . 
Jean Valjean returned home utterly overwhelmed . 
Such encounters are shocks , and the memory that they leave behind them resembles a thorough shaking up . 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean did not observe that , on his way back to the Rue de Babylone with Cosette , the latter was plying him with other questions on the subject of what they had just seen ; perhaps he was too much absorbed in his own dejection to notice her words and reply to them . 
But when Cosette was leaving him in the evening , to betake herself to bed , he heard her say in a low voice , and as though talking to herself : `` It seems to me , that if I were to find one of those men in my pathway , oh , my God , I should die merely from the sight of him close at hand . '' 
Fortunately , chance ordained that on the morrow of that tragic day , there was some official solemnity apropos of I know not what , -- fetes in Paris , a review in the Champ de Mars , jousts on the Seine , theatrical performances in the Champs-Elysees , fireworks at the Arc de l'Etoile , illuminations everywhere . 
Jean Valjean did violence to his habits , and took Cosette to see these rejoicings , for the purpose of diverting her from the memory of the day before , and of effacing , beneath the smiling tumult of all Paris , the abominable thing which had passed before her . 
The review with which the festival was spiced made the presence of uniforms perfectly natural ; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of a national guard with the vague inward feeling of a man who is betaking himself to shelter . 
However , this trip seemed to attain its object . 
Cosette , who made it her law to please her father , and to whom , moreover , all spectacles were a novelty , accepted this diversion with the light and easy good grace of youth , and did not pout too disdainfully at that flutter of enjoyment called a public fete ; so that Jean Valjean was able to believe that he had succeeded , and that no trace of that hideous vision remained . 
Some days later , one morning , when the sun was shining brightly , and they were both on the steps leading to the garden , another infraction of the rules which Jean Valjean seemed to have imposed upon himself , and to the custom of remaining in her chamber which melancholy had caused Cosette to adopt , Cosette , in a wrapper , was standing erect in that negligent attire of early morning which envelops young girls in an adorable way and which produces the effect of a cloud drawn over a star ; and , with her head bathed in light , rosy after a good sleep , submitting to the gentle glances of the tender old man , she was picking a daisy to pieces . 
Cosette did not know the delightful legend , I love a little , passionately , etc. -- who was there who could have taught her ? 
She was handling the flower instinctively , innocently , without a suspicion that to pluck a daisy apart is to do the same by a heart . 
If there were a fourth , and smiling Grace called Melancholy , she would have worn the air of that Grace . 
Jean Valjean was fascinated by the contemplation of those tiny fingers on that flower , and forgetful of everything in the radiance emitted by that child . 
A red-breast was warbling in the thicket , on one side . 
White cloudlets floated across the sky , so gayly , that one would have said that they had just been set at liberty . 
Cosette went on attentively tearing the leaves from her flower ; she seemed to be thinking about something ; but whatever it was , it must be something charming ; all at once she turned her head over her shoulder with the delicate languor of a swan , and said to Jean Valjean : `` Father , what are the galleys like ? '' 
A WOUND WITHOUT , HEALING WITHIN Thus their life clouded over by degrees . 
But one diversion , which had formerly been a happiness , remained to them , which was to carry bread to those who were hungry , and clothing to those who were cold . 
Cosette often accompanied Jean Valjean on these visits to the poor , on which they recovered some remnants of their former free intercourse ; and sometimes , when the day had been a good one , and they had assisted many in distress , and cheered and warmed many little children , Cosette was rather merry in the evening . 
It was at this epoch that they paid their visit to the Jondrette den . 
On the day following that visit , Jean Valjean made his appearance in the pavilion in the morning , calm as was his wont , but with a large wound on his left arm which was much inflamed , and very angry , which resembled a burn , and which he explained in some way or other . 
This wound resulted in his being detained in the house for a month with fever . 
He would not call in a doctor . 
When Cosette urged him , `` Call the dog-doctor , '' said he . 
Cosette dressed the wound morning and evening with so divine an air and such angelic happiness at being of use to him , that Jean Valjean felt all his former joy returning , his fears and anxieties dissipating , and he gazed at Cosette , saying : `` Oh ! 
what a kindly wound ! 
Oh ! 
what a good misfortune ! '' 
Cosette on perceiving that her father was ill , had deserted the pavilion and again taken a fancy to the little lodging and the back courtyard . 
She passed nearly all her days beside Jean Valjean and read to him the books which he desired . 
Generally they were books of travel . 
Jean Valjean was undergoing a new birth ; his happiness was reviving in these ineffable rays ; the Luxembourg , the prowling young stranger , Cosette 's coldness , -- all these clouds upon his soul were growing dim . 
He had reached the point where he said to himself : `` I imagined all that . 
I am an old fool . '' 
His happiness was so great that the horrible discovery of the Thenardiers made in the Jondrette hovel , unexpected as it was , had , after a fashion , glided over him unnoticed . 
He had succeeded in making his escape ; all trace of him was lost -- what more did he care for ! 
he only thought of those wretched beings to pity them . 
`` Here they are in prison , and henceforth they will be incapacitated for doing any harm , '' he thought , `` but what a lamentable family in distress ! '' 
As for the hideous vision of the Barriere du Maine , Cosette had not referred to it again . 
Sister Sainte-Mechtilde had taught Cosette music in the convent ; Cosette had the voice of a linnet with a soul , and sometimes , in the evening , in the wounded man 's humble abode , she warbled melancholy songs which delighted Jean Valjean . 
Spring came ; the garden was so delightful at that season of the year , that Jean Valjean said to Cosette : -- `` You never go there ; I want you to stroll in it . '' 
`` As you like , father , '' said Cosette . 
And for the sake of obeying her father , she resumed her walks in the garden , generally alone , for , as we have mentioned , Jean Valjean , who was probably afraid of being seen through the fence , hardly ever went there . 
Jean Valjean 's wound had created a diversion . 
When Cosette saw that her father was suffering less , that he was convalescing , and that he appeared to be happy , she experienced a contentment which she did not even perceive , so gently and naturally had it come . 
Then , it was in the month of March , the days were growing longer , the winter was departing , the winter always bears away with it a portion of our sadness ; then came April , that daybreak of summer , fresh as dawn always is , gay like every childhood ; a little inclined to weep at times like the new-born being that it is . 
In that month , nature has charming gleams which pass from the sky , from the trees , from the meadows and the flowers into the heart of man . 
Cosette was still too young to escape the penetrating influence of that April joy which bore so strong a resemblance to herself . 
Insensibly , and without her suspecting the fact , the blackness departed from her spirit . 
In spring , sad souls grow light , as light falls into cellars at midday . 
Cosette was no longer sad . 
However , though this was so , she did not account for it to herself . 
In the morning , about ten o'clock , after breakfast , when she had succeeded in enticing her father into the garden for a quarter of an hour , and when she was pacing up and down in the sunlight in front of the steps , supporting his left arm for him , she did not perceive that she laughed every moment and that she was happy . 
Jean Valjean , intoxicated , beheld her growing fresh and rosy once more . 
`` Oh ! 
What a good wound ! '' 
he repeated in a whisper . 
And he felt grateful to the Thenardiers . 
His wound once healed , he resumed his solitary twilight strolls . 
It is a mistake to suppose that a person can stroll alone in that fashion in the uninhabited regions of Paris without meeting with some adventure . 
MOTHER PLUTARQUE FINDS NO DIFFICULTY IN EXPLAINING A PHENOMENON One evening , little Gavroche had had nothing to eat ; he remembered that he had not dined on the preceding day either ; this was becoming tiresome . 
He resolved to make an effort to secure some supper . 
He strolled out beyond the Salpetriere into deserted regions ; that is where windfalls are to be found ; where there is no one , one always finds something . 
He reached a settlement which appeared to him to be the village of Austerlitz . 
In one of his preceding lounges he had noticed there an old garden haunted by an old man and an old woman , and in that garden , a passable apple-tree . 
Beside the apple-tree stood a sort of fruit-house , which was not securely fastened , and where one might contrive to get an apple . 
One apple is a supper ; one apple is life . 
That which was Adam 's ruin might prove Gavroche 's salvation . 
The garden abutted on a solitary , unpaved lane , bordered with brushwood while awaiting the arrival of houses ; the garden was separated from it by a hedge . 
Gavroche directed his steps towards this garden ; he found the lane , he recognized the apple-tree , he verified the fruit-house , he examined the hedge ; a hedge means merely one stride . 
The day was declining , there was not even a cat in the lane , the hour was propitious . 
Gavroche began the operation of scaling the hedge , then suddenly paused . 
Some one was talking in the garden . 
Gavroche peeped through one of the breaks in the hedge . 
A couple of paces distant , at the foot of the hedge on the other side , exactly at the point where the gap which he was meditating would have been made , there was a sort of recumbent stone which formed a bench , and on this bench was seated the old man of the garden , while the old woman was standing in front of him . 
The old woman was grumbling . 
Gavroche , who was not very discreet , listened . 
`` Monsieur Mabeuf ! '' 
said the old woman . 
`` Mabeuf ! '' 
thought Gavroche , `` that name is a perfect farce . '' 
The old man who was thus addressed , did not stir . 
The old woman repeated : -- `` Monsieur Mabeuf ! '' 
The old man , without raising his eyes from the ground , made up his mind to answer : -- `` What is it , Mother Plutarque ? '' 
`` Mother Plutarque ! '' 
thought Gavroche , `` another farcical name . '' 
Mother Plutarque began again , and the old man was forced to accept the conversation : -- `` The landlord is not pleased . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` We owe three quarters rent . '' 
`` In three months , we shall owe him for four quarters . '' 
`` He says that he will turn you out to sleep . '' 
`` I will go . '' 
`` The green-grocer insists on being paid . 
She will no longer leave her fagots . 
What will you warm yourself with this winter ? 
We shall have no wood . '' 
`` There is the sun . '' 
`` The butcher refuses to give credit ; he will not let us have any more meat . '' 
`` That is quite right . 
I do not digest meat well . 
It is too heavy . '' 
`` What shall we have for dinner ? '' 
`` Bread . '' 
`` The baker demands a settlement , and says , ` no money , no bread . ' '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` What will you eat ? '' 
`` We have apples in the apple-room . '' 
`` But , Monsieur , we ca n't live like that without money . '' 
`` I have none . '' 
The old woman went away , the old man remained alone . 
He fell into thought . 
Gavroche became thoughtful also . 
It was almost dark . 
The first result of Gavroche 's meditation was , that instead of scaling the hedge , he crouched down under it . 
The branches stood apart a little at the foot of the thicket . 
`` Come , '' exclaimed Gavroche mentally , `` here 's a nook ! '' 
and he curled up in it . 
His back was almost in contact with Father Mabeuf 's bench . 
He could hear the octogenarian breathe . 
Then , by way of dinner , he tried to sleep . 
It was a cat-nap , with one eye open . 
While he dozed , Gavroche kept on the watch . 
The twilight pallor of the sky blanched the earth , and the lane formed a livid line between two rows of dark bushes . 
All at once , in this whitish band , two figures made their appearance . 
One was in front , the other some distance in the rear . 
`` There come two creatures , '' muttered Gavroche . 
The first form seemed to be some elderly bourgeois , who was bent and thoughtful , dressed more than plainly , and who was walking slowly because of his age , and strolling about in the open evening air . 
The second was straight , firm , slender . 
It regulated its pace by that of the first ; but in the voluntary slowness of its gait , suppleness and agility were discernible . 
This figure had also something fierce and disquieting about it , the whole shape was that of what was then called an elegant ; the hat was of good shape , the coat black , well cut , probably of fine cloth , and well fitted in at the waist . 
The head was held erect with a sort of robust grace , and beneath the hat the pale profile of a young man could be made out in the dim light . 
The profile had a rose in its mouth . 
This second form was well known to Gavroche ; it was Montparnasse . 
He could have told nothing about the other , except that he was a respectable old man . 
Gavroche immediately began to take observations . 
One of these two pedestrians evidently had a project connected with the other . 
Gavroche was well placed to watch the course of events . 
The bedroom had turned into a hiding-place at a very opportune moment . 
Montparnasse on the hunt at such an hour , in such a place , betokened something threatening . 
Gavroche felt his gamin 's heart moved with compassion for the old man . 
What was he to do ? 
Interfere ? 
One weakness coming to the aid of another ! 
It would be merely a laughing matter for Montparnasse . 
Gavroche did not shut his eyes to the fact that the old man , in the first place , and the child in the second , would make but two mouthfuls for that redoubtable ruffian eighteen years of age . 
While Gavroche was deliberating , the attack took place , abruptly and hideously . 
The attack of the tiger on the wild ass , the attack of the spider on the fly . 
Montparnasse suddenly tossed away his rose , bounded upon the old man , seized him by the collar , grasped and clung to him , and Gavroche with difficulty restrained a scream . 
A moment later one of these men was underneath the other , groaning , struggling , with a knee of marble upon his breast . 
Only , it was not just what Gavroche had expected . 
The one who lay on the earth was Montparnasse ; the one who was on top was the old man . 
All this took place a few paces distant from Gavroche . 
The old man had received the shock , had returned it , and that in such a terrible fashion , that in a twinkling , the assailant and the assailed had exchanged roles . 
`` Here 's a hearty veteran ! '' 
thought Gavroche . 
He could not refrain from clapping his hands . 
But it was applause wasted . 
It did not reach the combatants , absorbed and deafened as they were , each by the other , as their breath mingled in the struggle . 
Silence ensued . 
Montparnasse ceased his struggles . 
Gavroche indulged in this aside : `` Can he be dead ! '' 
The goodman had not uttered a word , nor given vent to a cry . 
He rose to his feet , and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse : -- `` Get up . '' 
Montparnasse rose , but the goodman held him fast . 
Montparnasse 's attitude was the humiliated and furious attitude of the wolf who has been caught by a sheep . 
Gavroche looked on and listened , making an effort to reinforce his eyes with his ears . 
He was enjoying himself immensely . 
He was repaid for his conscientious anxiety in the character of a spectator . 
He was able to catch on the wing a dialogue which borrowed from the darkness an indescribably tragic accent . 
The goodman questioned , Montparnasse replied . 
`` How old are you ? '' 
`` Nineteen . '' 
`` You are strong and healthy . 
Why do you not work ? '' 
`` It bores me . '' 
`` What is your trade ? '' 
`` An idler . '' 
`` Speak seriously . 
Can anything be done for you ? 
What would you like to be ? '' 
`` A thief . '' 
A pause ensued . 
The old man seemed absorbed in profound thought . 
He stood motionless , and did not relax his hold on Montparnasse . 
Every moment the vigorous and agile young ruffian indulged in the twitchings of a wild beast caught in a snare . 
He gave a jerk , tried a crook of the knee , twisted his limbs desperately , and made efforts to escape . 
The old man did not appear to notice it , and held both his arms with one hand , with the sovereign indifference of absolute force . 
The old man 's revery lasted for some time , then , looking steadily at Montparnasse , he addressed to him in a gentle voice , in the midst of the darkness where they stood , a solemn harangue , of which Gavroche did not lose a single syllable : -- `` My child , you are entering , through indolence , on one of the most laborious of lives . 
Ah ! 
You declare yourself to be an idler ! 
prepare to toil . 
There is a certain formidable machine , have you seen it ? 
It is the rolling-mill . 
You must be on your guard against it , it is crafty and ferocious ; if it catches hold of the skirt of your coat , you will be drawn in bodily . 
That machine is laziness . 
Stop while there is yet time , and save yourself ! 
Otherwise , it is all over with you ; in a short time you will be among the gearing . 
Once entangled , hope for nothing more . 
Toil , lazybones ! 
there is no more repose for you ! 
The iron hand of implacable toil has seized you . 
You do not wish to earn your living , to have a task , to fulfil a duty ! 
It bores you to be like other men ? 
Well ! 
You will be different . 
Labor is the law ; he who rejects it will find ennui his torment . 
You do not wish to be a workingman , you will be a slave . 
Toil lets go of you on one side only to grasp you again on the other . 
You do not desire to be its friend , you shall be its negro slave . 
Ah ! 
You would have none of the honest weariness of men , you shall have the sweat of the damned . 
Where others sing , you will rattle in your throat . 
You will see afar off , from below , other men at work ; it will seem to you that they are resting . 
The laborer , the harvester , the sailor , the blacksmith , will appear to you in glory like the blessed spirits in paradise . 
What radiance surrounds the forge ! 
To guide the plough , to bind the sheaves , is joy . 
The bark at liberty in the wind , what delight ! 
Do you , lazy idler , delve , drag on , roll , march ! 
Drag your halter . 
You are a beast of burden in the team of hell ! 
Ah ! 
To do nothing is your object . 
Well , not a week , not a day , not an hour shall you have free from oppression . 
You will be able to lift nothing without anguish . 
Every minute that passes will make your muscles crack . 
What is a feather to others will be a rock to you . 
The simplest things will become steep acclivities . 
Life will become monstrous all about you . 
To go , to come , to breathe , will be just so many terrible labors . 
Your lungs will produce on you the effect of weighing a hundred pounds . 
Whether you shall walk here rather than there , will become a problem that must be solved . 
Any one who wants to go out simply gives his door a push , and there he is in the open air . 
If you wish to go out , you will be obliged to pierce your wall . 
What does every one who wants to step into the street do ? 
He goes down stairs ; you will tear up your sheets , little by little you will make of them a rope , then you will climb out of your window , and you will suspend yourself by that thread over an abyss , and it will be night , amid storm , rain , and the hurricane , and if the rope is too short , but one way of descending will remain to you , to fall . 
To drop hap-hazard into the gulf , from an unknown height , on what ? 
On what is beneath , on the unknown . 
Or you will crawl up a chimney-flue , at the risk of burning ; or you will creep through a sewer-pipe , at the risk of drowning ; I do not speak of the holes that you will be obliged to mask , of the stones which you will have to take up and replace twenty times a day , of the plaster that you will have to hide in your straw pallet . 
A lock presents itself ; the bourgeois has in his pocket a key made by a locksmith . 
If you wish to pass out , you will be condemned to execute a terrible work of art ; you will take a large sou , you will cut it in two plates ; with what tools ? 
You will have to invent them . 
That is your business . 
Then you will hollow out the interior of these plates , taking great care of the outside , and you will make on the edges a thread , so that they can be adjusted one upon the other like a box and its cover . 
The top and bottom thus screwed together , nothing will be suspected . 
To the overseers it will be only a sou ; to you it will be a box . 
What will you put in this box ? 
A small bit of steel . 
A watch-spring , in which you will have cut teeth , and which will form a saw . 
With this saw , as long as a pin , and concealed in a sou , you will cut the bolt of the lock , you will sever bolts , the padlock of your chain , and the bar at your window , and the fetter on your leg . 
This masterpiece finished , this prodigy accomplished , all these miracles of art , address , skill , and patience executed , what will be your recompense if it becomes known that you are the author ? 
The dungeon . 
There is your future . 
What precipices are idleness and pleasure ! 
Do you know that to do nothing is a melancholy resolution ? 
To live in idleness on the property of society ! 
to be useless , that is to say , pernicious ! 
This leads straight to the depth of wretchedness . 
Woe to the man who desires to be a parasite ! 
He will become vermin ! 
Ah ! 
So it does not please you to work ? 
Ah ! 
You have but one thought , to drink well , to eat well , to sleep well . 
You will drink water , you will eat black bread , you will sleep on a plank with a fetter whose cold touch you will feel on your flesh all night long , riveted to your limbs . 
You will break those fetters , you will flee . 
That is well . 
You will crawl on your belly through the brushwood , and you will eat grass like the beasts of the forest . 
And you will be recaptured . 
And then you will pass years in a dungeon , riveted to a wall , groping for your jug that you may drink , gnawing at a horrible loaf of darkness which dogs would not touch , eating beans that the worms have eaten before you . 
You will be a wood-louse in a cellar . 
Ah ! 
Have pity on yourself , you miserable young child , who were sucking at nurse less than twenty years ago , and who have , no doubt , a mother still alive ! 
I conjure you , listen to me , I entreat you . 
You desire fine black cloth , varnished shoes , to have your hair curled and sweet-smelling oils on your locks , to please low women , to be handsome . 
You will be shaven clean , and you will wear a red blouse and wooden shoes . 
You want rings on your fingers , you will have an iron necklet on your neck . 
If you glance at a woman , you will receive a blow . 
And you will enter there at the age of twenty . 
And you will come out at fifty ! 
You will enter young , rosy , fresh , with brilliant eyes , and all your white teeth , and your handsome , youthful hair ; you will come out broken , bent , wrinkled , toothless , horrible , with white locks ! 
Ah ! 
my poor child , you are on the wrong road ; idleness is counselling you badly ; the hardest of all work is thieving . 
Believe me , do not undertake that painful profession of an idle man . 
It is not comfortable to become a rascal . 
It is less disagreeable to be an honest man . 
Now go , and ponder on what I have said to you . 
By the way , what did you want of me ? 
My purse ? 
Here it is . '' 
And the old man , releasing Montparnasse , put his purse in the latter 's hand ; Montparnasse weighed it for a moment , after which he allowed it to slide gently into the back pocket of his coat , with the same mechanical precaution as though he had stolen it . 
All this having been said and done , the goodman turned his back and tranquilly resumed his stroll . 
`` The blockhead ! '' 
muttered Montparnasse . 
Who was this goodman ? 
The reader has , no doubt , already divined . 
Montparnasse watched him with amazement , as he disappeared in the dusk . 
This contemplation was fatal to him . 
While the old man was walking away , Gavroche drew near . 
Gavroche had assured himself , with a sidelong glance , that Father Mabeuf was still sitting on his bench , probably sound asleep . 
Then the gamin emerged from his thicket , and began to crawl after Montparnasse in the dark , as the latter stood there motionless . 
In this manner he came up to Montparnasse without being seen or heard , gently insinuated his hand into the back pocket of that frock-coat of fine black cloth , seized the purse , withdrew his hand , and having recourse once more to his crawling , he slipped away like an adder through the shadows . 
Montparnasse , who had no reason to be on his guard , and who was engaged in thought for the first time in his life , perceived nothing . 
When Gavroche had once more attained the point where Father Mabeuf was , he flung the purse over the hedge , and fled as fast as his legs would carry him . 
The purse fell on Father Mabeuf 's foot . 
This commotion roused him . 
He bent over and picked up the purse . 
He did not understand in the least , and opened it . 
The purse had two compartments ; in one of them there was some small change ; in the other lay six napoleons . 
M. Mabeuf , in great alarm , referred the matter to his housekeeper . 
`` That has fallen from heaven , '' said Mother Plutarque . 
SOLITUDE AND THE BARRACKS COMBINED Cosette 's grief , which had been so poignant and lively four or five months previously , had , without her being conscious of the fact , entered upon its convalescence . 
Nature , spring , youth , love for her father , the gayety of the birds and flowers , caused something almost resembling forgetfulness to filter gradually , drop by drop , into that soul , which was so virgin and so young . 
Was the fire wholly extinct there ? 
Or was it merely that layers of ashes had formed ? 
The truth is , that she hardly felt the painful and burning spot any longer . 
One day she suddenly thought of Marius : `` Why ! '' 
said she , `` I no longer think of him . '' 
That same week , she noticed a very handsome officer of lancers , with a wasp-like waist , a delicious uniform , the cheeks of a young girl , a sword under his arm , waxed mustaches , and a glazed schapka , passing the gate . 
Moreover , he had light hair , prominent blue eyes , a round face , was vain , insolent and good-looking ; quite the reverse of Marius . 
He had a cigar in his mouth . 
Cosette thought that this officer doubtless belonged to the regiment in barracks in the Rue de Babylone . 
On the following day , she saw him pass again . 
She took note of the hour . 
From that time forth , was it chance ? 
she saw him pass nearly every day . 
The officer 's comrades perceived that there was , in that `` badly kept '' garden , behind that malicious rococo fence , a very pretty creature , who was almost always there when the handsome lieutenant , -- who is not unknown to the reader , and whose name was Theodule Gillenormand , -- passed by . 
`` See here ! '' 
they said to him , `` there 's a little creature there who is making eyes at you , look . '' 
`` Have I the time , '' replied the lancer , `` to look at all the girls who look at me ? '' 
This was at the precise moment when Marius was descending heavily towards agony , and was saying : `` If I could but see her before I die ! '' 
-- Had his wish been realized , had he beheld Cosette at that moment gazing at the lancer , he would not have been able to utter a word , and he would have expired with grief . 
Whose fault was it ? 
No one 's . 
Marius possessed one of those temperaments which bury themselves in sorrow and there abide ; Cosette was one of those persons who plunge into sorrow and emerge from it again . 
Cosette was , moreover , passing through that dangerous period , the fatal phase of feminine revery abandoned to itself , in which the isolated heart of a young girl resembles the tendrils of the vine which cling , as chance directs , to the capital of a marble column or to the post of a wine-shop : A rapid and decisive moment , critical for every orphan , be she rich or poor , for wealth does not prevent a bad choice ; misalliances are made in very high circles , real misalliance is that of souls ; and as many an unknown young man , without name , without birth , without fortune , is a marble column which bears up a temple of grand sentiments and grand ideas , so such and such a man of the world satisfied and opulent , who has polished boots and varnished words , if looked at not outside , but inside , a thing which is reserved for his wife , is nothing more than a block obscurely haunted by violent , unclean , and vinous passions ; the post of a drinking-shop . 
What did Cosette 's soul contain ? 
Passion calmed or lulled to sleep ; something limpid , brilliant , troubled to a certain depth , and gloomy lower down . 
The image of the handsome officer was reflected in the surface . 
Did a souvenir linger in the depths ? 
-- Quite at the bottom ? 
-- Possibly . 
Cosette did not know . 
A singular incident supervened . 
COSETTE 'S APPREHENSIONS During the first fortnight in April , Jean Valjean took a journey . 
This , as the reader knows , happened from time to time , at very long intervals . 
He remained absent a day or two days at the utmost . 
Where did he go ? 
No one knew , not even Cosette . 
Once only , on the occasion of one of these departures , she had accompanied him in a hackney-coach as far as a little blind-alley at the corner of which she read : Impasse de la Planchette . 
There he alighted , and the coach took Cosette back to the Rue de Babylone . 
It was usually when money was lacking in the house that Jean Valjean took these little trips . 
So Jean Valjean was absent . 
He had said : `` I shall return in three days . '' 
That evening , Cosette was alone in the drawing-room . 
In order to get rid of her ennui , she had opened her piano-organ , and had begun to sing , accompanying herself the while , the chorus from Euryanthe : `` Hunters astray in the wood ! '' 
which is probably the most beautiful thing in all the sphere of music . 
When she had finished , she remained wrapped in thought . 
All at once , it seemed to her that she heard the sound of footsteps in the garden . 
It could not be her father , he was absent ; it could not be Toussaint , she was in bed , and it was ten o'clock at night . 
She stepped to the shutter of the drawing-room , which was closed , and laid her ear against it . 
It seemed to her that it was the tread of a man , and that he was walking very softly . 
She mounted rapidly to the first floor , to her own chamber , opened a small wicket in her shutter , and peeped into the garden . 
The moon was at the full . 
Everything could be seen as plainly as by day . 
There was no one there . 
She opened the window . 
The garden was absolutely calm , and all that was visible was that the street was deserted as usual . 
Cosette thought that she had been mistaken . 
She thought that she had heard a noise . 
It was a hallucination produced by the melancholy and magnificent chorus of Weber , which lays open before the mind terrified depths , which trembles before the gaze like a dizzy forest , and in which one hears the crackling of dead branches beneath the uneasy tread of the huntsmen of whom one catches a glimpse through the twilight . 
She thought no more about it . 
Moreover , Cosette was not very timid by nature . 
There flowed in her veins some of the blood of the bohemian and the adventuress who runs barefoot . 
It will be remembered that she was more of a lark than a dove . 
There was a foundation of wildness and bravery in her . 
On the following day , at an earlier hour , towards nightfall , she was strolling in the garden . 
In the midst of the confused thoughts which occupied her , she fancied that she caught for an instant a sound similar to that of the preceding evening , as though some one were walking beneath the trees in the dusk , and not very far from her ; but she told herself that nothing so closely resembles a step on the grass as the friction of two branches which have moved from side to side , and she paid no heed to it . 
Besides , she could see nothing . 
She emerged from `` the thicket '' ; she had still to cross a small lawn to regain the steps . 
The moon , which had just risen behind her , cast Cosette 's shadow in front of her upon this lawn , as she came out from the shrubbery . 
Cosette halted in alarm . 
Beside her shadow , the moon outlined distinctly upon the turf another shadow , which was particularly startling and terrible , a shadow which had a round hat . 
It was the shadow of a man , who must have been standing on the border of the clump of shrubbery , a few paces in the rear of Cosette . 
She stood for a moment without the power to speak , or cry , or call , or stir , or turn her head . 
Then she summoned up all her courage , and turned round resolutely . 
There was no one there . 
She glanced on the ground . 
The figure had disappeared . 
She re-entered the thicket , searched the corners boldly , went as far as the gate , and found nothing . 
She felt herself absolutely chilled with terror . 
Was this another hallucination ? 
What ! 
Two days in succession ! 
One hallucination might pass , but two hallucinations ? 
The disquieting point about it was , that the shadow had assuredly not been a phantom . 
Phantoms do not wear round hats . 
On the following day Jean Valjean returned . 
Cosette told him what she thought she had heard and seen . 
She wanted to be reassured and to see her father shrug his shoulders and say to her : `` You are a little goose . '' 
Jean Valjean grew anxious . 
`` It can not be anything , '' said he . 
He left her under some pretext , and went into the garden , and she saw him examining the gate with great attention . 
During the night she woke up ; this time she was sure , and she distinctly heard some one walking close to the flight of steps beneath her window . 
She ran to her little wicket and opened it . 
In point of fact , there was a man in the garden , with a large club in his hand . 
Just as she was about to scream , the moon lighted up the man 's profile . 
It was her father . 
She returned to her bed , saying to herself : `` He is very uneasy ! '' 
Jean Valjean passed that night and the two succeeding nights in the garden . 
Cosette saw him through the hole in her shutter . 
On the third night , the moon was on the wane , and had begun to rise later ; at one o'clock in the morning , possibly , she heard a loud burst of laughter and her father 's voice calling her : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
She jumped out of bed , threw on her dressing-gown , and opened her window . 
Her father was standing on the grass-plot below . 
`` I have waked you for the purpose of reassuring you , '' said he ; `` look , there is your shadow with the round hat . '' 
And he pointed out to her on the turf a shadow cast by the moon , and which did indeed , bear considerable resemblance to the spectre of a man wearing a round hat . 
It was the shadow produced by a chimney-pipe of sheet iron , with a hood , which rose above a neighboring roof . 
Cosette joined in his laughter , all her lugubrious suppositions were allayed , and the next morning , as she was at breakfast with her father , she made merry over the sinister garden haunted by the shadows of iron chimney-pots . 
Jean Valjean became quite tranquil once more ; as for Cosette , she did not pay much attention to the question whether the chimney-pot was really in the direction of the shadow which she had seen , or thought she had seen , and whether the moon had been in the same spot in the sky . 
She did not question herself as to the peculiarity of a chimney-pot which is afraid of being caught in the act , and which retires when some one looks at its shadow , for the shadow had taken the alarm when Cosette had turned round , and Cosette had thought herself very sure of this . 
Cosette 's serenity was fully restored . 
The proof appeared to her to be complete , and it quite vanished from her mind , whether there could possibly be any one walking in the garden during the evening or at night . 
A few days later , however , a fresh incident occurred . 
ENRICHED WITH COMMENTARIES BY TOUSSAINT In the garden , near the railing on the street , there was a stone bench , screened from the eyes of the curious by a plantation of yoke-elms , but which could , in case of necessity , be reached by an arm from the outside , past the trees and the gate . 
One evening during that same month of April , Jean Valjean had gone out ; Cosette had seated herself on this bench after sundown . 
The breeze was blowing briskly in the trees , Cosette was meditating ; an objectless sadness was taking possession of her little by little , that invincible sadness evoked by the evening , and which arises , perhaps , who knows , from the mystery of the tomb which is ajar at that hour . 
Perhaps Fantine was within that shadow . 
Cosette rose , slowly made the tour of the garden , walking on the grass drenched in dew , and saying to herself , through the species of melancholy somnambulism in which she was plunged : `` Really , one needs wooden shoes for the garden at this hour . 
One takes cold . '' 
She returned to the bench . 
As she was about to resume her seat there , she observed on the spot which she had quitted , a tolerably large stone which had , evidently , not been there a moment before . 
Cosette gazed at the stone , asking herself what it meant . 
All at once the idea occurred to her that the stone had not reached the bench all by itself , that some one had placed it there , that an arm had been thrust through the railing , and this idea appeared to alarm her . 
This time , the fear was genuine ; the stone was there . 
No doubt was possible ; she did not touch it , fled without glancing behind her , took refuge in the house , and immediately closed with shutter , bolt , and bar the door-like window opening on the flight of steps . 
