The musketry of the besiegers , though confined and embarrassed by being directed from below upwards , was deadly . 
The rim of the hole in the ceiling was speedily surrounded by heads of the slain , whence dripped long , red and smoking streams , the uproar was indescribable ; a close and burning smoke almost produced night over this combat . 
Words are lacking to express horror when it has reached this pitch . 
There were no longer men in this conflict , which was now infernal . 
They were no longer giants matched with colossi . 
It resembled Milton and Dante rather than Homer . 
Demons attacked , spectres resisted . 
It was heroism become monstrous . 
ORESTES FASTING AND PYLADES DRUNK At length , by dint of mounting on each other 's backs , aiding themselves with the skeleton of the staircase , climbing up the walls , clinging to the ceiling , slashing away at the very brink of the trap-door , the last one who offered resistance , a score of assailants , soldiers , National Guardsmen , municipal guardsmen , in utter confusion , the majority disfigured by wounds in the face during that redoubtable ascent , blinded by blood , furious , rendered savage , made an irruption into the apartment on the first floor . 
There they found only one man still on his feet , Enjolras . 
Without cartridges , without sword , he had nothing in his hand now but the barrel of his gun whose stock he had broken over the head of those who were entering . 
He had placed the billiard table between his assailants and himself ; he had retreated into the corner of the room , and there , with haughty eye , and head borne high , with this stump of a weapon in his hand , he was still so alarming as to speedily create an empty space around him . 
A cry arose : `` He is the leader ! 
It was he who slew the artillery-man . 
It is well that he has placed himself there . 
Let him remain there . 
Let us shoot him down on the spot . '' 
`` Shoot me , '' said Enjolras . 
And flinging away his bit of gun-barrel , and folding his arms , he offered his breast . 
The audacity of a fine death always affects men . 
As soon as Enjolras folded his arms and accepted his end , the din of strife ceased in the room , and this chaos suddenly stilled into a sort of sepulchral solemnity . 
The menacing majesty of Enjolras disarmed and motionless , appeared to oppress this tumult , and this young man , haughty , bloody , and charming , who alone had not a wound , who was as indifferent as an invulnerable being , seemed , by the authority of his tranquil glance , to constrain this sinister rabble to kill him respectfully . 
His beauty , at that moment augmented by his pride , was resplendent , and he was fresh and rosy after the fearful four and twenty hours which had just elapsed , as though he could no more be fatigued than wounded . 
It was of him , possibly , that a witness spoke afterwards , before the council of war : `` There was an insurgent whom I heard called Apollo . '' 
A National Guardsman who had taken aim at Enjolras , lowered his gun , saying : `` It seems to me that I am about to shoot a flower . '' 
Twelve men formed into a squad in the corner opposite Enjolras , and silently made ready their guns . 
Then a sergeant shouted : `` Take aim ! '' 
An officer intervened . 
`` Wait . '' 
And addressing Enjolras : `` Do you wish to have your eyes bandaged ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Was it you who killed the artillery sergeant ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Grantaire had waked up a few moments before . 
Grantaire , it will be remembered , had been asleep ever since the preceding evening in the upper room of the wine-shop , seated on a chair and leaning on the table . 
He realized in its fullest sense the old metaphor of `` dead drunk . '' 
The hideous potion of absinthe-porter and alcohol had thrown him into a lethargy . 
His table being small , and not suitable for the barricade , he had been left in possession of it . 
He was still in the same posture , with his breast bent over the table , his head lying flat on his arms , surrounded by glasses , beer-jugs and bottles . 
His was the overwhelming slumber of the torpid bear and the satiated leech . 
Nothing had had any effect upon it , neither the fusillade , nor the cannon-balls , nor the grape-shot which had made its way through the window into the room where he was . 
Nor the tremendous uproar of the assault . 
He merely replied to the cannonade , now and then , by a snore . 
He seemed to be waiting there for a bullet which should spare him the trouble of waking . 
Many corpses were strewn around him ; and , at the first glance , there was nothing to distinguish him from those profound sleepers of death . 
Noise does not rouse a drunken man ; silence awakens him . 
The fall of everything around him only augmented Grantaire 's prostration ; the crumbling of all things was his lullaby . 
The sort of halt which the tumult underwent in the presence of Enjolras was a shock to this heavy slumber . 
It had the effect of a carriage going at full speed , which suddenly comes to a dead stop . 
The persons dozing within it wake up . 
Grantaire rose to his feet with a start , stretched out his arms , rubbed his eyes , stared , yawned , and understood . 
A fit of drunkenness reaching its end resembles a curtain which is torn away . 
One beholds , at a single glance and as a whole , all that it has concealed . 
All suddenly presents itself to the memory ; and the drunkard who has known nothing of what has been taking place during the last twenty-four hours , has no sooner opened his eyes than he is perfectly informed . 
Ideas recur to him with abrupt lucidity ; the obliteration of intoxication , a sort of steam which has obscured the brain , is dissipated , and makes way for the clear and sharply outlined importunity of realities . 
Relegated , as he was , to one corner , and sheltered behind the billiard-table , the soldiers whose eyes were fixed on Enjolras , had not even noticed Grantaire , and the sergeant was preparing to repeat his order : `` Take aim ! '' 
when all at once , they heard a strong voice shout beside them : `` Long live the Republic ! 
I 'm one of them . '' 
Grantaire had risen . 
The immense gleam of the whole combat which he had missed , and in which he had had no part , appeared in the brilliant glance of the transfigured drunken man . 
He repeated : `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
crossed the room with a firm stride and placed himself in front of the guns beside Enjolras . 
`` Finish both of us at one blow , '' said he . 
And turning gently to Enjolras , he said to him : `` Do you permit it ? '' 
Enjolras pressed his hand with a smile . 
This smile was not ended when the report resounded . 
Enjolras , pierced by eight bullets , remained leaning against the wall , as though the balls had nailed him there . 
Only , his head was bowed . 
Grantaire fell at his feet , as though struck by a thunderbolt . 
A few moments later , the soldiers dislodged the last remaining insurgents , who had taken refuge at the top of the house . 
They fired into the attic through a wooden lattice . 
They fought under the very roof . 
They flung bodies , some of them still alive , out through the windows . 
Two light-infantrymen , who tried to lift the shattered omnibus , were slain by two shots fired from the attic . 
A man in a blouse was flung down from it , with a bayonet wound in the abdomen , and breathed his last on the ground . 
A soldier and an insurgent slipped together on the sloping slates of the roof , and , as they would not release each other , they fell , clasped in a ferocious embrace . 
A similar conflict went on in the cellar . 
Shouts , shots , a fierce trampling . 
Then silence . 
The barricade was captured . 
The soldiers began to search the houses round about , and to pursue the fugitives . 
PRISONER Marius was , in fact , a prisoner . 
The hand which had seized him from behind and whose grasp he had felt at the moment of his fall and his loss of consciousness was that of Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had taken no other part in the combat than to expose himself in it . 
Had it not been for him , no one , in that supreme phase of agony , would have thought of the wounded . 
Thanks to him , everywhere present in the carnage , like a providence , those who fell were picked up , transported to the tap-room , and cared for . 
In the intervals , he reappeared on the barricade . 
But nothing which could resemble a blow , an attack or even personal defence proceeded from his hands . 
He held his peace and lent succor . 
Moreover he had received only a few scratches . 
The bullets would have none of him . 
If suicide formed part of what he had meditated on coming to this sepulchre , to that spot , he had not succeeded . 
But we doubt whether he had thought of suicide , an irreligious act . 
Jean Valjean , in the thick cloud of the combat , did not appear to see Marius ; the truth is , that he never took his eyes from the latter . 
When a shot laid Marius low , Jean Valjean leaped forward with the agility of a tiger , fell upon him as on his prey , and bore him off . 
The whirlwind of the attack was , at that moment , so violently concentrated upon Enjolras and upon the door of the wine-shop , that no one saw Jean Valjean sustaining the fainting Marius in his arms , traverse the unpaved field of the barricade and disappear behind the angle of the Corinthe building . 
The reader will recall this angle which formed a sort of cape on the street ; it afforded shelter from the bullets , the grape-shot , and all eyes , and a few square feet of space . 
There is sometimes a chamber which does not burn in the midst of a conflagration , and in the midst of raging seas , beyond a promontory or at the extremity of a blind alley of shoals , a tranquil nook . 
It was in this sort of fold in the interior trapezium of the barricade , that Eponine had breathed her last . 
There Jean Valjean halted , let Marius slide to the ground , placed his back against the wall , and cast his eyes about him . 
The situation was alarming . 
For an instant , for two or three perhaps , this bit of wall was a shelter , but how was he to escape from this massacre ? 
He recalled the anguish which he had suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before , and in what manner he had contrived to make his escape ; it was difficult then , to-day it was impossible . 
He had before him that deaf and implacable house , six stories in height , which appeared to be inhabited only by a dead man leaning out of his window ; he had on his right the rather low barricade , which shut off the Rue de la Petite Truanderie ; to pass this obstacle seemed easy , but beyond the crest of the barrier a line of bayonets was visible . 
The troops of the line were posted on the watch behind that barricade . 
It was evident , that to pass the barricade was to go in quest of the fire of the platoon , and that any head which should run the risk of lifting itself above the top of that wall of stones would serve as a target for sixty shots . 
On his left he had the field of battle . 
Death lurked round the corner of that wall . 
What was to be done ? 
Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament . 
And it was necessary to decide on the instant , to devise some expedient , to come to some decision . 
Fighting was going on a few paces away ; fortunately , all were raging around a single point , the door of the wine-shop ; but if it should occur to one soldier , to one single soldier , to turn the corner of the house , or to attack him on the flank , all was over . 
Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him , he gazed at the barricade at one side of him , then he looked at the ground , with the violence of the last extremity , bewildered , and as though he would have liked to pierce a hole there with his eyes . 
By dint of staring , something vaguely striking in such an agony began to assume form and outline at his feet , as though it had been a power of glance which made the thing desired unfold . 
A few paces distant he perceived , at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and watched on the exterior , beneath a disordered mass of paving-stones which partly concealed it , an iron grating , placed flat and on a level with the soil . 
This grating , made of stout , transverse bars , was about two feet square . 
The frame of paving-stones which supported it had been torn up , and it was , as it were , unfastened . 
Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture , something like the flue of a chimney , or the pipe of a cistern . 
Jean Valjean darted forward . 
His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination . 
To thrust aside the stones , to raise the grating , to lift Marius , who was as inert as a dead body , upon his shoulders , to descend , with this burden on his loins , and with the aid of his elbows and knees into that sort of well , fortunately not very deep , to let the heavy trap , upon which the loosened stones rolled down afresh , fall into its place behind him , to gain his footing on a flagged surface three metres below the surface , -- all this was executed like that which one does in dreams , with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of an eagle ; this took only a few minutes . 
Jean Valjean found himself with Marius , who was still unconscious , in a sort of long , subterranean corridor . 
There reigned profound peace , absolute silence , night . 
The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from the wall into the convent recurred to him . 
Only , what he was carrying to-day was not Cosette ; it was Marius . 
He could barely hear the formidable tumult in the wine-shop , taken by assault , like a vague murmur overhead . 
THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water . 
And this without metaphor . 
How , and in what manner ? 
Day and night . 
With what object ? 
With no object . 
With what intention ? 
With no intention . 
Why ? 
For no reason . 
By means of what organ ? 
By means of its intestine . 
What is its intestine ? 
The sewer . 
Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure which the valuations of special science have set upon it . 
Science , after having long groped about , now knows that the most fecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure . 
The Chinese , let us confess it to our shame , knew it before us . 
Not a Chinese peasant -- it is Eckberg who says this , -- goes to town without bringing back with him , at the two extremities of his bamboo pole , two full buckets of what we designate as filth . 
Thanks to human dung , the earth in China is still as young as in the days of Abraham . 
Chinese wheat yields a hundred fold of the seed . 
There is no guano comparable in fertility with the detritus of a capital . 
A great city is the most mighty of dung-makers . 
Certain success would attend the experiment of employing the city to manure the plain . 
If our gold is manure , our manure , on the other hand , is gold . 
What is done with this golden manure ? 
It is swept into the abyss . 
Fleets of vessels are despatched , at great expense , to collect the dung of petrels and penguins at the South Pole , and the incalculable element of opulence which we have on hand , we send to the sea . 
All the human and animal manure which the world wastes , restored to the land instead of being cast into the water , would suffice to nourish the world . 
Those heaps of filth at the gate-posts , those tumbrils of mud which jolt through the street by night , those terrible casks of the street department , those fetid drippings of subterranean mire , which the pavements hide from you , -- do you know what they are ? 
They are the meadow in flower , the green grass , wild thyme , thyme and sage , they are game , they are cattle , they are the satisfied bellows of great oxen in the evening , they are perfumed hay , they are golden wheat , they are the bread on your table , they are the warm blood in your veins , they are health , they are joy , they are life . 
This is the will of that mysterious creation which is transformation on earth and transfiguration in heaven . 
Restore this to the great crucible ; your abundance will flow forth from it . 
The nutrition of the plains furnishes the nourishment of men . 
You have it in your power to lose this wealth , and to consider me ridiculous to boot . 
This will form the master-piece of your ignorance . 
Statisticians have calculated that France alone makes a deposit of half a milliard every year , in the Atlantic , through the mouths of her rivers . 
Note this : with five hundred millions we could pay one quarter of the expenses of our budget . 
The cleverness of man is such that he prefers to get rid of these five hundred millions in the gutter . 
It is the very substance of the people that is carried off , here drop by drop , there wave after wave , the wretched outpour of our sewers into the rivers , and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the ocean . 
Every hiccough of our sewers costs us a thousand francs . 
From this spring two results , the land impoverished , and the water tainted . 
Hunger arising from the furrow , and disease from the stream . 
It is notorious , for example , that at the present hour , the Thames is poisoning London . 
So far as Paris is concerned , it has become indispensable of late , to transport the mouths of the sewers down stream , below the last bridge . 
A double tubular apparatus , provided with valves and sluices , sucking up and driving back , a system of elementary drainage , simple as the lungs of a man , and which is already in full working order in many communities in England , would suffice to conduct the pure water of the fields into our cities , and to send back to the fields the rich water of the cities , and this easy exchange , the simplest in the world , would retain among us the five hundred millions now thrown away . 
People are thinking of other things . 
The process actually in use does evil , with the intention of doing good . 
The intention is good , the result is melancholy . 
Thinking to purge the city , the population is blanched like plants raised in cellars . 
A sewer is a mistake . 
When drainage , everywhere , with its double function , restoring what it takes , shall have replaced the sewer , which is a simple impoverishing washing , then , this being combined with the data of a now social economy , the product of the earth will be increased tenfold , and the problem of misery will be singularly lightened . 
Add the suppression of parasitism , and it will be solved . 
In the meanwhile , the public wealth flows away to the river , and leakage takes place . 
Leakage is the word . 
Europe is being ruined in this manner by exhaustion . 
As for France , we have just cited its figures . 
Now , Paris contains one twenty-fifth of the total population of France , and Parisian guano being the richest of all , we understate the truth when we value the loss on the part of Paris at twenty-five millions in the half milliard which France annually rejects . 
These twenty-five millions , employed in assistance and enjoyment , would double the splendor of Paris . 
The city spends them in sewers . 
So that we may say that Paris 's great prodigality , its wonderful festival , its Beaujon folly , its orgy , its stream of gold from full hands , its pomp , its luxury , its magnificence , is its sewer system . 
It is in this manner that , in the blindness of a poor political economy , we drown and allow to float down stream and to be lost in the gulfs the well-being of all . 
There should be nets at Saint-Cloud for the public fortune . 
Economically considered , the matter can be summed up thus : Paris is a spendthrift . 
Paris , that model city , that patron of well-arranged capitals , of which every nation strives to possess a copy , that metropolis of the ideal , that august country of the initiative , of impulse and of effort , that centre and that dwelling of minds , that nation-city , that hive of the future , that marvellous combination of Babylon and Corinth , would make a peasant of the Fo-Kian shrug his shoulders , from the point of view which we have just indicated . 
Imitate Paris and you will ruin yourselves . 
Moreover , and particularly in this immemorial and senseless waste , Paris is itself an imitator . 
These surprising exhibitions of stupidity are not novel ; this is no young folly . 
The ancients did like the moderns . 
`` The sewers of Rome , '' says Liebig , `` have absorbed all the well-being of the Roman peasant . '' 
When the Campagna of Rome was ruined by the Roman sewer , Rome exhausted Italy , and when she had put Italy in her sewer , she poured in Sicily , then Sardinia , then Africa . 
The sewer of Rome has engulfed the world . 
This cess-pool offered its engulfment to the city and the universe . 
Urbi et orbi . 
Eternal city , unfathomable sewer . 
Rome sets the example for these things as well as for others . 
Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar to intelligent towns . 
For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we have just explained our views , Paris has beneath it another Paris ; a Paris of sewers ; which has its streets , its cross-roads , its squares , its blind-alleys , its arteries , and its circulation , which is of mire and minus the human form . 
For nothing must be flattered , not even a great people ; where there is everything there is also ignominy by the side of sublimity ; and , if Paris contains Athens , the city of light , Tyre , the city of might , Sparta , the city of virtue , Nineveh , the city of marvels , it also contains Lutetia , the city of mud . 
However , the stamp of its power is there also , and the Titanic sink of Paris realizes , among monuments , that strange ideal realized in humanity by some men like Macchiavelli , Bacon and Mirabeau , grandiose vileness . 
The sub-soil of Paris , if the eye could penetrate its surface , would present the aspect of a colossal madrepore . 
A sponge has no more partitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six leagues round about , on which rests the great and ancient city . 
Not to mention its catacombs , which are a separate cellar , not to mention the inextricable trellis-work of gas pipes , without reckoning the vast tubular system for the distribution of fresh water which ends in the pillar fountains , the sewers alone form a tremendous , shadowy net-work under the two banks ; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guiding thread . 
There appears , in the humid mist , the rat which seems the product to which Paris has given birth . 
ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE SEWER Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover , the subterranean net-work of sewers , from a bird 's eye view , will outline on the banks a species of large branch grafted on the river . 
On the right bank , the belt sewer will form the trunk of this branch , the secondary ducts will form the branches , and those without exit the twigs . 
This figure is but a summary one and half exact , the right angle , which is the customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications , being very rare in vegetation . 
A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed by supposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet , as intricate as a thicket , against a background of shadows , and the misshapen letters should be welded one to another in apparent confusion , and as at haphazard , now by their angles , again by their extremities . 
Sinks and sewers played a great part in the Middle Ages , in the Lower Empire and in the Orient of old . 
The masses regarded these beds of decomposition , these monstrous cradles of death , with a fear that was almost religious . 
The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive to giddiness than the lions ' ditch of Babylon . 
Teglath-Phalasar , according to the rabbinical books , swore by the sink of Nineveh . 
It was from the sewer of Munster that John of Leyden produced his false moon , and it was from the cess-pool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme , Mokanna , the veiled prophet of Khorassan , caused his false sun to emerge . 
The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers . 
The Germoniae -LSB- 58 -RSB- narrated Rome . 
The sewer of Paris has been an ancient and formidable thing . 
It has been a sepulchre , it has served as an asylum . 
Crime , intelligence , social protest , liberty of conscience , thought , theft , all that human laws persecute or have persecuted , is hidden in that hole ; the maillotins in the fourteenth century , the tire-laine of the fifteenth , the Huguenots in the sixteenth , Morin 's illuminated in the seventeenth , the chauffeurs -LSB- brigands -RSB- in the eighteenth . 
A hundred years ago , the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged thence , the pickpocket in danger slipped thither ; the forest had its cave , Paris had its sewer . 
Vagrancy , that Gallic picareria , accepted the sewer as the adjunct of the Cour des Miracles , and at evening , it returned thither , fierce and sly , through the Maubuee outlet , as into a bed-chamber . 
-LSB- 58 -RSB- Steps on the Aventine Hill , leading to the Tiber , to which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks to be thrown into the Tiber . 
It was quite natural , that those who had the blind-alley Vide-Gousset , -LSB- Empty-Pocket -RSB- or the Rue Coupe-Gorge -LSB- Cut-Throat -RSB- , for the scene of their daily labor , should have for their domicile by night the culvert of the Chemin-Vert , or the catch basin of Hurepoix . 
Hence a throng of souvenirs . 
All sorts of phantoms haunt these long , solitary corridors ; everywhere is putrescence and miasma ; here and there are breathing-holes , where Villon within converses with Rabelais without . 
The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and of all attempts . 
Political economy therein spies a detritus , social philosophy there beholds a residuum . 
The sewer is the conscience of the city . 
Everything there converges and confronts everything else . 
In that livid spot there are shades , but there are no longer any secrets . 
Each thing bears its true form , or at least , its definitive form . 
The mass of filth has this in its favor , that it is not a liar . 
Ingenuousness has taken refuge there . 
The mask of Basil is to be found there , but one beholds its cardboard and its strings and the inside as well as the outside , and it is accentuated by honest mud . 
Scapin 's false nose is its next-door neighbor . 
All the uncleannesses of civilization , once past their use , fall into this trench of truth , where the immense social sliding ends . 
They are there engulfed , but they display themselves there . 
This mixture is a confession . 
There , no more false appearances , no plastering over is possible , filth removes its shirt , absolute denudation puts to the rout all illusions and mirages , there is nothing more except what really exists , presenting the sinister form of that which is coming to an end . 
There , the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness , a basket-handle tells a tale of domesticity ; there the core of an apple which has entertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more ; the effigy on the big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris , Caiphas ' spittle meets Falstaff 's puking , the louis-d'or which comes from the gaming-house jostles the nail whence hangs the rope 's end of the suicide . 
a livid foetus rolls along , enveloped in the spangles which danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday , a cap which has pronounced judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerly Margoton 's petticoat ; it is more than fraternization , it is equivalent to addressing each other as thou . 
All which was formerly rouged , is washed free . 
The last veil is torn away . 
A sewer is a cynic . 
It tells everything . 
The sincerity of foulness pleases us , and rests the soul . 
When one has passed one 's time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the great airs which reasons of state , the oath , political sagacity , human justice , professional probity , the austerities of situation , incorruptible robes all assume , it solaces one to enter a sewer and to behold the mire which befits it . 
This is instructive at the same time . 
We have just said that history passes through the sewer . 
The Saint-Barthelemys filter through there , drop by drop , between the paving-stones . 
Great public assassinations , political and religious butcheries , traverse this underground passage of civilization , and thrust their corpses there . 
For the eye of the thinker , all historic murderers are to be found there , in that hideous penumbra , on their knees , with a scrap of their winding-sheet for an apron , dismally sponging out their work . 
Louis XI . 
is there with Tristan , Francois I. with Duprat , Charles IX . 
is there with his mother , Richelieu is there with Louis XIII. , Louvois is there , Letellier is there , Hebert and Maillard are there , scratching the stones , and trying to make the traces of their actions disappear . 
Beneath these vaults one hears the brooms of spectres . 
One there breathes the enormous fetidness of social catastrophes . 
One beholds reddish reflections in the corners . 
There flows a terrible stream , in which bloody hands have been washed . 
The social observer should enter these shadows . 
They form a part of his laboratory . 
Philosophy is the microscope of the thought . 
Everything desires to flee from it , but nothing escapes it . 
Tergiversation is useless . 
What side of oneself does one display in evasions ? 
the shameful side . 
Philosophy pursues with its glance , probes the evil , and does not permit it to escape into nothingness . 
In the obliteration of things which disappear , in the watching of things which vanish , it recognizes all . 
It reconstructs the purple from the rag , and the woman from the scrap of her dress . 
From the cess-pool , it re-constitutes the city ; from mud , it reconstructs manners ; from the potsherd it infers the amphora or the jug . 
By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece of parchment , it recognizes the difference which separates the Jewry of the Judengasse from the Jewry of the Ghetto . 
It re-discovers in what remains that which has been , good , evil , the true , the blood-stain of the palace , the ink-blot of the cavern , the drop of sweat from the brothel , trials undergone , temptations welcomed , orgies cast forth , the turn which characters have taken as they became abased , the trace of prostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable , and on the vesture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina 's elbowing . 
BRUNESEAU The sewer of Paris in the Middle Ages was legendary . 
In the sixteenth century , Henri II . 
attempted a bore , which failed . 
Not a hundred years ago , the cess-pool , Mercier attests the fact , was abandoned to itself , and fared as best it might . 
Such was this ancient Paris , delivered over to quarrels , to indecision , and to gropings . 
It was tolerably stupid for a long time . 
Later on , '89 showed how understanding comes to cities . 
But in the good , old times , the capital had not much head . 
It did not know how to manage its own affairs either morally or materially , and could not sweep out filth any better than it could abuses . 
Everything presented an obstacle , everything raised a question . 
The sewer , for example , was refractory to every itinerary . 
One could no more find one 's bearings in the sewer than one could understand one 's position in the city ; above the unintelligible , below the inextricable ; beneath the confusion of tongues there reigned the confusion of caverns ; Daedalus backed up Babel . 
Sometimes the Paris sewer took a notion to overflow , as though this misunderstood Nile were suddenly seized with a fit of rage . 
There occurred , infamous to relate , inundations of the sewer . 
At times , that stomach of civilization digested badly , the cess-pool flowed back into the throat of the city , and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth . 
These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points ; they were warnings ; very badly accepted , however ; the city waxed indignant at the audacity of its mire , and did not admit that the filth should return . 
Drive it out better . 
The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of the age of eighty . 
The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des Victoires , where stands the statue of Louis XIV. ; it entered the Rue Saint-Honore by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer , the Rue Pierre-a-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie , the Rue Popincourt , through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert , the Rue de la Roquette , through the sewer of the Rue de Lappe ; it covered the drain of the Rue des Champs-Elysees to the height of thirty-five centimetres ; and , to the South , through the vent of the Seine , performing its functions in inverse sense , it penetrated the Rue Mazarine , the Rue de l'Echaude , and the Rue des Marais , where it stopped at a distance of one hundred and nine metres , a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had lived , respecting , in the seventeenth century , the poet more than the King . 
It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre , where it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of the water-spout , and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin , where it spread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in length . 
At the beginning of this century , the sewer of Paris was still a mysterious place . 
Mud can never enjoy a good fame ; but in this case its evil renown reached the verge of the terrible . 
Paris knew , in a confused way , that she had under her a terrible cavern . 
People talked of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedes fifteen long feet in length , and which might have served Behemoth for a bathtub . 
The great boots of the sewermen never ventured further than certain well-known points . 
We were then very near the epoch when the scavenger 's carts , from the summit of which Sainte-Foix fraternized with the Marquis de Crequi , discharged their loads directly into the sewer . 
As for cleaning out , -- that function was entrusted to the pouring rains which encumbered rather than swept away . 
Rome left some poetry to her sewer , and called it the Gemoniae ; Paris insulted hers , and entitled it the Polypus-Hole . 
Science and superstition were in accord , in horror . 
The Polypus hole was no less repugnant to hygiene than to legend . 
The goblin was developed under the fetid covering of the Mouffetard sewer ; the corpses of the Marmousets had been cast into the sewer de la Barillerie ; Fagon attributed the redoubtable malignant fever of 1685 to the great hiatus of the sewer of the Marais , which remained yawning until 1833 in the Rue Saint-Louis , almost opposite the sign of the Gallant Messenger . 
The mouth of the sewer of the Rue de la Mortellerie was celebrated for the pestilences which had their source there ; with its grating of iron , with points simulating a row of teeth , it was like a dragon 's maw in that fatal street , breathing forth hell upon men . 
The popular imagination seasoned the sombre Parisian sink with some indescribably hideous intermixture of the infinite . 
The sewer had no bottom . 
The sewer was the lower world . 
The idea of exploring these leprous regions did not even occur to the police . 
To try that unknown thing , to cast the plummet into that shadow , to set out on a voyage of discovery in that abyss -- who would have dared ? 
It was alarming . 
Nevertheless , some one did present himself . 
The cess-pool had its Christopher Columbus . 
One day , in 1805 , during one of the rare apparitions which the Emperor made in Paris , the Minister of the Interior , some Decres or Cretet or other , came to the master 's intimate levee . 
In the Carrousel there was audible the clanking of swords of all those extraordinary soldiers of the great Republic , and of the great Empire ; then Napoleon 's door was blocked with heroes ; men from the Rhine , from the Escaut , from the Adige , and from the Nile ; companions of Joubert , of Desaix , of Marceau , of Hoche , of Kleber ; the aerostiers of Fleurus , the grenadiers of Mayence , the pontoon-builders of Genoa , hussars whom the Pyramids had looked down upon , artillerists whom Junot 's cannon-ball had spattered with mud , cuirassiers who had taken by assault the fleet lying at anchor in the Zuyderzee ; some had followed Bonaparte upon the bridge of Lodi , others had accompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua , others had preceded Lannes in the hollow road of Montebello . 
The whole army of that day was present there , in the court-yard of the Tuileries , represented by a squadron or a platoon , and guarding Napoleon in repose ; and that was the splendid epoch when the grand army had Marengo behind it and Austerlitz before it . 
-- `` Sire , '' said the Minister of the Interior to Napoleon , `` yesterday I saw the most intrepid man in your Empire . '' 
-- `` What man is that ? '' 
said the Emperor brusquely , `` and what has he done ? '' 
-- `` He wants to do something , Sire . '' 
-- `` What is it ? '' 
-- `` To visit the sewers of Paris . '' 
This man existed and his name was Bruneseau . 
The visit took place . 
It was a formidable campaign ; a nocturnal battle against pestilence and suffocation . 
It was , at the same time , a voyage of discovery . 
One of the survivors of this expedition , an intelligent workingman , who was very young at the time , related curious details with regard to it , several years ago , which Bruneseau thought himself obliged to omit in his report to the prefect of police , as unworthy of official style . 
The processes of disinfection were , at that epoch , extremely rudimentary . 
Hardly had Bruneseau crossed the first articulations of that subterranean network , when eight laborers out of the twenty refused to go any further . 
The operation was complicated ; the visit entailed the necessity of cleaning ; hence it was necessary to cleanse and at the same time , to proceed ; to note the entrances of water , to count the gratings and the vents , to lay out in detail the branches , to indicate the currents at the point where they parted , to define the respective bounds of the divers basins , to sound the small sewers grafted on the principal sewer , to measure the height under the key-stone of each drain , and the width , at the spring of the vaults as well as at the bottom , in order to determine the arrangements with regard to the level of each water-entrance , either of the bottom of the arch , or on the soil of the street . 
They advanced with toil . 
The lanterns pined away in the foul atmosphere . 
From time to time , a fainting sewerman was carried out . 
At certain points , there were precipices . 
The soil had given away , the pavement had crumbled , the sewer had changed into a bottomless well ; they found nothing solid ; a man disappeared suddenly ; they had great difficulty in getting him out again . 
On the advice of Fourcroy , they lighted large cages filled with tow steeped in resin , from time to time , in spots which had been sufficiently disinfected . 
In some places , the wall was covered with misshapen fungi , -- one would have said tumors ; the very stone seemed diseased within this unbreathable atmosphere . 
Bruneseau , in his exploration , proceeded down hill . 
At the point of separation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur , he deciphered upon a projecting stone the date of 1550 ; this stone indicated the limits where Philibert Delorme , charged by Henri II . 
with visiting the subterranean drains of Paris , had halted . 
This stone was the mark of the sixteenth century on the sewer ; Bruneseau found the handiwork of the seventeenth century once more in the Ponceau drain of the old Rue Vielle-du-Temple , vaulted between 1600 and 1650 ; and the handiwork of the eighteenth in the western section of the collecting canal , walled and vaulted in 1740 . 
These two vaults , especially the less ancient , that of 1740 , were more cracked and decrepit than the masonry of the belt sewer , which dated from 1412 , an epoch when the brook of fresh water of Menilmontant was elevated to the dignity of the Grand Sewer of Paris , an advancement analogous to that of a peasant who should become first valet de chambre to the King ; something like Gros-Jean transformed into Lebel . 
Here and there , particularly beneath the Court-House , they thought they recognized the hollows of ancient dungeons , excavated in the very sewer itself . 
Hideous in-pace . 
An iron neck-collar was hanging in one of these cells . 
They walled them all up . 
Some of their finds were singular ; among others , the skeleton of an ourang-outan , who had disappeared from the Jardin des Plantes in 1800 , a disappearance probably connected with the famous and indisputable apparition of the devil in the Rue des Bernardins , in the last year of the eighteenth century . 
The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the sewer . 
Beneath this long , arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion , a perfectly preserved rag-picker 's basket excited the admiration of all connoisseurs . 
Everywhere , the mire , which the sewermen came to handle with intrepidity , abounded in precious objects , jewels of gold and silver , precious stones , coins . 
If a giant had filtered this cesspool , he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair . 
At the point where the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye separate , they picked up a singular Huguenot medal in copper , bearing on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal 's hat , and on the other , a wolf with a tiara on his head . 
The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer . 
This entrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothing but the hinges remained . 
From one of these hinges hung a dirty and shapeless rag which , arrested there in its passage , no doubt , had floated there in the darkness and finished its process of being torn apart . 
Bruneseau held his lantern close to this rag and examined it . 
It was of very fine batiste , and in one of the corners , less frayed than the rest , they made out a heraldic coronet and embroidered above these seven letters : LAVBESP . 
The crown was the coronet of a Marquis , and the seven letters signified Laubespine . 
They recognized the fact , that what they had before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat . 
Marat in his youth had had amorous intrigues . 
This was when he was a member of the household of the Comte d'Artois , in the capacity of physician to the Stables . 
From these love affairs , historically proved , with a great lady , he had retained this sheet . 
As a waif or a souvenir . 
At his death , as this was the only linen of any fineness which he had in his house , they buried him in it . 
Some old women had shrouded him for the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend of the people had enjoyed voluptuousness . 
Bruneseau passed on . 
They left that rag where it hung ; they did not put the finishing touch to it . 
Did this arise from scorn or from respect ? 
Marat deserved both . 
And then , destiny was there sufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touch it . 
Besides , the things of the sepulchre must be left in the spot which they select . 
In short , the relic was a strange one . 
A Marquise had slept in it ; Marat had rotted in it ; it had traversed the Pantheon to end with the rats of the sewer . 
This chamber rag , of which Watteau would formerly have joyfully sketched every fold , had ended in becoming worthy of the fixed gaze of Dante . 
The whole visit to the subterranean stream of filth of Paris lasted seven years , from 1805 to 1812 . 
As he proceeded , Bruneseau drew , directed , and completed considerable works ; in 1808 he lowered the arch of the Ponceau , and , everywhere creating new lines , he pushed the sewer , in 1809 , under the Rue Saint-Denis as far as the fountain of the Innocents ; in 1810 , under the Rue Froidmanteau and under the Salpetriere ; in 1811 under the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Peres , under the Rue du Mail , under the Rue de l'Echarpe , under the Place Royale ; in 1812 , under the Rue de la Paix , and under the Chaussee d'Antin . 
At the same time , he had the whole net-work disinfected and rendered healthful . 
In the second year of his work , Bruneseau engaged the assistance of his son-in-law Nargaud . 
It was thus that , at the beginning of the century , ancient society cleansed its double bottom , and performed the toilet of its sewer . 
There was that much clean , at all events . 
Tortuous , cracked , unpaved , full of fissures , intersected by gullies , jolted by eccentric elbows , mounting and descending illogically , fetid , wild , fierce , submerged in obscurity , with cicatrices on its pavements and scars on its walls , terrible , -- such was , retrospectively viewed , the antique sewer of Paris . 
Ramifications in every direction , crossings , of trenches , branches , goose-feet , stars , as in military mines , coecum , blind alleys , vaults lined with saltpetre , pestiferous pools , scabby sweats , on the walls , drops dripping from the ceilings , darkness ; nothing could equal the horror of this old , waste crypt , the digestive apparatus of Babylon , a cavern , ditch , gulf pierced with streets , a titanic mole-burrow , where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind mole , the past , prowling through the shadows , in the filth which has been splendor . 
This , we repeat , was the sewer of the past . 
PRESENT PROGRESS To-day the sewer is clean , cold , straight , correct . 
It almost realizes the ideal of what is understood in England by the word `` respectable . '' 
It is proper and grayish ; laid out by rule and line ; one might almost say as though it came out of a bandbox . 
It resembles a tradesman who has become a councillor of state . 
One can almost see distinctly there . 
The mire there comports itself with decency . 
At first , one might readily mistake it for one of those subterranean corridors , which were so common in former days , and so useful in flights of monarchs and princes , in those good old times , `` when the people loved their kings . '' 
The present sewer is a beautiful sewer ; the pure style reigns there ; the classical rectilinear alexandrine which , driven out of poetry , appears to have taken refuge in architecture , seems mingled with all the stones of that long , dark and whitish vault ; each outlet is an arcade ; the Rue de Rivoli serves as pattern even in the sewer . 
However , if the geometrical line is in place anywhere , it is certainly in the drainage trench of a great city . 
There , everything should be subordinated to the shortest road . 
The sewer has , nowadays , assumed a certain official aspect . 
The very police reports , of which it sometimes forms the subject , no longer are wanting in respect towards it . 
The words which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous and dignified . 
What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery ; what used to be called a hole is now called a surveying orifice . 
Villon would no longer meet with his ancient temporary provisional lodging . 
This net-work of cellars has its immemorial population of prowlers , rodents , swarming in greater numbers than ever ; from time to time , an aged and veteran rat risks his head at the window of the sewer and surveys the Parisians ; but even these vermin grow tame , so satisfied are they with their subterranean palace . 
The cesspool no longer retains anything of its primitive ferocity . 
The rain , which in former days soiled the sewer , now washes it . 
Nevertheless , do not trust yourself too much to it . 
Miasmas still inhabit it . 
It is more hypocritical than irreproachable . 
The prefecture of police and the commission of health have done their best . 
But , in spite of all the processes of disinfection , it exhales , a vague , suspicious odor like Tartuffe after confession . 
Let us confess , that , taking it all in all , this sweeping is a homage which the sewer pays to civilization , and as , from this point of view , Tartuffe 's conscience is a progress over the Augean stables , it is certain that the sewers of Paris have been improved . 
It is more than progress ; it is transmutation . 
Between the ancient and the present sewer there is a revolution . 
What has effected this revolution ? 
The man whom all the world forgets , and whom we have mentioned , Bruneseau . 
FUTURE PROGRESS The excavation of the sewer of Paris has been no slight task . 
The last ten centuries have toiled at it without being able to bring it to a termination , any more than they have been able to finish Paris . 
The sewer , in fact , receives all the counter-shocks of the growth of Paris . 
Within the bosom of the earth , it is a sort of mysterious polyp with a thousand antennae , which expands below as the city expands above . 
Every time that the city cuts a street , the sewer stretches out an arm . 
The old monarchy had constructed only twenty-three thousand three hundred metres of sewers ; that was where Paris stood in this respect on the first of January , 1806 . 
Beginning with this epoch , of which we shall shortly speak , the work was usefully and energetically resumed and prosecuted ; Napoleon built -- the figures are curious -- four thousand eight hundred and four metres ; Louis XVIII. , five thousand seven hundred and nine ; Charles X. , ten thousand eight hundred and thirty-six ; Louis-Philippe , eighty-nine thousand and twenty ; the Republic of 1848 , twenty-three thousand three hundred and eighty-one ; the present government , seventy thousand five hundred ; in all , at the present time , two hundred and twenty-six thousand six hundred and ten metres ; sixty leagues of sewers ; the enormous entrails of Paris . 
An obscure ramification ever at work ; a construction which is immense and ignored . 
As the reader sees , the subterranean labyrinth of Paris is to-day more than ten times what it was at the beginning of the century . 
It is difficult to form any idea of all the perseverance and the efforts which have been required to bring this cess-pool to the point of relative perfection in which it now is . 
It was with great difficulty that the ancient monarchical provostship and , during the last ten years of the eighteenth century , the revolutionary mayoralty , had succeeded in perforating the five leagues of sewer which existed previous to 1806 . 
All sorts of obstacles hindered this operation , some peculiar to the soil , others inherent in the very prejudices of the laborious population of Paris . 
Paris is built upon a soil which is singularly rebellious to the pick , the hoe , the bore , and to human manipulation . 
There is nothing more difficult to pierce and to penetrate than the geological formation upon which is superposed the marvellous historical formation called Paris ; as soon as work in any form whatsoever is begun and adventures upon this stretch of alluvium , subterranean resistances abound . 
There are liquid clays , springs , hard rocks , and those soft and deep quagmires which special science calls moutardes . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- The pick advances laboriously through the calcareous layers alternating with very slender threads of clay , and schistose beds in plates incrusted with oyster-shells , the contemporaries of the pre-Adamite oceans . 
Sometimes a rivulet suddenly bursts through a vault that has been begun , and inundates the laborers ; or a layer of marl is laid bare , and rolls down with the fury of a cataract , breaking the stoutest supporting beams like glass . 
Quite recently , at Villette , when it became necessary to pass the collecting sewer under the Saint-Martin canal without interrupting navigation or emptying the canal , a fissure appeared in the basin of the canal , water suddenly became abundant in the subterranean tunnel , which was beyond the power of the pumping engines ; it was necessary to send a diver to explore the fissure which had been made in the narrow entrance of the grand basin , and it was not without great difficulty that it was stopped up . 
Elsewhere near the Seine , and even at a considerable distance from the river , as for instance , at Belleville , Grand-Rue and Lumiere Passage , quicksands are encountered in which one sticks fast , and in which a man sinks visibly . 
Add suffocation by miasmas , burial by slides , and sudden crumbling of the earth . 
Add the typhus , with which the workmen become slowly impregnated . 
In our own day , after having excavated the gallery of Clichy , with a banquette to receive the principal water-conduit of Ourcq , a piece of work which was executed in a trench ten metres deep ; after having , in the midst of land-slides , and with the aid of excavations often putrid , and of shoring up , vaulted the Bievre from the Boulevard de l'Hopital , as far as the Seine ; after having , in order to deliver Paris from the floods of Montmartre and in order to provide an outlet for that river-like pool nine hectares in extent , which crouched near the Barriere des Martyrs , after having , let us state , constructed the line of sewers from the Barriere Blanche to the road of Aubervilliers , in four months , working day and night , at a depth of eleven metres ; after having -- a thing heretofore unseen -- made a subterranean sewer in the Rue Barre-du-Bec , without a trench , six metres below the surface , the superintendent , Monnot , died . 
After having vaulted three thousand metres of sewer in all quarters of the city , from the Rue Traversiere-Saint-Antoine to the Rue de l'Ourcine , after having freed the Carrefour Censier-Mouffetard from inundations of rain by means of the branch of the Arbalete , after having built the Saint-Georges sewer , on rock and concrete in the fluid sands , after having directed the formidable lowering of the flooring of the vault timber in the Notre-Dame-de-Nazareth branch , Duleau the engineer died . 
There are no bulletins for such acts of bravery as these , which are more useful , nevertheless , than the brutal slaughter of the field of battle . 
-LSB- 59 -RSB- Mustards . 
The sewers of Paris in 1832 were far from being what they are to-day . 
Bruneseau had given the impulse , but the cholera was required to bring about the vast reconstruction which took place later on . 
It is surprising to say , for example , that in 1821 , a part of the belt sewer , called the Grand Canal , as in Venice , still stood stagnating uncovered to the sky , in the Rue des Gourdes . 
It was only in 1821 that the city of Paris found in its pocket the two hundred and sixty-thousand eighty francs and six centimes required for covering this mass of filth . 
The three absorbing wells , of the Combat , the Cunette , and Saint-Mande , with their discharging mouths , their apparatus , their cesspools , and their depuratory branches , only date from 1836 . 
The intestinal sewer of Paris has been made over anew , and , as we have said , it has been extended more than tenfold within the last quarter of a century . 
Thirty years ago , at the epoch of the insurrection of the 5th and 6th of June , it was still , in many localities , nearly the same ancient sewer . 
A very great number of streets which are now convex were then sunken causeways . 
At the end of a slope , where the tributaries of a street or cross-roads ended , there were often to be seen large , square gratings with heavy bars , whose iron , polished by the footsteps of the throng , gleamed dangerous and slippery for vehicles , and caused horses to fall . 
The official language of the Roads and Bridges gave to these gratings the expressive name of Cassis . 
-LSB- 60 -RSB- -LSB- 60 -RSB- From casser , to break : break-necks . 
In 1832 , in a number of streets , in the Rue de l'Etoile , the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue du Temple , the Rue Vielle-duTemple , the Rue Notre-Dame de Nazareth , the Rue Folie-Mericourt , the Quai aux Fleurs , the Rue du Petit-Muse , the Rue du Normandie , the Rue Pont-Aux-Biches , the Rue des Marais , the Faubourg Saint-Martin , the Rue Notre Dame des-Victoires , the Faubourg Montmartre , the Rue Grange-Bateliere , in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Jacob , the Rue de Tournon , the ancient gothic sewer still cynically displayed its maw . 
It consisted of enormous voids of stone catch-basins sometimes surrounded by stone posts , with monumental effrontery . 
Paris in 1806 still had nearly the same sewers numerically as stated in 1663 ; five thousand three hundred fathoms . 
After Bruneseau , on the 1st of January , 1832 , it had forty thousand three hundred metres . 
Between 1806 and 1831 , there had been built , on an average , seven hundred and fifty metres annually , afterwards eight and even ten thousand metres of galleries were constructed every year , in masonry , of small stones , with hydraulic mortar which hardens under water , on a cement foundation . 
At two hundred francs the metre , the sixty leagues of Paris ' sewers of the present day represent forty-eight millions . 
In addition to the economic progress which we have indicated at the beginning , grave problems of public hygiene are connected with that immense question : the sewers of Paris . 
Paris is the centre of two sheets , a sheet of water and a sheet of air . 
The sheet of water , lying at a tolerably great depth underground , but already sounded by two bores , is furnished by the layer of green clay situated between the chalk and the Jurassic lime-stone ; this layer may be represented by a disk five and twenty leagues in circumference ; a multitude of rivers and brooks ooze there ; one drinks the Seine , the Marne , the Yonne , the Oise , the Aisne , the Cher , the Vienne and the Loire in a glass of water from the well of Grenelle . 
The sheet of water is healthy , it comes from heaven in the first place and next from the earth ; the sheet of air is unhealthy , it comes from the sewer . 
All the miasms of the cess-pool are mingled with the breath of the city ; hence this bad breath . 
The air taken from above a dung-heap , as has been scientifically proved , is purer than the air taken from above Paris . 
In a given time , with the aid of progress , mechanisms become perfected , and as light increases , the sheet of water will be employed to purify the sheet of air ; that is to say , to wash the sewer . 
The reader knows , that by `` washing the sewer '' we mean : the restitution of the filth to the earth ; the return to the soil of dung and of manure to the fields . 
Through this simple act , the entire social community will experience a diminution of misery and an augmentation of health . 
At the present hour , the radiation of diseases from Paris extends to fifty leagues around the Louvre , taken as the hub of this pestilential wheel . 
We might say that , for ten centuries , the cess-pool has been the disease of Paris . 
The sewer is the blemish which Paris has in her blood . 
The popular instinct has never been deceived in it . 
The occupation of sewermen was formerly almost as perilous , and almost as repugnant to the people , as the occupation of knacker , which was so long held in horror and handed over to the executioner . 
High wages were necessary to induce a mason to disappear in that fetid mine ; the ladder of the cess-pool cleaner hesitated to plunge into it ; it was said , in proverbial form : `` to descend into the sewer is to enter the grave ; '' and all sorts of hideous legends , as we have said , covered this colossal sink with terror ; a dread sink-hole which bears the traces of the revolutions of the globe as of the revolutions of man , and where are to be found vestiges of all cataclysms from the shells of the Deluge to the rag of Marat . 
THE SEWER AND ITS SURPRISES It was in the sewers of Paris that Jean Valjean found himself . 
Still another resemblance between Paris and the sea . 
As in the ocean , the diver may disappear there . 
The transition was an unheard-of one . 
In the very heart of the city , Jean Valjean had escaped from the city , and , in the twinkling of an eye , in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it , he had passed from broad daylight to complete obscurity , from midday to midnight , from tumult to silence , from the whirlwind of thunders to the stagnation of the tomb , and , by a vicissitude far more tremendous even than that of the Rue Polonceau , from the most extreme peril to the most absolute obscurity . 
An abrupt fall into a cavern ; a disappearance into the secret trap-door of Paris ; to quit that street where death was on every side , for that sort of sepulchre where there was life , was a strange instant . 
He remained for several seconds as though bewildered ; listening , stupefied . 
The waste-trap of safety had suddenly yawned beneath him . 
Celestial goodness had , in a manner , captured him by treachery . 
Adorable ambuscades of providence ! 
Only , the wounded man did not stir , and Jean Valjean did not know whether that which he was carrying in that grave was a living being or a dead corpse . 
His first sensation was one of blindness . 
All of a sudden , he could see nothing . 
It seemed to him too , that , in one instant , he had become deaf . 
He no longer heard anything . 
The frantic storm of murder which had been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him , thanks to the thickness of the earth which separated him from it , as we have said , otherwise than faintly and indistinctly , and like a rumbling , in the depths . 
He felt that the ground was solid under his feet ; that was all ; but that was enough . 
He extended one arm and then the other , touched the walls on both sides , and perceived that the passage was narrow ; he slipped , and thus perceived that the pavement was wet . 
He cautiously put forward one foot , fearing a hole , a sink , some gulf ; he discovered that the paving continued . 
A gust of fetidness informed him of the place in which he stood . 
After the lapse of a few minutes , he was no longer blind . 
A little light fell through the man-hole through which he had descended , and his eyes became accustomed to this cavern . 
He began to distinguish something . 
The passage in which he had burrowed -- no other word can better express the situation -- was walled in behind him . 
It was one of those blind alleys , which the special jargon terms branches . 
In front of him there was another wall , a wall like night . 
The light of the air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean stood , and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls of the sewer . 
Beyond , the opaqueness was massive ; to penetrate thither seemed horrible , an entrance into it appeared like an engulfment . 
A man could , however , plunge into that wall of fog and it was necessary so to do . 
