Here is none of your heavy-sides , a student who studies , a greenhorn pedant , strong on letters , theology , science , and sapience , one of those dull wits cut by the square ; a pin by profession . 
He is an honorable idler who lounges , who practises country jaunts , who cultivates the grisette , who pays court to the fair sex , who is at this very moment , perhaps , with my mistress . 
Let us save him . 
Death to Blondeau ! ' 
At that moment , Blondeau dipped his pen in , all black with erasures in the ink , cast his yellow eyes round the audience room , and repeated for the third time : ` Marius Pontmercy ! ' 
I replied : ` Present ! ' 
This is why you were not crossed off . '' 
`` Monsieur ! 
-- '' said Marius . 
`` And why I was , '' added Laigle de Meaux . 
`` I do not understand you , '' said Marius . 
Laigle resumed : -- `` Nothing is more simple . 
I was close to the desk to reply , and close to the door for the purpose of flight . 
The professor gazed at me with a certain intensity . 
All of a sudden , Blondeau , who must be the malicious nose alluded to by Boileau , skipped to the letter L. L is my letter . 
I am from Meaux , and my name is Lesgle . '' 
`` L'Aigle ! '' 
interrupted Marius , `` what fine name ! '' 
`` Monsieur , Blondeau came to this fine name , and called : ` Laigle ! ' 
I reply : ` Present ! ' 
Then Blondeau gazes at me , with the gentleness of a tiger , and says to me : ` lf you are Pontmercy , you are not Laigle . ' 
A phrase which has a disobliging air for you , but which was lugubrious only for me . 
That said , he crossed me off . '' 
Marius exclaimed : -- `` I am mortified , sir -- '' `` First of all , '' interposed Laigle , `` I demand permission to embalm Blondeau in a few phrases of deeply felt eulogium . 
I will assume that he is dead . 
There will be no great change required in his gauntness , in his pallor , in his coldness , and in his smell . 
And I say : ` Erudimini qui judicatis terram . 
Here lies Blondeau , Blondeau the Nose , Blondeau Nasica , the ox of discipline , bos disciplinae , the bloodhound of the password , the angel of the roll-call , who was upright , square exact , rigid , honest , and hideous . 
God crossed him off as he crossed me off . ' '' 
Marius resumed : -- `` I am very sorry -- '' `` Young man , '' said Laigle de Meaux , `` let this serve you as a lesson . 
In future , be exact . '' 
`` I really beg you a thousand pardons . '' 
`` Do not expose your neighbor to the danger of having his name erased again . '' 
`` I am extremely sorry -- '' Laigle burst out laughing . 
`` And I am delighted . 
I was on the brink of becoming a lawyer . 
This erasure saves me . 
I renounce the triumphs of the bar . 
I shall not defend the widow , and I shall not attack the orphan . 
No more toga , no more stage . 
Here is my erasure all ready for me . 
It is to you that I am indebted for it , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
I intend to pay a solemn call of thanks upon you . 
Where do you live ? '' 
`` In this cab , '' said Marius . 
`` A sign of opulence , '' retorted Laigle calmly . 
`` I congratulate you . 
You have there a rent of nine thousand francs per annum . '' 
At that moment , Courfeyrac emerged from the cafe . 
Marius smiled sadly . 
`` I have paid this rent for the last two hours , and I aspire to get rid of it ; but there is a sort of history attached to it , and I do n't know where to go . '' 
`` Come to my place , sir , '' said Courfeyrac . 
`` I have the priority , '' observed Laigle , `` but I have no home . '' 
`` Hold your tongue , Bossuet , '' said Courfeyrac . 
`` Bossuet , '' said Marius , `` but I thought that your name was Laigle . '' 
`` De Meaux , '' replied Laigle ; `` by metaphor , Bossuet . '' 
Courfeyrac entered the cab . 
`` Coachman , '' said he , `` hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques . '' 
And that very evening , Marius found himself installed in a chamber of the hotel de la Porte-Saint-Jacques side by side with Courfeyrac . 
MARIUS ' ASTONISHMENTS In a few days , Marius had become Courfeyrac 's friend . 
Youth is the season for prompt welding and the rapid healing of scars . 
Marius breathed freely in Courfeyrac 's society , a decidedly new thing for him . 
Courfeyrac put no questions to him . 
He did not even think of such a thing . 
At that age , faces disclose everything on the spot . 
Words are superfluous . 
There are young men of whom it can be said that their countenances chatter . 
One looks at them and one knows them . 
One morning , however , Courfeyrac abruptly addressed this interrogation to him : -- `` By the way , have you any political opinions ? '' 
`` The idea ! '' 
said Marius , almost affronted by the question . 
`` What are you ? '' 
`` A democrat-Bonapartist . '' 
`` The gray hue of a reassured rat , '' said Courfeyrac . 
On the following day , Courfeyrac introduced Marius at the Cafe Musain . 
Then he whispered in his ear , with a smile : `` I must give you your entry to the revolution . '' 
And he led him to the hall of the Friends of the A B C . 
He presented him to the other comrades , saying this simple word which Marius did not understand : `` A pupil . '' 
Marius had fallen into a wasps ' - nest of wits . 
However , although he was silent and grave , he was , none the less , both winged and armed . 
Marius , up to that time solitary and inclined to soliloquy , and to asides , both by habit and by taste , was a little fluttered by this covey of young men around him . 
All these various initiatives solicited his attention at once , and pulled him about . 
The tumultuous movements of these minds at liberty and at work set his ideas in a whirl . 
Sometimes , in his trouble , they fled so far from him , that he had difficulty in recovering them . 
He heard them talk of philosophy , of literature , of art , of history , of religion , in unexpected fashion . 
He caught glimpses of strange aspects ; and , as he did not place them in proper perspective , he was not altogether sure that it was not chaos that he grasped . 
On abandoning his grandfather 's opinions for the opinions of his father , he had supposed himself fixed ; he now suspected , with uneasiness , and without daring to avow it to himself , that he was not . 
The angle at which he saw everything began to be displaced anew . 
A certain oscillation set all the horizons of his brains in motion . 
An odd internal upsetting . 
He almost suffered from it . 
It seemed as though there were no `` consecrated things '' for those young men . 
Marius heard singular propositions on every sort of subject , which embarrassed his still timid mind . 
A theatre poster presented itself , adorned with the title of a tragedy from the ancient repertory called classic : `` Down with tragedy dear to the bourgeois ! '' 
cried Bahorel . 
And Marius heard Combeferre reply : -- `` You are wrong , Bahorel . 
The bourgeoisie loves tragedy , and the bourgeoisie must be left at peace on that score . 
Bewigged tragedy has a reason for its existence , and I am not one of those who , by order of AEschylus , contest its right to existence . 
There are rough outlines in nature ; there are , in creation , ready-made parodies ; a beak which is not a beak , wings which are not wings , gills which are not gills , paws which are not paws , a cry of pain which arouses a desire to laugh , there is the duck . 
Now , since poultry exists by the side of the bird , I do not see why classic tragedy should not exist in the face of antique tragedy . '' 
Or chance decreed that Marius should traverse Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau between Enjolras and Courfeyrac . 
Courfeyrac took his arm : -- `` Pay attention . 
This is the Rue Platriere , now called Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau , on account of a singular household which lived in it sixty years ago . 
This consisted of Jean-Jacques and Therese . 
From time to time , little beings were born there . 
Therese gave birth to them , Jean-Jacques represented them as foundlings . '' 
And Enjolras addressed Courfeyrac roughly : -- `` Silence in the presence of Jean-Jacques ! 
I admire that man . 
He denied his own children , that may be ; but he adopted the people . '' 
Not one of these young men articulated the word : The Emperor . 
Jean Prouvaire alone sometimes said Napoleon ; all the others said `` Bonaparte . '' 
Enjolras pronounced it `` Buonaparte . '' 
Marius was vaguely surprised . 
Initium sapientiae . 
THE BACK ROOM OF THE CAFE MUSAIN One of the conversations among the young men , at which Marius was present and in which he sometimes joined , was a veritable shock to his mind . 
This took place in the back room of the Cafe Musain . 
Nearly all the Friends of the A B C had convened that evening . 
The argand lamp was solemnly lighted . 
They talked of one thing and another , without passion and with noise . 
With the exception of Enjolras and Marius , who held their peace , all were haranguing rather at hap-hazard . 
Conversations between comrades sometimes are subject to these peaceable tumults . 
It was a game and an uproar as much as a conversation . 
They tossed words to each other and caught them up in turn . 
They were chattering in all quarters . 
No woman was admitted to this back room , except Louison , the dish-washer of the cafe , who passed through it from time to time , to go to her washing in the `` lavatory . '' 
Grantaire , thoroughly drunk , was deafening the corner of which he had taken possession , reasoning and contradicting at the top of his lungs , and shouting : -- `` I am thirsty . 
Mortals , I am dreaming : that the tun of Heidelberg has an attack of apoplexy , and that I am one of the dozen leeches which will be applied to it . 
I want a drink . 
I desire to forget life . 
Life is a hideous invention of I know not whom . 
It lasts no time at all , and is worth nothing . 
One breaks one 's neck in living . 
Life is a theatre set in which there are but few practicable entrances . 
Happiness is an antique reliquary painted on one side only . 
Ecclesiastes says : ` All is vanity . ' 
I agree with that good man , who never existed , perhaps . 
Zero not wishing to go stark naked , clothed himself in vanity . 
O vanity ! 
The patching up of everything with big words ! 
a kitchen is a laboratory , a dancer is a professor , an acrobat is a gymnast , a boxer is a pugilist , an apothecary is a chemist , a wigmaker is an artist , a hodman is an architect , a jockey is a sportsman , a wood-louse is a pterigybranche . 
Vanity has a right and a wrong side ; the right side is stupid , it is the negro with his glass beads ; the wrong side is foolish , it is the philosopher with his rags . 
I weep over the one and I laugh over the other . 
What are called honors and dignities , and even dignity and honor , are generally of pinchbeck . 
Kings make playthings of human pride . 
Caligula made a horse a consul ; Charles II . 
made a knight of a sirloin . 
Wrap yourself up now , then , between Consul Incitatus and Baronet Roastbeef . 
As for the intrinsic value of people , it is no longer respectable in the least . 
Listen to the panegyric which neighbor makes of neighbor . 
White on white is ferocious ; if the lily could speak , what a setting down it would give the dove ! 
A bigoted woman prating of a devout woman is more venomous than the asp and the cobra . 
It is a shame that I am ignorant , otherwise I would quote to you a mass of things ; but I know nothing . 
For instance , I have always been witty ; when I was a pupil of Gros , instead of daubing wretched little pictures , I passed my time in pilfering apples ; rapin -LSB- 24 -RSB- is the masculine of rapine . 
So much for myself ; as for the rest of you , you are worth no more than I am . 
I scoff at your perfections , excellencies , and qualities . 
Every good quality tends towards a defect ; economy borders on avarice , the generous man is next door to the prodigal , the brave man rubs elbows with the braggart ; he who says very pious says a trifle bigoted ; there are just as many vices in virtue as there are holes in Diogenes ' cloak . 
Whom do you admire , the slain or the slayer , Caesar or Brutus ? 
Generally men are in favor of the slayer . 
Long live Brutus , he has slain ! 
There lies the virtue . 
Virtue , granted , but madness also . 
There are queer spots on those great men . 
The Brutus who killed Caesar was in love with the statue of a little boy . 
This statue was from the hand of the Greek sculptor Strongylion , who also carved that figure of an Amazon known as the Beautiful Leg , Eucnemos , which Nero carried with him in his travels . 
This Strongylion left but two statues which placed Nero and Brutus in accord . 
Brutus was in love with the one , Nero with the other . 
All history is nothing but wearisome repetition . 
One century is the plagiarist of the other . 
The battle of Marengo copies the battle of Pydna ; the Tolbiac of Clovis and the Austerlitz of Napoleon are as like each other as two drops of water . 
I do n't attach much importance to victory . 
Nothing is so stupid as to conquer ; true glory lies in convincing . 
But try to prove something ! 
If you are content with success , what mediocrity , and with conquering , what wretchedness ! 
Alas , vanity and cowardice everywhere . 
Everything obeys success , even grammar . 
Si volet usus , says Horace . 
Therefore I disdain the human race . 
Shall we descend to the party at all ? 
Do you wish me to begin admiring the peoples ? 
What people , if you please ? 
Shall it be Greece ? 
The Athenians , those Parisians of days gone by , slew Phocion , as we might say Coligny , and fawned upon tyrants to such an extent that Anacephorus said of Pisistratus : `` His urine attracts the bees . '' 
The most prominent man in Greece for fifty years was that grammarian Philetas , who was so small and so thin that he was obliged to load his shoes with lead in order not to be blown away by the wind . 
There stood on the great square in Corinth a statue carved by Silanion and catalogued by Pliny ; this statue represented Episthates . 
What did Episthates do ? 
He invented a trip . 
That sums up Greece and glory . 
Let us pass on to others . 
Shall I admire England ? 
Shall I admire France ? 
France ? 
Why ? 
Because of Paris ? 
I have just told you my opinion of Athens . 
England ? 
Why ? 
Because of London ? 
I hate Carthage . 
And then , London , the metropolis of luxury , is the headquarters of wretchedness . 
There are a hundred deaths a year of hunger in the parish of Charing-Cross alone . 
Such is Albion . 
I add , as the climax , that I have seen an Englishwoman dancing in a wreath of roses and blue spectacles . 
A fig then for England ! 
If I do not admire John Bull , shall I admire Brother Jonathan ? 
I have but little taste for that slave-holding brother . 
Take away Time is money , what remains of England ? 
Take away Cotton is king , what remains of America ? 
Germany is the lymph , Italy is the bile . 
Shall we go into ecstasies over Russia ? 
Voltaire admired it . 
He also admired China . 
I admit that Russia has its beauties , among others , a stout despotism ; but I pity the despots . 
Their health is delicate . 
A decapitated Alexis , a poignarded Peter , a strangled Paul , another Paul crushed flat with kicks , divers Ivans strangled , with their throats cut , numerous Nicholases and Basils poisoned , all this indicates that the palace of the Emperors of Russia is in a condition of flagrant insalubrity . 
All civilized peoples offer this detail to the admiration of the thinker ; war ; now , war , civilized war , exhausts and sums up all the forms of ruffianism , from the brigandage of the Trabuceros in the gorges of Mont Jaxa to the marauding of the Comanche Indians in the Doubtful Pass . 
` Bah ! ' 
you will say to me , ` but Europe is certainly better than Asia ? ' 
I admit that Asia is a farce ; but I do not precisely see what you find to laugh at in the Grand Lama , you peoples of the west , who have mingled with your fashions and your elegances all the complicated filth of majesty , from the dirty chemise of Queen Isabella to the chamber-chair of the Dauphin . 
Gentlemen of the human race , I tell you , not a bit of it ! 
It is at Brussels that the most beer is consumed , at Stockholm the most brandy , at Madrid the most chocolate , at Amsterdam the most gin , at London the most wine , at Constantinople the most coffee , at Paris the most absinthe ; there are all the useful notions . 
Paris carries the day , in short . 
In Paris , even the rag-pickers are sybarites ; Diogenes would have loved to be a rag-picker of the Place Maubert better than to be a philosopher at the Piraeus . 
Learn this in addition ; the wineshops of the ragpickers are called bibines ; the most celebrated are the Saucepan and The Slaughter-House . 
Hence , tea-gardens , goguettes , caboulots , bouibuis , mastroquets , bastringues , manezingues , bibines of the rag-pickers , caravanseries of the caliphs , I certify to you , I am a voluptuary , I eat at Richard 's at forty sous a head , I must have Persian carpets to roll naked Cleopatra in ! 
Where is Cleopatra ? 
Ah ! 
So it is you , Louison . 
Good day . '' 
-LSB- 24 -RSB- The slang term for a painter 's assistant . 
Thus did Grantaire , more than intoxicated , launch into speech , catching at the dish-washer in her passage , from his corner in the back room of the Cafe Musain . 
Bossuet , extending his hand towards him , tried to impose silence on him , and Grantaire began again worse than ever : -- `` Aigle de Meaux , down with your paws . 
You produce on me no effect with your gesture of Hippocrates refusing Artaxerxes ' bric-a-brac . 
I excuse you from the task of soothing me . 
Moreover , I am sad . 
What do you wish me to say to you ? 
Man is evil , man is deformed ; the butterfly is a success , man is a failure . 
God made a mistake with that animal . 
A crowd offers a choice of ugliness . 
The first comer is a wretch , Femme -- woman -- rhymes with infame , -- infamous . 
Yes , I have the spleen , complicated with melancholy , with homesickness , plus hypochondria , and I am vexed and I rage , and I yawn , and I am bored , and I am tired to death , and I am stupid ! 
Let God go to the devil ! '' 
`` Silence then , capital R ! '' 
resumed Bossuet , who was discussing a point of law behind the scenes , and who was plunged more than waist high in a phrase of judicial slang , of which this is the conclusion : -- '' -- And as for me , although I am hardly a legist , and at the most , an amateur attorney , I maintain this : that , in accordance with the terms of the customs of Normandy , at Saint-Michel , and for each year , an equivalent must be paid to the profit of the lord of the manor , saving the rights of others , and by all and several , the proprietors as well as those seized with inheritance , and that , for all emphyteuses , leases , freeholds , contracts of domain , mortgages -- '' `` Echo , plaintive nymph , '' hummed Grantaire . 
Near Grantaire , an almost silent table , a sheet of paper , an inkstand and a pen between two glasses of brandy , announced that a vaudeville was being sketched out . 
This great affair was being discussed in a low voice , and the two heads at work touched each other : `` Let us begin by finding names . 
When one has the names , one finds the subject . '' 
`` That is true . 
Dictate . 
I will write . '' 
`` Monsieur Dorimon . '' 
`` An independent gentleman ? '' 
`` Of course . '' 
`` His daughter , Celestine . '' '' 
-- tine . 
What next ? '' 
`` Colonel Sainval . '' 
`` Sainval is stale . 
I should say Valsin . '' 
Beside the vaudeville aspirants , another group , which was also taking advantage of the uproar to talk low , was discussing a duel . 
An old fellow of thirty was counselling a young one of eighteen , and explaining to him what sort of an adversary he had to deal with . 
`` The deuce ! 
Look out for yourself . 
He is a fine swordsman . 
His play is neat . 
He has the attack , no wasted feints , wrist , dash , lightning , a just parade , mathematical parries , bigre ! 
and he is left-handed . '' 
In the angle opposite Grantaire , Joly and Bahorel were playing dominoes , and talking of love . 
`` You are in luck , that you are , '' Joly was saying . 
`` You have a mistress who is always laughing . '' 
`` That is a fault of hers , '' returned Bahorel . 
`` One 's mistress does wrong to laugh . 
That encourages one to deceive her . 
To see her gay removes your remorse ; if you see her sad , your conscience pricks you . '' 
`` Ingrate ! 
a woman who laughs is such a good thing ! 
And you never quarrel ! '' 
`` That is because of the treaty which we have made . 
On forming our little Holy Alliance we assigned ourselves each our frontier , which we never cross . 
What is situated on the side of winter belongs to Vaud , on the side of the wind to Gex . 
Hence the peace . '' 
`` Peace is happiness digesting . '' 
`` And you , Jolllly , where do you stand in your entanglement with Mamselle -- you know whom I mean ? '' 
`` She sulks at me with cruel patience . '' 
`` Yet you are a lover to soften the heart with gauntness . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
`` In your place , I would let her alone . '' 
`` That is easy enough to say . '' 
`` And to do . 
Is not her name Musichetta ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Ah ! 
my poor Bahorel , she is a superb girl , very literary , with tiny feet , little hands , she dresses well , and is white and dimpled , with the eyes of a fortune-teller . 
I am wild over her . '' 
`` My dear fellow , then in order to please her , you must be elegant , and produce effects with your knees . 
Buy a good pair of trousers of double-milled cloth at Staub 's . 
That will assist . '' 
`` At what price ? '' 
shouted Grantaire . 
The third corner was delivered up to a poetical discussion . 
Pagan mythology was giving battle to Christian mythology . 
The question was about Olympus , whose part was taken by Jean Prouvaire , out of pure romanticism . 
Jean Prouvaire was timid only in repose . 
Once excited , he burst forth , a sort of mirth accentuated his enthusiasm , and he was at once both laughing and lyric . 
`` Let us not insult the gods , '' said he . 
`` The gods may not have taken their departure . 
Jupiter does not impress me as dead . 
The gods are dreams , you say . 
Well , even in nature , such as it is to-day , after the flight of these dreams , we still find all the grand old pagan myths . 
Such and such a mountain with the profile of a citadel , like the Vignemale , for example , is still to me the headdress of Cybele ; it has not been proved to me that Pan does not come at night to breathe into the hollow trunks of the willows , stopping up the holes in turn with his fingers , and I have always believed that Io had something to do with the cascade of Pissevache . '' 
In the last corner , they were talking politics . 
The Charter which had been granted was getting roughly handled . 
Combeferre was upholding it weakly . 
Courfeyrac was energetically making a breach in it . 
On the table lay an unfortunate copy of the famous Touquet Charter . 
Courfeyrac had seized it , and was brandishing it , mingling with his arguments the rattling of this sheet of paper . 
`` In the first place , I wo n't have any kings ; if it were only from an economical point of view , I do n't want any ; a king is a parasite . 
One does not have kings gratis . 
Listen to this : the dearness of kings . 
At the death of Francois I. , the national debt of France amounted to an income of thirty thousand livres ; at the death of Louis XIV . 
it was two milliards , six hundred millions , at twenty-eight livres the mark , which was equivalent in 1760 , according to Desmarets , to four milliards , five hundred millions , which would to-day be equivalent to twelve milliards . 
In the second place , and no offence to Combeferre , a charter granted is but a poor expedient of civilization . 
To save the transition , to soften the passage , to deaden the shock , to cause the nation to pass insensibly from the monarchy to democracy by the practice of constitutional fictions , -- what detestable reasons all those are ! 
No ! 
no ! 
let us never enlighten the people with false daylight . 
Principles dwindle and pale in your constitutional cellar . 
No illegitimacy , no compromise , no grant from the king to the people . 
In all such grants there is an Article 14 . 
By the side of the hand which gives there is the claw which snatches back . 
I refuse your charter point-blank . 
A charter is a mask ; the lie lurks beneath it . 
A people which accepts a charter abdicates . 
The law is only the law when entire . 
No ! 
no charter ! '' 
It was winter ; a couple of fagots were crackling in the fireplace . 
This was tempting , and Courfeyrac could not resist . 
He crumpled the poor Touquet Charter in his fist , and flung it in the fire . 
The paper flashed up . 
Combeferre watched the masterpiece of Louis XVIII . 
burn philosophically , and contented himself with saying : -- `` The charter metamorphosed into flame . '' 
And sarcasms , sallies , jests , that French thing which is called entrain , and that English thing which is called humor , good and bad taste , good and bad reasons , all the wild pyrotechnics of dialogue , mounting together and crossing from all points of the room , produced a sort of merry bombardment over their heads . 
ENLARGEMENT OF HORIZON The shocks of youthful minds among themselves have this admirable property , that one can never foresee the spark , nor divine the lightning flash . 
What will dart out presently ? 
No one knows . 
The burst of laughter starts from a tender feeling . 
At the moment of jest , the serious makes its entry . 
Impulses depend on the first chance word . 
The spirit of each is sovereign , jest suffices to open the field to the unexpected . 
These are conversations with abrupt turns , in which the perspective changes suddenly . 
Chance is the stage-manager of such conversations . 
A severe thought , starting oddly from a clash of words , suddenly traversed the conflict of quips in which Grantaire , Bahorel , Prouvaire , Bossuet , Combeferre , and Courfeyrac were confusedly fencing . 
How does a phrase crop up in a dialogue ? 
Whence comes it that it suddenly impresses itself on the attention of those who hear it ? 
We have just said , that no one knows anything about it . 
In the midst of the uproar , Bossuet all at once terminated some apostrophe to Combeferre , with this date : -- `` June 18th , 1815 , Waterloo . '' 
At this name of Waterloo , Marius , who was leaning his elbows on a table , beside a glass of water , removed his wrist from beneath his chin , and began to gaze fixedly at the audience . 
`` Pardieu ! '' 
exclaimed Courfeyrac -LRB- `` Parbleu '' was falling into disuse at this period -RRB- , `` that number 18 is strange and strikes me . 
It is Bonaparte 's fatal number . 
Place Louis in front and Brumaire behind , you have the whole destiny of the man , with this significant peculiarity , that the end treads close on the heels of the commencement . '' 
Enjolras , who had remained mute up to that point , broke the silence and addressed this remark to Combeferre : -- `` You mean to say , the crime and the expiation . '' 
This word crime overpassed the measure of what Marius , who was already greatly agitated by the abrupt evocation of Waterloo , could accept . 
He rose , walked slowly to the map of France spread out on the wall , and at whose base an island was visible in a separate compartment , laid his finger on this compartment and said : -- `` Corsica , a little island which has rendered France very great . '' 
This was like a breath of icy air . 
All ceased talking . 
They felt that something was on the point of occurring . 
Bahorel , replying to Bossuet , was just assuming an attitude of the torso to which he was addicted . 
He gave it up to listen . 
Enjolras , whose blue eye was not fixed on any one , and who seemed to be gazing at space , replied , without glancing at Marius : -- `` France needs no Corsica to be great . 
France is great because she is France . 
Quia nomina leo . '' 
Marius felt no desire to retreat ; he turned towards Enjolras , and his voice burst forth with a vibration which came from a quiver of his very being : -- `` God forbid that I should diminish France ! 
But amalgamating Napoleon with her is not diminishing her . 
Come ! 
let us argue the question . 
I am a new comer among you , but I will confess that you amaze me . 
Where do we stand ? 
Who are we ? 
Who are you ? 
Who am I ? 
Let us come to an explanation about the Emperor . 
I hear you say Buonaparte , accenting the u like the Royalists . 
I warn you that my grandfather does better still ; he says Buonaparte ' . 
I thought you were young men . 
Where , then , is your enthusiasm ? 
And what are you doing with it ? 
Whom do you admire , if you do not admire the Emperor ? 
And what more do you want ? 
If you will have none of that great man , what great men would you like ? 
He had everything . 
He was complete . 
He had in his brain the sum of human faculties . 
He made codes like Justinian , he dictated like Caesar , his conversation was mingled with the lightning-flash of Pascal , with the thunderclap of Tacitus , he made history and he wrote it , his bulletins are Iliads , he combined the cipher of Newton with the metaphor of Mahomet , he left behind him in the East words as great as the pyramids , at Tilsit he taught Emperors majesty , at the Academy of Sciences he replied to Laplace , in the Council of State be held his own against Merlin , he gave a soul to the geometry of the first , and to the chicanery of the last , he was a legist with the attorneys and sidereal with the astronomers ; like Cromwell blowing out one of two candles , he went to the Temple to bargain for a curtain tassel ; he saw everything ; he knew everything ; which did not prevent him from laughing good-naturedly beside the cradle of his little child ; and all at once , frightened Europe lent an ear , armies put themselves in motion , parks of artillery rumbled , pontoons stretched over the rivers , clouds of cavalry galloped in the storm , cries , trumpets , a trembling of thrones in every direction , the frontiers of kingdoms oscillated on the map , the sound of a superhuman sword was heard , as it was drawn from its sheath ; they beheld him , him , rise erect on the horizon with a blazing brand in his hand , and a glow in his eyes , unfolding amid the thunder , his two wings , the grand army and the old guard , and he was the archangel of war ! '' 
All held their peace , and Enjolras bowed his head . 
Silence always produces somewhat the effect of acquiescence , of the enemy being driven to the wall . 
Marius continued with increased enthusiasm , and almost without pausing for breath : -- `` Let us be just , my friends ! 
What a splendid destiny for a nation to be the Empire of such an Emperor , when that nation is France and when it adds its own genius to the genius of that man ! 
To appear and to reign , to march and to triumph , to have for halting-places all capitals , to take his grenadiers and to make kings of them , to decree the falls of dynasties , and to transfigure Europe at the pace of a charge ; to make you feel that when you threaten you lay your hand on the hilt of the sword of God ; to follow in a single man , Hannibal , Caesar , Charlemagne ; to be the people of some one who mingles with your dawns the startling announcement of a battle won , to have the cannon of the Invalides to rouse you in the morning , to hurl into abysses of light prodigious words which flame forever , Marengo , Arcola , Austerlitz , Jena , Wagram ! 
To cause constellations of victories to flash forth at each instant from the zenith of the centuries , to make the French Empire a pendant to the Roman Empire , to be the great nation and to give birth to the grand army , to make its legions fly forth over all the earth , as a mountain sends out its eagles on all sides to conquer , to dominate , to strike with lightning , to be in Europe a sort of nation gilded through glory , to sound athwart the centuries a trumpet-blast of Titans , to conquer the world twice , by conquest and by dazzling , that is sublime ; and what greater thing is there ? '' 
`` To be free , '' said Combeferre . 
Marius lowered his head in his turn ; that cold and simple word had traversed his epic effusion like a blade of steel , and he felt it vanishing within him . 
When he raised his eyes , Combeferre was no longer there . 
Probably satisfied with his reply to the apotheosis , he had just taken his departure , and all , with the exception of Enjolras , had followed him . 
The room had been emptied . 
Enjolras , left alone with Marius , was gazing gravely at him . 
Marius , however , having rallied his ideas to some extent , did not consider himself beaten ; there lingered in him a trace of inward fermentation which was on the point , no doubt , of translating itself into syllogisms arrayed against Enjolras , when all of a sudden , they heard some one singing on the stairs as he went . 
It was Combeferre , and this is what he was singing : -- `` Si Cesar m ` avait donne -LSB- 25 -RSB- La gloire et la guerre , Et qu'il me fallait quitter L'amour de ma mere , Je dirais au grand Cesar : Reprends ton sceptre et ton char , J'aime mieux ma mere , o gue ! 
J'aime mieux ma mere ! '' 
-LSB- 25 -RSB- If Cesar had given me glory and war , and I were obliged to quit my mother 's love , I would say to great Caesar , `` Take back thy sceptre and thy chariot ; I prefer the love of my mother . '' 
The wild and tender accents with which Combeferre sang communicated to this couplet a sort of strange grandeur . 
Marius , thoughtfully , and with his eyes diked on the ceiling , repeated almost mechanically : `` My mother ? 
-- '' At that moment , he felt Enjolras ' hand on his shoulder . 
`` Citizen , '' said Enjolras to him , `` my mother is the Republic . '' 
RES ANGUSTA That evening left Marius profoundly shaken , and with a melancholy shadow in his soul . 
He felt what the earth may possibly feel , at the moment when it is torn open with the iron , in order that grain may be deposited within it ; it feels only the wound ; the quiver of the germ and the joy of the fruit only arrive later . 
Marius was gloomy . 
He had but just acquired a faith ; must he then reject it already ? 
He affirmed to himself that he would not . 
He declared to himself that he would not doubt , and he began to doubt in spite of himself . 
To stand between two religions , from one of which you have not as yet emerged , and another into which you have not yet entered , is intolerable ; and twilight is pleasing only to bat-like souls . 
Marius was clear-eyed , and he required the true light . 
The half-lights of doubt pained him . 
Whatever may have been his desire to remain where he was , he could not halt there , he was irresistibly constrained to continue , to advance , to examine , to think , to march further . 
Whither would this lead him ? 
He feared , after having taken so many steps which had brought him nearer to his father , to now take a step which should estrange him from that father . 
His discomfort was augmented by all the reflections which occurred to him . 
An escarpment rose around him . 
He was in accord neither with his grandfather nor with his friends ; daring in the eyes of the one , he was behind the times in the eyes of the others , and he recognized the fact that he was doubly isolated , on the side of age and on the side of youth . 
He ceased to go to the Cafe Musain . 
In the troubled state of his conscience , he no longer thought of certain serious sides of existence . 
The realities of life do not allow themselves to be forgotten . 
They soon elbowed him abruptly . 
One morning , the proprietor of the hotel entered Marius ' room and said to him : -- `` Monsieur Courfeyrac answered for you . '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` But I must have my money . '' 
`` Request Courfeyrac to come and talk with me , '' said Marius . 
Courfeyrac having made his appearance , the host left them . 
Marius then told him what it had not before occurred to him to relate , that he was the same as alone in the world , and had no relatives . 
`` What is to become of you ? '' 
said Courfeyrac . 
`` I do not know in the least , '' replied Marius . 
`` What are you going to do ? '' 
`` I do not know . '' 
`` Have you any money ? '' 
`` Fifteen francs . '' 
`` Do you want me to lend you some ? '' 
`` Never . '' 
`` Have you clothes ? '' 
`` Here is what I have . '' 
`` Have you trinkets ? '' 
`` A watch . '' 
`` Silver ? '' 
`` Gold ; here it is . '' 
`` I know a clothes-dealer who will take your frock-coat and a pair of trousers . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
`` You will then have only a pair of trousers , a waistcoat , a hat and a coat . '' 
`` And my boots . '' 
`` What ! 
you will not go barefoot ? 
What opulence ! '' 
`` That will be enough . '' 
`` I know a watchmaker who will buy your watch . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
`` No ; it is not good . 
What will you do after that ? '' 
`` Whatever is necessary . 
Anything honest , that is to say . '' 
`` Do you know English ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Do you know German ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` So much the worse . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Because one of my friends , a publisher , is getting up a sort of an encyclopaedia , for which you might have translated English or German articles . 
It is badly paid work , but one can live by it . '' 
`` I will learn English and German . '' 
`` And in the meanwhile ? '' 
`` In the meanwhile I will live on my clothes and my watch . '' 
The clothes-dealer was sent for . 
He paid twenty francs for the cast-off garments . 
They went to the watchmaker 's . 
He bought the watch for forty-five francs . 
`` That is not bad , '' said Marius to Courfeyrac , on their return to the hotel , `` with my fifteen francs , that makes eighty . '' 
`` And the hotel bill ? '' 
observed Courfeyrac . 
`` Hello , I had forgotten that , '' said Marius . 
The landlord presented his bill , which had to be paid on the spot . 
It amounted to seventy francs . 
`` I have ten francs left , '' said Marius . 
`` The deuce , '' exclaimed Courfeyrac , `` you will eat up five francs while you are learning English , and five while learning German . 
That will be swallowing a tongue very fast , or a hundred sous very slowly . '' 
In the meantime Aunt Gillenormand , a rather good-hearted person at bottom in difficulties , had finally hunted up Marius ' abode . 
One morning , on his return from the law-school , Marius found a letter from his aunt , and the sixty pistoles , that is to say , six hundred francs in gold , in a sealed box . 
Marius sent back the thirty louis to his aunt , with a respectful letter , in which he stated that he had sufficient means of subsistence and that he should be able thenceforth to supply all his needs . 
At that moment , he had three francs left . 
His aunt did not inform his grandfather of this refusal for fear of exasperating him . 
Besides , had he not said : `` Let me never hear the name of that blood-drinker again ! '' 
Marius left the hotel de la Porte Saint-Jacques , as he did not wish to run in debt there . 
BOOK FIFTH . 
