This strange battle was like a duel between two raging , wounded men , each of whom , still fighting and still resisting , is expending all his blood . 
Which of the two will be the first to fall ? 
The conflict on the plateau continued . 
What had become of the cuirassiers ? 
No one could have told . 
One thing is certain , that on the day after the battle , a cuirassier and his horse were found dead among the woodwork of the scales for vehicles at Mont-Saint-Jean , at the very point where the four roads from Nivelles , Genappe , La Hulpe , and Brussels meet and intersect each other . 
This horseman had pierced the English lines . 
One of the men who picked up the body still lives at Mont-Saint-Jean . 
His name is Dehaze . 
He was eighteen years old at that time . 
Wellington felt that he was yielding . 
The crisis was at hand . 
The cuirassiers had not succeeded , since the centre was not broken through . 
As every one was in possession of the plateau , no one held it , and in fact it remained , to a great extent , with the English . 
Wellington held the village and the culminating plain ; Ney had only the crest and the slope . 
They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both sides . 
But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable . 
The bleeding of that army was horrible . 
Kempt , on the left wing , demanded reinforcements . 
`` There are none , '' replied Wellington ; `` he must let himself be killed ! '' 
Almost at that same moment , a singular coincidence which paints the exhaustion of the two armies , Ney demanded infantry from Napoleon , and Napoleon exclaimed , `` Infantry ! 
Where does he expect me to get it ? 
Does he think I can make it ? '' 
Nevertheless , the English army was in the worse case of the two . 
The furious onsets of those great squadrons with cuirasses of iron and breasts of steel had ground the infantry to nothing . 
A few men clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment ; such and such a battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant ; Alten 's division , already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte , was almost destroyed ; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze 's brigade strewed the rye-fields all along the Nivelles road ; hardly anything was left of those Dutch grenadiers , who , intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks in 1811 , fought against Wellington ; and who , in 1815 , rallied to the English standard , fought against Napoleon . 
The loss in officers was considerable . 
Lord Uxbridge , who had his leg buried on the following day , had his knee shattered . 
If , on the French side , in that tussle of the cuirassiers , Delort , l'Heritier , Colbert , Dnop , Travers , and Blancard were disabled , on the side of the English there was Alten wounded , Barne wounded , Delancey killed , Van Meeren killed , Ompteda killed , the whole of Wellington 's staff decimated , and England had the worse of it in that bloody scale . 
The second regiment of foot-guards had lost five lieutenant-colonels , four captains , and three ensigns ; the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200 soldiers ; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded , 18 officers killed , 450 soldiers killed . 
The Hanoverian hussars of Cumberland , a whole regiment , with Colonel Hacke at its head , who was destined to be tried later on and cashiered , had turned bridle in the presence of the fray , and had fled to the forest of Soignes , sowing defeat all the way to Brussels . 
The transports , ammunition-wagons , the baggage-wagons , the wagons filled with wounded , on perceiving that the French were gaining ground and approaching the forest , rushed headlong thither . 
The Dutch , mowed down by the French cavalry , cried , `` Alarm ! '' 
From Vert-Coucou to Groentendael , for a distance of nearly two leagues in the direction of Brussels , according to the testimony of eye-witnesses who are still alive , the roads were encumbered with fugitives . 
This panic was such that it attacked the Prince de Conde at Mechlin , and Louis XVIII . 
at Ghent . 
With the exception of the feeble reserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean , and of Vivian 's and Vandeleur 's brigades , which flanked the left wing , Wellington had no cavalry left . 
A number of batteries lay unhorsed . 
These facts are attested by Siborne ; and Pringle , exaggerating the disaster , goes so far as to say that the Anglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men . 
The Iron Duke remained calm , but his lips blanched . 
Vincent , the Austrian commissioner , Alava , the Spanish commissioner , who were present at the battle in the English staff , thought the Duke lost . 
At five o'clock Wellington drew out his watch , and he was heard to murmur these sinister words , `` Blucher , or night ! '' 
It was at about that moment that a distant line of bayonets gleamed on the heights in the direction of Frischemont . 
Here comes the change of face in this giant drama . 
A BAD GUIDE TO NAPOLEON ; A GOOD GUIDE TO BULOW The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known . 
Grouchy hoped for , Blucher arriving . 
Death instead of life . 
Fate has these turns ; the throne of the world was expected ; it was Saint Helena that was seen . 
If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bulow , Blucher 's lieutenant , had advised him to debouch from the forest above Frischemont , instead of below Plancenoit , the form of the nineteenth century might , perhaps , have been different . 
Napoleon would have won the battle of Waterloo . 
By any other route than that below Plancenoit , the Prussian army would have come out upon a ravine impassable for artillery , and Bulow would not have arrived . 
Now the Prussian general , Muffling , declares that one hour 's delay , and Blucher would not have found Wellington on his feet . 
`` The battle was lost . '' 
It was time that Bulow should arrive , as will be seen . 
He had , moreover , been very much delayed . 
He had bivouacked at Dion-le-Mont , and had set out at daybreak ; but the roads were impassable , and his divisions stuck fast in the mire . 
The ruts were up to the hubs of the cannons . 
Moreover , he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow bridge of Wavre ; the street leading to the bridge had been fired by the French , so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not pass between two rows of burning houses , and had been obliged to wait until the conflagration was extinguished . 
It was mid-day before Bulow 's vanguard had been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert . 
Had the action been begun two hours earlier , it would have been over at four o'clock , and Blucher would have fallen on the battle won by Napoleon . 
Such are these immense risks proportioned to an infinite which we can not comprehend . 
The Emperor had been the first , as early as mid-day , to descry with his field-glass , on the extreme horizon , something which had attracted his attention . 
He had said , `` I see yonder a cloud , which seems to me to be troops . '' 
Then he asked the Duc de Dalmatie , `` Soult , what do you see in the direction of Chapelle-Saint-Lambert ? '' 
The marshal , levelling his glass , answered , `` Four or five thousand men , Sire ; evidently Grouchy . '' 
But it remained motionless in the mist . 
All the glasses of the staff had studied `` the cloud '' pointed out by the Emperor . 
Some said : `` It is trees . '' 
The truth is , that the cloud did not move . 
The Emperor detached Domon 's division of light cavalry to reconnoitre in that quarter . 
Bulow had not moved , in fact . 
His vanguard was very feeble , and could accomplish nothing . 
He was obliged to wait for the body of the army corps , and he had received orders to concentrate his forces before entering into line ; but at five o'clock , perceiving Wellington 's peril , Blucher ordered Bulow to attack , and uttered these remarkable words : `` We must give air to the English army . '' 
A little later , the divisions of Losthin , Hiller , Hacke , and Ryssel deployed before Lobau 's corps , the cavalry of Prince William of Prussia debouched from the forest of Paris , Plancenoit was in flames , and the Prussian cannon-balls began to rain even upon the ranks of the guard in reserve behind Napoleon . 
THE GUARD Every one knows the rest , -- the irruption of a third army ; the battle broken to pieces ; eighty-six months of fire thundering simultaneously ; Pirch the first coming up with Bulow ; Zieten 's cavalry led by Blucher in person , the French driven back ; Marcognet swept from the plateau of Ohain ; Durutte dislodged from Papelotte ; Donzelot and Quiot retreating ; Lobau caught on the flank ; a fresh battle precipitating itself on our dismantled regiments at nightfall ; the whole English line resuming the offensive and thrust forward ; the gigantic breach made in the French army ; the English grape-shot and the Prussian grape-shot aiding each other ; the extermination ; disaster in front ; disaster on the flank ; the Guard entering the line in the midst of this terrible crumbling of all things . 
Conscious that they were about to die , they shouted , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
History records nothing more touching than that agony bursting forth in acclamations . 
The sky had been overcast all day long . 
All of a sudden , at that very moment , -- it was eight o'clock in the evening -- the clouds on the horizon parted , and allowed the grand and sinister glow of the setting sun to pass through , athwart the elms on the Nivelles road . 
They had seen it rise at Austerlitz . 
Each battalion of the Guard was commanded by a general for this final catastrophe . 
Friant , Michel , Roguet , Harlet , Mallet , Poret de Morvan , were there . 
When the tall caps of the grenadiers of the Guard , with their large plaques bearing the eagle appeared , symmetrical , in line , tranquil , in the midst of that combat , the enemy felt a respect for France ; they thought they beheld twenty victories entering the field of battle , with wings outspread , and those who were the conquerors , believing themselves to be vanquished , retreated ; but Wellington shouted , `` Up , Guards , and aim straight ! '' 
The red regiment of English guards , lying flat behind the hedges , sprang up , a cloud of grape-shot riddled the tricolored flag and whistled round our eagles ; all hurled themselves forwards , and the final carnage began . 
In the darkness , the Imperial Guard felt the army losing ground around it , and in the vast shock of the rout it heard the desperate flight which had taken the place of the `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
and , with flight behind it , it continued to advance , more crushed , losing more men at every step that it took . 
There were none who hesitated , no timid men in its ranks . 
The soldier in that troop was as much of a hero as the general . 
Not a man was missing in that suicide . 
Ney , bewildered , great with all the grandeur of accepted death , offered himself to all blows in that tempest . 
He had his fifth horse killed under him there . 
Perspiring , his eyes aflame , foaming at the mouth , with uniform unbuttoned , one of his epaulets half cut off by a sword-stroke from a horseguard , his plaque with the great eagle dented by a bullet ; bleeding , bemired , magnificent , a broken sword in his hand , he said , `` Come and see how a Marshal of France dies on the field of battle ! '' 
But in vain ; he did not die . 
He was haggard and angry . 
At Drouet d'Erlon he hurled this question , `` Are you not going to get yourself killed ? '' 
In the midst of all that artillery engaged in crushing a handful of men , he shouted : `` So there is nothing for me ! 
Oh ! 
I should like to have all these English bullets enter my bowels ! '' 
Unhappy man , thou wert reserved for French bullets ! 
THE CATASTROPHE The rout behind the Guard was melancholy . 
The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once , -- Hougomont , La Haie-Sainte , Papelotte , Plancenoit . 
The cry `` Treachery ! '' 
was followed by a cry of `` Save yourselves who can ! '' 
An army which is disbanding is like a thaw . 
All yields , splits , cracks , floats , rolls , falls , jostles , hastens , is precipitated . 
The disintegration is unprecedented . 
Ney borrows a horse , leaps upon it , and without hat , cravat , or sword , places himself across the Brussels road , stopping both English and French . 
He strives to detain the army , he recalls it to its duty , he insults it , he clings to the rout . 
He is overwhelmed . 
The soldiers fly from him , shouting , `` Long live Marshal Ney ! '' 
Two of Durutte 's regiments go and come in affright as though tossed back and forth between the swords of the Uhlans and the fusillade of the brigades of Kempt , Best , Pack , and Rylandt ; the worst of hand-to-hand conflicts is the defeat ; friends kill each other in order to escape ; squadrons and battalions break and disperse against each other , like the tremendous foam of battle . 
Lobau at one extremity , and Reille at the other , are drawn into the tide . 
In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him of his Guard ; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable squadrons . 
Quiot retreats before Vivian , Kellermann before Vandeleur , Lobau before Bulow , Morand before Pirch , Domon and Subervic before Prince William of Prussia ; Guyot , who led the Emperor 's squadrons to the charge , falls beneath the feet of the English dragoons . 
Napoleon gallops past the line of fugitives , harangues , urges , threatens , entreats them . 
All the mouths which in the morning had shouted , `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
remain gaping ; they hardly recognize him . 
The Prussian cavalry , newly arrived , dashes forwards , flies , hews , slashes , kills , exterminates . 
Horses lash out , the cannons flee ; the soldiers of the artillery-train unharness the caissons and use the horses to make their escape ; transports overturned , with all four wheels in the air , clog the road and occasion massacres . 
Men are crushed , trampled down , others walk over the dead and the living . 
Arms are lost . 
A dizzy multitude fills the roads , the paths , the bridges , the plains , the hills , the valleys , the woods , encumbered by this invasion of forty thousand men . 
Shouts despair , knapsacks and guns flung among the rye , passages forced at the point of the sword , no more comrades , no more officers , no more generals , an inexpressible terror . 
Zieten putting France to the sword at its leisure . 
Lions converted into goats . 
Such was the flight . 
At Genappe , an effort was made to wheel about , to present a battle front , to draw up in line . 
Lobau rallied three hundred men . 
The entrance to the village was barricaded , but at the first volley of Prussian canister , all took to flight again , and Lobau was taken . 
That volley of grape-shot can be seen to-day imprinted on the ancient gable of a brick building on the right of the road at a few minutes ' distance before you enter Genappe . 
The Prussians threw themselves into Genappe , furious , no doubt , that they were not more entirely the conquerors . 
The pursuit was stupendous . 
Blucher ordered extermination . 
Roguet had set the lugubrious example of threatening with death any French grenadier who should bring him a Prussian prisoner . 
Blucher outdid Roguet . 
Duhesme , the general of the Young Guard , hemmed in at the doorway of an inn at Genappe , surrendered his sword to a huzzar of death , who took the sword and slew the prisoner . 
The victory was completed by the assassination of the vanquished . 
Let us inflict punishment , since we are history : old Blucher disgraced himself . 
This ferocity put the finishing touch to the disaster . 
The desperate route traversed Genappe , traversed Quatre-Bras , traversed Gosselies , traversed Frasnes , traversed Charleroi , traversed Thuin , and only halted at the frontier . 
Alas ! 
and who , then , was fleeing in that manner ? 
The Grand Army . 
This vertigo , this terror , this downfall into ruin of the loftiest bravery which ever astounded history , -- is that causeless ? 
No . 
The shadow of an enormous right is projected athwart Waterloo . 
It is the day of destiny . 
The force which is mightier than man produced that day . 
Hence the terrified wrinkle of those brows ; hence all those great souls surrendering their swords . 
Those who had conquered Europe have fallen prone on the earth , with nothing left to say nor to do , feeling the present shadow of a terrible presence . 
Hoc erat in fatis . 
That day the perspective of the human race underwent a change . 
Waterloo is the hinge of the nineteenth century . 
The disappearance of the great man was necessary to the advent of the great century . 
Some one , a person to whom one replies not , took the responsibility on himself . 
The panic of heroes can be explained . 
In the battle of Waterloo there is something more than a cloud , there is something of the meteor . 
God has passed by . 
At nightfall , in a meadow near Genappe , Bernard and Bertrand seized by the skirt of his coat and detained a man , haggard , pensive , sinister , gloomy , who , dragged to that point by the current of the rout , had just dismounted , had passed the bridle of his horse over his arm , and with wild eye was returning alone to Waterloo . 
It was Napoleon , the immense somnambulist of this dream which had crumbled , essaying once more to advance . 
THE LAST SQUARE Several squares of the Guard , motionless amid this stream of the defeat , as rocks in running water , held their own until night . 
Night came , death also ; they awaited that double shadow , and , invincible , allowed themselves to be enveloped therein . 
Each regiment , isolated from the rest , and having no bond with the army , now shattered in every part , died alone . 
They had taken up position for this final action , some on the heights of Rossomme , others on the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
There , abandoned , vanquished , terrible , those gloomy squares endured their death-throes in formidable fashion . 
Ulm , Wagram , Jena , Friedland , died with them . 
At twilight , towards nine o'clock in the evening , one of them was left at the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
In that fatal valley , at the foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended , now inundated by the masses of the English , under the converging fires of the victorious hostile cavalry , under a frightful density of projectiles , this square fought on . 
It was commanded by an obscure officer named Cambronne . 
At each discharge , the square diminished and replied . 
It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade , continually contracting its four walls . 
The fugitives pausing breathless for a moment in the distance , listened in the darkness to that gloomy and ever-decreasing thunder . 
When this legion had been reduced to a handful , when nothing was left of their flag but a rag , when their guns , the bullets all gone , were no longer anything but clubs , when the heap of corpses was larger than the group of survivors , there reigned among the conquerors , around those men dying so sublimely , a sort of sacred terror , and the English artillery , taking breath , became silent . 
This furnished a sort of respite . 
These combatants had around them something in the nature of a swarm of spectres , silhouettes of men on horseback , the black profiles of cannon , the white sky viewed through wheels and gun-carriages , the colossal death 's - head , which the heroes saw constantly through the smoke , in the depths of the battle , advanced upon them and gazed at them . 
Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces being loaded ; the matches all lighted , like the eyes of tigers at night , formed a circle round their heads ; all the lintstocks of the English batteries approached the cannons , and then , with emotion , holding the supreme moment suspended above these men , an English general , Colville according to some , Maitland according to others , shouted to them , `` Surrender , brave Frenchmen ! '' 
Cambronne replied , '' ----- . '' 
-LCB- EDITOR 'S COMMENTARY : Another edition of this book has the word `` Merde ! '' 
in lieu of the ----- above . -RCB- 
CAMBRONNE If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended , one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is perhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made . 
This would enjoin us from consigning something sublime to History . 
At our own risk and peril , let us violate this injunction . 
Now , then , among those giants there was one Titan , -- Cambronne . 
To make that reply and then perish , what could be grander ? 
For being willing to die is the same as to die ; and it was not this man 's fault if he survived after he was shot . 
The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon , who was put to flight ; nor Wellington , giving way at four o'clock , in despair at five ; nor Blucher , who took no part in the engagement . 
The winner of Waterloo was Cambronne . 
To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you is to conquer ! 
Thus to answer the Catastrophe , thus to speak to Fate , to give this pedestal to the future lion , to hurl such a challenge to the midnight rainstorm , to the treacherous wall of Hougomont , to the sunken road of Ohain , to Grouchy 's delay , to Blucher 's arrival , to be Irony itself in the tomb , to act so as to stand upright though fallen , to drown in two syllables the European coalition , to offer kings privies which the Caesars once knew , to make the lowest of words the most lofty by entwining with it the glory of France , insolently to end Waterloo with Mardigras , to finish Leonidas with Rabellais , to set the crown on this victory by a word impossible to speak , to lose the field and preserve history , to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage , -- this is immense ! 
It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl ! 
It reaches the grandeur of AEschylus ! 
Cambronne 's reply produces the effect of a violent break . 
'T is like the breaking of a heart under a weight of scorn . 
'T is the overflow of agony bursting forth . 
Who conquered ? 
Wellington ? 
No ! 
Had it not been for Blucher , he was lost . 
Was it Blucher ? 
No ! 
If Wellington had not begun , Blucher could not have finished . 
This Cambronne , this man spending his last hour , this unknown soldier , this infinitesimal of war , realizes that here is a falsehood , a falsehood in a catastrophe , and so doubly agonizing ; and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because of it , he is offered this mockery , -- life ! 
How could he restrain himself ? 
Yonder are all the kings of Europe , the general 's flushed with victory , the Jupiter 's darting thunderbolts ; they have a hundred thousand victorious soldiers , and back of the hundred thousand a million ; their cannon stand with yawning mouths , the match is lighted ; they grind down under their heels the Imperial guards , and the grand army ; they have just crushed Napoleon , and only Cambronne remains , -- only this earthworm is left to protest . 
He will protest . 
Then he seeks for the appropriate word as one seeks for a sword . 
His mouth froths , and the froth is the word . 
In face of this mean and mighty victory , in face of this victory which counts none victorious , this desperate soldier stands erect . 
He grants its overwhelming immensity , but he establishes its triviality ; and he does more than spit upon it . 
Borne down by numbers , by superior force , by brute matter , he finds in his soul an expression : `` Excrement ! '' 
We repeat it , -- to use that word , to do thus , to invent such an expression , is to be the conqueror ! 
The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent on that unknown man . 
Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rouget invents the `` Marseillaise , '' under the visitation of a breath from on high . 
An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes sweeping over these men , and they shake , and one of them sings the song supreme , and the other utters the frightful cry . 
This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe in the name of the Empire , -- that would be a trifle : he hurls it at the past in the name of the Revolution . 
It is heard , and Cambronne is recognized as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans . 
Danton seems to be speaking ! 
Kleber seems to be bellowing ! 
At that word from Cambronne , the English voice responded , `` Fire ! '' 
The batteries flamed , the hill trembled , from all those brazen mouths belched a last terrible gush of grape-shot ; a vast volume of smoke , vaguely white in the light of the rising moon , rolled out , and when the smoke dispersed , there was no longer anything there . 
That formidable remnant had been annihilated ; the Guard was dead . 
The four walls of the living redoubt lay prone , and hardly was there discernible , here and there , even a quiver in the bodies ; it was thus that the French legions , greater than the Roman legions , expired on Mont-Saint-Jean , on the soil watered with rain and blood , amid the gloomy grain , on the spot where nowadays Joseph , who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles , passes whistling , and cheerfully whipping up his horse at four o'clock in the morning . 
QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE ? 
The battle of Waterloo is an enigma . 
It is as obscure to those who won it as to those who lost it . 
For Napoleon it was a panic ; -LSB- 10 -RSB- Blucher sees nothing in it but fire ; Wellington understands nothing in regard to it . 
Look at the reports . 
The bulletins are confused , the commentaries involved . 
Some stammer , others lisp . 
Jomini divides the battle of Waterloo into four moments ; Muffling cuts it up into three changes ; Charras alone , though we hold another judgment than his on some points , seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of that catastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance . 
All the other historians suffer from being somewhat dazzled , and in this dazzled state they fumble about . 
It was a day of lightning brilliancy ; in fact , a crumbling of the military monarchy which , to the vast stupefaction of kings , drew all the kingdoms after it -- the fall of force , the defeat of war . 
-LSB- 10 -RSB- `` A battle terminated , a day finished , false measures repaired , greater successes assured for the morrow , -- all was lost by a moment of panic , terror . '' 
-- Napoleon , Dictees de Sainte Helene . 
In this event , stamped with superhuman necessity , the part played by men amounts to nothing . 
If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blucher , do we thereby deprive England and Germany of anything ? 
No . 
Neither that illustrious England nor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo . 
Thank Heaven , nations are great , independently of the lugubrious feats of the sword . 
Neither England , nor Germany , nor France is contained in a scabbard . 
At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords , above Blucher , Germany has Schiller ; above Wellington , England has Byron . 
A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our century , and in that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance . 
They are majestic because they think . 
The elevation of level which they contribute to civilization is intrinsic with them ; it proceeds from themselves and not from an accident . 
The aggrandizement which they have brought to the nineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source . 
It is only barbarous peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory . 
That is the temporary vanity of torrents swelled by a storm . 
Civilized people , especially in our day , are neither elevated nor abased by the good or bad fortune of a captain . 
Their specific gravity in the human species results from something more than a combat . 
Their honor , thank God ! 
their dignity , their intelligence , their genius , are not numbers which those gamblers , heroes and conquerors , can put in the lottery of battles . 
Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered . 
There is less glory and more liberty . 
The drum holds its peace ; reason takes the word . 
It is a game in which he who loses wins . 
Let us , therefore , speak of Waterloo coldly from both sides . 
Let us render to chance that which is due to chance , and to God that which is due to God . 
What is Waterloo ? 
A victory ? 
No . 
The winning number in the lottery . 
The quine -LSB- 11 -RSB- won by Europe , paid by France . 
-LSB- 11 -RSB- Five winning numbers in a lottery . 
It was not worth while to place a lion there . 
Waterloo , moreover , is the strangest encounter in history . 
Napoleon and Wellington . 
They are not enemies ; they are opposites . 
Never did God , who is fond of antitheses , make a more striking contrast , a more extraordinary comparison . 
On one side , precision , foresight , geometry , prudence , an assured retreat , reserves spared , with an obstinate coolness , an imperturbable method , strategy , which takes advantage of the ground , tactics , which preserve the equilibrium of battalions , carnage , executed according to rule , war regulated , watch in hand , nothing voluntarily left to chance , the ancient classic courage , absolute regularity ; on the other , intuition , divination , military oddity , superhuman instinct , a flaming glance , an indescribable something which gazes like an eagle , and which strikes like the lightning , a prodigious art in disdainful impetuosity , all the mysteries of a profound soul , associated with destiny ; the stream , the plain , the forest , the hill , summoned , and in a manner , forced to obey , the despot going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle ; faith in a star mingled with strategic science , elevating but perturbing it . 
Wellington was the Bareme of war ; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo ; and on this occasion , genius was vanquished by calculation . 
On both sides some one was awaited . 
It was the exact calculator who succeeded . 
Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy ; he did not come . 
Wellington expected Blucher ; he came . 
Wellington is classic war taking its revenge . 
Bonaparte , at his dawning , had encountered him in Italy , and beaten him superbly . 
The old owl had fled before the young vulture . 
The old tactics had been not only struck as by lightning , but disgraced . 
Who was that Corsican of six and twenty ? 
What signified that splendid ignoramus , who , with everything against him , nothing in his favor , without provisions , without ammunition , without cannon , without shoes , almost without an army , with a mere handful of men against masses , hurled himself on Europe combined , and absurdly won victories in the impossible ? 
Whence had issued that fulminating convict , who almost without taking breath , and with the same set of combatants in hand , pulverized , one after the other , the five armies of the emperor of Germany , upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi , Wurmser on Beaulieu , Melas on Wurmser , Mack on Melas ? 
Who was this novice in war with the effrontery of a luminary ? 
The academical military school excommunicated him , and as it lost its footing ; hence , the implacable rancor of the old Caesarism against the new ; of the regular sword against the flaming sword ; and of the exchequer against genius . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , that rancor had the last word . 
and beneath Lodi , Montebello , Montenotte , Mantua , Arcola , it wrote : Waterloo . 
A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority . 
Destiny consented to this irony . 
In his decline , Napoleon found Wurmser , the younger , again in front of him . 
In fact , to get Wurmser , it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington . 
Waterloo is a battle of the first order , won by a captain of the second . 
That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo , is England ; the English firmness , the English resolution , the English blood ; the superb thing about England there , no offence to her , was herself . 
It was not her captain ; it was her army . 
Wellington , oddly ungrateful , declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst , that his army , the army which fought on the 18th of June , 1815 , was a `` detestable army . '' 
What does that sombre intermingling of bones buried beneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that ? 
England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington . 
To make Wellington so great is to belittle England . 
Wellington is nothing but a hero like many another . 
Those Scotch Grays , those Horse Guards , those regiments of Maitland and of Mitchell , that infantry of Pack and Kempt , that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset , those Highlanders playing the pibroch under the shower of grape-shot , those battalions of Rylandt , those utterly raw recruits , who hardly knew how to handle a musket holding their own against Essling 's and Rivoli 's old troops , -- that is what was grand . 
Wellington was tenacious ; in that lay his merit , and we are not seeking to lessen it : but the least of his foot-soldiers and of his cavalry would have been as solid as he . 
The iron soldier is worth as much as the Iron Duke . 
As for us , all our glorification goes to the English soldier , to the English army , to the English people . 
If trophy there be , it is to England that the trophy is due . 
The column of Waterloo would be more just , if , instead of the figure of a man , it bore on high the statue of a people . 
But this great England will be angry at what we are saying here . 
She still cherishes , after her own 1688 and our 1789 , the feudal illusion . 
She believes in heredity and hierarchy . 
This people , surpassed by none in power and glory , regards itself as a nation , and not as a people . 
And as a people , it willingly subordinates itself and takes a lord for its head . 
As a workman , it allows itself to be disdained ; as a soldier , it allows itself to be flogged . 
It will be remembered , that at the battle of Inkermann a sergeant who had , it appears , saved the army , could not be mentioned by Lord Paglan , as the English military hierarchy does not permit any hero below the grade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports . 
That which we admire above all , in an encounter of the nature of Waterloo , is the marvellous cleverness of chance . 
A nocturnal rain , the wall of Hougomont , the hollow road of Ohain , Grouchy deaf to the cannon , Napoleon 's guide deceiving him , Bulow 's guide enlightening him , -- the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted . 
On the whole , let us say it plainly , it was more of a massacre than of a battle at Waterloo . 
Of all pitched battles , Waterloo is the one which has the smallest front for such a number of combatants . 
Napoleon three-quarters of a league ; Wellington , half a league ; seventy-two thousand combatants on each side . 
From this denseness the carnage arose . 
The following calculation has been made , and the following proportion established : Loss of men : at Austerlitz , French , fourteen per cent ; Russians , thirty per cent ; Austrians , forty-four per cent . 
At Wagram , French , thirteen per cent ; Austrians , fourteen . 
At the Moskowa , French , thirty-seven per cent ; Russians , forty-four . 
At Bautzen , French , thirteen per cent ; Russians and Prussians , fourteen . 
At Waterloo , French , fifty-six per cent ; the Allies , thirty-one . 
Total for Waterloo , forty-one per cent ; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants ; sixty thousand dead . 
To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth , the impassive support of man , and it resembles all plains . 
At night , moreover , a sort of visionary mist arises from it ; and if a traveller strolls there , if he listens , if he watches , if he dreams like Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi , the hallucination of the catastrophe takes possession of him . 
The frightful 18th of June lives again ; the false monumental hillock disappears , the lion vanishes in air , the battle-field resumes its reality , lines of infantry undulate over the plain , furious gallops traverse the horizon ; the frightened dreamer beholds the flash of sabres , the gleam of bayonets , the flare of bombs , the tremendous interchange of thunders ; he hears , as it were , the death rattle in the depths of a tomb , the vague clamor of the battle phantom ; those shadows are grenadiers , those lights are cuirassiers ; that skeleton Napoleon , that other skeleton is Wellington ; all this no longer exists , and yet it clashes together and combats still ; and the ravines are empurpled , and the trees quiver , and there is fury even in the clouds and in the shadows ; all those terrible heights , Hougomont , Mont-Saint-Jean , Frischemont , Papelotte , Plancenoit , appear confusedly crowned with whirlwinds of spectres engaged in exterminating each other . 
IS WATERLOO TO BE CONSIDERED GOOD ? 
There exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hate Waterloo . 
We do not belong to it . 
To us , Waterloo is but the stupefied date of liberty . 
That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg is certainly unexpected . 
If one places one 's self at the culminating point of view of the question , Waterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory . 
It is Europe against France ; it is Petersburg , Berlin , and Vienna against Paris ; it is the statu quo against the initiative ; it is the 14th of July , 1789 , attacked through the 20th of March , 1815 ; it is the monarchies clearing the decks in opposition to the indomitable French rioting . 
The final extinction of that vast people which had been in eruption for twenty-six years -- such was the dream . 
The solidarity of the Brunswicks , the Nassaus , the Romanoffs , the Hohenzollerns , the Hapsburgs with the Bourbons . 
Waterloo bears divine right on its crupper . 
It is true , that the Empire having been despotic , the kingdom by the natural reaction of things , was forced to be liberal , and that a constitutional order was the unwilling result of Waterloo , to the great regret of the conquerors . 
It is because revolution can not be really conquered , and that being providential and absolutely fatal , it is always cropping up afresh : before Waterloo , in Bonaparte overthrowing the old thrones ; after Waterloo , in Louis XVIII . 
granting and conforming to the charter . 
Bonaparte places a postilion on the throne of Naples , and a sergeant on the throne of Sweden , employing inequality to demonstrate equality ; Louis XVIII . 
at Saint-Ouen countersigns the declaration of the rights of man . 
If you wish to gain an idea of what revolution is , call it Progress ; and if you wish to acquire an idea of the nature of progress , call it To-morrow . 
To-morrow fulfils its work irresistibly , and it is already fulfilling it to-day . 
It always reaches its goal strangely . 
It employs Wellington to make of Foy , who was only a soldier , an orator . 
Foy falls at Hougomont and rises again in the tribune . 
Thus does progress proceed . 
There is no such thing as a bad tool for that workman . 
It does not become disconcerted , but adjusts to its divine work the man who has bestridden the Alps , and the good old tottering invalid of Father Elysee . 
It makes use of the gouty man as well as of the conqueror ; of the conqueror without , of the gouty man within . 
Waterloo , by cutting short the demolition of European thrones by the sword , had no other effect than to cause the revolutionary work to be continued in another direction . 
The slashers have finished ; it was the turn of the thinkers . 
The century that Waterloo was intended to arrest has pursued its march . 
That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty . 
In short , and incontestably , that which triumphed at Waterloo ; that which smiled in Wellington 's rear ; that which brought him all the marshals ' staffs of Europe , including , it is said , the staff of a marshal of France ; that which joyously trundled the barrows full of bones to erect the knoll of the lion ; that which triumphantly inscribed on that pedestal the date `` June 18 , 1815 '' ; that which encouraged Blucher , as he put the flying army to the sword ; that which , from the heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , hovered over France as over its prey , was the counter-revolution . 
It was the counter-revolution which murmured that infamous word `` dismemberment . '' 
On arriving in Paris , it beheld the crater close at hand ; it felt those ashes which scorched its feet , and it changed its mind ; it returned to the stammer of a charter . 
Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo . 
Of intentional liberty there is none . 
The counter-revolution was involuntarily liberal , in the same manner as , by a corresponding phenomenon , Napoleon was involuntarily revolutionary . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the mounted Robespierre was hurled from his saddle . 
A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT End of the dictatorship . 
A whole European system crumbled away . 
The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world as it expired . 
Again we behold the abyss , as in the days of the barbarians ; only the barbarism of 1815 , which must be called by its pet name of the counter-revolution , was not long breathed , soon fell to panting , and halted short . 
The Empire was bewept , -- let us acknowledge the fact , -- and bewept by heroic eyes . 
If glory lies in the sword converted into a sceptre , the Empire had been glory in person . 
It had diffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can give a sombre light . 
We will say more ; an obscure light . 
Compared to the true daylight , it is night . 
This disappearance of night produces the effect of an eclipse . 
Louis XVIII . 
re-entered Paris . 
The circling dances of the 8th of July effaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March . 
The Corsican became the antithesis of the Bearnese . 
The flag on the dome of the Tuileries was white . 
The exile reigned . 
Hartwell 's pine table took its place in front of the fleur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV . 
Bouvines and Fontenoy were mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding day , Austerlitz having become antiquated . 
The altar and the throne fraternized majestically . 
One of the most undisputed forms of the health of society in the nineteenth century was established over France , and over the continent . 
Europe adopted the white cockade . 
Trestaillon was celebrated . 
The device non pluribus impar re-appeared on the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on the Quai d'Orsay . 
Where there had been an Imperial Guard , there was now a red house . 
The Arc du Carrousel , all laden with badly borne victories , thrown out of its element among these novelties , a little ashamed , it may be , of Marengo and Arcola , extricated itself from its predicament with the statue of the Duc d'Angouleme . 
The cemetery of the Madeleine , a terrible pauper 's grave in 1793 , was covered with jasper and marble , since the bones of Louis XVI . 
and Marie Antoinette lay in that dust . 
In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth , recalling the fact that the Duc d'Enghien had perished in the very month when Napoleon was crowned . 
Pope Pius VII. , who had performed the coronation very near this death , tranquilly bestowed his blessing on the fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation . 
At Schoenbrunn there was a little shadow , aged four , whom it was seditious to call the King of Rome . 
And these things took place , and the kings resumed their thrones , and the master of Europe was put in a cage , and the old regime became the new regime , and all the shadows and all the light of the earth changed place , because , on the afternoon of a certain summer 's day , a shepherd said to a Prussian in the forest , `` Go this way , and not that ! '' 
This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April . 
Ancient unhealthy and poisonous realities were covered with new appearances . 
A lie wedded 1789 ; the right divine was masked under a charter ; fictions became constitutional ; prejudices , superstitions and mental reservations , with Article 14 in the heart , were varnished over with liberalism . 
It was the serpent 's change of skin . 
Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon . 
Under this reign of splendid matter , the ideal had received the strange name of ideology ! 
It is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the future into derision . 
The populace , however , that food for cannon which is so fond of the cannoneer , sought him with its glance . 
Where is he ? 
What is he doing ? 
`` Napoleon is dead , '' said a passer-by to a veteran of Marengo and Waterloo . 
`` He dead ! '' 
cried the soldier ; `` you do n't know him . '' 
Imagination distrusted this man , even when overthrown . 
The depths of Europe were full of darkness after Waterloo . 
Something enormous remained long empty through Napoleon 's disappearance . 
The kings placed themselves in this void . 
Ancient Europe profited by it to undertake reforms . 
There was a Holy Alliance ; Belle-Alliance , Beautiful Alliance , the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance . 
In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed , the features of a new France were sketched out . 
The future , which the Emperor had rallied , made its entry . 
On its brow it bore the star , Liberty . 
The glowing eyes of all young generations were turned on it . 
Singular fact ! 
people were , at one and the same time , in love with the future , Liberty , and the past , Napoleon . 
Defeat had rendered the vanquished greater . 
Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than Napoleon erect . 
Those who had triumphed were alarmed . 
England had him guarded by Hudson Lowe , and France had him watched by Montchenu . 
His folded arms became a source of uneasiness to thrones . 
Alexander called him `` my sleeplessness . '' 
This terror was the result of the quantity of revolution which was contained in him . 
That is what explains and excuses Bonapartist liberalism . 
This phantom caused the old world to tremble . 
The kings reigned , but ill at their ease , with the rock of Saint Helena on the horizon . 
While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood , the sixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo were quietly rotting , and something of their peace was shed abroad over the world . 
The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815 , and Europe called this the Restoration . 
This is what Waterloo was . 
But what matters it to the Infinite ? 
all that tempest , all that cloud , that war , then that peace ? 
All that darkness did not trouble for a moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from one blade of grass to another equals the eagle soaring from belfry to belfry on the towers of Notre Dame . 
THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT Let us return -- it is a necessity in this book -- to that fatal battle-field . 
On the 18th of June the moon was full . 
Its light favored Blucher 's ferocious pursuit , betrayed the traces of the fugitives , delivered up that disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry , and aided the massacre . 
Such tragic favors of the night do occur sometimes during catastrophes . 
After the last cannon-shot had been fired , the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean remained deserted . 
The English occupied the encampment of the French ; it is the usual sign of victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished . 
They established their bivouac beyond Rossomme . 
The Prussians , let loose on the retreating rout , pushed forward . 
Wellington went to the village of Waterloo to draw up his report to Lord Bathurst . 
If ever the sic vos non vobis was applicable , it certainly is to that village of Waterloo . 
Waterloo took no part , and lay half a league from the scene of action . 
Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded , Hougomont was burned , La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault , Papelotte was burned , Plancenoit was burned , La Belle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the two conquerors ; these names are hardly known , and Waterloo , which worked not in the battle , bears off all the honor . 
We are not of the number of those who flatter war ; when the occasion presents itself , we tell the truth about it . 
War has frightful beauties which we have not concealed ; it has also , we acknowledge , some hideous features . 
One of the most surprising is the prompt stripping of the bodies of the dead after the victory . 
The dawn which follows a battle always rises on naked corpses . 
Who does this ? 
Who thus soils the triumph ? 
What hideous , furtive hand is that which is slipped into the pocket of victory ? 
What pickpockets are they who ply their trade in the rear of glory ? 
Some philosophers -- Voltaire among the number -- affirm that it is precisely those persons have made the glory . 
It is the same men , they say ; there is no relief corps ; those who are erect pillage those who are prone on the earth . 
The hero of the day is the vampire of the night . 
One has assuredly the right , after all , to strip a corpse a bit when one is the author of that corpse . 
For our own part , we do not think so ; it seems to us impossible that the same hand should pluck laurels and purloin the shoes from a dead man . 
One thing is certain , which is , that generally after conquerors follow thieves . 
But let us leave the soldier , especially the contemporary soldier , out of the question . 
Every army has a rear-guard , and it is that which must be blamed . 
Bat-like creatures , half brigands and lackeys ; all the sorts of vespertillos that that twilight called war engenders ; wearers of uniforms , who take no part in the fighting ; pretended invalids ; formidable limpers ; interloping sutlers , trotting along in little carts , sometimes accompanied by their wives , and stealing things which they sell again ; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers ; soldiers ' servants ; marauders ; armies on the march in days gone by , -- we are not speaking of the present , -- dragged all this behind them , so that in the special language they are called `` stragglers . '' 
No army , no nation , was responsible for those beings ; they spoke Italian and followed the Germans , then spoke French and followed the English . 
It was by one of these wretches , a Spanish straggler who spoke French , that the Marquis of Fervacques , deceived by his Picard jargon , and taking him for one of our own men , was traitorously slain and robbed on the battle-field itself , in the course of the night which followed the victory of Cerisoles . 
The rascal sprang from this marauding . 
The detestable maxim , Live on the enemy ! 
produced this leprosy , which a strict discipline alone could heal . 
There are reputations which are deceptive ; one does not always know why certain generals , great in other directions , have been so popular . 
Turenne was adored by his soldiers because he tolerated pillage ; evil permitted constitutes part of goodness . 
Turenne was so good that he allowed the Palatinate to be delivered over to fire and blood . 
The marauders in the train of an army were more or less in number , according as the chief was more or less severe . 
Hoche and Marceau had no stragglers ; Wellington had few , and we do him the justice to mention it . 
Nevertheless , on the night from the 18th to the 19th of June , the dead were robbed . 
Wellington was rigid ; he gave orders that any one caught in the act should be shot ; but rapine is tenacious . 
The marauders stole in one corner of the battlefield while others were being shot in another . 
The moon was sinister over this plain . 
Towards midnight , a man was prowling about , or rather , climbing in the direction of the hollow road of Ohain . 
To all appearance he was one of those whom we have just described , -- neither English nor French , neither peasant nor soldier , less a man than a ghoul attracted by the scent of the dead bodies having theft for his victory , and come to rifle Waterloo . 
He was clad in a blouse that was something like a great coat ; he was uneasy and audacious ; he walked forwards and gazed behind him . 
Who was this man ? 
The night probably knew more of him than the day . 
He had no sack , but evidently he had large pockets under his coat . 
From time to time he halted , scrutinized the plain around him as though to see whether he were observed , bent over abruptly , disturbed something silent and motionless on the ground , then rose and fled . 
His sliding motion , his attitudes , his mysterious and rapid gestures , caused him to resemble those twilight larvae which haunt ruins , and which ancient Norman legends call the Alleurs . 
Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among the marshes . 
A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have perceived at some distance a sort of little sutler 's wagon with a fluted wicker hood , harnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass across its bit as it halted , hidden , as it were , behind the hovel which adjoins the highway to Nivelles , at the angle of the road from Mont-Saint-Jean to Braine l'Alleud ; and in the wagon , a sort of woman seated on coffers and packages . 
Perhaps there was some connection between that wagon and that prowler . 
The darkness was serene . 
Not a cloud in the zenith . 
What matters it if the earth be red ! 
the moon remains white ; these are the indifferences of the sky . 
In the fields , branches of trees broken by grape-shot , but not fallen , upheld by their bark , swayed gently in the breeze of night . 
A breath , almost a respiration , moved the shrubbery . 
Quivers which resembled the departure of souls ran through the grass . 
In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general rounds of the English camp were audible . 
Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn , forming , one in the west , the other in the east , two great flames which were joined by the cordon of bivouac fires of the English , like a necklace of rubies with two carbuncles at the extremities , as they extended in an immense semicircle over the hills along the horizon . 
We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain . 
The heart is terrified at the thought of what that death must have been to so many brave men . 
If there is anything terrible , if there exists a reality which surpasses dreams , it is this : to live , to see the sun ; to be in full possession of virile force ; to possess health and joy ; to laugh valiantly ; to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of one ; to feel in one 's breast lungs which breathe , a heart which beats , a will which reasons ; to speak , think , hope , love ; to have a mother , to have a wife , to have children ; to have the light -- and all at once , in the space of a shout , in less than a minute , to sink into an abyss ; to fall , to roll , to crush , to be crushed ; to see ears of wheat , flowers , leaves , branches ; not to be able to catch hold of anything ; to feel one 's sword useless , men beneath one , horses on top of one ; to struggle in vain , since one 's bones have been broken by some kick in the darkness ; to feel a heel which makes one 's eyes start from their sockets ; to bite horses ' shoes in one 's rage ; to stifle , to yell , to writhe ; to be beneath , and to say to one 's self , `` But just a little while ago I was a living man ! '' 
There , where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle , all was silence now . 
The edges of the hollow road were encumbered with horses and riders , inextricably heaped up . 
