Thenardier , raising his right hand to a level with his forehead , formed with it a shade , then he brought his eyelashes together , by screwing up his eyes , a motion which , in connection with a slight contraction of the mouth , characterizes the sagacious attention of a man who is endeavoring to recognize another man . 
He did not succeed . 
Jean Valjean , as we have just stated , had his back turned to the light , and he was , moreover , so disfigured , so bemired , so bleeding that he would have been unrecognizable in full noonday . 
On the contrary , illuminated by the light from the grating , a cellar light , it is true , livid , yet precise in its lividness , Thenardier , as the energetic popular metaphor expresses it , immediately `` leaped into '' Jean Valjean 's eyes . 
This inequality of conditions sufficed to assure some advantage to Jean Valjean in that mysterious duel which was on the point of beginning between the two situations and the two men . 
The encounter took place between Jean Valjean veiled and Thenardier unmasked . 
Jean Valjean immediately perceived that Thenardier did not recognize him . 
They surveyed each other for a moment in that half-gloom , as though taking each other 's measure . 
Thenardier was the first to break the silence . 
`` How are you going to manage to get out ? '' 
Jean Valjean made no reply . 
Thenardier continued : `` It 's impossible to pick the lock of that gate . 
But still you must get out of this . '' 
`` That is true , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Well , half shares then . '' 
`` What do you mean by that ? '' 
`` You have killed that man ; that 's all right . 
I have the key . '' 
Thenardier pointed to Marius . 
He went on : `` I do n't know you , but I want to help you . 
You must be a friend . '' 
Jean Valjean began to comprehend . 
Thenardier took him for an assassin . 
Thenardier resumed : `` Listen , comrade . 
You did n't kill that man without looking to see what he had in his pockets . 
Give me my half . 
I 'll open the door for you . '' 
And half drawing from beneath his tattered blouse a huge key , he added : `` Do you want to see how a key to liberty is made ? 
Look here . '' 
Jean Valjean `` remained stupid '' -- the expression belongs to the elder Corneille -- to such a degree that he doubted whether what he beheld was real . 
It was providence appearing in horrible guise , and his good angel springing from the earth in the form of Thenardier . 
Thenardier thrust his fist into a large pocket concealed under his blouse , drew out a rope and offered it to Jean Valjean . 
`` Hold on , '' said he , `` I 'll give you the rope to boot . '' 
`` What is the rope for ? '' 
`` You will need a stone also , but you can find one outside . 
There 's a heap of rubbish . '' 
`` What am I to do with a stone ? '' 
`` Idiot , you 'll want to sling that stiff into the river , you 'll need a stone and a rope , otherwise it would float on the water . '' 
Jean Valjean took the rope . 
There is no one who does not occasionally accept in this mechanical way . 
Thenardier snapped his fingers as though an idea had suddenly occurred to him . 
`` Ah , see here , comrade , how did you contrive to get out of that slough yonder ? 
I have n't dared to risk myself in it . 
Phew ! 
you do n't smell good . '' 
After a pause he added : `` I 'm asking you questions , but you 're perfectly right not to answer . 
It 's an apprenticeship against that cursed quarter of an hour before the examining magistrate . 
And then , when you do n't talk at all , you run no risk of talking too loud . 
That 's no matter , as I ca n't see your face and as I do n't know your name , you are wrong in supposing that I do n't know who you are and what you want . 
I twig . 
You 've broken up that gentleman a bit ; now you want to tuck him away somewhere . 
The river , that great hider of folly , is what you want . 
I 'll get you out of your scrape . 
Helping a good fellow in a pinch is what suits me to a hair . '' 
While expressing his approval of Jean Valjean 's silence , he endeavored to force him to talk . 
He jostled his shoulder in an attempt to catch a sight of his profile , and he exclaimed , without , however , raising his tone : `` Apropos of that quagmire , you 're a hearty animal . 
Why did n't you toss the man in there ? '' 
Jean Valjean preserved silence . 
Thenardier resumed , pushing the rag which served him as a cravat to the level of his Adam 's apple , a gesture which completes the capable air of a serious man : `` After all , you acted wisely . 
The workmen , when they come to-morrow to stop up that hole , would certainly have found the stiff abandoned there , and it might have been possible , thread by thread , straw by straw , to pick up the scent and reach you . 
Some one has passed through the sewer . 
Who ? 
Where did he get out ? 
Was he seen to come out ? 
The police are full of cleverness . 
The sewer is treacherous and tells tales of you . 
Such a find is a rarity , it attracts attention , very few people make use of the sewers for their affairs , while the river belongs to everybody . 
The river is the true grave . 
At the end of a month they fish up your man in the nets at Saint-Cloud . 
Well , what does one care for that ? 
It 's carrion ! 
Who killed that man ? 
Paris . 
And justice makes no inquiries . 
You have done well . '' 
The more loquacious Thenardier became , the more mute was Jean Valjean . 
Again Thenardier shook him by the shoulder . 
`` Now let 's settle this business . 
Let 's go shares . 
You have seen my key , show me your money . '' 
Thenardier was haggard , fierce , suspicious , rather menacing , yet amicable . 
There was one singular circumstance ; Thenardier 's manners were not simple ; he had not the air of being wholly at his ease ; while affecting an air of mystery , he spoke low ; from time to time he laid his finger on his mouth , and muttered , `` hush ! '' 
It was difficult to divine why . 
There was no one there except themselves . 
Jean Valjean thought that other ruffians might possibly be concealed in some nook , not very far off , and that Thenardier did not care to share with them . 
Thenardier resumed : `` Let 's settle up . 
How much did the stiff have in his bags ? '' 
Jean Valjean searched his pockets . 
It was his habit , as the reader will remember , to always have some money about him . 
The mournful life of expedients to which he had been condemned imposed this as a law upon him . 
On this occasion , however , he had been caught unprepared . 
When donning his uniform of a National Guardsman on the preceding evening , he had forgotten , dolefully absorbed as he was , to take his pocket-book . 
He had only some small change in his fob . 
He turned out his pocket , all soaked with ooze , and spread out on the banquette of the vault one louis d'or , two five-franc pieces , and five or six large sous . 
Thenardier thrust out his lower lip with a significant twist of the neck . 
`` You knocked him over cheap , '' said he . 
He set to feeling the pockets of Jean Valjean and Marius , with the greatest familiarity . 
Jean Valjean , who was chiefly concerned in keeping his back to the light , let him have his way . 
While handling Marius ' coat , Thenardier , with the skill of a pickpocket , and without being noticed by Jean Valjean , tore off a strip which he concealed under his blouse , probably thinking that this morsel of stuff might serve , later on , to identify the assassinated man and the assassin . 
However , he found no more than the thirty francs . 
`` That 's true , '' said he , `` both of you together have no more than that . '' 
And , forgetting his motto : `` half shares , '' he took all . 
He hesitated a little over the large sous . 
After due reflection , he took them also , muttering : `` Never mind ! 
You cut folks ' throats too cheap altogether . '' 
That done , he once more drew the big key from under his blouse . 
`` Now , my friend , you must leave . 
It 's like the fair here , you pay when you go out . 
You have paid , now clear out . '' 
And he began to laugh . 
Had he , in lending to this stranger the aid of his key , and in making some other man than himself emerge from that portal , the pure and disinterested intention of rescuing an assassin ? 
We may be permitted to doubt this . 
Thenardier helped Jean Valjean to replace Marius on his shoulders , then he betook himself to the grating on tiptoe , and barefooted , making Jean Valjean a sign to follow him , looked out , laid his finger on his mouth , and remained for several seconds , as though in suspense ; his inspection finished , he placed the key in the lock . 
The bolt slipped back and the gate swung open . 
It neither grated nor squeaked . 
It moved very softly . 
It was obvious that this gate and those hinges , carefully oiled , were in the habit of opening more frequently than was supposed . 
This softness was suspicious ; it hinted at furtive goings and comings , silent entrances and exits of nocturnal men , and the wolf-like tread of crime . 
The sewer was evidently an accomplice of some mysterious band . 
This taciturn grating was a receiver of stolen goods . 
Thenardier opened the gate a little way , allowing just sufficient space for Jean Valjean to pass out , closed the grating again , gave the key a double turn in the lock and plunged back into the darkness , without making any more noise than a breath . 
He seemed to walk with the velvet paws of a tiger . 
A moment later , that hideous providence had retreated into the invisibility . 
Jean Valjean found himself in the open air . 
MARIUS PRODUCES ON SOME ONE WHO IS A JUDGE OF THE MATTER , THE EFFECT OF BEING DEAD He allowed Marius to slide down upon the shore . 
They were in the open air ! 
The miasmas , darkness , horror lay behind him . 
The pure , healthful , living , joyous air that was easy to breathe inundated him . 
Everywhere around him reigned silence , but that charming silence when the sun has set in an unclouded azure sky . 
Twilight had descended ; night was drawing on , the great deliverer , the friend of all those who need a mantle of darkness that they may escape from an anguish . 
The sky presented itself in all directions like an enormous calm . 
The river flowed to his feet with the sound of a kiss . 
The aerial dialogue of the nests bidding each other good night in the elms of the Champs-Elysees was audible . 
A few stars , daintily piercing the pale blue of the zenith , and visible to revery alone , formed imperceptible little splendors amid the immensity . 
Evening was unfolding over the head of Jean Valjean all the sweetness of the infinite . 
It was that exquisite and undecided hour which says neither yes nor no . 
Night was already sufficiently advanced to render it possible to lose oneself at a little distance and yet there was sufficient daylight to permit of recognition at close quarters . 
For several seconds , Jean Valjean was irresistibly overcome by that august and caressing serenity ; such moments of oblivion do come to men ; suffering refrains from harassing the unhappy wretch ; everything is eclipsed in the thoughts ; peace broods over the dreamer like night ; and , beneath the twilight which beams and in imitation of the sky which is illuminated , the soul becomes studded with stars . 
Jean Valjean could not refrain from contemplating that vast , clear shadow which rested over him ; thoughtfully he bathed in the sea of ecstasy and prayer in the majestic silence of the eternal heavens . 
Then he bent down swiftly to Marius , as though the sentiment of duty had returned to him , and , dipping up water in the hollow of his hand , he gently sprinkled a few drops on the latter 's face . 
Marius ' eyelids did not open ; but his half-open mouth still breathed . 
Jean Valjean was on the point of dipping his hand in the river once more , when , all at once , he experienced an indescribable embarrassment , such as a person feels when there is some one behind him whom he does not see . 
We have already alluded to this impression , with which everyone is familiar . 
He turned round . 
Some one was , in fact , behind him , as there had been a short while before . 
A man of lofty stature , enveloped in a long coat , with folded arms , and bearing in his right fist a bludgeon of which the leaden head was visible , stood a few paces in the rear of the spot where Jean Valjean was crouching over Marius . 
With the aid of the darkness , it seemed a sort of apparition . 
An ordinary man would have been alarmed because of the twilight , a thoughtful man on account of the bludgeon . 
Jean Valjean recognized Javert . 
The reader has divined , no doubt , that Thenardier 's pursuer was no other than Javert . 
Javert , after his unlooked-for escape from the barricade , had betaken himself to the prefecture of police , had rendered a verbal account to the Prefect in person in a brief audience , had then immediately gone on duty again , which implied -- the note , the reader will recollect , which had been captured on his person -- a certain surveillance of the shore on the right bank of the Seine near the Champs-Elysees , which had , for some time past , aroused the attention of the police . 
There he had caught sight of Thenardier and had followed him . 
The reader knows the rest . 
Thus it will be easily understood that that grating , so obligingly opened to Jean Valjean , was a bit of cleverness on Thenardier 's part . 
Thenardier intuitively felt that Javert was still there ; the man spied upon has a scent which never deceives him ; it was necessary to fling a bone to that sleuth-hound . 
An assassin , what a godsend ! 
Such an opportunity must never be allowed to slip . 
Thenardier , by putting Jean Valjean outside in his stead , provided a prey for the police , forced them to relinquish his scent , made them forget him in a bigger adventure , repaid Javert for his waiting , which always flatters a spy , earned thirty francs , and counted with certainty , so far as he himself was concerned , on escaping with the aid of this diversion . 
Jean Valjean had fallen from one danger upon another . 
These two encounters , this falling one after the other , from Thenardier upon Javert , was a rude shock . 
Javert did not recognize Jean Valjean , who , as we have stated , no longer looked like himself . 
He did not unfold his arms , he made sure of his bludgeon in his fist , by an imperceptible movement , and said in a curt , calm voice : `` Who are you ? '' 
`` I. '' `` Who is ` I ' ? '' 
`` Jean Valjean . '' 
Javert thrust his bludgeon between his teeth , bent his knees , inclined his body , laid his two powerful hands on the shoulders of Jean Valjean , which were clamped within them as in a couple of vices , scrutinized him , and recognized him . 
Their faces almost touched . 
Javert 's look was terrible . 
Jean Valjean remained inert beneath Javert 's grasp , like a lion submitting to the claws of a lynx . 
`` Inspector Javert , '' said he , `` you have me in your power . 
Moreover , I have regarded myself as your prisoner ever since this morning . 
I did not give you my address with any intention of escaping from you . 
Take me . 
Only grant me one favor . '' 
Javert did not appear to hear him . 
He kept his eyes riveted on Jean Valjean . 
His chin being contracted , thrust his lips upwards towards his nose , a sign of savage revery . 
At length he released Jean Valjean , straightened himself stiffly up without bending , grasped his bludgeon again firmly , and , as though in a dream , he murmured rather than uttered this question : `` What are you doing here ? 
And who is this man ? '' 
He still abstained from addressing Jean Valjean as thou . 
Jean Valjean replied , and the sound of his voice appeared to rouse Javert : `` It is with regard to him that I desire to speak to you . 
Dispose of me as you see fit ; but first help me to carry him home . 
That is all that I ask of you . '' 
Javert 's face contracted as was always the case when any one seemed to think him capable of making a concession . 
Nevertheless , he did not say `` no . '' 
Again he bent over , drew from his pocket a handkerchief which he moistened in the water and with which he then wiped Marius ' blood-stained brow . 
`` This man was at the barricade , '' said he in a low voice and as though speaking to himself . 
`` He is the one they called Marius . '' 
A spy of the first quality , who had observed everything , listened to everything , and taken in everything , even when he thought that he was to die ; who had played the spy even in his agony , and who , with his elbows leaning on the first step of the sepulchre , had taken notes . 
He seized Marius ' hand and felt his pulse . 
`` He is wounded , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` He is a dead man , '' said Javert . 
Jean Valjean replied : `` No . 
Not yet . '' 
`` So you have brought him thither from the barricade ? '' 
remarked Javert . 
His preoccupation must indeed have been very profound for him not to insist on this alarming rescue through the sewer , and for him not to even notice Jean Valjean 's silence after his question . 
Jean Valjean , on his side , seemed to have but one thought . 
He resumed : `` He lives in the Marais , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , with his grandfather . 
I do not recollect his name . '' 
Jean Valjean fumbled in Marius ' coat , pulled out his pocket-book , opened it at the page which Marius had pencilled , and held it out to Javert . 
There was still sufficient light to admit of reading . 
Besides this , Javert possessed in his eye the feline phosphorescence of night birds . 
He deciphered the few lines written by Marius , and muttered : `` Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-duCalvaire , No. 6 . '' 
Then he exclaimed : `` Coachman ! '' 
The reader will remember that the hackney-coach was waiting in case of need . 
Javert kept Marius ' pocket-book . 
A moment later , the carriage , which had descended by the inclined plane of the watering-place , was on the shore . 
Marius was laid upon the back seat , and Javert seated himself on the front seat beside Jean Valjean . 
The door slammed , and the carriage drove rapidly away , ascending the quays in the direction of the Bastille . 
They quitted the quays and entered the streets . 
The coachman , a black form on his box , whipped up his thin horses . 
A glacial silence reigned in the carriage . 
Marius , motionless , with his body resting in the corner , and his head drooping on his breast , his arms hanging , his legs stiff , seemed to be awaiting only a coffin ; Jean Valjean seemed made of shadow , and Javert of stone , and in that vehicle full of night , whose interior , every time that it passed in front of a street lantern , appeared to be turned lividly wan , as by an intermittent flash of lightning , chance had united and seemed to be bringing face to face the three forms of tragic immobility , the corpse , the spectre , and the statue . 
RETURN OF THE SON WHO WAS PRODIGAL OF HIS LIFE At every jolt over the pavement , a drop of blood trickled from Marius ' hair . 
Night had fully closed in when the carriage arrived at No. 6 , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
Javert was the first to alight ; he made sure with one glance of the number on the carriage gate , and , raising the heavy knocker of beaten iron , embellished in the old style , with a male goat and a satyr confronting each other , he gave a violent peal . 
The gate opened a little way and Javert gave it a push . 
The porter half made his appearance yawning , vaguely awake , and with a candle in his hand . 
Everyone in the house was asleep . 
People go to bed betimes in the Marais , especially on days when there is a revolt . 
This good , old quarter , terrified at the Revolution , takes refuge in slumber , as children , when they hear the Bugaboo coming , hide their heads hastily under their coverlet . 
In the meantime Jean Valjean and the coachman had taken Marius out of the carriage , Jean Valjean supporting him under the armpits , and the coachman under the knees . 
As they thus bore Marius , Jean Valjean slipped his hand under the latter 's clothes , which were broadly rent , felt his breast , and assured himself that his heart was still beating . 
It was even beating a little less feebly , as though the movement of the carriage had brought about a certain fresh access of life . 
Javert addressed the porter in a tone befitting the government , and the presence of the porter of a factious person . 
`` Some person whose name is Gillenormand ? '' 
`` Here . 
What do you want with him ? '' 
`` His son is brought back . '' 
`` His son ? '' 
said the porter stupidly . 
`` He is dead . '' 
Jean Valjean , who , soiled and tattered , stood behind Javert , and whom the porter was surveying with some horror , made a sign to him with his head that this was not so . 
The porter did not appear to understand either Javert 's words or Jean Valjean 's sign . 
Javert continued : `` He went to the barricade , and here he is . '' 
`` To the barricade ? '' 
ejaculated the porter . 
`` He has got himself killed . 
Go waken his father . '' 
The porter did not stir . 
`` Go along with you ! '' 
repeated Javert . 
And he added : `` There will be a funeral here to-morrow . '' 
For Javert , the usual incidents of the public highway were categorically classed , which is the beginning of foresight and surveillance , and each contingency had its own compartment ; all possible facts were arranged in drawers , as it were , whence they emerged on occasion , in variable quantities ; in the street , uproar , revolt , carnival , and funeral . 
The porter contented himself with waking Basque . 
Basque woke Nicolette ; Nicolette roused great-aunt Gillenormand . 
As for the grandfather , they let him sleep on , thinking that he would hear about the matter early enough in any case . 
Marius was carried up to the first floor , without any one in the other parts of the house being aware of the fact , and deposited on an old sofa in M. Gillenormand 's antechamber ; and while Basque went in search of a physician , and while Nicolette opened the linen-presses , Jean Valjean felt Javert touch him on the shoulder . 
He understood and descended the stairs , having behind him the step of Javert who was following him . 
The porter watched them take their departure as he had watched their arrival , in terrified somnolence . 
They entered the carriage once more , and the coachman mounted his box . 
`` Inspector Javert , '' said Jean , `` grant me yet another favor . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
demanded Javert roughly . 
`` Let me go home for one instant . 
Then you shall do whatever you like with me . '' 
Javert remained silent for a few moments , with his chin drawn back into the collar of his great-coat , then he lowered the glass and front : `` Driver , '' said he , `` Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
CONCUSSION IN THE ABSOLUTE They did not open their lips again during the whole space of their ride . 
What did Jean Valjean want ? 
To finish what he had begun ; to warn Cosette , to tell her where Marius was , to give her , possibly , some other useful information , to take , if he could , certain final measures . 
As for himself , so far as he was personally concerned , all was over ; he had been seized by Javert and had not resisted ; any other man than himself in like situation would , perhaps , have had some vague thoughts connected with the rope which Thenardier had given him , and of the bars of the first cell that he should enter ; but , let us impress it upon the reader , after the Bishop , there had existed in Jean Valjean a profound hesitation in the presence of any violence , even when directed against himself . 
Suicide , that mysterious act of violence against the unknown which may contain , in a measure , the death of the soul , was impossible to Jean Valjean . 
At the entrance to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , the carriage halted , the way being too narrow to admit of the entrance of vehicles . 
Javert and Jean Valjean alighted . 
The coachman humbly represented to `` monsieur l'Inspecteur , '' that the Utrecht velvet of his carriage was all spotted with the blood of the assassinated man , and with mire from the assassin . 
That is the way he understood it . 
He added that an indemnity was due him . 
At the same time , drawing his certificate book from his pocket , he begged the inspector to have the goodness to write him `` a bit of an attestation . '' 
Javert thrust aside the book which the coachman held out to him , and said : `` How much do you want , including your time of waiting and the drive ? '' 
`` It comes to seven hours and a quarter , '' replied the man , `` and my velvet was perfectly new . 
Eighty francs , Mr. Inspector . '' 
Javert drew four napoleons from his pocket and dismissed the carriage . 
Jean Valjean fancied that it was Javert 's intention to conduct him on foot to the post of the Blancs-Manteaux or to the post of the Archives , both of which are close at hand . 
They entered the street . 
It was deserted as usual . 
Javert followed Jean Valjean . 
They reached No. 7 . 
Jean Valjean knocked . 
The door opened . 
`` It is well , '' said Javert . 
`` Go up stairs . '' 
He added with a strange expression , and as though he were exerting an effort in speaking in this manner : `` I will wait for you here . '' 
Jean Valjean looked at Javert . 
This mode of procedure was but little in accord with Javert 's habits . 
However , he could not be greatly surprised that Javert should now have a sort of haughty confidence in him , the confidence of the cat which grants the mouse liberty to the length of its claws , seeing that Jean Valjean had made up his mind to surrender himself and to make an end of it . 
He pushed open the door , entered the house , called to the porter who was in bed and who had pulled the cord from his couch : `` It is I ! '' 
and ascended the stairs . 
On arriving at the first floor , he paused . 
All sorrowful roads have their stations . 
The window on the landing-place , which was a sash-window , was open . 
As in many ancient houses , the staircase got its light from without and had a view on the street . 
The street-lantern , situated directly opposite , cast some light on the stairs , and thus effected some economy in illumination . 
Jean Valjean , either for the sake of getting the air , or mechanically , thrust his head out of this window . 
He leaned out over the street . 
It is short , and the lantern lighted it from end to end . 
Jean Valjean was overwhelmed with amazement ; there was no longer any one there . 
Javert had taken his departure . 
THE GRANDFATHER Basque and the porter had carried Marius into the drawing-room , as he still lay stretched out , motionless , on the sofa upon which he had been placed on his arrival . 
The doctor who had been sent for had hastened thither . 
Aunt Gillenormand had risen . 
Aunt Gillenormand went and came , in affright , wringing her hands and incapable of doing anything but saying : `` Heavens ! 
is it possible ? '' 
At times she added : `` Everything will be covered with blood . '' 
When her first horror had passed off , a certain philosophy of the situation penetrated her mind , and took form in the exclamation : `` It was bound to end in this way ! '' 
She did not go so far as : `` I told you so ! '' 
which is customary on this sort of occasion . 
At the physician 's orders , a camp bed had been prepared beside the sofa . 
The doctor examined Marius , and after having found that his pulse was still beating , that the wounded man had no very deep wound on his breast , and that the blood on the corners of his lips proceeded from his nostrils , he had him placed flat on the bed , without a pillow , with his head on the same level as his body , and even a trifle lower , and with his bust bare in order to facilitate respiration . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , on perceiving that they were undressing Marius , withdrew . 
She set herself to telling her beads in her own chamber . 
The trunk had not suffered any internal injury ; a bullet , deadened by the pocket-book , had turned aside and made the tour of his ribs with a hideous laceration , which was of no great depth , and consequently , not dangerous . 
The long , underground journey had completed the dislocation of the broken collar-bone , and the disorder there was serious . 
The arms had been slashed with sabre cuts . 
Not a single scar disfigured his face ; but his head was fairly covered with cuts ; what would be the result of these wounds on the head ? 
Would they stop short at the hairy cuticle , or would they attack the brain ? 
As yet , this could not be decided . 
A grave symptom was that they had caused a swoon , and that people do not always recover from such swoons . 
Moreover , the wounded man had been exhausted by hemorrhage . 
From the waist down , the barricade had protected the lower part of the body from injury . 
Basque and Nicolette tore up linen and prepared bandages ; Nicolette sewed them , Basque rolled them . 
As lint was lacking , the doctor , for the time being , arrested the bleeding with layers of wadding . 
Beside the bed , three candles burned on a table where the case of surgical instruments lay spread out . 
The doctor bathed Marius ' face and hair with cold water . 
A full pail was reddened in an instant . 
The porter , candle in hand , lighted them . 
The doctor seemed to be pondering sadly . 
From time to time , he made a negative sign with his head , as though replying to some question which he had inwardly addressed to himself . 
A bad sign for the sick man are these mysterious dialogues of the doctor with himself . 
At the moment when the doctor was wiping Marius ' face , and lightly touching his still closed eyes with his finger , a door opened at the end of the drawing-room , and a long , pallid figure made its appearance . 
This was the grandfather . 
The revolt had , for the past two days , deeply agitated , enraged and engrossed the mind of M. Gillenormand . 
He had not been able to sleep on the previous night , and he had been in a fever all day long . 
In the evening , he had gone to bed very early , recommending that everything in the house should be well barred , and he had fallen into a doze through sheer fatigue . 
Old men sleep lightly ; M. Gillenormand 's chamber adjoined the drawing-room , and in spite of all the precautions that had been taken , the noise had awakened him . 
Surprised at the rift of light which he saw under his door , he had risen from his bed , and had groped his way thither . 
He stood astonished on the threshold , one hand on the handle of the half-open door , with his head bent a little forward and quivering , his body wrapped in a white dressing-gown , which was straight and as destitute of folds as a winding-sheet ; and he had the air of a phantom who is gazing into a tomb . 
He saw the bed , and on the mattress that young man , bleeding , white with a waxen whiteness , with closed eyes and gaping mouth , and pallid lips , stripped to the waist , slashed all over with crimson wounds , motionless and brilliantly lighted up . 
The grandfather trembled from head to foot as powerfully as ossified limbs can tremble , his eyes , whose corneae were yellow on account of his great age , were veiled in a sort of vitreous glitter , his whole face assumed in an instant the earthy angles of a skull , his arms fell pendent , as though a spring had broken , and his amazement was betrayed by the outspreading of the fingers of his two aged hands , which quivered all over , his knees formed an angle in front , allowing , through the opening in his dressing-gown , a view of his poor bare legs , all bristling with white hairs , and he murmured : `` Marius ! '' 
`` Sir , '' said Basque , `` Monsieur has just been brought back . 
He went to the barricade , and ... '' `` He is dead ! '' 
cried the old man in a terrible voice . 
`` Ah ! 
The rascal ! '' 
Then a sort of sepulchral transformation straightened up this centenarian as erect as a young man . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` you are the doctor . 
Begin by telling me one thing . 
He is dead , is he not ? '' 
The doctor , who was at the highest pitch of anxiety , remained silent . 
M. Gillenormand wrung his hands with an outburst of terrible laughter . 
`` He is dead ! 
He is dead ! 
He is dead ! 
He has got himself killed on the barricades ! 
Out of hatred to me ! 
He did that to spite me ! 
Ah ! 
You blood-drinker ! 
This is the way he returns to me ! 
Misery of my life , he is dead ! '' 
He went to the window , threw it wide open as though he were stifling , and , erect before the darkness , he began to talk into the street , to the night : `` Pierced , sabred , exterminated , slashed , hacked in pieces ! 
Just look at that , the villain ! 
He knew well that I was waiting for him , and that I had had his room arranged , and that I had placed at the head of my bed his portrait taken when he was a little child ! 
He knew well that he had only to come back , and that I had been recalling him for years , and that I remained by my fireside , with my hands on my knees , not knowing what to do , and that I was mad over it ! 
You knew well , that you had but to return and to say : ` It is I , ' and you would have been the master of the house , and that I should have obeyed you , and that you could have done whatever you pleased with your old numskull of a grandfather ! 
you knew that well , and you said : `` No , he is a Royalist , I will not go ! 
And you went to the barricades , and you got yourself killed out of malice ! 
To revenge yourself for what I said to you about Monsieur le Duc de Berry . 
It is infamous ! 
Go to bed then and sleep tranquilly ! 
he is dead , and this is my awakening . '' 
The doctor , who was beginning to be uneasy in both quarters , quitted Marius for a moment , went to M. Gillenormand , and took his arm . 
The grandfather turned round , gazed at him with eyes which seemed exaggerated in size and bloodshot , and said to him calmly : `` I thank you , sir . 
I am composed , I am a man , I witnessed the death of Louis XVI. , I know how to bear events . 
One thing is terrible and that is to think that it is your newspapers which do all the mischief . 
You will have scribblers , chatterers , lawyers , orators , tribunes , discussions , progress , enlightenment , the rights of man , the liberty of the press , and this is the way that your children will be brought home to you . 
Ah ! 
Marius ! 
It is abominable ! 
Killed ! 
Dead before me ! 
A barricade ! 
Ah , the scamp ! 
Doctor , you live in this quarter , I believe ? 
Oh ! 
I know you well . 
I see your cabriolet pass my window . 
I am going to tell you . 
You are wrong to think that I am angry . 
One does not fly into a rage against a dead man . 
That would be stupid . 
This is a child whom I have reared . 
I was already old while he was very young . 
He played in the Tuileries garden with his little shovel and his little chair , and in order that the inspectors might not grumble , I stopped up the holes that he made in the earth with his shovel , with my cane . 
One day he exclaimed : Down with Louis XVIII . ! 
and off he went . 
It was no fault of mine . 
He was all rosy and blond . 
His mother is dead . 
Have you ever noticed that all little children are blond ? 
Why is it so ? 
He is the son of one of those brigands of the Loire , but children are innocent of their fathers ' crimes . 
I remember when he was no higher than that . 
He could not manage to pronounce his Ds . 
He had a way of talking that was so sweet and indistinct that you would have thought it was a bird chirping . 
I remember that once , in front of the Hercules Farnese , people formed a circle to admire him and marvel at him , he was so handsome , was that child ! 
He had a head such as you see in pictures . 
I talked in a deep voice , and I frightened him with my cane , but he knew very well that it was only to make him laugh . 
In the morning , when he entered my room , I grumbled , but he was like the sunlight to me , all the same . 
One can not defend oneself against those brats . 
They take hold of you , they hold you fast , they never let you go again . 
The truth is , that there never was a cupid like that child . 
Now , what can you say for your Lafayettes , your Benjamin Constants , and your Tirecuir de Corcelles who have killed him ? 
This can not be allowed to pass in this fashion . '' 
He approached Marius , who still lay livid and motionless , and to whom the physician had returned , and began once more to wring his hands . 
The old man 's pallid lips moved as though mechanically , and permitted the passage of words that were barely audible , like breaths in the death agony : `` Ah ! 
heartless lad ! 
Ah ! 
clubbist ! 
Ah ! 
wretch ! 
Ah ! 
Septembrist ! '' 
Reproaches in the low voice of an agonizing man , addressed to a corpse . 
Little by little , as it is always indispensable that internal eruptions should come to the light , the sequence of words returned , but the grandfather appeared no longer to have the strength to utter them , his voice was so weak , and extinct , that it seemed to come from the other side of an abyss : `` It is all the same to me , I am going to die too , that I am . 
And to think that there is not a hussy in Paris who would not have been delighted to make this wretch happy ! 
A scamp who , instead of amusing himself and enjoying life , went off to fight and get himself shot down like a brute ! 
And for whom ? 
Why ? 
For the Republic ! 
Instead of going to dance at the Chaumiere , as it is the duty of young folks to do ! 
What 's the use of being twenty years old ? 
The Republic , a cursed pretty folly ! 
Poor mothers , beget fine boys , do ! 
Come , he is dead . 
That will make two funerals under the same carriage gate . 
So you have got yourself arranged like this for the sake of General Lamarque 's handsome eyes ! 
What had that General Lamarque done to you ? 
A slasher ! 
A chatter-box ! 
To get oneself killed for a dead man ! 
If that is n't enough to drive any one mad ! 
Just think of it ! 
At twenty ! 
And without so much as turning his head to see whether he was not leaving something behind him ! 
That 's the way poor , good old fellows are forced to die alone , now-adays . 
Perish in your corner , owl ! 
Well , after all , so much the better , that is what I was hoping for , this will kill me on the spot . 
I am too old , I am a hundred years old , I am a hundred thousand years old , I ought , by rights , to have been dead long ago . 
This blow puts an end to it . 
So all is over , what happiness ! 
What is the good of making him inhale ammonia and all that parcel of drugs ? 
You are wasting your trouble , you fool of a doctor ! 
Come , he 's dead , completely dead . 
I know all about it , I am dead myself too . 
He has n't done things by half . 
Yes , this age is infamous , infamous and that 's what I think of you , of your ideas , of your systems , of your masters , of your oracles , of your doctors , of your scape-graces of writers , of your rascally philosophers , and of all the revolutions which , for the last sixty years , have been frightening the flocks of crows in the Tuileries ! 
But you were pitiless in getting yourself killed like this , I shall not even grieve over your death , do you understand , you assassin ? '' 
At that moment , Marius slowly opened his eyes , and his glance , still dimmed by lethargic wonder , rested on M. Gillenormand . 
`` Marius ! '' 
cried the old man . 
`` Marius ! 
My little Marius ! 
my child ! 
my well-beloved son ! 
You open your eyes , you gaze upon me , you are alive , thanks ! '' 
And he fell fainting . 
Javert passed slowly down the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
He walked with drooping head for the first time in his life , and likewise , for the first time in his life , with his hands behind his back . 
Up to that day , Javert had borrowed from Napoleon 's attitudes , only that which is expressive of resolution , with arms folded across the chest ; that which is expressive of uncertainty -- with the hands behind the back -- had been unknown to him . 
Now , a change had taken place ; his whole person , slow and sombre , was stamped with anxiety . 
He plunged into the silent streets . 
Nevertheless , he followed one given direction . 
He took the shortest cut to the Seine , reached the Quai des Ormes , skirted the quay , passed the Greve , and halted at some distance from the post of the Place du Chatelet , at the angle of the Pont Notre-Dame . 
There , between the Notre-Dame and the Pont au Change on the one hand , and the Quai de la Megisserie and the Quai aux Fleurs on the other , the Seine forms a sort of square lake , traversed by a rapid . 
This point of the Seine is dreaded by mariners . 
Nothing is more dangerous than this rapid , hemmed in , at that epoch , and irritated by the piles of the mill on the bridge , now demolished . 
The two bridges , situated thus close together , augment the peril ; the water hurries in formidable wise through the arches . 
It rolls in vast and terrible waves ; it accumulates and piles up there ; the flood attacks the piles of the bridges as though in an effort to pluck them up with great liquid ropes . 
Men who fall in there never re-appear ; the best of swimmers are drowned there . 
Javert leaned both elbows on the parapet , his chin resting in both hands , and , while his nails were mechanically twined in the abundance of his whiskers , he meditated . 
A novelty , a revolution , a catastrophe had just taken place in the depths of his being ; and he had something upon which to examine himself . 
Javert was undergoing horrible suffering . 
For several hours , Javert had ceased to be simple . 
He was troubled ; that brain , so limpid in its blindness , had lost its transparency ; that crystal was clouded . 
Javert felt duty divided within his conscience , and he could not conceal the fact from himself . 
When he had so unexpectedly encountered Jean Valjean on the banks of the Seine , there had been in him something of the wolf which regains his grip on his prey , and of the dog who finds his master again . 
He beheld before him two paths , both equally straight , but he beheld two ; and that terrified him ; him , who had never in all his life known more than one straight line . 
And , the poignant anguish lay in this , that the two paths were contrary to each other . 
One of these straight lines excluded the other . 
Which of the two was the true one ? 
His situation was indescribable . 
To owe his life to a malefactor , to accept that debt and to repay it ; to be , in spite of himself , on a level with a fugitive from justice , and to repay his service with another service ; to allow it to be said to him , `` Go , '' and to say to the latter in his turn : `` Be free '' ; to sacrifice to personal motives duty , that general obligation , and to be conscious , in those personal motives , of something that was also general , and , perchance , superior , to betray society in order to remain true to his conscience ; that all these absurdities should be realized and should accumulate upon him , -- this was what overwhelmed him . 
One thing had amazed him , -- this was that Jean Valjean should have done him a favor , and one thing petrified him , -- that he , Javert , should have done Jean Valjean a favor . 
Where did he stand ? 
He sought to comprehend his position , and could no longer find his bearings . 
What was he to do now ? 
To deliver up Jean Valjean was bad ; to leave Jean Valjean at liberty was bad . 
In the first case , the man of authority fell lower than the man of the galleys , in the second , a convict rose above the law , and set his foot upon it . 
In both cases , dishonor for him , Javert . 
There was disgrace in any resolution at which he might arrive . 
