And the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer , and everybody joined in with all their might , and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting out . 
Music is a good thing ; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash I never see it freshen up things so , and sound so honest and bully . 
Then the king begins to work his jaw again , and says how him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family would take supper here with them this evening , and help set up with the ashes of the diseased ; and says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak he knows who he would name , for they was names that was very dear to him , and mentioned often in his letters ; and so he will name the same , to wit , as follows , vizz. : -- Rev. Mr. Hobson , and Deacon Lot Hovey , and Mr. Ben Rucker , and Abner Shackleford , and Levi Bell , and Dr. Robinson , and their wives , and the widow Bartley . 
Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting together -- that is , I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t ` other world , and the preacher was pinting him right . 
Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville on business . 
But the rest was on hand , and so they all come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him ; and then they shook hands with the duke and did n't say nothing , but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads whilst he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said `` Goo-goo -- goo-goo-goo '' all the time , like a baby that ca n't talk . 
So the king he blattered along , and managed to inquire about pretty much everybody and dog in town , by his name , and mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or another in the town , or to George 's family , or to Peter . 
And he always let on that Peter wrote him the things ; but that was a lie : he got every blessed one of them out of that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat . 
Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind , and the king he read it out loud and cried over it . 
It give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars , gold , to the girls ; and it give the tanyard -LRB- which was doing a good business -RRB- , along with some other houses and land -LRB- worth about seven thousand -RRB- , and three thousand dollars in gold to Harvey and William , and told where the six thousand cash was hid down cellar . 
