We was very well satisfied with this business , and Tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took , because he said NOW she could n't ever count them spoons twice alike again to save her life ; and would n't believe she 'd counted them right if she DID ; and said that after she 'd about counted her head off for the next three days he judged she 'd give it up and offer to kill anybody that wanted her to ever count them any more . 
So we put the sheet back on the line that night , and stole one out of her closet ; and kept on putting it back and stealing it again for a couple of days till she did n't know how many sheets she had any more , and she did n't CARE , and war n't a-going to bullyrag the rest of her soul out about it , and would n't count them again not to save her life ; she druther die first . 
So we was all right now , as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon and the candles , by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up counting ; and as to the candlestick , it war n't no consequence , it would blow over by and by . 
But that pie was a job ; we had no end of trouble with that pie . 
We fixed it up away down in the woods , and cooked it there ; and we got it done at last , and very satisfactory , too ; but not all in one day ; and we had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through , and we got burnt pretty much all over , in places , and eyes put out with the smoke ; because , you see , we did n't want nothing but a crust , and we could n't prop it up right , and she would always cave in . 
But of course we thought of the right way at last -- which was to cook the ladder , too , in the pie . 
So then we laid in with Jim the second night , and tore up the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together , and long before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person with . 
We let on it took nine months to make it . 
And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods , but it would n't go into the pie . 
Being made of a whole sheet , that way , there was rope enough for forty pies if we 'd a wanted them , and plenty left over for soup , or sausage , or anything you choose . 
