When I got to where I found the boy I see I could n't cut the bullet out without some help , and he war n't in no condition for me to leave to go and get help ; and he got a little worse and a little worse , and after a long time he went out of his head , and would n't let me come a-nigh him any more , and said if I chalked his raft he 'd kill me , and no end of wild foolishness like that , and I see I could n't do anything at all with him ; so I says , I got to have HELP somehow ; and the minute I says it out crawls this nigger from somewheres and says he 'll help , and he done it , too , and done it very well . 
Of course I judged he must be a runaway nigger , and there I WAS ! 
and there I had to stick right straight along all the rest of the day and all night . 
It was a fix , I tell you ! 
I had a couple of patients with the chills , and of course I 'd of liked to run up to town and see them , but I das n't , because the nigger might get away , and then I 'd be to blame ; and yet never a skiff come close enough for me to hail . 
So there I had to stick plumb until daylight this morning ; and I never see a nigger that was a better nuss or faithfuller , and yet he was risking his freedom to do it , and was all tired out , too , and I see plain enough he 'd been worked main hard lately . 
I liked the nigger for that ; I tell you , gentlemen , a nigger like that is worth a thousand dollars -- and kind treatment , too . 
I had everything I needed , and the boy was doing as well there as he would a done at home -- better , maybe , because it was so quiet ; but there I WAS , with both of 'm on my hands , and there I had to stick till about dawn this morning ; then some men in a skiff come by , and as good luck would have it the nigger was setting by the pallet with his head propped on his knees sound asleep ; so I motioned them in quiet , and they slipped up on him and grabbed him and tied him before he knowed what he was about , and we never had no trouble . 
And the boy being in a kind of a flighty sleep , too , we muffled the oars and hitched the raft on , and towed her over very nice and quiet , and the nigger never made the least row nor said a word from the start . 
He ai n't no bad nigger , gentlemen ; that 's what I think about him . '' 
