And then when I went up to bed she come up with me and fetched her candle , and tucked me in , and mothered me so good I felt mean , and like I could n't look her in the face ; and she set down on the bed and talked with me a long time , and said what a splendid boy Sid was , and did n't seem to want to ever stop talking about him ; and kept asking me every now and then if I reckoned he could a got lost , or hurt , or maybe drownded , and might be laying at this minute somewheres suffering or dead , and she not by him to help him , and so the tears would drip down silent , and I would tell her that Sid was all right , and would be home in the morning , sure ; and she would squeeze my hand , or maybe kiss me , and tell me to say it again , and keep on saying it , because it done her good , and she was in so much trouble . 
And when she was going away she looked down in my eyes so steady and gentle , and says : `` The door ai n't going to be locked , Tom , and there 's the window and the rod ; but you 'll be good , WO N'T you ? 
And you wo n't go ? 
For MY sake . '' 
Laws knows I WANTED to go bad enough to see about Tom , and was all intending to go ; but after that I would n't a went , not for kingdoms . 
But she was on my mind and Tom was on my mind , so I slept very restless . 
And twice I went down the rod away in the night , and slipped around front , and see her setting there by her candle in the window with her eyes towards the road and the tears in them ; and I wished I could do something for her , but I could n't , only to swear that I would n't never do nothing to grieve her any more . 
And the third time I waked up at dawn , and slid down , and she was there yet , and her candle was most out , and her old gray head was resting on her hand , and she was asleep . 
THE old man was uptown again before breakfast , but could n't get no track of Tom ; and both of them set at the table thinking , and not saying nothing , and looking mournful , and their coffee getting cold , and not eating anything . 
And by and by the old man says : `` Did I give you the letter ? '' 
