He too worships fire ; most faithful , broad , baronial vassal of the sun ! 
-- Oh that these too-favoring eyes should see these too-favoring sights . 
Look ! 
here , far water-locked ; beyond all hum of human weal or woe ; in these most candid and impartial seas ; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets ; where for long Chinese ages , the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to , as stars that shine upon the Niger 's unknown source ; here , too , life dies sunwards full of faith , but see ! 
no sooner dead , than death whirls round the corpse , and it heads some other way . 
`` Oh , thou dark Hindoo half of nature , who of drowned bones hast builded thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas ; thou art an infidel , thou queen , and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering Typhoon , and the hushed burial of its after calm . 
Nor has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head , and then gone round again , without a lesson to me . 
`` Oh , trebly hooped and welded hip of power ! 
Oh , high aspiring , rainbowed jet ! 
-- that one strivest , this one jettest all in vain ! 
In vain , oh whale , dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun , that only calls forth life , but gives it not again . 
Yet dost thou darker half , rock me with a prouder , if a darker faith . 
All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me here ; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things , exhaled as air , but water now . 
`` Then hail , for ever hail , O sea , in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl finds his only rest . 
Born of earth , yet suckled by the sea ; though hill and valley mothered me , ye billows are my foster-brothers ! '' 
The Whale Watch The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart ; one , far to windward ; one less distant , to leeward ; one ahead ; one astern . 
These last three were brought alongside ere nightfall ; but the windward one could not be reached till morning ; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night ; and that boat was Ahab 's . 
The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale 's spout-hole ; and the lantern hanging from its top , cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black , glossy back , and far out upon the midnight waves , which gently chafed the whale 's broad flank , like soft surf upon a beach . 
Ahab and all his boat 's crew seemed asleep but the Parsee ; who crouching in the bow , sat watching the sharks , that spectrally played round the whale , and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails . 
A sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah , ran shuddering through the air . 
Started from his slumbers , Ahab , face to face , saw the Parsee ; and hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world . 
`` I have dreamed it again , '' said he . 
`` Of the hearses ? 
Have I not said , old man , that neither hearse nor coffin can be thine ? '' 
`` And who are hearsed that die on the sea ? '' 
`` But I said , old man , that ere thou couldst die on this voyage , two hearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea ; the first not made by mortal hands ; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America . '' 
`` Aye , aye ! 
a strange sight that , Parsee ! 
-- a hearse and its plumes floating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers . 
Ha ! 
Such a sight we shall not soon see . '' 
`` Believe it or not , thou canst not die till it be seen , old man . '' 
`` And what was that saying about thyself ? '' 
`` Though it come to the last , I shall still go before thee thy pilot . '' 
`` And when thou art so gone before -- if that ever befall -- then ere I can follow , thou must still appear to me , to pilot me still ? 
-- Was it not so ? 
Well , then , did I believe all ye say , oh my pilot ! 
I have here two pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it . '' 
`` Take another pledge , old man , '' said the Parsee , as his eyes lighted up like fire-flies in the gloom -- `` Hemp only can kill thee . '' 
`` The gallows , ye mean . 
-- I am immortal then , on land and on sea , '' cried Ahab , with a laugh of derision ; -- `` Immortal on land and on sea ! '' 
Both were silent again , as one man . 
The grey dawn came on , and the slumbering crew arose from the boat 's bottom , and ere noon the dead whale was brought to the ship . 
The Quadrant The season for the Line at length drew near ; and every day when Ahab , coming from his cabin cast his eyes aloft , the vigilant helmsman would ostentatiously handle his spokes , and the eager mariners quickly run to the braces , and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the nailed doubloon ; impatient for the order to point the ship 's prow for the equator . 
In good time the order came . 
It was hard upon high noon ; and Ahab , seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat , was about taking his wonted daily observation of the sun to determine his latitude . 
Now , in that Japanese sea , the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences . 
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy ocean 's immeasurable burning-glass . 
The sky looks lacquered ; clouds there are none ; the horizon floats ; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the insufferable splendors of God 's throne . 
Well that Ahab 's quadrant was furnished with colored glasses , through which to take sight of that solar fire . 
So , swinging his seated form to the roll of the ship , and with his astrological-looking instrument placed to his eye , he remained in that posture for some moments to catch the precise instant when the sun should gain its precise meridian . 
Meantime while his whole attention was absorbed , the Parsee was kneeling beneath him on the ship 's deck , and with face thrown up like Ahab 's , was eyeing the same sun with him ; only the lids of his eyes half hooded their orbs , and his wild face was subdued to an earthly passionlessness . 
At length the desired observation was taken ; and with his pencil upon his ivory leg , Ahab soon calculated what his latitude must be at that precise instant . 
Then falling into a moment 's revery , he again looked up towards the sun and murmured to himself : `` Thou seamark ! 
thou high and mighty Pilot ! 
thou tellest me truly where I am -- but canst thou cast the least hint where I shall be ? 
Or canst thou tell where some other thing besides me is this moment living ? 
Where is Moby Dick ? 
This instant thou must be eyeing him . 
These eyes of mine look into the very eye that is even now beholding him ; aye , and into the eye that is even now equally beholding the objects on the unknown , thither side of thee , thou sun ! '' 
Then gazing at his quadrant , and handling , one after the other , its numerous cabalistical contrivances , he pondered again , and muttered : `` Foolish toy ! 
babies ' plaything of haughty Admirals , and Commodores , and Captains ; the world brags of thee , of thy cunning and might ; but what after all canst thou do , but tell the poor , pitiful point , where thou thyself happenest to be on this wide planet , and the hand that holds thee : no ! 
not one jot more ! 
Thou canst not tell where one drop of water or one grain of sand will be to-morrow noon ; and yet with thy impotence thou insultest the sun ! 
Science ! 
Curse thee , thou vain toy ; and cursed be all the things that cast man 's eyes aloft to that heaven , whose live vividness but scorches him , as these old eyes are even now scorched with thy light , O sun ! 
Level by nature to this earth 's horizon are the glances of man 's eyes ; not shot from the crown of his head , as if God had meant him to gaze on his firmament . 
Curse thee , thou quadrant ! '' 
dashing it to the deck , `` no longer will I guide my earthly way by thee ; the level ship 's compass , and the level deadreckoning , by log and by line ; these shall conduct me , and show me my place on the sea . 
Aye , '' lighting from the boat to the deck , `` thus I trample on thee , thou paltry thing that feebly pointest on high ; thus I split and destroy thee ! '' 
As the frantic old man thus spoke and thus trampled with his live and dead feet , a sneering triumph that seemed meant for Ahab , and a fatalistic despair that seemed meant for himself -- these passed over the mute , motionless Parsee 's face . 
Unobserved he rose and glided away ; while , awestruck by the aspect of their commander , the seamen clustered together on the forecastle , till Ahab , troubledly pacing the deck , shouted out -- `` To the braces ! 
Up helm ! 
-- square in ! '' 
In an instant the yards swung round ; and as the ship half-wheeled upon her heel , her three firm-seated graceful masts erectly poised upon her long , ribbed hull , seemed as the three Horatii pirouetting on one sufficient steed . 
Standing between the knight-heads , Starbuck watched the Pequod 's tumultuous way , and Ahab 's also , as he went lurching along the deck . 
`` I have sat before the dense coal fire and watched it all aglow , full of its tormented flaming life ; and I have seen it wane at last , down , down , to dumbest dust . 
Old man of oceans ! 
of all this fiery life of thine , what will at length remain but one little heap of ashes ! '' 
`` Aye , '' cried Stubb , `` but sea-coal ashes -- mind ye that , Mr. Starbuck -- sea-coal , not your common charcoal . 
Well , well ! 
I heard Ahab mutter , ` Here some one thrusts these cards into these old hands of mine ; swears that I must play them , and no others . ' 
And damn me , Ahab , but thou actest right ; live in the game , and die in it ! '' 
The Candles Warmest climes but nurse the cruellest fangs : the tiger of Bengal crouches in spiced groves of ceaseless verdure . 
Skies the most effulgent but basket the deadliest thunders : gorgeous Cuba knows tornadoes that never swept tame northern lands . 
So , too , it is , that in these resplendent Japanese seas the mariner encounters the direst of all storms , the Typhoon . 
It will sometimes burst from out that cloudless sky , like an exploding bomb upon a dazed and sleepy town . 
Towards evening of that day , the Pequod was torn of her canvas , and bare-poled was left to fight a Typhoon which had struck her directly ahead . 
When darkness came on , sky and sea roared and split with the thunder , and blazed with the lightning , that showed the disabled mast fluttering here and there with the rags which the first fury of the tempest had left for its after sport . 
Holding by a shroud , Starbuck was standing on the quarter-deck ; at every flash of the lightning glancing aloft , to see what additional disaster might have befallen the intricate hamper there ; while Stubb and Flask were directing the men in the higher hoisting and firmer lashing of the boats . 
But all their pains seemed naught . 
Though lifted to the very top of the cranes , the windward quarter boat -LRB- Ahab 's -RRB- did not escape . 
A great rolling sea , dashing high up against the reeling ship 's high teetering side , stove in the boat 's bottom at the stern , and left it again , all dripping through like a sieve . 
`` Bad work , bad work ! 
Mr. Starbuck , '' said Stubb , regarding the wreck , `` but the sea will have its way . 
Stubb , for one , ca n't fight it . 
You see , Mr. Starbuck , a wave has such a great long start before it leaps , all round the world it runs , and then comes the spring ! 
But as for me , all the start I have to meet it , is just across the deck here . 
But never mind ; it 's all in fun : so the old song says ; '' -- -LRB- sings . -RRB- 
Oh ! 
