Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself , as his measureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others . 
But it is time to return to the Pequod . 
`` I fear not thy epidemic , man , '' said Ahab from the bulwarks , to Captain Mayhew , who stood in the boat 's stern ; `` come on board . '' 
But now Gabriel started to his feet . 
`` Think , think of the fevers , yellow and bilious ! 
Beware of the horrible plague ! '' 
`` Gabriel ! 
Gabriel ! '' 
cried Captain Mayhew ; `` thou must either - '' But that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead , and its seethings drowned all speech . 
`` Hast thou seen the White Whale ? '' 
demanded Ahab , when the boat drifted back . 
`` Think , think of thy whale-boat , stoven and sunk ! 
Beware of the horrible tail ! '' 
`` I tell thee again , Gabriel , that - '' But again the boat tore ahead as if dragged by fiends . 
Nothing was said for some moments , while a succession of riotous waves rolled by which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas were tumbling , not heaving it . 
Meantime , the hoisted sperm whale 's head jogged about very violently , and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant . 
When this interlude was over , Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning Moby Dick ; not , however , without frequent interruptions from Gabriel , whenever his name was mentioned , and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him . 
It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home , when upon speaking a whale-ship , her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick , and the havoc he had made . 
Greedily sucking in this intelligence , Gabriel solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale , in case the monster should be seen ; in his gibbering insanity , pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated ; the Shakers receiving the Bible . 
But when , some year or two afterwards , Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the mast-heads , Macey , the chief mate , burned with ardor to encounter him ; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the opportunity , despite all the archangel 's denunciations and forewarnings , Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat . 
With them he pushed off ; and , after much weary pulling , and many perilous , unsuccessful onsets , he at last succeeded in getting one iron fast . 
Meantime , Gabriel , ascending to the main-royal mast-head , was tossing one arm in frantic gestures , and hurling forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his divinity . 
Now , while Macey , the mate , was standing up in his boat 's bow , and with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations upon the whale , and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance , lo ! 
a broad white shadow rose from the sea ; by its quick , fanning motion , temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen . 
Next instant , the luckless mate , so full of furious life , was smitten bodily into the air , and making a long arc in his descent , fell into the sea at the distance of about fifty yards . 
Not a chip of the boat was harmed , nor a hair of any oarsman 's head ; but the mate for ever sank . 
It is well to parenthesize here , that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-Whale Fishery , this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any . 
Sometimes , nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated ; oftener the boat 's bow is knocked off , or the thigh-board , on which the headsman stands , is torn from its place and accompanies the body . 
But strangest of all is the circumstance , that in more instances than one , when the body has been recovered , not a single mark of violence is discernible the man being stark dead . 
The whole calamity , with the falling form of Macey , was plainly descried from the ship . 
Raising a piercing shriek -- `` The vial ! 
the vial ! '' 
Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale . 
This terrible event clothed the archangel with added influence ; because his credulous disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it , instead of only making a general prophecy , which any one might have done , and so have chanced to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed . 
He became a nameless terror to the ship . 
Mayhew having concluded his narration , Ahab put such questions to him , that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt the White Whale , if opportunity should offer . 
To which Ahab answered -- `` Aye . '' 
Straightway , then , Gabriel once more started to his feet , glaring upon the old man , and vehemently exclaimed , with downward pointed finger -- `` Think , think of the blasphemer -- dead , and down there ! 
-- beware of the blasphemer 's end ! '' 
Ahab stolidly turned aside ; then said to Mayhew , `` Captain , I have just bethought me of my letter-bag ; there is a letter for one of thy officers , if I mistake not . 
Starbuck , look over the bag . '' 
Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships , whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed , depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans . 
Thus , most letters never reach their mark ; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three years or more . 
Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand . 
It was sorely tumbled , damp , and covered with a dull , spotted , green mould , in consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin . 
Of such a letter , Death himself might well have been the post-boy . 
`` Can ` st not read it ? '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Give it me , man . 
Aye , aye , aye it 's but a dim scrawl ; -- what 's this ? '' 
As he was studying it out , Starbuck took a long cutting-spade pole , and with his knife slightly split the end , to insert the letter there , and in that way , hand it to the boat , without its coming any closer to the ship . 
Meantime , Ahab holding the letter , muttered , `` Mr. Har -- yes , Mr. Harry -- -LRB- a woman 's pinny hand , -- the man 's wife , I 'll wager -RRB- -- Aye -- Mr. Harry Macey , Ship Jeroboam ; why it 's Macey , and he 's dead ! '' 
`` Poor fellow ! 
poor fellow ! 
and from his wife , '' sighed Mayhew ; `` but let me have it . '' 
`` Nay , keep it thyself , '' cried Gabriel to Ahab ; `` thou art soon going that way . '' 
`` Curses throttle thee ! '' 
yelled Ahab . 
`` Captain Mayhew , stand by now to receive it '' ; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck 's hands , he caught it in the slit of the pole , and reached it over towards the boat . 
But as he did so , the oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing ; the boat drifted a little towards the ship 's stern ; so that , as if by magic , the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel 's eager hand . 
He clutched it in an instant , seized the boat-knife , and impaling the letter on it , sent it thus loaded back into the ship . 
It fell at Ahab 's feet . 
Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way with their oars , and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from the Pequod . 
As , after this interlude , the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the whale , many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair . 
The Monkey-Rope In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale , there is much running backwards and forwards among the crew . 
Now hands are wanted here , and then again hands are wanted there . 
There is no staying in any one place ; for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere . 
It is much the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene . 
We must now retrace our way a little . 
It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in the whale 's back , the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there cut by the spades of the mates . 
But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as that same hook get fixed in that hole ? 
It was inserted there by my particular friend Queequeg , whose duty it was , as harpooneer , to descend upon the monster 's back for the special purpose referred to . 
But in very many cases , circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the whole tensing or stripping operation is concluded . 
The whale , be it observed , lies almost entirely submerged , excepting the immediate parts operated upon . 
So down there , some ten feet below the level of the deck , the poor harpooneer flounders about , half on the whale and half in the water , as the vast mass revolves like a tread-mill beneath him . 
On the occasion in question , Queequeg figured in the Highland costume -- a shirt and socks -- in which to my eyes , at least , he appeared to uncommon advantage ; and no one had a better chance to observe him , as will presently be seen . 
Being the savage 's bowsman , that is , the person who pulled the bow-oar in his boat -LRB- the second one from forward -RRB- , it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale 's back . 
You have seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord . 
Just so , from the ship 's steep side , did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea , by what is technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope , attached to a strong strip of canvas belted round his waist . 
It was a humorously perilous business for both of us . 
For , before we proceed further , it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends ; fast to Queequeg 's broad canvas belt , and fast to my narrow leather one . 
So that for better or for worse , we two , for the time , were wedded ; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more , then both usage and honor demanded , that instead of cutting the cord , it should drag me down in his wake . 
So , then , an elongated Siamese ligature united us . 
Queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother ; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the hempen bond entailed . 
So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then , that while earnestly watching his motions , I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two ; that my free will had received a mortal wound ; and that another 's mistake or misfortune might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death . 
Therefore , I saw that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence ; for its even-handed equity never could have so gross an injustice . 
And yet still further pondering -- while I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship , which would threaten to jam him -- still further pondering , I say , I saw that this situation of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes ; only , in most cases , he , one way or other , has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of other mortals . 
If your banker breaks , you snap ; if your apothecary by mistake sends you poison in your pills , you die . 
True , you may say that , by exceeding caution , you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil chances of life . 
But handle Queequeg 's monkey-rope heedfully as I would , sometimes he jerked it so , that I came very near sliding overboard . 
Nor could I possibly forget that , do what I would , I only had the management of one end of it . 
* * The monkey-rope is found in all whalers ; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together . 
This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb , in order to afford to the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder . 
I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and the ship -- where he would occasionally fall , from the incessant rolling and swaying of both . 
But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to . 
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night , the sharks now freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow from the carcass -- the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive . 
And right in among those sharks was Queequeg ; who often pushed them aside with his floundering feet . 
A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale , the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom touch a man . 
Nevertheless , it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous finger in the pie , it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them . 
Accordingly , besides the monkey-rope , with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark -- he was provided with still another protection . 
