Old Captain Peleg , many years her chief-mate , before he commanded another vessel of his own , and now a retired seaman , and one of the principal owners of the Pequod , -- this old Peleg , during the term of his chief-mateship , had built upon her original grotesqueness , and inlaid it , all over , with a quaintness both of material and device , unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake 's carved buckler or bedstead . 
She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor , his neck heavy with pendants of polished ivory . 
She was a thing of trophies . 
A cannibal of a craft , tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies . 
All round , her unpanelled , open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw , with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale , inserted there for pins , to fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to . 
Those thews ran not through base blocks of land wood , but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory . 
Scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm , she sported there a tiller ; and that tiller was in one mass , curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe . 
The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest , felt like the Tartar , when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw . 
A noble craft , but somehow a most melancholy ! 
All noble things are touched with that . 
Now when I looked about the quarter-deck , for some one having authority , in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage , at first I saw nobody ; but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent , or rather wigwam , pitched a little behind the main-mast . 
It seemed only a temporary erection used in port . 
It was of a conical shape , some ten feet high ; consisting of the long , huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws of the right-whale . 
Planted with their broad ends on the deck , a circle of these slabs laced together , mutually sloped towards each other , and at the apex united in a tufted point , where the loose hairy fibres waved to and fro like a top-knot on some old Pottowotamie Sachem 's head . 
A triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship , so that the insider commanded a complete view forward . 
And half concealed in this queer tenement , I at length found one who by his aspect seemed to have authority ; and who , it being noon , and the ship 's work suspended , was now enjoying respite from the burden of command . 
He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair , wriggling all over with curious carving ; and the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam was constructed . 
There was nothing so very particular , perhaps , about the appearance of the elderly man I saw ; he was brown and brawny , like most old seamen , and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth , cut in the Quaker style ; only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his eyes , which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales , and always looking to windward ; -- for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursed together . 
Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl . 
`` Is this the Captain of the Pequod ? '' 
said I , advancing to the door of the tent . 
`` Supposing it be the Captain of the Pequod , what dost thou want of him ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` I was thinking of shipping . '' 
`` Thou wast , wast thou ? 
I see thou art no Nantucketer -- ever been in a stove boat ? '' 
`` No , Sir , I never have . '' 
`` Dost know nothing at all about whaling , I dare say -- eh ? 
`` Nothing , Sir ; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn . 
I 've been several voyages in the merchant service , and I think that - '' `` Merchant service be damned . 
Talk not that lingo to me . 
Dost see that leg ? 
-- I 'll take that leg away from thy stern , if ever thou talkest of the merchant service to me again . 
Marchant service indeed ! 
I suppose now ye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships . 
But flukes ! 
man , what makes thee want to go a whaling , eh ? 
-- it looks a little suspicious , do n't it , eh ? 
-- Hast not been a pirate , hast thou ? 
-- Didst not rob thy last Captain , didst thou ? 
-- Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea ? '' 
I protested my innocence of these things . 
I saw that under the mask of these half humorous innuendoes , this old seaman , as an insulated Quakerish Nantucketer , was full of his insular prejudices , and rather distrustful of all aliens , unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard . 
`` But what takes thee a-whaling ? 
I want to know that before I think of shipping ye . '' 
`` Well , sir , I want to see what whaling is . 
I want to see the world . '' 
`` Want to see what whaling is , eh ? 
Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab ? '' 
`` Who is Captain Ahab , sir ? '' 
`` Aye , aye , I thought so . 
Captain Ahab is the Captain of this ship . '' 
`` I am mistaken then . 
I thought I was speaking to the Captain himself . '' 
`` Thou art speaking to Captain Peleg -- that 's who ye are speaking to , young man . 
It belongs to me and Captain Bildad to see the Pequod fitted out for the voyage , and supplied with all her needs , including crew . 
We are part owners and agents . 
But as I was going to say , if thou wantest to know what whaling is , as thou tellest ye do , I can put ye in a way of finding it out before ye bind yourself to it , past backing out . 
Clap eye on Captain Ahab , young man , and thou wilt find that he has only one leg . '' 
`` What do you mean , sir ? 
Was the other one lost by a whale ? '' 
`` Lost by a whale ! 
Young man , come nearer to me : it was devoured , chewed up , crunched by the monstrousest parmacetty that ever chipped a boat ! 
-- ah , ah ! '' 
I was a little alarmed by his energy , perhaps also a little touched at the hearty grief in his concluding exclamation , but said as calmly as I could , `` What you say is no doubt true enough , sir ; but how could I know there was any peculiar ferocity in that particular whale , though indeed I might have inferred as much from the simple fact of the accident . '' 
`` Look ye now , young man , thy lungs are a sort of soft , d'ye see ; thou dost not talk shark a bit . 
Sure , ye 've been to sea before now ; sure of that ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said I , `` I thought I told you that I had been four voyages in the merchant - '' `` Hard down out of that ! 
Mind what I said about the marchant service -- do n't aggravate me -- I wo n't have it . 
But let us understand each other . 
I have given thee a hint about what whaling is ! 
do ye yet feel inclined for it ? '' 
`` I do , sir . '' 
`` Very good . 
Now , art thou the man to pitch a harpoon down a live whale 's throat , and then jump after it ? 
Answer , quick ! '' 
`` I am , sir , if it should be positively indispensable to do so ; not to be got rid of , that is ; which I do n't take to be the fact . '' 
`` Good again . 
Now then , thou not only wantest to go a-whaling , to find out by experience what whaling is , but ye also want to go in order to see the world ? 
Was not that what ye said ? 
I thought so . 
Well then , just step forward there , and take a peep over the weather bow , and then back to me and tell me what ye see there . '' 
For a moment I stood a little puzzled by this curious request , not knowing exactly how to take it , whether humorously or in earnest . 
But concentrating all his crow 's feet into one scowl , Captain Peleg started me on the errand . 
Going forward and glancing over the weather bow , I perceived that the ship swinging to her anchor with the flood-tide , was now obliquely pointing towards the open ocean . 
The prospect was unlimited , but exceedingly monotonous and forbidding ; not the slightest variety that I could see . 
`` Well , what 's the report ? '' 
said Peleg when I came back ; `` what did ye see ? '' 
`` Not much , '' I replied -- `` nothing but water ; considerable horizon though , and there 's a squall coming up , I think . '' 
`` Well , what dost thou think then of seeing the world ? 
Do ye wish to go round Cape Horn to see any more of it , eh ? 
Ca n't ye see the world where you stand ? '' 
I was a little staggered , but go a-whaling I must , and I would ; and the Pequod was as good a ship as any -- I thought the best -- and all this I now repeated to Peleg . 
Seeing me so determined , he expressed his willingness to ship me . 
`` And thou mayest as well sign the papers right off , '' he added -- `` come along with ye . '' 
And so saying , he led the way below deck into the cabin . 
Seated on the transom was what seemed to me a most uncommon and surprising figure . 
It turned out to be Captain Bildad who along with Captain Peleg was one of the largest owners of the vessel ; the other shares , as is sometimes the case in these ports , being held by a crowd of old annuitants ; widows , fatherless children , and chancery wards ; each owning about the value of a timber head , or a foot of plank , or a nail or two in the ship . 
People in Nantucket invest their money in whaling vessels , the same way that you do yours in approved state stocks bringing in good interest . 
Now , Bildad , like Peleg , and indeed many other Nantucketers , was a Quaker , the island having been originally settled by that sect ; and to this day its inhabitants in general retain in an uncommon measure the peculiarities of the Quaker , only variously and anomalously modified by things altogether alien and heterogeneous . 
