What a relief it was to choking Stubb , when a rat made a sudden racket in the hold below . 
And poor little Flask , he was the youngest son , and little boy of this weary family party . 
His were the shin-bones of the saline beef ; his would have been the drumsticks . 
For Flask to have presumed to help himself , this must have seemed to him tantamount to larceny in the first degree . 
Had he helped himself at that table , doubtless , never more would he have been able to hold his head up in this honest world ; nevertheless , strange to say , Ahab never forbade him . 
And had Flask helped himself , the chances were Ahab had never so much as noticed it . 
Least of all , did Flask presume to help himself to butter . 
Whether he thought the owners of the ship denied it to him , on account of its clotting his clear , sunny complexion ; or whether he deemed that , on so long a voyage in such marketless waters , butter was at a premium , and therefore was not for him , a subaltern ; however it was , Flask , alas ! 
was a butterless man ! 
Another thing . 
Flask was the last person down at the dinner , and Flask is the first man up . 
Consider ! 
For hereby Flask 's dinner was badly jammed in point of time . 
Starbuck and Stubb both had the start of him ; and yet they also have the privilege of lounging in the rear . 
If Stubb even , who is but a peg higher than Flask , happens to have but a small appetite , and soon shows symptoms of concluding his repast , then Flask must bestir himself , he will not get more than three mouthfuls that day ; for it is against holy usage for Stubb to precede Flask to the deck . 
Therefore it was that Flask once admitted in private , that ever since he had arisen to the dignity of an officer , from that moment he had never known what it was to be otherwise than hungry , more or less . 
For what he ate did not so much relieve his hunger , as keep it immortal in him . 
Peace and satisfaction , thought Flask , have for ever departed from my stomach . 
I am an officer ; but , how I wish I could fist a bit of old-fashioned beef in the fore-castle , as I used to when I was before the mast . 
There 's the fruits of promotion now ; there 's the vanity of glory : there 's the insanity of life ! 
Besides , if it were so that any mere sailor of the Pequod had a grudge against Flask in Flask 's official capacity , all that sailor had to do , in order to obtain ample vengeance , was to go aft at dinnertime , and get a peep at Flask through the cabin sky-light , sitting silly and dumfoundered before awful Ahab . 
Now , Ahab and his three mates formed what may be called the first table in the Pequod 's cabin . 
After their departure , taking place in inverted order to their arrival , the canvas cloth was cleared , or rather was restored to some hurried order by the pallid steward . 
And then the three harpooneers were bidden to the feast , they being its residuary legatees . 
They made a sort of temporary servants ' hall of the high and mighty cabin . 
In strange contrast to the hardly tolerable constraint and nameless invisible domineerings of the captain 's table , was the entire care-free license and ease , the almost frantic democracy of those inferior fellows the harpooneers . 
While their masters , the mates , seemed afraid of the sound of the hinges of their own jaws , the harpooneers chewed their food with such a relish that there was a report to it . 
They dined like lords ; they filled their bellies like Indian ships all day loading with spices . 
Such portentous appetites had Queequeg and Tashtego , that to fill out the vacancies made by the previous repast , often the pale Dough-Boy was fain to bring on a great baron of salt-junk , seemingly quarried out of the solid ox . 
And if he were not lively about it , if he did not go with a nimble hop-skip-and-jump , then Tashtego had an ungentlemanly way of accelerating him by darting a fork at his back , harpoon-wise . 
And once Daggoo , seized with a sudden humor , assisted Dough-Boy 's memory by snatching him up bodily , and thrusting his head into a great empty wooden trencher , while Tashtego , knife in hand , began laying out the circle preliminary to scalping him . 
He was naturally a very nervous , shuddering sort of little fellow , this bread-faced steward ; the progeny of a bankrupt baker and a hospital nurse . 
And what with the standing spectacle of the black terrific Ahab , and the periodical tumultuous visitations of these three savages , Dough-Boy 's whole life was one continual lip-quiver . 
Commonly , after seeing the harpooneers furnished with all things they demanded , he would escape from their clutches into his little pantry adjoining , and fearfully peep out at them through the blinds of its door , till all was over . 
It was a sight to see Queequeg seated over against Tashtego , opposing his filed teeth to the Indian 's ; crosswise to them , Daggoo seated on the floor , for a bench would have brought his hearse-plumed head to the low carlines ; at every motion of his colossal limbs , making the low cabin framework to shake , as when an African elephant goes passenger in a ship . 
But for all this , the great negro was wonderfully abstemious , not to say dainty . 
It seemed hardly possible that by such comparatively small mouthfuls he could keep up the vitality diffused through so broad , baronial , and superb a person . 
But , doubtless , this noble savage fed strong and drank deep of the abounding element of air ; and through his dilated nostrils snuffed in the sublime life of the worlds . 
Not by beef or by bread , are giants made or nourished . 
But Queequeg , he had a mortal , barbaric smack of the lip in eating -- an ugly sound enough -- so much so , that the trembling Dough-Boy almost looked to see whether any marks of teeth lurked in his own lean arms . 
And when he would hear Tashtego singing out for him to produce himself , that his bones might be picked , the simple-witted Steward all but shattered the crockery hanging round him in the pantry , by his sudden fits of the palsy . 
Nor did the whetstone which the harpooneers carried in their pockets , for their lances and other weapons ; and with which whetstones , at dinner , they would ostentatiously sharpen their knives ; that grating sound did not at all tend to tranquillize poor Dough-Boy . 
How could he forget that in his Island days , Queequeg , for one , must certainly have been guilty of some murderous , convivial indiscretion . 
Alas ! 
Dough-Boy ! 
hard fares the white waiter who waits upon cannibals . 
Not a napkin should he carry on his arm , but a buckler . 
In good time , though , to his great delight , the three salt-sea warriors would rise and depart ; to his credulous , fable-mongering ears , all their martial bones jingling in them at every step , like Moorish scimetars in scabbards . 
But , though these barbarians dined in the cabin , and nominally lived there ; still , being anything but sedentary in their habits , they were scarcely ever in it except at mealtimes , and just before sleeping-time , when they passed through it to their own peculiar quarters . 
In this one matter , Ahab seemed no exception to most American whale captains , who , as a set , rather incline to the opinion that by rights the ship 's cabin belongs to them ; and that it is by courtesy alone that anybody else is , at any time , permitted there . 
So that , in real truth , the mates and harpooneers of the Pequod might more properly be said to have lived out of the cabin than in it . 
For when they did enter it , it was something as a streetdoor enters a house ; turning inwards for a moment , only to be turned out the next ; and , as a permanent thing , residing in the open air . 
Nor did they lose much hereby ; in the cabin was no companionship ; socially , Ahab was inaccessible . 
Though nominally included in the census of Christendom , he was still an alien to it . 
He lived in the world , as the last of the Grisly Bears lived in settled Missouri . 
And as when Spring and Summer had departed , that wild Logan of the woods , burying himself in the hollow of a tree , lived out the winter there , sucking his own paws ; so , in his inclement , howling old age , Ahab 's soul , shut up in the caved trunk of his body , there fed upon the sullen paws of its gloom ! 
The Mast-Head It was during the more pleasant weather , that in due rotation with the other seamen my first mast-head came round . 
In most American whalemen the mast-heads are manned almost simultaneously with the vessel 's leaving her port ; even though she may have fifteen thousand miles , and more , to sail ere reaching her proper cruising ground . 
And if , after a three , four , or five years ' voyage she is drawing nigh home with anything empty in her -- say , an empty vial even -- then , her mast-heads are kept manned to the last ! 
and not till her skysail-poles sail in among the spires of the port , does she altogether relinquish the hope of capturing one whale more . 
Now , as the business of standing mast-heads , ashore or afloat , is a very ancient and interesting one , let us in some measure expatiate here . 
I take it , that the earliest standers of mast-heads were the old Egyptians ; because , in all my researches , I find none prior to them . 
For though their progenitors , the builders of Babel , must doubtless , by their tower , have intended to rear the loftiest mast-head in all Asia , or Africa either ; yet -LRB- ere the final truck was put to it -RRB- as that great stone mast of theirs may be said to have gone by the board , in the dread gale of God 's wrath ; therefore , we can not give these Babel builders priority over the Egyptians . 
And that the Egyptians were a nation of mast-head standers , is an assertion based upon the general belief among archaeologists , that the first pyramids were founded for astronomical purposes : a theory singularly supported by the peculiar stairlike formation of all four sides of those edifices ; whereby , with prodigious long upliftings of their legs , those old astronomers were wont to mount to the apex , and sing out for new stars ; even as the look-outs of a modern ship sing out for a sail , or a whale just bearing in sight . 
In Saint Stylites , the famous Christian hermit of old times , who built him a lofty stone pillar in the desert and spent the whole latter portion of his life on its summit , hoisting his food from the ground with a tackle ; in him we have a remarkable instance of a dauntless stander-of-mast-heads ; who was not to be driven from his place by fogs or frosts , rain , hail , or sleet ; but valiantly facing everything out to the last , literally died at his post . 
Of modern standers-of-mast-heads we have but a lifeless set ; mere stone , iron , and bronze men ; who , though well capable of facing out a stiff gale , are still entirely incompetent to the business of singing out upon discovering any strange sight . 
There is Napoleon ; who , upon the top of the column of Vendome stands with arms folded , some one hundred and fifty feet in the air ; careless , now , who rules the decks below , whether Louis Philippe , Louis Blanc , or Louis the Devil . 
Great Washington , too , stands high aloft on his towering main-mast in Baltimore , and like one of Hercules ' pillars , his column marks that point of human grandeur beyond which few mortals will go . 
Admiral Nelson , also , on a capstan of gun-metal , stands his mast-head in Trafalgar Square ; and even when most obscured by that London smoke , token is yet given that a hidden hero is there ; for where there is smoke , must be fire . 
But neither great Washington , nor Napoleon , nor Nelson , will answer a single hail from below , however madly invoked to befriend by their counsels the distracted decks upon which they gaze ; however it may be surmised , that their spirits penetrate through the thick haze of the future , and descry what shoals and what rocks must be shunned . 
It may seem unwarrantable to couple in any respect the mast-head standers of the land with those of the sea ; but that in truth it is not so , is plainly evinced by an item for which Obed Macy , the sole historian of Nantucket , stands accountable . 
The worthy Obed tells us , that in the early times of the whale fishery , ere ships were regularly launched in pursuit of the game , the people of that island erected lofty spars along the seacoast , to which the look-outs ascended by means of nailed cleats , something as fowls go upstairs in a hen-house . 
A few years ago this same plan was adopted by the Bay whalemen of New Zealand , who , upon descrying the game , gave notice to the ready-manned boats nigh the beach . 
But this custom has now become obsolete ; turn we then to the one proper mast-head , that of a whale-ship at sea . 
The three mast-heads are kept manned from sun-rise to sun-set ; the seamen taking their regular turns -LRB- as at the helm -RRB- , and relieving each other every two hours . 
In the serene weather of the tropics it is exceedingly pleasant the mast-head : nay , to a dreamy meditative man it is delightful . 
There you stand , a hundred feet above the silent decks , striding along the deep , as if the masts were gigantic stilts , while beneath you and between your legs , as it were , swim the hugest monsters of the sea , even as ships once sailed between the boots of the famous Colossus at old Rhodes . 
There you stand , lost in the infinite series of the sea , with nothing ruffled but the waves . 
The tranced ship indolently rolls ; the drowsy trade winds blow ; everything resolves you into languor . 
For the most part , in this tropic whaling life , a sublime uneventfulness invests you ; you hear no news ; read no gazettes ; extras with startling accounts of commonplaces never delude you into unnecessary excitements ; you hear of no domestic afflictions ; bankrupt securities ; fall of stocks ; are never troubled with the thought of what you shall have for dinner -- for all your meals for three years and more are snugly stowed in casks , and your bill of fare is immutable . 
In one of those southern whalesmen , on a long three or four years ' voyage , as often happens , the sum of the various hours you spend at the mast-head would amount to several entire months . 
And it is much to be deplored that the place to which you devote so considerable a portion of the whole term of your natural life , should be so sadly destitute of anything approaching to a cosy inhabitiveness , or adapted to breed a comfortable localness of feeling , such as pertains to a bed , a hammock , a hearse , a sentry box , a pulpit , a coach , or any other of those small and snug contrivances in which men temporarily isolate themselves . 
Your most usual point of perch is the head of the t ' gallant-mast , where you stand upon two thin parallel sticks -LRB- almost peculiar to whalemen -RRB- called the t ' gallant crosstrees . 
Here , tossed about by the sea , the beginner feels about as cosy as he would standing on a bull 's horns . 
To be sure , in cold weather you may carry your house aloft with you , in the shape of a watch-coat ; but properly speaking the thickest watch-coat is no more of a house than the unclad body ; for as the soul is glued inside of its fleshy tabernacle , and can not freely move about in it , nor even move out of it , without running great risk of perishing -LRB- like an ignorant pilgrim crossing the snowy Alps in winter -RRB- ; so a watch-coat is not so much of a house as it is a mere envelope , or additional skin encasing you . 
You can not put a shelf or chest of drawers in your body , and no more can you make a convenience closet of your watch-coat . 
Concerning all this , it is much to be deplored that the mast-heads of a southern whale ship are unprovided with those enviable little tents or pulpits , called crow 's - nests , in which the look-outs of a Greenland whaler are protected from the inclement weather of the frozen seas . 
In the fireside narrative of Captain Sleet , entitled `` A Voyage among the Icebergs , in quest of the Greenland Whale , and incidentally for the re-discovery of the Lost Icelandic Colonies of Old Greenland ; '' in this admirable volume , all standers of mast-heads are furnished with a charmingly circumstantial account of the then recently invented crow 's - nest of the Glacier , which was the name of Captain Sleet 's good craft . 
He called it the Sleet 's crow 's - nest , in honor of himself ; he being the original inventor and patentee , and free from all ridiculous false delicacy , and holding that if we call our own children after our own names -LRB- we fathers being the original inventors and patentees -RRB- , so likewise should we denominate after ourselves any other apparatus we may beget . 
In shape , the Sleet 's crow 's - nest is something like a large tierce or pipe ; it is open above , however , where it is furnished with a movable sidescreen to keep to windward of your head in a hard gale . 
Being fixed on the summit of the mast , you ascend into it through a little trap-hatch in the bottom . 
On the after side , or side next the stern of the ship , is a comfortable seat , with a locker underneath for umbrellas , comforters , and coats . 
In front is a leather rack , in which to keep your speaking trumpet , pipe , telescope , and other nautical conveniences . 
When Captain Sleet in person stood his mast-head in this crow 's - nest of his , he tells us that he always had a rifle with him -LRB- also fixed in the rack -RRB- , together with a powder flask and shot , for the purpose of popping off the stray narwhales , or vagrant sea unicorns infesting those waters ; for you can not successfully shoot at them from the deck owing to the resistance of the water , but to shoot down upon them is a very different thing . 
Now , it was plainly a labor of love for Captain Sleet to describe , as he does , all the little detailed conveniences of his crow 's - nest ; but though he so enlarges upon many of these , and though he treats us to a very scientific account of his experiments in this crow 's - nest , with a small compass he kept there for the purpose of counteracting the errors resulting from what is called the `` local attraction '' of all binnacle magnets ; an error ascribable to the horizontal vicinity of the iron in the ship 's planks , and in the Glacier 's case , perhaps , to there having been so many broken-down blacksmiths among her crew ; I say , that though the Captain is very discreet and scientific here , yet , for all his learned `` binnacle deviations , '' `` azimuth compass observations , '' and `` approximate errors , '' he knows very well , Captain Sleet , that he was not so much immersed in those profound magnetic meditations , as to fail being attracted occasionally towards that well replenished little case-bottle , so nicely tucked in on one side of his crow 's nest , within easy reach of his hand . 
Though , upon the whole , I greatly admire and even love the brave , the honest , and learned Captain ; yet I take it very ill of him that he should so utterly ignore that case-bottle , seeing what a faithful friend and comforter it must have been , while with mittened fingers and hooded head he was studying the mathematics aloft there in that bird 's nest within three or four perches of the pole . 
But if we Southern whale-fishers are not so snugly housed aloft as Captain Sleet and his Greenlandmen were ; yet that disadvantage is greatly counter-balanced by the widely contrasting serenity of those seductive seas in which we South fishers mostly float . 
For one , I used to lounge up the rigging very leisurely , resting in the top to have a chat with Queequeg , or any one else off duty whom I might find there ; then ascending a little way further , and throwing a lazy leg over the top-sail yard , take a preliminary view of the watery pastures , and so at last mount to my ultimate destination . 
Let me make a clean breast of it here , and frankly admit that I kept but sorry guard . 
With the problem of the universe revolving in me , how could I -- being left completely to myself at such a thought-engendering altitude -- how could I but lightly hold my obligations to observe all whaleships ' standing orders , `` Keep your weather eye open , and sing out every time . '' 
