Merely make a spread angle of two poles , and you can not stand them up . 
Then , again , it would never do in plain sight of the world 's riveted eyes , it would never do , I say , for this straddling captain to be seen steadying himself the slightest particle by catching hold of anything with his hands ; indeed , as token of his entire , buoyant self-command , he generally carries his hands in his trowsers ' pockets ; but perhaps being generally very large , heavy hands , he carries them there for ballast . 
Nevertheless there have occurred instances , well authenticated ones too , where the captain has been known for an uncommonly critical moment or two , in a sudden squall say -- to seize hold of the nearest oarsman 's hair , and hold on there like grim death . 
The Town-Ho 's Story -LRB- As told at the Golden Inn -RRB- The Cape of Good Hope , and all the watery region round about there , is much like some noted four corners of a great highway , where you meet more travellers than in any other part . 
It was not very long after speaking the Goney that another homeward-bound whaleman , the Town-Ho , * was encountered . 
She was manned almost wholly by Polynesians . 
In the short gam that ensued she gave us strong news of Moby Dick . 
To some the general interest in the White Whale was now wildly heightened by a circumstance of the Town-Ho 's story , which seemed obscurely to involve with the whale a certain wondrous , inverted visitation of one of those so called judgments of God which at times are said to overtake some men . 
This latter circumstance , with its own particular accompaniments , forming what may be called the secret part of the tragedy about to be narrated , never reached the ears of Captain Ahab or his mates . 
For that secret part of the story was unknown to the captain of the Town-Ho himself . 
It was the private property of three confederate white seamen of that ship , one of whom , it seems , communicated it to Tashtego with Romish injunctions of secrecy , but the following night Tashtego rambled in his sleep , and revealed so much of it in that way , that when he was wakened he could not well withhold the rest . 
Nevertheless , so potent an influence did this thing have on those seamen in the Pequod who came to the full knowledge of it , and by such a strange delicacy , to call it so , were they governed in this matter , that they kept the secret among themselves so that it never transpired abaft the Pequod 's main-mast . 
Interweaving in its proper place this darker thread with the story as publicly narrated on the ship , the whole of this strange affair I now proceed to put on lasting record . 
* The ancient whale-cry upon first sighting a whale from the mast-head , still used by whalemen in hunting the famous Gallipagos terrapin . 
For my humor 's sake , I shall preserve the style in which I once narrated it at Lima , to a lounging circle of my Spanish friends , one saint 's eve , smoking upon the thick-gilt tiled piazza of the Golden Inn . 
Of those fine cavaliers , the young Dons , Pedro and Sebastian , were on the closer terms with me ; and hence the interluding questions they occasionally put , and which are duly answered at the time . 
`` Some two years prior to my first learning the events which I am about rehearsing to you , gentlemen , the Town-Ho , Sperm Whaler of Nantucket , was cruising in your Pacific here , not very many days ' sail eastward from the eaves of this good Golden Inn . 
She was somewhere to the northward of the Line . 
One morning upon handling the pumps according to daily usage , it was observed that she made more water in her hold than common . 
They supposed a sword-fish had stabbed her , gentlemen . 
But the captain , having some unusual reason for believing that rare good luck awaited him in those latitudes ; and therefore being very averse to quit them , and the leak not being then considered at all dangerous , though , indeed , they could not find it after searching the hold as low down as was possible in rather heavy weather , the ship still continued her cruisings , the mariners working at the pumps at wide and easy intervals ; but no good luck came ; more days went by and not only was the leak yet undiscovered , but it sensibly increased . 
So much so , that now taking some alarm , the captain , making all sail , stood away for the nearest harbor among the islands , there to have his hull hove out and repaired . 
`` Though no small passage was before her , yet , if the commonest chance favoured , he did not at all fear that his ship would founder by the way , because his pumps were of the best , and being periodically relieved at them , those six-and-thirty men of his could easily keep the ship free ; never mind if the leak should double on her . 
In truth , well nigh the whole of this passage being attended by very prosperous breezes , the Town-Ho had all but certainly arrived in perfect safety at her port without the occurrence of the least fatality , had it not been for the brutal overbearing of Radney , the mate , a Vineyarder , and the bitterly provoked vengeance of Steelkilt , a Lakeman and desperado from Buffalo . '' 
` Lakeman ! 
-- Buffalo ! 
Pray , what is a Lakeman , and where is Buffalo ? ' 
said Don Sebastian , rising in his swinging mat of grass . 
`` On the eastern shore of our Lake Erie , Don ; but -- I crave your courtesy -- may be , you shall soon hear further of all that . 
Now , gentlemen , in square-sail brigs and three-masted ships , well nigh as large and stout as any that ever sailed out of your old Callao to far Manilla ; this Lakeman , in the land-locked heart of our America , had yet been nurtured by all those agrarian freebooting impressions popularly connected with the open ocean . 
For in their interflowing aggregate , those grand fresh-water seas of ours , -- Erie , and Ontario , and Huron , and Superior , and Michigan , -- possess an ocean-like expansiveness , with many of the ocean 's noblest traits ; with many of its rimmed varieties of races and of climes . 
They contain round archipelagoes of romantic isles , even as the Polynesian waters do ; in large part , are shored by two great contrasting nations , as the Atlantic is ; they furnish long maritime approaches to our numerous territorial colonies from the East , dotted all round their banks ; here and there are frowned upon by batteries , and by the goat-like craggy guns of lofty Mackinaw ; they have heard the fleet thunderings of naval victories ; at intervals , they yield their beaches to wild barbarians , whose red painted faces flash from out their peltry wigwams ; for leagues and leagues are flanked by ancient and unentered forests , where the gaunt pines stand like serried lines of kings in Gothic genealogies ; those same woods harboring wild Afric beasts of prey , and silken creatures whose exported furs give robes to Tartar Emperors ; they mirror the paved capitals of Buffalo and Cleveland , as well as Winnebago villages ; they float alike the full-rigged merchant ship , the armed cruiser of the State , the steamer , and the beech canoe ; they are swept by Borean and dismasting blasts as direful as any that lash the salted wave ; they know what shipwrecks are , for out of sight of land , however inland , they have drowned full many a midnight ship with all its shrieking crew . 
Thus , gentlemen , though an inlander , Steelkilt was wild-ocean born , and wild-ocean nurtured ; as much of an audacious mariner as any . 
And for Radney , though in his infancy he may have laid him down on the lone Nantucket beach , to nurse at his maternal sea ; though in after life he had long followed our austere Atlantic and your contemplative Pacific ; yet was he quite as vengeful and full of social quarrel as the backwoods seaman , fresh from the latitudes of buckhorn handled Bowie-knives . 
Yet was this Nantucketer a man with some good-hearted traits ; and this Lakeman , a mariner , who though a sort of devil indeed , might yet by inflexible firmness , only tempered by that common decency of human recognition which is the meanest slave 's right ; thus treated , this Steelkilt had long been retained harmless and docile . 
At all events , he had proved so thus far ; but Radney was doomed and made mad , and Steelkilt -- but , gentlemen , you shall hear . 
`` It was not more than a day or two at the furthest after pointing her prow for her island haven , that the Town-Ho 's leak seemed again increasing , but only so as to require an hour or more at the pumps every day . 
You must know that in a settled and civilized ocean like our Atlantic , for example , some skippers think little of pumping their whole way across it ; though of a still , sleepy night , should the officer of the deck happen to forget his duty in that respect , the probability would be that he and his shipmates would never again remember it , on account of all hands gently subsiding to the bottom . 
Nor in the solitary and savage seas far from you to the westward , gentlemen , is it altogether unusual for ships to keep clanging at their pump-handles in full chorus even for a voyage of considerable length ! 
that is , if it lie along a tolerably accessible coast , or if any other reasonable retreat is afforded them . 
It is only when a leaky vessel is in some very out of the way part of those waters , some really landless latitude , that her captain begins to feel a little anxious . 
`` Much this way had it been with the Town-Ho ; so when her leak was found gaining once more , there was in truth some small concern manifested by several of her company ; especially by Radney the mate . 
He commanded the upper sails to be well hoisted , sheeted home anew , and every way expanded to the breeze . 
Now this Radney , I suppose , was as little of a coward , and as little inclined to any sort of nervous apprehensiveness touching his own person as any fearless , unthinking creature on land or on sea that you can conveniently imagine , gentlemen . 
Therefore when he betrayed this imagine , solicitude about the safety of the ship , some of the seamen declared that it was only on account of his being a part owner in her . 
So when they were working that evening at the pumps , there was on this head no small gamesomeness slily going on among them , as they stood with their feet continually overflowed by the rippling clear water ; clear as any mountain spring , gentlemen -- that bubbling from the pumps ran across the deck , and poured itself out in steady spouts at the lee scupper-holes . 
`` Now , as you well know , it is not seldom the case in this conventional world of ours -- watery or otherwise ; that when a person placed in command over his fellow-men finds one of them to be very significantly his superior in general pride of manhood , straightway against that man he conceives an unconquerable dislike and bitterness ; and if he had a chance he will pull down and pulverize that subaltern 's tower , and make a little heap of dust of it . 
Be this conceit of mine as it may , gentlemen , at all events Steelkilt was a tall and noble animal with a head like a Roman , and a flowing golden beard like the tasseled housings of your last viceroy 's snorting charger ; and a brain , and a heart , and a soul in him , gentlemen , which had made Steelkilt Charlemagne , had he been born son to Charlemagne 's father . 
But Radney , the mate , was ugly as a mule ; yet as hardy , as stubborn , as malicious . 
He did not love Steelkilt , and Steelkilt knew it . 
`` Espying the mate drawing near as he was toiling at the pump with the rest , the Lakeman affected not to notice him , but unawed , went on with his gay banterings . '' 
` Aye , aye , my merry lads , it 's a lively leak this ; hold a cannikin , one of ye , and let 's have a taste . 
By the Lord , it 's worth bottling ! 
I tell ye what , men , old Rad 's investment must go for it ! 
he had best cut away his part of the hull and tow it home . 
The fact is , boys , that sword-fish only began the job ; he 's come back again with a gang of ship-carpenters , saw-fish , and file-fish , and what not ; and the whole posse of 'em are now hard at work cutting and slashing at the bottom ; making improvements , I suppose . 
If old Rad were here now , I 'd tell him to jump overboard and scatter 'em . 
They 're playing the devil with his estate , I can tell him . 
But he 's a simple old soul , -- Rad , and a beauty too . 
Boys , they say the rest of his property is invested in looking-glasses . 
I wonder if he 'd give a poor devil like me the model of his nose . ' '' 
` Damn your eyes ! 
what 's that pump stopping for ? ' 
roared Radney , pretending not to have heard the sailors ' talk . 
` Thunder away at it ! ' 
` Aye , aye , sir , ' said Steelkilt , merry as a cricket . 
` Lively , boys , lively , now ! ' 
And with that the pump clanged like fifty fire-engines ; the men tossed their hats off to it , and ere long that peculiar gasping of the lungs was heard which denotes the fullest tension of life 's utmost energies . 
`` Quitting the pump at last , with the rest of his band , the Lakeman went forward all panting , and sat himself down on the windlass ; his face fiery red , his eyes bloodshot , and wiping the profuse sweat from his brow . 
Now what cozening fiend it was , gentlemen , that possessed Radney to meddle with such a man in that corporeally exasperated state , I know not ; but so it happened . 
Intolerably striding along the deck , the mate commanded him to get a broom and sweep down the planks , and also a shovel , and remove some offensive matters consequent upon allowing a pig to run at large . 
`` Now , gentlemen , sweeping a ship 's deck at sea is a piece of household work which in all times but raging gales is regularly attended to every evening ; it has been known to be done in the case of ships actually foundering at the time . 
Such , gentlemen , is the inflexibility of sea-usages and the instinctive love of neatness in seamen ; some of whom would not willingly drown without first washing their faces . 
But in all vessels this broom business is the prescriptive province of the boys , if boys there be aboard . 
Besides , it was the stronger men in the Town-Ho that had been divided into gangs , taking turns at the pumps ; and being the most athletic seaman of them all , Steelkilt had been regularly assigned captain of one of the gangs ; consequently he should have been freed from any trivial business not connected with truly nautical duties , such being the case with his comrades . 
I mention all these particulars so that you may understand exactly how this affair stood between the two men . 
`` But there was more than this : the order about the shovel was almost as plainly meant to sting and insult Steelkilt , as though Radney had spat in his face . 
Any man who has gone sailor in a whale-ship will understand this ; and all this and doubtless much more , the Lakeman fully comprehended when the mate uttered his command . 
But as he sat still for a moment , and as he steadfastly looked into the mate 's malignant eye and perceived the stacks of powder-casks heaped up in him and the slow-match silently burning along towards them ; as he instinctively saw all this , that strange forbearance and unwillingness to stir up the deeper passionateness in any already ireful being -- a repugnance most felt , when felt at all , by really valiant men even when aggrieved -- this nameless phantom feeling , gentlemen , stole over Steelkilt . 
`` Therefore , in his ordinary tone , only a little broken by the bodily exhaustion he was temporarily in , he answered him saying that sweeping the deck was not his business , and he would not do it . 
And then , without at all alluding to the shovel , he pointed to three lads , as the customary sweepers ; who , not being billeted at the pumps , had done little or nothing all day . 
To this , Radney replied , with an oath , in a most domineering and outrageous manner unconditionally reiterating his command ; meanwhile advancing upon the still seated Lakeman , with an uplifted cooper 's club hammer which he had snatched from a cask near by . 
`` Heated and irritated as he was by his spasmodic toil at the pumps , for all his first nameless feeling of forbearance the sweating Steelkilt could but ill brook this bearing in the mate ; but somehow still smothering the conflagration within him , without speaking he remained doggedly rooted to his seat , till at last the incensed Radney shook the hammer within a few inches of his face , furiously commanding him to do his bidding . 
`` Steelkilt rose , and slowly retreating round the windlass , steadily followed by the mate with his menacing hammer , deliberately repeated his intention not to obey . 
Seeing , however , that his forbearance had not the slightest effect , by an awful and unspeakable intimation with his twisted hand he warned off the foolish and infatuated man ; but it was to no purpose . 
And in this way the two went once slowly round the windlass ; when , resolved at last no longer to retreat , bethinking him that he had now forborne as much as comported with his humor , the Lakeman paused on the hatches and thus spoke to the officer : '' ` Mr. Radney , I will not obey you . 
Take that hammer away , or look to yourself . ' 
But the predestinated mate coming still closer to him , where the Lakeman stood fixed , now shook the heavy hammer within an inch of his teeth ; meanwhile repeating a string of insufferable maledictions . 
Retreating not the thousandth part of an inch ; stabbing him in the eye with the unflinching poniard of his glance , Steelkilt , clenching his right hand behind him and creepingly drawing it back , told his persecutor that if the hammer but grazed his cheek he -LRB- Steelkilt -RRB- would murder him . 
But , gentlemen , the fool had been branded for the slaughter by the gods . 
Immediately the hammer touched the cheek ; the next instant the lower jaw of the mate was stove in his head ; he fell on the hatch spouting blood like a whale . 
`` Ere the cry could go aft Steelkilt was shaking one of the backstays leading far aloft to where two of his comrades were standing their mastheads . 
They were both Canallers . '' 
` Canallers ! ' 
cried Don Pedro . 
` We have seen many whaleships in our harbors , but never heard of your Canallers . 
Pardon : who and what are they ? ' '' 
` Canallers , Don , are the boatmen belonging to our grand Erie Canal . 
You must have heard of it . ' '' 
` Nay , Senor ; hereabouts in this dull , warm , most lazy , and hereditary land , we know but little of your vigorous North . ' '' 
