Utter confusion exists among the historians of this animal '' -LRB- sperm whale -RRB- , says Surgeon Beale , A.D. 1839 . 
`` Unfitness to pursue our research in the unfathomable waters . '' 
`` Impenetrable veil covering our knowledge of the cetacea . '' 
`` A field strewn with thorns . '' 
`` All these incomplete indications but serve to torture us naturalists . '' 
Thus speak of the whale , the great Cuvier , and John Hunter , and Lesson , those lights of zoology and anatomy . 
Nevertheless , though of real knowledge there be little , yet of books there are a plenty ; and so in some small degree , with cetology , or the science of whales . 
Many are the men , small and great , old and new , landsmen and seamen , who have at large or in little , written of the whale . 
Run over a few : -- The Authors of the Bible ; Aristotle ; Pliny ; Aldrovandi ; Sir Thomas Browne ; Gesner ; Ray ; Linnaeus ; Rondeletius ; Willoughby ; Green ; Artedi ; Sibbald ; Brisson ; Marten ; Lacepede ; Bonneterre ; Desmarest ; Baron Cuvier ; Frederick Cuvier ; John Hunter ; Owen ; Scoresby ; Beale ; Bennett ; J. Ross Browne ; the Author of Miriam Coffin ; Olmstead ; and the Rev. T. Cheever . 
But to what ultimate generalizing purpose all these have written , the above cited extracts will show . 
Of the names in this list of whale authors only those following Owen ever saw living whales ; and but one of them was a real professional harpooneer and whaleman . 
I mean Captain Scoresby . 
On the separate subject of the Greenland or right-whale , he is the best existing authority . 
But Scoresby knew nothing and says nothing of the great sperm whale , compared with which the Greenland whale is almost unworthy mentioning . 
And here be it said , that the Greenland whale is an usurper upon the throne of the seas . 
He is not even by any means the largest of the whales . 
Yet , owing to the long priority of his claims , and the profound ignorance which till some seventy years back , invested the then fabulous and utterly unknown sperm-whale , and which ignorance to this present day still reigns in all but some few scientific retreats and whale-ports ; this usurpation has been every way complete . 
Reference to nearly all the leviathanic allusions in the great poets of past days , will satisfy you that the Greenland whale , without one rival , was to them the monarch of the seas . 
But the time has at last come for a new proclamation . 
This is Charing Cross ; hear ye ! 
good people all , -- the Greenland whale is deposed , -- the great sperm whale now reigneth ! 
There are only two books in being which at all pretend to put the living sperm whale before you , and at the same time , in the remotest degree succeed in the attempt . 
Those books are Beale 's and Bennett 's ; both in their time surgeons to the English South-Sea whale-ships , and both exact and reliable men . 
The original matter touching the sperm whale to be found in their volumes is necessarily small ; but so far as it goes , it is of excellent quality , though mostly confined to scientific description . 
As yet , however , the sperm whale , scientific or poetic , lives not complete in any literature . 
Far above all other hunted whales , his is an unwritten life . 
Now the various species of whales need some sort of popular comprehensive classification , if only an easy outline one for the present , hereafter to be filled in all-outward its departments by subsequent laborers . 
As no better man advances to take this matter in hand , I hereupon offer my own poor endeavors . 
I promise nothing complete ; because any human thing supposed to be complete must for that very reason infallibly be faulty . 
I shall not pretend to a minute anatomical description of the various species , or -- in this space at least -- to much of any description . 
My object here is simply to project the draught of a systematization of cetology . 
I am the architect , not the builder . 
But it is a ponderous task ; no ordinary letter-sorter in the Post-Office is equal to it . 
To grope down into the bottom of the sea after them ; to have one 's hands among the unspeakable foundations , ribs , and very pelvis of the world ; this is a fearful thing . 
What am I that I should essay to hook the nose of this leviathan ! 
The awful tauntings in Job might well appal me . 
`` Will he -LRB- the leviathan -RRB- make a covenant with thee ? 
Behold the hope of him is vain ! 
But I have swam through libraries and sailed through oceans ; I have had to do with whales with these visible hands ; I am in earnest ; and I will try . 
There are some preliminaries to settle . 
First : The uncertain , unsettled condition of this science of Cetology is in the very vestibule attested by the fact , that in some quarters it still remains a moot point whether a whale be a fish . 
In his System of Nature , A.D. 1776 , Linnaeus declares , `` I hereby separate the whales from the fish . '' 
But of my own knowledge , I know that down to the year 1850 , sharks and shad , alewives and herring , against Linnaeus 's express edict , were still found dividing the possession of the same seas with the Leviathan . 
The grounds upon which Linnaeus would fain have banished the whales from the waters , he states as follows : `` On account of their warm bilocular heart , their lungs , their movable eyelids , their hollow ears , penem intrantem feminam mammis lactantem , '' and finally , `` ex lege naturae jure meritoque . '' 
I submitted all this to my friends Simeon Macey and Charley Coffin , of Nantucket , both messmates of mine in a certain voyage , and they united in the opinion that the reasons set forth were altogether insufficient . 
Charley profanely hinted they were humbug . 
Be it known that , waiving all argument , I take the good old fashioned ground that the whale is a fish , and call upon holy Jonah to back me . 
This fundamental thing settled , the next point is , in what internal respect does the whale differ from other fish . 
Above , Linnaeus has given you those items . 
But in brief they are these : lungs and warm blood ; whereas , all other fish are lungless and cold blooded . 
Next : how shall we define the whale , by his obvious externals , so as conspicuously to label him for all time to come . 
To be short , then , a whale is a spouting fish with a horizontal tail . 
There you have him . 
However contracted , that definition is the result of expanded meditation . 
A walrus spouts much like a whale , but the walrus is not a fish , because he is amphibious . 
But the last term of the definition is still more cogent , as coupled with the first . 
Almost any one must have noticed that all the fish familiar to landsmen have not a flat , but a vertical , or up-and-down tail . 
Whereas , among spouting fish the tail , though it may be similarly shaped , invariably assumes a horizontal position . 
By the above definition of what a whale is , I do by no means exclude from the leviathanic brotherhood any sea creature hitherto identified with the whale by the best informed Nantucketers ; nor , on the other hand , link with it any fish hitherto authoritatively regarded as alien . 
* Hence , all the smaller , spouting and horizontal tailed fish must be included in this ground-plan of Cetology . 
Now , then , come the grand divisions of the entire whale host . 
* I am aware that down to the present time , the fish styled Lamatins and Dugongs -LRB- Pig-fish and Sow-fish of the Coffins of Nantucket -RRB- are included by many naturalists among the whales . 
But as these pig-fish are a noisy , contemptible set , mostly lurking in the mouths of rivers , and feeding on wet hay , and especially as they do not spout , I deny their credentials as whales ; and have presented them with their passports to quit the Kingdom of Cetology . 
First : According to magnitude I divide the whales into three primary BOOKS -LRB- subdivisible into CHAPTERS -RRB- , and these shall comprehend them all , both small and large . 
I . 
THE FOLIO WHALE ; II . 
the OCTAVO WHALE ; III . 
the DUODECIMO WHALE . 
As the type of the FOLIO I present the Sperm Whale ; of the OCTAVO , the Grampus ; of the DUODECIMO , the Porpoise . 
FOLIOS . 
Among these I here include the following chapters : -- I . 
The Sperm Whale ; II . 
the Right Whale ; III . 
the Fin Back Whale ; IV . 
the Humpbacked Whale ; V. the Razor Back Whale ; VI . 
the Sulphur Bottom Whale . 
Some pretend to see a difference between the Greenland whale of the English and the right whale of the Americans . 
But they precisely agree in all their grand features ; nor has there yet been presented a single determinate fact upon which to ground a radical distinction . 
It is by endless subdivisions based upon the most inconclusive differences , that some departments of natural history become so repellingly intricate . 
The right whale will be elsewhere treated of at some length , with reference to elucidating the sperm whale . 
names of Fin-Back , Tall-Spout , and Long-John , has been seen almost in every sea and is commonly the whale whose distant jet is so often descried by passengers crossing the Atlantic , in the New York packet-tracks . 
In the length he attains , and in his baleen , the Fin-back resembles the right whale , but is of a less portly girth , and a lighter color , approaching to olive . 
His great lips present a cable-like aspect , formed by the intertwisting , slanting folds of large wrinkles . 
His grand distinguishing feature , the fin , from which he derives his name , is often a conspicuous object . 
This fin is some three or four feet long , growing vertically from the hinder part of the back , of an angular shape , and with a very sharp pointed end . 
Even if not the slightest other part of the creature be visible , this isolated fin will , at times , be seen plainly projecting from the surface . 
When the sea is moderately calm , and slightly marked with spherical ripples , and this gnomon-like fin stands up and casts shadows upon the wrinkled surface , it may well be supposed that the watery circle surrounding it somewhat resembles a dial , with its style and wavy hour-lines graved on it . 
On that Ahaz-dial the shadow often goes back . 
The Fin-Back is not gregarious . 
He seems a whale-hater , as some men are man-haters . 
Very shy ; always going solitary ; unexpectedly rising to the surface in the remotest and most sullen waters ; his straight and single lofty jet rising like a tall misanthropic spear upon a barren plain ; gifted with such wondrous power and velocity in swimming , as to defy all present pursuit from man ; this leviathan seems the banished and unconquerable Cain of his race , bearing for his mark that style upon his back . 
From having the baleen in his mouth , the Fin-Back is sometimes included with the right whale , among a theoretic species denominated Whalebone whales , that is , whales with baleen . 
Of these so-called Whalebone whales , there would seem to be several varieties , most of which , however , are little known . 
Broad-nosed whales and beaked whales ; pike-headed whales ; bunched whales ; under-jawed whales and rostrated whales , are the fisherman 's names for a few sorts . 
In connexion with this appellative of `` Whalebone whales , '' it is of great importance to mention , that however such a nomenclature may be convenient in facilitating allusions to some kind of whales , yet it is in vain to attempt a clear classification of the Leviathan , founded upon either his baleen , or hump , or fin , or teeth ; notwithstanding that those marked parts or features very obviously seem better adapted to afford the basis for a regular system of Cetology than any other detached bodily distinctions , which the whale , in his kinds , presents . 
How then ? 
The baleen , hump , back-fin , and teeth ; these are things whose peculiarities are indiscriminately dispersed among all sorts of whales , without any regard to what may be the nature of their structure in other and more essential particulars . 
Thus , the sperm whale and the humpbacked whale , each has a hump ; but there the similitude ceases . 
Then this same humpbacked whale and the Greenland whale , each of these has baleen ; but there again the similitude ceases . 
And it is just the same with the other parts above mentioned . 
