Yet the voice spake true ; for scarce had he pushed from the ship , when numbers of sharks , seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath the hull , maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars , every time they dipped in the water ; and in this way accompanied the boat with their bites . 
It is a thing not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats in those swarming seas ; the sharks at times apparently following them in the same prescient way that vultures hover over the banners of marching regiments in the east . 
But these were the first sharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had been first descried ; and whether it was that Ahab 's crew were all such tiger-yellow barbarians , and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses of the sharks -- a matter sometimes well known to affect them , -- however it was , they seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others . 
`` Heart of wrought steel ! '' 
murmured Starbuck gazing over the side , and following with his eyes the receding boat -- `` canst thou yet ring boldly to that sight ? 
-- lowering thy keel among ravening sharks , and followed by them , open-mouthed to the chase ; and this the critical third day ? 
-- For when three days flow together in one continuous intense pursuit ; be sure the first is the morning , the second the noon , and the third the evening and the end of that thing -- be that end what it may . 
Oh ! 
my God ! 
what is this that shoots through me , and leaves me so deadly calm , yet expectant , -- fixed at the top of a shudder ! 
Future things swim before me , as in empty outlines and skeletons ; all the past is somehow grown dim . 
Mary , girl ; thou fadest in pale glories behind me ; boy ! 
I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue . 
Strangest problems of life seem clearing ; but clouds sweep between -- Is my journey 's end coming ? 
My legs feel faint ; like his who has footed it all day . 
Feel thy heart , -- beats it yet ? 
Stir thyself , Starbuck ! 
-- stave it off -- move , move ! 
speak aloud ! 
-- Mast-head there ! 
See ye my boy 's hand on the hill ? 
-- Crazed ; aloft there ! 
-- keep thy keenest eye upon the boats : -- mark well the whale ! 
-- Ho ! 
again ! 
-- drive off that hawk ! 
see ! 
he pecks -- he tears the vane '' -- pointing to the red flag flying at the main-truck -- `` Ha , he soars away with it ! 
-- Where 's the old man now ? 
see ` st thou that sight , oh Ahab ! 
-- shudder , shudder ! '' 
The boats had not gone very far , when by a signal from the mast-heads -- a downward pointed arm , Ahab knew that the whale had sounded ; but intending to be near him at the next rising , he held on his way a little sideways from the vessel ; the becharmed crew maintaining the profoundest silence , as the head-bent waves hammered and hammered against the opposing bow . 
`` Drive , drive in your nails , oh ye waves ! 
to their uttermost heads drive them in ! 
ye but strike a thing without a lid ; and no coffin and no hearse can be mine : -- and hemp only can kill me ! 
Ha ! 
ha ! '' 
Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles ; then quickly upheaved , as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice , swiftly rising to the surface . 
A low rumbling sound was heard ; a subterraneous hum ; and then all held their breaths ; as bedraggled with trailing ropes , and harpoons , and lances , a vast form shot lengthwise , but obliquely from the sea . 
Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist , it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air ; and then fell swamping back into the deep . 
Crushed thirty feet upwards , the waters flashed for an instant like heaps of fountains , then brokenly sank in a shower of flakes , leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the marble trunk of the whale . 
`` Give way ! '' 
cried Ahab to the oarsmen , and the boats darted forward to the attack ; but maddened by yesterday 's fresh irons that corroded in him , Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell from heaven . 
The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad white forehead , beneath the transparent skin , looked knitted together ; as head on , he came churning his tail among the boats ; and once more flailed them apart ; spilling out the irons and lances from the two mates ' boats , and dashing in one side of the upper part of their bows , but leaving Ahab 's almost without a scar . 
While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks ; and as the whale swimming out from them , turned , and showed one entire flank as he shot by them again ; at that moment a quick cry went up . 
Lashed round and round to the fish 's back ; pinioned in the turns upon turns in which , during the past night , the whale had reeled the involutions of the lines around him , the half torn body of the Parsee was seen ; his sable raiment frayed to shreds ; his distended eyes turned full upon old Ahab . 
The harpoon dropped from his hand . 
`` Befooled , befooled ! '' 
-- drawing in a long lean breath -- `` Aye , Parsee ! 
I see thee again . 
-- Aye , and thou goest before ; and this , this then is the hearse that thou didst promise . 
But I hold thee to the last letter of thy word . 
Where is the second hearse ? 
Away , mates , to the ship ! 
those boats are useless now ; repair them if ye can in time , and return to me ; if not , Ahab is enough to die -- Down , men ! 
the first thing that but offers to jump from this boat I stand in , that thing I harpoon . 
Ye are not other men , but my arms and my legs ; and so obey me . 
-- Where 's the whale ? 
gone down again ? '' 
But he looked too nigh the boat ; for as if bent upon escaping with the corpse he bore , and as if the particular place of the last encounter had been but a stage in his leeward voyage , Moby Dick was now again steadily swimming forward ; and had almost passed the ship , -- which thus far had been sailing in the contrary direction to him , though for the present her headway had been stopped . 
He seemed swimming with his utmost velocity , and now only intent upon pursuing his own straight path in the sea . 
`` Oh ! 
Ahab , '' cried Starbuck , `` not too late is it , even now , the third day , to desist . 
See ! 
Moby Dick seeks thee not . 
It is thou , thou , that madly seekest him ! '' 
Setting sail to the rising wind , the lonely boat was swiftly impelled to leeward , by both oars and canvas . 
And at last when Ahab was sliding by the vessel , so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck 's face as he leaned over the rail , he hailed him to turn the vessel about , and follow him , not too swiftly , at a judicious interval . 
Glancing upwards he saw Tashtego , Queequeg , and Daggoo , eagerly mounting to the three mast-heads ; while the oarsmen were rocking in the two staved boats which had but just been hoisted to the side , and were busily at work in repairing them . 
One after the other , through the port-holes , as he sped , he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask , busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances . 
As he saw all this ; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats ; far other hammers seemed driving a nail into his heart . 
But he rallied . 
And now marking that the vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head , he shouted to Tashtego , who had just gained that perch , to descend again for another flag , and a hammer and nails , and so nail it to the mast . 
Whether fagged by the three days ' running chase , and the resistance to his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore ; or whether it was some latent deceitfulness and malice in him : whichever was true , the White Whale 's way now began to abate , as it seemed , from the boat so rapidly nearing him once more ; though indeed the whale 's last start had not been so long a one as before . 
And still as Ahab glided over the waves the unpitying sharks accompanied him ; and so pertinaciously stuck to the boat ; and so continually bit at the plying oars , that the blades became jagged and crunched , and left small splinters in the sea , at almost every dip . 
`` Heed them not ! 
those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars . 
Pull on ! 
't is the better rest , the sharks ' jaw than the yielding water . '' 
`` But at every bite , sir , the thin blades grow smaller and smaller ! '' 
`` They will last long enough ! 
pull on ! 
-- But who can tell '' -- he muttered -- `` whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on Ahab ? 
-- But pull on ! 
Aye , all alive , now -- we near him . 
The helm ! 
take the helm ! 
let me pass , '' -- and so saying two of the oarsmen helped him forward to the bows of the still flying boat . 
At length as the craft was cast to one side , and ran ranging along with the White Whale 's flank , he seemed strangely oblivious of its advance -- as the whale sometimes will -- and Ahab was fairly within the smoky mountain mist , which , thrown off from the whale 's spout , curled round his great Monadnock hump ; he was even thus close to him ; when , with body arched back , and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to the poise , he darted his fierce iron , and his far fiercer curse into the hated whale . 
As both steel and curse sank to the socket , as if sucked into a morass , Moby Dick sideways writhed ; spasmodically rolled his nigh flank against the bow , and , without staving a hole in it , so suddenly canted the boat over , that had it not been for the elevated part of the gunwale to which he then clung , Ahab would once more have been tossed into the sea . 
As it was , three of the oarsmen -- who foreknew not the precise instant of the dart , and were therefore unprepared for its effects -- these were flung out ; but so fell , that , in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again , and rising to its level on a combing wave , hurled themselves bodily inboard again ; the third man helplessly dropping astern , but still afloat and swimming . 
Almost simultaneously , with a mighty volition of ungraduated , instantaneous swiftness , the White Whale darted through the weltering sea . 
But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns with the line , and hold it so ; and commanded the crew to turn round on their seats , and tow the boat up to the mark ; the moment the treacherous line felt that double strain and tug , it snapped in the empty air ! 
`` What breaks in me ? 
Some sinew cracks ! 
-- 't is whole again ; oars ! 
oars ! 
Burst in upon him ! '' 
Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat , the whale wheeled round to present his blank forehead at bay ; but in that evolution , catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship ; seemingly seeing in it the source of all his persecutions ; bethinking it -- it may be -- a larger and nobler foe ; of a sudden , he bore down upon its advancing prow , smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam . 
Ahab staggered ; his hand smote his forehead . 
