I 'd crawl somewhere to a cave , and slink there . 
And yet , 't is a noble and heroic thing , the wind ! 
who ever conquered it ? 
In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow . 
Run tilting at it , and you but run through it . 
Ha ! 
a coward wind that strikes stark naked men , but will not stand to receive a single blow . 
Even Ahab is a braver thing -- a nobler thing than that . 
Would now the wind but had a body ; but all the things that most exasperate and outrage mortal man , all these things are bodiless , but only bodiless as objects , not as agents . 
There 's a most special , a most cunning , oh , a most malicious difference ! 
And yet , I say again , and swear it now , that there 's something all glorious and gracious in the wind . 
These warm Trade Winds , at least , that in the clear heavens blow straight on , in strong and steadfast , vigorous mildness ; and veer not from their mark , however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack , and mightiest Mississippies of the land swift and swerve about , uncertain where to go at last . 
And by the eternal Poles ! 
these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on ; these Trades , or something like them -- something so unchangeable , and full as strong , blow my keeled soul along ! 
To it ! 
Aloft there ! 
What d'ye see ? '' 
`` Nothing , sir . '' 
`` Nothing ! 
and noon at hand ! 
The doubloon goes a-begging ! 
See the sun ! 
Aye , aye , it must be so . 
I 've over-sailed him . 
How , got the start ? 
Aye , he 's chasing me now ; not I , him -- that 's bad ; I might have known it , too . 
Fool ! 
the lines -- the harpoons he 's towing . 
Aye , aye , I have run him by last night . 
About ! 
about ! 
Come down , all of ye , but the regular look outs ! 
Man the braces ! '' 
Steering as she had done , the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod 's quarter , so that now being pointed in the reverse direction , the braced ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own white wake . 
`` Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw , '' murmured Starbuck to himself , as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail . 
`` God keep us , but already my bones feel damp within me , and from the inside wet my flesh . 
I misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him ! '' 
`` Stand by to sway me up ! '' 
cried Ahab , advancing to the hempen basket . 
`` We should meet him soon . '' 
`` Aye , aye , sir , '' and straightway Starbuck did Ahab 's bidding , and once more Ahab swung on high . 
A whole hour now passed ; gold-beaten out to ages . 
Time itself now held long breaths with keen suspense . 
But at last , some three points off the weather bow , Ahab descried the spout again , and instantly from the three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voiced it . 
`` Forehead to forehead I meet thee , this third time , Moby Dick ! 
On deck there ! 
-- brace sharper up ; crowd her into the wind 's eye . 
He 's too far off to lower yet , Mr. Starbuck . 
The sails shake ! 
Stand over that helmsman with a top-maul ! 
So , so ; he travels fast , and I must down . 
But let me have one more good round look aloft here at the sea ; there 's time for that . 
An old , old sight , and yet somehow so young ; aye , and not changed a wink since I first saw it , a boy , from the sand-hills of Nantucket ! 
The same -- the same ! 
-- the same to Noah as to me . 
There 's a soft shower to leeward . 
Such lovely leewardings ! 
They must lead somewhere -- to something else than common land , more palmy than the palms . 
Leeward ! 
the white whale goes that way ; look to windward , then ; the better if the bitterer quarter . 
But good bye , good bye , old mast-head ! 
What 's this ? 
-- green ? 
aye , tiny mosses in these warped cracks . 
No such green weather stains on Ahab 's head ! 
There 's the difference now between man 's old age and matter 's . 
But aye , old mast , we both grow old together ; sound in our hulls , though are we not , my ship ? 
Aye , minus a leg , that 's all . 
By heaven this dead wood has the better of my live flesh every way . 
I ca n't compare with it ; and I 've known some ships made of dead trees outlast the lives of men made of the most vital stuff of vital fathers . 
What 's that he said ? 
he should still go before me , my pilot ; and yet to be seen again ? 
But where ? 
Will I have eyes at the bottom of the sea , supposing I descend those endless stairs ? 
and all night I 've been sailing from him , wherever he did sink to . 
Aye , aye , like many more thou told ` st direful truth as touching thyself , O Parsee ; but , Ahab , there thy shot fell short . 
Good bye , mast-head -- keep a good eye upon the whale , the while I 'm gone . 
We 'll talk to-morrow , nay , to-night , when the white whale lies down there , tied by head and tail . '' 
He gave the word ; and still gazing round him , was steadily lowered through the cloven blue air to the deck . 
In due time the boats were lowered ; but as standing in his shallop 's stern , Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent , he waved to the mate , -- who held one of the tackle -- ropes on deck -- and bade him pause . 
`` Starbuck ! '' 
`` Sir ? '' 
`` For the third time my soul 's ship starts upon this voyage , Starbuck . '' 
`` Aye , sir , thou wilt have it so . '' 
`` Some ships sail from their ports , and ever afterwards are missing , Starbuck ! '' 
`` Truth , sir : saddest truth . '' 
`` Some men die at ebb tide ; some at low water ; some at the full of the flood ; -- and I feel now like a billow that 's all one crested comb , Starbuck . 
I am old ; -- shake hands with me , man . '' 
Their hands met ; their eyes fastened ; Starbuck 's tears the glue . 
`` Oh , my captain , my captain ! 
-- noble heart -- go not -- go not ! 
-- see , it 's a brave man that weeps ; how great the agony of the persuasion then ! '' 
`` Lower away ! '' 
- cried Ahab , tossing the mate 's arm from him . 
`` Stand by for the crew ! '' 
In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern . 
`` The sharks ! 
the sharks ! '' 
cried a voice from the low cabin-window there ; `` O master , my master , come back ! '' 
But Ahab heard nothing ; for his own voice was high-lifted then ; and the boat leaped on . 
