Come , why do n't some of ye burst a blood-vessel ? 
Who 's that been dropping an anchor overboard -- we do n't budge an inch -- we 're becalmed . 
Halloo , here 's grass growing in the boat 's bottom -- and by the Lord , the mast there 's budding . 
This wo n't do , boys . 
Look at that Yarman ! 
The short and long of it is , men , will ye spit fire or not ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
see the suds he makes ! '' 
cried Flask , dancing up and down -- `` What a hump -- Oh , do pile on the beef -- lays like a log ! 
Oh ! 
my lads , do spring -- slap-jacks and quahogs for supper , you know , my lads -- baked clams and muffins -- oh , do , do , spring , -- he 's a hundred barreler -- do n't lose him now -- do n't oh , do n't ! 
-- see that Yarman -- Oh , wo n't ye pull for your duff , my lads -- such a sog ! 
such a sogger ! 
Do n't ye love sperm ? 
There goes three thousand dollars , men ! 
-- a bank ! 
-- a whole bank ! 
The bank of England ! 
-- Oh , do , do , do ! 
-- What 's that Yarman about now ? '' 
At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder at the advancing boats , and also his oil-can ; perhaps with the double view of retarding his rivals ' way , and at the same time economically accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss . 
`` The unmannerly Dutch dogger ! '' 
cried Stubb . 
`` Pull now , men , like fifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils . 
What d'ye say , Tashtego ; are you the man to snap your spine in two-and-twenty pieces for the honor of old Gayhead ? 
What d'ye say ? '' 
`` I say , pull like god-dam , '' -- cried the Indian . 
Fiercely , but evenly incited by the taunts of the German , the Pequod 's three boats now began ranging almost abreast ; and , so disposed , momentarily neared him . 
In that fine , loose , chivalrous attitude of the headsman when drawing near to his prey , the three mates stood up proudly , occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating cry of , `` There she slides , now ! 
Hurrah for the white-ash breeze ! 
Down with the Yarman ! 
Sail over him ! '' 
But so decided an original start had Derick had , that spite of all their gallantry , he would have proved the victor in this race , had not a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught the blade of his midship oarsman . 
While this clumsy lubber was striving to free his white-ash , and while , in consequence , Derick 's boat was nigh to capsizing , and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage ; -- that was a good time for Starbuck , Stubb , and Flask . 
With a shout , they took a mortal start forwards , and slantingly ranged up on the German 's quarter . 
An instant more , and all four boats were diagonically in the whale 's immediate wake , while stretching from them , on both sides , was the foaming swell that he made . 
It was a terrific , most pitiable , and maddening sight . 
The whale was now going head out , and sending his spout before him in a continual tormented jet ; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of fright . 
Now to this hand , now to that , he yawed in his faltering flight , and still at every billow that he broke , he spasmodically sank in the sea , or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating fin . 
So have I seen a bird with clipped wing , making affrighted broken circles in the air , vainly striving to escape the piratical hawks . 
But the bird has a voice , and with plaintive cries will make known her fear ; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea , was chained up and enchanted in him ; he had no voice , save that choking respiration through his spiracle , and this made the sight of him unspeakably pitiable ; while still , in his amazing bulk , portcullis jaw , and omnipotent tail , there was enough to appal the stoutest man who so pitied . 
Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod 's boats the advantage , and rather than be thus foiled of his game , Derick chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually long dart , ere the last chance would for ever escape . 
But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke , than all three tigers -- Queequeg , Tashtego , Daggoo -- instinctively sprang to their feet , and standing in a diagonal row , simultaneously pointed their barbs ; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer , their three Nantucket irons entered the whale . 
Blinding vapors of foam and white-fire ! 
The three boats , in the first fury of the whale 's headlong rush , bumped the German 's aside with such force , that both Derick and his baffled harpooneer were spilled out , and sailed over by the three flying keels . 
`` Do n't be afraid , my butter-boxes , '' cried Stubb , casting a passing glance upon them as he shot by ; `` ye 'll be picked up presently -- all right -- I saw some sharks astern -- St. Bernard 's dogs , you know -- relieve distressed travellers . 
Hurrah ! 
this is the way to sail now . 
Every keel a sunbeam ! 
Hurrah ! 
-- Here we go like three tin kettles at the tail of a mad cougar ! 
This puts me in mind of fastening to an elephant in a tilbury on a plain -- makes the wheelspokes fly , boys , when you fasten to him that way ; and there 's danger of being pitched out too , when you strike a hill . 
Hurrah ! 
this is the way a fellow feels when he 's going to Davy Jones -- all a rush down an endless inclined plane ! 
Hurrah ! 
this whale carries the everlasting mail ! '' 
But the monster 's run was a brief one . 
Giving a sudden gasp , he tumultuously sounded . 
With a grating rush , the three lines flew round the loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in them ; while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid sounding would soon exhaust the lines , that using all their dexterous might , they caught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on ; till at last -- owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined chocks of the boats , whence the three ropes went straight down into the blue -- the gunwales of the bows were almost even with the water , while the three sterns tilted high in the air . 
And the whale soon ceasing to sound , for some time they remained in that attitude , fearful of expending more line , though the position was a little ticklish . 
But though boats have been taken down and lost in this way , yet it is this `` holding on , '' as it is called ; this hooking up by the sharp barbs of his live flesh from the back ; this it is that often torments the Leviathan into soon rising again to meet the sharp lance of his foes . 
Yet not to speak of the peril of the thing , it is to be doubted whether this course is always the best ; for it is but reasonable to presume , that the longer the stricken whale stays under water , the more he is exhausted . 
Because , owing to the enormous surface of him -- in a full grown sperm whale something less than 2000 square feet -- the pressure of the water is immense . 
We all know what an astonishing atmospheric weight we ourselves stand up under ; even here , above-ground , in the air ; how vast , then , the burden of a whale , bearing on his back a column of two hundred fathoms of ocean ! 
It must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres . 
One whaleman has estimated it at the weight of twenty line-of-battle ships , with all their guns , and stores , and men on board . 
As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea , gazing down into its eternal blue noon ; and as not a single groan or cry of any sort , nay , not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its depths ; what landsman would have thought , that beneath all that silence and placidity , the utmost monster of the seas was writhing and wrenching in agony ! 
Not eight inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows . 
Seems it credible that by three such thin threads the great Leviathan was suspended like the big weight to an eight day clock . 
Suspended ? 
and to what ? 
To three bits of board . 
Is this the creature of whom it was once so triumphantly said -- `` Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons ? 
or his head with fish-spears ? 
The sword of him that layeth at him can not hold , the spear , the dart , nor the habergeon : he esteemeth iron as straw ; the arrow can not make him flee ; darts are counted as stubble ; he laugheth at the shaking of a spear ! '' 
This the creature ? 
this he ? 
Oh ! 
that unfulfilments should follow the prophets . 
For with the strength of a thousand thighs in his tail , Leviathan had run his head under the mountains of the sea , to hide him from the Pequod 's fishspears ! 
In that sloping afternoon sunlight , the shadows that the three boats sent down beneath the surface , must have been long enough and broad enough to shade half Xerxes ' army . 
Who can tell how appalling to the wounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over his head ! 
`` Stand by , men ; he stirs , '' cried Starbuck , as the three lines suddenly vibrated in the water , distinctly conducting upwards to them , as by magnetic wires , the life and death throbs of the whale , so that every oarsman felt them in his seat . 
The next moment , relieved in a great part from the downward strain at the bows , the boats gave a sudden bounce upwards , as a small icefield will , when a dense herd of white bears are scared from it into the sea . 
`` Haul in ! 
Haul in ! '' 
cried Starbuck again ; `` he 's rising . '' 
The lines , of which , hardly an instant before , not one hand 's breadth could have been gained , were now in long quick coils flung back all dripping into the boats , and soon the whale broke water within two ship 's length of the hunters . 
His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion . 
In most land animals there are certain valves or flood-gates in many of their veins , whereby when wounded , the blood is in some degree at least instantly shut off in certain directions . 
Not so with the whale ; one of whose peculiarities it is , to have an entire non-valvular structure of the blood-vessels , so that when pierced even by so small a point as a harpoon , a deadly drain is at once begun upon his whole arterial system ; and when this is heightened by the extraordinary pressure of water at a great distance below the surface , his life may be said to pour from him in incessant streams . 
Yet so vast is the quantity of blood in him , and so distant and numerous its interior fountains , that he will keep thus bleeding and bleeding for a considerable period ; even as in a drought a river will flow , whose source is in the well-springs of far-off and indiscernible hills . 
Even now , when the boats pulled upon this whale , and perilously drew over his swaying flukes , and the lances were darted into him , they were followed by steady jets from the new made wound , which kept continually playing , while the natural spout-hole in his head was only at intervals , however rapid , sending its affrighted moisture into the air . 
From this last vent no blood yet came , because no vital part of him had thus far been struck . 
His life , as they significantly call it , was untouched . 
As the boats now more closely surrounded him , the whole upper part of his form , with much of it that is ordinarily submerged , was plainly revealed . 
His eyes , or rather the places where his eyes had been , were beheld . 
As strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes of the noblest oaks when prostrate , so from the points which the whale 's eyes had once occupied , now protruded blind bulbs , horribly pitiable to see . 
But pity there was none . 
For all his old age , and his one arm , and his blind eyes , he must die the death and be murdered , in order to light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men , and also to illuminate the solemn churches that preach unconditional inoffensiveness by all to all . 
