I confess , that since Jonah , few whalemen have penetrated very far beneath the skin of the adult whale ; nevertheless , I have been blessed with an opportunity to dissect him in miniature . 
In a ship I belonged to , a small cub Sperm Whale was once bodily hoisted to the deck for his poke or bag , to make sheaths for the barbs of the harpoons , and for the heads of the lances . 
Think you I let that chance go , without using my boat-hatchet and jack-knife , and breaking the seal and reading all the contents of that young cub ? 
And as for my exact knowledge of the bones of the leviathan in their gigantic , full grown development , for that rare knowledge I am indebted to my late royal friend Tranquo , king of Tranque , one of the Arsacides . 
For being at Tranque , years ago , when attached to the trading-ship Dey of Algiers , I was invited to spend part of the Arsacidean holidays with the lord of Tranque , at his retired palm villa at Pupella ; a sea-side glen not very far distant from what our sailors called Bamboo-Town , his capital . 
Among many other fine qualities , my royal friend Tranquo , being gifted with a devout love for all matters of barbaric vertu , had brought together in Pupella whatever rare things the more ingenious of his people could invent ; chiefly carved woods of wonderful devices , chiselled shells , inlaid spears , costly paddles , aromatic canoes ; and all these distributed among whatever natural wonders , the wonder-freighted , tribute-rendering waves had cast upon his shores . 
Chief among these latter was a great Sperm Whale , which , after an unusually long raging gale , had been found dead and stranded , with his head against a cocoa-nut tree , whose plumage-like , tufted droopings seemed his verdant jet . 
When the vast body had at last been stripped of its fathomdeep enfoldings , and the bones become dust dry in the sun , then the skeleton was carefully transported up the Pupella glen , where a grand temple of lordly palms now sheltered it . 
The ribs were hung with trophies ; the vertebrae were carved with Arsacidean annals , in strange hieroglyphics ; in the skull , the priests kept up an unextinguished aromatic flame , so that the mystic head again sent forth its vapory spout ; while , suspended from a bough , the terrific lower jaw vibrated over all the devotees , like the hair-hung sword that so affrighted Damocles . 
It was a wondrous sight . 
The wood was green as mosses of the Icy Glen ; the trees stood high and haughty , feeling their living sap ; the industrious earth beneath was as a weaver 's loom , with a gorgeous carpet on it , whereof the ground-vine tendrils formed the warp and woof , and the living flowers the figures . 
All the trees , with all their laden branches ; all the shrubs , and ferns , and grasses ; the message-carrying air ; all these unceasingly were active . 
Through the lacings of the leaves , the great sun seemed a flying shuttle weaving the unwearied verdure . 
Oh , busy weaver ! 
unseen weaver ! 
-- pause ! 
-- one word ! 
-- whither flows the fabric ? 
what palace may it deck ? 
wherefore all these ceaseless toilings ? 
Speak , weaver ! 
-- stay thy hand ! 
-- but one single word with thee ! 
Nay -- the shuttle flies -- the figures float from forth the loom ; the fresher-rushing carpet for ever slides away . 
The weaver-god , he weaves ; and by that weaving is he deafened , that he hears no mortal voice ; and by that humming , we , too , who look on the loom are deafened ; and only when we escape it shall we hear the thousand voices that speak through it . 
For even so it is in all material factories . 
The spoken words that are inaudible among the flying spindles ; those same words are plainly heard without the walls , bursting from the opened casements . 
Thereby have villainies been detected . 
Ah , mortal ! 
then , be heedful ; for so , in all this din of the great world 's loom , thy subtlest thinkings may be overheard afar . 
Now , amid the green , life-restless loom of that Arsacidean wood , the great , white , worshipped skeleton lay lounging -- a gigantic idler ! 
Yet , as the ever-woven verdant warp and woof intermixed and hummed around him , the mighty idler seemed the cunning weaver ; himself all woven over with the vines ; every month assuming greener , fresher verdure ; but himself a skeleton . 
Life folded Death ; Death trellised Life ; the grim god wived with youthful Life , and begat him curly-headed glories . 
Now , when with royal Tranquo I visited this wondrous whale , and saw the skull an altar , and the artificial smoke ascending from where the real jet had issued , I marvelled that the king should regard a chapel as an object of vertu . 
He laughed . 
But more I marvelled that the priests should swear that smoky jet of his was genuine . 
To and fro I paced before this skeleton -- brushed the vines aside -- broke through the ribs -- and with a ball of Arsacidean twine , wandered , eddied long amid its many winding , shaded colonnades and arbors . 
But soon my line was out ; and following it back , I emerged from the opening where I entered . 
I saw no living thing within ; naught was there but bones . 
Cutting me a green measuring-rod , I once more dived within the skeleton . 
From their arrow-slit in the skull , the priests perceived me taking the altitude of the final rib , `` How now ! '' 
they shouted ; `` Dar ` st thou measure this our god ! 
That 's for us . '' 
`` Aye , priests -- well , how long do ye make him , then ? '' 
But hereupon a fierce contest rose among them , concerning feet and inches ; they cracked each other 's sconces with their yard-sticks -- the great skull echoed -- and seizing that lucky chance , I quickly concluded my own admeasurements . 
These admeasurements I now propose to set before you . 
But first , be it recorded , that , in this matter , I am not free to utter any fancied measurements I please . 
Because there are skeleton authorities you can refer to , to test my accuracy . 
There is a Leviathanic Museum , they tell me , in Hull , England , one of the whaling ports of that country , where they have some fine specimens of fin-backs and other whales . 
Likewise , I have heard that in the museum of Manchester , in New Hampshire , they have what the proprietors call `` the only perfect specimen of a Greenland or River Whale in the United States . '' 
Moreover , at a place in Yorkshire , England , Burton Constable by name , a certain Sir Clifford Constable has in his possession the skeleton of a Sperm Whale , but of moderate size , by no means of the full-grown magnitude of my friend King Tranquo 's . 
In both cases , the stranded whales to which these two skeletons belonged , were originally claimed by their proprietors upon similar grounds . 
King Tranquo seizing his because he wanted it ; and Sir Clifford , because he was lord of the seignories of those parts . 
Sir Clifford 's whale has been articulated throughout ; so that , like a great chest of drawers , you can open and shut him , in all his bony cavities -- spread out his ribs like a gigantic fan -- and swing all day upon his lower jaw . 
Locks are to be put upon some of his trap-doors and shutters ; and a footman will show round future visitors with a bunch of keys at his side . 
Sir Clifford thinks of charging twopence for a peep at the whispering gallery in the spinal column ; threepence to hear the echo in the hollow of his cerebellum ; and sixpence for the unrivalled view from his forehead . 
The skeleton dimensions I shall now proceed to set down are copied verbatim from my right arm , where I had them tattooed ; as in my wild wanderings at that period , there was no other secure way of preserving such valuable statistics . 
But as I was crowded for space , and wished the other parts of my body to remain a blank page for a poem I was then composing -- at least , what untattooed parts might remain -- I did not trouble myself with the odd inches ; nor , indeed , should inches at all enter into a congenial admeasurement of the whale . 
Measurement of The Whale 's Skeleton In the first place , I wish to lay before you a particular , plain statement , touching the living bulk of this leviathan , whose skeleton we are briefly to exhibit . 
Such a statement may prove useful here . 
According to a careful calculation I have made , and which I partly base upon Captain Scoresby 's estimate , of seventy tons for the largest sized Greenland whale of sixty feet in length ; according to my careful calculation , I say , a Sperm Whale of the largest magnitude , between eighty-five and ninety feet in length , and something less than forty feet in its fullest circumference , such a whale will weigh at least ninety tons ; so that , reckoning thirteen men to a ton , he would considerably outweigh the combined population of a whole village of one thousand one hundred inhabitants . 
Think you not then that brains , like yoked cattle , should be put to this leviathan , to make him at all budge to any landsman 's imagination ? 
Having already in various ways put before you his skull , spout-hole , jaw , teeth , tail , forehead , fins , and divers other parts , I shall now simply point out what is most interesting in the general bulk of his unobstructed bones . 
But as the colossal skull embraces so very large a proportion of the entire extent of the skeleton ; as it is by far the most complicated part ; and as nothing is to be repeated concerning it in this chapter , you must not fail to carry it in your mind , or under your arm , as we proceed , otherwise you will not gain a complete notion of the general structure we are about to view . 
In length , the Sperm Whale 's skeleton at Tranque measured seventy-two feet : so that when fully invested and extended in life , he must have been ninety feet long ; for in the whale , the skeleton loses about one fifth in length compared with the living body . 
Of this seventy-two feet , his skull and jaw comprised some twenty feet , leaving some fifty feet of plain backbone . 
Attached to this back-bone , for something less than a third of its length , was the mighty circular basket of ribs which once enclosed his vitals . 
To me this vast ivory-ribbed chest , with the long , unrelieved spine , extending far away from it in a straight line , not a little resembled the hull of a great ship new-laid upon the stocks , when only some twenty of her naked bow-ribs are inserted , and the keel is otherwise , for the time , but a long , disconnected timber . 
The ribs were ten on a side . 
The first , to begin from the neck , was nearly six feet long ; the second , third , and fourth were each successively longer , till you came to the climax of the fifth , or one of the middle ribs , which measured eight feet and some inches . 
From that part , the remaining ribs diminished , till the tenth and last only spanned five feet and some inches . 
In general thickness , they all bore a seemly correspondence to their length . 
The middle ribs were the most arched . 
In some of the Arsacides they are used for beams whereon to lay footpath bridges over small streams . 
In considering these ribs , I could not but be struck anew with the circumstance , so variously repeated in this book , that the skeleton of the whale is by no means the mould of his invested form . 
The largest of the Tranque ribs , one of the middle ones , occupied that part of the fish which , in life , is greatest in depth . 
Now , the greatest depth of the invested body of this particular whale must have been at least sixteen feet ; whereas , the corresponding rib measured but little more than eight feet . 
So that this rib only conveyed half of the true notion of the living magnitude of that part . 
Besides , for some way , where I now saw but a naked spine , all that had been once wrapped round with tons of added bulk in flesh , muscle , blood , and bowels . 
Still more , for the ample fins , I here saw but a few disordered joints ; and in place of the weighty and majestic , but boneless flukes , an utter blank ! 
How vain and foolish , then , thought I , for timid untravelled man to try to comprehend aright this wondrous whale , by merely poring over his dead attenuated skeleton , stretched in this peaceful wood . 
No . 
Only in the heart of quickest perils ; only when within the eddyings of his angry flukes ; only on the profound unbounded sea , can the fully invested whale be truly and livingly found out . 
But the spine . 
For that , the best way we can consider it is , with a crane , to pile its bones high up on end . 
No speedy enterprise . 
But now it 's done , it looks much like Pompey 's Pillar . 
There are forty and odd vertebrae in all , which in the skeleton are not locked together . 
They mostly lie like the great knobbed blocks on a Gothic spire , forming solid courses of heavy masonry . 
The largest , a middle one , is in width something less than three feet , and in depth more than four . 
The smallest , where the spine tapers away into the tail , is only two inches in width , and looks something like a white billiard-ball . 
I was told that there were still smaller ones , but they had been lost by some little cannibal urchins , the priest 's children , who had stolen them to play marbles with . 
Thus we see how that the spine of even the hugest of living things tapers off at last into simple child 's play . 
The Fossil Whale From his mighty bulk the whale affords a most congenial theme whereon to enlarge , amplify , and generally expatiate . 
Would you , you could not compress him . 
By good rights he should only be treated of in imperial folio . 
Not to tell over again his furlongs from spiracle to tail , and the yards he measures about the waist ; only think of the gigantic involutions of his intestines , where they lie in him like great cables and hawsers coiled away in the subterranean orlop-deck of a line-of-battle-ship . 
Since I have undertaken to manhandle this Leviathan , it behoves me to approve myself omnisciently exhaustive in the enterprise ; not overlooking the minutest seminal germs of his blood , and spinning him out to the uttermost coil of his bowels . 
Having already described him in most of his present habitatory and anatomical peculiarities , it now remains to magnify him in an archaeological , fossiliferous , and antediluvian point of view . 
Applied to any other creature than the Leviathan -- to an ant or a flea -- such portly terms might justly be deemed unwarrantably grandiloquent . 
