The sailors at the fore and mizzen had come down ; the line tubs were fixed in their places ; the cranes were thrust out ; the mainyard was backed , and the three boats swung over the sea like three samphire baskets over high cliffs . 
Outside of the bulwarks their eager crews with one hand clung to the rail , while one foot was expectantly poised on the gunwale . 
So look the long line of man-of-war 's men about to throw themselves on board an enemy 's ship . 
But at this critical instant a sudden exclamation was heard that took every eye from the whale . 
With a start all glared at dark Ahab , who was surrounded by five dusky phantoms that seemed fresh formed out of air . 
The First Lowering The phantoms , for so they then seemed , were flitting on the other side of the deck , and , with a noiseless celerity , were casting loose the tackles and bands of the boat which swung there . 
This boat had always been deemed one of the spare boats , though technically called the captain 's , on account of its hanging from the starboard quarter . 
The figure that now stood by its bows was tall and swart , with one white tooth evilly protruding from its steel-like lips . 
A rumpled Chinese jacket of black cotton funereally invested him , with wide black trowsers of the same dark stuff . 
But strangely crowning this ebonness was a glistening white plaited turban , the living hair braided and coiled round and round upon his head . 
Less swart in aspect , the companions of this figure were of that vivid , tiger-yellow complexion peculiar to some of the aboriginal natives of the Manillas ; -- a race notorious for a certain diabolism of subtilty , and by some honest white mariners supposed to be the paid spies and secret confidential agents on the water of the devil , their lord , whose counting-room they suppose to be elsewhere . 
While yet the wondering ship 's company were gazing upon these strangers , Ahab cried out to the white-turbaned old man at their head , `` All ready there , Fedallah ? '' 
`` Ready , '' was the half-hissed reply . 
`` Lower away then ; d'ye hear ? '' 
shouting across the deck . 
`` Lower away there , I say . '' 
Such was the thunder of his voice , that spite of their amazement the men sprang over the rail ; the sheaves whirled round in the blocks ; with a wallow , the three boats dropped into the sea ; while , with a dexterous , off-handed daring , unknown in any other vocation , the sailors , goat-like , leaped down the rolling ship 's side into the tossed boats below . 
Hardly had they pulled out from under the ship 's lee , when a fourth keel , coming from the windward side , pulled round under the stern , and showed the five strangers rowing Ahab , who , standing erect in the stern , loudly hailed Starbuck , Stubb , and Flask , to spread themselves widely , so as to cover a large expanse of water . 
But with all their eyes again riveted upon the swart Fedallah and his crew , the inmates of the other boats obeyed not the command . 
`` Captain Ahab ? 
- '' said Starbuck . 
`` Spread yourselves , '' cried Ahab ; `` give way , all four boats . 
Thou , Flask , pull out more to leeward ! '' 
`` Aye , aye , sir , '' cheerily cried little King-Post , sweeping round his great steering oar . 
`` Lay back ! '' 
addressing his crew . 
`` There ! 
-- there ! 
-- there again ! 
There she blows right ahead , boys ! 
-- lay back ! 
`` Never heed yonder yellow boys , Archy . '' 
`` Oh , I do n't mind 'em , sir , '' said Archy ; `` I knew it all before now . 
Did n't I hear 'em in the hold ? 
And did n't I tell Cabaco here of it ? 
What say ye , Cabaco ? 
They are stowaways , Mr. Flask . '' 
`` Pull , pull , my fine hearts-alive ; pull , my children ; pull , my little ones , '' drawlingly and soothingly sighed Stubb to his crew , some of whom still showed signs of uneasiness . 
`` Why do n't you break your backbones , my boys ? 
What is it you stare at ? 
Those chaps in yonder boat ? 
Tut ! 
They are only five more hands come to help us never mind from where the more the merrier . 
Pull , then , do pull ; never mind the brimstone devils are good fellows enough . 
So , so ; there you are now ; that 's the stroke for a thousand pounds ; that 's the stroke to sweep the stakes ! 
Hurrah for the gold cup of sperm oil , my heroes ! 
Three cheers , men -- all hearts alive ! 
Easy , easy ; do n't be in a hurry -- do n't be in a hurry . 
Why do n't you snap your oars , you rascals ? 
Bite something , you dogs ! 
So , so , so , then : -- softly , softly ! 
That 's it -- that 's it ! 
long and strong . 
Give way there , give way ! 
The devil fetch ye , ye ragamuffin rapscallions ; ye are all asleep . 
Stop snoring , ye sleepers , and pull . 
Pull , will ye ? 
pull , ca n't ye ? 
pull , wo n't ye ? 
Why in the name of gudgeons and ginger-cakes do n't ye pull ? 
-- pull and break something ! 
pull , and start your eyes out ! 
Here , '' whipping out the sharp knife from his girdle ; `` every mother 's son of ye draw his knife , and pull with the blade between his teeth . 
That 's it -- that 's it . 
Now ye do something ; that looks like it , my steel-bits . 
Start her -- start her , my silverspoons ! 
Start her , marling-spikes ! '' 
Stubb 's exordium to his crew is given here at large , because he had rather a peculiar way of talking to them in general , and especially in inculcating the religion of rowing . 
But you must not suppose from this specimen of his sermonizings that he ever flew into downright passions with his congregation . 
Not at all ; and therein consisted his chief peculiarity . 
He would say the most terrific things to his crew , in a tone so strangely compounded of fun and fury , and the fury seemed so calculated merely as a spice to the fun , that no oarsman could hear such queer invocations without pulling for dear life , and yet pulling for the mere joke of the thing . 
Besides he all the time looked so easy and indolent himself , so loungingly managed his steering-oar , and so broadly gaped -- open-mouthed at times -- that the mere sight of such a yawning commander , by sheer force of contrast , acted like a charm upon the crew . 
Then again , Stubb was one of those odd sort of humorists , whose jollity is sometimes so curiously ambiguous , as to put all inferiors on their guard in the matter of obeying them . 
In obedience to a sign from Ahab , Starbuck was now pulling obliquely across Stubb 's bow ; and when for a minute or so the two boats were pretty near to each other , Stubb hailed the mate . 
`` Mr. Starbuck ! 
larboard boat there , ahoy ! 
a word with ye , sir , if ye please ! '' 
`` Halloa ! '' 
returned Starbuck , turning round not a single inch as he spoke ; still earnestly but whisperingly urging his crew ; his face set like a flint from Stubb 's . 
`` What think ye of those yellow boys , sir ! 
`` Smuggled on board , somehow , before the ship sailed . 
-LRB- Strong , strong , boys ! -RRB- '' 
in a whisper to his crew , then speaking out loud again : `` A sad business , Mr. Stubb ! 
-LRB- seethe her , seethe her , my lads ! -RRB- 
but never mind , Mr. Stubb , all for the best . 
Let all your crew pull strong , come what will . 
-LRB- Spring , my men , spring ! -RRB- 
There 's hogsheads of sperm ahead , Mr. Stubb , and that 's what ye came for . 
-LRB- Pull , my boys ! -RRB- 
Sperm , sperm 's the play ! 
This at least is duty ; duty and profit hand in hand . '' 
`` Aye , aye , I thought as much , '' soliloquized Stubb , when the boats diverged , `` as soon as I clapt eye on 'em , I thought so . 
Aye , and that 's what he went into the after hold for , so often , as Dough-Boy long suspected . 
They were hidden down there . 
The White Whale 's at the bottom of it . 
Well , well , so be it ! 
Ca n't be helped ! 
All right ! 
Give way men ! 
It ai n't the White Whale to-day ! 
