Like the great dome of St. Peter 's , and like the great whale , retain , O man ! 
in all seasons a temperature of thine own . 
But how easy and how hopeless to teach these fine things ! 
Of erections , how few are domed like St. Peter 's ! 
of creatures , how few vast as the whale ! 
The Funeral Haul in the chains ! 
Let the carcase go astern ! 
The vast tackles have now done their duty . 
The peeled white body of the beheaded whale flashes like a marble sepulchre ; though changed in hue , it has not perceptibly lost anything in bulk . 
It is still colossal . 
Slowly it floats more and more away , the water round it torn and splashed by the insatiate sharks , and the air above vexed with rapacious flights of screaming fowls , whose beaks are like so many insulting poniards in the whale.The vast white headless phantom floats further and further from the ship , and every rod that it so floats , what seem square roods of sharks and cubic roods of fowls , augment the murderous din . 
For hours and hours from the almost stationary ship that hideous sight is seen . 
Beneath the unclouded and mild azure sky , upon the fair face of the pleasant sea , wafted by the joyous breezes , that great mass of death floats on and on , till lost in infinite perspectives . 
There 's a most doleful and most mocking funeral ! 
The sea-vultures all in pious mourning , the air-sharks all punctiliously in black or speckled . 
In life but few of them would have helped the whale , I ween , if peradventure he had needed it ; but upon the banquet of his funeral they most piously do pounce . 
Oh , horrible vulturism of earth ! 
from which not the mightiest whale is free . 
Nor is this the end . 
Desecrated as the body is , a vengeful ghost survives and hovers over it to scare . 
Espied by some timid man-of-war or blundering discovery-vessel from afar , when the distance obscuring the swarming fowls , nevertheless still shows the white mass floating in the sun , and the white spray heaving high against it ; straightway the whale 's unharming corpse , with trembling fingers is set down in the log -- shoals , rocks , and breakers hereabouts : beware ! 
And for years afterwards , perhaps , ships shun the place ; leaping over it as silly sheep leap over a vacuum , because their leader originally leaped there when a stick was held . 
There 's your law of precedents ; there 's your utility of traditions ; there 's the story of your obstinate survival of old beliefs never bottomed on the earth , and now not even hovering in the air ! 
There 's orthodoxy ! 
Thus , while in the life the great whale 's body may have been a real terror to his foes , in his death his ghost becomes a powerless panic to a world . 
Are you a believer in ghosts , my friend ? 
There are other ghosts than the Cock-Lane one , and far deeper men than Doctor Johnson who believe in them . 
The Sphynx It should not have been omitted that previous to completely stripping the body of the leviathan , he was beheaded . 
Now , the beheading of the Sperm Whale is a scientific anatomical feat , upon which experienced whale surgeons very much pride themselves : and not without reason . 
Consider that the whale has nothing that can properly be called a neck ; on the contrary , where his head and body seem to join , there , in that very place , is the thickest part of him . 
Remember , also , that the surgeon must operate from above , some eight or ten feet intervening between him and his subject , and that subject almost hidden in a discolored , rolling , and oftentimes tumultuous and bursting sea . 
Bear in mind , too , that under these untoward circumstances he has to cut many feet deep in the flesh ; and in that subterraneous manner , without so much as getting one single peep into the ever-contracting gash thus made , he must skilfully steer clear of all adjacent , interdicted parts , and exactly divide the spine at a critical point hard by its insertion into the skull . 
Do you not marvel , then , at Stubb 's boast , that he demanded but ten minutes to behead a sperm whale ? 
When first severed , the head is dropped astern and held there by a cable till the body is stripped . 
That done , if it belong to a small whale it is hoisted on deck to be deliberately disposed of . 
But , with a full grown leviathan this is impossible ; for the sperm whale 's head embraces nearly one third of his entire bulk , and completely to suspend such a burden as that , even by the immense tackles of a whaler , this were as vain a thing as to attempt weighing a Dutch barn in jewellers ' scales . 
The Pequod 's whale being decapitated and the body stripped , the head was hoisted against the ship 's side -- about half way out of the sea , so that it might yet in great part be buoyed up by its native element . 
And there with the strained craft steeply leaning over to it , by reason of the enormous downward drag from the lower mast-head , and every yard-arm on that side projecting like a crane over the waves ; there , that blood-dripping head hung to the Pequod 's waist like the giant Holofernes 's from the girdle of Judith . 
When this last task was accomplished it was noon , and the seamen went below to their dinner . 
Silence reigned over the before tumultuous but now deserted deck . 
An intense copper calm , like a universal yellow lotus , was more and more unfolding its noiseless measureless leaves upon the sea . 
A short space elapsed , and up into this noiselessness came Ahab alone from his cabin . 
Taking a few turns on the quarter-deck , he paused to gaze over the side , then slowly getting into the main-chains he took Stubb 's long spade still remaining there after the whale 's decapitation and striking it into the lower part of the half-suspended mass , placed its other end crutchwise under one arm , and so stood leaning over with eyes attentively fixed on this head . 
It was a black and hooded head ; and hanging there in the midst of so intense a calm , it seemed the Sphynx 's in the desert . 
`` Speak , thou vast and venerable head , '' muttered Ahab , `` which , though ungarnished with a beard , yet here and there lookest hoary with mosses ; speak , mighty head , and tell us the secret thing that is in thee . 
Of all divers , thou hast dived the deepest . 
That head upon which the upper sun now gleams , has moved amid this world 's foundations . 
Where unrecorded names and navies rust , and untold hopes and anchors rot ; where in her murderous hold this frigate earth is ballasted with bones of millions of the drowned ; there , in that awful water-land , there was thy most familiar home . 
Thou hast been where bell or diver never went ; hast slept by many a sailor 's side , where sleepless mothers would give their lives to lay them down . 
Thou saw ` st the locked lovers when leaping from their flaming ship ; heart to heart they sank beneath the exulting wave ; true to each other , when heaven seemed false to them . 
Thou saw ` st the murdered mate when tossed by pirates from the midnight deck ; for hours he fell into the deeper midnight of the insatiate maw ; and his murderers still sailed on unharmed -- while swift lightnings shivered the neighboring ship that would have borne a righteous husband to outstretched , longing arms . 
O head ! 
thou hast seen enough to split the planets and make an infidel of Abraham , and not one syllable is thine ! '' 
`` Sail ho ! '' 
cried a triumphant voice from the main-mast-head . 
`` Aye ? 
Well , now , that 's cheering , '' cried Ahab , suddenly erecting himself , while whole thunder-clouds swept aside from his brow . 
`` That lively cry upon this deadly calm might almost convert a better man . 
-- Where away ? '' 
`` Three points on the starboard bow , sir , and bringing down her breeze to us ! 
`` Better and better , man . 
Would now St. Paul would come along that way , and to my breezelessness bring his breeze ! 
O Nature , and O soul of man ! 
how far beyond all utterance are your linked analogies ; not the smallest atom stirs or lives on matter , but has its cunning duplicate in mind . '' 
The Jeroboam 's Story Hand in hand , ship and breeze blew on ; but the breeze came faster than the ship , and soon the Pequod began to rock . 
By and by , through the glass the stranger 's boats and manned mast-heads proved her a whale-ship . 
But as she was so far to windward , and shooting by , apparently making a passage to some other ground , the Pequod could not hope to reach her . 
So the signal was set to see what response would be made . 
Here be it said , that like the vessels of military marines , the ships of the American Whale Fleet have each a private signal ; all which signals being collected in a book with the names of the respective vessels attached , every captain is provided with it . 
Thereby , the whale commanders are enabled to recognise each other upon the ocean , even at considerable distance , and with no small facility . 
The Pequod 's signal was at last responded to by the stranger 's setting her own ; which proved the ship to be the Jeroboam of Nantucket . 
Squaring her yards , she bore down , ranged abeam under the Pequod 's lee , and lowered a boat ; it soon drew nigh ; but , as the side-ladder was being rigged by Starbuck 's order to accommodate the visiting captain , the stranger in question waved his hand from his boat 's stern in token of that proceeding being entirely unnecessary . 
It turned out that the Jeroboam had a malignant epidemic on board , and that Mayhew , her captain , was fearful of infecting the Pequod 's company . 
For , though himself and the boat 's crew remained untainted , and though his ship was half a rifle-shot off , and an incorruptible sea and air rolling and flowing between ; yet conscientiously adhering to the timid quarantine of the land , he peremptorily refused to come into direct contact with the Pequod . 
But this did by no means prevent all communications . 
Preserving an interval of some few yards between itself and the ship , the Jeroboam 's boat by the occasional use of its oars contrived to keep parallel to the Pequod , as she heavily forged through the sea -LRB- for by this time it blew very fresh -RRB- , with her main-topsail aback ; though , indeed , at times by the sudden onset of a large rolling wave , the boat would be pushed some way ahead ; but would be soon skilfully brought to her proper bearings again . 
Subject to this , and other the like interruptions now and then , a conversation was sustained between the two parties ; but at intervals not without still another interruption of a very different sort . 
Pulling an oar in the Jeroboam 's boat , was a man of a singular appearance , even in that wild whaling life where individual notabilities make up all totalities . 
He was a small , short , youngish man , sprinkled all over his face with freckles , and wearing redundant yellow hair . 
A long-skirted , cabalistically-cut coat of a faded walnut tinge enveloped him ; the overlapping sleeves of which were rolled up on his wrists . 
A deep , settled , fanatic delirium was in his eyes . 
So soon as this figure had been first descried , Stubb had exclaimed -- `` That 's he ! 
that 's he ! 
-- the long-togged scaramouch the Town-Ho 's company told us of ! '' 
Stubb here alluded to a strange story told of the Jeroboam , and a certain man among her crew , some time previous when the Pequod spoke the Town-Ho . 
According to this account and what was subsequently learned , it seemed that the scaramouch in question had gained a wonderful ascendency over almost everybody in the Jeroboam . 
His story was this : He had been originally nurtured among the crazy society of Neskyeuna Shakers , where he had been a great prophet ; in their cracked , secret meetings having several times descended from heaven by the way of a trapdoor , announcing the speedy opening of the seventh vial , which he carried in his vest-pocket ; but , which , instead of containing gunpowder , was supposed to be charged with laudanum . 
A strange , apostolic whim having seized him , he had left Neskyeuna for Nantucket , where , with that cunning peculiar to craziness , he assumed a steady , common sense exterior , and offered himself as a green-hand candidate for the Jeroboam 's whaling voyage . 
They engaged him ; but straightway upon the ship 's getting out of sight of land , his insanity broke out in a freshet . 
He announced himself as the archangel Gabriel , and commanded the captain to jump overboard . 
He published his manifesto , whereby he set himself forth as the deliverer of the isles of the sea and vicar-general of all Oceanica . 
The unflinching earnestness with which he declared these things ; -- the dark , daring play of his sleepless , excited imagination , and all the preternatural terrors of real delirium , united to invest this Gabriel in the minds of the majority of the ignorant crew , with an atmosphere of sacredness . 
Moreover , they were afraid of him . 
As such a man , however , was not of much practical use in the ship , especially as he refused to work except when he pleased , the incredulous captain would fain have been rid of him ; but apprised that that individual 's intention was to land him in the first convenient port , the archangel forthwith opened all his seals and vials -- devoting the ship and all hands to unconditional perdition , in case this intention was carried out . 
So strongly did he work upon his disciples among the crew , that at last in a body they went to the captain and told him if Gabriel was sent from the ship , not a man of them would remain . 
He was therefore forced to relinquish his plan . 
Nor would they permit Gabriel to be any way maltreated , say or do what he would ; so that it came to pass that Gabriel had the complete freedom of the ship . 
The consequence of all this was , that the archangel cared little or nothing for the captain and mates ; and since the epidemic had broken out , he carried a higher hand than ever ; declaring that the plague , as he called it , was at his sole command ; nor should it be stayed but according to his good pleasure . 
The sailors , mostly poor devils , cringed , and some of them fawned before him ; in obedience to his instructions , sometimes rendering him personal homage , as to a god . 
Such things may seem incredible ; but , however wondrous , they are true . 
