Captain D'Wolf applied immediately to the pumps to examine whether or not the vessel had received any damage from the shock , but we found that very happily it had escaped entirely uninjured . '' 
Now , the Captain D'Wolf here alluded to as commanding the ship in question , is a New Englander , who , after a long life of unusual adventures as a sea-captain , this day resides in the village of Dorchester near Boston . 
I have the honor of being a nephew of his . 
I have particularly questioned him concerning this passage in Langsdorff . 
He substantiates every word . 
The ship , however , was by no means a large one : a Russian craft built on the Siberian coast , and purchased by my uncle after bartering away the vessel in which he sailed from home . 
In that up and down manly book of old-fashioned adventure , so full , too , of honest wonders -- the voyage of Lionel Wafer , one of ancient Dampier 's old chums -- I found a little matter set down so like that just quoted from Langsdorff , that I can not forbear inserting it here for a corroborative example , if such be needed . 
Lionel , it seems , was on his way to `` John Ferdinando , '' as he calls the modern Juan Fernandes . 
`` In our way thither , '' he says , `` about four o'clock in the morning , when we were about one hundred and fifty leagues from the Main of America , our ship felt a terrible shock , which put our men in such consternation that they could hardly tell where they were or what to think ; but every one began to prepare for death . 
And , indeed , the shock was so sudden and violent , that we took it for granted the ship had struck against a rock ; but when the amazement was a little over , we cast the lead , and sounded , but found no ground . 
... The suddenness of the shock made the guns leap in their carriages , and several of the men were shaken out of their hammocks . 
Captain Davis , who lay with his head on a gun , was thrown out of his cabin ! '' 
Lionel then goes on to impute the shock to an earthquake , and seems to substantiate the imputation by stating that a great earthquake , somewhere about that time , did actually do great mischief along the Spanish land . 
But I should not much wonder if , in the darkness of that early hour of the morning , the shock was after all caused by an unseen whale vertically bumping the hull from beneath . 
I might proceed with several more examples , one way or another known to me , of the great power and malice at times of the sperm whale . 
In more than one instance , he has been known , not only to chase the assailing boats back to their ships , but to pursue the ship itself , and long withstand all the lances hurled at him from its decks . 
The English ship Pusie Hall can tell a story on that head ; and , as for his strength , let me say , that there have been examples where the lines attached to a running sperm whale have , in a calm , been transferred to the ship , and secured there ! 
the whale towing her great hull through the water , as a horse walks off with a cart . 
Again , it is very often observed that , if the sperm whale , once struck , is allowed time to rally , he then acts , not so often with blind rage , as with wilful , deliberate designs of destruction to his pursuers ; nor is it without conveying some eloquent indication of his character , that upon being attacked he will frequently open his mouth , and retain it in that dread expansion for several consecutive minutes . 
But I must be content with only one more and a concluding illustration ; a remarkable and most significant one , by which you will not fail to see , that not only is the most marvellous event in this book corroborated by plain facts of the present day , but that these marvels -LRB- like all marvels -RRB- are mere repetitions of the ages ; so that for the millionth time we say amen with Solomon -- Verily there is nothing new under the sun . 
In the sixth Christian century lived Procopius , a Christian magistrate of Constantinople , in the days when Justinian was Emperor and Belisarius general . 
As many know , he wrote the history of his own times , a work every way of uncommon value . 
By the best authorities , he has always been considered a most trustworthy and unexaggerating historian , except in some one or two particulars , not at all affecting the matter presently to be mentioned . 
Now , in this history of his , Procopius mentions that , during the term of his prefecture at Constantinople , a great sea-monster was captured in the neighboring Propontis , or Sea of Marmora , after having destroyed vessels at intervals in those waters for a period of more than fifty years . 
A fact thus set down in substantial history can not easily be gainsaid . 
Nor is there any reason it should be . 
Of what precise species this sea-monster was , is not mentioned . 
But as he destroyed ships , as well as for other reasons , he must have been a whale ; and I am strongly inclined to think a sperm whale . 
And I will tell you why . 
For a long time I fancied that the sperm whale had been always unknown in the Mediterranean and the deep waters connecting with it . 
Even now I am certain that those seas are not , and perhaps never can be , in the present constitution of things , a place for his habitual gregarious resort . 
But further investigations have recently proved to me , that in modern times there have been isolated instances of the presence of the sperm whale in the Mediterranean . 
I am told , on good authority , that on the Barbary coast , a Commodore Davis of the British navy found the skeleton of a sperm whale . 
Now , as a vessel of war readily passes through the Dardanelles , hence a sperm whale could , by the same route , pass out of the Mediterranean into the Propontis . 
In the Propontis , as far as I can learn , none of that peculiar substance called brit is to be found , the aliment of the right whale . 
But I have every reason to believe that the food of the sperm whale -- squid or cuttle-fish -- lurks at the bottom of that sea , because large creatures , but by no means the largest of that sort , have been found at its surface . 
If , then , you properly put these statements together , and reason upon them a bit , you will clearly perceive that , according to all human reasoning , Procopius 's sea-monster , that for half a century stove the ships of a Roman Emperor , must in all probability have been a sperm whale . 
Surmises Though , consumed with the hot fire of his purpose , Ahab in all his thoughts and actions ever had in view the ultimate capture of Moby Dick ; though he seemed ready to sacrifice all mortal interests to that one passion ; nevertheless it may have been that he was by nature and long habituation far too wedded to a fiery whaleman 's ways , altogether to abandon the collateral prosecution of the voyage . 
Or at least if this were otherwise , there were not wanting other motives much more influential with him . 
It would be refining too much , perhaps , even considering his monomania , to hint that his vindictiveness towards the White Whale might have possibly extended itself in some degree to all sperm whales , and that the more monsters he slew by so much the more he multiplied the chances that each subsequently encountered whale would prove to be the hated one he hunted . 
But if such an hypothesis be indeed exceptionable , there were still additional considerations which , though not so strictly according with the wildness of his ruling passion , yet were by no means incapable of swaying him . 
To accomplish his object Ahab must use tools ; and of all tools used in the shadow of the moon , men are most apt to get out of order . 
He knew , for example , that however magnetic his ascendency in some respects was over Starbuck , yet that ascendency did not cover the complete spiritual man any more than mere corporeal superiority involves intellectual mastership ; for to the purely spiritual , the intellectual but stand in a sort of corporeal relation . 
Starbuck 's body and Starbuck 's coerced will were Ahab 's , so long as Ahab kept his magnet at Starbuck 's brain ; still he knew that for all this the chief mate , in his soul , abhorred his captain 's quest , and could he , would joyfully disintegrate himself from it , or even frustrate it . 
It might be that a long interval would elapse ere the White Whale was seen . 
During that long interval Starbuck would ever be apt to fall into open relapses of rebellion against his captain 's leadership , unless some ordinary , prudential , circumstantial influences were brought to bear upon him . 
Not only that , but the subtle insanity of Ahab respecting Moby Dick was noways more significantly manifested than in his superlative sense and shrewdness in foreseeing that , for the present , the hunt should in some way be stripped of that strange imaginative impiousness which naturally invested it ; that the full terror of the voyage must be kept withdrawn into the obscure background -LRB- for few men 's courage is proof against protracted meditation unrelieved by action -RRB- ; that when they stood their long night watches , his officers and men must have some nearer things to think of than Moby Dick . 
For however eagerly and impetuously the savage crew had hailed the announcement of his quest ; yet all sailors of all sorts are more or less capricious and unreliable -- they live in the varying outer weather , and they inhale its fickleness -- and when retained for any object remote and blank in the pursuit , however promissory of life and passion in the end , it is above all things requisite that temporary interests and employments should intervene and hold them healthily suspended for the final dash . 
Nor was Ahab unmindful of another thing . 
In times of strong emotion mankind disdain all base considerations ; but such times are evanescent . 
The permanent constitutional condition of the manufactured man , thought Ahab , is sordidness . 
Granting that the White Whale fully incites the hearts of this my savage crew , and playing round their savageness even breeds a certain generous knight-errantism in them , still , while for the love of it they give chase to Moby Dick , they must also have food for their more common , daily appetites . 
For even the high lifted and chivalric Crusaders of old times were not content to traverse two thousand miles of land to fight for their holy sepulchre , without committing burglaries , picking pockets , and gaining other pious perquisites by the way . 
Had they been strictly held to their one final and romantic object -- that final and romantic object , too many would have turned from in disgust . 
I will not strip these men , thought Ahab , of all hopes of cash -- aye , cash . 
They may scorn cash now ; but let some months go by , and no perspective promise of it to them , and then this same quiescent cash all at once mutinying in them , this same cash would soon cashier Ahab . 
Nor was there wanting still another precautionary motive more related to Ahab personally . 
Having impulsively , it is probable , and perhaps somewhat prematurely revealed the prime but private purpose of the Pequod 's voyage , Ahab was now entirely conscious that , in so doing , he had indirectly laid himself open to the unanswerable charge of usurpation ; and with perfect impunity , both moral and legal , his crew if so disposed , and to that end competent , could refuse all further obedience to him , and even violently wrest from him the command . 
From even the barely hinted imputation of usurpation , and the possible consequences of such a suppressed impression gaining ground , Ahab must of course have been most anxious to protect himself . 
That protection could only consist in his own predominating brain and heart and hand , backed by a heedful , closely calculating attention to every minute atmospheric influence which it was possible for his crew to be subjected to . 
For all these reasons then , and others perhaps too analytic to be verbally developed here , Ahab plainly saw that he must still in a good degree continue true to the natural , nominal purpose of the Pequod 's voyage ; observe all customary usages ; and not only that , but force himself to evince all his well known passionate interest in the general pursuit of his profession . 
Be all this as it may , his voice was now often heard hailing the three mastheads and admonishing them to keep a bright look-out , and not omit reporting even a porpoise . 
This vigilance was not long without reward . 
The Mat-Maker It was a cloudy , sultry afternoon ; the seamen were lazily lounging about the decks , or vacantly gazing over into the lead-colored waters . 
Queequeg and I were mildly employed weaving what is called a sword-mat , for an additional lashing to our boat . 
So still and subdued and yet somehow preluding was all the scene , and such an incantation of revelry lurked in the air , that each silent sailor seemed resolved into his own invisible self . 
I was the attendant or page of Queequeg , while busy at the mat . 
As I kept passing and repassing the filling or woof of marline between the long yarns of the warp , using my own hand for the shuttle , and as Queequeg , standing sideways , ever and anon slid his heavy oaken sword between the threads , and idly looking off upon the water , carelessly and unthinkingly drove home every yarn ; I say so strange a dreaminess did there then reign all over the ship and all over the sea , only broken by the intermitting dull sound of the sword , that it seemed as if this were the Loom of Time , and I myself were a shuttle mechanically weaving and weaving away at the Fates . 
There lay the fixed threads of the warp subject to but one single , ever returning , unchanging vibration , and that vibration merely enough to admit of the crosswise interblending of other threads with its own . 
This warp seemed necessity ; and here , thought I , with my own hand I ply my own shuttle and weave my own destiny into these unalterable threads . 
Meantime , Queequeg 's impulsive , indifferent sword , sometimes hitting the woof slantingly , or crookedly , or strongly , or weakly , as the case might be ; and by this difference in the concluding blow producing a corresponding contrast in the final aspect of the completed fabric ; this savage 's sword , thought I , which thus finally shapes and fashions both warp and woof ; this easy , indifferent sword must be chance -- aye , chance , free will , and necessity -- no wise incompatible -- all interweavingly working together . 
The straight warp of necessity , not to be swerved from its ultimate course -- its every alternating vibration , indeed , only tending to that ; free will still free to ply her shuttle between given threads ; and chance , though restrained in its play within the right lines of necessity , and sideways in its motions directed by free will , though thus prescribed to by both , chance by turns rules either , and has the last featuring blow at events . 
Thus we were weaving and weaving away when I started at a sound so strange , long drawn , and musically wild and unearthly , that the ball of free will dropped from my hand , and I stood gazing up at the clouds whence that voice dropped like a wing . 
High aloft in the cross-trees was that mad Gay-Header , Tashtego . 
His body was reaching eagerly forward , his hand stretched out like a wand , and at brief sudden intervals he continued his cries . 
To be sure the same sound was that very moment perhaps being heard all over the seas , from hundreds of whalemen 's look-outs perched as high in the air ; but from few of those lungs could that accustomed old cry have derived such a marvellous cadence as from Tashtego the Indian 's . 
As he stood hovering over you half suspended in air , so wildly and eagerly peering towards the horizon , you would have thought him some prophet or seer beholding the shadows of Fate , and by those wild cries announcing their coming . 
`` There she blows ! 
there ! 
there ! 
there ! 
she blows ! 
she blows ! '' 
`` Where-away ? '' 
`` On the lee-beam , about two miles off ! 
a school of them ! '' 
Instantly all was commotion . 
The Sperm Whale blows as a clock ticks , with the same undeviating and reliable uniformity . 
And thereby whalemen distinguish this fish from other tribes of his genus . 
`` There go flukes ! '' 
was now the cry from Tashtego ; and the whales disappeared . 
`` Quick , steward ! '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Time ! 
time ! '' 
Dough-Boy hurried below , glanced at the watch , and reported the exact minute to Ahab . 
The ship was now kept away from the wind , and she went gently rolling before it . 
Tashtego reporting that the whales had gone down heading to leeward , we confidently looked to see them again directly in advance of our bows . 
For that singular craft at times evinced by the Sperm Whale when , sounding with his head in one direction , he nevertheless , while concealed beneath the surface , mills around , and swiftly swims off in the opposite quarter -- this deceitfulness of his could not now be in action ; for there was no reason to suppose that the fish seen by Tashtego had been in any way alarmed , or indeed knew at all of our vicinity . 
One of the men selected for shipkeepers -- that is , those not appointed to the boats , by this time relieved the Indian at the main-mast head . 
