-- Why then do you try to `` enlarge '' your mind ? 
Subtilize it . 
Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand , cant over the sperm whale 's head , so , that it may lie bottom up ; then , ascending by a ladder to the summit , have a peep down the mouth ; and were it not that the body is now completely separated from it , with a lantern we might descend into the great Kentucky Mammoth Cave of his stomach . 
But let us hold on here by this tooth , and look about us where we are . 
What a really beautiful and chaste-looking mouth ! 
from floor to ceiling , lined , or rather papered with a glistening white membrane , glossy as bridal satins . 
But come out now , and look at this portentous lower jaw , which seems like the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box , with the hinge at one end , instead of one side . 
If you pry it up , so as to get it overhead , and expose its rows of teeth , it seems a terrific portcullis ; and such , alas ! 
it proves to many a poor wight in the fishery , upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force . 
But far more terrible is it to behold , when fathoms down in the sea , you see some sulky whale , floating there suspended , with his prodigious jaw , some fifteen feet long , hanging straight down at right-angles with his body ; for all the world like a ship 's jibboom . 
This whale is not dead ; he is only dispirited ; out of sorts , perhaps ; hypochondriac ; and so supine , that the hinges of his jaw have relaxed , leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight , a reproach to all his tribe , who must , no doubt , imprecate lock-jaws upon him . 
In most cases this lower jaw -- being easily unhinged by a practised artist -- is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extracting the ivory teeth , and furnishing a supply of that hard white whalebone with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious articles including canes , umbrella-stocks , and handles to riding-whips . 
With a long , weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board , as if it were an anchor ; and when the proper time comes -- some few days after the other work -- Queequeg , Daggoo , and Tashtego , being all accomplished dentists , are set to drawing teeth . 
With a keen cutting-spade , Queequeg lances the gums ; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts , and a tackle being rigged from aloft , they drag out these teeth , as Michigan oxen drag stumps of old oaks out of wild woodlands . 
There are generally forty-two teeth in all ; in old whales , much worn down , but undecayed ; nor filled after our artificial fashion . 
The jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs , and piled away like joists for building houses . 
The Right Whale 's Head - Contrasted View Crossing the deck , let us now have a good long look at the the Right Whale 's head . 
As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale 's head may be compared to a Roman war-chariot -LRB- especially in front , where it is so broadly rounded -RRB- ; so , at a broad view , the Right Whale 's head bears a rather inelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe . 
Two hundred years ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape to that of a shoemaker 's last . 
And in this same last or shoe , that old woman of the nursery tale with the swarming brood , might very comfortably be lodged , she and all her progeny . 
But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume different aspects , according to your point of view . 
If you stand on its summit and look at these two f-shaped spout-holes , you would take the whole head for an enormous bass viol , and these spiracles , the apertures in its soundingboard . 
Then , again , if you fix your eye upon this strange , crested , comblike incrustation on the top of the mass -- this green , barnacled thing , which the Greenlanders call the `` crown , '' and the Southern fishers the `` bonnet '' of the Right Whale ; fixing your eyes solely on this , you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak , with a bird 's nest in its crotch . 
At any rate , when you watch those live crabs that nestle here on this bonnet , such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you ; unless , indeed , your fancy has been fixed by the technical term `` crown '' also bestowed upon it ; in which case you will take great interest in thinking how this mighty monster is actually a diademed king of the sea , whose green crown has been put together for him in this marvellous manner . 
But if this whale be a king , he is a very sulky looking fellow to grace a diadem . 
Look at that hanging lower lip ! 
what a huge sulk and pout is there ! 
a sulk and pout , by carpenter 's measurement , about twenty feet long and five feet deep ; a sulk and pout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more . 
A great pity , now , that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped . 
The fissure is about a foot across . 
Probably the mother during an important interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast , when earthquakes caused the beach to gape . 
Over this lip , as over a slippery threshold , we now slide into the mouth . 
Upon my word were I at Mackinaw , I should take this to be the inside of an Indian wigwam . 
Good Lord ! 
is this the road that Jonah went ? 
The roof is about twelve feet high , and runs to a pretty sharp angle , as if there were a regular ridge-pole there ; while these ribbed , arched , hairy sides , present us with those wondrous , half vertical , scimitar-shaped slats of whalebone , say three hundred on a side , which depending from the upper part of the head or crown bone , form those Venetian blinds which have elsewhere been cursorily mentioned . 
The edges of these bones are fringed with hairy fibres , through which the Right Whale strains the water , and in whose intricacies he retains the small fish , when openmouthed he goes through the seas of brit in feeding time . 
In the central blinds of bone , as they stand in their natural order , there are certain curious marks , curves , hollows , and ridges , whereby some whalemen calculate the creature 's age , as the age of an oak by its circular rings . 
Though the certainty of this criterion is far from demonstrable , yet it has the savor of analogical probability . 
At any rate , if we yield to it , we must grant a far greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance will seem reasonable . 
In old times , there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies concerning these blinds . 
One voyager in Purchas calls them the wondrous `` whiskers '' inside of the whale 's mouth ; * another , `` hogs ' bristles '' ; a third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the following elegant language : `` There are about two hundred and fifty fins growing on each side of his upper chop , which arch over his tongue on each side of his mouth . '' 
* This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker , or rather a moustache , consisting of a few scattered white hairs on the upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw . 
Sometimes these tufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn countenance . 
As every one knows , these same `` hogs ' bristles , '' `` fins , '' `` whiskers , '' `` blinds , '' or whatever you please , furnish to the ladies their busks and other stiffening contrivances . 
But in this particular , the demand has long been on the decline . 
It was in Queen Anne 's time that the bone was in its glory , the farthingale being then all the fashion . 
And as those ancient dames moved about gaily , though in the jaws of the whale , as you may say ; even so , in a shower , with the like thoughtlessness , do we nowadays fly under the same jaws for protection ; the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone . 
But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment , and , standing in the Right Whale 's mouth , look around you afresh . 
Seeing all these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about , would you not think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ , and gazing upon its thousand pipes ? 
For a carpet to the organ we have a rug of the softest Turkey -- the tongue , which is glued , as it were , to the floor of the mouth . 
It is very fat and tender , and apt to tear in pieces in hoisting it on deck . 
This particular tongue now before us ; at a passing glance I should say it was a six-barreler ; that is , it will yield you about that amount of oil . 
Ere this , you must have plainly seen the truth of what I started with -- that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirely different heads . 
To sum up , then : in the Right Whale 's there is no great well of sperm ; no ivory teeth at all ; no long , slender mandible of a lower jaw , like the Sperm Whale 's . 
Nor in the Sperm Whale are there any of those blinds of bone ; no huge lower lip ; and scarcely anything of a tongue . 
Again , the Right Whale has two external spout-holes , the Sperm Whale only one . 
Look your last now , on these venerable hooded heads , while they yet lie together ; for one will soon sink , unrecorded , in the sea ; the other will not be very long in following . 
Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale 's there ? 
It is the same he died with , only some of the longer wrinkles in the forehead seem now faded away . 
I think his broad brow to be full of a prairie-like placidity , born of a speculative indifference as to death . 
But mark the other head 's expression . 
See that amazing lower lip , pressed by accident against the vessel 's side , so as firmly to embrace the jaw . 
Does not this whole head seem to speak of an enormous practical resolution in facing death ? 
This Right Whale I take to have been a Stoic ; the Sperm Whale , a Platonian , who might have taken up Spinoza in his latter years . 
The Battering-Ram Ere quitting , for the nonce , the Sperm Whale 's head , I would have you , as a sensible physiologist , simply -- particularly remark its front aspect , in all its compacted collectedness . 
I would have you investigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself some unexaggerated , intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may be lodged there . 
Here is a vital point ; for you must either satisfactorily settle this matter with yourself , or for ever remain an infidel as to one of the most appalling , but not the less true events , perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded history . 
You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm Whale , the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane to the water ; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes considerably backwards , so as to furnish more of a retreat for the long socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw ; you observe that the mouth is entirely under the head , much in the same way , indeed , as though your own mouth were entirely under your chin . 
Moreover you observe that the whale has no external nose ; and that what nose he has -- his spout hole -- is on the top of his head ; you observe that his eyes and ears are at the sides of his head ; nearly one third of his entire length from the front . 
Wherefore , you must now have perceived that the front of the Sperm Whale 's head is a dead , blind wall , without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever . 
Furthermore , you are now to consider that only in the extreme , lower , backward sloping part of the front of the head , is there the slightest vestige of bone ; and not till you get near twenty feet from the forehead do you come to the full cranial development . 
So that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad . 
Finally , though , as will soon be revealed , its contents partly comprise the most delicate oil ; yet , you are now to be apprised of the nature of the substance which so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy . 
In some previous place I have described to you how the blubber wraps the body of the whale , as the rind wraps an orange . 
Just so with the head ; but with this difference : about the head this envelope , though not so thick is of a boneless toughness , inestimable by any man who has not handled it . 
The severest pointed harpoon , the sharpest lance darted by the strongest human arm , impotently rebounds from it . 
It is as though the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved with horses ' hoofs . 
I do not think that any sensation lurks in it . 
Bethink yourself also of another thing . 
When two large , loaded Indian-men chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks , what do the sailors do ? 
They do not suspend between them , at the point of coming contact , any merely hard substance , like iron or wood . 
No , they hold there a large , round wad of tow and cork , enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide . 
That bravely and uninjured takes the jam which would have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars . 
By itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive at . 
But supplementary to this , it has hypothetically occurred to me , that as ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder in them , capable , at will , of distension or contraction ; and as the Sperm Whale , as far as I know , has no such provision in him ; considering , too , the otherwise inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogether beneath the surface , and anon swims with it high elevated out of the water ; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope ; considering the unique interior of his head ; it has hypothetically occurred to me , I say , that those mystical lung-celled honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspected connexion with the outer air , so as to be susceptible to atmospheric distension and contraction . 
If this be so , fancy the irresistibleness of that might , to which the most impalpable and destructive of all elements contributes . 
Now , mark . 
Unerringly impelling this dead , impregnable , uninjurable wall , and this most buoyant thing within ; there swims behind it all a mass of tremendous life , only to be adequately estimated as piled wood is -- by the cord ; and all obedient to one volition , as the smallest insect . 
So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this expansive monster ; when I shall show you some of his more inconsiderable braining feats ; I trust you will have renounced all ignorant incredulity , and be ready to abide by this ; that though the Sperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien , and mixed the Atlantic with the Pacific , you would not elevate one hair of your eye-brow . 
For unless you own the whale , you are but a provincial and sentimentalist in Truth . 
But clear Truth is a thing for salamander giants only to encounter ; how small the chances for the provincials then ? 
What befell the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess 's veil at Lais ? 
The Great Heidelburgh Tun Now comes the Baling of the Case . 
But to comprehend it aright , you must know something of the curious internal structure of the thing operated upon . 
Regarding the Sperm Whale 's head as a solid oblong , you may , on an inclined plane , sideways divide it into two quoins , * whereof the lower is the bony structure , forming the cranium and jaws , and the upper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones ; its broad forward end forming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale . 
At the middle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin , and then you have two almost equal parts , which before were naturally divided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance . 
* Quoin is not a Euclidean term . 
It belongs to the pure nautical mathematics . 
I know not that it has been defined before . 
