Though by the repeated bloody chastisements they have received at the hands of European cruisers , the audacity of these corsairs has of late been somewhat repressed ; yet , even at the present day , we occasionally hear of English and American vessels , which , in those waters , have been remorselessly boarded and pillaged . 
With a fair , fresh wind , the Pequod was now drawing nigh to these straits ; Ahab purposing to pass through them into the Java sea , and thence , cruising northwards , over waters known to be frequented here and there by the Sperm Whale , sweep inshore by the Philippine Islands , and gain the far coast of Japan , in time for the great whaling season there . 
By these means , the circumnavigating Pequod would sweep almost all the known Sperm Whale cruising grounds of the world , previous to descending upon the Line in the Pacific ; where Ahab , though everywhere else foiled in his pursuit , firmly counted upon giving battle to Moby Dick , in the sea he was most known to frequent ; and at a season when he might most reasonably be presumed to be haunting it . 
But how now ? 
in this zoned quest , does Ahab touch no land ? 
does his crew drink air ? 
Surely , he will stop for water . 
Nay . 
For a long time , now , the circus-running sun has raced within his fiery ring , and needs no sustenance but what 's in himself . 
So Ahab . 
Mark this , too , in the whaler . 
While other hulls are loaded down with alien stuff , to be transferred to foreign wharves ; the world-wandering whale-ship carries no cargo but herself and crew , their weapons and their wants . 
She has a whole lake 's contents bottled in her ample hold . 
She is ballasted with utilities ; not altogether with unusable pig-lead and kentledge . 
She carries years ' water in her . 
Clear old prime Nantucket water ; which , when three years afloat , the Nantucketer , in the Pacific , prefers to drink before the brackish fluid , but yesterday rafted off in casks , from the Peruvian or Indian streams . 
Hence it is , that , while other ships may have gone to China from New York , and back again , touching at a score of ports , the whale-ship , in all that interval , may not have sighted one grain of soil ; her crew having seen no man but floating seamen like themselves . 
So that did you carry them the news that another flood had come ; they would only answer -- `` Well , boys , here 's the ark ! '' 
Now , as many Sperm Whales had been captured off the western coast of Java , in the near vicinity of the Straits of Sunda ; indeed , as most of the ground , roundabout , was generally recognised by the fishermen as an excellent spot for cruising ; therefore , as the Pequod gained more and more upon Java Head , the look-outs were repeatedly hailed , and admonished to keep wide awake . 
But though the green palmy cliffs of the land soon loomed on the starboard bow , and with delighted nostrils the fresh cinnamon was snuffed in the air , yet not a single jet was descried . 
Almost renouncing all thought of falling in with any game hereabouts , the ship had well nigh entered the straits , when the customary cheering cry was heard from aloft , and ere long a spectacle of singular magnificence saluted us . 
But here be it premised , that owing to the unwearied activity with which of late they have been hunted over all four oceans , the Sperm Whales , instead of almost invariably sailing in small detached companies , as in former times , are now frequently met with in extensive herds , sometimes embracing so great a multitude , that it would almost seem as if numerous nations of them had sworn solemn league and covenant for mutual assistance and protection . 
To this aggregation of the Sperm Whale into such immense caravans , may be imputed the circumstance that even in the best cruising grounds , you may now sometimes sail for weeks and months together , without being greeted by a single spout ; and then be suddenly saluted by what sometimes seems thousands on thousands . 
Broad on both bows , at the distance of some two or three miles , and forming a great semicircle , embracing one half of the level horizon , a continuous chain of whale-jets were up-playing and sparkling in the noon-day air . 
Unlike the straight perpendicular twin-jets of the Right Whale , which , dividing at top , falls over in two branches , like the cleft drooping boughs of a willow , the single forward-slanting spout of the Sperm Whale presents a thick curled bush of white mist , continually rising and falling away to leeward . 
Seen from the Pequod 's deck , then , as she would rise on a high hill of the sea , this host of vapory spouts , individually curling up into the air , and beheld through a blending atmosphere of bluish haze , showed like the thousand cheerful chimneys of some dense metropolis , descried of a balmy autumnal morning , by some horseman on a height . 
As marching armies approaching an unfriendly defile in the mountains , accelerate their march , all eagerness to place that perilous passage in their rear , and once more expand in comparative security upon the plain ; even so did this vast fleet of whales now seem hurrying forward through the straits ; gradually contracting the wings of their semicircle , and swimming on , in one solid , but still crescentic centre . 
Crowding all sail the Pequod pressed after them ; the harpooneers handling their weapons , and loudly cheering from the heads of their yet suspended boats . 
If the wind only held , little doubt had they , that chased through these Straits of Sunda , the vast host would only deploy into the Oriental seas to witness the capture of not a few of their number . 
And who could tell whether , in that congregated caravan , Moby Dick himself might not temporarily be swimming , like the worshipped white-elephant in the coronation procession of the Siamese ! 
So with stun-sail piled on stun-sail , we sailed along , driving these leviathans before us ; when , of a sudden , the voice of Tashtego was heard , loudly directing attention to something in our wake . 
Corresponding to the crescent in our van , we beheld another in our rear . 
It seemed formed of detached white vapors , rising and falling something like the spouts of the whales ; only they did not so completely come and go ; for they constantly hovered , without finally disappearing . 
Levelling his glass at this sight , Ahab quickly revolved in his pivot-hole , crying , `` Aloft there , and rig whips and buckets to wet the sails ; -- Malays , sir , and after us ! '' 
As if too long lurking behind the headlands , till the Pequod should fairly have entered the straits , these rascally Asiatics were now in hot pursuit , to make up for their over-cautious delay . 
But when the swift Pequod , with a fresh leading wind , was herself in hot chase ; how very kind of these tawny philanthropists to assist in speeding her on to her own chosen pursuit , -- mere riding-whips and rowels to her , that they were . 
As with glass under arm , Ahab to-and-fro paced the deck ; in his forward turn beholding the monsters he chased , and in the after one the bloodthirsty pirates chasing him ; some such fancy as the above seemed his . 
And when he glanced upon the green walls of the watery defile in which the ship was then sailing , and bethought him that through that gate lay the route to his vengeance , and beheld , how that through that same gate he was now both chasing and being chased to his deadly end ; and not only that , but a herd of remorseless wild pirates and inhuman atheistical devils were infernally cheering him on with their curses ; -- when all these conceits had passed through his brain , Ahab 's brow was left gaunt and ribbed , like the black sand beach after some stormy tide has been gnawing it , without being able to drag the firm thing from its place . 
But thoughts like these troubled very few of the reckless crew ; and when , after steadily dropping and dropping the pirates astern , the Pequod at last shot by the vivid green Cockatoo Point on the Sumatra side , emerging at last upon the broad waters beyond ; then , the harpooneers seemed more to grieve that the swift whales had been gaining upon the ship , than to rejoice that the ship had so victoriously gained upon the Malays . 
But still driving on in the wake of the whales , at length they seemed abating their speed ; gradually the ship neared them ; and the wind now dying away , word was passed to spring to the boats . 
But no sooner did the herd , by some presumed wonderful instinct of the Sperm Whale , become notified of the three keels that were after them , -- though as yet a mile in their rear , -- than they rallied again , and forming in close ranks and battalions , so that their spouts all looked like flashing lines of stacked bayonets , moved on with redoubled velocity . 
Stripped to our shirts and drawers , we sprang to the white-ash , and after several hours ' pulling were almost disposed to renounce the chase , when a general pausing commotion among the whales gave animating tokens that they were now at last under the influence of that strange perplexity of inert irresolution , which , when the fishermen perceive it in the whale , they say he is gallied * . 
The compact martial columns in which they had been hitherto rapidly and steadily swimming , were now broken up in one measureless rout ; and like King Porus ' elephants in the Indian battle with Alexander , they seemed going mad with consternation . 
In all directions expanding in vast irregular circles , and aimlessly swimming hither and thither , by their short thick spoutings , they plainly betrayed their distraction of panic . 
This was still more strangely evinced by those of their number , who , completely paralysed as it were , helplessly floated like water-logged dismantled ships on the sea . 
Had these Leviathans been but a flock of simple sheep , pursued over the pasture by three fierce wolves , they could not possibly have evinced such excessive dismay . 
But this occasional timidity is characteristic of almost all herding creatures . 
Though banding together in tens of thousands , the lion-maned buffaloes of the West have fled before a solitary horseman . 
Witness , too , all human beings , how when herded together in the sheepfold of a theatre 's pit , they will , at the slightest alarm of fire , rush helter-skelter for the outlets , crowding , trampling , jamming , and remorselessly dashing each other to death . 
Best , therefore , withhold any amazement at the strangely gallied whales before us , for there is no folly of the beasts of the earth which is not infinitely outdone by the madness of men . 
* To gally , or gallow , is to frighten excessively -- to confound with fright . 
It is an old Saxon word . 
It occurs once in Shakespeare : -- The wrathful skies Gallow the very wanderers of the dark And make them keep their caves . 
To common language , the word is now completely obsolete . 
When the polite landsman first hears it from the gaunt Nantucketer , he is apt to set it down as one of the whaleman 's self-derived savageries . 
Much the same is it with many other sinewy Saxonisms of this sort , which emigrated to New-England rocks with the noble brawn of the old English emigrants in the time of the Commonwealth . 
Thus , some of the best and furthest-descended English words -- the etymological Howards and Percys -- are now democratised , nay , plebeianised -- so to speak -- in the New World . 
Though many of the whales , as has been said , were in violent motion , yet it is to be observed that as a whole the herd neither advanced nor retreated , but collectively remained in one place . 
As is customary in those cases , the boats at once separated , each making for some one lone whale on the outskirts of the shoal . 
In about three minutes ' time , Queequeg 's harpoon was flung ; the stricken fish darted blinding spray in our faces , and then running away with us like light , steered straight for the heart of the herd . 
Though such a movement on the part of the whale struck under such circumstances , is in no wise unprecedented ; and indeed is almost always more or less anticipated ; yet does it present one of the more perilous vicissitudes of the fishery . 
For as the swift monster drags you deeper and deeper into the frantic shoal , you bid adieu to circumspect life and only exist in a delirious throb . 
As , blind and deaf , the whale plunged forward , as if by sheer power of speed to rid himself of the iron leech that had fastened to him ; as we thus tore a white gash in the sea , on all sides menaced as we flew , by the crazed creatures to and fro rushing about us ; our beset boat was like a ship mobbed by ice-isles in a tempest , and striving to steer through their complicated channels and straits , knowing not at what moment it may be locked in and crushed . 
But not a bit daunted , Queequeg steered us manfully ; now sheering off from this monster directly across our route in advance ; now edging away from that , whose colossal flukes were suspended overhead , while all the time , Starbuck stood up in the bows , lance in hand , pricking out of our way whatever whales he could reach by short darts , for there was no time to make long ones . 
Nor were the oarsmen quite idle , though their wonted duty was now altogether dispensed with . 
They chiefly attended to the shouting part of the business . 
`` Out of the way , Commodore ! '' 
cried one , to a great dromedary that of a sudden rose bodily to the surface , and for an instant threatened to swamp us . 
`` Hard down with your tail , there ! '' 
cried a second to another , which , close to our gunwale , seemed calmly cooling himself with his own fan-like extremity . 
All whale-boats carry certain curious contrivances , originally invented by the Nantucket Indians , called druggs . 
Two thick squares of wood of equal size are stoutly clenched together , so that they cross each other 's grain at right angles ; a line of considerable length is then attached to the middle of this block , and the other end of the line being looped , it can in a moment be fastened to a harpoon . 
It is chiefly among gallied whales that this drugg is used . 
For then , more whales are close round you than you can possibly chase at one time . 
But sperm whales are not every day encountered ; while you may , then , you must kill all you can . 
And if you can not kill them all at once , you must wing them , so that they can be afterwards killed at your leisure . 
Hence it is , that at times like these the drug , comes into requisition . 
Our boat was furnished with three of them . 
The first and second were successfully darted , and we saw the whales staggeringly running off , fettered by the enormous sidelong resistance of the towing drugg . 
They were cramped like malefactors with the chain and ball . 
But upon flinging the third , in the act of tossing overboard the clumsy wooden block , it caught under one of the seats of the boat , and in an instant tore it out and carried it away , dropping the oarsman in the boat 's bottom as the seat slid from under him . 
On both sides the sea came in at the wounded planks , but we stuffed two or three drawers and shirts in , and so stopped the leaks for the time . 
It had been next to impossible to dart these drugged-harpoons , were it not that as we advanced into the herd , our whale 's way greatly diminished ; moreover , that as we went still further and further from the circumference of commotion , the direful disorders seemed waning . 
So that when at last the jerking harpoon drew out , and the towing whale sideways vanished ; then , with the tapering force of his parting momentum , we glided between two whales into the innermost heart of the shoal , as if from some mountain torrent we had slid into a serene valley lake . 
Here the storms in the roaring glens between the outermost whales , were heard but not felt . 
In this central expanse the sea presented that smooth satin-like surface , called a sleek , produced by the subtle moisture thrown off by the whale in his more quiet moods . 
Yes , we were now in that enchanted calm which they say lurks at the heart of every commotion . 
And still in the distracted distance we beheld the tumults of the outer concentric circles , and saw successive pods of whales , eight or ten in each , swiftly going round and round , like multiplied spans of horses in a ring ; and so closely shoulder to shoulder , that a Titanic circus-rider might easily have over-arched the middle ones , and so have gone round on their backs . 
Owing to the density of the crowd of reposing whales , more immediately surrounding the embayed axis of the herd , no possible chance of escape was at present afforded us . 
We must watch for a breach in the living wall that hemmed us in ; the wall that had only admitted us in order to shut us up . 
Keeping at the centre of the lake , we were occasionally visited by small tame cows and calves ; the women and children of this routed host . 
Now , inclusive of the occasional wide intervals between the revolving outer circles , and inclusive of the spaces between the various pods in any one of those circles , the entire area at this juncture , embraced by the whole multitude , must have contained at least two or three square miles . 
At any rate -- though indeed such a test at such a time might be deceptive -- spoutings might be discovered from our low boat that seemed playing up almost from the rim of the horizon . 
I mention this circumstance , because , as if the cows and calves had been purposely locked up in this innermost fold ; and as if the wide extent of the herd had hitherto prevented them from learning the precise cause of its stopping ; or , possibly , being so young , unsophisticated , and every way innocent and inexperienced ; however it may have been , these smaller whales -- now and then visiting our becalmed boat from the margin of the lake -- evinced a wondrous fearlessness and confidence , or else a still becharmed panic which it was impossible not to marvel at . 
Like household dogs they came snuffling round us , right up to our gunwales , and touching them ; till it almost seemed that some spell had suddenly domesticated them . 
Queequeg patted their foreheads ; Starbuck scratched their backs with his lance ; but fearful of the consequences , for the time refrained from darting it . 
But far beneath this wondrous world upon the surface , another and still stranger world met our eyes as we gazed over the side . 
For , suspended in those watery vaults , floated the forms of the nursing mothers of the whales , and those that by their enormous girth seemed shortly to become mothers . 
The lake , as I have hinted , was to a considerable depth exceedingly transparent ; and as human infants while suckling will calmly and fixedly gaze away from the breast , as if leading two different lives at the time ; and while yet drawing mortal nourishment , be still spiritually feasting upon some unearthly reminiscence ; -- even so did the young of these whales seem looking up towards us , but not at us , as if we were but a bit of Gulfweed in their new-born sight . 
Floating on their sides , the mothers also seemed quietly eyeing us . 
