It was a beautiful , bounteous , blue day ! 
the spangled sea calm and cool , and flatly stretching away , all round , to the horizon , like gold-beater 's skin hammered out to the extremest . 
Bobbing up and down in that sea , Pip 's ebon head showed like a head of cloves . 
No boat-knife was lifted when he fell so rapidly astern . 
Stubb 's inexorable back was turned upon him ; and the whale was winged . 
In three minutes , a whole mile of shoreless ocean was between Pip and Stubb . 
Out from the centre of the sea , poor Pip turned his crisp , curling , black head to the sun , another lonely castaway , though the loftiest and the brightest . 
Now , in calm weather , to swim in the open ocean is as easy to the practised swimmer as to ride in a spring-carriage ashore . 
But the awful lonesomeness is intolerable . 
The intense concentration of self in the middle of such a heartless immensity , my God ! 
who can tell it ? 
Mark , how when sailors in a dead calm bathe in the open sea -- mark how closely they hug their ship and only coast along her sides . 
But had Stubb really abandoned the poor little negro to his fate ? 
No ; he did not mean to , at least . 
Because there were two boats in his wake , and he supposed , no doubt , that they would of course come up to Pip very quickly , and pick him up ; though , indeed , such considerations towards oarsmen jeopardized through their own timidity , is not always manifested by the hunters in all similar instances ; and such instances not unfrequently occur ; almost invariably in the fishery , a coward , so called , is marked with the same ruthless detestation peculiar to military navies and armies . 
But it so happened , that those boats , without seeing Pip , suddenly spying whales close to them on one side , turned , and gave chase ; and Stubb 's boat was now so far away , and he and all his crew so intent upon his fish , that Pip 's ringed horizon began to expand around him miserably . 
By the merest chance the ship itself at last rescued him ; but from that hour the little negro went about the deck an idiot ; such , at least , they said he was . 
The sea had jeeringly kept his finite body up , but drowned the infinite of his soul . 
Not drowned entirely , though . 
Rather carried down alive to wondrous depths , where strange shapes of the unwarped primal world glided to and fro before his passive eyes ; and the miser-merman , Wisdom , revealed his hoarded heaps ; and among the joyous , heartless , ever-juvenile eternities , Pip saw the multitudinous , God-omnipresent , coral insects , that out of the firmament of waters heaved the colossal orbs . 
He saw God 's foot upon the treadle of the loom , and spoke it ; and therefore his shipmates called him mad . 
So man 's insanity is heaven 's sense ; and wandering from all mortal reason , man comes at last to that celestial thought , which , to reason , is absurd and frantic ; and weal or woe , feels then uncompromised , indifferent as his God . 
For the rest blame not Stubb too hardly . 
The thing is common in that fishery ; and in the sequel of the narrative , it will then be seen what like abandonment befell myself . 
A Squeeze of the Hand That whale of Stubb 's , so dearly purchased , was duly brought to the Pequod 's side , where all those cutting and hoisting operations previously detailed , were regularly gone through , even to the baling of the Heidelburgh Tun , or Case . 
While some were occupied with this latter duty , others were employed in dragging away the larger tubs , so soon as filled with the sperm ; and when the proper time arrived , this same sperm was carefully manipulated ere going to the try-works , of which anon . 
It had cooled and crystallized to such a degree , that when , with several others , I sat down before a large Constantine 's bath of it , I found it strangely concreted into lumps , here and there rolling about in the liquid part . 
It was our business to squeeze these lumps back into fluid . 
A sweet and unctuous duty ! 
No wonder that in old times this sperm was such a favorite cosmetic . 
Such a clearer ! 
such a sweetener ! 
such a softener ; such a delicious mollifier ! 
After having my hands in it for only a few minutes , my fingers felt like eels , and began , as it were , to serpentine and spiralize . 
As I sat there at my ease , cross-legged on the deck ; after the bitter exertion at the windlass ; under a blue tranquil sky ; the ship under indolent sail , and gliding so serenely along ; as I bathed my hands among those soft , gentle globules of infiltrated tissues , woven almost within the hour ; as they richly broke to my fingers , and discharged all their opulence , like fully ripe grapes their wine ; as . 
I snuffed up that uncontaminated aroma , -- literally and truly , like the smell of spring violets ; I declare to you , that for the time I lived as in a musky meadow ; I forgot all about our horrible oath ; in that inexpressible sperm , I washed my hands and my heart of it ; I almost began to credit the old Paracelsan superstition that sperm is of rare virtue in allaying the heat of anger ; while bathing in that bath , I felt divinely free from all ill-will , or petulance , or malice , of any sort whatsoever . 
Squeeze ! 
squeeze ! 
squeeze ! 
all the morning long ; I squeezed that sperm till I myself almost melted into it ; I squeezed that sperm till a strange sort of insanity came over me ; and I found myself unwittingly squeezing my co-laborers ' hands in it , mistaking their hands for the gentle globules . 
Such an abounding , affectionate , friendly , loving feeling did this avocation beget ; that at last I was continually squeezing their hands , and looking up into their eyes sentimentally ; as much as to say , -- Oh ! 
my dear fellow beings , why should we longer cherish any social acerbities , or know the slightest ill-humor or envy ! 
Come ; let us squeeze hands all round ; nay , let us all squeeze ourselves into each other ; let us squeeze ourselves universally into the very milk and sperm of kindness . 
Would that I could keep squeezing that sperm for ever ! 
For now , since by many prolonged , repeated experiences , I have perceived that in all cases man must eventually lower , or at least shift , his conceit of attainable felicity ; not placing it anywhere in the intellect or the fancy ; but in the wife , the heart , the bed , the table , the saddle , the fire-side ; the country ; now that I have perceived all this , I am ready to squeeze case eternally . 
In thoughts of the visions of the night , I saw long rows of angels in paradise , each with his hands in a jar of spermaceti . 
Now , while discoursing of sperm it behooves to speak of other things akin to it , in the business of preparing the sperm whale for the try-works . 
First comes white-horse , so called , which is obtained from the tapering part of the fish , and also from the thicker portions of his flukes . 
It is tough with congealed tendons -- a wad of muscle -- but still contains some oil . 
After being severed from the whale , the white-horse is first cut into portable oblongs ere going to the mincer . 
They look much like blocks of Berkshire marble . 
Plum-pudding is the term bestowed upon certain fragmentary parts of the whale 's flesh , here and there adhering to the blanket of blubber , and often participating to a considerable degree in its unctuousness . 
It is a most refreshing , convivial , beautiful object to behold . 
As its name imports , it is of an exceedingly rich , mottled tint , with a bestreaked snowy and golden ground , dotted with spots of the deepest crimson and purple . 
It is plums of rubies , in pictures of citron . 
Spite of reason , it is hard to keep yourself from eating it . 
I confess , that once I stole behind the foremast to try it . 
It tasted something as I should conceive a royal cutlet from the thigh of Louis le Gros might have tasted , supposing him to have been killed the first day after the venison season , and that particular venison season contemporary with an unusually fine vintage of the vineyards of Champagne . 
There is another substance , and a very singular one , which turns up in the course of this business , but which I feel it to be very puzzling adequately to describe . 
It is called slobgollion ; an appellation original with the whalemen , and even so is the nature of the substance . 
It is an ineffably oozy , stringy affair , most frequently found in the tubs of sperm , after a prolonged squeezing , and subsequent decanting . 
I hold it to be the wondrously thin , ruptured membranes of the case , coalescing . 
Gurry , so called , is a term properly belonging to right whalemen , but sometimes incidentally used by the sperm fishermen . 
It designates the dark , glutinous substance which is scraped off the back of the Greenland or right whale , and much of which covers the decks of those inferior souls who hunt that ignoble Leviathan . 
Nippers . 
Strictly this word is not indigenous to the whale 's vocabulary . 
But as applied by whalemen , it becomes so . 
A whaleman 's nipper is a short firm strip of tendinous stuff cut from the tapering part of Leviathan 's tail : it averages an inch in thickness , and for the rest , is about the size of the iron part of a hoe . 
Edgewise moved along the oily deck , it operates like a leathern squilgee ; and by nameless blandishments , as of magic , allures along with it all impurities . 
But to learn all about these recondite matters , your best way is at once to descend into the blubber-room , and have a long talk with its inmates . 
This place has previously been mentioned as the receptacle for the blanket-pieces , when stript and hoisted from the whale . 
When the proper time arrives for cutting up its contents , this apartment is a scene of terror to all tyros , especially by night . 
On one side , lit by a dull lantern , a space has been left clear for the workmen . 
They generally go in pairs , -- a pike-and-gaffman and a spade-man . 
The whaling-pike is similar to a frigate 's boarding-weapon of the same name . 
The gaff is something like a boat-hook . 
With his gaff , the gaffman hooks on to a sheet of blubber , and strives to hold it from slipping , as the ship pitches and lurches about . 
Meanwhile , the spade-man stands on the sheet itself , perpendicularly chopping it into the portable horse-pieces . 
This spade is sharp as hone can make it ; the spademan 's feet are shoeless ; the thing he stands on will sometimes irresistibly slide away from him , like a sledge . 
If he cuts off one of his own toes , or one of his assistants ' , would you be very much astonished ? 
Toes are scarce among veteran blubber-room men . 
The Cassock Had you stepped on board the Pequod at a certain juncture of this post-mortemizing of the whale ; and had you strolled forward nigh the windlass , pretty sure am I that you would have scanned with no small curiosity a very strange , enigmatical object , which you would have seen there , lying along lengthwise in the lee scuppers . 
Not the wondrous cistern in the whale 's huge head ; not the prodigy of his unhinged lower jaw ; not the miracle of his symmetrical tail ; none of these would so surprise you , as half a glimpse of that unaccountable cone , -- longer than a Kentuckian is tall , nigh a foot in diameter at the base , and jet-black as Yojo , the ebony idol of Queequeg . 
And an idol , indeed , it is ; or rather , in old times , its likeness was . 
Such an idol as that found in the secret groves of Queen Maachah in Judea ; and for worshipping which , King Asa , her son , did depose her , and destroyed the idol , and burnt it for an abomination at the brook Kedron , as darkly set forth in the 15th chapter of the First Book of Kings . 
Look at the sailor , called the mincer , who now comes along , and assisted by two allies , heavily backs the grandissimus , as the mariners call it , and with bowed shoulders , staggers off with it as if he were a grenadier carrying a dead comrade from the field . 
Extending it upon the forecastle deck , he now proceeds cylindrically to remove its dark pelt , as an African hunter the pelt of a boa . 
This done he turns the pelt inside out , like a pantaloon leg ; gives it a good stretching , so as almost to double its diameter ; and at last hangs it , well spread , in the rigging , to dry . 
Ere long , it is taken down ; when removing some three feet of it , towards the pointed extremity , and then cutting two slits for arm-holes at the other end , he lengthwise slips himself bodily into it . 
The mincer now stands before you invested in the full canonicals of his calling . 
Immemorial to all his order , this investiture alone will adequately protect him , while employed in the peculiar functions of his office . 
That office consists in mincing the horse-pieces of blubber for the pots ; an operation which is conducted at a curious wooden horse , planted endwise against the bulwarks , and with a capacious tub beneath it , into which the minced pieces drop , fast as the sheets from a rapt orator 's desk . 
Arrayed in decent black ; occupying a conspicuous pulpit ; intent on bible leaves ; what a candidate for an archbishopric , what a lad for a Pope were this mincer ! 
* * Bible leaves ! 
Bible leaves ! 
This is the invariable cry from the mates to the mincer . 
It enjoins him to be careful , and cut his work into as thin slices as possible , inasmuch as by so doing the business of boiling out the oil is much accelerated , and its quantity considerably increased , besides perhaps improving it in quality . 
The Try-Works Besides her hoisted boats , an American whaler is outwardly distinguished by her try-works . 
She presents the curious anomaly of the most solid masonry joining with oak and hemp in constituting the completed ship . 
It is as if from the open field a brick-kiln were transported to her planks . 
