This circumstance , coupled with his ambiguous , half-hinting , half-revealing , shrouded sort of talk , now begat in me all kinds of vague wonderments and half-apprehensions , and all connected with the Pequod ; and Captain Ahab ; and the leg he had lost ; and the Cape Horn fit ; and the silver calabash ; and what Captain Peleg had said of him , when I left the ship the day previous ; and the prediction of the squaw Tistig ; and the voyage we had bound ourselves to sail ; and a hundred other shadowy things . 
I was resolved to satisfy myself whether this ragged Elijah was really dogging us or not , and with that intent crossed the way with Queequeg , and on that side of it retraced our steps . 
But Elijah passed on , without seeming to notice us . 
This relieved me ; and once more , and finally as it seemed to me , I pronounced him in my heart , a humbug . 
A day or two passed , and there was great activity aboard the Pequod . 
Not only were the old sails being mended , but new sails were coming on board , and bolts of canvas , and coils of rigging ; in short , everything betokened that the ship 's preparations were hurrying to a close . 
Captain Peleg seldom or never went ashore , but sat in his wigwam keeping a sharp look-out upon the hands : Bildad did all the purchasing and providing at the stores ; and the men employed in the hold and on the rigging were working till long after night-fall . 
On the day following Queequeg 's signing the articles , word was given at all the inns where the ship 's company were stopping , that their chests must be on board before night , for there was no telling how soon the vessel might be sailing . 
So Queequeg and I got down our traps , resolving , however , to sleep ashore till the last . 
But it seems they always give very long notice in these cases , and the ship did not sail for several days . 
But no wonder ; there was a good deal to be done , and there is no telling how many things to be thought of , before the Pequod was fully equipped . 
Every one knows what a multitude of things -- beds , sauce-pans , knives and forks , shovels and tongs , napkins , nut-crackers , and what not , are indispensable to the business of housekeeping . 
Just so with whaling , which necessitates a three-years ' housekeeping upon the wide ocean , far from all grocers , costermongers , doctors , bakers , and bankers . 
And though this also holds true of merchant vessels , yet not by any means to the same extent as with whalemen . 
For besides the great length of the whaling voyage , the numerous articles peculiar to the prosecution of the fishery , and the impossibility of replacing them at the remote harbors usually frequented , it must be remembered , that of all ships , whaling vessels are the most exposed to accidents of all kinds , and especially to the destruction and loss of the very things upon which the success of the voyage most depends . 
Hence , the spare boats , spare spars , and spare lines and harpoons , and spare everythings , almost , but a spare Captain and duplicate ship . 
At the period of our arrival at the Island , the heaviest storage of the Pequod had been almost completed ; comprising her beef , bread , water , fuel , and iron hoops and staves . 
But , as before hinted , for some time there was a continual fetching and carrying on board of divers odds and ends of things , both large and small . 
Chief among those who did this fetching and carrying was Captain Bildad 's sister , a lean old lady of a most determined and indefatigable spirit , but withal very kindhearted , who seemed resolved that , if SHE could help it , nothing should be found wanting in the Pequod , after once fairly getting to sea . 
At one time she would come on board with a jar of pickles for the steward 's pantry ; another time with a bunch of quills for the chief mate 's desk , where he kept his log ; a third time with a roll of flannel for the small of some one 's rheumatic back . 
Never did any woman better deserve her name , which was Charity -- Aunt Charity , as everybody called her . 
And like a sister of charity did this charitable Aunt Charity bustle about hither and thither , ready to turn her hand and heart to anything that promised to yield safety , comfort , and consolation to all on board a ship in which her beloved brother Bildad was concerned , and in which she herself owned a score or two of well-saved dollars . 
But it was startling to see this excellent hearted Quakeress coming on board , as she did the last day , with a long oil-ladle in one hand , and a still longer whaling lance in the other . 
Nor was Bildad himself nor Captain Peleg at all backward . 
As for Bildad , he carried about with him a long list of the articles needed , and at every fresh arrival , down went his mark opposite that article upon the paper . 
Every once in a while Peleg came hobbling out of his whalebone den , roaring at the men down the hatchways , roaring up to the riggers at the mast-head , and then concluded by roaring back into his wigwam . 
During these days of preparation , Queequeg and I often visited the craft , and as often I asked about Captain Ahab , and how he was , and when he was going to come on board his ship . 
To these questions they would answer , that he was getting better and better , and was expected aboard every day ; meantime , the two captains , Peleg and Bildad , could attend to everything necessary to fit the vessel for the voyage . 
If I had been downright honest with myself , I would have seen very plainly in my heart that I did but half fancy being committed this way to so long a voyage , without once laying my eyes on the man who was to be the absolute dictator of it , so soon as the ship sailed out upon the open sea . 
But when a man suspects any wrong , it sometimes happens that if he be already involved in the matter , he insensibly strives to cover up his suspicions even from himself . 
And much this way it was with me . 
I said nothing , and tried to think nothing . 
At last it was given out that some time next day the ship would certainly sail . 
So next morning , Queequeg and I took a very early start . 
It was nearly six o'clock , but only grey imperfect misty dawn , when we drew nigh the wharf . 
`` There are some sailors running ahead there , if I see right , '' said I to Queequeg , `` it ca n't be shadows ; she 's off by sunrise , I guess ; come on ! '' 
`` Avast ! '' 
cried a voice , whose owner at the same time coming close behind us , laid a hand upon both our shoulders , and then insinuating himself between us , stood stooping forward a little , in the uncertain twilight , strangely peering from Queequeg to me . 
It was Elijah . 
`` Going aboard ? '' 
`` Hands off , will you , '' said I. `` Lookee here , '' said Queequeg , shaking himself , `` go ` way ! '' 
`` Ai n't going aboard , then ? '' 
`` Yes , we are , '' said I , `` but what business is that of yours ? 
Do you know , Mr. Elijah , that I consider you a little impertinent ? '' 
`` No , no , no ; I was n't aware of that , '' said Elijah , slowly and wonderingly looking from me to Queequeg , with the most unaccountable glances . 
`` Elijah , '' said I , `` you will oblige my friend and me by withdrawing . 
We are going to the Indian and Pacific Oceans , and would prefer not to be detained . '' 
`` Ye be , be ye ? 
Coming back afore breakfast ? '' 
`` He 's cracked , Queequeg , '' said I , `` come on . '' 
`` Holloa ! '' 
cried stationary Elijah , hailing us when we had removed a few paces . 
`` Never mind him , '' said I , `` Queequeg , come on . '' 
But he stole up to us again , and suddenly clapping his hand on my shoulder , said -- `` Did ye see anything looking like men going towards that ship a while ago ? '' 
Struck by this plain matter-of-fact question , I answered , saying , `` Yes , I thought I did see four or five men ; but it was too dim to be sure . '' 
`` Very dim , very dim , '' said Elijah . 
`` Morning to ye . '' 
Once more we quitted him ; but once more he came softly after us ; and touching my shoulder again , said , `` See if you can find 'em now , will ye ? 
`` Find who ? '' 
`` Morning to ye ! 
morning to ye ! '' 
he rejoined , again moving off . 
`` Oh ! 
I was going to warn ye against -- but never mind , never mind -- it 's all one , all in the family too ; -- sharp frost this morning , ai n't it ? 
Good-bye to ye . 
Sha n't see ye again very soon , I guess ; unless it 's before the Grand Jury . '' 
And with these cracked words he finally departed , leaving me , for the moment , in no small wonderment at his frantic impudence . 
At last , stepping on board the Pequod , we found everything in profound quiet , not a soul moving . 
The cabin entrance was locked within ; the hatches were all on , and lumbered with coils of rigging . 
Going forward to the forecastle , we found the slide of the scuttle open . 
Seeing a light , we went down , and found only an old rigger there , wrapped in a tattered pea-jacket . 
He was thrown at whole length upon two chests , his face downwards and inclosed in his folded arms . 
The profoundest slumber slept upon him . 
`` Those sailors we saw , Queequeg , where can they have gone to ? '' 
said I , looking dubiously at the sleeper . 
But it seemed that , when on the wharf , Queequeg had not at all noticed what I now alluded to ; hence I would have thought myself to have been optically deceived in that matter , were it not for Elijah 's otherwise inexplicable question . 
But I beat the thing down ; and again marking the sleeper , jocularly hinted to Queequeg that perhaps we had best sit up with the body ; telling him to establish himself accordingly . 
He put his hand upon the sleeper 's rear , as though feeling if it was soft enough ; and then , without more ado , sat quietly down there . 
`` Gracious ! 
Queequeg , do n't sit there , '' said I. `` Oh ! 
perry dood seat , '' said Queequeg , `` my country way ; wo n't hurt him face . '' 
`` Face ! '' 
said I , `` call that his face ? 
very benevolent countenance then ; but how hard he breathes , he 's heaving himself ; get off , Queequeg , you are heavy , it 's grinding the face of the poor . 
Get off , Queequeg ! 
Look , he 'll twitch you off soon . 
I wonder he do n't wake . '' 
Queequeg removed himself to just beyond the head of the sleeper , and lighted his tomahawk pipe . 
I sat at the feet . 
We kept the pipe passing over the sleeper , from one to the other . 
Meanwhile , upon questioning him in his broken fashion , Queequeg gave me to understand that , in his land , owing to the absence of settees and sofas of all sorts , the king , chiefs , and great people generally , were in the custom of fattening some of the lower orders for ottomans ; and to furnish a house comfortably in that respect , you had only to buy up eight or ten lazy fellows , and lay them round in the piers and alcoves . 
Besides , it was very convenient on an excursion ; much better than those garden-chairs which are convertible into walking-sticks ; upon occasion , a chief calling his attendant , and desiring him to make a settee of himself under a spreading tree , perhaps in some damp marshy place . 
While narrating these things , every time Queequeg received the tomahawk from me , he flourished the hatchet-side of it over the sleeper 's head . 
`` What 's that for , Queequeg ? '' 
`` Perry easy , kill-e ; oh ! 
perry easy ! '' 
He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe , which , it seemed , had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul , when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger . 
The strong vapour now completely filling the contracted hole , it began to tell upon him . 
He breathed with a sort of muffledness ; then seemed troubled in the nose ; then revolved over once or twice ; then sat up and rubbed his eyes . 
`` Holloa ! '' 
he breathed at last , `` who be ye smokers ? '' 
`` Shipped men , '' answered I , `` when does she sail ? '' 
`` Aye , aye , ye are going in her , be ye ? 
She sails to-day . 
The Captain came aboard last night . '' 
`` What Captain ? 
-- Ahab ? '' 
`` Who but him indeed ? '' 
I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab , when we heard a noise on deck . 
`` Holloa ! 
Starbuck 's astir , '' said the rigger . 
`` He 's a lively chief mate , that ; good man , and a pious ; but all alive now , I must turn to . '' 
And so saying he went on deck , and we followed . 
It was now clear sunrise . 
Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes ; the riggers bestirred themselves ; the mates were actively engaged ; and several of the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board . 
Meanwhile Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin . 
At length , towards noon , upon the final dismissal of the ship 's riggers , and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf , and after the ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat , with her last gift -- a night-cap for Stubb , the second mate , her brother-in-law , and a spare Bible for the steward -- after all this , the two Captains , Peleg and Bildad , issued from the cabin , and turning to the chief mate , Peleg said : `` Now , Mr. Starbuck , are you sure everything is right ? 
Captain Ahab is all ready -- just spoke to him -- nothing more to be got from shore , eh ? 
Well , call all hands , then . 
Muster 'em aft here -- blast 'em ! '' 
`` No need of profane words , however great the hurry , Peleg , '' said Bildad , `` but away with thee , friend Starbuck , and do our bidding . '' 
How now ! 
Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage , Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck , just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea , as well as to all appearances in port . 
And , as for Captain Ahab , no sign of him was yet to be seen ; only , they said he was in the cabin . 
But then , the idea was , that his presence was by no means necessary in getting the ship under weigh , and steering her well out to sea . 
Indeed , as that was not at all his proper business , but the pilot 's ; and as he was not yet completely recovered -- so they said -- therefore , Captain Ahab stayed below . 
And all this seemed natural enough ; especially as in the merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a considerable time after heaving up the anchor , but remain over the cabin table , having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends , before they quit the ship for good with the pilot . 
But there was not much chance to think over the matter , for Captain Peleg was now all alive . 
He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding , and not Bildad . 
`` Aft here , ye sons of bachelors , '' he cried , as the sailors lingered at the main-mast . 
`` Mr. Starbuck , drive'em aft . '' 
`` Strike the tent there ! '' 
-- was the next order . 
As I hinted before , this whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port ; and on board the Pequod , for thirty years , the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor . 
`` Man the capstan ! 
Blood and thunder ! 
-- jump ! '' 
-- was the next command , and the crew sprang for the handspikes . 
Now in getting under weigh , the station generally occupied by the pilot is the forward part of the ship . 
And here Bildad , who , with Peleg , be it known , in addition to his other officers , was one of the licensed pilots of the port -- he being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in , for he never piloted any other craft -- Bildad , I say , might now be seen actively engaged in looking over the bows for the approaching anchor , and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave of psalmody , to cheer the hands at the windlass , who roared forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley , with hearty good will . 
Nevertheless , not three days previous , Bildad had told them that no profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod , particularly in getting under weigh ; and Charity , his sister , had placed a small choice copy of Watts in each seaman 's berth . 
Meantime , overseeing the other part of the ship , Captain Peleg ripped and swore astern in the most frightful manner . 
I almost thought he would sink the ship before the anchor could be got up ; involuntarily I paused on my handspike , and told Queequeg to do the same , thinking of the perils we both ran , in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot . 
I was comforting myself , however , with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some salvation , spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay ; when I felt a sudden sharp poke in my rear , and turning round , was horrified at the apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my immediate vicinity . 
That was my first kick . 
`` Is that the way they heave in the marchant service ? '' 
he roared . 
`` Spring , thou sheep-head ; spring , and break thy backbone ! 
Why do n't ye spring , I say , all of ye -- spring ! 
Quohog ! 
spring , thou chap with the red whiskers ; spring there , Scotch-cap ; spring , thou green pants . 
Spring , I say , all of ye , and spring your eyes out ! '' 
And so saying , he moved along the windlass , here and there using his leg very freely , while imperturbable Bildad kept leading off with his psalmody . 
Thinks I , Captain Peleg must have been drinking something to-day . 
At last the anchor was up , the sails were set , and off we glided . 
It was a short , cold Christmas ; and as the short northern day merged into night , we found ourselves almost broad upon the wintry ocean , whose freezing spray cased us in ice , as in polished armor . 
The long rows of teeth on the bulwarks glistened in the moonlight ; and like the white ivory tusks of some huge elephant , vast curving icicles depended from the bows . 
Lank Bildad , as pilot , headed the first watch , and ever and anon , as the old craft deep dived into the green seas , and sent the shivering frost all over her , and the winds howled , and the cordage rang , his steady notes were heard , -- `` Sweet fields beyond the swelling flood , Stand dressed in living green . 
So to the Jews old Canaan stood , While Jordan rolled between . '' 
Never did those sweet words sound more sweetly to me than then . 
They were full of hope and fruition . 
Spite of this frigid winter night in the boisterous Atlantic , spite of my wet feet and wetter jacket , there was yet , it then seemed to me , many a pleasant haven in store ; and meads and glades so eternally vernal , that the grass shot up by the spring , untrodden , unwilted , remains at midsummer . 
At last we gained such an offing , that the two pilots were needed no longer . 
The stout sail-boat that had accompanied us began ranging alongside . 
It was curious and not unpleasing , how Peleg and Bildad were affected at this juncture , especially Captain Bildad . 
For loath to depart , yet ; very loath to leave , for good , a ship bound on so long and perilous a voyage -- beyond both stormy Capes ; a ship in which some thousands of his hard earned dollars were invested ; a ship , in which an old shipmate sailed as captain ; a man almost as old as he , once more starting to encounter all the terrors of the pitiless jaw ; loath to say good-bye to a thing so every way brimful of every interest to him , -- poor old Bildad lingered long ; paced the deck with anxious strides ; ran down into the cabin to speak another farewell word there ; again came on deck , and looked to windward ; looked towards the wide and endless waters , only bounded by the far-off unseen Eastern Continents ; looked towards the land ; looked aloft ; looked right and left ; looked everywhere and nowhere ; and at last , mechanically coiling a rope upon its pin , convulsively grasped stout Peleg by the hand , and holding up a lantern , for a moment stood gazing heroically in his face , as much as to say , `` Nevertheless , friend Peleg , I can stand it ; yes , I can . '' 
As for Peleg himself , he took it more like a philosopher ; but for all his philosophy , there was a tear twinkling in his eye , when the lantern came too near . 
And he , too , did not a little run from cabin to deck -- now a word below , and now a word with Starbuck , the chief mate . 
But , at last , he turned to his comrade , with a final sort of look about him , -- `` Captain Bildad -- come , old shipmate , we must go . 
Back the main-yard there ! 
Boat ahoy ! 
Stand by to come close alongside , now ! 
Careful , careful ! 
-- come , Bildad , boy -- say your last . 
Luck to ye , Starbuck -- luck to ye , Mr. Stubb -- luck to ye , Mr. Flask -- good-bye and good luck to ye all -- and this day three years I 'll have a hot supper smoking for ye in old Nantucket . 
Hurrah and away ! '' 
`` God bless ye , and have ye in His holy keeping , men , '' murmured old Bildad , almost incoherently . 
`` I hope ye 'll have fine weather now , so that Captain Ahab may soon be moving among ye -- a pleasant sun is all he needs , and ye 'll have plenty of them in the tropic voyage ye go . 
Be careful in the hunt , ye mates . 
Do n't stave the boats needlessly , ye harpooneers ; good white cedar plank is raised full three per cent . 
within the year . 
Do n't forget your prayers , either . 
Mr. Starbuck , mind that cooper do n't waste the spare staves . 
Oh ! 
the sail-needles are in the green locker ! 
Do n't whale it too much a ' Lord 's days , men ; but do n't miss a fair chance either , that 's rejecting Heaven 's good gifts . 
Have an eye to the molasses tierce , Mr. Stubb ; it was a little leaky , I thought . 
If ye touch at the islands , Mr. Flask , beware of fornication . 
Good-bye , good-bye ! 
Do n't keep that cheese too long down in the hold , Mr. Starbuck ; it 'll spoil . 
Be careful with the butter -- twenty cents the pound it was , and mind ye , if -- '' `` Come , come , Captain Bildad ; stop palavering , -- away ! '' 
and with that , Peleg hurried him over the side , and both dropt into the boat . 
Ship and boat diverged ; the cold , damp night breeze blew between ; a screaming gull flew overhead ; the two hulls wildly rolled ; we gave three heavy-hearted cheers , and blindly plunged like fate into the lone Atlantic . 
Some chapters back , one Bulkington was spoken of , a tall , newlanded mariner , encountered in New Bedford at the inn . 
When on that shivering winter 's night , the Pequod thrust her vindictive bows into the cold malicious waves , who should I see standing at her helm but Bulkington ! 
I looked with sympathetic awe and fearfulness upon the man , who in mid-winter just landed from a four years ' dangerous voyage , could so unrestingly push off again for still another tempestuous term . 
The land seemed scorching to his feet . 
Wonderfullest things are ever the unmentionable ; deep memories yield no epitaphs ; this six-inch chapter is the stoneless grave of Bulkington . 
Let me only say that it fared with him as with the storm-tossed ship , that miserably drives along the leeward land . 
The port would fain give succor ; the port is pitiful ; in the port is safety , comfort , hearthstone , supper , warm blankets , friends , all that 's kind to our mortalities . 
But in that gale , the port , the land , is that ship 's direst jeopardy ; she must fly all hospitality ; one touch of land , though it but graze the keel , would make her shudder through and through . 
With all her might she crowds all sail off shore ; in so doing , fights ` gainst the very winds that fain would blow her homeward ; seeks all the lashed sea 's landlessness again ; for refuge 's sake forlornly rushing into peril ; her only friend her bitterest foe ! 
Know ye now , Bulkington ? 
Glimpses do ye seem to see of that mortally intolerable truth ; that all deep , earnest thinking is but the intrepid effort of the soul to keep the open independence of her sea ; while the wildest winds of heaven and earth conspire to cast her on the treacherous , slavish shore ? 
But as in landlessness alone resides highest truth , shoreless , indefinite as God -- so , better is it to perish in that howling infinite , than be ingloriously dashed upon the lee , even if that were safety ! 
For worm-like , then , oh ! 
who would craven crawl to land ! 
Terrors of the terrible ! 
is all this agony so vain ? 
Take heart , take heart , O Bulkington ! 
Bear thee grimly , demigod ! 
Up from the spray of thy ocean-perishing -- straight up , leaps thy apotheosis ! 
As Queequeg and I are now fairly embarked in this business of whaling ; and as this business of whaling has somehow come to be regarded among landsmen as a rather unpoetical and disreputable pursuit ; therefore , I am all anxiety to convince ye , ye landsmen , of the injustice hereby done to us hunters of whales . 
In the first place , it may be deemed almost superfluous to establish the fact , that among people at large , the business of whaling is not accounted on a level with what are called the liberal professions . 
If a stranger were introduced into any miscellaneous metropolitan society , it would but slightly advance the general opinion of his merits , were he presented to the company as a harpooneer , say ; and if in emulation of the naval officers he should append the initials S.W.F. -LRB- Sperm Whale Fishery -RRB- to his visiting card , such a procedure would be deemed pre-eminently presuming and ridiculous . 
Doubtless one leading reason why the world declines honouring us whalemen , is this : they think that , at best , our vocation amounts to a butchering sort of business ; and that when actively engaged therein , we are surrounded by all manner of defilements . 
Butchers we are , that is true . 
But butchers , also , and butchers of the bloodiest badge have been all Martial Commanders whom the world invariably delights to honour . 
And as for the matter of the alleged uncleanliness of our business , ye shall soon be initiated into certain facts hitherto pretty generally unknown , and which , upon the whole , will triumphantly plant the sperm whale-ship at least among the cleanliest things of this tidy earth . 
But even granting the charge in question to be true ; what disordered slippery decks of a whale-ship are comparable to the unspeakable carrion of those battle-fields from which so many soldiers return to drink in all ladies ' plaudits ? 
And if the idea of peril so much enhances the popular conceit of the soldier 's profession ; let me assure ye that many a veteran who has freely marched up to a battery , would quickly recoil at the apparition of the sperm whale 's vast tail , fanning into eddies the air over his head . 
For what are the comprehensible terrors of man compared with the interlinked terrors and wonders of God ! 
But , though the world scouts at us whale hunters , yet does it unwittingly pay us the profoundest homage ; yea , an all-abounding adoration ! 
for almost all the tapers , lamps , and candles that burn round the globe , burn , as before so many shrines , to our glory ! 
But look at this matter in other lights ; weigh it in all sorts of scales ; see what we whalemen are , and have been . 
Why did the Dutch in De Witt 's time have admirals of their whaling fleets ? 
Why did Louis XVI . 
of France , at his own personal expense , fit out whaling ships from Dunkirk , and politely invite to that town some score or two of families from our own island of Nantucket ? 
Why did Britain between the years 1750 and 1788 pay to her whalemen in bounties upwards of L1 ,000,000 ? 
And lastly , how comes it that we whalemen of America now outnumber all the rest of the banded whalemen in the world ; sail a navy of upwards of seven hundred vessels ; manned by eighteen thousand men ; yearly consuming 4,000,000 of dollars ; the ships worth , at the time of sailing , $ 20,000,000 ! 
and every year importing into our harbors a well reaped harvest of $ 7,000,000 . 
How comes all this , if there be not something puissant in whaling ? 
But this is not the half ; look again . 
I freely assert , that the cosmopolite philosopher can not , for his life , point out one single peaceful influence , which within the last sixty years has operated more potentially upon the whole broad world , taken in one aggregate , than the high and mighty business of whaling . 
One way and another , it has begotten events so remarkable in themselves , and so continuously momentous in their sequential issues , that whaling may well be regarded as that Egyptian mother , who bore offspring themselves pregnant from her womb . 
It would be a hopeless , endless task to catalogue all these things . 
Let a handful suffice . 
For many years past the whale-ship has been the pioneer in ferreting out the remotest and least known parts of the earth . 
She has explored seas and archipelagoes which had no chart , where no Cook or Vancouver had ever sailed . 
If American and European men-of-war now peacefully ride in once savage harbors , let them fire salutes to the honour and glory of the whale-ship , which originally showed them the way , and first interpreted between them and the savages . 
They may celebrate as they will the heroes of Exploring Expeditions , your Cooks , your Krusensterns ; but I say that scores of anonymous Captains have sailed out of Nantucket , that were as great , and greater than your Cook and your Krusenstern . 
For in their succourless empty-handedness , they , in the heathenish sharked waters , and by the beaches of unrecorded , javelin islands , battled with virgin wonders and terrors that Cook with all his marines and muskets would not willingly have dared . 
All that is made such a flourish of in the old South Sea Voyages , those things were but the life-time commonplaces of our heroic Nantucketers . 
Often , adventures which Vancouver dedicates three chapters to , these men accounted unworthy of being set down in the ship 's common log . 
Ah , the world ! 
Oh , the world ! 
Until the whale fishery rounded Cape Horn , no commerce but colonial , scarcely any intercourse but colonial , was carried on between Europe and the long line of the opulent Spanish provinces on the Pacific coast . 
It was the whaleman who first broke through the jealous policy of the Spanish crown , touching those colonies ; and , if space permitted , it might be distinctly shown how from those whalemen at last eventuated the liberation of Peru , Chili , and Bolivia from the yoke of Old Spain , and the establishment of the eternal democracy in those parts . 
That great America on the other side of the sphere , Australia , was given to the enlightened world by the whaleman . 
After its first blunder-born discovery by a Dutchman , all other ships long shunned those shores as pestiferously barbarous ; but the whale-ship touched there . 
The whale-ship is the true mother of that now mighty colony . 
Moreover , in the infancy of the first Australian settlement , the emigrants were several times saved from starvation by the benevolent biscuit of the whale-ship luckily dropping an anchor in their waters . 
The uncounted isles of all Polynesia confess the same truth , and do commercial homage to the whale-ship , that cleared the way for the missionary and the merchant , and in many cases carried the primitive missionaries to their first destinations . 
If that double-bolted land , Japan , is ever to become hospitable , it is the whale-ship alone to whom the credit will be due ; for already she is on the threshold . 
But if , in the face of all this , you still declare that whaling has no aesthetically noble associations connected with it , then am I ready to shiver fifty lances with you there , and unhorse you with a split helmet every time . 
The whale has no famous author , and whaling no famous chronicler , you will say . 
THE WHALE NO FAMOUS AUTHOR , AND WHALING NO FAMOUS CHRONICLER ? 
Who wrote the first account of our Leviathan ? 
Who but mighty Job ! 
And who composed the first narrative of a whaling-voyage ? 
Who , but no less a prince than Alfred the Great , who , with his own royal pen , took down the words from Other , the Norwegian whale-hunter of those times ! 
And who pronounced our glowing eulogy in Parliament ? 
Who , but Edmund Burke ! 
True enough , but then whalemen themselves are poor devils ; they have no good blood in their veins . 
NO GOOD BLOOD IN THEIR VEINS ? 
They have something better than royal blood there . 
The grandmother of Benjamin Franklin was Mary Morrel ; afterwards , by marriage , Mary Folger , one of the old settlers of Nantucket , and the ancestress to a long line of Folgers and harpooneers -- all kith and kin to noble Benjamin -- this day darting the barbed iron from one side of the world to the other . 
Good again ; but then all confess that somehow whaling is not respectable . 
WHALING NOT RESPECTABLE ? 
Whaling is imperial ! 
By old English statutory law , the whale is declared `` a royal fish . '' 
* Oh , that 's only nominal ! 
The whale himself has never figured in any grand imposing way . 
THE WHALE NEVER FIGURED IN ANY GRAND IMPOSING WAY ? 
In one of the mighty triumphs given to a Roman general upon his entering the world 's capital , the bones of a whale , brought all the way from the Syrian coast , were the most conspicuous object in the cymballed procession . 
* * See subsequent chapters for something more on this head . 
Grant it , since you cite it ; but , say what you will , there is no real dignity in whaling . 
NO DIGNITY IN WHALING ? 
The dignity of our calling the very heavens attest . 
Cetus is a constellation in the South ! 
No more ! 
Drive down your hat in presence of the Czar , and take it off to Queequeg ! 
No more ! 
I know a man that , in his lifetime , has taken three hundred and fifty whales . 
I account that man more honourable than that great captain of antiquity who boasted of taking as many walled towns . 
And , as for me , if , by any possibility , there be any as yet undiscovered prime thing in me ; if I shall ever deserve any real repute in that small but high hushed world which I might not be unreasonably ambitious of ; if hereafter I shall do anything that , upon the whole , a man might rather have done than to have left undone ; if , at my death , my executors , or more properly my creditors , find any precious MSS . 
in my desk , then here I prospectively ascribe all the honour and the glory to whaling ; for a whale-ship was my Yale College and my Harvard . 
In behalf of the dignity of whaling , I would fain advance naught but substantiated facts . 
But after embattling his facts , an advocate who should wholly suppress a not unreasonable surmise , which might tell eloquently upon his cause -- such an advocate , would he not be blameworthy ? 
It is well known that at the coronation of kings and queens , even modern ones , a certain curious process of seasoning them for their functions is gone through . 
There is a saltcellar of state , so called , and there may be a castor of state . 
How they use the salt , precisely -- who knows ? 
Certain I am , however , that a king 's head is solemnly oiled at his coronation , even as a head of salad . 
Can it be , though , that they anoint it with a view of making its interior run well , as they anoint machinery ? 
Much might be ruminated here , concerning the essential dignity of this regal process , because in common life we esteem but meanly and contemptibly a fellow who anoints his hair , and palpably smells of that anointing . 
In truth , a mature man who uses hair-oil , unless medicinally , that man has probably got a quoggy spot in him somewhere . 
As a general rule , he ca n't amount to much in his totality . 
But the only thing to be considered here , is this -- what kind of oil is used at coronations ? 
Certainly it can not be olive oil , nor macassar oil , nor castor oil , nor bear 's oil , nor train oil , nor cod-liver oil . 
What then can it possibly be , but sperm oil in its unmanufactured , unpolluted state , the sweetest of all oils ? 
Think of that , ye loyal Britons ! 
we whalemen supply your kings and queens with coronation stuff ! 
The chief mate of the Pequod was Starbuck , a native of Nantucket , and a Quaker by descent . 
He was a long , earnest man , and though born on an icy coast , seemed well adapted to endure hot latitudes , his flesh being hard as twice-baked biscuit . 
Transported to the Indies , his live blood would not spoil like bottled ale . 
He must have been born in some time of general drought and famine , or upon one of those fast days for which his state is famous . 
Only some thirty arid summers had he seen ; those summers had dried up all his physical superfluousness . 
But this , his thinness , so to speak , seemed no more the token of wasting anxieties and cares , than it seemed the indication of any bodily blight . 
It was merely the condensation of the man . 
He was by no means ill-looking ; quite the contrary . 
His pure tight skin was an excellent fit ; and closely wrapped up in it , and embalmed with inner health and strength , like a revivified Egyptian , this Starbuck seemed prepared to endure for long ages to come , and to endure always , as now ; for be it Polar snow or torrid sun , like a patent chronometer , his interior vitality was warranted to do well in all climates . 
Looking into his eyes , you seemed to see there the yet lingering images of those thousand-fold perils he had calmly confronted through life . 
A staid , steadfast man , whose life for the most part was a telling pantomime of action , and not a tame chapter of sounds . 
Yet , for all his hardy sobriety and fortitude , there were certain qualities in him which at times affected , and in some cases seemed well nigh to overbalance all the rest . 
Uncommonly conscientious for a seaman , and endued with a deep natural reverence , the wild watery loneliness of his life did therefore strongly incline him to superstition ; but to that sort of superstition , which in some organizations seems rather to spring , somehow , from intelligence than from ignorance . 
Outward portents and inward presentiments were his . 
And if at times these things bent the welded iron of his soul , much more did his far-away domestic memories of his young Cape wife and child , tend to bend him still more from the original ruggedness of his nature , and open him still further to those latent influences which , in some honest-hearted men , restrain the gush of dare-devil daring , so often evinced by others in the more perilous vicissitudes of the fishery . 
`` I will have no man in my boat , '' said Starbuck , `` who is not afraid of a whale . '' 
By this , he seemed to mean , not only that the most reliable and useful courage was that which arises from the fair estimation of the encountered peril , but that an utterly fearless man is a far more dangerous comrade than a coward . 
`` Aye , aye , '' said Stubb , the second mate , `` Starbuck , there , is as careful a man as you 'll find anywhere in this fishery . '' 
But we shall ere long see what that word `` careful '' precisely means when used by a man like Stubb , or almost any other whale hunter . 
Starbuck was no crusader after perils ; in him courage was not a sentiment ; but a thing simply useful to him , and always at hand upon all mortally practical occasions . 
Besides , he thought , perhaps , that in this business of whaling , courage was one of the great staple outfits of the ship , like her beef and her bread , and not to be foolishly wasted . 
Wherefore he had no fancy for lowering for whales after sun-down ; nor for persisting in fighting a fish that too much persisted in fighting him . 
For , thought Starbuck , I am here in this critical ocean to kill whales for my living , and not to be killed by them for theirs ; and that hundreds of men had been so killed Starbuck well knew . 
What doom was his own father 's ? 
Where , in the bottomless deeps , could he find the torn limbs of his brother ? 
With memories like these in him , and , moreover , given to a certain superstitiousness , as has been said ; the courage of this Starbuck which could , nevertheless , still flourish , must indeed have been extreme . 
But it was not in reasonable nature that a man so organized , and with such terrible experiences and remembrances as he had ; it was not in nature that these things should fail in latently engendering an element in him , which , under suitable circumstances , would break out from its confinement , and burn all his courage up . 
And brave as he might be , it was that sort of bravery chiefly , visible in some intrepid men , which , while generally abiding firm in the conflict with seas , or winds , or whales , or any of the ordinary irrational horrors of the world , yet can not withstand those more terrific , because more spiritual terrors , which sometimes menace you from the concentrating brow of an enraged and mighty man . 
But were the coming narrative to reveal in any instance , the complete abasement of poor Starbuck 's fortitude , scarce might I have the heart to write it ; for it is a thing most sorrowful , nay shocking , to expose the fall of valour in the soul . 
Men may seem detestable as joint stock-companies and nations ; knaves , fools , and murderers there may be ; men may have mean and meagre faces ; but man , in the ideal , is so noble and so sparkling , such a grand and glowing creature , that over any ignominious blemish in him all his fellows should run to throw their costliest robes . 
That immaculate manliness we feel within ourselves , so far within us , that it remains intact though all the outer character seem gone ; bleeds with keenest anguish at the undraped spectacle of a valor-ruined man . 
Nor can piety itself , at such a shameful sight , completely stifle her upbraidings against the permitting stars . 
But this august dignity I treat of , is not the dignity of kings and robes , but that abounding dignity which has no robed investiture . 
Thou shalt see it shining in the arm that wields a pick or drives a spike ; that democratic dignity which , on all hands , radiates without end from God ; Himself ! 
The great God absolute ! 
The centre and circumference of all democracy ! 
His omnipresence , our divine equality ! 
If , then , to meanest mariners , and renegades and castaways , I shall hereafter ascribe high qualities , though dark ; weave round them tragic graces ; if even the most mournful , perchance the most abased , among them all , shall at times lift himself to the exalted mounts ; if I shall touch that workman 's arm with some ethereal light ; if I shall spread a rainbow over his disastrous set of sun ; then against all mortal critics bear me out in it , thou Just Spirit of Equality , which hast spread one royal mantle of humanity over all my kind ! 
Bear me out in it , thou great democratic God ! 
who didst not refuse to the swart convict , Bunyan , the pale , poetic pearl ; Thou who didst clothe with doubly hammered leaves of finest gold , the stumped and paupered arm of old Cervantes ; Thou who didst pick up Andrew Jackson from the pebbles ; who didst hurl him upon a war-horse ; who didst thunder him higher than a throne ! 
Thou who , in all Thy mighty , earthly marchings , ever cullest Thy selectest champions from the kingly commons ; bear me out in it , O God ! 
Stubb was the second mate . 
He was a native of Cape Cod ; and hence , according to local usage , was called a Cape-Cod-man . 
A happy-go-lucky ; neither craven nor valiant ; taking perils as they came with an indifferent air ; and while engaged in the most imminent crisis of the chase , toiling away , calm and collected as a journeyman joiner engaged for the year . 
Good-humored , easy , and careless , he presided over his whale-boat as if the most deadly encounter were but a dinner , and his crew all invited guests . 
He was as particular about the comfortable arrangement of his part of the boat , as an old stage-driver is about the snugness of his box . 
When close to the whale , in the very death-lock of the fight , he handled his unpitying lance coolly and off-handedly , as a whistling tinker his hammer . 
He would hum over his old rigadig tunes while flank and flank with the most exasperated monster . 
Long usage had , for this Stubb , converted the jaws of death into an easy chair . 
What he thought of death itself , there is no telling . 
Whether he ever thought of it at all , might be a question ; but , if he ever did chance to cast his mind that way after a comfortable dinner , no doubt , like a good sailor , he took it to be a sort of call of the watch to tumble aloft , and bestir themselves there , about something which he would find out when he obeyed the order , and not sooner . 
What , perhaps , with other things , made Stubb such an easy-going , unfearing man , so cheerily trudging off with the burden of life in a world full of grave pedlars , all bowed to the ground with their packs ; what helped to bring about that almost impious good-humor of his ; that thing must have been his pipe . 
For , like his nose , his short , black little pipe was one of the regular features of his face . 
You would almost as soon have expected him to turn out of his bunk without his nose as without his pipe . 
He kept a whole row of pipes there ready loaded , stuck in a rack , within easy reach of his hand ; and , whenever he turned in , he smoked them all out in succession , lighting one from the other to the end of the chapter ; then loading them again to be in readiness anew . 
For , when Stubb dressed , instead of first putting his legs into his trowsers , he put his pipe into his mouth . 
I say this continual smoking must have been one cause , at least , of his peculiar disposition ; for every one knows that this earthly air , whether ashore or afloat , is terribly infected with the nameless miseries of the numberless mortals who have died exhaling it ; and as in time of the cholera , some people go about with a camphorated handkerchief to their mouths ; so , likewise , against all mortal tribulations , Stubb 's tobacco smoke might have operated as a sort of disinfecting agent . 
The third mate was Flask , a native of Tisbury , in Martha 's Vineyard . 
A short , stout , ruddy young fellow , very pugnacious concerning whales , who somehow seemed to think that the great leviathans had personally and hereditarily affronted him ; and therefore it was a sort of point of honour with him , to destroy them whenever encountered . 
So utterly lost was he to all sense of reverence for the many marvels of their majestic bulk and mystic ways ; and so dead to anything like an apprehension of any possible danger from encountering them ; that in his poor opinion , the wondrous whale was but a species of magnified mouse , or at least water-rat , requiring only a little circumvention and some small application of time and trouble in order to kill and boil . 
This ignorant , unconscious fearlessness of his made him a little waggish in the matter of whales ; he followed these fish for the fun of it ; and a three years ' voyage round Cape Horn was only a jolly joke that lasted that length of time . 
As a carpenter 's nails are divided into wrought nails and cut nails ; so mankind may be similarly divided . 
Little Flask was one of the wrought ones ; made to clinch tight and last long . 
They called him King-Post on board of the Pequod ; because , in form , he could be well likened to the short , square timber known by that name in Arctic whalers ; and which by the means of many radiating side timbers inserted into it , serves to brace the ship against the icy concussions of those battering seas . 
Now these three mates -- Starbuck , Stubb , and Flask , were momentous men . 
They it was who by universal prescription commanded three of the Pequod 's boats as headsmen . 
In that grand order of battle in which Captain Ahab would probably marshal his forces to descend on the whales , these three headsmen were as captains of companies . 
Or , being armed with their long keen whaling spears , they were as a picked trio of lancers ; even as the harpooneers were flingers of javelins . 
And since in this famous fishery , each mate or headsman , like a Gothic Knight of old , is always accompanied by his boat-steerer or harpooneer , who in certain conjunctures provides him with a fresh lance , when the former one has been badly twisted , or elbowed in the assault ; and moreover , as there generally subsists between the two , a close intimacy and friendliness ; it is therefore but meet , that in this place we set down who the Pequod 's harpooneers were , and to what headsman each of them belonged . 
First of all was Queequeg , whom Starbuck , the chief mate , had selected for his squire . 
But Queequeg is already known . 
Next was Tashtego , an unmixed Indian from Gay Head , the most westerly promontory of Martha 's Vineyard , where there still exists the last remnant of a village of red men , which has long supplied the neighboring island of Nantucket with many of her most daring harpooneers . 
In the fishery , they usually go by the generic name of Gay-Headers . 
Tashtego 's long , lean , sable hair , his high cheek bones , and black rounding eyes -- for an Indian , Oriental in their largeness , but Antarctic in their glittering expression -- all this sufficiently proclaimed him an inheritor of the unvitiated blood of those proud warrior hunters , who , in quest of the great New England moose , had scoured , bow in hand , the aboriginal forests of the main . 
But no longer snuffing in the trail of the wild beasts of the woodland , Tashtego now hunted in the wake of the great whales of the sea ; the unerring harpoon of the son fitly replacing the infallible arrow of the sires . 
To look at the tawny brawn of his lithe snaky limbs , you would almost have credited the superstitions of some of the earlier Puritans , and half-believed this wild Indian to be a son of the Prince of the Powers of the Air . 
Tashtego was Stubb the second mate 's squire . 
Third among the harpooneers was Daggoo , a gigantic , coal-black negro-savage , with a lion-like tread -- an Ahasuerus to behold . 
Suspended from his ears were two golden hoops , so large that the sailors called them ring-bolts , and would talk of securing the top-sail halyards to them . 
In his youth Daggoo had voluntarily shipped on board of a whaler , lying in a lonely bay on his native coast . 
And never having been anywhere in the world but in Africa , Nantucket , and the pagan harbors most frequented by whalemen ; and having now led for many years the bold life of the fishery in the ships of owners uncommonly heedful of what manner of men they shipped ; Daggoo retained all his barbaric virtues , and erect as a giraffe , moved about the decks in all the pomp of six feet five in his socks . 
There was a corporeal humility in looking up at him ; and a white man standing before him seemed a white flag come to beg truce of a fortress . 
Curious to tell , this imperial negro , Ahasuerus Daggoo , was the Squire of little Flask , who looked like a chess-man beside him . 
As for the residue of the Pequod 's company , be it said , that at the present day not one in two of the many thousand men before the mast employed in the American whale fishery , are Americans born , though pretty nearly all the officers are . 
Herein it is the same with the American whale fishery as with the American army and military and merchant navies , and the engineering forces employed in the construction of the American Canals and Railroads . 
The same , I say , because in all these cases the native American liberally provides the brains , the rest of the world as generously supplying the muscles . 
No small number of these whaling seamen belong to the Azores , where the outward bound Nantucket whalers frequently touch to augment their crews from the hardy peasants of those rocky shores . 
In like manner , the Greenland whalers sailing out of Hull or London , put in at the Shetland Islands , to receive the full complement of their crew . 
Upon the passage homewards , they drop them there again . 
How it is , there is no telling , but Islanders seem to make the best whalemen . 
They were nearly all Islanders in the Pequod , ISOLATOES too , I call such , not acknowledging the common continent of men , but each ISOLATO living on a separate continent of his own . 
Yet now , federated along one keel , what a set these Isolatoes were ! 
An Anacharsis Clootz deputation from all the isles of the sea , and all the ends of the earth , accompanying Old Ahab in the Pequod to lay the world 's grievances before that bar from which not very many of them ever come back . 
Black Little Pip -- he never did -- oh , no ! 
he went before . 
Poor Alabama boy ! 
On the grim Pequod 's forecastle , ye shall ere long see him , beating his tambourine ; prelusive of the eternal time , when sent for , to the great quarter-deck on high , he was bid strike in with angels , and beat his tambourine in glory ; called a coward here , hailed a hero there ! 
For several days after leaving Nantucket , nothing above hatches was seen of Captain Ahab . 
