`` Where ` bouts do you live ? 
In this neighborhood ? ' 
`` No 'm . 
In Hookerville , seven mile below . 
I 've walked all the way and I 'm all tired out . '' 
`` Hungry , too , I reckon . 
I 'll find you something . '' 
`` No 'm , I ai n't hungry . 
I was so hungry I had to stop two miles below here at a farm ; so I ai n't hungry no more . 
It 's what makes me so late . 
My mother 's down sick , and out of money and everything , and I come to tell my uncle Abner Moore . 
He lives at the upper end of the town , she says . 
I hai n't ever been here before . 
Do you know him ? '' 
`` No ; but I do n't know everybody yet . 
I have n't lived here quite two weeks . 
It 's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town . 
You better stay here all night . 
Take off your bonnet . '' 
`` No , '' I says ; `` I 'll rest a while , I reckon , and go on . 
I ai n't afeared of the dark . '' 
She said she would n't let me go by myself , but her husband would be in by and by , maybe in a hour and a half , and she 'd send him along with me . 
Then she got to talking about her husband , and about her relations up the river , and her relations down the river , and about how much better off they used to was , and how they did n't know but they 'd made a mistake coming to our town , instead of letting well alone -- and so on and so on , till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was going on in the town ; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the murder , and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right along . 
She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars -LRB- only she got it ten -RRB- and all about pap and what a hard lot he was , and what a hard lot I was , and at last she got down to where I was murdered . 
I says : `` Who done it ? 
We 've heard considerable about these goings on down in Hookerville , but we do n't know who 't was that killed Huck Finn . '' 
`` Well , I reckon there 's a right smart chance of people here that 'd like to know who killed him . 
Some think old Finn done it himself . '' 
`` No -- is that so ? '' 
`` Most everybody thought it at first . 
He 'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched . 
But before night they changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named Jim . '' 
`` Why he -- '' I stopped . 
I reckoned I better keep still . 
She run on , and never noticed I had put in at all : `` The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed . 
So there 's a reward out for him -- three hundred dollars . 
And there 's a reward out for old Finn , too -- two hundred dollars . 
You see , he come to town the morning after the murder , and told about it , and was out with 'em on the ferryboat hunt , and right away after he up and left . 
Before night they wanted to lynch him , but he was gone , you see . 
Well , next day they found out the nigger was gone ; they found out he had n't ben seen sence ten o'clock the night the murder was done . 
So then they put it on him , you see ; and while they was full of it , next day , back comes old Finn , and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over Illinois with . 
The judge gave him some , and that evening he got drunk , and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty hard-looking strangers , and then went off with them . 
Well , he hai n't come back sence , and they ai n't looking for him back till this thing blows over a little , for people thinks now that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think robbers done it , and then he 'd get Huck 's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit . 
People do say he war n't any too good to do it . 
Oh , he 's sly , I reckon . 
If he do n't come back for a year he 'll be all right . 
You ca n't prove anything on him , you know ; everything will be quieted down then , and he 'll walk in Huck 's money as easy as nothing . '' 
`` Yes , I reckon so , 'm . 
I do n't see nothing in the way of it . 
Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it ? '' 
`` Oh , no , not everybody . 
A good many thinks he done it . 
But they 'll get the nigger pretty soon now , and maybe they can scare it out of him . '' 
`` Why , are they after him yet ? '' 
`` Well , you 're innocent , ai n't you ! 
Does three hundred dollars lay around every day for people to pick up ? 
Some folks think the nigger ai n't far from here . 
I 'm one of them -- but I hai n't talked it around . 
A few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log shanty , and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island over yonder that they call Jackson 's Island . 
Do n't anybody live there ? 
says I. No , nobody , says they . 
I did n't say any more , but I done some thinking . 
I was pretty near certain I 'd seen smoke over there , about the head of the island , a day or two before that , so I says to myself , like as not that nigger 's hiding over there ; anyway , says I , it 's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt . 
I hai n't seen any smoke sence , so I reckon maybe he 's gone , if it was him ; but husband 's going over to see -- him and another man . 
He was gone up the river ; but he got back to-day , and I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago . '' 
I had got so uneasy I could n't set still . 
I had to do something with my hands ; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it . 
My hands shook , and I was making a bad job of it . 
When the woman stopped talking I looked up , and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling a little . 
I put down the needle and thread , and let on to be interested -- and I was , too -- and says : `` Three hundred dollars is a power of money . 
I wish my mother could get it . 
Is your husband going over there to-night ? '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
He went up-town with the man I was telling you of , to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun . 
They 'll go over after midnight . '' 
`` Could n't they see better if they was to wait till daytime ? '' 
`` Yes . 
And could n't the nigger see better , too ? 
After midnight he 'll likely be asleep , and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark , if he 's got one . '' 
`` I did n't think of that . '' 
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious , and I did n't feel a bit comfortable . 
Pretty soon she says , `` What did you say your name was , honey ? '' 
`` M -- Mary Williams . '' 
Somehow it did n't seem to me that I said it was Mary before , so I did n't look up -- seemed to me I said it was Sarah ; so I felt sort of cornered , and was afeared maybe I was looking it , too . 
I wished the woman would say something more ; the longer she set still the uneasier I was . 
But now she says : `` Honey , I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in ? '' 
`` Oh , yes 'm , I did . 
Sarah Mary Williams . 
Sarah 's my first name . 
Some calls me Sarah , some calls me Mary . '' 
`` Oh , that 's the way of it ? '' 
`` Yes 'm . '' 
I was feeling better then , but I wished I was out of there , anyway . 
I could n't look up yet . 
Well , the woman fell to talking about how hard times was , and how poor they had to live , and how the rats was as free as if they owned the place , and so forth and so on , and then I got easy again . 
She was right about the rats . 
You 'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner every little while . 
She said she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was alone , or they would n't give her no peace . 
She showed me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot , and said she was a good shot with it generly , but she 'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago , and did n't know whether she could throw true now . 
But she watched for a chance , and directly banged away at a rat ; but she missed him wide , and said `` Ouch ! '' 
it hurt her arm so . 
Then she told me to try for the next one . 
I wanted to be getting away before the old man got back , but of course I did n't let on . 
I got the thing , and the first rat that showed his nose I let drive , and if he 'd a stayed where he was he 'd a been a tolerable sick rat . 
She said that was first-rate , and she reckoned I would hive the next one . 
She went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back , and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with . 
I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them , and went on talking about her and her husband 's matters . 
But she broke off to say : `` Keep your eye on the rats . 
You better have the lead in your lap , handy . '' 
So she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment , and I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking . 
But only about a minute . 
Then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face , and very pleasant , and says : `` Come , now , what 's your real name ? '' 
`` Wh -- what , mum ? '' 
`` What 's your real name ? 
Is it Bill , or Tom , or Bob ? 
-- or what is it ? '' 
I reckon I shook like a leaf , and I did n't know hardly what to do . 
But I says : `` Please to do n't poke fun at a poor girl like me , mum . 
If I 'm in the way here , I 'll -- '' `` No , you wo n't . 
Set down and stay where you are . 
I ai n't going to hurt you , and I ai n't going to tell on you , nuther . 
You just tell me your secret , and trust me . 
I 'll keep it ; and , what 's more , I 'll help you . 
So 'll my old man if you want him to . 
You see , you 're a runaway ` prentice , that 's all . 
It ai n't anything . 
There ai n't no harm in it . 
You 've been treated bad , and you made up your mind to cut . 
Bless you , child , I would n't tell on you . 
Tell me all about it now , that 's a good boy . '' 
So I said it would n't be no use to try to play it any longer , and I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything , but she mus n't go back on her promise . 
Then I told her my father and mother was dead , and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back from the river , and he treated me so bad I could n't stand it no longer ; he went away to be gone a couple of days , and so I took my chance and stole some of his daughter 's old clothes and cleared out , and I had been three nights coming the thirty miles . 
I traveled nights , and hid daytimes and slept , and the bag of bread and meat I carried from home lasted me all the way , and I had a-plenty . 
I said I believed my uncle Abner Moore would take care of me , and so that was why I struck out for this town of Goshen . 
`` Goshen , child ? 
This ai n't Goshen . 
This is St. Petersburg . 
Goshen 's ten mile further up the river . 
Who told you this was Goshen ? '' 
`` Why , a man I met at daybreak this morning , just as I was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep . 
He told me when the roads forked I must take the right hand , and five mile would fetch me to Goshen . '' 
`` He was drunk , I reckon . 
He told you just exactly wrong . '' 
`` Well , he did act like he was drunk , but it ai n't no matter now . 
I got to be moving along . 
I 'll fetch Goshen before daylight . '' 
`` Hold on a minute . 
I 'll put you up a snack to eat . 
You might want it . '' 
So she put me up a snack , and says : `` Say , when a cow 's laying down , which end of her gets up first ? 
Answer up prompt now -- do n't stop to study over it . 
Which end gets up first ? '' 
`` The hind end , mum . '' 
`` Well , then , a horse ? '' 
`` The for ` rard end , mum . '' 
`` Which side of a tree does the moss grow on ? '' 
`` North side . '' 
`` If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside , how many of them eats with their heads pointed the same direction ? '' 
`` The whole fifteen , mum . '' 
`` Well , I reckon you have lived in the country . 
I thought maybe you was trying to hocus me again . 
What 's your real name , now ? '' 
`` George Peters , mum . '' 
`` Well , try to remember it , George . 
Do n't forget and tell me it 's Elexander before you go , and then get out by saying it 's George Elexander when I catch you . 
And do n't go about women in that old calico . 
You do a girl tolerable poor , but you might fool men , maybe . 
Bless you , child , when you set out to thread a needle do n't hold the thread still and fetch the needle up to it ; hold the needle still and poke the thread at it ; that 's the way a woman most always does , but a man always does t ` other way . 
And when you throw at a rat or anything , hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can , and miss your rat about six or seven foot . 
Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder , like there was a pivot there for it to turn on , like a girl ; not from the wrist and elbow , with your arm out to one side , like a boy . 
And , mind you , when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees apart ; she do n't clap them together , the way you did when you catched the lump of lead . 
Why , I spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle ; and I contrived the other things just to make certain . 
Now trot along to your uncle , Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters , and if you get into trouble you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus , which is me , and I 'll do what I can to get you out of it . 
Keep the river road all the way , and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you . 
The river road 's a rocky one , and your feet 'll be in a condition when you get to Goshen , I reckon . '' 
I went up the bank about fifty yards , and then I doubled on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was , a good piece below the house . 
I jumped in , and was off in a hurry . 
I went up-stream far enough to make the head of the island , and then started across . 
I took off the sun-bonnet , for I did n't want no blinders on then . 
When I was about the middle I heard the clock begin to strike , so I stops and listens ; the sound come faint over the water but clear -- eleven . 
When I struck the head of the island I never waited to blow , though I was most winded , but I shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be , and started a good fire there on a high and dry spot . 
Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place , a mile and a half below , as hard as I could go . 
I landed , and slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern . 
There Jim laid , sound asleep on the ground . 
I roused him out and says : `` Git up and hump yourself , Jim ! 
There ai n't a minute to lose . 
They 're after us ! '' 
Jim never asked no questions , he never said a word ; but the way he worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared . 
By that time everything we had in the world was on our raft , and she was ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid . 
We put out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing , and did n't show a candle outside after that . 
I took the canoe out from the shore a little piece , and took a look ; but if there was a boat around I could n't see it , for stars and shadows ai n't good to see by . 
Then we got out the raft and slipped along down in the shade , past the foot of the island dead still -- never saying a word . 
IT must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at last , and the raft did seem to go mighty slow . 
If a boat was to come along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the Illinois shore ; and it was well a boat did n't come , for we had n't ever thought to put the gun in the canoe , or a fishing-line , or anything to eat . 
We was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things . 
It war n't good judgment to put everything on the raft . 
If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I built , and watched it all night for Jim to come . 
Anyways , they stayed away from us , and if my building the fire never fooled them it war n't no fault of mine . 
I played it as low down on them as I could . 
When the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a big bend on the Illinois side , and hacked off cottonwood branches with the hatchet , and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there had been a cave-in in the bank there . 
A tow-head is a sandbar that has cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth . 
We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois side , and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place , so we war n't afraid of anybody running across us . 
We laid there all day , and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore , and up-bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle . 
I told Jim all about the time I had jabbering with that woman ; and Jim said she was a smart one , and if she was to start after us herself she would n't set down and watch a camp fire -- no , sir , she 'd fetch a dog . 
Well , then , I said , why could n't she tell her husband to fetch a dog ? 
Jim said he bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start , and he believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time , or else we would n't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the village -- no , indeedy , we would be in that same old town again . 
So I said I did n't care what was the reason they did n't get us as long as they did n't . 
When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the cottonwood thicket , and looked up and down and across ; nothing in sight ; so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy , and to keep the things dry . 
Jim made a floor for the wigwam , and raised it a foot or more above the level of the raft , so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach of steamboat waves . 
Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place ; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly ; the wigwam would keep it from being seen . 
We made an extra steering-oar , too , because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something . 
We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on , because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming down-stream , to keep from getting run over ; but we would n't have to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a `` crossing '' ; for the river was pretty high yet , very low banks being still a little under water ; so up-bound boats did n't always run the channel , but hunted easy water . 
This second night we run between seven and eight hours , with a current that was making over four mile an hour . 
We catched fish and talked , and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness . 
It was kind of solemn , drifting down the big , still river , laying on our backs looking up at the stars , and we did n't ever feel like talking loud , and it war n't often that we laughed -- only a little kind of a low chuckle . 
We had mighty good weather as a general thing , and nothing ever happened to us at all -- that night , nor the next , nor the next . 
Every night we passed towns , some of them away up on black hillsides , nothing but just a shiny bed of lights ; not a house could you see . 
The fifth night we passed St. Louis , and it was like the whole world lit up . 
In St. Petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis , but I never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights at two o'clock that still night . 
There war n't a sound there ; everybody was asleep . 
Every night now I used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little village , and buy ten or fifteen cents ' worth of meal or bacon or other stuff to eat ; and sometimes I lifted a chicken that war n't roosting comfortable , and took him along . 
Pap always said , take a chicken when you get a chance , because if you do n't want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does , and a good deed ai n't ever forgot . 
I never see pap when he did n't want the chicken himself , but that is what he used to say , anyway . 
Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a watermelon , or a mushmelon , or a punkin , or some new corn , or things of that kind . 
Pap always said it war n't no harm to borrow things if you was meaning to pay them back some time ; but the widow said it war n't anything but a soft name for stealing , and no decent body would do it . 
Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right ; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list and say we would n't borrow them any more -- then he reckoned it would n't be no harm to borrow the others . 
So we talked it over all one night , drifting along down the river , trying to make up our minds whether to drop the watermelons , or the cantelopes , or the mushmelons , or what . 
But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory , and concluded to drop crabapples and p ` simmons . 
We war n't feeling just right before that , but it was all comfortable now . 
I was glad the way it come out , too , because crabapples ai n't ever good , and the p ` simmons would n't be ripe for two or three months yet . 
We shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or did n't go to bed early enough in the evening . 
Take it all round , we lived pretty high . 
The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight , with a power of thunder and lightning , and the rain poured down in a solid sheet . 
We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself . 
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead , and high , rocky bluffs on both sides . 
By and by says I , `` Hel - lo , Jim , looky yonder ! '' 
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock . 
We was drifting straight down for her . 
The lightning showed her very distinct . 
She was leaning over , with part of her upper deck above water , and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear , and a chair by the big bell , with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it , when the flashes come . 
Well , it being away in the night and stormy , and all so mysterious-like , I felt just the way any other boy would a felt when I see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river . 
I wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little , and see what there was there . 
So I says : `` Le 's land on her , Jim . '' 
But Jim was dead against it at first . 
He says : `` I doan ' want to go fool 'n ` long er no wrack . 
We 's doin ' blame ' well , en we better let blame ' well alone , as de good book says . 
Like as not dey 's a watchman on dat wrack . '' 
`` Watchman your grandmother , '' I says ; `` there ai n't nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house ; and do you reckon anybody 's going to resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this , when it 's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute ? '' 
Jim could n't say nothing to that , so he did n't try . 
`` And besides , '' I says , `` we might borrow something worth having out of the captain 's stateroom . 
Seegars , I bet you -- and cost five cents apiece , solid cash . 
Steamboat captains is always rich , and get sixty dollars a month , and they do n't care a cent what a thing costs , you know , long as they want it . 
Stick a candle in your pocket ; I ca n't rest , Jim , till we give her a rummaging . 
Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing ? 
Not for pie , he would n't . 
He 'd call it an adventure -- that 's what he 'd call it ; and he 'd land on that wreck if it was his last act . 
And would n't he throw style into it ? 
-- would n't he spread himself , nor nothing ? 
Why , you 'd think it was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come . 
I wish Tom Sawyer was here . '' 
Jim he grumbled a little , but give in . 
He said we must n't talk any more than we could help , and then talk mighty low . 
The lightning showed us the wreck again just in time , and we fetched the stabboard derrick , and made fast there . 
The deck was high out here . 
We went sneaking down the slope of it to labboard , in the dark , towards the texas , feeling our way slow with our feet , and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys , for it was so dark we could n't see no sign of them . 
Pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight , and clumb on to it ; and the next step fetched us in front of the captain 's door , which was open , and by Jimminy , away down through the texas-hall we see a light ! 
and all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in yonder ! 
Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick , and told me to come along . 
I says , all right , and was going to start for the raft ; but just then I heard a voice wail out and say : `` Oh , please do n't , boys ; I swear I wo n't ever tell ! '' 
Another voice said , pretty loud : `` It 's a lie , Jim Turner . 
You 've acted this way before . 
You always want more 'n your share of the truck , and you 've always got it , too , because you 've swore ' t if you did n't you 'd tell . 
But this time you 've said it jest one time too many . 
You 're the meanest , treacherousest hound in this country . '' 
By this time Jim was gone for the raft . 
I was just a-biling with curiosity ; and I says to myself , Tom Sawyer would n't back out now , and so I wo n't either ; I 'm a-going to see what 's going on here . 
So I dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage , and crept aft in the dark till there war n't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas . 
Then in there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand and foot , and two men standing over him , and one of them had a dim lantern in his hand , and the other one had a pistol . 
This one kept pointing the pistol at the man 's head on the floor , and saying : `` I 'd like to ! 
And I orter , too -- a mean skunk ! '' 
The man on the floor would shrivel up and say , `` Oh , please do n't , Bill ; I hai n't ever goin ' to tell . '' 
And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say : '' ` Deed you ai n't ! 
You never said no truer thing 'n that , you bet you . '' 
And once he said : `` Hear him beg ! 
and yit if we had n't got the best of him and tied him he 'd a killed us both . 
And what for ? 
Jist for noth ` n. Jist because we stood on our rights -- that 's what for . 
But I lay you ai n't a-goin ' to threaten nobody any more , Jim Turner . 
Put up that pistol , Bill . '' 
Bill says : `` I do n't want to , Jake Packard . 
I 'm for killin ' him -- and did n't he kill old Hatfield jist the same way -- and do n't he deserve it ? '' 
`` But I do n't want him killed , and I 've got my reasons for it . '' 
`` Bless yo ' heart for them words , Jake Packard ! 
I 'll never forgit you long 's I live ! '' 
says the man on the floor , sort of blubbering . 
Packard did n't take no notice of that , but hung up his lantern on a nail and started towards where I was there in the dark , and motioned Bill to come . 
I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards , but the boat slanted so that I could n't make very good time ; so to keep from getting run over and catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side . 
The man came a-pawing along in the dark , and when Packard got to my stateroom , he says : `` Here -- come in here . '' 
And in he come , and Bill after him . 
But before they got in I was up in the upper berth , cornered , and sorry I come . 
Then they stood there , with their hands on the ledge of the berth , and talked . 
I could n't see them , but I could tell where they was by the whisky they 'd been having . 
I was glad I did n't drink whisky ; but it would n't made much difference anyway , because most of the time they could n't a treed me because I did n't breathe . 
I was too scared . 
And , besides , a body could n't breathe and hear such talk . 
They talked low and earnest . 
Bill wanted to kill Turner . 
He says : `` He 's said he 'll tell , and he will . 
If we was to give both our shares to him now it would n't make no difference after the row and the way we 've served him . 
Shore 's you 're born , he 'll turn State 's evidence ; now you hear me . 
I 'm for putting him out of his troubles . '' 
`` So 'm I , '' says Packard , very quiet . 
`` Blame it , I 'd sorter begun to think you was n't . 
Well , then , that 's all right . 
Le 's go and do it . '' 
`` Hold on a minute ; I hai n't had my say yit . 
You listen to me . 
Shooting 's good , but there 's quieter ways if the thing 's got to be done . 
But what I say is this : it ai n't good sense to go court 'n around after a halter if you can git at what you 're up to in some way that 's jist as good and at the same time do n't bring you into no resks . 
Ai n't that so ? '' 
`` You bet it is . 
But how you goin ' to manage it this time ? '' 
`` Well , my idea is this : we 'll rustle around and gather up whatever pickins we 've overlooked in the staterooms , and shove for shore and hide the truck . 
Then we 'll wait . 
Now I say it ai n't a-goin ' to be more 'n two hours befo ' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river . 
See ? 
He 'll be drownded , and wo n't have nobody to blame for it but his own self . 
I reckon that 's a considerble sight better 'n killin ' of him . 
I 'm unfavorable to killin ' a man as long as you can git aroun ' it ; it ai n't good sense , it ai n't good morals . 
Ai n't I right ? '' 
`` Yes , I reck 'n you are . 
But s ` pose she do n't break up and wash off ? '' 
`` Well , we can wait the two hours anyway and see , ca n't we ? '' 
`` All right , then ; come along . '' 
So they started , and I lit out , all in a cold sweat , and scrambled forward . 
It was dark as pitch there ; but I said , in a kind of a coarse whisper , `` Jim ! '' 
and he answered up , right at my elbow , with a sort of a moan , and I says : `` Quick , Jim , it ai n't no time for fooling around and moaning ; there 's a gang of murderers in yonder , and if we do n't hunt up their boat and set her drifting down the river so these fellows ca n't get away from the wreck there 's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix . 
But if we find their boat we can put all of 'em in a bad fix -- for the sheriff 'll get 'em . 
Quick -- hurry ! 
I 'll hunt the labboard side , you hunt the stabboard . 
You start at the raft , and -- '' `` Oh , my lordy , lordy ! 
raf ' ? 
Dey ain ' no raf ' no mo ' ; she done broke loose en gone I -- en here we is ! '' 
WELL , I catched my breath and most fainted . 
Shut up on a wreck with such a gang as that ! 
But it war n't no time to be sentimentering . 
We 'd got to find that boat now -- had to have it for ourselves . 
So we went a-quaking and shaking down the stabboard side , and slow work it was , too -- seemed a week before we got to the stern . 
No sign of a boat . 
Jim said he did n't believe he could go any further -- so scared he had n't hardly any strength left , he said . 
But I said , come on , if we get left on this wreck we are in a fix , sure . 
So on we prowled again . 
We struck for the stern of the texas , and found it , and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight , hanging on from shutter to shutter , for the edge of the skylight was in the water . 
When we got pretty close to the cross-hall door there was the skiff , sure enough ! 
I could just barely see her . 
I felt ever so thankful . 
In another second I would a been aboard of her , but just then the door opened . 
One of the men stuck his head out only about a couple of foot from me , and I thought I was gone ; but he jerked it in again , and says : `` Heave that blame lantern out o ' sight , Bill ! '' 
He flung a bag of something into the boat , and then got in himself and set down . 
It was Packard . 
Then Bill he come out and got in . 
Packard says , in a low voice : `` All ready -- shove off ! '' 
I could n't hardly hang on to the shutters , I was so weak . 
But Bill says : `` Hold on -- 'd you go through him ? '' 
`` No . 
Did n't you ? '' 
`` No . 
So he 's got his share o ' the cash yet . '' 
`` Well , then , come along ; no use to take truck and leave money . '' 
`` Say , wo n't he suspicion what we 're up to ? '' 
`` Maybe he wo n't . 
But we got to have it anyway . 
Come along . '' 
So they got out and went in . 
The door slammed to because it was on the careened side ; and in a half second I was in the boat , and Jim come tumbling after me . 
I out with my knife and cut the rope , and away we went ! 
We did n't touch an oar , and we did n't speak nor whisper , nor hardly even breathe . 
We went gliding swift along , dead silent , past the tip of the paddle-box , and past the stern ; then in a second or two more we was a hundred yards below the wreck , and the darkness soaked her up , every last sign of her , and we was safe , and knowed it . 
When we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern show like a little spark at the texas door for a second , and we knowed by that that the rascals had missed their boat , and was beginning to understand that they was in just as much trouble now as Jim Turner was . 
Then Jim manned the oars , and we took out after our raft . 
Now was the first time that I begun to worry about the men -- I reckon I had n't had time to before . 
I begun to think how dreadful it was , even for murderers , to be in such a fix . 
I says to myself , there ai n't no telling but I might come to be a murderer myself yet , and then how would I like it ? 
So says I to Jim : `` The first light we see we 'll land a hundred yards below it or above it , in a place where it 's a good hiding-place for you and the skiff , and then I 'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn , and get somebody to go for that gang and get them out of their scrape , so they can be hung when their time comes . '' 
But that idea was a failure ; for pretty soon it begun to storm again , and this time worse than ever . 
The rain poured down , and never a light showed ; everybody in bed , I reckon . 
We boomed along down the river , watching for lights and watching for our raft . 
After a long time the rain let up , but the clouds stayed , and the lightning kept whimpering , and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead , floating , and we made for it . 
It was the raft , and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again . 
We seen a light now away down to the right , on shore . 
So I said I would go for it . 
The skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole there on the wreck . 
We hustled it on to the raft in a pile , and I told Jim to float along down , and show a light when he judged he had gone about two mile , and keep it burning till I come ; then I manned my oars and shoved for the light . 
As I got down towards it three or four more showed -- up on a hillside . 
It was a village . 
I closed in above the shore light , and laid on my oars and floated . 
As I went by I see it was a lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat . 
I skimmed around for the watchman , a-wondering whereabouts he slept ; and by and by I found him roosting on the bitts forward , with his head down between his knees . 
I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves , and begun to cry . 
He stirred up in a kind of a startlish way ; but when he see it was only me he took a good gap and stretch , and then he says : `` Hello , what 's up ? 
