I hope so , anyway . '' 
I did n't hope so . 
They all crowded up and leaned over the rails , nearly in my face , and kept still , watching with all their might . 
I could see them first-rate , but they could n't see me . 
Then the captain sung out : `` Stand away ! '' 
and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that it made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke , and I judged I was gone . 
If they 'd a had some bullets in , I reckon they 'd a got the corpse they was after . 
Well , I see I war n't hurt , thanks to goodness . 
The boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder of the island . 
I could hear the booming now and then , further and further off , and by and by , after an hour , I did n't hear it no more . 
The island was three mile long . 
I judged they had got to the foot , and was giving it up . 
But they did n't yet a while . 
They turned around the foot of the island and started up the channel on the Missouri side , under steam , and booming once in a while as they went . 
I crossed over to that side and watched them . 
When they got abreast the head of the island they quit shooting and dropped over to the Missouri shore and went home to the town . 
I knowed I was all right now . 
Nobody else would come a-hunting after me . 
I got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the thick woods . 
I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things under so the rain could n't get at them . 
I catched a catfish and haggled him open with my saw , and towards sundown I started my camp fire and had supper . 
Then I set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast . 
When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking , and feeling pretty well satisfied ; but by and by it got sort of lonesome , and so I went and set on the bank and listened to the current swashing along , and counted the stars and drift logs and rafts that come down , and then went to bed ; there ai n't no better way to put in time when you are lonesome ; you ca n't stay so , you soon get over it . 
And so for three days and nights . 
No difference -- just the same thing . 
But the next day I went exploring around down through the island . 
I was boss of it ; it all belonged to me , so to say , and I wanted to know all about it ; but mainly I wanted to put in the time . 
I found plenty strawberries , ripe and prime ; and green summer grapes , and green razberries ; and the green blackberries was just beginning to show . 
They would all come handy by and by , I judged . 
Well , I went fooling along in the deep woods till I judged I war n't far from the foot of the island . 
I had my gun along , but I had n't shot nothing ; it was for protection ; thought I would kill some game nigh home . 
About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake , and it went sliding off through the grass and flowers , and I after it , trying to get a shot at it . 
I clipped along , and all of a sudden I bounded right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking . 
My heart jumped up amongst my lungs . 
I never waited for to look further , but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as fast as ever I could . 
Every now and then I stopped a second amongst the thick leaves and listened , but my breath come so hard I could n't hear nothing else . 
I slunk along another piece further , then listened again ; and so on , and so on . 
If I see a stump , I took it for a man ; if I trod on a stick and broke it , it made me feel like a person had cut one of my breaths in two and I only got half , and the short half , too . 
When I got to camp I war n't feeling very brash , there war n't much sand in my craw ; but I says , this ai n't no time to be fooling around . 
So I got all my traps into my canoe again so as to have them out of sight , and I put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an old last year 's camp , and then clumb a tree . 
I reckon I was up in the tree two hours ; but I did n't see nothing , I did n't hear nothing -- I only thought I heard and seen as much as a thousand things . 
Well , I could n't stay up there forever ; so at last I got down , but I kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the time . 
All I could get to eat was berries and what was left over from breakfast . 
By the time it was night I was pretty hungry . 
So when it was good and dark I slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the Illinois bank -- about a quarter of a mile . 
I went out in the woods and cooked a supper , and I had about made up my mind I would stay there all night when I hear a plunkety-plunk , plunkety-plunk , and says to myself , horses coming ; and next I hear people 's voices . 
I got everything into the canoe as quick as I could , and then went creeping through the woods to see what I could find out . 
I had n't got far when I hear a man say : `` We better camp here if we can find a good place ; the horses is about beat out . 
Let 's look around . '' 
I did n't wait , but shoved out and paddled away easy . 
I tied up in the old place , and reckoned I would sleep in the canoe . 
I did n't sleep much . 
I could n't , somehow , for thinking . 
And every time I waked up I thought somebody had me by the neck . 
So the sleep did n't do me no good . 
By and by I says to myself , I ca n't live this way ; I 'm a-going to find out who it is that 's here on the island with me ; I 'll find it out or bust . 
Well , I felt better right off . 
So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two , and then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows . 
The moon was shining , and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day . 
I poked along well on to an hour , everything still as rocks and sound asleep . 
Well , by this time I was most down to the foot of the island . 
A little ripply , cool breeze begun to blow , and that was as good as saying the night was about done . 
I give her a turn with the paddle and brung her nose to shore ; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge of the woods . 
I sat down there on a log , and looked out through the leaves . 
I see the moon go off watch , and the darkness begin to blanket the river . 
But in a little while I see a pale streak over the treetops , and knowed the day was coming . 
So I took my gun and slipped off towards where I had run across that camp fire , stopping every minute or two to listen . 
But I had n't no luck somehow ; I could n't seem to find the place . 
But by and by , sure enough , I catched a glimpse of fire away through the trees . 
I went for it , cautious and slow . 
By and by I was close enough to have a look , and there laid a man on the ground . 
It most give me the fan-tods . 
He had a blanket around his head , and his head was nearly in the fire . 
I set there behind a clump of bushes , in about six foot of him , and kept my eyes on him steady . 
It was getting gray daylight now . 
Pretty soon he gapped and stretched himself and hove off the blanket , and it was Miss Watson 's Jim ! 
I bet I was glad to see him . 
I says : `` Hello , Jim ! '' 
and skipped out . 
He bounced up and stared at me wild . 
Then he drops down on his knees , and puts his hands together and says : `` Doan ' hurt me -- do n't ! 
I hai n't ever done no harm to a ghos ' . 
I alwuz liked dead people , en done all I could for 'em . 
You go en git in de river agin , whah you b ` longs , en doan ' do nuffn to Ole Jim , ` at ` uz awluz yo ' fren ' . '' 
Well , I war n't long making him understand I war n't dead . 
I was ever so glad to see Jim . 
I war n't lonesome now . 
I told him I war n't afraid of him telling the people where I was . 
I talked along , but he only set there and looked at me ; never said nothing . 
Then I says : `` It 's good daylight . 
Le 's get breakfast . 
Make up your camp fire good . '' 
`` What 's de use er makin ' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich truck ? 
But you got a gun , hai n't you ? 
Den we kin git sumfn better den strawbries . '' 
`` Strawberries and such truck , '' I says . 
`` Is that what you live on ? '' 
`` I couldn ' git nuffn else , '' he says . 
`` Why , how long you been on the island , Jim ? '' 
`` I come heah de night arter you 's killed . '' 
`` What , all that time ? '' 
`` Yes -- indeedy . '' 
`` And ai n't you had nothing but that kind of rubbage to eat ? '' 
`` No , sah -- nuffn else . '' 
`` Well , you must be most starved , ai n't you ? '' 
`` I reck 'n I could eat a hoss . 
I think I could . 
How long you ben on de islan ' ? '' 
`` Since the night I got killed . '' 
`` No ! 
W ` y , what has you lived on ? 
But you got a gun . 
Oh , yes , you got a gun . 
Dat 's good . 
Now you kill sumfn en I 'll make up de fire . '' 
So we went over to where the canoe was , and while he built a fire in a grassy open place amongst the trees , I fetched meal and bacon and coffee , and coffee-pot and frying-pan , and sugar and tin cups , and the nigger was set back considerable , because he reckoned it was all done with witchcraft . 
I catched a good big catfish , too , and Jim cleaned him with his knife , and fried him . 
When breakfast was ready we lolled on the grass and eat it smoking hot . 
Jim laid it in with all his might , for he was most about starved . 
Then when we had got pretty well stuffed , we laid off and lazied . 
By and by Jim says : `` But looky here , Huck , who wuz it dat ` uz killed in dat shanty ef it war n't you ? '' 
Then I told him the whole thing , and he said it was smart . 
He said Tom Sawyer could n't get up no better plan than what I had . 
Then I says : `` How do you come to be here , Jim , and how 'd you get here ? '' 
He looked pretty uneasy , and did n't say nothing for a minute . 
Then he says : `` Maybe I better not tell . '' 
`` Why , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , dey 's reasons . 
But you wouldn ' tell on me ef I uz to tell you , would you , Huck ? '' 
`` Blamed if I would , Jim . '' 
`` Well , I b ` lieve you , Huck . 
I -- I run off . '' 
`` Jim ! '' 
`` But mind , you said you wouldn ' tell -- you know you said you wouldn ' tell , Huck . '' 
`` Well , I did . 
I said I would n't , and I 'll stick to it . 
Honest injun , I will . 
People would call me a low-down Abolitionist and despise me for keeping mum -- but that do n't make no difference . 
I ai n't a-going to tell , and I ai n't a-going back there , anyways . 
So , now , le 's know all about it . '' 
`` Well , you see , it ` uz dis way . 
Ole missus -- dat 's Miss Watson -- she pecks on me all de time , en treats me pooty rough , but she awluz said she wouldn ' sell me down to Orleans . 
But I noticed dey wuz a nigger trader roun ' de place considable lately , en I begin to git oneasy . 
Well , one night I creeps to de do ' pooty late , en de do ' war n't quite shet , en I hear old missus tell de widder she gwyne to sell me down to Orleans , but she didn ' want to , but she could git eight hund 'd dollars for me , en it ` uz sich a big stack o ' money she couldn ' resis ' . 
De widder she try to git her to say she wouldn ' do it , but I never waited to hear de res ' . 
I lit out mighty quick , I tell you . 
`` I tuck out en shin down de hill , en ` spec to steal a skift ` long de sho ' som ` ers ` bove de town , but dey wuz people a-stirring yit , so I hid in de ole tumble-down cooper-shop on de bank to wait for everybody to go ` way . 
Well , I wuz dah all night . 
Dey wuz somebody roun ' all de time . 
` Long ` bout six in de mawnin ' skifts begin to go by , en ` bout eight er nine every skift dat went ` long wuz talkin ' ` bout how yo ' pap come over to de town en say you 's killed . 
Dese las ' skifts wuz full o ' ladies en genlmen a-goin ' over for to see de place . 
Sometimes dey 'd pull up at de sho ' en take a res ' b ` fo ' dey started acrost , so by de talk I got to know all ` bout de killin ' . 
I ` uz powerful sorry you 's killed , Huck , but I ai n't no mo ' now . 
`` I laid dah under de shavin 's all day . 
I ` uz hungry , but I war n't afeard ; bekase I knowed ole missus en de widder wuz goin ' to start to de camp-meet 'n' right arter breakfas ' en be gone all day , en dey knows I goes off wid de cattle ` bout daylight , so dey wouldn ' ` spec to see me roun ' de place , en so dey wouldn ' miss me tell arter dark in de evenin ' . 
De yuther servants wouldn ' miss me , kase dey 'd shin out en take holiday soon as de ole folks ` uz out 'n de way . 
`` Well , when it come dark I tuck out up de river road , en went ` bout two mile er more to whah dey war n't no houses . 
I 'd made up my mine ` bout what I 's agwyne to do . 
You see , ef I kep ' on tryin ' to git away afoot , de dogs ` ud track me ; ef I stole a skift to cross over , dey 'd miss dat skift , you see , en dey 'd know ` bout whah I 'd lan ' on de yuther side , en whah to pick up my track . 
So I says , a raff is what I 's arter ; it doan ' make no track . 
`` I see a light a-comin ' roun ' de p ` int bymeby , so I wade ' in en shove ' a log ahead o ' me en swum more 'n half way acrost de river , en got in ` mongst de drift-wood , en kep ' my head down low , en kinder swum agin de current tell de raff come along . 
Den I swum to de stern uv it en tuck a-holt . 
It clouded up en ` uz pooty dark for a little while . 
So I clumb up en laid down on de planks . 
De men ` uz all ` way yonder in de middle , whah de lantern wuz . 
De river wuz a-risin ' , en dey wuz a good current ; so I reck 'n' d ` at by fo ' in de mawnin ' I 'd be twenty-five mile down de river , en den I 'd slip in jis b ` fo ' daylight en swim asho ' , en take to de woods on de Illinois side . 
`` But I didn ' have no luck . 
When we ` uz mos ' down to de head er de islan ' a man begin to come aft wid de lantern , I see it war n't no use fer to wait , so I slid overboard en struck out fer de islan ' . 
Well , I had a notion I could lan ' mos ' anywhers , but I could n't -- bank too bluff . 
I ` uz mos ' to de foot er de islan ' b ` fo ' I found ' a good place . 
I went into de woods en jedged I wouldn ' fool wid raffs no mo ' , long as dey move de lantern roun ' so . 
I had my pipe en a plug er dog-leg , en some matches in my cap , en dey war n't wet , so I ` uz all right . '' 
`` And so you ai n't had no meat nor bread to eat all this time ? 
Why did n't you get mud-turkles ? '' 
`` How you gwyne to git 'm ? 
You ca n't slip up on um en grab um ; en how 's a body gwyne to hit um wid a rock ? 
How could a body do it in de night ? 
En I war n't gwyne to show mysef on de bank in de daytime . '' 
`` Well , that 's so . 
You 've had to keep in the woods all the time , of course . 
Did you hear 'em shooting the cannon ? '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
I knowed dey was arter you . 
I see um go by heah -- watched um thoo de bushes . '' 
Some young birds come along , flying a yard or two at a time and lighting . 
Jim said it was a sign it was going to rain . 
He said it was a sign when young chickens flew that way , and so he reckoned it was the same way when young birds done it . 
I was going to catch some of them , but Jim would n't let me . 
He said it was death . 
He said his father laid mighty sick once , and some of them catched a bird , and his old granny said his father would die , and he did . 
And Jim said you must n't count the things you are going to cook for dinner , because that would bring bad luck . 
The same if you shook the table-cloth after sundown . 
And he said if a man owned a beehive and that man died , the bees must be told about it before sun-up next morning , or else the bees would all weaken down and quit work and die . 
Jim said bees would n't sting idiots ; but I did n't believe that , because I had tried them lots of times myself , and they would n't sting me . 
I had heard about some of these things before , but not all of them . 
Jim knowed all kinds of signs . 
He said he knowed most everything . 
I said it looked to me like all the signs was about bad luck , and so I asked him if there war n't any good-luck signs . 
He says : `` Mighty few -- an ' dey ai n't no use to a body . 
What you want to know when good luck 's a-comin ' for ? 
Want to keep it off ? '' 
And he said : `` Ef you 's got hairy arms en a hairy breas ' , it 's a sign dat you 's agwyne to be rich . 
Well , dey 's some use in a sign like dat , ` kase it 's so fur ahead . 
You see , maybe you 's got to be po ' a long time fust , en so you might git discourage ' en kill yo ` sef ' f you didn ' know by de sign dat you gwyne to be rich bymeby . '' 
`` Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast , Jim ? '' 
`` What 's de use to ax dat question ? 
Do n't you see I has ? '' 
`` Well , are you rich ? '' 
`` No , but I ben rich wunst , and gwyne to be rich agin . 
Wunst I had foteen dollars , but I tuck to specalat 'n' , en got busted out . '' 
`` What did you speculate in , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , fust I tackled stock . '' 
`` What kind of stock ? '' 
`` Why , live stock -- cattle , you know . 
I put ten dollars in a cow . 
But I ain ' gwyne to resk no mo ' money in stock . 
De cow up 'n' died on my han 's . '' 
`` So you lost the ten dollars . '' 
`` No , I did n't lose it all . 
I on ' y los ' ` bout nine of it . 
I sole de hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents . '' 
`` You had five dollars and ten cents left . 
Did you speculate any more ? '' 
`` Yes . 
You know that one-laigged nigger dat b ` longs to old Misto Bradish ? 
Well , he sot up a bank , en say anybody dat put in a dollar would git fo ' dollars mo ' at de en ' er de year . 
Well , all de niggers went in , but dey did n't have much . 
I wuz de on ' y one dat had much . 
So I stuck out for mo ' dan fo ' dollars , en I said ' f I didn ' git it I 'd start a bank mysef . 
Well , o ' course dat nigger want ' to keep me out er de business , bekase he says dey war n't business ` nough for two banks , so he say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en ' er de year . 
`` So I done it . 
Den I reck 'n' d I 'd inves ' de thirty-five dollars right off en keep things a-movin ' . 
Dey wuz a nigger name ' Bob , dat had ketched a wood-flat , en his marster didn ' know it ; en I bought it off 'n him en told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en ' er de year come ; but somebody stole de wood-flat dat night , en nex day de one-laigged nigger say de bank 's busted . 
So dey didn ' none uv us git no money . '' 
`` What did you do with the ten cents , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , I ` uz gwyne to spen ' it , but I had a dream , en de dream tole me to give it to a nigger name ' Balum -- Balum 's Ass dey call him for short ; he 's one er dem chuckleheads , you know . 
But he 's lucky , dey say , en I see I war n't lucky . 
De dream say let Balum inves ' de ten cents en he 'd make a raise for me . 
Well , Balum he tuck de money , en when he wuz in church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po ' len ' to de Lord , en boun ' to git his money back a hund 'd times . 
So Balum he tuck en give de ten cents to de po ' , en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to come of it . '' 
`` Well , what did come of it , Jim ? '' 
`` Nuffn never come of it . 
I couldn ' manage to k ` leck dat money no way ; en Balum he couldn ' . 
I ain ' gwyne to len ' no mo ' money ` dout I see de security . 
Boun ' to git yo ' money back a hund 'd times , de preacher says ! 
Ef I could git de ten cents back , I 'd call it squah , en be glad er de chanst . '' 
`` Well , it 's all right anyway , Jim , long as you 're going to be rich again some time or other . '' 
`` Yes ; en I 's rich now , come to look at it . 
I owns mysef , en I 's wuth eight hund 'd dollars . 
I wisht I had de money , I wouldn ' want no mo ' . '' 
I wanted to go and look at a place right about the middle of the island that I 'd found when I was exploring ; so we started and soon got to it , because the island was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide . 
This place was a tolerable long , steep hill or ridge about forty foot high . 
We had a rough time getting to the top , the sides was so steep and the bushes so thick . 
We tramped and clumb around all over it , and by and by found a good big cavern in the rock , most up to the top on the side towards Illinois . 
The cavern was as big as two or three rooms bunched together , and Jim could stand up straight in it . 
It was cool in there . 
Jim was for putting our traps in there right away , but I said we did n't want to be climbing up and down there all the time . 
Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place , and had all the traps in the cavern , we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island , and they would never find us without dogs . 
And , besides , he said them little birds had said it was going to rain , and did I want the things to get wet ? 
So we went back and got the canoe , and paddled up abreast the cavern , and lugged all the traps up there . 
Then we hunted up a place close by to hide the canoe in , amongst the thick willows . 
We took some fish off of the lines and set them again , and begun to get ready for dinner . 
The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in , and on one side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit , and was flat and a good place to build a fire on . 
So we built it there and cooked dinner . 
We spread the blankets inside for a carpet , and eat our dinner in there . 
We put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern . 
Pretty soon it darkened up , and begun to thunder and lighten ; so the birds was right about it . 
Directly it begun to rain , and it rained like all fury , too , and I never see the wind blow so . 
It was one of these regular summer storms . 
It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black outside , and lovely ; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby ; and here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the pale underside of the leaves ; and then a perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set the branches to tossing their arms as if they was just wild ; and next , when it was just about the bluest and blackest -- FST ! 
it was as bright as glory , and you 'd have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in the storm , hundreds of yards further than you could see before ; dark as sin again in a second , and now you 'd hear the thunder let go with an awful crash , and then go rumbling , grumbling , tumbling , down the sky towards the under side of the world , like rolling empty barrels down stairs -- where it 's long stairs and they bounce a good deal , you know . 
`` Jim , this is nice , '' I says . 
`` I would n't want to be nowhere else but here . 
Pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread . '' 
`` Well , you would n't a ben here ' f it had n't a ben for Jim . 
You 'd a ben down dah in de woods widout any dinner , en gittn ' mos ' drownded , too ; dat you would , honey . 
Chickens knows when it 's gwyne to rain , en so do de birds , chile . '' 
The river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days , till at last it was over the banks . 
The water was three or four foot deep on the island in the low places and on the Illinois bottom . 
On that side it was a good many miles wide , but on the Missouri side it was the same old distance across -- a half a mile -- because the Missouri shore was just a wall of high bluffs . 
Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe , It was mighty cool and shady in the deep woods , even if the sun was blazing outside . 
We went winding in and out amongst the trees , and sometimes the vines hung so thick we had to back away and go some other way . 
Well , on every old broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things ; and when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame , on account of being hungry , that you could paddle right up and put your hand on them if you wanted to ; but not the snakes and turtles -- they would slide off in the water . 
The ridge our cavern was in was full of them . 
We could a had pets enough if we 'd wanted them . 
One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft -- nice pine planks . 
It was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long , and the top stood above water six or seven inches -- a solid , level floor . 
We could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes , but we let them go ; we did n't show ourselves in daylight . 
Another night when we was up at the head of the island , just before daylight , here comes a frame-house down , on the west side . 
She was a two-story , and tilted over considerable . 
We paddled out and got aboard -- clumb in at an upstairs window . 
But it was too dark to see yet , so we made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight . 
The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island . 
Then we looked in at the window . 
We could make out a bed , and a table , and two old chairs , and lots of things around about on the floor , and there was clothes hanging against the wall . 
There was something laying on the floor in the far corner that looked like a man . 
So Jim says : `` Hello , you ! '' 
But it did n't budge . 
So I hollered again , and then Jim says : `` De man ai n't asleep -- he 's dead . 
You hold still -- I 'll go en see . '' 
He went , and bent down and looked , and says : `` It 's a dead man . 
Yes , indeedy ; naked , too . 
He 's ben shot in de back . 
I reck 'n he 's ben dead two er three days . 
Come in , Huck , but doan ' look at his face -- it 's too gashly . '' 
I did n't look at him at all . 
Jim throwed some old rags over him , but he need n't done it ; I did n't want to see him . 
There was heaps of old greasy cards scattered around over the floor , and old whisky bottles , and a couple of masks made out of black cloth ; and all over the walls was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal . 
There was two old dirty calico dresses , and a sun-bonnet , and some women 's underclothes hanging against the wall , and some men 's clothing , too . 
We put the lot into the canoe -- it might come good . 
There was a boy 's old speckled straw hat on the floor ; I took that , too . 
And there was a bottle that had had milk in it , and it had a rag stopper for a baby to suck . 
We would a took the bottle , but it was broke . 
There was a seedy old chest , and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke . 
They stood open , but there war n't nothing left in them that was any account . 
The way things was scattered about we reckoned the people left in a hurry , and war n't fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff . 
We got an old tin lantern , and a butcher-knife without any handle , and a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any store , and a lot of tallow candles , and a tin candlestick , and a gourd , and a tin cup , and a ratty old bedquilt off the bed , and a reticule with needles and pins and beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it , and a hatchet and some nails , and a fishline as thick as my little finger with some monstrous hooks on it , and a roll of buckskin , and a leather dog-collar , and a horseshoe , and some vials of medicine that did n't have no label on them ; and just as we was leaving I found a tolerable good curry-comb , and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow , and a wooden leg . 
The straps was broke off of it , but , barring that , it was a good enough leg , though it was too long for me and not long enough for Jim , and we could n't find the other one , though we hunted all around . 
And so , take it all around , we made a good haul . 
When we was ready to shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island , and it was pretty broad day ; so I made Jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the quilt , because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good ways off . 
I paddled over to the Illinois shore , and drifted down most a half a mile doing it . 
I crept up the dead water under the bank , and had n't no accidents and did n't see nobody . 
We got home all safe . 
AFTER breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he come to be killed , but Jim did n't want to . 
He said it would fetch bad luck ; and besides , he said , he might come and ha ` nt us ; he said a man that war n't buried was more likely to go a-ha ` nting around than one that was planted and comfortable . 
That sounded pretty reasonable , so I did n't say no more ; but I could n't keep from studying over it and wishing I knowed who shot the man , and what they done it for . 
We rummaged the clothes we 'd got , and found eight dollars in silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat . 
Jim said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat , because if they 'd a knowed the money was there they would n't a left it . 
I said I reckoned they killed him , too ; but Jim did n't want to talk about that . 
I says : `` Now you think it 's bad luck ; but what did you say when I fetched in the snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday ? 
You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin with my hands . 
Well , here 's your bad luck ! 
We 've raked in all this truck and eight dollars besides . 
I wish we could have some bad luck like this every day , Jim . '' 
`` Never you mind , honey , never you mind . 
Do n't you git too peart . 
It 's a-comin ' . 
Mind I tell you , it 's a-comin ' . '' 
It did come , too . 
It was a Tuesday that we had that talk . 
Well , after dinner Friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the ridge , and got out of tobacco . 
I went to the cavern to get some , and found a rattlesnake in there . 
I killed him , and curled him up on the foot of Jim 's blanket , ever so natural , thinking there 'd be some fun when Jim found him there . 
Well , by night I forgot all about the snake , and when Jim flung himself down on the blanket while I struck a light the snake 's mate was there , and bit him . 
He jumped up yelling , and the first thing the light showed was the varmint curled up and ready for another spring . 
I laid him out in a second with a stick , and Jim grabbed pap 's whisky-jug and begun to pour it down . 
He was barefooted , and the snake bit him right on the heel . 
That all comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it . 
Jim told me to chop off the snake 's head and throw it away , and then skin the body and roast a piece of it . 
I done it , and he eat it and said it would help cure him . 
He made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist , too . 
He said that that would help . 
Then I slid out quiet and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes ; for I war n't going to let Jim find out it was all my fault , not if I could help it . 
Jim sucked and sucked at the jug , and now and then he got out of his head and pitched around and yelled ; but every time he come to himself he went to sucking at the jug again . 
His foot swelled up pretty big , and so did his leg ; but by and by the drunk begun to come , and so I judged he was all right ; but I 'd druther been bit with a snake than pap 's whisky . 
Jim was laid up for four days and nights . 
Then the swelling was all gone and he was around again . 
I made up my mind I would n't ever take a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands , now that I see what had come of it . 
Jim said he reckoned I would believe him next time . 
And he said that handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we had n't got to the end of it yet . 
He said he druther see the new moon over his left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin in his hand . 
Well , I was getting to feel that way myself , though I 've always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do . 
Old Hank Bunker done it once , and bragged about it ; and in less than two years he got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower , and spread himself out so that he was just a kind of a layer , as you may say ; and they slid him edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin , and buried him so , so they say , but I did n't see it . 
Pap told me . 
But anyway it all come of looking at the moon that way , like a fool . 
Well , the days went along , and the river went down between its banks again ; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was as big as a man , being six foot two inches long , and weighed over two hundred pounds . 
We could n't handle him , of course ; he would a flung us into Illinois . 
We just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he drownded . 
We found a brass button in his stomach and a round ball , and lots of rubbage . 
We split the ball open with the hatchet , and there was a spool in it . 
Jim said he 'd had it there a long time , to coat it over so and make a ball of it . 
It was as big a fish as was ever catched in the Mississippi , I reckon . 
Jim said he had n't ever seen a bigger one . 
He would a been worth a good deal over at the village . 
They peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the market-house there ; everybody buys some of him ; his meat 's as white as snow and makes a good fry . 
Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull , and I wanted to get a stirring up some way . 
I said I reckoned I would slip over the river and find out what was going on . 
Jim liked that notion ; but he said I must go in the dark and look sharp . 
Then he studied it over and said , could n't I put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl ? 
That was a good notion , too . 
So we shortened up one of the calico gowns , and I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it . 
Jim hitched it behind with the hooks , and it was a fair fit . 
I put on the sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin , and then for a body to look in and see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe . 
Jim said nobody would know me , even in the daytime , hardly . 
I practiced around all day to get the hang of the things , and by and by I could do pretty well in them , only Jim said I did n't walk like a girl ; and he said I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket . 
I took notice , and done better . 
I started up the Illinois shore in the canoe just after dark . 
I started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing , and the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town . 
I tied up and started along the bank . 
There was a light burning in a little shanty that had n't been lived in for a long time , and I wondered who had took up quarters there . 
I slipped up and peeped in at the window . 
There was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by a candle that was on a pine table . 
I did n't know her face ; she was a stranger , for you could n't start a face in that town that I did n't know . 
Now this was lucky , because I was weakening ; I was getting afraid I had come ; people might know my voice and find me out . 
But if this woman had been in such a little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to know ; so I knocked at the door , and made up my mind I would n't forget I was a girl . 
`` COME in , '' says the woman , and I did . 
She says : `` Take a cheer . '' 
I done it . 
She looked me all over with her little shiny eyes , and says : `` What might your name be ? '' 
`` Sarah Williams . '' 
