The rough man held the candle to her face , and uttering a kind of compassionate grunt , opened the door of a small bed-room adjoining to the large kitchen where they were standing , and motioned her to go in . 
He took down a candle , and lighting it , set it upon the table , and then addressed himself to Eliza . 
`` Now , I say , gal , you need n't be a bit afeard , let who will come here . 
I 'm up to all that sort o ' thing , '' said he , pointing to two or three goodly rifles over the mantel-piece ; `` and most people that know me know that ' t would n't be healthy to try to get anybody out o ' my house when I 'm agin it . 
So now you jist go to sleep now , as quiet as if yer mother was a rockin ' ye , '' said he , as he shut the door . 
`` Why , this is an uncommon handsome un , '' he said to the senator . 
`` Ah , well ; handsome uns has the greatest cause to run , sometimes , if they has any kind o ' feelin , such as decent women should . 
I know all about that . '' 
The senator , in a few words , briefly explained Eliza 's history . 
`` O ! 
ou ! 
aw ! 
now , I want to know ? '' 
said the good man , pitifully ; `` sho ! 
now sho ! 
That 's natur now , poor crittur ! 
hunted down now like a deer , -- hunted down , jest for havin ' natural feelin 's , and doin ' what no kind o ' mother could help a doin ' ! 
I tell ye what , these yer things make me come the nighest to swearin ' , now , o ' most anything , '' said honest John , as he wiped his eyes with the back of a great , freckled , yellow hand . 
`` I tell yer what , stranger , it was years and years before I 'd jine the church , 'cause the ministers round in our parts used to preach that the Bible went in for these ere cuttings up , -- and I could n't be up to 'em with their Greek and Hebrew , and so I took up agin 'em , Bible and all . 
I never jined the church till I found a minister that was up to 'em all in Greek and all that , and he said right the contrary ; and then I took right hold , and jined the church , -- I did now , fact , '' said John , who had been all this time uncorking some very frisky bottled cider , which at this juncture he presented . 
`` Ye 'd better jest put up here , now , till daylight , '' said he , heartily , `` and I 'll call up the old woman , and have a bed got ready for you in no time . '' 
`` Thank you , my good friend , '' said the senator , `` I must be along , to take the night stage for Columbus . '' 
`` Ah ! 
well , then , if you must , I 'll go a piece with you , and show you a cross road that will take you there better than the road you came on . 
That road 's mighty bad . '' 
John equipped himself , and , with a lantern in hand , was soon seen guiding the senator 's carriage towards a road that ran down in a hollow , back of his dwelling . 
When they parted , the senator put into his hand a ten-dollar bill . 
`` It 's for her , '' he said , briefly . 
`` Ay , ay , '' said John , with equal conciseness . 
They shook hands , and parted . 
The February morning looked gray and drizzling through the window of Uncle Tom 's cabin . 
It looked on downcast faces , the images of mournful hearts . 
The little table stood out before the fire , covered with an ironing-cloth ; a coarse but clean shirt or two , fresh from the iron , hung on the back of a chair by the fire , and Aunt Chloe had another spread out before her on the table . 
Carefully she rubbed and ironed every fold and every hem , with the most scrupulous exactness , every now and then raising her hand to her face to wipe off the tears that were coursing down her cheeks . 
Tom sat by , with his Testament open on his knee , and his head leaning upon his hand ; -- but neither spoke . 
It was yet early , and the children lay all asleep together in their little rude trundle-bed . 
Tom , who had , to the full , the gentle , domestic heart , which woe for them ! 
has been a peculiar characteristic of his unhappy race , got up and walked silently to look at his children . 
`` It 's the last time , '' he said . 
Aunt Chloe did not answer , only rubbed away over and over on the coarse shirt , already as smooth as hands could make it ; and finally setting her iron suddenly down with a despairing plunge , she sat down to the table , and `` lifted up her voice and wept . '' 
`` S'pose we must be resigned ; but oh Lord ! 
how ken I ? 
If I know 'd anything whar you 's goin ' , or how they 'd sarve you ! 
Missis says she 'll try and ` deem ye , in a year or two ; but Lor ! 
nobody never comes up that goes down thar ! 
They kills 'em ! 
I 've hearn 'em tell how dey works 'em up on dem ar plantations . '' 
`` There 'll be the same God there , Chloe , that there is here . '' 
`` Well , '' said Aunt Chloe , `` s ` pose dere will ; but de Lord lets drefful things happen , sometimes . 
I do n't seem to get no comfort dat way . '' 
`` I 'm in the Lord 's hands , '' said Tom ; `` nothin ' can go no furder than he lets it ; -- and thar 's one thing I can thank him for . 
It 's me that 's sold and going down , and not you nur the chil ` en . 
Here you 're safe ; -- what comes will come only on me ; and the Lord , he 'll help me , -- I know he will . '' 
Ah , brave , manly heart , -- smothering thine own sorrow , to comfort thy beloved ones ! 
Tom spoke with a thick utterance , and with a bitter choking in his throat , -- but he spoke brave and strong . 
`` Let 's think on our marcies ! '' 
he added , tremulously , as if he was quite sure he needed to think on them very hard indeed . 
`` Marcies ! '' 
said Aunt Chloe ; `` do n't see no marcy in ` t ! 
` ta n't right ! 
ta n't right it should be so ! 
Mas ' r never ought ter left it so that ye could be took for his debts . 
Ye 've arnt him all he gets for ye , twice over . 
He owed ye yer freedom , and ought ter gin ' t to yer years ago . 
Mebbe he ca n't help himself now , but I feel it 's wrong . 
Nothing ca n't beat that ar out o ' me . 
Sich a faithful crittur as ye 've been , -- and allers sot his business ` fore yer own every way , -- and reckoned on him more than yer own wife and chil ` en ! 
Them as sells heart 's love and heart 's blood , to get out thar scrapes , de Lord 'll be up to 'em ! '' 
`` Chloe ! 
now , if ye love me , ye wo n't talk so , when perhaps jest the last time we 'll ever have together ! 
And I 'll tell ye , Chloe , it goes agin me to hear one word agin Mas ` r. Wa n't he put in my arms a baby ? 
-- it 's natur I should think a heap of him . 
And he could n't be spected to think so much of poor Tom . 
Mas ` rs is used to havin ' all these yer things done for 'em , and nat ` lly they do n't think so much on ` t . 
They ca n't be spected to , no way . 
Set him ` longside of other Mas ` rs -- who 's had the treatment and livin ' I 've had ? 
And he never would have let this yer come on me , if he could have seed it aforehand . 
I know he would n't . '' 
`` Wal , any way , thar 's wrong about it somewhar , '' said Aunt Chloe , in whom a stubborn sense of justice was a predominant trait ; `` I ca n't jest make out whar ' t is , but thar 's wrong somewhar , I 'm clar o ' that . '' 
`` Yer ought ter look up to the Lord above -- he 's above all -- thar do n't a sparrow fall without him . '' 
`` It do n't seem to comfort me , but I spect it orter , '' said Aunt Chloe . 
`` But dar 's no use talkin ' ; I 'll jes wet up de corn-cake , and get ye one good breakfast , 'cause nobody knows when you 'll get another . '' 
In order to appreciate the sufferings of the negroes sold south , it must be remembered that all the instinctive affections of that race are peculiarly strong . 
Their local attachments are very abiding . 
They are not naturally daring and enterprising , but home-loving and affectionate . 
Add to this all the terrors with which ignorance invests the unknown , and add to this , again , that selling to the south is set before the negro from childhood as the last severity of punishment . 
The threat that terrifies more than whipping or torture of any kind is the threat of being sent down river . 
We have ourselves heard this feeling expressed by them , and seen the unaffected horror with which they will sit in their gossipping hours , and tell frightful stories of that `` down river , '' which to them is `` That undiscovered country , from whose bourn No traveller returns . '' 
* * A slightly inaccurate quotation from Hamlet , Act III , scene I , lines 369-370 . 
A missionary figure among the fugitives in Canada told us that many of the fugitives confessed themselves to have escaped from comparatively kind masters , and that they were induced to brave the perils of escape , in almost every case , by the desperate horror with which they regarded being sold south , -- a doom which was hanging either over themselves or their husbands , their wives or children . 
This nerves the African , naturally patient , timid and unenterprising , with heroic courage , and leads him to suffer hunger , cold , pain , the perils of the wilderness , and the more dread penalties of recapture . 
The simple morning meal now smoked on the table , for Mrs. Shelby had excused Aunt Chloe 's attendance at the great house that morning . 
The poor soul had expended all her little energies on this farewell feast , -- had killed and dressed her choicest chicken , and prepared her corn-cake with scrupulous exactness , just to her husband 's taste , and brought out certain mysterious jars on the mantel-piece , some preserves that were never produced except on extreme occasions . 
`` Lor , Pete , '' said Mose , triumphantly , `` ha n't we got a buster of a breakfast ! '' 
at the same time catching at a fragment of the chicken . 
Aunt Chloe gave him a sudden box on the ear . 
`` Thar now ! 
crowing over the last breakfast yer poor daddy 's gwine to have to home ! '' 
`` O , Chloe ! '' 
said Tom , gently . 
`` Wal , I ca n't help it , '' said Aunt Chloe , hiding her face in her apron ; `` I 's so tossed about it , it makes me act ugly . '' 
The boys stood quite still , looking first at their father and then at their mother , while the baby , climbing up her clothes , began an imperious , commanding cry . 
`` Thar ! '' 
said Aunt Chloe , wiping her eyes and taking up the baby ; `` now I 's done , I hope , -- now do eat something . 
This yer 's my nicest chicken . 
Thar , boys , ye shall have some , poor critturs ! 
Yer mammy 's been cross to yer . '' 
The boys needed no second invitation , and went in with great zeal for the eatables ; and it was well they did so , as otherwise there would have been very little performed to any purpose by the party . 
`` Now , '' said Aunt Chloe , bustling about after breakfast , `` I must put up yer clothes . 
Jest like as not , he 'll take 'em all away . 
I know thar ways -- mean as dirt , they is ! 
Wal , now , yer flannels for rhumatis is in this corner ; so be careful , 'cause there wo n't nobody make ye no more . 
Then here 's yer old shirts , and these yer is new ones . 
I toed off these yer stockings last night , and put de ball in 'em to mend with . 
But Lor ! 
who 'll ever mend for ye ? '' 
and Aunt Chloe , again overcome , laid her head on the box side , and sobbed . 
`` To think on ` t ! 
no crittur to do for ye , sick or well ! 
I do n't railly think I ought ter be good now ! '' 
The boys , having eaten everything there was on the breakfast-table , began now to take some thought of the case ; and , seeing their mother crying , and their father looking very sad , began to whimper and put their hands to their eyes . 
Uncle Tom had the baby on his knee , and was letting her enjoy herself to the utmost extent , scratching his face and pulling his hair , and occasionally breaking out into clamorous explosions of delight , evidently arising out of her own internal reflections . 
`` Ay , crow away , poor crittur ! '' 
said Aunt Chloe ; `` ye 'll have to come to it , too ! 
ye 'll live to see yer husband sold , or mebbe be sold yerself ; and these yer boys , they 's to be sold , I s ` pose , too , jest like as not , when dey gets good for somethin' ; a n't no use in niggers havin ' nothin ' ! '' 
Here one of the boys called out , `` Thar 's Missis a-comin ' in ! '' 
`` She ca n't do no good ; what 's she coming for ? '' 
said Aunt Chloe . 
Mrs. Shelby entered . 
Aunt Chloe set a chair for her in a manner decidedly gruff and crusty . 
She did not seem to notice either the action or the manner . 
She looked pale and anxious . 
`` Tom , '' she said , `` I come to -- '' and stopping suddenly , and regarding the silent group , she sat down in the chair , and , covering her face with her handkerchief , began to sob . 
`` Lor , now , Missis , do n't -- do n't ! '' 
said Aunt Chloe , bursting out in her turn ; and for a few moments they all wept in company . 
And in those tears they all shed together , the high and the lowly , melted away all the heart-burnings and anger of the oppressed . 
O , ye who visit the distressed , do ye know that everything your money can buy , given with a cold , averted face , is not worth one honest tear shed in real sympathy ? 
`` My good fellow , '' said Mrs. Shelby , `` I ca n't give you anything to do you any good . 
If I give you money , it will only be taken from you . 
But I tell you solemnly , and before God , that I will keep trace of you , and bring you back as soon as I can command the money ; -- and , till then , trust in God ! '' 
Here the boys called out that Mas ' r Haley was coming , and then an unceremonious kick pushed open the door . 
Haley stood there in very ill humor , having ridden hard the night before , and being not at all pacified by his ill success in recapturing his prey . 
`` Come , '' said he , `` ye nigger , ye ' r ready ? 
Servant , ma'am ! '' 
said he , taking off his hat , as he saw Mrs. Shelby . 
Aunt Chloe shut and corded the box , and , getting up , looked gruffly on the trader , her tears seeming suddenly turned to sparks of fire . 
Tom rose up meekly , to follow his new master , and raised up his heavy box on his shoulder . 
His wife took the baby in her arms to go with him to the wagon , and the children , still crying , trailed on behind . 
Mrs. Shelby , walking up to the trader , detained him for a few moments , talking with him in an earnest manner ; and while she was thus talking , the whole family party proceeded to a wagon , that stood ready harnessed at the door . 
A crowd of all the old and young hands on the place stood gathered around it , to bid farewell to their old associate . 
Tom had been looked up to , both as a head servant and a Christian teacher , by all the place , and there was much honest sympathy and grief about him , particularly among the women . 
`` Why , Chloe , you bar it better 'n we do ! '' 
said one of the women , who had been weeping freely , noticing the gloomy calmness with which Aunt Chloe stood by the wagon . 
`` I 's done my tears ! '' 
she said , looking grimly at the trader , who was coming up . 
`` I does not feel to cry ` fore dat ar old limb , no how ! '' 
`` Get in ! '' 
said Haley to Tom , as he strode through the crowd of servants , who looked at him with lowering brows . 
Tom got in , and Haley , drawing out from under the wagon seat a heavy pair of shackles , made them fast around each ankle . 
A smothered groan of indignation ran through the whole circle , and Mrs. Shelby spoke from the verandah , -- `` Mr. Haley , I assure you that precaution is entirely unnecessary . '' 
`` Don ' know , ma'am ; I 've lost one five hundred dollars from this yer place , and I ca n't afford to run no more risks . '' 
`` What else could she spect on him ? '' 
said Aunt Chloe , indignantly , while the two boys , who now seemed to comprehend at once their father 's destiny , clung to her gown , sobbing and groaning vehemently . 
`` I 'm sorry , '' said Tom , `` that Mas ' r George happened to be away . '' 
George had gone to spend two or three days with a companion on a neighboring estate , and having departed early in the morning , before Tom 's misfortune had been made public , had left without hearing of it . 
`` Give my love to Mas ' r George , '' he said , earnestly . 
Haley whipped up the horse , and , with a steady , mournful look , fixed to the last on the old place , Tom was whirled away . 
Mr. Shelby at this time was not at home . 
He had sold Tom under the spur of a driving necessity , to get out of the power of a man whom he dreaded , -- and his first feeling , after the consummation of the bargain , had been that of relief . 
But his wife 's expostulations awoke his half-slumbering regrets ; and Tom 's manly disinterestedness increased the unpleasantness of his feelings . 
It was in vain that he said to himself that he had a right to do it , -- that everybody did it , -- and that some did it without even the excuse of necessity ; -- he could not satisfy his own feelings ; and that he might not witness the unpleasant scenes of the consummation , he had gone on a short business tour up the country , hoping that all would be over before he returned . 
Tom and Haley rattled on along the dusty road , whirling past every old familiar spot , until the bounds of the estate were fairly passed , and they found themselves out on the open pike . 
After they had ridden about a mile , Haley suddenly drew up at the door of a blacksmith 's shop , when , taking out with him a pair of handcuffs , he stepped into the shop , to have a little alteration in them . 
`` These yer 's a little too small for his build , '' said Haley , showing the fetters , and pointing out to Tom . 
`` Lor ! 
now , if thar a n't Shelby 's Tom . 
He ha n't sold him , now ? '' 
said the smith . 
`` Yes , he has , '' said Haley . 
`` Now , ye do n't ! 
well , reely , '' said the smith , `` who 'd a thought it ! 
Why , ye need n't go to fetterin ' him up this yer way . 
He 's the faithfullest , best crittur -- '' `` Yes , yes , '' said Haley ; `` but your good fellers are just the critturs to want ter run off . 
Them stupid ones , as does n't care whar they go , and shifless , drunken ones , as do n't care for nothin ' , they 'll stick by , and like as not be rather pleased to be toted round ; but these yer prime fellers , they hates it like sin . 
No way but to fetter 'em ; got legs , -- they 'll use 'em , -- no mistake . '' 
`` Well , '' said the smith , feeling among his tools , `` them plantations down thar , stranger , a n't jest the place a Kentuck nigger wants to go to ; they dies thar tol ` able fast , do n't they ? '' 
`` Wal , yes , tol ` able fast , ther dying is ; what with the ` climating and one thing and another , they dies so as to keep the market up pretty brisk , '' said Haley . 
`` Wal , now , a feller ca n't help thinkin ' it 's a mighty pity to have a nice , quiet , likely feller , as good un as Tom is , go down to be fairly ground up on one of them ar sugar plantations . '' 
`` Wal , he 's got a fa ' r chance . 
I promised to do well by him . 
I 'll get him in house-servant in some good old family , and then , if he stands the fever and ` climating , he 'll have a berth good as any nigger ought ter ask for . '' 
`` He leaves his wife and chil ` en up here , s ` pose ? '' 
`` Yes ; but he 'll get another thar . 
Lord , thar 's women enough everywhar , '' said Haley . 
Tom was sitting very mournfully on the outside of the shop while this conversation was going on . 
Suddenly he heard the quick , short click of a horse 's hoof behind him ; and , before he could fairly awake from his surprise , young Master George sprang into the wagon , threw his arms tumultuously round his neck , and was sobbing and scolding with energy . 
`` I declare , it 's real mean ! 
I do n't care what they say , any of 'em ! 
It 's a nasty , mean shame ! 
If I was a man , they should n't do it , -- they should not , so ! '' 
said George , with a kind of subdued howl . 
`` O ! 
Mas ' r George ! 
this does me good ! '' 
said Tom . 
`` I could n't bar to go off without seein ' ye ! 
It does me real good , ye ca n't tell ! '' 
Here Tom made some movement of his feet , and George 's eye fell on the fetters . 
`` What a shame ! '' 
he exclaimed , lifting his hands . 
`` I 'll knock that old fellow down -- I will ! '' 
`` No you wo n't , Mas ' r George ; and you must not talk so loud . 
It wo n't help me any , to anger him . '' 
`` Well , I wo n't , then , for your sake ; but only to think of it -- is n't it a shame ? 
They never sent for me , nor sent me any word , and , if it had n't been for Tom Lincon , I should n't have heard it . 
I tell you , I blew 'em up well , all of 'em , at home ! '' 
`` That ar was n't right , I 'm ` feard , Mas ' r George . '' 
`` Ca n't help it ! 
I say it 's a shame ! 
Look here , Uncle Tom , '' said he , turning his back to the shop , and speaking in a mysterious tone , `` I 've brought you my dollar ! '' 
`` O ! 
I could n't think o ' takin ' on ` t , Mas ' r George , no ways in the world ! '' 
said Tom , quite moved . 
`` But you shall take it ! '' 
said George ; `` look here -- I told Aunt Chloe I 'd do it , and she advised me just to make a hole in it , and put a string through , so you could hang it round your neck , and keep it out of sight ; else this mean scamp would take it away . 
I tell ye , Tom , I want to blow him up ! 
it would do me good ! '' 
`` No , do n't Mas ' r George , for it wo n't do me any good . '' 
`` Well , I wo n't , for your sake , '' said George , busily tying his dollar round Tom 's neck ; `` but there , now , button your coat tight over it , and keep it , and remember , every time you see it , that I 'll come down after you , and bring you back . 
Aunt Chloe and I have been talking about it . 
I told her not to fear ; I 'll see to it , and I 'll tease father 's life out , if he do n't do it . '' 
`` O ! 
Mas ' r George , ye must n't talk so ` bout yer father ! '' 
`` Lor , Uncle Tom , I do n't mean anything bad . '' 
`` And now , Mas ' r George , '' said Tom , `` ye must be a good boy ; ` member how many hearts is sot on ye . 
Al ` ays keep close to yer mother . 
Do n't be gettin ' into any of them foolish ways boys has of gettin ' too big to mind their mothers . 
Tell ye what , Mas ' r George , the Lord gives good many things twice over ; but he do n't give ye a mother but once . 
Ye 'll never see sich another woman , Mas ' r George , if ye live to be a hundred years old . 
So , now , you hold on to her , and grow up , and be a comfort to her , thar 's my own good boy , -- you will now , wo n't ye ? '' 
`` Yes , I will , Uncle Tom , '' said George seriously . 
`` And be careful of yer speaking , Mas ' r George . 
Young boys , when they comes to your age , is wilful , sometimes -- it is natur they should be . 
But real gentlemen , such as I hopes you 'll be , never lets fall on words that is n't ` spectful to thar parents . 
Ye a n't ` fended , Mas ' r George ? '' 
`` No , indeed , Uncle Tom ; you always did give me good advice . '' 
`` I 's older , ye know , '' said Tom , stroking the boy 's fine , curly head with his large , strong hand , but speaking in a voice as tender as a woman 's , `` and I sees all that 's bound up in you . 
O , Mas ' r George , you has everything , -- l'arnin ' , privileges , readin ' , writin ' , -- and you 'll grow up to be a great , learned , good man and all the people on the place and your mother and father 'll be so proud on ye ! 
Be a good Mas ` r , like yer father ; and be a Christian , like yer mother . 
` Member yer Creator in the days o ' yer youth , Mas ' r George . '' 
`` I 'll be real good , Uncle Tom , I tell you , '' said George . 
`` I 'm going to be a first-rater ; and do n't you be discouraged . 
I 'll have you back to the place , yet . 
As I told Aunt Chloe this morning , I 'll build our house all over , and you shall have a room for a parlor with a carpet on it , when I 'm a man . 
O , you 'll have good times yet ! '' 
Haley now came to the door , with the handcuffs in his hands . 
`` Look here , now , Mister , '' said George , with an air of great superiority , as he got out , `` I shall let father and mother know how you treat Uncle Tom ! '' 
`` You 're welcome , '' said the trader . 
`` I should think you 'd be ashamed to spend all your life buying men and women , and chaining them , like cattle ! 
I should think you 'd feel mean ! '' 
said George . 
`` So long as your grand folks wants to buy men and women , I 'm as good as they is , '' said Haley ; '' ` ta n't any meaner sellin ' on 'em , that ' t is buyin ' ! '' 
`` I 'll never do either , when I 'm a man , '' said George ; `` I 'm ashamed , this day , that I 'm a Kentuckian . 
I always was proud of it before ; '' and George sat very straight on his horse , and looked round with an air , as if he expected the state would be impressed with his opinion . 
`` Well , good-by , Uncle Tom ; keep a stiff upper lip , '' said George . 
`` Good-by , Mas ' r George , '' said Tom , looking fondly and admiringly at him . 
`` God Almighty bless you ! 
Ah ! 
Kentucky ha n't got many like you ! '' 
he said , in the fulness of his heart , as the frank , boyish face was lost to his view . 
Away he went , and Tom looked , till the clatter of his horse 's heels died away , the last sound or sight of his home . 
But over his heart there seemed to be a warm spot , where those young hands had placed that precious dollar . 
Tom put up his hand , and held it close to his heart . 
`` Now , I tell ye what , Tom , '' said Haley , as he came up to the wagon , and threw in the handcuffs , `` I mean to start fa ' r with ye , as I gen ` ally do with my niggers ; and I 'll tell ye now , to begin with , you treat me fa ` r , and I 'll treat you fa ` r ; I a n't never hard on my niggers . 
Calculates to do the best for 'em I can . 
Now , ye see , you 'd better jest settle down comfortable , and not be tryin ' no tricks ; because nigger 's tricks of all sorts I 'm up to , and it 's no use . 
If niggers is quiet , and do n't try to get off , they has good times with me ; and if they do n't , why , it 's thar fault , and not mine . '' 
Tom assured Haley that he had no present intentions of running off . 
In fact , the exhortation seemed rather a superfluous one to a man with a great pair of iron fetters on his feet . 
But Mr. Haley had got in the habit of commencing his relations with his stock with little exhortations of this nature , calculated , as he deemed , to inspire cheerfulness and confidence , and prevent the necessity of any unpleasant scenes . 
And here , for the present , we take our leave of Tom , to pursue the fortunes of other characters in our story . 
It was late in a drizzly afternoon that a traveler alighted at the door of a small country hotel , in the village of N -- , in Kentucky . 
In the barroom he found assembled quite a miscellaneous company , whom stress of weather had driven to harbor , and the place presented the usual scenery of such reunions . 
Great , tall , raw-boned Kentuckians , attired in hunting-shirts , and trailing their loose joints over a vast extent of territory , with the easy lounge peculiar to the race , -- rifles stacked away in the corner , shot-pouches , game-bags , hunting-dogs , and little negroes , all rolled together in the corners , -- were the characteristic features in the picture . 
At each end of the fireplace sat a long-legged gentleman , with his chair tipped back , his hat on his head , and the heels of his muddy boots reposing sublimely on the mantel-piece , -- a position , we will inform our readers , decidedly favorable to the turn of reflection incident to western taverns , where travellers exhibit a decided preference for this particular mode of elevating their understandings . 
Mine host , who stood behind the bar , like most of his country men , was great of stature , good-natured and loose-jointed , with an enormous shock of hair on his head , and a great tall hat on the top of that . 
In fact , everybody in the room bore on his head this characteristic emblem of man 's sovereignty ; whether it were felt hat , palm-leaf , greasy beaver , or fine new chapeau , there it reposed with true republican independence . 
In truth , it appeared to be the characteristic mark of every individual . 
Some wore them tipped rakishly to one side -- these were your men of humor , jolly , free-and-easy dogs ; some had them jammed independently down over their noses -- these were your hard characters , thorough men , who , when they wore their hats , wanted to wear them , and to wear them just as they had a mind to ; there were those who had them set far over back -- wide-awake men , who wanted a clear prospect ; while careless men , who did not know , or care , how their hats sat , had them shaking about in all directions . 
The various hats , in fact , were quite a Shakespearean study . 
Divers negroes , in very free-and-easy pantaloons , and with no redundancy in the shirt line , were scuttling about , hither and thither , without bringing to pass any very particular results , except expressing a generic willingness to turn over everything in creation generally for the benefit of Mas ' r and his guests . 
Add to this picture a jolly , crackling , rollicking fire , going rejoicingly up a great wide chimney , -- the outer door and every window being set wide open , and the calico window-curtain flopping and snapping in a good stiff breeze of damp raw air , -- and you have an idea of the jollities of a Kentucky tavern . 
Your Kentuckian of the present day is a good illustration of the doctrine of transmitted instincts and peculiarities . 
His fathers were mighty hunters , -- men who lived in the woods , and slept under the free , open heavens , with the stars to hold their candles ; and their descendant to this day always acts as if the house were his camp , -- wears his hat at all hours , tumbles himself about , and puts his heels on the tops of chairs or mantelpieces , just as his father rolled on the green sward , and put his upon trees and logs , -- keeps all the windows and doors open , winter and summer , that he may get air enough for his great lungs , -- calls everybody `` stranger , '' with nonchalant bonhommie , and is altogether the frankest , easiest , most jovial creature living . 
Into such an assembly of the free and easy our traveller entered . 
He was a short , thick-set man , carefully dressed , with a round , good-natured countenance , and something rather fussy and particular in his appearance . 
He was very careful of his valise and umbrella , bringing them in with his own hands , and resisting , pertinaciously , all offers from the various servants to relieve him of them . 
He looked round the barroom with rather an anxious air , and , retreating with his valuables to the warmest corner , disposed them under his chair , sat down , and looked rather apprehensively up at the worthy whose heels illustrated the end of the mantel-piece , who was spitting from right to left , with a courage and energy rather alarming to gentlemen of weak nerves and particular habits . 
`` I say , stranger , how are ye ? '' 
said the aforesaid gentleman , firing an honorary salute of tobacco-juice in the direction of the new arrival . 
`` Well , I reckon , '' was the reply of the other , as he dodged , with some alarm , the threatening honor . 
`` Any news ? '' 
said the respondent , taking out a strip of tobacco and a large hunting-knife from his pocket . 
`` Not that I know of , '' said the man . 
`` Chaw ? '' 
said the first speaker , handing the old gentleman a bit of his tobacco , with a decidedly brotherly air . 
`` No , thank ye -- it do n't agree with me , '' said the little man , edging off . 
`` Do n't , eh ? '' 
said the other , easily , and stowing away the morsel in his own mouth , in order to keep up the supply of tobacco-juice , for the general benefit of society . 
The old gentleman uniformly gave a little start whenever his long-sided brother fired in his direction ; and this being observed by his companion , he very good-naturedly turned his artillery to another quarter , and proceeded to storm one of the fire-irons with a degree of military talent fully sufficient to take a city . 
`` What 's that ? '' 
said the old gentleman , observing some of the company formed in a group around a large handbill . 
`` Nigger advertised ! '' 
said one of the company , briefly . 
Mr. Wilson , for that was the old gentleman 's name , rose up , and , after carefully adjusting his valise and umbrella , proceeded deliberately to take out his spectacles and fix them on his nose ; and , this operation being performed , read as follows : `` Ran away from the subscriber , my mulatto boy , George . 
Said George six feet in height , a very light mulatto , brown curly hair ; is very intelligent , speaks handsomely , can read and write , will probably try to pass for a white man , is deeply scarred on his back and shoulders , has been branded in his right hand with the letter H. `` I will give four hundred dollars for him alive , and the same sum for satisfactory proof that he has been killed . '' 
The old gentleman read this advertisement from end to end in a low voice , as if he were studying it . 
The long-legged veteran , who had been besieging the fire-iron , as before related , now took down his cumbrous length , and rearing aloft his tall form , walked up to the advertisement and very deliberately spit a full discharge of tobacco-juice on it . 
`` There 's my mind upon that ! '' 
said he , briefly , and sat down again . 
`` Why , now , stranger , what 's that for ? '' 
said mine host . 
`` I 'd do it all the same to the writer of that ar paper , if he was here , '' said the long man , coolly resuming his old employment of cutting tobacco . 
`` Any man that owns a boy like that , and ca n't find any better way o ' treating on him , deserves to lose him . 
Such papers as these is a shame to Kentucky ; that 's my mind right out , if anybody wants to know ! '' 
`` Well , now , that 's a fact , '' said mine host , as he made an entry in his book . 
`` I 've got a gang of boys , sir , '' said the long man , resuming his attack on the fire-irons , `` and I jest tells 'em -- ` Boys , ' says I , -- ' run now ! 
dig ! 
put ! 
jest when ye want to ! 
I never shall come to look after you ! ' 
That 's the way I keep mine . 
Let 'em know they are free to run any time , and it jest breaks up their wanting to . 
More 'n all , I 've got free papers for 'em all recorded , in case I gets keeled up any o ' these times , and they know it ; and I tell ye , stranger , there a n't a fellow in our parts gets more out of his niggers than I do . 
Why , my boys have been to Cincinnati , with five hundred dollars ' worth of colts , and brought me back the money , all straight , time and agin . 
It stands to reason they should . 
Treat 'em like dogs , and you 'll have dogs ' works and dogs ' actions . 
Treat 'em like men , and you 'll have men 's works . '' 
And the honest drover , in his warmth , endorsed this moral sentiment by firing a perfect feu de joi at the fireplace . 
`` I think you 're altogether right , friend , '' said Mr. Wilson ; `` and this boy described here is a fine fellow -- no mistake about that . 
He worked for me some half-dozen years in my bagging factory , and he was my best hand , sir . 
He is an ingenious fellow , too : he invented a machine for the cleaning of hemp -- a really valuable affair ; it 's gone into use in several factories . 
His master holds the patent of it . '' 
`` I 'll warrant ye , '' said the drover , `` holds it and makes money out of it , and then turns round and brands the boy in his right hand . 
If I had a fair chance , I 'd mark him , I reckon so that he 'd carry it one while . '' 
`` These yer knowin ' boys is allers aggravatin ' and sarcy , '' said a coarse-looking fellow , from the other side of the room ; `` that 's why they gets cut up and marked so . 
If they behaved themselves , they would n't . '' 
`` That is to say , the Lord made 'em men , and it 's a hard squeeze gettin 'em down into beasts , '' said the drover , dryly . 
`` Bright niggers is n't no kind of ` vantage to their masters , '' continued the other , well entrenched , in a coarse , unconscious obtuseness , from the contempt of his opponent ; `` what 's the use o ' talents and them things , if you ca n't get the use on 'em yourself ? 
Why , all the use they make on ' t is to get round you . 
I 've had one or two of these fellers , and I jest sold 'em down river . 
I knew I 'd got to lose 'em , first or last , if I did n't . '' 
`` Better send orders up to the Lord , to make you a set , and leave out their souls entirely , '' said the drover . 
Here the conversation was interrupted by the approach of a small one-horse buggy to the inn . 
It had a genteel appearance , and a well-dressed , gentlemanly man sat on the seat , with a colored servant driving . 
The whole party examined the new comer with the interest with which a set of loafers in a rainy day usually examine every newcomer . 
He was very tall , with a dark , Spanish complexion , fine , expressive black eyes , and close-curling hair , also of a glossy blackness . 
His well-formed aquiline nose , straight thin lips , and the admirable contour of his finely-formed limbs , impressed the whole company instantly with the idea of something uncommon . 
He walked easily in among the company , and with a nod indicated to his waiter where to place his trunk , bowed to the company , and , with his hat in his hand , walked up leisurely to the bar , and gave in his name as Henry Butter , Oaklands , Shelby County . 
Turning , with an indifferent air , he sauntered up to the advertisement , and read it over . 
`` Jim , '' he said to his man , `` seems to me we met a boy something like this , up at Beman 's , did n't we ? '' 
`` Yes , Mas ` r , '' said Jim , `` only I a n't sure about the hand . '' 
`` Well , I did n't look , of course , '' said the stranger with a careless yawn . 
Then walking up to the landlord , he desired him to furnish him with a private apartment , as he had some writing to do immediately . 
The landlord was all obsequious , and a relay of about seven negroes , old and young , male and female , little and big , were soon whizzing about , like a covey of partridges , bustling , hurrying , treading on each other 's toes , and tumbling over each other , in their zeal to get Mas ` r 's room ready , while he seated himself easily on a chair in the middle of the room , and entered into conversation with the man who sat next to him . 
The manufacturer , Mr. Wilson , from the time of the entrance of the stranger , had regarded him with an air of disturbed and uneasy curiosity . 
He seemed to himself to have met and been acquainted with him somewhere , but he could not recollect . 
Every few moments , when the man spoke , or moved , or smiled , he would start and fix his eyes on him , and then suddenly withdraw them , as the bright , dark eyes met his with such unconcerned coolness . 
At last , a sudden recollection seemed to flash upon him , for he stared at the stranger with such an air of blank amazement and alarm , that he walked up to him . 
`` Mr. Wilson , I think , '' said he , in a tone of recognition , and extending his hand . 
`` I beg your pardon , I did n't recollect you before . 
I see you remember me , -- Mr. Butler , of Oaklands , Shelby County . '' 
`` Ye -- yes -- yes , sir , '' said Mr. Wilson , like one speaking in a dream . 
Just then a negro boy entered , and announced that Mas ` r 's room was ready . 
`` Jim , see to the trunks , '' said the gentleman , negligently ; then addressing himself to Mr. Wilson , he added -- `` I should like to have a few moments ' conversation with you on business , in my room , if you please . '' 
Mr. Wilson followed him , as one who walks in his sleep ; and they proceeded to a large upper chamber , where a new-made fire was crackling , and various servants flying about , putting finishing touches to the arrangements . 
When all was done , and the servants departed , the young man deliberately locked the door , and putting the key in his pocket , faced about , and folding his arms on his bosom , looked Mr. Wilson full in the face . 
`` George ! '' 
said Mr. Wilson . 
`` Yes , George , '' said the young man . 
`` I could n't have thought it ! '' 
`` I am pretty well disguised , I fancy , '' said the young man , with a smile . 
`` A little walnut bark has made my yellow skin a genteel brown , and I 've dyed my hair black ; so you see I do n't answer to the advertisement at all . '' 
`` O , George ! 
but this is a dangerous game you are playing . 
I could not have advised you to it . '' 
`` I can do it on my own responsibility , '' said George , with the same proud smile . 
We remark , en passant , that George was , by his father 's side , of white descent . 
His mother was one of those unfortunates of her race , marked out by personal beauty to be the slave of the passions of her possessor , and the mother of children who may never know a father . 
From one of the proudest families in Kentucky he had inherited a set of fine European features , and a high , indomitable spirit . 
From his mother he had received only a slight mulatto tinge , amply compensated by its accompanying rich , dark eye . 
A slight change in the tint of the skin and the color of his hair had metamorphosed him into the Spanish-looking fellow he then appeared ; and as gracefulness of movement and gentlemanly manners had always been perfectly natural to him , he found no difficulty in playing the bold part he had adopted -- that of a gentleman travelling with his domestic . 
Mr. Wilson , a good-natured but extremely fidgety and cautious old gentleman , ambled up and down the room , appearing , as John Bunyan hath it , `` much tumbled up and down in his mind , '' and divided between his wish to help George , and a certain confused notion of maintaining law and order : so , as he shambled about , he delivered himself as follows : `` Well , George , I s ` pose you 're running away -- leaving your lawful master , George -- -LRB- I do n't wonder at it -RRB- -- at the same time , I 'm sorry , George , -- yes , decidedly -- I think I must say that , George -- it 's my duty to tell you so . '' 
`` Why are you sorry , sir ? '' 
said George , calmly . 
`` Why , to see you , as it were , setting yourself in opposition to the laws of your country . '' '' 
My country ! '' 
said George , with a strong and bitter emphasis ; `` what country have I , but the grave , -- and I wish to God that I was laid there ! '' 
`` Why , George , no -- no -- it wo n't do ; this way of talking is wicked -- unscriptural . 
George , you 've got a hard master -- in fact , he is -- well he conducts himself reprehensibly -- I ca n't pretend to defend him . 
