Late in the afternoon of a chilly day in February , two gentlemen were sitting alone over their wine , in a well-furnished dining parlor , in the town of P -- , in Kentucky . 
There were no servants present , and the gentlemen , with chairs closely approaching , seemed to be discussing some subject with great earnestness . 
For convenience sake , we have said , hitherto , two gentlemen . 
One of the parties , however , when critically examined , did not seem , strictly speaking , to come under the species . 
He was a short , thick-set man , with coarse , commonplace features , and that swaggering air of pretension which marks a low man who is trying to elbow his way upward in the world . 
He was much over-dressed , in a gaudy vest of many colors , a blue neckerchief , bedropped gayly with yellow spots , and arranged with a flaunting tie , quite in keeping with the general air of the man . 
His hands , large and coarse , were plentifully bedecked with rings ; and he wore a heavy gold watch-chain , with a bundle of seals of portentous size , and a great variety of colors , attached to it , -- which , in the ardor of conversation , he was in the habit of flourishing and jingling with evident satisfaction . 
His conversation was in free and easy defiance of Murray 's Grammar , * and was garnished at convenient intervals with various profane expressions , which not even the desire to be graphic in our account shall induce us to transcribe . 
* English Grammar -LRB- 1795 -RRB- , by Lindley Murray -LRB- 1745-1826 -RRB- , the most authoritative American grammarian of his day . 
His companion , Mr. Shelby , had the appearance of a gentleman ; and the arrangements of the house , and the general air of the housekeeping , indicated easy , and even opulent circumstances . 
As we before stated , the two were in the midst of an earnest conversation . 
`` That is the way I should arrange the matter , '' said Mr. Shelby . 
`` I ca n't make trade that way -- I positively ca n't , Mr. Shelby , '' said the other , holding up a glass of wine between his eye and the light . 
`` Why , the fact is , Haley , Tom is an uncommon fellow ; he is certainly worth that sum anywhere , -- steady , honest , capable , manages my whole farm like a clock . '' 
`` You mean honest , as niggers go , '' said Haley , helping himself to a glass of brandy . 
`` No ; I mean , really , Tom is a good , steady , sensible , pious fellow . 
He got religion at a camp-meeting , four years ago ; and I believe he really did get it . 
I 've trusted him , since then , with everything I have , -- money , house , horses , -- and let him come and go round the country ; and I always found him true and square in everything . '' 
`` Some folks do n't believe there is pious niggers Shelby , '' said Haley , with a candid flourish of his hand , `` but I do . 
I had a fellow , now , in this yer last lot I took to Orleans -- ' t was as good as a meetin , now , really , to hear that critter pray ; and he was quite gentle and quiet like . 
He fetched me a good sum , too , for I bought him cheap of a man that was ` bliged to sell out ; so I realized six hundred on him . 
Yes , I consider religion a valeyable thing in a nigger , when it 's the genuine article , and no mistake . '' 
`` Well , Tom 's got the real article , if ever a fellow had , '' rejoined the other . 
`` Why , last fall , I let him go to Cincinnati alone , to do business for me , and bring home five hundred dollars . 
` Tom , ' says I to him , ' I trust you , because I think you 're a Christian -- I know you would n't cheat . ' 
Tom comes back , sure enough ; I knew he would . 
Some low fellows , they say , said to him -- Tom , why do n't you make tracks for Canada ? ' 
` Ah , master trusted me , and I could n't , ' -- they told me about it . 
I am sorry to part with Tom , I must say . 
You ought to let him cover the whole balance of the debt ; and you would , Haley , if you had any conscience . '' 
`` Well , I 've got just as much conscience as any man in business can afford to keep , -- just a little , you know , to swear by , as ' t were , '' said the trader , jocularly ; `` and , then , I 'm ready to do anything in reason to ` blige friends ; but this yer , you see , is a leetle too hard on a fellow -- a leetle too hard . '' 
The trader sighed contemplatively , and poured out some more brandy . 
`` Well , then , Haley , how will you trade ? '' 
said Mr. Shelby , after an uneasy interval of silence . 
`` Well , have n't you a boy or gal that you could throw in with Tom ? '' 
`` Hum ! 
-- none that I could well spare ; to tell the truth , it 's only hard necessity makes me willing to sell at all . 
I do n't like parting with any of my hands , that 's a fact . '' 
Here the door opened , and a small quadroon boy , between four and five years of age , entered the room . 
There was something in his appearance remarkably beautiful and engaging . 
His black hair , fine as floss silk , hung in glossy curls about his round , dimpled face , while a pair of large dark eyes , full of fire and softness , looked out from beneath the rich , long lashes , as he peered curiously into the apartment . 
A gay robe of scarlet and yellow plaid , carefully made and neatly fitted , set off to advantage the dark and rich style of his beauty ; and a certain comic air of assurance , blended with bashfulness , showed that he had been not unused to being petted and noticed by his master . 
`` Hulloa , Jim Crow ! '' 
said Mr. Shelby , whistling , and snapping a bunch of raisins towards him , `` pick that up , now ! '' 
The child scampered , with all his little strength , after the prize , while his master laughed . 
`` Come here , Jim Crow , '' said he . 
The child came up , and the master patted the curly head , and chucked him under the chin . 
`` Now , Jim , show this gentleman how you can dance and sing . '' 
The boy commenced one of those wild , grotesque songs common among the negroes , in a rich , clear voice , accompanying his singing with many comic evolutions of the hands , feet , and whole body , all in perfect time to the music . 
`` Bravo ! '' 
said Haley , throwing him a quarter of an orange . 
`` Now , Jim , walk like old Uncle Cudjoe , when he has the rheumatism , '' said his master . 
Instantly the flexible limbs of the child assumed the appearance of deformity and distortion , as , with his back humped up , and his master 's stick in his hand , he hobbled about the room , his childish face drawn into a doleful pucker , and spitting from right to left , in imitation of an old man . 
Both gentlemen laughed uproariously . 
`` Now , Jim , '' said his master , `` show us how old Elder Robbins leads the psalm . '' 
The boy drew his chubby face down to a formidable length , and commenced toning a psalm tune through his nose , with imperturbable gravity . 
`` Hurrah ! 
bravo ! 
what a young ` un ! '' 
said Haley ; `` that chap 's a case , I 'll promise . 
Tell you what , '' said he , suddenly clapping his hand on Mr. Shelby 's shoulder , `` fling in that chap , and I 'll settle the business -- I will . 
Come , now , if that ai n't doing the thing up about the rightest ! '' 
At this moment , the door was pushed gently open , and a young quadroon woman , apparently about twenty-five , entered the room . 
There needed only a glance from the child to her , to identify her as its mother . 
There was the same rich , full , dark eye , with its long lashes ; the same ripples of silky black hair . 
The brown of her complexion gave way on the cheek to a perceptible flush , which deepened as she saw the gaze of the strange man fixed upon her in bold and undisguised admiration . 
Her dress was of the neatest possible fit , and set off to advantage her finely moulded shape ; -- a delicately formed hand and a trim foot and ankle were items of appearance that did not escape the quick eye of the trader , well used to run up at a glance the points of a fine female article . 
`` Well , Eliza ? '' 
said her master , as she stopped and looked hesitatingly at him . 
`` I was looking for Harry , please , sir ; '' and the boy bounded toward her , showing his spoils , which he had gathered in the skirt of his robe . 
`` Well , take him away then , '' said Mr. Shelby ; and hastily she withdrew , carrying the child on her arm . 
`` By Jupiter , '' said the trader , turning to him in admiration , `` there 's an article , now ! 
You might make your fortune on that ar gal in Orleans , any day . 
I 've seen over a thousand , in my day , paid down for gals not a bit handsomer . '' 
`` I do n't want to make my fortune on her , '' said Mr. Shelby , dryly ; and , seeking to turn the conversation , he uncorked a bottle of fresh wine , and asked his companion 's opinion of it . 
`` Capital , sir , -- first chop ! '' 
said the trader ; then turning , and slapping his hand familiarly on Shelby 's shoulder , he added -- `` Come , how will you trade about the gal ? 
-- what shall I say for her -- what 'll you take ? '' 
`` Mr. Haley , she is not to be sold , '' said Shelby . 
`` My wife would not part with her for her weight in gold . '' 
`` Ay , ay ! 
women always say such things , cause they ha ` nt no sort of calculation . 
Just show 'em how many watches , feathers , and trinkets , one 's weight in gold would buy , and that alters the case , I reckon . '' 
`` I tell you , Haley , this must not be spoken of ; I say no , and I mean no , '' said Shelby , decidedly . 
`` Well , you 'll let me have the boy , though , '' said the trader ; `` you must own I 've come down pretty handsomely for him . '' 
`` What on earth can you want with the child ? '' 
said Shelby . 
`` Why , I 've got a friend that 's going into this yer branch of the business -- wants to buy up handsome boys to raise for the market . 
Fancy articles entirely -- sell for waiters , and so on , to rich ` uns , that can pay for handsome ` uns . 
It sets off one of yer great places -- a real handsome boy to open door , wait , and tend . 
They fetch a good sum ; and this little devil is such a comical , musical concern , he 's just the article ! ' 
`` I would rather not sell him , '' said Mr. Shelby , thoughtfully ; `` the fact is , sir , I 'm a humane man , and I hate to take the boy from his mother , sir . '' 
`` O , you do ? 
-- La ! 
yes -- something of that ar natur . 
I understand , perfectly . 
It is mighty onpleasant getting on with women , sometimes , I al ` ays hates these yer screechin , ' screamin ' times . 
They are mighty onpleasant ; but , as I manages business , I generally avoids 'em , sir . 
Now , what if you get the girl off for a day , or a week , or so ; then the thing 's done quietly , -- all over before she comes home . 
Your wife might get her some ear-rings , or a new gown , or some such truck , to make up with her . '' 
`` I 'm afraid not . '' 
`` Lor bless ye , yes ! 
These critters ai n't like white folks , you know ; they gets over things , only manage right . 
Now , they say , '' said Haley , assuming a candid and confidential air , `` that this kind o ' trade is hardening to the feelings ; but I never found it so . 
Fact is , I never could do things up the way some fellers manage the business . 
I 've seen 'em as would pull a woman 's child out of her arms , and set him up to sell , and she screechin ' like mad all the time ; -- very bad policy -- damages the article -- makes 'em quite unfit for service sometimes . 
I knew a real handsome gal once , in Orleans , as was entirely ruined by this sort o ' handling . 
The fellow that was trading for her did n't want her baby ; and she was one of your real high sort , when her blood was up . 
I tell you , she squeezed up her child in her arms , and talked , and went on real awful . 
It kinder makes my blood run cold to think of ` t ; and when they carried off the child , and locked her up , she jest went ravin ' mad , and died in a week . 
Clear waste , sir , of a thousand dollars , just for want of management , -- there 's where ' t is . 
It 's always best to do the humane thing , sir ; that 's been my experience . '' 
And the trader leaned back in his chair , and folded his arm , with an air of virtuous decision , apparently considering himself a second Wilberforce . 
The subject appeared to interest the gentleman deeply ; for while Mr. Shelby was thoughtfully peeling an orange , Haley broke out afresh , with becoming diffidence , but as if actually driven by the force of truth to say a few words more . 
`` It do n't look well , now , for a feller to be praisin ' himself ; but I say it jest because it 's the truth . 
I believe I 'm reckoned to bring in about the finest droves of niggers that is brought in , -- at least , I 've been told so ; if I have once , I reckon I have a hundred times , -- all in good case , -- fat and likely , and I lose as few as any man in the business . 
And I lays it all to my management , sir ; and humanity , sir , I may say , is the great pillar of my management . '' 
Mr. Shelby did not know what to say , and so he said , `` Indeed ! '' 
`` Now , I 've been laughed at for my notions , sir , and I 've been talked to . 
They a n't pop ` lar , and they a n't common ; but I stuck to 'em , sir ; I 've stuck to 'em , and realized well on 'em ; yes , sir , they have paid their passage , I may say , '' and the trader laughed at his joke . 
There was something so piquant and original in these elucidations of humanity , that Mr. Shelby could not help laughing in company . 
Perhaps you laugh too , dear reader ; but you know humanity comes out in a variety of strange forms now-a-days , and there is no end to the odd things that humane people will say and do . 
Mr. Shelby 's laugh encouraged the trader to proceed . 
`` It 's strange , now , but I never could beat this into people 's heads . 
Now , there was Tom Loker , my old partner , down in Natchez ; he was a clever fellow , Tom was , only the very devil with niggers , -- on principle ' t was , you see , for a better hearted feller never broke bread ; ' t was his system , sir . 
I used to talk to Tom . 
` Why , Tom , ' I used to say , ` when your gals takes on and cry , what 's the use o ' crackin on ' em over the head , and knockin ' on 'em round ? 
It 's ridiculous , ' says I , ` and do n't do no sort o ' good . 
Why , I do n't see no harm in their cryin ' , ' says I ; ` it 's natur , ' says I , ` and if natur ca n't blow off one way , it will another . 
Besides , Tom , ' says I , ` it jest spiles your gals ; they get sickly , and down in the mouth ; and sometimes they gets ugly , -- particular yallow gals do , -- and it 's the devil and all gettin ' on 'em broke in . 
Now , ' says I , ` why ca n't you kinder coax 'em up , and speak 'em fair ? 
Depend on it , Tom , a little humanity , thrown in along , goes a heap further than all your jawin ' and crackin ' ; and it pays better , ' says I , ` depend on ` t. ' But Tom could n't get the hang on ` t ; and he spiled so many for me , that I had to break off with him , though he was a good-hearted fellow , and as fair a business hand as is goin ' . '' 
`` And do you find your ways of managing do the business better than Tom 's ? '' 
said Mr. Shelby . 
`` Why , yes , sir , I may say so . 
You see , when I any ways can , I takes a leetle care about the onpleasant parts , like selling young uns and that , -- get the gals out of the way -- out of sight , out of mind , you know , -- and when it 's clean done , and ca n't be helped , they naturally gets used to it . 
` Ta n't , you know , as if it was white folks , that 's brought up in the way of ` spectin ' to keep their children and wives , and all that . 
Niggers , you know , that 's fetched up properly , ha 'n' t no kind of ` spectations of no kind ; so all these things comes easier . '' 
`` I 'm afraid mine are not properly brought up , then , '' said Mr. Shelby . 
`` S'pose not ; you Kentucky folks spile your niggers . 
You mean well by 'em , but ` ta n't no real kindness , arter all . 
Now , a nigger , you see , what 's got to be hacked and tumbled round the world , and sold to Tom , and Dick , and the Lord knows who , ` ta n't no kindness to be givin ' on him notions and expectations , and bringin ' on him up too well , for the rough and tumble comes all the harder on him arter . 
Now , I venture to say , your niggers would be quite chop-fallen in a place where some of your plantation niggers would be singing and whooping like all possessed . 
Every man , you know , Mr. Shelby , naturally thinks well of his own ways ; and I think I treat niggers just about as well as it 's ever worth while to treat 'em . '' 
`` It 's a happy thing to be satisfied , '' said Mr. Shelby , with a slight shrug , and some perceptible feelings of a disagreeable nature . 
`` Well , '' said Haley , after they had both silently picked their nuts for a season , `` what do you say ? '' 
`` I 'll think the matter over , and talk with my wife , '' said Mr. Shelby . 
`` Meantime , Haley , if you want the matter carried on in the quiet way you speak of , you 'd best not let your business in this neighborhood be known . 
It will get out among my boys , and it will not be a particularly quiet business getting away any of my fellows , if they know it , I 'll promise you . '' 
`` O ! 
certainly , by all means , mum ! 
of course . 
But I 'll tell you . 
I 'm in a devil of a hurry , and shall want to know , as soon as possible , what I may depend on , '' said he , rising and putting on his overcoat . 
`` Well , call up this evening , between six and seven , and you shall have my answer , '' said Mr. Shelby , and the trader bowed himself out of the apartment . 
`` I 'd like to have been able to kick the fellow down the steps , '' said he to himself , as he saw the door fairly closed , `` with his impudent assurance ; but he knows how much he has me at advantage . 
If anybody had ever said to me that I should sell Tom down south to one of those rascally traders , I should have said , ` Is thy servant a dog , that he should do this thing ? ' 
And now it must come , for aught I see . 
And Eliza 's child , too ! 
I know that I shall have some fuss with wife about that ; and , for that matter , about Tom , too . 
So much for being in debt , -- heigho ! 
The fellow sees his advantage , and means to push it . '' 
Perhaps the mildest form of the system of slavery is to be seen in the State of Kentucky . 
The general prevalence of agricultural pursuits of a quiet and gradual nature , not requiring those periodic seasons of hurry and pressure that are called for in the business of more southern districts , makes the task of the negro a more healthful and reasonable one ; while the master , content with a more gradual style of acquisition , has not those temptations to hardheartedness which always overcome frail human nature when the prospect of sudden and rapid gain is weighed in the balance , with no heavier counterpoise than the interests of the helpless and unprotected . 
Whoever visits some estates there , and witnesses the good-humored indulgence of some masters and mistresses , and the affectionate loyalty of some slaves , might be tempted to dream the oft-fabled poetic legend of a patriarchal institution , and all that ; but over and above the scene there broods a portentous shadow -- the shadow of law . 
So long as the law considers all these human beings , with beating hearts and living affections , only as so many things belonging to a master , -- so long as the failure , or misfortune , or imprudence , or death of the kindest owner , may cause them any day to exchange a life of kind protection and indulgence for one of hopeless misery and toil , -- so long it is impossible to make anything beautiful or desirable in the best regulated administration of slavery . 
Mr. Shelby was a fair average kind of man , good-natured and kindly , and disposed to easy indulgence of those around him , and there had never been a lack of anything which might contribute to the physical comfort of the negroes on his estate . 
He had , however , speculated largely and quite loosely ; had involved himself deeply , and his notes to a large amount had come into the hands of Haley ; and this small piece of information is the key to the preceding conversation . 
Now , it had so happened that , in approaching the door , Eliza had caught enough of the conversation to know that a trader was making offers to her master for somebody . 
She would gladly have stopped at the door to listen , as she came out ; but her mistress just then calling , she was obliged to hasten away . 
Still she thought she heard the trader make an offer for her boy ; -- could she be mistaken ? 
Her heart swelled and throbbed , and she involuntarily strained him so tight that the little fellow looked up into her face in astonishment . 
`` Eliza , girl , what ails you today ? '' 
said her mistress , when Eliza had upset the wash-pitcher , knocked down the workstand , and finally was abstractedly offering her mistress a long nightgown in place of the silk dress she had ordered her to bring from the wardrobe . 
Eliza started . 
`` O , missis ! '' 
she said , raising her eyes ; then , bursting into tears , she sat down in a chair , and began sobbing . 
`` Why , Eliza child , what ails you ? '' 
said her mistress . 
`` O ! 
missis , missis , '' said Eliza , `` there 's been a trader talking with master in the parlor ! 
I heard him . '' 
`` Well , silly child , suppose there has . '' 
`` O , missis , do you suppose mas ' r would sell my Harry ? '' 
And the poor creature threw herself into a chair , and sobbed convulsively . 
`` Sell him ! 
No , you foolish girl ! 
You know your master never deals with those southern traders , and never means to sell any of his servants , as long as they behave well . 
Why , you silly child , who do you think would want to buy your Harry ? 
Do you think all the world are set on him as you are , you goosie ? 
Come , cheer up , and hook my dress . 
There now , put my back hair up in that pretty braid you learnt the other day , and do n't go listening at doors any more . '' 
`` Well , but , missis , you never would give your consent -- to -- to -- '' `` Nonsense , child ! 
to be sure , I should n't . 
What do you talk so for ? 
I would as soon have one of my own children sold . 
But really , Eliza , you are getting altogether too proud of that little fellow . 
A man ca n't put his nose into the door , but you think he must be coming to buy him . '' 
Reassured by her mistress ' confident tone , Eliza proceeded nimbly and adroitly with her toilet , laughing at her own fears , as she proceeded . 
Mrs. Shelby was a woman of high class , both intellectually and morally . 
To that natural magnanimity and generosity of mind which one often marks as characteristic of the women of Kentucky , she added high moral and religious sensibility and principle , carried out with great energy and ability into practical results . 
Her husband , who made no professions to any particular religious character , nevertheless reverenced and respected the consistency of hers , and stood , perhaps , a little in awe of her opinion . 
Certain it was that he gave her unlimited scope in all her benevolent efforts for the comfort , instruction , and improvement of her servants , though he never took any decided part in them himself . 
In fact , if not exactly a believer in the doctrine of the efficiency of the extra good works of saints , he really seemed somehow or other to fancy that his wife had piety and benevolence enough for two -- to indulge a shadowy expectation of getting into heaven through her superabundance of qualities to which he made no particular pretension . 
The heaviest load on his mind , after his conversation with the trader , lay in the foreseen necessity of breaking to his wife the arrangement contemplated , -- meeting the importunities and opposition which he knew he should have reason to encounter . 
Mrs. Shelby , being entirely ignorant of her husband 's embarrassments , and knowing only the general kindliness of his temper , had been quite sincere in the entire incredulity with which she had met Eliza 's suspicions . 
In fact , she dismissed the matter from her mind , without a second thought ; and being occupied in preparations for an evening visit , it passed out of her thoughts entirely . 
Eliza had been brought up by her mistress , from girlhood , as a petted and indulged favorite . 
The traveller in the south must often have remarked that peculiar air of refinement , that softness of voice and manner , which seems in many cases to be a particular gift to the quadroon and mulatto women . 
These natural graces in the quadroon are often united with beauty of the most dazzling kind , and in almost every case with a personal appearance prepossessing and agreeable . 
Eliza , such as we have described her , is not a fancy sketch , but taken from remembrance , as we saw her , years ago , in Kentucky . 
Safe under the protecting care of her mistress , Eliza had reached maturity without those temptations which make beauty so fatal an inheritance to a slave . 
She had been married to a bright and talented young mulatto man , who was a slave on a neighboring estate , and bore the name of George Harris . 
This young man had been hired out by his master to work in a bagging factory , where his adroitness and ingenuity caused him to be considered the first hand in the place . 
He had invented a machine for the cleaning of the hemp , which , considering the education and circumstances of the inventor , displayed quite as much mechanical genius as Whitney 's cotton-gin . 
* * A machine of this description was really the invention of a young colored man in Kentucky . 
-LSB- Mrs. Stowe 's note . -RSB- 
He was possessed of a handsome person and pleasing manners , and was a general favorite in the factory . 
Nevertheless , as this young man was in the eye of the law not a man , but a thing , all these superior qualifications were subject to the control of a vulgar , narrow-minded , tyrannical master . 
This same gentleman , having heard of the fame of George 's invention , took a ride over to the factory , to see what this intelligent chattel had been about . 
He was received with great enthusiasm by the employer , who congratulated him on possessing so valuable a slave . 
He was waited upon over the factory , shown the machinery by George , who , in high spirits , talked so fluently , held himself so erect , looked so handsome and manly , that his master began to feel an uneasy consciousness of inferiority . 
What business had his slave to be marching round the country , inventing machines , and holding up his head among gentlemen ? 
He 'd soon put a stop to it . 
He 'd take him back , and put him to hoeing and digging , and `` see if he 'd step about so smart . '' 
Accordingly , the manufacturer and all hands concerned were astounded when he suddenly demanded George 's wages , and announced his intention of taking him home . 
`` But , Mr. Harris , '' remonstrated the manufacturer , `` is n't this rather sudden ? '' 
`` What if it is ? 
-- is n't the man mine ? '' 
`` We would be willing , sir , to increase the rate of compensation . '' 
`` No object at all , sir . 
I do n't need to hire any of my hands out , unless I 've a mind to . '' 
`` But , sir , he seems peculiarly adapted to this business . '' 
`` Dare say he may be ; never was much adapted to anything that I set him about , I 'll be bound . '' 
`` But only think of his inventing this machine , '' interposed one of the workmen , rather unluckily . 
`` O yes ! 
a machine for saving work , is it ? 
He 'd invent that , I 'll be bound ; let a nigger alone for that , any time . 
They are all labor-saving machines themselves , every one of 'em . 
No , he shall tramp ! '' 
George had stood like one transfixed , at hearing his doom thus suddenly pronounced by a power that he knew was irresistible . 
He folded his arms , tightly pressed in his lips , but a whole volcano of bitter feelings burned in his bosom , and sent streams of fire through his veins . 
He breathed short , and his large dark eyes flashed like live coals ; and he might have broken out into some dangerous ebullition , had not the kindly manufacturer touched him on the arm , and said , in a low tone , `` Give way , George ; go with him for the present . 
We 'll try to help you , yet . '' 
The tyrant observed the whisper , and conjectured its import , though he could not hear what was said ; and he inwardly strengthened himself in his determination to keep the power he possessed over his victim . 
George was taken home , and put to the meanest drudgery of the farm . 
He had been able to repress every disrespectful word ; but the flashing eye , the gloomy and troubled brow , were part of a natural language that could not be repressed , -- indubitable signs , which showed too plainly that the man could not become a thing . 
It was during the happy period of his employment in the factory that George had seen and married his wife . 
During that period , -- being much trusted and favored by his employer , -- he had free liberty to come and go at discretion . 
The marriage was highly approved of by Mrs. Shelby , who , with a little womanly complacency in match-making , felt pleased to unite her handsome favorite with one of her own class who seemed in every way suited to her ; and so they were married in her mistress ' great parlor , and her mistress herself adorned the bride 's beautiful hair with orange-blossoms , and threw over it the bridal veil , which certainly could scarce have rested on a fairer head ; and there was no lack of white gloves , and cake and wine , -- of admiring guests to praise the bride 's beauty , and her mistress ' indulgence and liberality . 
For a year or two Eliza saw her husband frequently , and there was nothing to interrupt their happiness , except the loss of two infant children , to whom she was passionately attached , and whom she mourned with a grief so intense as to call for gentle remonstrance from her mistress , who sought , with maternal anxiety , to direct her naturally passionate feelings within the bounds of reason and religion . 
After the birth of little Harry , however , she had gradually become tranquillized and settled ; and every bleeding tie and throbbing nerve , once more entwined with that little life , seemed to become sound and healthful , and Eliza was a happy woman up to the time that her husband was rudely torn from his kind employer , and brought under the iron sway of his legal owner . 
The manufacturer , true to his word , visited Mr. Harris a week or two after George had been taken away , when , as he hoped , the heat of the occasion had passed away , and tried every possible inducement to lead him to restore him to his former employment . 
`` You need n't trouble yourself to talk any longer , '' said he , doggedly ; `` I know my own business , sir . '' 
`` I did not presume to interfere with it , sir . 
I only thought that you might think it for your interest to let your man to us on the terms proposed . '' 
`` O , I understand the matter well enough . 
I saw your winking and whispering , the day I took him out of the factory ; but you do n't come it over me that way . 
It 's a free country , sir ; the man 's mine , and I do what I please with him , -- that 's it ! '' 
And so fell George 's last hope ; -- nothing before him but a life of toil and drudgery , rendered more bitter by every little smarting vexation and indignity which tyrannical ingenuity could devise . 
A very humane jurist once said , The worst use you can put a man to is to hang him . 
No ; there is another use that a man can be put to that is WORSE ! 
Mrs. Shelby had gone on her visit , and Eliza stood in the verandah , rather dejectedly looking after the retreating carriage , when a hand was laid on her shoulder . 
She turned , and a bright smile lighted up her fine eyes . 
`` George , is it you ? 
How you frightened me ! 
Well ; I am so glad you 's come ! 
Missis is gone to spend the afternoon ; so come into my little room , and we 'll have the time all to ourselves . '' 
Saying this , she drew him into a neat little apartment opening on the verandah , where she generally sat at her sewing , within call of her mistress . 
`` How glad I am ! 
-- why do n't you smile ? 
-- and look at Harry -- how he grows . '' 
The boy stood shyly regarding his father through his curls , holding close to the skirts of his mother 's dress . 
`` Is n't he beautiful ? '' 
said Eliza , lifting his long curls and kissing him . 
`` I wish he 'd never been born ! '' 
said George , bitterly . 
`` I wish I 'd never been born myself ! '' 
Surprised and frightened , Eliza sat down , leaned her head on her husband 's shoulder , and burst into tears . 
`` There now , Eliza , it 's too bad for me to make you feel so , poor girl ! '' 
said he , fondly ; `` it 's too bad : O , how I wish you never had seen me -- you might have been happy ! '' 
`` George ! 
George ! 
how can you talk so ? 
What dreadful thing has happened , or is going to happen ? 
I 'm sure we 've been very happy , till lately . '' 
`` So we have , dear , '' said George . 
Then drawing his child on his knee , he gazed intently on his glorious dark eyes , and passed his hands through his long curls . 
`` Just like you , Eliza ; and you are the handsomest woman I ever saw , and the best one I ever wish to see ; but , oh , I wish I 'd never seen you , nor you me ! '' 
`` O , George , how can you ! '' 
`` Yes , Eliza , it 's all misery , misery , misery ! 
My life is bitter as wormwood ; the very life is burning out of me . 
I 'm a poor , miserable , forlorn drudge ; I shall only drag you down with me , that 's all . 
What 's the use of our trying to do anything , trying to know anything , trying to be anything ? 
What 's the use of living ? 
I wish I was dead ! '' 
`` O , now , dear George , that is really wicked ! 
I know how you feel about losing your place in the factory , and you have a hard master ; but pray be patient , and perhaps something -- '' `` Patient ! '' 
said he , interrupting her ; `` have n't I been patient ? 
Did I say a word when he came and took me away , for no earthly reason , from the place where everybody was kind to me ? 
I 'd paid him truly every cent of my earnings , -- and they all say I worked well . '' 
`` Well , it is dreadful , '' said Eliza ; `` but , after all , he is your master , you know . '' 
`` My master ! 
and who made him my master ? 
That 's what I think of -- what right has he to me ? 
I 'm a man as much as he is . 
I 'm a better man than he is . 
I know more about business than he does ; I am a better manager than he is ; I can read better than he can ; I can write a better hand , -- and I 've learned it all myself , and no thanks to him , -- I 've learned it in spite of him ; and now what right has he to make a dray-horse of me ? 
-- to take me from things I can do , and do better than he can , and put me to work that any horse can do ? 
He tries to do it ; he says he 'll bring me down and humble me , and he puts me to just the hardest , meanest and dirtiest work , on purpose ! '' 
`` O , George ! 
George ! 
you frighten me ! 
Why , I never heard you talk so ; I 'm afraid you 'll do something dreadful . 
I do n't wonder at your feelings , at all ; but oh , do be careful -- do , do -- for my sake -- for Harry 's ! '' 
`` I have been careful , and I have been patient , but it 's growing worse and worse ; flesh and blood ca n't bear it any longer ; -- every chance he can get to insult and torment me , he takes . 
I thought I could do my work well , and keep on quiet , and have some time to read and learn out of work hours ; but the more he sees I can do , the more he loads on . 
He says that though I do n't say anything , he sees I 've got the devil in me , and he means to bring it out ; and one of these days it will come out in a way that he wo n't like , or I 'm mistaken ! '' 
`` O dear ! 
what shall we do ? '' 
said Eliza , mournfully . 
`` It was only yesterday , '' said George , `` as I was busy loading stones into a cart , that young Mas ' r Tom stood there , slashing his whip so near the horse that the creature was frightened . 
I asked him to stop , as pleasant as I could , -- he just kept right on . 
I begged him again , and then he turned on me , and began striking me . 
I held his hand , and then he screamed and kicked and ran to his father , and told him that I was fighting him . 
He came in a rage , and said he 'd teach me who was my master ; and he tied me to a tree , and cut switches for young master , and told him that he might whip me till he was tired ; -- and he did do it ! 
If I do n't make him remember it , some time ! '' 
and the brow of the young man grew dark , and his eyes burned with an expression that made his young wife tremble . 
`` Who made this man my master ? 
That 's what I want to know ! '' 
he said . 
`` Well , '' said Eliza , mournfully , `` I always thought that I must obey my master and mistress , or I could n't be a Christian . '' 
`` There is some sense in it , in your case ; they have brought you up like a child , fed you , clothed you , indulged you , and taught you , so that you have a good education ; that is some reason why they should claim you . 
But I have been kicked and cuffed and sworn at , and at the best only let alone ; and what do I owe ? 
I 've paid for all my keeping a hundred times over . 
I wo n't bear it . 
No , I wo n't ! '' 
he said , clenching his hand with a fierce frown . 
Eliza trembled , and was silent . 
She had never seen her husband in this mood before ; and her gentle system of ethics seemed to bend like a reed in the surges of such passions . 
`` You know poor little Carlo , that you gave me , '' added George ; `` the creature has been about all the comfort that I 've had . 
He has slept with me nights , and followed me around days , and kind o ' looked at me as if he understood how I felt . 
Well , the other day I was just feeding him with a few old scraps I picked up by the kitchen door , and Mas ' r came along , and said I was feeding him up at his expense , and that he could n't afford to have every nigger keeping his dog , and ordered me to tie a stone to his neck and throw him in the pond . '' 
`` O , George , you did n't do it ! '' 
`` Do it ? 
not I ! 
-- but he did . 
Mas ' r and Tom pelted the poor drowning creature with stones . 
Poor thing ! 
he looked at me so mournful , as if he wondered why I did n't save him . 
I had to take a flogging because I would n't do it myself . 
I do n't care . 
Mas ' r will find out that I 'm one that whipping wo n't tame . 
My day will come yet , if he do n't look out . '' 
`` What are you going to do ? 
O , George , do n't do anything wicked ; if you only trust in God , and try to do right , he 'll deliver you . '' 
`` I a n't a Christian like you , Eliza ; my heart 's full of bitterness ; I ca n't trust in God . 
Why does he let things be so ? '' 
`` O , George , we must have faith . 
Mistress says that when all things go wrong to us , we must believe that God is doing the very best . '' 
`` That 's easy to say for people that are sitting on their sofas and riding in their carriages ; but let 'em be where I am , I guess it would come some harder . 
I wish I could be good ; but my heart burns , and ca n't be reconciled , anyhow . 
You could n't in my place , -- you ca n't now , if I tell you all I 've got to say . 
You do n't know the whole yet . '' 
`` What can be coming now ? '' 
`` Well , lately Mas ' r has been saying that he was a fool to let me marry off the place ; that he hates Mr. Shelby and all his tribe , because they are proud , and hold their heads up above him , and that I 've got proud notions from you ; and he says he wo n't let me come here any more , and that I shall take a wife and settle down on his place . 
At first he only scolded and grumbled these things ; but yesterday he told me that I should take Mina for a wife , and settle down in a cabin with her , or he would sell me down river . '' 
`` Why -- but you were married to me , by the minister , as much as if you 'd been a white man ! '' 
said Eliza , simply . 
`` Do n't you know a slave ca n't be married ? 
There is no law in this country for that ; I ca n't hold you for my wife , if he chooses to part us . 
That 's why I wish I 'd never seen you , -- why I wish I 'd never been born ; it would have been better for us both , -- it would have been better for this poor child if he had never been born . 
All this may happen to him yet ! '' 
`` O , but master is so kind ! '' 
`` Yes , but who knows ? 
-- he may die -- and then he may be sold to nobody knows who . 
What pleasure is it that he is handsome , and smart , and bright ? 
I tell you , Eliza , that a sword will pierce through your soul for every good and pleasant thing your child is or has ; it will make him worth too much for you to keep . '' 
The words smote heavily on Eliza 's heart ; the vision of the trader came before her eyes , and , as if some one had struck her a deadly blow , she turned pale and gasped for breath . 
She looked nervously out on the verandah , where the boy , tired of the grave conversation , had retired , and where he was riding triumphantly up and down on Mr. Shelby 's walking-stick . 
She would have spoken to tell her husband her fears , but checked herself . 
`` No , no , -- he has enough to bear , poor fellow ! '' 
she thought . 
`` No , I wo n't tell him ; besides , it a n't true ; Missis never deceives us . '' 
`` So , Eliza , my girl , '' said the husband , mournfully , `` bear up , now ; and good-by , for I 'm going . '' 
`` Going , George ! 
Going where ? '' 
`` To Canada , '' said he , straightening himself up ; `` and when I 'm there , I 'll buy you ; that 's all the hope that 's left us . 
You have a kind master , that wo n't refuse to sell you . 
I 'll buy you and the boy ; -- God helping me , I will ! '' 
`` O , dreadful ! 
if you should be taken ? '' 
`` I wo n't be taken , Eliza ; I 'll die first ! 
I 'll be free , or I 'll die ! '' 
`` You wo n't kill yourself ! '' 
`` No need of that . 
They will kill me , fast enough ; they never will get me down the river alive ! '' 
`` O , George , for my sake , do be careful ! 
Do n't do anything wicked ; do n't lay hands on yourself , or anybody else ! 
You are tempted too much -- too much ; but do n't -- go you must -- but go carefully , prudently ; pray God to help you . '' 
