Her father and female guardian were incessantly busy in pursuit of her , -- but , when caught , she melted from them again like a summer cloud ; and as no word of chiding or reproof ever fell on her ear for whatever she chose to do , she pursued her own way all over the boat . 
Always dressed in white , she seemed to move like a shadow through all sorts of places , without contracting spot or stain ; and there was not a corner or nook , above or below , where those fairy footsteps had not glided , and that visionary golden head , with its deep blue eyes , fleeted along . 
The fireman , as he looked up from his sweaty toil , sometimes found those eyes looking wonderingly into the raging depths of the furnace , and fearfully and pityingly at him , as if she thought him in some dreadful danger . 
Anon the steersman at the wheel paused and smiled , as the picture-like head gleamed through the window of the round house , and in a moment was gone again . 
A thousand times a day rough voices blessed her , and smiles of unwonted softness stole over hard faces , as she passed ; and when she tripped fearlessly over dangerous places , rough , sooty hands were stretched involuntarily out to save her , and smooth her path . 
Tom , who had the soft , impressible nature of his kindly race , ever yearning toward the simple and childlike , watched the little creature with daily increasing interest . 
To him she seemed something almost divine ; and whenever her golden head and deep blue eyes peered out upon him from behind some dusky cotton-bale , or looked down upon him over some ridge of packages , he half believed that he saw one of the angels stepped out of his New Testament . 
Often and often she walked mournfully round the place where Haley 's gang of men and women sat in their chains . 
She would glide in among them , and look at them with an air of perplexed and sorrowful earnestness ; and sometimes she would lift their chains with her slender hands , and then sigh wofully , as she glided away . 
Several times she appeared suddenly among them , with her hands full of candy , nuts , and oranges , which she would distribute joyfully to them , and then be gone again . 
Tom watched the little lady a great deal , before he ventured on any overtures towards acquaintanceship . 
He knew an abundance of simple acts to propitiate and invite the approaches of the little people , and he resolved to play his part right skilfully . 
He could cut cunning little baskets out of cherry-stones , could make grotesque faces on hickory-nuts , or odd-jumping figures out of elder-pith , and he was a very Pan in the manufacture of whistles of all sizes and sorts . 
His pockets were full of miscellaneous articles of attraction , which he had hoarded in days of old for his master 's children , and which he now produced , with commendable prudence and economy , one by one , as overtures for acquaintance and friendship . 
The little one was shy , for all her busy interest in everything going on , and it was not easy to tame her . 
For a while , she would perch like a canary-bird on some box or package near Tom , while busy in the little arts afore-named , and take from him , with a kind of grave bashfulness , the little articles he offered . 
But at last they got on quite confidential terms . 
`` What 's little missy 's name ? '' 
said Tom , at last , when he thought matters were ripe to push such an inquiry . 
`` Evangeline St. Clare , '' said the little one , `` though papa and everybody else call me Eva . 
Now , what 's your name ? '' 
`` My name 's Tom ; the little chil ` en used to call me Uncle Tom , way back thar in Kentuck . '' 
`` Then I mean to call you Uncle Tom , because , you see , I like you , '' said Eva . 
`` So , Uncle Tom , where are you going ? '' 
`` I do n't know , Miss Eva . '' 
`` Do n't know ? '' 
said Eva . 
`` No , I am going to be sold to somebody . 
I do n't know who . '' 
`` My papa can buy you , '' said Eva , quickly ; `` and if he buys you , you will have good times . 
I mean to ask him , this very day . '' 
`` Thank you , my little lady , '' said Tom . 
The boat here stopped at a small landing to take in wood , and Eva , hearing her father 's voice , bounded nimbly away . 
Tom rose up , and went forward to offer his service in wooding , and soon was busy among the hands . 
Eva and her father were standing together by the railings to see the boat start from the landing-place , the wheel had made two or three revolutions in the water , when , by some sudden movement , the little one suddenly lost her balance and fell sheer over the side of the boat into the water . 
Her father , scarce knowing what he did , was plunging in after her , but was held back by some behind him , who saw that more efficient aid had followed his child . 
Tom was standing just under her on the lower deck , as she fell . 
He saw her strike the water , and sink , and was after her in a moment . 
A broad-chested , strong-armed fellow , it was nothing for him to keep afloat in the water , till , in a moment or two the child rose to the surface , and he caught her in his arms , and , swimming with her to the boat-side , handed her up , all dripping , to the grasp of hundreds of hands , which , as if they had all belonged to one man , were stretched eagerly out to receive her . 
A few moments more , and her father bore her , dripping and senseless , to the ladies ' cabin , where , as is usual in cases of the kind , there ensued a very well-meaning and kind-hearted strife among the female occupants generally , as to who should do the most things to make a disturbance , and to hinder her recovery in every way possible . 
It was a sultry , close day , the next day , as the steamer drew near to New Orleans . 
A general bustle of expectation and preparation was spread through the boat ; in the cabin , one and another were gathering their things together , and arranging them , preparatory to going ashore . 
The steward and chambermaid , and all , were busily engaged in cleaning , furbishing , and arranging the splendid boat , preparatory to a grand entree . 
On the lower deck sat our friend Tom , with his arms folded , and anxiously , from time to time , turning his eyes towards a group on the other side of the boat . 
There stood the fair Evangeline , a little paler than the day before , but otherwise exhibiting no traces of the accident which had befallen her . 
A graceful , elegantly-formed young man stood by her , carelessly leaning one elbow on a bale of cotton while a large pocket-book lay open before him . 
It was quite evident , at a glance , that the gentleman was Eva 's father . 
There was the same noble cast of head , the same large blue eyes , the same golden-brown hair ; yet the expression was wholly different . 
In the large , clear blue eyes , though in form and color exactly similar , there was wanting that misty , dreamy depth of expression ; all was clear , bold , and bright , but with a light wholly of this world : the beautifully cut mouth had a proud and somewhat sarcastic expression , while an air of free-and-easy superiority sat not ungracefully in every turn and movement of his fine form . 
He was listening , with a good-humored , negligent air , half comic , half contemptuous , to Haley , who was very volubly expatiating on the quality of the article for which they were bargaining . 
`` All the moral and Christian virtues bound in black Morocco , complete ! '' 
he said , when Haley had finished . 
`` Well , now , my good fellow , what 's the damage , as they say in Kentucky ; in short , what 's to be paid out for this business ? 
How much are you going to cheat me , now ? 
Out with it ! '' 
`` Wal , '' said Haley , `` if I should say thirteen hundred dollars for that ar fellow , I should n't but just save myself ; I should n't , now , re ` ly . '' 
`` Poor fellow ! '' 
said the young man , fixing his keen , mocking blue eye on him ; `` but I suppose you 'd let me have him for that , out of a particular regard for me . '' 
`` Well , the young lady here seems to be sot on him , and nat ` lly enough . '' 
`` O ! 
certainly , there 's a call on your benevolence , my friend . 
Now , as a matter of Christian charity , how cheap could you afford to let him go , to oblige a young lady that 's particular sot on him ? '' 
`` Wal , now , just think on ` t , '' said the trader ; `` just look at them limbs , -- broad-chested , strong as a horse . 
Look at his head ; them high forrads allays shows calculatin niggers , that 'll do any kind o ' thing . 
I 've , marked that ar . 
Now , a nigger of that ar heft and build is worth considerable , just as you may say , for his body , supposin he 's stupid ; but come to put in his calculatin faculties , and them which I can show he has oncommon , why , of course , it makes him come higher . 
Why , that ar fellow managed his master 's whole farm . 
He has a strornary talent for business . '' 
`` Bad , bad , very bad ; knows altogether too much ! '' 
said the young man , with the same mocking smile playing about his mouth . 
`` Never will do , in the world . 
Your smart fellows are always running off , stealing horses , and raising the devil generally . 
I think you 'll have to take off a couple of hundred for his smartness . '' 
`` Wal , there might be something in that ar , if it warnt for his character ; but I can show recommends from his master and others , to prove he is one of your real pious , -- the most humble , prayin , pious crittur ye ever did see . 
Why , he 's been called a preacher in them parts he came from . '' 
`` And I might use him for a family chaplain , possibly , '' added the young man , dryly . 
`` That 's quite an idea . 
Religion is a remarkably scarce article at our house . '' 
`` You 're joking , now . '' 
`` How do you know I am ? 
Did n't you just warrant him for a preacher ? 
Has he been examined by any synod or council ? 
Come , hand over your papers . '' 
If the trader had not been sure , by a certain good-humored twinkle in the large eye , that all this banter was sure , in the long run , to turn out a cash concern , he might have been somewhat out of patience ; as it was , he laid down a greasy pocket-book on the cotton-bales , and began anxiously studying over certain papers in it , the young man standing by , the while , looking down on him with an air of careless , easy drollery . 
`` Papa , do buy him ! 
it 's no matter what you pay , '' whispered Eva , softly , getting up on a package , and putting her arm around her father 's neck . 
`` You have money enough , I know . 
I want him . '' 
`` What for , pussy ? 
Are you going to use him for a rattle-box , or a rocking-horse , or what ? 
`` I want to make him happy . '' 
`` An original reason , certainly . '' 
Here the trader handed up a certificate , signed by Mr. Shelby , which the young man took with the tips of his long fingers , and glanced over carelessly . 
`` A gentlemanly hand , '' he said , `` and well spelt , too . 
Well , now , but I 'm not sure , after all , about this religion , '' said he , the old wicked expression returning to his eye ; `` the country is almost ruined with pious white people ; such pious politicians as we have just before elections , -- such pious goings on in all departments of church and state , that a fellow does not know who 'll cheat him next . 
I do n't know , either , about religion 's being up in the market , just now . 
I have not looked in the papers lately , to see how it sells . 
How many hundred dollars , now , do you put on for this religion ? '' 
`` You like to be jokin , now , '' said the trader ; `` but , then , there 's sense under all that ar . 
I know there 's differences in religion . 
Some kinds is mis ` rable : there 's your meetin pious ; there 's your singin , roarin pious ; them ar a n't no account , in black or white ; -- but these rayly is ; and I 've seen it in niggers as often as any , your rail softly , quiet , stiddy , honest , pious , that the hull world could n't tempt 'em to do nothing that they thinks is wrong ; and ye see in this letter what Tom 's old master says about him . '' 
`` Now , '' said the young man , stooping gravely over his book of bills , `` if you can assure me that I really can buy this kind of pious , and that it will be set down to my account in the book up above , as something belonging to me , I would n't care if I did go a little extra for it . 
How d'ye say ? '' 
`` Wal , raily , I ca n't do that , '' said the trader . 
`` I 'm a thinkin that every man 'll have to hang on his own hook , in them ar quarters . '' 
`` Rather hard on a fellow that pays extra on religion , and ca n't trade with it in the state where he wants it most , a n't it , now ? '' 
said the young man , who had been making out a roll of bills while he was speaking . 
`` There , count your money , old boy ! '' 
he added , as he handed the roll to the trader . 
`` All right , '' said Haley , his face beaming with delight ; and pulling out an old inkhorn , he proceeded to fill out a bill of sale , which , in a few moments , he handed to the young man . 
`` I wonder , now , if I was divided up and inventoried , '' said the latter as he ran over the paper , `` how much I might bring . 
Say so much for the shape of my head , so much for a high forehead , so much for arms , and hands , and legs , and then so much for education , learning , talent , honesty , religion ! 
Bless me ! 
there would be small charge on that last , I 'm thinking . 
But come , Eva , '' he said ; and taking the hand of his daughter , he stepped across the boat , and carelessly putting the tip of his finger under Tom 's chin , said , good-humoredly , `` Look-up , Tom , and see how you like your new master . '' 
Tom looked up . 
It was not in nature to look into that gay , young , handsome face , without a feeling of pleasure ; and Tom felt the tears start in his eyes as he said , heartily , `` God bless you , Mas ` r ! '' 
`` Well , I hope he will . 
What 's your name ? 
Tom ? 
Quite as likely to do it for your asking as mine , from all accounts . 
Can you drive horses , Tom ? '' 
`` I 've been allays used to horses , '' said Tom . 
`` Mas ' r Shelby raised heaps of 'em . '' 
`` Well , I think I shall put you in coachy , on condition that you wo n't be drunk more than once a week , unless in cases of emergency , Tom . '' 
Tom looked surprised , and rather hurt , and said , `` I never drink , Mas ` r. '' `` I 've heard that story before , Tom ; but then we 'll see . 
It will be a special accommodation to all concerned , if you do n't . 
Never mind , my boy , '' he added , good-humoredly , seeing Tom still looked grave ; `` I do n't doubt you mean to do well . '' 
`` I sartin do , Mas ` r , '' said Tom . 
`` And you shall have good times , '' said Eva . 
`` Papa is very good to everybody , only he always will laugh at them . '' 
`` Papa is much obliged to you for his recommendation , '' said St. Clare , laughing , as he turned on his heel and walked away . 
Since the thread of our humble hero 's life has now become interwoven with that of higher ones , it is necessary to give some brief introduction to them . 
Augustine St. Clare was the son of a wealthy planter of Louisiana . 
The family had its origin in Canada . 
Of two brothers , very similar in temperament and character , one had settled on a flourishing farm in Vermont , and the other became an opulent planter in Louisiana . 
The mother of Augustine was a Huguenot French lady , whose family had emigrated to Louisiana during the days of its early settlement . 
Augustine and another brother were the only children of their parents . 
Having inherited from his mother an exceeding delicacy of constitution , he was , at the instance of physicians , during many years of his boyhood , sent to the care of his uncle in Vermont , in order that his constitution might be strengthened by the cold of a more bracing climate . 
In childhood , he was remarkable for an extreme and marked sensitiveness of character , more akin to the softness of woman than the ordinary hardness of his own sex . 
Time , however , overgrew this softness with the rough bark of manhood , and but few knew how living and fresh it still lay at the core . 
His talents were of the very first order , although his mind showed a preference always for the ideal and the aesthetic , and there was about him that repugnance to the actual business of life which is the common result of this balance of the faculties . 
Soon after the completion of his college course , his whole nature was kindled into one intense and passionate effervescence of romantic passion . 
His hour came , -- the hour that comes only once ; his star rose in the horizon , -- that star that rises so often in vain , to be remembered only as a thing of dreams ; and it rose for him in vain . 
To drop the figure , -- he saw and won the love of a high-minded and beautiful woman , in one of the northern states , and they were affianced . 
He returned south to make arrangements for their marriage , when , most unexpectedly , his letters were returned to him by mail , with a short note from her guardian , stating to him that ere this reached him the lady would be the wife of another . 
Stung to madness , he vainly hoped , as many another has done , to fling the whole thing from his heart by one desperate effort . 
Too proud to supplicate or seek explanation , he threw himself at once into a whirl of fashionable society , and in a fortnight from the time of the fatal letter was the accepted lover of the reigning belle of the season ; and as soon as arrangements could be made , he became the husband of a fine figure , a pair of bright dark eyes , and a hundred thousand dollars ; and , of course , everybody thought him a happy fellow . 
The married couple were enjoying their honeymoon , and entertaining a brilliant circle of friends in their splendid villa , near Lake Pontchartrain , when , one day , a letter was brought to him in that well-remembered writing . 
It was handed to him while he was in full tide of gay and successful conversation , in a whole room-full of company . 
He turned deadly pale when he saw the writing , but still preserved his composure , and finished the playful warfare of badinage which he was at the moment carrying on with a lady opposite ; and , a short time after , was missed from the circle . 
In his room , alone , he opened and read the letter , now worse than idle and useless to be read . 
It was from her , giving a long account of a persecution to which she had been exposed by her guardian 's family , to lead her to unite herself with their son : and she related how , for a long time , his letters had ceased to arrive ; how she had written time and again , till she became weary and doubtful ; how her health had failed under her anxieties , and how , at last , she had discovered the whole fraud which had been practised on them both . 
The letter ended with expressions of hope and thankfulness , and professions of undying affection , which were more bitter than death to the unhappy young man . 
He wrote to her immediately : `` I have received yours , -- but too late . 
I believed all I heard . 
I was desperate . 
I am married , and all is over . 
Only forget , -- it is all that remains for either of us . '' 
And thus ended the whole romance and ideal of life for Augustine St. Clare . 
But the real remained , -- the real , like the flat , bare , oozy tide-mud , when the blue sparkling wave , with all its company of gliding boats and white-winged ships , its music of oars and chiming waters , has gone down , and there it lies , flat , slimy , bare , -- exceedingly real . 
Of course , in a novel , people 's hearts break , and they die , and that is the end of it ; and in a story this is very convenient . 
But in real life we do not die when all that makes life bright dies to us . 
There is a most busy and important round of eating , drinking , dressing , walking , visiting , buying , selling , talking , reading , and all that makes up what is commonly called living , yet to be gone through ; and this yet remained to Augustine . 
Had his wife been a whole woman , she might yet have done something -- as woman can -- to mend the broken threads of life , and weave again into a tissue of brightness . 
But Marie St. Clare could not even see that they had been broken . 
As before stated , she consisted of a fine figure , a pair of splendid eyes , and a hundred thousand dollars ; and none of these items were precisely the ones to minister to a mind diseased . 
When Augustine , pale as death , was found lying on the sofa , and pleaded sudden sick-headache as the cause of his distress , she recommended to him to smell of hartshorn ; and when the paleness and headache came on week after week , she only said that she never thought Mr. St. Clare was sickly ; but it seems he was very liable to sick-headaches , and that it was a very unfortunate thing for her , because he did n't enjoy going into company with her , and it seemed odd to go so much alone , when they were just married . 
Augustine was glad in his heart that he had married so undiscerning a woman ; but as the glosses and civilities of the honeymoon wore away , he discovered that a beautiful young woman , who has lived all her life to be caressed and waited on , might prove quite a hard mistress in domestic life . 
Marie never had possessed much capability of affection , or much sensibility , and the little that she had , had been merged into a most intense and unconscious selfishness ; a selfishness the more hopeless , from its quiet obtuseness , its utter ignorance of any claims but her own . 
From her infancy , she had been surrounded with servants , who lived only to study her caprices ; the idea that they had either feelings or rights had never dawned upon her , even in distant perspective . 
Her father , whose only child she had been , had never denied her anything that lay within the compass of human possibility ; and when she entered life , beautiful , accomplished , and an heiress , she had , of course , all the eligibles and non-eligibles of the other sex sighing at her feet , and she had no doubt that Augustine was a most fortunate man in having obtained her . 
It is a great mistake to suppose that a woman with no heart will be an easy creditor in the exchange of affection . 
There is not on earth a more merciless exactor of love from others than a thoroughly selfish woman ; and the more unlovely she grows , the more jealously and scrupulously she exacts love , to the uttermost farthing . 
When , therefore , St. Clare began to drop off those gallantries and small attentions which flowed at first through the habitude of courtship , he found his sultana no way ready to resign her slave ; there were abundance of tears , poutings , and small tempests , there were discontents , pinings , upbraidings . 
St. Clare was good-natured and self-indulgent , and sought to buy off with presents and flatteries ; and when Marie became mother to a beautiful daughter , he really felt awakened , for a time , to something like tenderness . 
St. Clare 's mother had been a woman of uncommon elevation and purity of character , and he gave to his child his mother 's name , fondly fancying that she would prove a reproduction of her image . 
The thing had been remarked with petulant jealousy by his wife , and she regarded her husband 's absorbing devotion to the child with suspicion and dislike ; all that was given to her seemed so much taken from herself . 
From the time of the birth of this child , her health gradually sunk . 
A life of constant inaction , bodily and mental , -- the friction of ceaseless ennui and discontent , united to the ordinary weakness which attended the period of maternity , -- in course of a few years changed the blooming young belle into a yellow faded , sickly woman , whose time was divided among a variety of fanciful diseases , and who considered herself , in every sense , the most ill-used and suffering person in existence . 
There was no end of her various complaints ; but her principal forte appeared to lie in sick-headache , which sometimes would confine her to her room three days out of six . 
As , of course , all family arrangements fell into the hands of servants , St. Clare found his menage anything but comfortable . 
His only daughter was exceedingly delicate , and he feared that , with no one to look after her and attend to her , her health and life might yet fall a sacrifice to her mother 's inefficiency . 
He had taken her with him on a tour to Vermont , and had persuaded his cousin , Miss Ophelia St. Clare , to return with him to his southern residence ; and they are now returning on this boat , where we have introduced them to our readers . 
And now , while the distant domes and spires of New Orleans rise to our view , there is yet time for an introduction to Miss Ophelia . 
Whoever has travelled in the New England States will remember , in some cool village , the large farmhouse , with its clean-swept grassy yard , shaded by the dense and massive foliage of the sugar maple ; and remember the air of order and stillness , of perpetuity and unchanging repose , that seemed to breathe over the whole place . 
Nothing lost , or out of order ; not a picket loose in the fence , not a particle of litter in the turfy yard , with its clumps of lilac bushes growing up under the windows . 
Within , he will remember wide , clean rooms , where nothing ever seems to be doing or going to be done , where everything is once and forever rigidly in place , and where all household arrangements move with the punctual exactness of the old clock in the corner . 
In the family `` keeping-room , '' as it is termed , he will remember the staid , respectable old book-case , with its glass doors , where Rollin 's History , * Milton 's Paradise Lost , Bunyan 's Pilgrim 's Progress , and Scott 's Family Bible , ** stand side by side in decorous order , with multitudes of other books , equally solemn and respectable . 
There are no servants in the house , but the lady in the snowy cap , with the spectacles , who sits sewing every afternoon among her daughters , as if nothing ever had been done , or were to be done , -- she and her girls , in some long-forgotten fore part of the day , '' did up the work , '' and for the rest of the time , probably , at all hours when you would see them , it is '' done up . '' 
The old kitchen floor never seems stained or spotted ; the tables , the chairs , and the various cooking utensils , never seem deranged or disordered ; though three and sometimes four meals a day are got there , though the family washing and ironing is there performed , and though pounds of butter and cheese are in some silent and mysterious manner there brought into existence . 
* The Ancient History , ten volumes -LRB- 1730-1738 -RRB- , by the French historian Charles Rollin -LRB- 1661-1741 -RRB- . 
** Scott 's Family Bible -LRB- 1788-1792 -RRB- , edited with notes by the English Biblical commentator , Thomas Scott -LRB- 1747-1821 -RRB- . 
On such a farm , in such a house and family , Miss Ophelia had spent a quiet existence of some forty-five years , when her cousin invited her to visit his southern mansion . 
The eldest of a large family , she was still considered by her father and mother as one of `` the children , '' and the proposal that she should go to Orleans was a most momentous one to the family circle . 
The old gray-headed father took down Morse 's Atlas * out of the book-case , and looked out the exact latitude and longitude ; and read Flint 's Travels in the South and West , ** to make up his own mind as to the nature of the country . 
* The Cerographic Atlas of the United States -LRB- 1842-1845 -RRB- , by Sidney Edwards Morse -LRB- 1794-1871 -RRB- , son of the geographer , Jedidiah Morse , and brother of the painter-inventor , Samuel F. B. Morse . 
** Recollections of the Last Ten Years -LRB- 1826 -RRB- by Timothy Flint -LRB- 1780-1840 -RRB- , missionary of Presbyterianism to the trans-Allegheny West . 
The good mother inquired , anxiously , `` if Orleans was n't an awful wicked place , '' saying , `` that it seemed to her most equal to going to the Sandwich Islands , or anywhere among the heathen . '' 
It was known at the minister 's and at the doctor 's , and at Miss Peabody 's milliner shop , that Ophelia St. Clare was `` talking about '' going away down to Orleans with her cousin ; and of course the whole village could do no less than help this very important process of talking about the matter . 
The minister , who inclined strongly to abolitionist views , was quite doubtful whether such a step might not tend somewhat to encourage the southerners in holding on to their slaves ; while the doctor , who was a stanch colonizationist , inclined to the opinion that Miss Ophelia ought to go , to show the Orleans people that we do n't think hardly of them , after all . 
He was of opinion , in fact , that southern people needed encouraging . 
When however , the fact that she had resolved to go was fully before the public mind , she was solemnly invited out to tea by all her friends and neighbors for the space of a fortnight , and her prospects and plans duly canvassed and inquired into . 
Miss Moseley , who came into the house to help to do the dress-making , acquired daily accessions of importance from the developments with regard to Miss Ophelia 's wardrobe which she had been enabled to make . 
It was credibly ascertained that Squire Sinclare , as his name was commonly contracted in the neighborhood , had counted out fifty dollars , and given them to Miss Ophelia , and told her to buy any clothes she thought best ; and that two new silk dresses , and a bonnet , had been sent for from Boston . 
As to the propriety of this extraordinary outlay , the public mind was divided , -- some affirming that it was well enough , all things considered , for once in one 's life , and others stoutly affirming that the money had better have been sent to the missionaries ; but all parties agreed that there had been no such parasol seen in those parts as had been sent on from New York , and that she had one silk dress that might fairly be trusted to stand alone , whatever might be said of its mistress . 
There were credible rumors , also , of a hemstitched pocket-handkerchief ; and report even went so far as to state that Miss Ophelia had one pocket-handkerchief with lace all around it , -- it was even added that it was worked in the corners ; but this latter point was never satisfactorily ascertained , and remains , in fact , unsettled to this day . 
Miss Ophelia , as you now behold her , stands before you , in a very shining brown linen travelling-dress , tall , square-formed , and angular . 
Her face was thin , and rather sharp in its outlines ; the lips compressed , like those of a person who is in the habit of making up her mind definitely on all subjects ; while the keen , dark eyes had a peculiarly searching , advised movement , and travelled over everything , as if they were looking for something to take care of . 
All her movements were sharp , decided , and energetic ; and , though she was never much of a talker , her words were remarkably direct , and to the purpose , when she did speak . 
In her habits , she was a living impersonation of order , method , and exactness . 
In punctuality , she was as inevitable as a clock , and as inexorable as a railroad engine ; and she held in most decided contempt and abomination anything of a contrary character . 
The great sin of sins , in her eyes , -- the sum of all evils , -- was expressed by one very common and important word in her vocabulary -- `` shiftlessness . '' 
Her finale and ultimatum of contempt consisted in a very emphatic pronunciation of the word `` shiftless ; '' and by this she characterized all modes of procedure which had not a direct and inevitable relation to accomplishment of some purpose then definitely had in mind . 
People who did nothing , or who did not know exactly what they were going to do , or who did not take the most direct way to accomplish what they set their hands to , were objects of her entire contempt , -- a contempt shown less frequently by anything she said , than by a kind of stony grimness , as if she scorned to say anything about the matter . 
As to mental cultivation , -- she had a clear , strong , active mind , was well and thoroughly read in history and the older English classics , and thought with great strength within certain narrow limits . 
Her theological tenets were all made up , labelled in most positive and distinct forms , and put by , like the bundles in her patch trunk ; there were just so many of them , and there were never to be any more . 
So , also , were her ideas with regard to most matters of practical life , -- such as housekeeping in all its branches , and the various political relations of her native village . 
And , underlying all , deeper than anything else , higher and broader , lay the strongest principle of her being -- conscientiousness . 
Nowhere is conscience so dominant and all-absorbing as with New England women . 
It is the granite formation , which lies deepest , and rises out , even to the tops of the highest mountains . 
Miss Ophelia was the absolute bond-slave of the '' ought . '' 
Once make her certain that the `` path of duty , '' as she commonly phrased it , lay in any given direction , and fire and water could not keep her from it . 
She would walk straight down into a well , or up to a loaded cannon 's mouth , if she were only quite sure that there the path lay . 
Her standard of right was so high , so all-embracing , so minute , and making so few concessions to human frailty , that , though she strove with heroic ardor to reach it , she never actually did so , and of course was burdened with a constant and often harassing sense of deficiency ; -- this gave a severe and somewhat gloomy cast to her religious character . 
But , how in the world can Miss Ophelia get along with Augustine St. Clare , -- gay , easy , unpunctual , unpractical , sceptical , -- in short , -- walking with impudent and nonchalant freedom over every one of her most cherished habits and opinions ? 
To tell the truth , then , Miss Ophelia loved him . 
When a boy , it had been hers to teach him his catechism , mend his clothes , comb his hair , and bring him up generally in the way he should go ; and her heart having a warm side to it , Augustine had , as he usually did with most people , monopolized a large share of it for himself , and therefore it was that he succeeded very easily in persuading her that the `` path of duty '' lay in the direction of New Orleans , and that she must go with him to take care of Eva , and keep everything from going to wreck and ruin during the frequent illnesses of his wife . 
The idea of a house without anybody to take care of it went to her heart ; then she loved the lovely little girl , as few could help doing ; and though she regarded Augustine as very much of a heathen , yet she loved him , laughed at his jokes , and forbore with his failings , to an extent which those who knew him thought perfectly incredible . 
But what more or other is to be known of Miss Ophelia our reader must discover by a personal acquaintance . 
There she is , sitting now in her state-room , surrounded by a mixed multitude of little and big carpet-bags , boxes , baskets , each containing some separate responsibility which she is tying , binding up , packing , or fastening , with a face of great earnestness . 
`` Now , Eva , have you kept count of your things ? 
Of course you have n't , -- children never do : there 's the spotted carpet-bag and the little blue band-box with your best bonnet , -- that 's two ; then the India rubber satchel is three ; and my tape and needle box is four ; and my band-box , five ; and my collar-box ; and that little hair trunk , seven . 
What have you done with your sunshade ? 
Give it to me , and let me put a paper round it , and tie it to my umbrella with my shade ; -- there , now . '' 
`` Why , aunty , we are only going up home ; -- what is the use ? '' 
`` To keep it nice , child ; people must take care of their things , if they ever mean to have anything ; and now , Eva , is your thimble put up ? '' 
`` Really , aunty , I do n't know . '' 
`` Well , never mind ; I 'll look your box over , -- thimble , wax , two spools , scissors , knife , tape-needle ; all right , -- put it in here . 
What did you ever do , child , when you were coming on with only your papa . 
I should have thought you 'd a lost everything you had . '' 
`` Well , aunty , I did lose a great many ; and then , when we stopped anywhere , papa would buy some more of whatever it was . '' 
`` Mercy on us , child , -- what a way ! '' 
`` It was a very easy way , aunty , '' said Eva . 
`` It 's a dreadful shiftless one , '' said aunty . 
`` Why , aunty , what 'll you do now ? '' 
said Eva ; `` that trunk is too full to be shut down . '' 
`` It must shut down , '' said aunty , with the air of a general , as she squeezed the things in , and sprung upon the lid ; -- still a little gap remained about the mouth of the trunk . 
`` Get up here , Eva ! '' 
said Miss Ophelia , courageously ; `` what has been done can be done again . 
This trunk has got to be shut and locked -- there are no two ways about it . '' 
And the trunk , intimidated , doubtless , by this resolute statement , gave in . 
The hasp snapped sharply in its hole , and Miss Ophelia turned the key , and pocketed it in triumph . 
`` Now we 're ready . 
Where 's your papa ? 
I think it time this baggage was set out . 
Do look out , Eva , and see if you see your papa . '' 
`` O , yes , he 's down the other end of the gentlemen 's cabin , eating an orange . '' 
`` He ca n't know how near we are coming , '' said aunty ; `` had n't you better run and speak to him ? '' 
`` Papa never is in a hurry about anything , '' said Eva , `` and we have n't come to the landing . 
Do step on the guards , aunty . 
Look ! 
there 's our house , up that street ! '' 
The boat now began , with heavy groans , like some vast , tired monster , to prepare to push up among the multiplied steamers at the levee . 
Eva joyously pointed out the various spires , domes , and way-marks , by which she recognized her native city . 
`` Yes , yes , dear ; very fine , '' said Miss Ophelia . 
`` But mercy on us ! 
the boat has stopped ! 
where is your father ? '' 
And now ensued the usual turmoil of landing -- waiters running twenty ways at once -- men tugging trunks , carpet-bags , boxes -- women anxiously calling to their children , and everybody crowding in a dense mass to the plank towards the landing . 
Miss Ophelia seated herself resolutely on the lately vanquished trunk , and marshalling all her goods and chattels in fine military order , seemed resolved to defend them to the last . 
`` Shall I take your trunk , ma'am ? '' 
`` Shall I take your baggage ? '' 
`` Let me ` tend to your baggage , Missis ? '' 
`` Sha n't I carry out these yer , Missis ? '' 
rained down upon her unheeded . 
She sat with grim determination , upright as a darning-needle stuck in a board , holding on her bundle of umbrella and parasols , and replying with a determination that was enough to strike dismay even into a hackman , wondering to Eva , in each interval , `` what upon earth her papa could be thinking of ; he could n't have fallen over , now , -- but something must have happened ; '' -- and just as she had begun to work herself into a real distress , he came up , with his usually careless motion , and giving Eva a quarter of the orange he was eating , said , `` Well , Cousin Vermont , I suppose you are all ready . '' 
`` I 've been ready , waiting , nearly an hour , '' said Miss Ophelia ; `` I began to be really concerned about you . 
`` That 's a clever fellow , now , '' said he . 
`` Well , the carriage is waiting , and the crowd are now off , so that one can walk out in a decent and Christian manner , and not be pushed and shoved . 
Here , '' he added to a driver who stood behind him , `` take these things . '' 
`` I 'll go and see to his putting them in , '' said Miss Ophelia . 
`` O , pshaw , cousin , what 's the use ? '' 
said St. Clare . 
`` Well , at any rate , I 'll carry this , and this , and this , '' said Miss Ophelia , singling out three boxes and a small carpet-bag . 
`` My dear Miss Vermont , positively you must n't come the Green Mountains over us that way . 
You must adopt at least a piece of a southern principle , and not walk out under all that load . 
They 'll take you for a waiting-maid ; give them to this fellow ; he 'll put them down as if they were eggs , now . '' 
Miss Ophelia looked despairingly as her cousin took all her treasures from her , and rejoiced to find herself once more in the carriage with them , in a state of preservation . 
`` Where 's Tom ? '' 
said Eva . 
`` O , he 's on the outside , Pussy . 
I 'm going to take Tom up to mother for a peace-offering , to make up for that drunken fellow that upset the carriage . '' 
`` O , Tom will make a splendid driver , I know , '' said Eva ; `` he 'll never get drunk . '' 
The carriage stopped in front of an ancient mansion , built in that odd mixture of Spanish and French style , of which there are specimens in some parts of New Orleans . 
It was built in the Moorish fashion , -- a square building enclosing a court-yard , into which the carriage drove through an arched gateway . 
The court , in the inside , had evidently been arranged to gratify a picturesque and voluptuous ideality . 
Wide galleries ran all around the four sides , whose Moorish arches , slender pillars , and arabesque ornaments , carried the mind back , as in a dream , to the reign of oriental romance in Spain . 
In the middle of the court , a fountain threw high its silvery water , falling in a never-ceasing spray into a marble basin , fringed with a deep border of fragrant violets . 
The water in the fountain , pellucid as crystal , was alive with myriads of gold and silver fishes , twinkling and darting through it like so many living jewels . 
Around the fountain ran a walk , paved with a mosaic of pebbles , laid in various fanciful patterns ; and this , again , was surrounded by turf , smooth as green velvet , while a carriage-drive enclosed the whole . 
Two large orange-trees , now fragrant with blossoms , threw a delicious shade ; and , ranged in a circle round upon the turf , were marble vases of arabesque sculpture , containing the choicest flowering plants of the tropics . 
Huge pomegranate trees , with their glossy leaves and flame-colored flowers , dark-leaved Arabian jessamines , with their silvery stars , geraniums , luxuriant roses bending beneath their heavy abundance of flowers , golden jessamines , lemon-scented verbenum , all united their bloom and fragrance , while here and there a mystic old aloe , with its strange , massive leaves , sat looking like some old enchanter , sitting in weird grandeur among the more perishable bloom and fragrance around it . 
The galleries that surrounded the court were festooned with a curtain of some kind of Moorish stuff , and could be drawn down at pleasure , to exclude the beams of the sun . 
On the whole , the appearance of the place was luxurious and romantic . 
As the carriage drove in , Eva seemed like a bird ready to burst from a cage , with the wild eagerness of her delight . 
`` O , is n't it beautiful , lovely ! 
my own dear , darling home ! '' 
she said to Miss Ophelia . 
`` Is n't it beautiful ? '' '' ' 
T is a pretty place , '' said Miss Ophelia , as she alighted ; `` though it looks rather old and heathenish to me . '' 
Tom got down from the carriage , and looked about with an air of calm , still enjoyment . 
The negro , it must be remembered , is an exotic of the most gorgeous and superb countries of the world , and he has , deep in his heart , a passion for all that is splendid , rich , and fanciful ; a passion which , rudely indulged by an untrained taste , draws on them the ridicule of the colder and more correct white race . 
St. Clare , who was in heart a poetical voluptuary , smiled as Miss Ophelia made her remark on his premises , and , turning to Tom , who was standing looking round , his beaming black face perfectly radiant with admiration , he said , `` Tom , my boy , this seems to suit you . '' 
`` Yes , Mas ` r , it looks about the right thing , '' said Tom . 
All this passed in a moment , while trunks were being hustled off , hackman paid , and while a crowd , of all ages and sizes , -- men , women , and children , -- came running through the galleries , both above and below to see Mas ' r come in . 
Foremost among them was a highly-dressed young mulatto man , evidently a very distingue personage , attired in the ultra extreme of the mode , and gracefully waving a scented cambric handkerchief in his hand . 
This personage had been exerting himself , with great alacrity , in driving all the flock of domestics to the other end of the verandah . 
`` Back ! 
all of you . 
I am ashamed of you , '' he said , in a tone of authority . 
`` Would you intrude on Master 's domestic relations , in the first hour of his return ? '' 
All looked abashed at this elegant speech , delivered with quite an air , and stood huddled together at a respectful distance , except two stout porters , who came up and began conveying away the baggage . 
Owing to Mr. Adolph 's systematic arrangements , when St. Clare turned round from paying the hackman , there was nobody in view but Mr. Adolph himself , conspicuous in satin vest , gold guard-chain , and white pants , and bowing with inexpressible grace and suavity . 
`` Ah , Adolph , is it you ? '' 
said his master , offering his hand to him ; `` how are you , boy ? '' 
while Adolph poured forth , with great fluency , an extemporary speech , which he had been preparing , with great care , for a fortnight before . 
`` Well , well , '' said St. Clare , passing on , with his usual air of negligent drollery , `` that 's very well got up , Adolph . 
See that the baggage is well bestowed . 
I 'll come to the people in a minute ; '' and , so saying , he led Miss Ophelia to a large parlor that opened on the verandah . 
While this had been passing , Eva had flown like a bird , through the porch and parlor , to a little boudoir opening likewise on the verandah . 
A tall , dark-eyed , sallow woman , half rose from a couch on which she was reclining . 
`` Mamma ! '' 
said Eva , in a sort of a rapture , throwing herself on her neck , and embracing her over and over again . 
`` That 'll do , -- take care , child , -- do n't , you make my head ache , '' said the mother , after she had languidly kissed her . 
St. Clare came in , embraced his wife in true , orthodox , husbandly fashion , and then presented to her his cousin . 
Marie lifted her large eyes on her cousin with an air of some curiosity , and received her with languid politeness . 
A crowd of servants now pressed to the entry door , and among them a middle-aged mulatto woman , of very respectable appearance , stood foremost , in a tremor of expectation and joy , at the door . 
`` O , there 's Mammy ! '' 
said Eva , as she flew across the room ; and , throwing herself into her arms , she kissed her repeatedly . 
This woman did not tell her that she made her head ache , but , on the contrary , she hugged her , and laughed , and cried , till her sanity was a thing to be doubted of ; and when released from her , Eva flew from one to another , shaking hands and kissing , in a way that Miss Ophelia afterwards declared fairly turned her stomach . 
`` Well ! '' 
said Miss Ophelia , `` you southern children can do something that I could n't . '' 
`` What , now , pray ? '' 
said St. Clare . 
`` Well , I want to be kind to everybody , and I would n't have anything hurt ; but as to kissing -- '' `` Niggers , '' said St. Clare , `` that you 're not up to , -- hey ? '' 
`` Yes , that 's it . 
How can she ? '' 
St. Clare laughed , as he went into the passage . 
`` Halloa , here , what 's to pay out here ? 
Here , you all -- Mammy , Jimmy , Polly , Sukey -- glad to see Mas ` r ? '' 
he said , as he went shaking hands from one to another . 
`` Look out for the babies ! '' 
he added , as he stumbled over a sooty little urchin , who was crawling upon all fours . 
`` If I step upon anybody , let 'em mention it . '' 
There was an abundance of laughing and blessing Mas ` r , as St. Clare distributed small pieces of change among them . 
`` Come , now , take yourselves off , like good boys and girls , '' he said ; and the whole assemblage , dark and light , disappeared through a door into a large verandah , followed by Eva , who carried a large satchel , which she had been filling with apples , nuts , candy , ribbons , laces , and toys of every description , during her whole homeward journey . 
As St. Clare turned to go back his eye fell upon Tom , who was standing uneasily , shifting from one foot to the other , while Adolph stood negligently leaning against the banisters , examining Tom through an opera-glass , with an air that would have done credit to any dandy living . 
`` Puh ! 
you puppy , '' said his master , striking down the opera glass ; `` is that the way you treat your company ? 
Seems to me , Dolph , '' he added , laying his finger on the elegant figured satin vest that Adolph was sporting , `` seems to me that 's my vest . '' 
`` O ! 
Master , this vest all stained with wine ; of course , a gentleman in Master 's standing never wears a vest like this . 
I understood I was to take it . 
It does for a poor nigger-fellow , like me . '' 
And Adolph tossed his head , and passed his fingers through his scented hair , with a grace . 
`` So , that 's it , is it ? '' 
said St. Clare , carelessly . 
`` Well , here , I 'm going to show this Tom to his mistress , and then you take him to the kitchen ; and mind you do n't put on any of your airs to him . 
He 's worth two such puppies as you . '' 
`` Master always will have his joke , '' said Adolph , laughing . 
`` I 'm delighted to see Master in such spirits . '' 
`` Here , Tom , '' said St. Clare , beckoning . 
Tom entered the room . 
He looked wistfully on the velvet carpets , and the before unimagined splendors of mirrors , pictures , statues , and curtains , and , like the Queen of Sheba before Solomon , there was no more spirit in him . 
He looked afraid even to set his feet down . 
`` See here , Marie , '' said St. Clare to his wife , `` I 've bought you a coachman , at last , to order . 
I tell you , he 's a regular hearse for blackness and sobriety , and will drive you like a funeral , if you want . 
Open your eyes , now , and look at him . 
Now , do n't say I never think about you when I 'm gone . '' 
Marie opened her eyes , and fixed them on Tom , without rising . 
`` I know he 'll get drunk , '' she said . 
`` No , he 's warranted a pious and sober article . '' 
`` Well , I hope he may turn out well , '' said the lady ; `` it 's more than I expect , though . '' 
`` Dolph , '' said St. Clare , `` show Tom down stairs ; and , mind yourself , '' he added ; `` remember what I told you . '' 
Adolph tripped gracefully forward , and Tom , with lumbering tread , went after . 
`` He 's a perfect behemoth ! '' 
said Marie . 
`` Come , now , Marie , '' said St. Clare , seating himself on a stool beside her sofa , `` be gracious , and say something pretty to a fellow . '' 
`` You 've been gone a fortnight beyond the time , '' said the lady , pouting . 
`` Well , you know I wrote you the reason . '' 
`` Such a short , cold letter ! '' 
said the lady . 
`` Dear me ! 
the mail was just going , and it had to be that or nothing . '' 
`` That 's just the way , always , '' said the lady ; `` always something to make your journeys long , and letters short . '' 
`` See here , now , '' he added , drawing an elegant velvet case out of his pocket , and opening it , `` here 's a present I got for you in New York . '' 
It was a daguerreotype , clear and soft as an engraving , representing Eva and her father sitting hand in hand . 
Marie looked at it with a dissatisfied air . 
`` What made you sit in such an awkward position ? '' 
