And again she cried bitterly . 
`` This I can tell you for certain , Grushenka , '' Alyosha said , getting up . 
`` First , that he loves you , loves you more than anyone in the world , and you only , believe me . 
I know . 
I do know . 
The second thing is that I do n't want to worm his secret out of him , but if he 'll tell me of himself to-day , I shall tell him straight out that I have promised to tell you . 
Then I 'll come to you to-day and tell you . 
Only ... I fancy ... Katerina Ivanovna has nothing to do with it , and that the secret is about something else . 
That 's certain . 
It is n't likely it 's about Katerina Ivanovna , it seems to me . 
Good-bye for now . '' 
Alyosha shook hands with her . 
Grushenka was still crying . 
He saw that she put little faith in his consolation , but she was better for having had her sorrow out , for having spoken of it . 
He was sorry to leave her in such a state of mind , but he was in haste . 
He had a great many things to do still . 
The Injured Foot THE first of these things was at the house of Madame Hohlakov , and he hurried there to get it over as quickly as possible and not be too late for Mitya . 
Madame Hohlakov had been slightly ailing for the last three weeks : her foot had for some reason swollen up , and though she was not in bed , she lay all day half-reclining on the couch in her boudoir , in a fascinating but decorous deshabille . 
Alyosha had once noted with innocent amusement that , in spite of her illness , Madame Hohlakov had begun to be rather dressy - topknots , ribbons , loose wrappers had made their appearance , and he had an inkling of the reason , though he dismissed such ideas from his mind as frivolous . 
During the last two months the young official , Perhotin , had become a regular visitor at the house . 
Alyosha had not called for four days and he was in haste to go straight to Lise , as it was with her he had to speak , for Lise had sent a maid to him the previous day specially asking him to come to her `` about something very important , '' a request which , for certain reasons , had interest for Alyosha . 
But while the maid went to take his name in to Lise , Madame Hohlakov heard of his arrival from someone , and immediately sent to beg him to come to her `` just for one minute . '' 
Alyosha reflected that it was better to accede to the mamma 's request , or else she would be sending down to Lise 's room every minute that he was there . 
Madame Hohlakov was lying on a couch . 
She was particularly smartly dressed and was evidently in a state of extreme nervous excitement . 
She greeted Alyosha with cries of rapture . 
`` It 's ages , ages , perfect ages since I 've seen you ! 
It 's a whole week - only think of it ! 
Ah , but you were here only four days ago , on Wednesday . 
You have come to see Lise . 
I 'm sure you meant to slip into her room on tiptoe , without my hearing you . 
My dear , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , if you only knew how worried I am about her ! 
But of that later , though that 's the most important thing , of that later . 
Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , I trust you implicitly with my Lise . 
Since the death of Father Zossima - God rest his soul ! '' 
-LRB- she crossed herself -RRB- - `` I look upon you as a monk , though you look charming in your new suit . 
Where did you find such a tailor in these parts ? 
No , no , that 's not the chief thing - of that later . 
Forgive me for sometimes calling you Alyosha ; an old woman like me may take liberties , '' she smiled coquettishly ; `` but that will do later , too . 
The important thing is that I should n't forget what is important . 
Please remind me of it yourself . 
As soon as my tongue runs away with me , you just say ` the important thing ? ' 
Ach ! 
how do I know now what is of most importance ? 
Ever since Lise took back her promise - her childish promise , Alexey Fyodorovitch - to marry you , you 've realised , of course , that it was only the playful fancy of a sick child who had been so long confined to her chair - thank God , she can walk now ! 
... that-new doctor Katya sent for from Moscow for your unhappy brother , who will to-morrow - but why speak of to-morrow ? 
I am ready to die at the very thought of to-morrow . 
Ready to die of curiosity ... . 
That doctor was with us yesterday and saw Lise ... . 
I paid him fifty roubles for the visit . 
But that 's not the point , that 's not the point again . 
You see , I 'm mixing everything up . 
I am in such a hurry . 
Why am I in a hurry ? 
I do n't understand . 
It 's awful how I seem growing unable to understand anything . 
Everything seems mixed up in a sort of tangle . 
I am afraid you are so bored you will jump up and run away , and that will be all I shall see of you . 
Goodness ! 
Why are we sitting here and no coffee ? 
Yulia , Glafira , coffee ! '' 
Alyosha made haste to thank her , and said that he had only just had coffee . 
`` Where ? '' 
`` At Agrfena Alexandrovna 's . '' 
`` At ... at that woman 's ? 
Ah , it 's she has brought ruin on everyone . 
I know nothing about it though . 
They say she has become a saint , though it 's rather late in the day . 
She had better have done it before . 
What use is it now ? 
Hush , hush , Alexey Fyodorovitch , for I have so much to say to you that I am afraid I shall tell you nothing . 
This awful trial ... I shall certainly go , I am making arrangements . 
I shall be carried there in my chair ; besides I can sit up . 
I shall have people with me . 
And , you know , I am a witness . 
How shall I speak , how shall I speak ? 
I do n't know what I shall say . 
One has to take an oath , has n't one ? '' 
`` Yes ; but I do n't think you will be able to go . '' 
`` I can sit up . 
Ah , you put me out ! 
Ah ! 
this trial , this savage act , and then they are all going to Siberia , some are getting married , and all this so quickly , so quickly , everything 's changing , and at last - nothing . 
All grow old and have death to look forward to . 
Well , so be it ! 
I am weary . 
This Katya , cette charmante personne , has disappointed all my hopes . 
Now she is going to follow one of your brothers to Siberia , and your other brother is going to follow her , and will live in the nearest town , and they will all torment one another . 
It drives me out of my mind . 
Worst of all - the publicity . 
The story has been told a million times over in all the papers in Moscow and Petersburg . 
Ah ! 
yes , would you believe it , there 's a paragraph that I was ' a dear friend ' of your brother 's - , I ca n't repeat the horrid word . 
just fancy , just fancy ! '' 
`` Impossible ! 
Where was the paragraph ? 
What did it say ? '' 
`` I 'll show you directly . 
I got the paper and read it yesterday . 
Here , in the Petersburg paper Gossip . 
The paper began coming out this year . 
I am awfully fond of gossip , and I take it in , and now it pays me out - this is what gossip comes to ! 
Here it is , here , this passage . 
Read it . '' 
And she handed Alyosha a sheet of newspaper which had been under her pillow . 
It was not exactly that she was upset , she seemed overwhelmed and perhaps everything really was mixed up in a tangle in her head . 
The paragraph was very typical , and must have been a great shock to her , but , fortunately perhaps , she was unable to keep her mind fixed on any one subject at that moment , and so might race off in a minute to something else and quite forget the newspaper . 
Alyosha was well aware that the story of the terrible case had spread all over Russia . 
And , good heavens ! 
what wild rumours about his brother , about the Karamazovs , and about himself he had read in the course of those two months , among other equally credible items ! 
One paper had even stated that he had gone into a monastery and become a monk , in horror at his brother 's crime . 
Another contradicted this , and stated that he and his elder , Father Zossima , had broken into the monastery chest and `` made tracks from the monastery . '' 
The present paragraph in the paper Gossip was under the heading , `` The Karamazov Case at Skotoprigonyevsk . '' 
-LRB- That , alas ! 
was the name of our little town . 
I had hitherto kept it concealed . -RRB- 
It was brief , and Madame Hohlakov was not directly mentioned in it . 
No names appeared , in fact . 
It was merely stated that the criminal , whose approaching trial was making such a sensation - retired army captain , an idle swaggerer , and reactionary bully - was continually involved in amorous intrigues , and particularly popular with certain ladies `` who were pining in solitude . '' 
One such lady , a pining widow , who tried to seem young though she had a grown-up daughter , was so fascinated by him that only two hours before the crime she offered him three thousand roubles , on condition that he would elope with her to the gold mines . 
But the criminal , counting on escaping punishment , had preferred to murder his father to get the three thousand rather than go off to Siberia with the middle-aged charms of his pining lady . 
This playful paragraph finished , of course , with an outburst of generous indignation at the wickedness of parricide and at the lately abolished institution of serfdom . 
Reading it with curiosity , Alyosha folded up the paper and handed it back to Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Well , that must be me , '' she hurried on again . 
`` Of course I am meant . 
Scarcely more than an hour before , I suggested gold mines to him , and here they talk of ` middle-aged charms ' as though that were my motive ! 
He writes that out of spite ! 
God Almighty forgive him for the middle-aged charms , as I forgive him ! 
You know it 's - Do you know who it is ? 
It 's your friend Rakitin . '' 
`` Perhaps , '' said Alyosha , `` though I 've heard nothing about it . '' 
`` It 's he , it 's he ! 
No ` perhaps ' about it . 
You know I turned him out of the house ... . 
You know all that story , do n't you ? '' 
`` I know that you asked him not to visit you for the future , but why it was , I have n't heard ... from you , at least . '' 
`` Ah , then you 've heard it from him ! 
He abuses me , I suppose , abuses me dreadfully ? '' 
`` Yes , he does ; but then he abuses everyone . 
But why you 've given him up I , have n't heard from him either . 
I meet him very seldom now , indeed . 
We are not friends . '' 
`` Well , then , I 'll tell you all about it . 
There 's no help for it , I 'll confess , for there is one point in which I was perhaps to blame . 
Only a little , little point , so little that perhaps it does n't count . 
You see , my dear boy '' - Madame Hohlakov suddenly looked arch and a charming , though enigmatic , smile played about her lips - `` you see , I suspect ... You must forgive me , Alyosha . 
I am like a mother to you ... No , no ; quite the contrary . 
I speak to you now as though you were my father - mother 's quite out of place . 
Well , it 's as though I were confessing to Father Zossima , that 's just it . 
I called you a monk just now . 
Well , that poor young man , your friend , Rakitin -LRB- Mercy on us ! 
I ca n't be angry with him . 
I feel cross , but not very -RRB- , that frivolous young man , would you believe it , seems to have taken it into his head to fall in love with me . 
I only noticed it later . 
At first - a month ago - he only began to come oftener to see me , almost every day ; though , of course , we were acquainted before . 
I knew nothing about it ... and suddenly it dawned upon me , and I began to notice things with surprise . 
You know , two months ago , that modest , charming , excellent young man , Ilyitch Perhotin , who 's in the service here , began to be a regular visitor at the house . 
You met him here ever so many times yourself . 
And he is an excellent , earnest young man , is n't he ? 
He comes once every three days , not every day -LRB- though I should be glad to see him every day -RRB- , and always so well dressed . 
Altogether , I love young people , Alyosha , talented , modest , like you , and he has almost the mind of a statesman , he talks so charmingly , and I shall certainly , certainly try and get promotion for him . 
He is a future diplomat . 
On that awful day he almost saved me from death by coming in the night . 
And your friend Rakitin comes in such boots , and always stretches them out on the carpet ... . 
He began hinting at his feelings , in fact , and one day , as he was going , he squeezed my hand terribly hard . 
My foot began to swell directly after he pressed my hand like that . 
He had met Pyotr Ilyitch here before , and would you believe it , he is always gibing at him , growling at him , for some reason . 
I simply looked at the way they went on together and laughed inwardly . 
So I was sitting here alone - no , I was laid up then . 
Well , I was lying here alone and suddenly Rakitin comes in , and only fancy ! 
brought me some verses of his own composition - a short poem , on my bad foot : that is , he described my foot in a poem . 
Wait a minute - how did it go ? 
A captivating little foot . 
It began somehow like that . 
I can never remember poetry . 
I 've got it here . 
I 'll show it to you later . 
But it 's a charming thing - charming ; and , you know , it 's not only about the foot , it had a good moral , too , a charming idea , only I 've forgotten it ; in fact , it was just the thing for an album . 
So , of course , I thanked him , and he was evidently flattered . 
I 'd hardly had time to thank him when in comes Pyotr Ilyitch , and Rakitin suddenly looked as black as night . 
I could see that Pyotr Ilyitch was in the way , for Rakitin certainly wanted to say something after giving me the verses . 
I had a presentiment of it ; but Pyotr Ilyitch came in . 
I showed Pyotr Ilyitch the verses and did n't say who was the author . 
But I am convinced that he guessed , though he wo n't own it to this day , and declares he had no idea . 
But he says that on purpose . 
Pyotr Ilyitch began to laugh at once , and fell to criticising it . 
` Wretched doggerel , ' he said they were , ` some divinity student must have written them , ' and with such vehemence , such vehemence ! 
Then , instead of laughing , your friend flew into a rage . 
` Good gracious ! ' 
I thought , ` they 'll fly at each other . ' 
` It was I who wrote them , ' said he . ' 
I wrote them as a joke , ' he said , ` for I think it degrading to write verses ... . 
But they are good poetry . 
They want to put a monument to your Pushkin for writing about women 's feet , while I wrote with a moral purpose , and you , ' said he , ` are an advocate of serfdom . 
You 've no humane ideas , ' said he . 
` You have no modern enlightened feelings , you are uninfluenced by progress , you are a mere official , ' he said , ` and you take bribes . ' 
Then I began screaming and imploring them . 
And , you know , Pyotr Ilyitch is anything but a coward . 
He at once took up the most gentlemanly tone , looked at him sarcastically , listened , and apologised . 
` I 'd no idea , ' said he . ' 
I should n't have said it , if I had known . 
I should have praised it . 
Poets are all so irritable , ' he said . 
In short , he laughed at him under cover of the most gentlemanly tone . 
He explained to me afterwards that it was all sarcastic . 
I thought he was in earnest . 
Only as I lay there , just as before you now , I thought , ` Would it , or would it not , be the proper thing for me to turn Rakitin out for shouting so rudely at a visitor in my house ? ' 
And , would you believe it , I lay here , shut my eyes , and wondered , would it be the proper thing or not . 
I kept worrying and worrying , and my heart began to beat , and I could n't make up my mind whether to make an outcry or not . 
One voice seemed to be telling me , ` Speak , ' and the other ` No , do n't speak . ' 
And no sooner had the second voice said that than I cried out , and fainted . 
Of course , there was a fuss . 
I got up suddenly and said to Rakitin , ` It 's painful for me to say it , but I do n't wish to see you in my house again . ' 
So I turned him out . 
Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I know myself I did wrong . 
I was putting it on . 
I was n't angry with him at all , really ; but I suddenly fancied - that was what did it - that it would be such a fine scene ... . 
And yet , believe me , it was quite natural , for I really shed tears and cried for several days afterwards , and then suddenly , one afternoon , I forgot all about it . 
So it 's a fortnight since he 's been here , and I kept wondering whether he would come again . 
I wondered even yesterday , then suddenly last night came this Gossip . 
I read it and gasped . 
Who could have written it ? 
He must have written it . 
He went home , sat down , wrote it on the spot , sent it , and they put it in . 
It was a fortnight ago , you see . 
But , Alyosha , it 's awful how I keep talking and do n't say what I want to say . 
the words come of themselves ! '' 
`` It 's very important for me to be in time to see my brother to-day , '' Alyosha faltered . 
`` To be sure , to be sure ! 
You bring it all back to me . 
Listen , what is an aberration ? '' 
`` What aberration ? '' 
asked Alyosha , wondering . 
`` In the legal sense . 
An aberration in which everything is pardonable . 
Whatever you do , you will be acquitted at once . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
This Katya ... Ah ! 
she is a charming , charming creature , only I never can make out who it is she is in love with . 
She was with me some time ago and I could n't get anything out of her . 
Especially as she wo n't talk to me except on the surface now . 
She is always talking about my health and nothing else , and she takes up such a tone with me , too . 
I simply said to myself , ` Well so be it . 
I do n't care ' ... Oh , yes . 
I was talking of aberration . 
This doctor has come . 
You know a doctor has come ? 
Of course , you know it - the one who discovers madmen . 
You wrote for him . 
No , it was n't you , but Katya . 
It 's all Katya 's doing . 
Well , you see , a man may be sitting perfectly sane and suddenly have an aberration . 
He may be conscious and know what he is doing and yet be in a state of aberration . 
And there 's no doubt that Dmitri Fyodorovitch was suffering from aberration . 
They found out about aberration as soon as the law courts were reformed . 
It 's all the good effect of the reformed law courts . 
The doctor has been here and questioned me about that evening , about the gold mines . 
` How did he seem then ? ' 
he asked me . 
He must have been in a state of aberration . 
He came in shouting , ` Money , money , three thousand ! 
Give me three thousand ! ' 
and then went away and immediately did the murder . ' 
I do n't want to murder him , ' he said , and he suddenly went and murdered him . 
That 's why they 'll acquit him , because he struggled against it and yet he murdered him . '' 
`` But he did n't murder him , '' Alyosha interrupted rather sharply . 
He felt more and more sick with anxiety and impatience . 
`` Yes , I know it was that old man Grigory murdered him . '' 
`` Grigory ? '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Yes , yes ; it was Grigory . 
He lay as Dmitri Fyodorovitch struck him down , and then got up , saw the door open , went in and killed Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
`` But why , why ? '' 
`` Suffering from aberration . 
When he recovered from the blow Dmitri Fyodorovitch gave him on the head , he was suffering from aberration : he went and committed the murder . 
As for his saying he did n't , he very likely does n't remember . 
Only , you know , it 'll be better , ever so much better , if Dmitri Fyodorovitch murdered him . 
And that 's how it must have been , though I say it was Grigory . 
It certainly was Dmitri Fyodorovitch , and that 's better , ever so much better ! 
Oh ! 
not better that a son should have killed his father , I do n't defend that . 
Children ought to honour their parents , and yet it would be better if it were he , as you 'd have nothing to cry over then , for he did it when he was unconscious or rather when he was conscious , but did not know what he was doing . 
Let them acquit him - that 's so humane , and would show what a blessing reformed law courts are . 
I knew nothing about it , but they say they have been so a long time . 
And when I heard it yesterday , I was so struck by it that I wanted to send for you at once . 
And if he is acquitted , make him come straight from the law courts to dinner with me , and I 'll have a party of friends , and we 'll drink to the reformed law courts . 
I do n't believe he 'd be dangerous ; besides , I 'll invite a great many friends , so that he could always be led out if he did anything . 
And then he might be made a justice of the peace or something in another town , for those who have been in trouble themselves make the best judges . 
And , besides , who is n't suffering from aberration nowadays ? 
- you , I , all of us , are in a state of aberration , and there are ever so many examples of it : a man sits singing a song , suddenly something annoys him , he takes a pistol and shoots the first person he comes across , and no one blames him for it . 
I read that lately , and all the doctors confirm it . 
The doctors are always confirming ; they confirm , - anything . 
Why , my Lise is in a state of aberration . 
She made me cry again yesterday , and the day before , too , and to-day I suddenly realised that it 's all due to aberration . 
Oh , Lise grieves me so ! 
I believe she 's quite mad . 
Why did she send for you ? 
Did she send for you or did you come of yourself ? '' 
`` Yes , she sent for me , and I am just going to her . '' 
Alyosha got up resolutely . 
`` Oh , my dear , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , perhaps that 's what 's most important , '' Madame Hohlakov cried , suddenly bursting into tears . 
`` God knows I trust Lise to you with all my heart , and it 's no matter her sending for you on the sly , without telling her mother . 
But forgive me , I ca n't trust my daughter so easily to your brother Ivan Fyodorovitch , though I still consider him the most chivalrous young man . 
But only fancy , he 's been to see Lise and I knew nothing about it ! '' 
`` How ? 
What ? 
When ? '' 
Alyosha was exceedingly surprised . 
He had not sat down again and listened standing . 
`` I will tell you ; that 's perhaps why I asked you to come , for I do n't know now why I did ask you to come . 
Well , Ivan Fyodorovitch has been to see me twice , since he came back from Moscow . 
First time he came as a friend to call on me , and the second time Katya was here and he came because he heard she was here . 
I did n't , of course , expect him to come often , knowing what a lot he has to do as it is , vous comprenez , cette affaire et la mort terrible de votre papa . 
-LRB- You know , this affair and your father 's terrible death . -RRB- 
But I suddenly heard he 'd been here again , not to see me but to see Lise . 
That 's six days ago now . 
He came , stayed five minutes , and went away . 
And I did n't hear of it till three days afterwards , from Glafira , so it was a great shock to me . 
I sent for Lise directly . 
She laughed . 
` He thought you were asleep , ' she said , ` and came in to me to ask after your health . ' 
Of course , that 's how it happened . 
But Lise , Lise , mercy on us , how she distresses me ! 
Would you believe it , one night , four days ago , just after you saw her last time , and had gone away , she suddenly had a fit , screaming , shrieking , hysterics ! 
Why is it I never have hysterics ? 
Then , next day another fit , and the same thing on the third , and yesterday too , and then yesterday that aberration . 
She suddenly screamed out , ' I hate Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I insist on your never letting him come to the house again . ' 
I was struck dumb at these amazing words , and answered , ` On what grounds could I refuse to see such an excellent young man , a young man of such learning too , and so unfortunate ? ' 
- for all this business is a misfortune , is n't it ? ' 
She suddenly burst out laughing at my words , and so rudely , you know . 
Well , I was pleased ; I thought I had amused her and the fits would pass off , especially as I wanted to refuse to see Ivan Fyodorovitch anyway on account of his strange visits without my knowledge , and meant to ask him for an explanation . 
But early this morning Lise waked up and flew into a passion with Yulia and , would you believe it , slapped her in the face . 
That 's monstrous ; I am always polite to my servants . 
And an hour later she was hugging Yulia 's feet and kissing them . 
She sent a message to me that she was n't coming to me at all , and would never come and see me again , and when I dragged myself down to her , she rushed to kiss me , crying , and as she kissed me , she pushed me out of the room without saying a word , so I could n't find out what was the matter . 
Now , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , I rest all my hopes on you , and , of course , my whole life is in your hands . 
I simply beg you to go to Lise and find out everything from her , as you alone can , and come back and tell me - me , her mother , for you understand it will be the death of me , simply the death of me , if this goes on , or else I shall run away . 
I can stand no more . 
I have patience ; but I may lose patience , and then ... then something awful will happen . 
Ah , dear me ! 
At last , Pyotr Ilyitch ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , beaming all over as she saw Perhotin enter the room . 
`` You are late , you are late ! 
Well , sit down , speak , put us out of suspense . 
What does the counsel say . 
Where are you off to , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` To Lise . '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
You wo n't forget , you wo n't forget what I asked you ? 
It 's a question of life and death ! 
`` Of course , I wo n't forget , if I can ... but I am so late , '' muttered Alyosha , beating a hasty retreat . 
`` No , be sure , be sure to come in ; do n't say ` If you can . ' 
I shall die if you do n't , '' Madame Hohlakov called after him , but Alyosha had already left the room . 
A Little Demon GOING in to Lise , he found her half reclining in the invalid-chair , in which she had been wheeled when she was unable to walk . 
She did not move to meet him , but her sharp , keen eyes were simply riveted on his face . 
There was a feverish look in her eyes , her face was pale and yellow . 
Alyosha was amazed at the change that had taken place in her in three days . 
She was positively thinner . 
She did not hold out her hand to him . 
He touched the thin , long fingers which lay motionless on her dress , then he sat down facing her , without a word . 
`` I know you are in a hurry to get to the prison , '' Lise said curtly , `` and mamma 's kept you there for hours ; she 's just been telling you about me and Yulia . '' 
`` How do you know ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` I 've been listening . 
Why do you stare at me ? 
I want to listen and I do listen , there 's no harm in that . 
I do n't apologise . '' 
`` You are upset about something ? '' 
`` On the contrary , I am very happy . 
I 've only just been reflecting for the thirtieth time what a good thing it is I refused you and shall not be your wife . 
You are not fit to be a husband . 
If I were to marry you and give you a note to take to the man I loved after you , you 'd take it and be sure to give it to him and bring an answer back , too . 
If you were forty , you would still go on taking my love-letters for me . '' 
She suddenly laughed . 
`` There is something spiteful and yet open-hearted about you , '' Alyosha smiled to her . 
`` The open-heartedness consists in my not being ashamed of myself with you . 
What 's more , I do n't want to feel ashamed with you , just with you . 
Alyosha , why is it I do n't respect you ? 
I am very fond of you , but I do n't respect you . 
If I respected you , I should n't talk to you without shame , should I ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` But do you believe that I am not ashamed with you ? '' 
`` No , I do n't believe it . '' 
Lise laughed nervously again ; she spoke rapidly . 
`` I sent your brother , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , some sweets in prison . 
Alyosha , you know , you are quite pretty ! 
I shall love you awfully for having so quickly allowed me not to love you . '' 
`` Why did you send for me to-day , Lise ? '' 
`` I wanted to tell you of a longing I have . 
I should like some one to torture me , marry me and then torture me , deceive me and go away . 
I do n't want to be happy . '' 
`` You are in love with disorder ? '' 
`` Yes , I want disorder . 
I keep wanting to set fire to the house . 
I keep imagining how I 'll creep up and set fire to the house on the sly ; it must be on the sly . 
They 'll try to put it out , but it 'll go on burning . 
And I shall know and say nothing . 
Ah , what silliness ! 
And how bored I am ! '' 
She waved her hand with a look of repulsion . 
`` It 's your luxurious life , '' said Alyosha , softly '' `` Is it better , then , to be poor ? '' 
`` Yes , it is better . '' 
`` That 's what your monk taught you . 
That 's not true . 
Let me be rich and all the rest poor , I 'll eat sweets and drink cream and not give any to anyone else . 
Ach , do n't speak , do n't say anything '' ; she shook her hand at him , though Alyosha had not opened his mouth . 
`` You 've told me all that before , I know it all by heart . 
It bores me . 
If I am ever poor , I shall murder somebody , and even if I am rich , I may murder someone , perhaps - why do nothing ! 
But do you know , I should like to reap , cut the rye ? 
I 'll marry you , and you shall become a peasant , a real peasant ; we 'll keep a colt , shall we ? 
Do you know Kalganov ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` He is always wandering about , dreaming . 
He says , ` Why live in real life ? 
It 's better to dream . 
One can dream the most delightful things , but real life is a bore . ' 
But he 'll be married soon for all that ; he 's been making love to me already . 
Can you spin tops ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , he 's just like a top : he wants to be wound up and set spinning and then to be lashed , lashed , lashed with a whip . 
If I marry him , I 'll keep him spinning all his life . 
You are not ashamed to be with me ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` You are awfully cross , because I do n't talk about holy things . 
I do n't want to be holy . 
What will they do to one in the next world for the greatest sin ? 
You must know all about that . '' 
`` God will censure you . '' 
Alyosha was watching her steadily . 
`` That 's just what I should like . 
I would go up and they would censure me , and I would burst out laughing in their faces . 
I should dreadfully like to set fire to the house , Alyosha , to our house ; you still do n't believe me ? '' 
`` Why ? 
There are children of twelve years old , who have a longing to set fire to something and they do set things on fire , too . 
It 's a sort of disease . '' 
`` That 's not true , that 's not true ; there may be children , but that 's not what I mean . '' 
`` You take evil for good ; it 's a passing crisis ; it 's the result of your illness , perhaps . '' 
`` You do despise me , though ! 
It 's simply that I do n't want to do good , I want to do evil , and it has nothing to do with illness . '' 
`` Why do evil ? '' 
`` So that everything might be destroyed . 
Ah , how nice it would be if everything were destroyed ! 
You know , Alyosha , I sometimes think of doing a fearful lot of harm and everything bad , and I should do it for a long while on the sly and suddenly everyone would find it out . 
Everyone will stand round and point their fingers at me and I would look at them all . 
That would be awfully nice . 
Why would it be so nice , Alyosha ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
It 's a craving to destroy something good or , as you say , to set fire to something . 
It happens sometimes . '' 
`` I not only say it , I shall do it . '' 
`` I believe you . '' 
`` Ah , how I love you for saying you believe me . 
And you are not lying one little bit . 
But perhaps you think that I am saying all this on purpose to annoy you ? '' 
`` No , I do n't think that ... though perhaps there is a little desire to do that in it , too . '' 
`` There is a little . 
I never can tell lies to you , '' she declared , with a strange fire in her eyes . 
What struck Alyosha above everything was her earnestness . 
There was not a trace of humour or jesting in her face now , though , in old days , fun and gaiety never deserted her even at her most `` earnest '' moments . 
`` There are moments when people love crime , '' said Alyosha thoughtfully . 
`` Yes , yes ! 
You have uttered my thought ; they love crime , everyone loves crime , they love it always , not at some ` moments . ' 
You know , it 's as though people have made an agreement to lie about it and have lied about it ever since . 
They all declare that they hate evil , but secretly they all love it . '' 
`` And are you still reading nasty books ? '' 
`` Yes , I am . 
Mamma reads them and hides them under her pillow and I steal them . '' 
`` Are n't you ashamed to destroy yourself ? '' 
`` I want to destroy myself . 
There 's a boy here , who lay down between the railway lines when the train was passing . 
Lucky fellow ! 
Listen , your brother is being tried now for murdering his father and everyone loves his having killed his father . '' 
`` Loves his having killed his father ? '' 
`` Yes , loves it ; everyone loves it ! 
Everybody says it 's so awful , but secretly they simply love it . 
I for one love it . '' 
`` There is some truth in what you say about everyone , '' said Alyosha softly . 
`` Oh , what ideas you have ! '' 
Lise shrieked in delight . 
`` And you a monk , too ! 
You would n't believe how I respect you , Alyosha , for never telling lies . 
Oh , I must tell you a funny dream of mine . 
I sometimes dream of devils . 
It 's night ; I am in my room with a candle and suddenly there are devils all over the place , in all the corners , under the table , and they open the doors ; there 's a crowd of them behind the doors and they want to come and seize me . 
And they are just coming , just seizing me . 
But I suddenly cross myself and they all draw back , though they do n't go away altogether , they stand at the doors and in the corners , waiting . 
And suddenly I have a frightful longing to revile God aloud , and so I begin , and then they come crowding back to me , delighted , and seize me again and I cross myself again and they all draw back . 
It 's awful fun , it takes one 's breath away . '' 
`` I 've had the same dream , too , '' said Alyosha suddenly . 
`` Really ? '' 
cried Lise , surprised . 
`` I say , Alyosha , do n't laugh , that 's awfully important . 
Could two different people have the same dream ? '' 
`` It seems they can . '' 
`` Alyosha , I tell you , it 's awfully important , '' Lise went on , with really excessive amazement . 
`` It 's not the dream that 's important , but your having the same dream as me . 
You never lie to me , do n't lie now ; is it true ? 
You are not laughing ? '' 
`` It 's true . '' 
Lise seemed extraordinarily impressed and for half a minute she was silent . 
`` Alyosha , come and see me , come and see me more often , '' she said suddenly , in a supplicating voice . 
`` I 'll always come to see you , all my life , '' answered Alyosha firmly . 
`` You are the only person I can talk to , you know , '' Lise began again . 
`` I talk to no one but myself and you . 
Only you in the whole world . 
And to you more readily than to myself . 
And I am not a bit ashamed with you , not a bit . 
Alyosha , why am I not ashamed with you , not a bit ? 
Alyosha , is it true that at Easter the Jews steal a child and kill it ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` There 's a book here in which I read about the trial of a Jew , who took a child of four years old and cut off the fingers from both hands , and then crucified him on the wall , hammered nails into him and crucified him , and afterwards , when he was tried , he said that the child died soon , within four hours . 
That was ` soon ' ! 
He said the child moaned , kept on moaning and he stood admiring it . 
That 's nice ! '' 
`` Nice ? '' 
`` Nice ; I sometimes imagine that it was I who crucified him . 
He would hang there moaning and I would sit opposite him eating pineapple compote . 
I am awfully fond of pineapple compote . 
Do you like it ? '' 
Alyosha looked at her in silence . 
Her pale , sallow face was suddenly contorted , her eyes burned . 
`` You know , when I read about that Jew I shook with sobs all night . 
I kept fancying how the little thing cried and moaned -LRB- a child of four years old understands , you know -RRB- , and all the while the thought of pineapple compote haunted me . 
In the morning I wrote a letter to a certain person , begging him particularly to come and see me . 
He came and I suddenly told him all about the child and the pineapple compote . 
All about it , all , and said that it was nice . 
He laughed and said it really was nice . 
Then he got up and went away . 
He was only here five minutes . 
Did he despise me ? 
Did he despise me ? 
Tell me , tell me , Alyosha , did he despise me or not ? '' 
She sat up on the couch , with flashing eyes . 
`` Tell me , '' Alyosha asked anxiously , `` did you send for that person ? '' 
`` Yes , I did . '' 
`` Did you send him a letter ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Simply to ask about that , about that child ? '' 
`` No , not about that at all . 
But when he came , I asked him about that at once . 
He answered , laughed , got up and went away . '' 
`` That person behaved honourably , '' Alyosha murmured . 
`` And did he despise me ? 
Did he laugh at me ? '' 
`` No , for perhaps he believes in the pineapple compote himself . 
He is very ill now , too , Lise . '' 
`` Yes , he does believe in it , '' said Lise , with flashing eyes . 
`` He does n't despise anyone , '' Alyosha went on . 
`` Only he does not believe anyone . 
If he does n't believe in people , of course , he does despise them . '' 
`` Then he despises me , me ? '' 
`` You , too . '' 
`` Good . '' 
Lise seemed to grind her teeth . 
`` When he went out laughing , I felt that it was nice to be despised . 
The child with fingers cut off is nice , and to be despised is nice ... '' And she laughed in Alyosha 's face , a feverish malicious laugh . 
`` Do you know , Alyosha , do you know , I should like - Alyosha , save me ! '' 
She suddenly jumped from the couch , rushed to him and seized him with both hands . 
`` Save me ! '' 
she almost groaned . 
`` Is there anyone in the world I could tell what I 've told you ? 
I 've told you the truth , the truth . 
I shall kill myself , because I loathe everything ! 
I do n't want to live , because I loathe everything ! 
I loathe everything , everything . 
Alyosha , why do n't you love me in the least ? '' 
she finished in a frenzy . 
`` But I do love you ! '' 
answered Alyosha warmly . 
`` And will you weep over me , will you ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Not because I wo n't be your wife , but simply weep for me ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Thank you ! 
It 's only your tears I want . 
Everyone else may punish me and trample me under foot , everyone , everyone , not excepting anyone . 
For I do n't love anyone . 
Do you hear , not anyone ! 
On the contrary , I hate him ! 
Go , Alyosha ; it 's time you went to your brother '' ; she tore herself away from him suddenly . 
`` How can I leave you like this ? '' 
said Alyosha , almost in alarm . 
`` Go to your brother , the prison will be shut ; go , here 's your hat . 
Give my love to Mitya , go , go ! '' 
And she almost forcibly pushed Alyosha out of the door . 
He looked at her with pained surprise , when he was suddenly aware of a letter in his right hand , a tiny letter folded up tight and sealed . 
He glanced at it and instantly read the address , `` To Ivan Fyodorovitch Karamazov . '' 
He looked quickly at Lise . 
Her face had become almost menacing . 
`` Give it to him , you must give it to him ! '' 
she ordered him , trembling and beside herself . 
`` To-day , at once , or I 'll poison myself ! 
That 's why I sent for you . '' 
And she slammed the door quickly . 
The bolt clicked . 
Alyosha put the note in his pocket and went straight downstairs , without going back to Madame Hohlakov ; forgetting her , in fact . 
As soon as Alyosha had gone , Lise unbolted the door , opened it a little , put her finger in the crack and slammed the door with all her might , pinching her finger . 
Ten seconds after , releasing her finger , she walked softly , slowly to her chair , sat up straight in it and looked intently at her blackened finger and at the blood that oozed from under the nail . 
Her lips were quivering and she kept whispering rapidly to herself : `` I am a wretch , wretch , wretch , wretch ! '' 
A Hymn and a Secret IT was quite late -LRB- days are short in November -RRB- when Alyosha rang at the prison gate . 
It was beginning to get dusk . 
But Alyosha knew that he would be admitted without difficulty . 
Things were managed in our little town , as everywhere else . 
At first , of course , on the conclusion of the preliminary inquiry , relations and a few other persons could only obtain interviews with Mitya by going through certain inevitable formalities . 
But later , though the formalities were not relaxed , exceptions were made for some , at least , of Mitya 's visitors . 
So much so , that sometimes the interviews with the prisoner in the room set aside for the purpose were practically tete-a-tete . 
These exceptions , however , were few in number ; only Grushenka , Alyosha and Rakitin were treated like this . 
But the captain of the police , Mihail Mihailovitch , was very favourably disposed to Grushenka . 
His abuse of her at Mokroe weighed on the old man 's conscience , and when he learned the whole story , he completely changed his view of her . 
And strange to say , though he was firmly persuaded of his guilt , yet after Mitya was once in prison , the old man came to take a more and more lenient view of him . 
`` He was a man of good heart , perhaps , '' he thought , `` who had come to grief from drinking and dissipation . '' 
His first horror had been succeeded by pity . 
As for Alyosha , the police captain was very fond of him and had known him for a long time . 
Rakitin , who had of late taken to coming very often to see the prisoner , was one of the most intimate acquaintances of the `` police captain 's young ladies , '' as he called them , and was always hanging about their house . 
He gave lessons in the house of the prison superintendent , too , who , though scrupulous in the performance of his duties , was a kindhearted old man . 
Alyosha , again , had an intimate acquaintance of long standing with the superintendent , who was fond of talking to him , generally on sacred subjects . 
He respected Ivan Fyodorovitch , and stood in awe of his opinion , though he was a great philosopher himself ; `` self-taught , '' of course . 
But Alyosha had an irresistible attraction for him . 
During the last year the old man had taken to studying the Apocryphal Gospels , and constantly talked over his impressions with his young friend . 
He used to come and see him in the monastery and discussed for hours together with him and with the monks . 
So even if Alyosha were late at the prison , he had only to go to the superintendent and everything was made easy . 
Besides , everyone in the prison , down to the humblest warder , had grown used to Alyosha . 
The sentry , of course , did not trouble him so long as the authorities were satisfied . 
When Mitya was summoned from his cell , he always went downstairs , to the place set aside for interviews . 
As Alyosha entered the room he came upon Rakitin , who was just taking leave of Mitya . 
They were both talking loudly . 
Mitya was laughing heartily as he saw him out , while Rakitin seemed grumbling . 
Rakitin did not like meeting Alyosha , especially of late . 
He scarcely spoke to him , and bowed to him stiffly . 
Seeing Alyosha enter now , he frowned and looked away , as though he were entirely absorbed in buttoning his big , warm , fur-trimmed overcoat . 
Then he began looking at once for his umbrella . 
`` I must mind not to forget my belongings , '' he muttered , simply to say something . 
`` Mind you do n't forget other people 's belongings , '' said Mitya , as a joke , and laughed at once at his own wit . 
Rakitin fired up instantly . 
`` You 'd better give that advice to your own family , who 've always been a slave-driving lot , and not to Rakitin , '' he cried , suddenly trembling with anger . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
I was joking , '' cried Mitya . 
`` Damn it all ! 
They are all like that . '' 
He turned to Alyosha , nodding towards Rakitin 's hurriedly retreating figure . 
`` He was sitting here , laughing and cheerful , and all at once he boils up like that . 
He did n't even nod to you . 
Have you broken with him completely ? 
Why are you so late ? 
I 've not been simply waiting , but thirsting for you the whole morning . 
But never mind . 
We 'll make up for it now . '' 
`` Why does he come here so often ? 
Surely you are not such great friends ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
He , too , nodded at the door through which Rakitin had disappeared . 
`` Great friends with Rakitin ? 
No , not as much as that . 
Is it likely - a pig like that ? 
He considers I am ... a blackguard . 
They ca n't understand a joke either , that 's the worst of such people . 
They never understand a joke , and their souls are dry , dry and flat ; they remind me of prison walls when I was first brought here . 
But he is a clever fellow , very clever . 
Well , Alexey , it 's all over with me now . '' 
He sat down on the bench and made Alyosha sit down beside him . 
`` Yes , the trial 's to-morrow . 
Are you so hopeless , brother ? '' 
Alyosha said , with an apprehensive feeling . 
`` What are you talking about ? '' 
said Mitya , looking at him rather uncertainly . 
`` Oh , you mean the trial ! 
Damn it all ! 
Till now we 've been talking of things that do n't matter , about this trial , but I have n't said a word to you about the chief thing . 
Yes , the trial is to-morrow ; but it was n't the trial I meant , when I said it was all over with me . 
Why do you look at me so critically ? '' 
`` What do you mean , Mitya ? '' 
`` Ideas , ideas , that 's all ! 
Ethics ! 
What is ethics ? '' 
`` Ethics ? '' 
asked Alyosha , wondering . 
`` Yes ; is it a science ? '' 
`` Yes , there is such a science ... but ... I confess I ca n't explain to you what sort of science it is . '' 
`` Rakitin knows . 
Rakitin knows a lot , damn him ! 
He 's not going to be a monk . 
He means to go to Petersburg . 
There he 'll go in for criticism of an elevating tendency . 
Who knows , he may be of use and make his own career , too . 
Ough ! 
they are first-rate , these people , at making a career ! 
Damn ethics , I am done for , Alexey , I am , you man of God ! 
I love you more than anyone . 
It makes my heart yearn to look at you . 
Who was Karl Bernard ? '' 
`` Karl Bernard ? '' 
Alyosha was surprised again . 
`` No , not Karl . 
Stay , I made a mistake . 
Claude Bernard . 
What was he ? 
Chemist or what ? '' 
`` He must be a savant , '' answered Alyosha ; `` but I confess I ca n't tell you much about him , either . 
I 've heard of him as a savant , but what sort I do n't know . '' 
`` Well , damn him , then ! 
I do n't know either , '' swore Mitya . 
`` A scoundrel of some sort , most likely . 
They are all scoundrels . 
And Rakitin will make his way . 
Rakitin will get on anywhere ; he is another Bernard . 
Ugh , these Bernards ! 
They are all over the place . '' 
`` But what is the matter ? '' 
Alyosha asked insistently . 
`` He wants to write an article about me , about my case , and so begin his literary career . 
That 's what he comes for ; he said so himself . 
He wants to prove some theory . 
He wants to say ` he could n't help murdering his father , he was corrupted by his environment , ' and so on . 
He explained it all to me . 
He is going to put in a tinge of Socialism , he says . 
But there , damn the fellow , he can put in a tinge if he likes , I do n't care . 
He ca n't bear Ivan , he hates him . 
He 's not fond of you , either . 
But I do n't turn him out , for he is a clever fellow . 
Awfully conceited , though . 
I said to him just now , ' The Karamazovs are not blackguards , but philosophers ; for all true Russians are philosophers , and though you 've studied , you are not a philosopher - you are a low fellow . ' 
He laughed , so maliciously . 
And I said to him , ` De ideabus non est disputandum . ' 
* Is n't that rather good ? 
I can set up for being a classic , you see ! '' 
Mitya laughed suddenly . 
* There 's no disputing ideas . 
`` Why is it all over with you ? 
You said so just now , '' Alyosha interposed . 
`` Why is it all over with me ? 
H 'm ! 
... The fact of it is ... if you take it as a whole , I am sorry to lose God - that 's why it is . '' 
`` What do you mean by ` sorry to lose God ' ? '' 
`` Imagine : inside , in the nerves , in the head - that is , these nerves are there in the brain ... -LRB- damn them ! -RRB- 
there are sort of little tails , the little tails of those nerves , and as soon as they begin quivering ... that is , you see , I look at something with my eyes and then they begin quivering , those little tails ... and when they quiver , then an image appears ... it does n't appear at once , but an instant , a second , passes ... and then something like a moment appears ; that is , not a moment - devil take the moment ! 
- but an image ; that is , an object , or an action , damn it ! 
That 's why I see and then think , because of those tails , not at all because I 've got a soul , and that I am some sort of image and likeness . 
All that is nonsense ! 
Rakitin explained it all to me yesterday , brother , and it simply bowled me over . 
It 's magnificent , Alyosha , this science ! 
A new man 's arising - that I understand ... . 
And yet I am sorry to lose God ! '' 
`` Well , that 's a good thing , anyway , '' said Alyosha . 
`` That I am sorry to lose God ? 
It 's chemistry , brother , chemistry ! 
There 's no help for it , your reverence , you must make way for chemistry . 
And Rakitin does dislike God . 
Ough ! 
does n't he dislike Him ! 
That 's the sore point with all of them . 
But they conceal it . 
They tell lies . 
They pretend . 
` Will you preach this in your reviews ? ' 
I asked him . 
` Oh , well , if I did it openly , they wo n't let it through , ` he said . 
He laughed . 
` But what will become of men then ? ' 
I asked him , ` without God and immortal life ? 
All things are lawful then , they can do what they like ? ' 
` Did n't you know ? ' 
he said laughing , ' a clever man can do what he likes , ' he said . ' 
A clever man knows his way about , but you 've put your foot in it , committing a murder , and now you are rotting in prison . ' 
He says that to my face ! 
A regular pig ! 
I used to kick such people out , but now I listen to them . 
He talks a lot of sense , too . 
Writes well . 
He began reading me an article last week . 
I copied out three lines of it . 
Wait a minute . 
Here it is . '' 
Mitya hurriedly pulled out a piece of paper from his pocket and read : '' ` In order to determine this question , it is above all essential to put one 's personality in contradiction to one 's reality . ' 
Do you understand that ? '' 
`` No , I do n't , '' said Alyosha . 
He looked at Mitya and listened to him with curiosity . 
`` I do n't understand either . 
It 's dark and obscure , but intellectual . 
` Everyone writes like that now , ' he says , ` it 's the effect of their environment . ' 
They are afraid of the environment . 
He writes poetry , too , the rascal . 
He 's written in honour of Madame Hohlakov 's foot . 
Ha ha ha ! '' 
`` I 've heard about it , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Have you ? 
And have you heard the poem ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I 've got it . 
Here it is . 
I 'll read it to you . 
You do n't know - I have n't told you - there 's quite a story about it . 
He 's a rascal ! 
Three weeks ago he began to tease me . 
` You 've got yourself into a mess , like a fool , for the sake of three thousand , but I 'm going to collar a hundred and fifty thousand . 
I am going to marry a widow and buy a house in Petersburg . ' 
And he told me he was courting Madame Hohlakov . 
She had n't much brains in her youth , and now at forty she has lost what she had . 
` But she 's awfully sentimental , ' he says ; ` that 's how I shall get hold of her . 
When I marry her , I shall take her to Petersburg and there I shall start a newspaper . ' 
And his mouth was simply watering , the beast , not for the widow , but for the hundred and fifty thousand . 
And he made me believe it . 
He came to see me every day . 
` She is coming round , ' he declared . 
He was beaming with delight . 
And then , all of a sudden , he was turned out of the house . 
Perhotin 's carrying everything before him , bravo ! 
I could kiss the silly old noodle for turning him out of the house . 
And he had written this doggerel . 
` It 's the first time I 've soiled my hands with writing poetry , ' he said . 
` It 's to win her heart , so it 's in a good cause . 
When I get hold of the silly woman 's fortune , I can be of great social utility . ' 
They have this social justification for every nasty thing they do ! 
` Anyway it 's better than your Pushkin 's poetry , ' he said , ` for I 've managed to advocate enlightenment even in that . ' 
I understand what he means about Pushkin , I quite see that , if he really was a man of talent and only wrote about women 's feet . 
But was n't Rakitin stuck up about his doggerel ! 
The vanity of these fellows ! 
` On the convalescence of the swollen foot of the object of my affections ' - he thought of that for a title . 
He 's a waggish fellow . 
A captivating little foot , Though swollen and red and tender ! 
The doctors come and plasters put , But still they can not mend her . 
Yet , 't is not for her foot I dread - A theme for Pushkin 's muse more fit - It 's not her foot , it is her head : I tremble for her loss of wit ! 
For as her foot swells , strange to say , Her intellect is on the wane - Oh , for some remedy I pray That may restore both foot and brain ! 
He is a pig , a regular pig , but he 's very arch , the rascal ! 
And he really has put in a progressive idea . 
And was n't he angry when she kicked him out ! 
He was gnashing his teeth ! '' 
`` He 's taken his revenge already , '' said Alyosha . 
`` He 's written a paragraph about Madame Hohlakov . '' 
And Alyosha told him briefly about the paragraph in Gossip . 
`` That 's his doing , that 's his doing ! '' 
Mitya assented , frowning . 
`` That 's him ! 
These paragraphs ... I know ... the insulting things that have been written about Grushenka , for instance ... . 
And about Katya , too ... . 
H 'm ! 
He walked across the room with a harassed air . 
`` Brother , I can not stay long , '' Alyosha said , after a pause . 
`` To-morrow will be a great and awful day for you , the judgment of God will be accomplished ... I am amazed at you , you walk about here , talking of I do n't know what ... '' `` No , do n't be amazed at me , '' Mitya broke in warmly . 
`` Am I to talk of that stinking dog ? 
Of the murderer ? 
We 've talked enough of him . 
I do n't want to say more of the stinking son of Stinking Lizaveta ! 
God will kill him , you will see . 
Hush ! '' 
He went up to Alyosha excitedly and kissed him . 
His eyes glowed . 
`` Rakitin would n't understand it , '' he began in a sort of exaltation ; `` but you , you 'll understand it all . 
That 's why I was thirsting for you . 
You see , there 's so much I 've been wanting to tell you for ever so long , here , within these peeling walls , but I have n't said a word about what matters most ; the moment never seems to have come . 
Now I can wait no longer . 
I must pour out my heart to you . 
Brother , these last two months I 've found in myself a new man . 
A new man has risen up in me . 
He was hidden in me , but would never have come to the surface , if it had n't been for this blow from heaven . 
I am afraid ! 
And what do I care if I spend twenty years in the mines , breaking ore with a hammer ? 
I am not a bit afraid of that - it 's something else I am afraid of now : that that new man may leave me . 
Even there , in the mines , underground , I may find a human heart in another convict and murderer by my side , and I may make friends with him , for even there one may live and love and suffer . 
One may thaw and revive a frozen heart in that convict , one may wait upon him for years , and at last bring up from the dark depths a lofty soul , a feeling , suffering creature ; one may bring forth an angel , create a hero ! 
There are so many of them , hundreds of them , and we are all to blame for them . 
Why was it I dreamed of that ` babe ' at such a moment ? 
` Why is the babe so poor ? ' 
That was a sign to me at that moment . 
It 's for the babe I 'm going . 
Because we are all responsible for all . 
For all the ` babes , ' for there are big children as well as little children All are ` babes . ' 
I go for all , because someone must go for all . 
I did n't kill father , but I 've got to go . 
I accept it . 
It 's all come to me here , here , within these peeling walls . 
There are numbers of them there , hundreds of them underground , with hammers in their hands . 
Oh , yes , we shall be in chains and there will be no freedom , but then , in our great sorrow , we shall rise again to joy , without which man can not live nor God exist , for God gives joy : it 's His privilege - a grand one . 
Ah , man should be dissolved in prayer ! 
What should I be underground there without God ? 
Rakitin 's laughing ! 
If they drive God from the earth , we shall shelter Him underground . 
One can not exist in prison without God ; it 's even more impossible than out of prison . 
And then we men underground will sing from the bowels of the earth a glorious hymn to God , with Whom is joy . 
Hail to God and His joy ! 
I love Him ! '' 
Mitya was almost gasping for breath as he uttered his wild speech . 
He turned pale , his lips quivered , and tears rolled down his cheeks . 
`` Yes , life is full , there is life even underground , '' he began again . 
`` You would n't believe , Alexey , how I want to live now , what a thirst for existence and consciousness has sprung up in me within these peeling walls . 
Rakitin does n't understand that ; all he cares about is building a house and letting flats . 
But I 've been longing for you . 
And what is suffering ? 
I am not afraid of it , even if it were beyond reckoning . 
I am not afraid of it now . 
I was afraid of it before . 
Do you know , perhaps I wo n't answer at the trial at all ... . 
And I seem to have such strength in me now , that I think I could stand anything , any suffering , only to be able to say and to repeat to myself every moment , ' I exist . ' 
In thousands of agonies - I exist . 
I 'm tormented on the rack - but I exist ! 
Though I sit alone on a pillar - I exist ! 
I see the sun , and if I do n't see the sun , I know it 's there . 
And there 's a whole life in that , in knowing that the sun is there . 
Alyosha , my angel , all these philosophies are the death of me . 
Damn them ! 
Brother Ivan - '' `` What of brother Ivan ? '' 
interrupted Alyosha , but Mitya did not hear . 
`` You see , I never had any of these doubts before , but it was all hidden away in me . 
It was perhaps just because ideas I did not understand were surging up in me , that I used to drink and fight and rage . 
It was to stifle them in myself , to still them , to smother them . 
Ivan is not Rakitin , there is an idea in him . 
Ivan is a sphinx and is silent ; he is always silent . 
It 's God that 's worrying me . 
That 's the only thing that 's worrying me . 
What if He does n't exist ? 
What if Rakitin 's right - that it 's an idea made up by men ? 
Then if He does n't exist , man is the chief of the earth , of the universe . 
Magnificent ! 
Only how is he going to be good without God ? 
That 's the question . 
I always come back to that . 
For whom is man going to love then ? 
To whom will he be thankful ? 
To whom will he sing the hymn ? 
Rakitin laughs . 
Rakitin says that one can love humanity without God . 
Well , only a snivelling idiot can maintain that . 
I ca n't understand it . 
Life 's easy for Rakitin . 
` You 'd better think about the extension of civic rights , or even of keeping down the price of meat . 
You will show your love for humanity more simply and directly by that , than by philosophy . ' 
I answered him , ` Well , but you , without a God , are more likely to raise the price of meat , if it suits you , and make a rouble on every copeck . ' 
He lost his temper . 
But after all , what is goodness ? 
Answer me that , Alexey . 
Goodness is one thing with me and another with a Chinaman , so it 's a relative thing . 
Or is n't it ? 
Is it not relative ? 
A treacherous question ! 
You wo n't laugh if I tell you it 's kept me awake two nights . 
I only wonder now how people can live and think nothing about it . 
Vanity ! 
Ivan has no God . 
He has an idea . 
It 's beyond me . 
But he is silent . 
I believe he is a Freemason . 
I asked him , but he is silent . 
I wanted to drink from the springs of his soul - he was silent . 
But once he did drop a word . '' 
`` What did he say ? '' 
Alyosha took it up quickly . 
`` I said to him , ` Then everything is lawful , if it is so ? ' 
He frowned . 
` Fyodor Pavlovitch , our papa , ' he said , ` was a pig , but his ideas were right enough . ' 
That was what he dropped . 
That was all he said . 
That was going one better than Rakitin . '' 
`` Yes , '' Alyosha assented bitterly . 
`` When was he with you ? '' 
`` Of that later ; now I must speak of something else . 
I have said nothing about Ivan to you before . 
I put it off to the last . 
When my business here is over and the verdict has been given , then I 'll tell you something . 
I 'll tell you everything . 
We 've something tremendous on hand ... . 
And you shall be my judge in it . 
But do n't begin about that now ; be silent . 
You talk of to-morrow , of the trial ; but , would you believe it , I know nothing about it . '' 
`` Have you talked to the counsel ? '' 
`` What 's the use of the counsel ? 
I told him all about it . 
He 's a soft , city-bred rogue - a Bernard ! 
But he does n't believe me - not a bit of it . 
Only imagine , he believes I did it . 
I see it . 
` In that case , ' I asked him , ` why have you come to defend me ? ' 
Hang them all ! 
They 've got a doctor down , too , want to prove I 'm mad . 
I wo n't have that ! 
Katerina Ivanovna wants to do her ` duty ' to the end , whatever the strain ! '' 
Mitya smiled bitterly . 
`` The cat ! 
Hard-hearted creature ! 
She knows that I said of her at Mokroe that she was a woman of ` great wrath . ' 
They repeated it . 
Yes , the facts against me have grown numerous as the sands of the sea . 
Grigory sticks to his point . 
Grigory 's honest , but a fool . 
Many people are honest because they are fools : that 's Rakitin 's idea . 
Grigory 's my enemy . 
And there are some people who are better as foes than friends . 
I mean Katerina Ivanovna . 
I am afraid , oh , I am afraid she will tell how she bowed to the ground after that four thousand . 
She 'll pay it back to the last farthing . 
I do n't want her sacrifice ; they 'll put me to shame at the trial . 
I wonder how I can stand it . 
Go to her , Alyosha , ask her not to speak of that in the court , ca n't you ? 
But damn it all , it does n't matter ! 
I shall get through somehow . 
I do n't pity her . 
It 's her own doing . 
