`` But he said I was a stinking lackey . 
He thinks that I might be unruly . 
He is mistaken there . 
If I had a certain sum in my pocket , I would have left here long ago . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in his behaviour , in his mind , and in his poverty . 
He does n't know how to do anything , and yet he is respected by everyone . 
I may be only a soup-maker , but with luck I could open a cafe restaurant in Petrovka , in Moscow , for my cookery is something special , and there 's no one in Moscow , except the foreigners , whose cookery is anything special . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is a beggar , but if he were to challenge the son of the first count in the country , he 'd fight him . 
Though in what way is he better than I am ? 
For he is ever so much stupider than I am . 
Look at the money he has wasted without any need ! '' 
`` It must be lovely , a duel , '' Marya Kondratyevna observed suddenly . 
`` How so ? '' 
`` It must be so dreadful and so brave , especially when young officers with pistols in their hands pop at one another for the sake of some lady . 
A perfect picture ! 
Ah , if only girls were allowed to look on , I 'd give anything to see one ! '' 
`` It 's all very well when you are firing at someone , but when he is firing straight in your mug , you must feel pretty silly . 
You 'd be glad to run away , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` You do n't mean you would run away ? '' 
But Smerdyakov did not deign to reply . 
After a moment 's silence the guitar tinkled again , and he sang again in the same falsetto : Whatever you may say , I shall go far away . 
Life will be bright and gay In the city far away . 
I shall not grieve , I shall not grieve at all , I do n't intend to grieve at all . 
Then something unexpected happened . 
Alyosha suddenly sneezed . 
They were silent . 
Alyosha got up and walked towards them . 
He found Smerdyakov dressed up and wearing polished boots , his hair pomaded , and perhaps curled . 
The guitar lay on the garden-seat . 
His companion was the daughter of the house , wearing a light-blue dress with a train two yards long . 
She was young and would not have been bad-looking , but that her face was so round and terribly freckled . 
`` Will my brother Dmitri soon be back ? 
asked Alyosha with as much composure as he could . 
Smerdyakov got up slowly ; Marya Kondratyevna rose too . 
`` How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
It 's not as if I were his keeper , '' answered Smerdyakov quietly , distinctly , and superciliously . 
`` But I simply asked whether you do know ? '' 
Alyosha explained . 
`` I know nothing of his whereabouts and do n't want to . '' 
`` But my brother told me that you let him know all that goes on in the house , and promised to let him know when Agrafena Alexandrovna comes . '' 
Smerdyakov turned a deliberate , unmoved glance upon him . 
`` And how did you get in this time , since the gate was bolted an hour ago ? '' 
he asked , looking at Alyosha . 
`` I came in from the back-alley , over the fence , and went straight to the summer-house . 
I hope you 'll forgive me , he added addressing Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` I was in a hurry to find my brother . '' 
`` Ach , as though we could take it amiss in you ! '' 
drawled Marya Kondratyevna , flattered by Alyosha 's apology . 
`` For Dmitri Fyodorovitch often goes to the summer-house in that way . 
We do n't know he is here and he is sitting in the summer-house . '' 
`` I am very anxious to find him , or to learn from you where he is now . 
Believe me , it 's on business of great importance to him . '' 
`` He never tells us , '' lisped Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` Though I used to come here as a friend , '' Smerdyakov began again , `` Dmitri Fyodorovitch has pestered me in a merciless way even here by his incessant questions about the master . 
` What news ? ' 
he 'll ask . 
` What 's going on in there now ? 
Who 's coming and going ? ' 
and ca n't I tell him something more . 
Twice already he 's threatened me with death `` With death ? '' 
Alyosha exclaimed in surprise . 
`` Do you suppose he 'd think much of that , with his temper , which you had a chance of observing yourself yesterday ? 
He says if I let Agrafena Alexandrovna in and she passes the night there , I 'll be the first to suffer for it . 
I am terribly afraid of him , and if I were not even more afraid of doing so , I ought to let the police know . 
God only knows what he might not do ! '' 
`` His honour said to him the other day , ` I 'll pound you in a mortar ! ' '' 
added Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` Oh , if it 's pounding in a mortar , it may be only talk , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` If I could meet him , I might speak to him about that too . '' 
`` Well , the only thing I can tell you is this , '' said Smerdyakov , as though thinking better of it ; `` I am here as an old friend and neighbour , and it would be odd if I did n't come . 
On the other hand , Ivan Fyodorovitch sent me first thing this morning to your brother 's lodging in Lake Street , without a letter , but with a message to Dmitri Fyodorovitch to go to dine with him at the restaurant here , in the marketplace . 
I went , but did n't find Dmitri Fyodorovitch at home , though it was eight o'clock . 
` He 's been here , but he is quite gone , ' those were the very words of his landlady . 
It 's as though there was an understanding between them . 
Perhaps at this moment he is in the restaurant with Ivan Fyodorovitch , for Ivan Fyodorovitch has not been home to dinner and Fyodor Pavlovitch dined alone an hour ago , and is gone to lie down . 
But I beg you most particularly not to speak of me and of what I have told you , for he 'd kill me for nothing at all . '' 
`` Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant to-day ? '' 
repeated Alyosha quickly . 
`` That 's so . '' 
`` The Metropolis tavern in the marketplace ? '' 
`` The very same . '' 
`` That 's quite likely , '' cried Alyosha , much excited . 
`` Thank you , Smerdyakov ; that 's important . 
I 'll go there at once . '' 
`` Do n't betray me , '' Smerdyakov called after him . 
`` Oh , no , I 'll go to the tavern as though by chance . 
Do n't be anxious . '' 
`` But wait a minute , I 'll open the gate to you , '' cried Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` No ; it 's a short cut , I 'll get over the fence again . '' 
What he had heard threw Alyosha into great agitation . 
He ran to the tavern . 
It was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monastic dress , but he could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and call them down . 
But just as he reached the tavern , a window was flung open , and his brother Ivan called down to him from it . 
`` Alyosha , ca n't you come up here to me ? 
I shall be awfully grateful . '' 
`` To be sure I can , only I do n't quite know whether in this dress - '' `` But I am in a room apart . 
Come up the steps ; I 'll run down to meet you . '' 
A minute later Alyosha was sitting beside his brother . 
Ivan was alone dining . 
The Brothers Make Friends IVAN was not , however , in a separate room , but only in a place shut off by a screen , so that it was unseen by other people in the room . 
It was the first room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall . 
Waiters were continually darting to and fro in it . 
The only customer in the room was an old retired military man drinking tea in a corner . 
But there was the usual bustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern ; there were shouts for the waiters , the sound of popping corks , the click of billiard balls , the drone of the organ . 
Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit this tavern and disliked taverns in general . 
So he must have come here , he reflected , simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement . 
Yet Dmitri was not there . 
`` Shall I order you fish , soup , or anything . 
You do n't live on tea alone , I suppose , '' cried Ivan , apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha . 
He had finished dinner and was drinking tea . 
`` Let me have soup , and tea afterwards , I am hungry , '' said Alyosha gaily . 
`` And cherry jam ? 
They have it here . 
You remember how you used to love cherry jam when you were little ? '' 
`` You remember that ? 
Let me have jam too , I like it still . '' 
Ivan rang for the waiter and ordered soup , jam , and tea . 
`` I remember everything , Alyosha , I remember you till you were eleven , I was nearly fifteen . 
There 's such a difference between fifteen and eleven that brothers are never companions at those ages . 
I do n't know whether I was fond of you even . 
When I went away to Moscow for the first few years I never thought of you at all . 
Then , when you came to Moscow yourself , we only met once somewhere , I believe . 
And now I 've been here more than three months , and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other . 
To-morrow I am going away , and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see you to say good-bye and just then you passed . '' 
`` Were you very anxious to see me , then ? '' 
`` Very . 
I want to get to know you once for all , and I want you to know me . 
And then to say good-bye . 
I believe it 's always best to get to know people just before leaving them . 
I 've noticed how you 've been looking at me these three months . 
There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes , and I ca n't endure that . 
That 's how it is I 've kept away from you . 
But in the end I have learned to respect you . 
The little man stands firm , I thought . 
Though I am laughing , I am serious . 
You do stand firm , do n't you ? 
I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by , even if they are such little fellows as you . 
Your expectant eyes ceased to annoy me , I grew fond of them in the end , those expectant eyes . 
You seem to love me for some reason , Alyosha ? '' 
`` I do love you , Ivan . 
Dmitri says of you - Ivan is a tomb ! 
I say of you , Ivan is a riddle . 
You are a riddle to me even now . 
But I understand something in you , and I did not understand it till this morning . '' 
`` What 's that ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` You wo n't be angry ? '' 
Alyosha laughed too . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That you are just as young as other young men of three and twenty , that you are just a young and fresh and nice boy , green in fact ! 
Now , have I insulted you dreadfully ? '' 
`` On the contrary , I am struck by a coincidence , '' cried Ivan , warmly and good-humouredly . 
`` Would you believe it that ever since that scene with her , I have thought of nothing else but my youthful greenness , and just as though you guessed that , you begin about it . 
Do you know I 've been sitting here thinking to myself : that if I did n't believe in life , if I lost faith in the woman I love , lost faith in the order of things , were convinced , in fact , that everything is a disorderly , damnable , and perhaps devil-ridden chaos , if I were struck by every horror of man 's disillusionment - still I should want to live and , having once tasted of the cup , I would not turn away from it till I had drained it ! 
At thirty , though , I shall be sure to leave the cup , even if I 've not emptied it , and turn away - where I do n't know . 
But till I am thirty , I know that my youth will triumph over everything - every disillusionment , every disgust with life . 
I 've asked myself many times whether there is in the world any despair that would overcome this frantic and perhaps unseemly thirst for life in me , and I 've come to the conclusion that there is n't , that is till I am thirty , and then I shall lose it of myself , I fancy . 
Some drivelling consumptive moralists - and poets especially - often call that thirst for life base . 
It 's a feature of the Karamazovs , it 's true , that thirst for life regardless of everything ; you have it no doubt too , but why is it base ? 
The centripetal force on our planet is still fearfully strong , Alyosha . 
I have a longing for life , and I go on living in spite of logic . 
Though I may not believe in the order of the universe , yet I love the sticky little leaves as they open in spring . 
I love the blue sky , I love some people , whom one loves you know sometimes without knowing why . 
I love some great deeds done by men , though I 've long ceased perhaps to have faith in them , yet from old habit one 's heart prizes them . 
Here they have brought the soup for you , eat it , it will do you good . 
It 's first-rate soup , they know how to make it here . 
I want to travel in Europe , Alyosha , I shall set off from here . 
And yet I know that I am only going to a graveyard , but it 's a most precious graveyard , that 's what it is ! 
Precious are the dead that lie there , every stone over them speaks of such burning life in the past , of such passionate faith in their work , their truth , their struggle and their science , that I know I shall fall on the ground and kiss those stones and weep over them ; though I 'm convinced in my heart that it 's long been nothing but a graveyard . 
And I shall not weep from despair , but simply because I shall be happy in my tears , I shall steep my soul in emotion . 
I love the sticky leaves in spring , the blue sky - that 's all it is . 
It 's not a matter of intellect or logic , it 's loving with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
One loves the first strength of one 's youth . 
Do you understand anything of my tirade , Alyosha ? '' 
Ivan laughed suddenly . 
`` I understand too well , Ivan . 
One longs to love with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
You said that so well and I am awfully glad that you have such a longing for life , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` I think everyone should love life above everything in the world . '' 
`` Love life more than the meaning of it ? '' 
`` Certainly , love it , regardless of logic as you say , it must be regardless of logic , and it 's only then one will understand the meaning of it . 
I have thought so a long time . 
Half your work is done , Ivan , you love life , now you 've only to try to do the second half and you are saved . '' 
`` You are trying to save me , but perhaps I am not lost ! 
And what does your second half mean ? '' 
`` Why , one has to raise up your dead , who perhaps have not died after all . 
Come , let me have tea . 
I am so glad of our talk , Ivan . '' 
`` I see you are feeling inspired . 
I am awfully fond of such professions de foi * from such - novices . 
You are a steadfast person , Alexey . 
Is it true that you mean to leave the monastery ? '' 
* Professions of faith . 
`` Yes , my elder sends me out into the world . '' 
`` We shall see each other then in the world . 
We shall meet before I am thirty , when I shall begin to turn aside from the cup . 
Father does n't want to turn aside from his cup till he is seventy , he dreams of hanging on to eighty in fact , so he says . 
He means it only too seriously , though he is a buffoon . 
He stands on a firm rock , too , he stands on his sensuality though after we are thirty , indeed , there may be nothing else to stand on ... . 
But to hang on to seventy is nasty , better only to thirty ; one might retain ' a shadow of nobility ' by deceiving oneself . 
Have you seen Dmitri to-day ? '' 
`` No , but I saw Smerdyakov , '' and Alyosha rapidly , though minutely , described his meeting with Smerdyakov . 
Ivan began listening anxiously and questioned him . 
`` But he begged me not to tell Dmitri that he had told me about him , '' added Alyosha . 
Ivan frowned and pondered . 
`` Are you frowning on Smerdyakov 's account ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , on his account . 
Damn him , I certainly did want to see Dmitri , but now there 's no need , '' said Ivan reluctantly . 
`` But are you really going so soon , brother ? '' 
`` What of Dmitri and father ? 
how will it end ? '' 
asked Alyosha anxiously . 
`` You are always harping upon it ! 
What have I to do with it ? 
Am I my brother Dmitri 's keeper ? '' 
Ivan snapped irritably , but then he suddenly smiled bitterly . 
`` Cain 's answer about his murdered brother , was n't it ? 
Perhaps that 's what you 're thinking at this moment ? 
Well damn it all , I ca n't stay here to be their keeper , can I ? 
I 've finished what I had to do , and I am going . 
Do you imagine I am jealous of Dmitri , that I 've been trying to steal his beautiful Katerina Ivanovna for the last three months ? 
Nonsense , I had business of my own . 
I finished it . 
I am going . 
I finished it just now , you were witness . '' 
`` At Katerina Ivanovna 's ? '' 
`` Yes , and I 've released myself once for all . 
And after all , what have I to do with Dmitri ? 
Dmitri does n't come in . 
I had my own business to settle with Katerina Ivanovna . 
You know , on the contrary , that Dmitri behaved as though there was an understanding between us . 
I did n't ask to do it , but he solemnly handed her over to me and gave us his blessing . 
It 's all too funny . 
Ah , Alyosha , if you only knew how light my heart is now ! 
Would you believe it , I sat here eating my dinner and was nearly ordering champagne to celebrate my first hour of freedom . 
Tfoo ! 
It 's been going on nearly six months , and all at once I 've thrown it off . 
I could never have guessed even yesterday , how easy it would be to put an end to it if I wanted . '' 
`` You are speaking of your love , Ivan ? '' 
`` Of my love , if you like . 
I fell in love with the young lady , I worried myself over her and she worried me . 
I sat watching over her ... and all at once it 's collapsed ! 
I spoke this morning with inspiration , but I went away and roared with laughter . 
Would you believe it ? 
Yes , it 's the literal truth . '' 
`` You seem very merry about it now , '' observed Alyosha , looking into his face , which had suddenly grown brighter . 
`` But how could I tell that I did n't care for her a bit ! 
Ha ha ! 
It appears after all I did n't . 
And yet how she attracted me ! 
How attractive she was just now when I made my speech ! 
And do you know she attracts me awfully even now , yet how easy it is to leave her . 
Do you think I am boasting ? '' 
`` No , only perhaps it was n't love . '' 
`` Alyosha , '' laughed Ivan , `` do n't make reflections about love , it 's unseemly for you . 
How you rushed into the discussion this morning ! 
I 've forgotten to kiss you for it ... . 
But how she tormented me ! 
It certainly was sitting by a ` laceration . ' 
Ah , she knew how I loved her ! 
She loved me and not Dmitri , '' Ivan insisted gaily . 
`` Her feeling for Dmitri was simply a self-laceration . 
All I told her just now was perfectly true , but the worst of it is , it may take her fifteen or twenty years to find out that she does n't care for Dmitri , and loves me whom she torments , and perhaps she may never find it out at all , in spite of her lesson to-day . 
Well , it 's better so ; I can simply go away for good . 
By the way , how is she now ? 
What happened after I departed ? '' 
Alyosha told him she had been hysterical , and that she was now , he heard , unconscious and delirious . 
`` Is n't Madame Hohlakov laying it on ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` I must find out . 
Nobody dies of hysterics , though . 
They do n't matter . 
God gave woman hysterics as a relief . 
I wo n't go to her at all . 
Why push myself forward again ? '' 
`` But you told her that she had never cared for you . '' 
`` I did that on purpose . 
Alyosha , shall I call for some champagne ? 
Let us drink to my freedom . 
Ah , if only you knew how glad I am ! '' 
`` No , brother , we had better not drink , '' said Alyosha suddenly . 
`` Besides I feel somehow depressed . '' 
`` Yes , you 've been depressed a long time , I 've noticed it . '' 
`` Have you settled to go to-morrow morning , then ? '' 
`` Morning ? 
I did n't say I should go in the morning ... . 
But perhaps it may be the morning . 
Would you believe it , I dined here to-day only to avoid dining with the old man , I loathe him so . 
I should have left long ago , so far as he is concerned . 
But why are you so worried about my going away ? 
We 've plenty of time before I go , an eternity ! '' 
`` If you are going away to-morrow , what do you mean by an eternity ? '' 
`` But what does it matter to us ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` We 've time enough for our talk , for what brought us here . 
Why do you look so surprised ? 
Answer : why have we met here ? 
To talk of my love for Katerina Ivanovna , of the old man and Dmitri ? 
of foreign travel ? 
of the fatal position of Russia ? 
of the Emperor Napoleon ? 
Is that it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Then you know what for . 
It 's different for other people ; but we in our green youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all . 
That 's what we care about . 
Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternal questions now . 
just when the old folks are all taken up with practical questions . 
Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the last three months ? 
To ask me , ` What do you believe , or do n't you believe at all ? ' 
That 's what your eyes have been meaning for these three months , have n't they ? '' 
`` Perhaps so , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` You are not laughing at me , now , Ivan ? 
`` Me laughing ! 
I do n't want to wound my little brother who has been watching me with such expectation for three months . 
Alyosha , look straight at me ! 
Of course , I am just such a little boy as you are , only not a novice . 
And what have Russian boys been doing up till now , some of them , I mean ? 
In this stinking tavern , for instance , here , they meet and sit down in a corner . 
They 've never met in their lives before and , when they go out of the tavern , they wo n't meet again for forty years . 
And what do they talk about in that momentary halt in the tavern ? 
Of the eternal questions , of the existence of God and immortality . 
And those who do not believe in God talk of socialism or anarchism , of the transformation of all humanity on a new pattern , so that it all comes to the same , they 're the same questions turned inside out . 
And masses , masses of the most original Russian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions ! 
Is n't it so ? '' 
`` Yes , for real Russians the questions of God 's existence and of immortality , or , as you say , the same questions turned inside out , come first and foremost , of course , and so they should , '' said Alyosha , still watching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile . 
`` Well , Alyosha , it 's sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all , but anything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one can hardly imagine . 
But there 's one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfully fond of . '' 
`` How nicely you put that in ! '' 
Alyosha laughed suddenly . 
`` Well , tell me where to begin , give your orders . 
The existence of God , eh ? '' 
`` Begin where you like . 
You declared yesterday at father 's that there was no God . '' 
Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother . 
`` I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw your eyes glow . 
But now I 've no objection to discussing with you , and I say so very seriously . 
I want to be friends with you , Alyosha , for I have no friends and want to try it . 
Well , only fancy , perhaps I too accept God , '' laughed Ivan ; `` that 's a surprise for you , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes of course , if you are not joking now . '' 
`` Joking ? 
I was told at the elder 's yesterday that I was joking . 
You know , dear boy , there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declared that , if there were no God , he would have to be invented . 
S'il n'existait pas Dieu , il faudrait l'inventer . 
And man has actually invented God . 
And what 's strange , what would be marvellous , is not that God should really exist ; the marvel is that such an idea , the idea of the necessity of God , could enter the head of such a savage , vicious beast as man . 
So holy it is , so touching , so wise and so great a credit it does to man . 
As for me , I 've long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man . 
And I wo n't go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject , all derived from European hypotheses ; for what 's a hypothesis there is an axiom with the Russian boy , and not only with the boys but with their teachers too , for our Russian professors are often just the same boys themselves . 
And so I omit all the hypotheses . 
For what are we aiming at now ? 
I am trying to explain as quickly as possible my essential nature , that is what manner of man I am , what I believe in , and for what I hope , that 's it , is n't it ? 
And therefore I tell you that I accept God simply . 
But you must note this : if God exists and if He really did create the world , then , as we all know , He created it according to the geometry of Euclid and the human mind with the conception of only three dimensions in space . 
Yet there have been and still are geometricians and philosophers , and even some of the most distinguished , who doubt whether the whole universe , or to speak more widely , the whole of being , was only created in Euclid 's geometry ; they even dare to dream that two parallel lines , which according to Euclid can never meet on earth , may meet somewhere in infinity . 
I have come to the conclusion that , since I ca n't understand even that , I ca n't expect to understand about God . 
I acknowledge humbly that I have no faculty for settling such questions , I have a Euclidian earthly mind , and how could I solve problems that are not of this world ? 
And I advise you never to think about it either , my dear Alyosha , especially about God , whether He exists or not . 
All such questions are utterly inappropriate for a mind created with an idea of only three dimensions . 
And so I accept God and am glad to , and what 's more , I accept His wisdom , His purpose which are utterly beyond our ken ; I believe in the underlying order and the meaning of life ; I believe in the eternal harmony in which they say we shall one day be blended . 
I believe in the Word to Which the universe is striving , and Which Itself was ` with God , ' and Which Itself is God and so on , and so on , to infinity . 
There are all sorts of phrases for it . 
I seem to be on the right path , do n't I ' ? 
Yet would you believe it , in the final result I do n't accept this world of God 's , and , although I know it exists , I do n't accept it at all . 
It 's not that I do n't accept God , you must understand , it 's the world created by Him I do n't and can not accept . 
Let me make it plain . 
I believe like a child that suffering will be healed and made up for , that all the humiliating absurdity of human contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage , like the despicable fabrication of the impotent and infinitely small Euclidian mind of man , that in the world 's finale , at the moment of eternal harmony , something so precious will come to pass that it will suffice for all hearts , for the comforting of all resentments , for the atonement of all the crimes of humanity , of all the blood they 've shed ; that it will make it not only possible to forgive but to justify all that has happened with men - but thought all that may come to pass , I do n't accept it . 
I wo n't accept it . 
Even if parallel lines do meet and I see it myself , I shall see it and say that they 've met , but still I wo n't accept it . 
That 's what 's at the root of me , Alyosha ; that 's my creed . 
I am in earnest in what I say . 
I began our talk as stupidly as I could on purpose , but I 've led up to my confession , for that 's all you want . 
You did n't want to hear about God , but only to know what the brother you love lives by . 
And so I 've told you . '' 
Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling . 
`` And why did you begin ` as stupidly as you could ' ? '' 
asked Alyosha , looking dreamily at him . 
`` To begin with , for the sake of being Russian . 
Russian conversations on such subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly . 
And secondly , the stupider one is , the closer one is to reality . 
The stupider one is , the clearer one is . 
Stupidity is brief and artless , while intelligence wriggles and hides itself . 
Intelligence is a knave , but stupidity is honest and straight forward . 
I 've led the conversation to my despair , and the more stupidly I have presented it , the better for me . '' 
`` You will explain why you do n't accept the world ? '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` To be sure I will , it 's not a secret , that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
Dear little brother , I do n't want to corrupt you or to turn you from your stronghold , perhaps I want to be healed by you . '' 
Ivan smiled suddenly quite like a little gentle child . 
Alyosha had never seen such a smile on his face before . 
Rebellion `` I MUST make one confession '' Ivan began . 
`` I could never understand how one can love one 's neighbours . 
It 's just one 's neighbours , to my mind , that one ca n't love , though one might love those at a distance . 
I once read somewhere of John the Merciful , a saint , that when a hungry , frozen beggar came to him , he took him into his bed , held him in his arms , and began breathing into his mouth , which was putrid and loathsome from some awful disease . 
I am convinced that he did that from ` self-laceration , ' from the self-laceration of falsity , for the sake of the charity imposed by duty , as a penance laid on him . 
For anyone to love a man , he must be hidden , for as soon as he shows his face , love is gone . '' 
`` Father Zossima has talked of that more than once , '' observed Alyosha ; `` he , too , said that the face of a man often hinders many people not practised in love , from loving him . 
But yet there 's a great deal of love in mankind , and almost Christ-like love . 
I know that myself , Ivan . '' 
`` Well , I know nothing of it so far , and ca n't understand it , and the innumerable mass of mankind are with me there . 
The question is , whether that 's due to men 's bad qualities or whether it 's inherent in their nature . 
To my thinking , Christ-like love for men is a miracle impossible on earth . 
He was God . 
But we are not gods . 
Suppose I , for instance , suffer intensely . 
Another can never know how much I suffer , because he is another and not I. And what 's more , a man is rarely ready to admit another 's suffering -LRB- as though it were a distinction -RRB- . 
Why wo n't he admit it , do you think ? 
Because I smell unpleasant , because I have a stupid face , because I once trod on his foot . 
Besides , there is suffering and suffering ; degrading , humiliating suffering such as humbles me - hunger , for instance - my benefactor will perhaps allow me ; but when you come to higher suffering - for an idea , for instance - he will very rarely admit that , perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a man should have who suffers for an idea . 
And so he deprives me instantly of his favour , and not at all from badness of heart . 
Beggars , especially genteel beggars , ought never to show themselves , but to ask for charity through the newspapers . 
One can love one 's neighbours in the abstract , or even at a distance , but at close quarters it 's almost impossible . 
If it were as on the stage , in the ballet , where if beggars come in , they wear silken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully , then one might like looking at them . 
But even then we should not love them . 
But enough of that . 
I simply wanted to show you my point of view . 
I meant to speak of the suffering of mankind generally , but we had better confine ourselves to the sufferings of the children . 
That reduces the scope of my argument to a tenth of what it would be . 
Still we 'd better keep to the children , though it does weaken my case . 
But , in the first place , children can be loved even at close quarters , even when they are dirty , even when they are ugly -LRB- I fancy , though , children never are ugly -RRB- . 
The second reason why I wo n't speak of grown-up people is that , besides being disgusting and unworthy of love , they have a compensation - they 've eaten the apple and know good and evil , and they have become ` like gods . ' 
They go on eating it still . 
But the children have n't eaten anything , and are so far innocent . 
Are you fond of children , Alyosha ? 
I know you are , and you will understand why I prefer to speak of them . 
If they , too , suffer horribly on earth , they must suffer for their fathers ' sins , they must be punished for their fathers , who have eaten the apple ; but that reasoning is of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here on earth . 
The innocent must not suffer for another 's sins , and especially such innocents ! 
You may be surprised at me , Alyosha , but I am awfully fond of children , too . 
And observe , cruel people , the violent , the rapacious , the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children . 
Children while they are quite little - up to seven , for instance - are so remote from grown-up people they are different creatures , as it were , of a different species . 
I knew a criminal in prison who had , in the course of his career as a burglar , murdered whole families , including several children . 
But when he was in prison , he had a strange affection for them . 
He spent all his time at his window , watching the children playing in the prison yard . 
He trained one little boy to come up to his window and made great friends with him ... . 
You do n't know why I am telling you all this , Alyosha ? 
My head aches and I am sad . '' 
`` You speak with a strange air , '' observed Alyosha uneasily , `` as though you were not quite yourself . '' 
`` By the way , a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow , '' Ivan went on , seeming not to hear his brother 's words , `` told me about the crimes committed by Turks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a general rising of the Slavs . 
They burn villages , murder , outrage women and children , they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences , leave them so till morning , and in the morning they hang them - all sorts of things you ca n't imagine . 
People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty , but that 's a great injustice and insult to the beasts ; a beast can never be so cruel as a man , so artistically cruel . 
The tiger only tears and gnaws , that 's all he can do . 
He would never think of nailing people by the ears , even if he were able to do it . 
These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children , - too ; cutting the unborn child from the mothers womb , and tossing babies up in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets before their mothers ' eyes . 
Doing it before the mothers ' eyes was what gave zest to the amusement . 
Here is another scene that I thought very interesting . 
Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms , a circle of invading Turks around her . 
They 've planned a diversion : they pet the baby , laugh to make it laugh . 
They succeed , the baby laughs . 
At that moment a Turk points a pistol four inches from the baby 's face . 
The baby laughs with glee , holds out its little hands to the pistol , and he pulls the trigger in the baby 's face and blows out its brains . 
Artistic , was n't it ? 
By the way , Turks are particularly fond of sweet things , they say . '' 
`` Brother , what are you driving at ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` I think if the devil does n't exist , but man has created him , he has created him in his own image and likeness . '' 
`` Just as he did God , then ? '' 
observed Alyosha . '' 
` It 's wonderful how you can turn words , ' as Polonius says in Hamlet , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` You turn my words against me . 
Well , I am glad . 
Yours must be a fine God , if man created Him in his image and likeness . 
You asked just now what I was driving at . 
You see , I am fond of collecting certain facts , and , would you believe , I even copy anecdotes of a certain sort from newspapers and books , and I 've already got a fine collection . 
The Turks , of course , have gone into it , but they are foreigners . 
I have specimens from home that are even better than the Turks . 
You know we prefer beating - rods and scourges - that 's our national institution . 
Nailing ears is unthinkable for us , for we are , after all , Europeans . 
But the rod and the scourge we have always with us and they can not be taken from us . 
Abroad now they scarcely do any beating . 
Manners are more humane , or laws have been passed , so that they do n't dare to flog men now . 
But they make up for it in another way just as national as ours . 
And so national that it would be practically impossible among us , though I believe we are being inoculated with it , since the religious movement began in our aristocracy . 
I have a charming pamphlet , translated from the French , describing how , quite recently , five years ago , a murderer , Richard , was executed - a young man , I believe , of three and twenty , who repented and was converted to the Christian faith at the very scaffold . 
This Richard was an illegitimate child who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds on the Swiss mountains . 
They brought him up to work for them . 
He grew up like a little wild beast among them . 
The shepherds taught him nothing , and scarcely fed or clothed him , but sent him out at seven to herd the flock in cold and wet , and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so . 
Quite the contrary , they thought they had every right , for Richard had been given to them as a chattel , and they did not even see the necessity of feeding him . 
Richard himself describes how in those years , like the Prodigal Son in the Gospel , he longed to eat of the mash given to the pigs , which were fattened for sale . 
But they would n't even give that , and beat him when he stole from the pigs . 
And that was how he spent all his childhood and his youth , till he grew up and was strong enough to go away and be a thief . 
The savage began to earn his living as a day labourer in Geneva . 
He drank what he earned , he lived like a brute , and finished by killing and robbing an old man . 
He was caught , tried , and condemned to death . 
They are not sentimentalists there . 
And in prison he was immediately surrounded by pastors , members of Christian brotherhoods , philanthropic ladies , and the like . 
They taught him to read and write in prison , and expounded the Gospel to him . 
They exhorted him , worked upon him , drummed at him incessantly , till at last he solemnly confessed his crime . 
He was converted . 
He wrote to the court himself that he was a monster , but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace . 
All Geneva was in excitement about him - all philanthropic and religious Geneva . 
All the aristocratic and well-bred society of the town rushed to the prison , kissed Richard and embraced him ; ` You are our brother , you have found grace . ' 
And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion , ` Yes , I 've found grace ! 
All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs ' food , but now even I have found grace . 
I am dying in the Lord . ' 
` Yes , Richard , die in the Lord ; you have shed blood and must die . 
Though it 's not your fault that you knew not the Lord , when you coveted the pigs ' food and were beaten for stealing it -LRB- which was very wrong of you , for stealing is forbidden -RRB- ; but you 've shed blood and you must die . 
` And on the last day , Richard , perfectly limp , did nothing but cry and repeat every minute : ` This is my happiest day . 
I am going to the Lord . ' 
` Yes , ' cry the pastors and the judges and philanthropic ladies . 
` This is the happiest day of your life , for you are going to the Lord ! ' 
They all walk or drive to the scaffold in procession behind the prison van . 
At the scaffold they call to Richard : ` Die , brother , die in the Lord , for even thou hast found grace ! ' 
And so , covered with his brothers ' kisses , Richard is dragged on to the scaffold , and led to the guillotine . 
And they chopped off his head in brotherly fashion , because he had found grace . 
Yes , that 's characteristic . 
That pamphlet is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropists of aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations , and has been distributed gratis for the enlightenment of the people . 
The case of Richard is interesting because it 's national . 
Though to us it 's absurd to cut off a man 's head , because he has become our brother and has found grace , yet we have our own speciality , which is all but worse . 
Our historical pastime is the direct satisfaction of inflicting pain . 
There are lines in Nekrassov describing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes , ` on its meek eyes , ' everyone must have seen it . 
It 's peculiarly Russian . 
He describes how a feeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a load and can not move . 
The peasant beats it , beats it savagely , beats it at last not knowing what he is doing in the intoxication of cruelty , thrashes it mercilessly over and over again . 
` However weak you are , you must pull , if you die for it . ' 
The nag strains , and then he begins lashing the poor defenceless creature on its weeping , on its ` meek eyes . ' 
The frantic beast tugs and draws the load , trembling all over , gasping for breath , moving sideways , with a sort of unnatural spasmodic action - it 's awful in Nekrassov . 
But that only a horse , and God has horses to be beaten . 
So the Tatars have taught us , and they left us the knout as a remembrance of it . 
But men , too , can be beaten . 
A well-educated , cultured gentleman and his wife beat their own child with a birch-rod , a girl of seven . 
I have an exact account of it . 
The papa was glad that the birch was covered with twigs . 
` It stings more , ' said he , and so be began stinging his daughter . 
I know for a fact there are people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality , to literal sensuality , which increases progressively at every blow they inflict . 
They beat for a minute , for five minutes , for ten minutes , more often and more savagely . 
The child screams . 
At last the child can not scream , it gasps , ` Daddy daddy ! ' 
By some diabolical unseemly chance the case was brought into court . 
A counsel is engaged . 
The Russian people have long called a barrister ' a conscience for hire . ' 
The counsel protests in his client 's defence . 
` It 's such a simple thing , ' he says , ` an everyday domestic event . 
A father corrects his child . 
To our shame be it said , it is brought into court . ' 
The jury , convinced by him , give a favourable verdict . 
The public roars with delight that the torturer is acquitted . 
Ah , pity I was n't there ! 
I would have proposed to raise a subscription in his honour ! 
Charming pictures . 
`` But I 've still better things about children . 
I 've collected a great , great deal about Russian children , Alyosha . 
There was a little girl of five who was hated by her father and mother , ` most worthy and respectable people , of good education and breeding . ' 
You see , I must repeat again , it is a peculiar characteristic of many people , this love of torturing children , and children only . 
To all other types of humanity these torturers behave mildly and benevolently , like cultivated and humane Europeans ; but they are very fond of tormenting children , even fond of children themselves in that sense . 
it 's just their defencelessness that tempts the tormentor , just the angelic confidence of the child who has no refuge and no appeal , that sets his vile blood on fire . 
In every man , of course , a demon lies hidden - the demon of rage , the demon of lustful heat at the screams of the tortured victim , the demon of lawlessness let off the chain , the demon of diseases that follow on vice , gout , kidney disease , and so on . 
`` This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by those cultivated parents . 
They beat her , thrashed her , kicked her for no reason till her body was one bruise . 
Then , they went to greater refinements of cruelty - shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a privy , and because she did n't ask to be taken up at night -LRB- as though a child of five sleeping its angelic , sound sleep could be trained to wake and ask -RRB- , they smeared her face and filled her mouth with excrement , and it was her mother , her mother did this . 
And that mother could sleep , hearing the poor child 's groans ! 
Can you understand why a little creature , who ca n't even understand what 's done to her , should beat her little aching heart with her tiny fist in the dark and the cold , and weep her meek unresentful tears to dear , kind God to protect her ? 
Do you understand that , friend and brother , you pious and humble novice ? 
Do you understand why this infamy must be and is permitted ? 
Without it , I am told , man could not have existed on earth , for he could not have known good and evil . 
Why should he know that diabolical good and evil when it costs so much ? 
Why , the whole world of knowledge is not worth that child 's prayer to dear , kind God ' ! 
I say nothing of the sufferings of grown-up people , they have eaten the apple , damn them , and the devil take them all ! 
But these little ones ! 
I am making you suffer , Alyosha , you are not yourself . 
I 'll leave off if you like . '' 
`` Nevermind . 
I want to suffer too , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` One picture , only one more , because it 's so curious , so characteristic , and I have only just read it in some collection of Russian antiquities . 
I 've forgotten the name . 
I must look it up . 
It was in the darkest days of serfdom at the beginning of the century , and long live the Liberator of the People ! 
There was in those days a general of aristocratic connections , the owner of great estates , one of those men - somewhat exceptional , I believe , even then - who , retiring from the service into a life of leisure , are convinced that they 've earned absolute power over the lives of their subjects . 
There were such men then . 
So our general , settled on his property of two thousand souls , lives in pomp , and domineers over his poor neighbours as though they were dependents and buffoons . 
He has kennels of hundreds of hounds and nearly a hundred dog-boys - all mounted , and in uniform . 
One day a serf-boy , a little child of eight , threw a stone in play and hurt the paw of the general 's favourite hound . 
` Why is my favourite dog lame ? ' 
He is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog 's paw . 
` So you did it . ' 
The general looked the child up and down . 
` Take him . ' 
He was taken - taken from his mother and kept shut up all night . 
Early that morning the general comes out on horseback , with the hounds , his dependents , dog-boys , and huntsmen , all mounted around him in full hunting parade . 
The servants are summoned for their edification , and in front of them all stands the mother of the child . 
The child is brought from the lock-up . 
It 's a gloomy , cold , foggy , autumn day , a capital day for hunting . 
The general orders the child to be undressed ; the child is stripped naked . 
He shivers , numb with terror , not daring to cry ... ` Make him run , ' commands the general . 
` Run ! 
run ! ' 
shout the dog-boys . 
The boy runs ... ` At him ! ' 
yells the general , and he sets the whole pack of hounds on the child . 
The hounds catch him , and tear him to pieces before his mother 's eyes ! 
... I believe the general was afterwards declared incapable of administering his estates . 
Well - what did he deserve ? 
To be shot ? 
To be shot for the satisfaction of our moral feelings ? 
Speak , Alyosha ! 
`` To be shot , '' murmured Alyosha , lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale , twisted smile . 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried Ivan delighted . 
`` If even you say so ... You 're a pretty monk ! 
So there is a little devil sitting in your heart , Alyosha Karamazov ! '' 
`` What I said was absurd , but - '' `` That 's just the point , that ` but ' ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` Let me tell you , novice , that the absurd is only too necessary on earth . 
The world stands on absurdities , and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it without them . 
We know what we know ! '' 
`` What do you know ? '' 
`` I understand nothing , '' Ivan went on , as though in delirium . 
`` I do n't want to understand anything now . 
I want to stick to the fact . 
I made up my mind long ago not to understand . 
If I try to understand anything , I shall be false to the fact , and I have determined to stick to the fact . '' 
`` Why are you trying me ? '' 
Alyosha cried , with sudden distress . 
`` Will you say what you mean at last ? '' 
`` Of course , I will ; that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
You are dear to me , I do n't want to let you go , and I wo n't give you up to your Zossima . '' 
Ivan for a minute was silent , his face became all at once very sad . 
`` Listen ! 
I took the case of children only to make my case clearer . 
Of the other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust to its centre , I will say nothing . 
I have narrowed my subject on purpose . 
I am a bug , and I recognise in all humility that I can not understand why the world is arranged as it is . 
Men are themselves to blame , I suppose ; they were given paradise , they wanted freedom , and stole fire from heaven , though they knew they would become unhappy , so there is no need to pity them . 
With my pitiful , earthly , Euclidian understanding , all I know is that there is suffering and that there are none guilty ; that cause follows effect , simply and directly ; that everything flows and finds its level - but that 's only Euclidian nonsense , I know that , and I ca n't consent to live by it ! 
What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause follows effect simply and directly , and that I know it ? 
- I must have justice , or I will destroy myself . 
And not justice in some remote infinite time and space , but here on earth , and that I could see myself . 
I have believed in it . 
I want to see it , and if I am dead by then , let me rise again , for if it all happens without me , it will be too unfair . 
Surely I have n't suffered simply that I , my crimes and my sufferings , may manure the soil of the future harmony for somebody else . 
I want to see with my own eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace his murderer . 
I want to be there when everyone suddenly understands what it has all been for . 
All the religions of the world are built on this longing , and I am a believer . 
But then there are the children , and what am I to do about them ? 
That 's a question I ca n't answer . 
For the hundredth time I repeat , there are numbers of questions , but I 've only taken the children , because in their case what I mean is so unanswerably clear . 
Listen ! 
If all must suffer to pay for the eternal harmony , what have children to do with it , tell me , please ? 
It 's beyond all comprehension why they should suffer , and why they should pay for the harmony . 
Why should they , too , furnish material to enrich the soil for the harmony of the future ? 
I understand solidarity in sin among men . 
I understand solidarity in retribution , too ; but there can be no such solidarity with children . 
And if it is really true that they must share responsibility for all their fathers ' crimes , such a truth is not of this world and is beyond my comprehension . 
Some jester will say , perhaps , that the child would have grown up and have sinned , but you see he did n't grow up , he was torn to pieces by the dogs , at eight years old . 
Oh , Alyosha , I am not blaspheming ! 
I understand , of course , what an upheaval of the universe it will be when everything in heaven and earth blends in one hymn of praise and everything that lives and has lived cries aloud : ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed . ' 
When the mother embraces the fiend who threw her child to the dogs , and all three cry aloud with tears , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
then , of course , the crown of knowledge will be reached and all will be made clear . 
But what pulls me up here is that I ca n't accept that harmony . 
And while I am on earth , I make haste to take my own measures . 
You see , Alyosha , perhaps it really may happen that if I live to that moment , or rise again to see it , I , too , perhaps , may cry aloud with the rest , looking at the mother embracing the child 's torturer , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
but I do n't want to cry aloud then . 
While there is still time , I hasten to protect myself , and so I renounce the higher harmony altogether . 
It 's not worth the tears of that one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stinking outhouse , with its unexpiated tears to ` dear , kind God ' ! 
It 's not worth it , because those tears are unatoned for . 
They must be atoned for , or there can be no harmony . 
But how ? 
How are you going to atone for them ? 
Is it possible ? 
By their being avenged ? 
But what do I care for avenging them ? 
What do I care for a hell for oppressors ? 
What good can hell do , since those children have already been tortured ? 
And what becomes of harmony , if there is hell ? 
I want to forgive . 
I want to embrace . 
I do n't want more suffering . 
And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth , then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price . 
I do n't want the mother to embrace the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs ! 
She dare not forgive him ! 
Let her forgive him for herself , if she will , let her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother 's heart . 
But the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to forgive ; she dare not forgive the torturer , even if the child were to forgive him ! 
And if that is so , if they dare not forgive , what becomes of harmony ? 
Is there in the whole world a being who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
I do n't want harmony . 
From love for humanity I do n't want it . 
I would rather be left with the unavenged suffering . 
I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation , even if I were wrong . 
Besides , too high a price is asked for harmony ; it 's beyond our means to pay so much to enter on it . 
And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket , and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as possible . 
And that I am doing . 
It 's not God that I do n't accept , Alyosha , only I most respectfully return him the ticket . '' 
`` That 's rebellion , '' murmered Alyosha , looking down . 
`` Rebellion ? 
I am sorry you call it that , '' said Ivan earnestly . 
`` One can hardly live in rebellion , and I want to live . 
Tell me yourself , I challenge your answer . 
Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human destiny with the object of making men happy in the end , giving them peace and rest at last , but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to death only one tiny creature - that baby beating its breast with its fist , for instance - and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears , would you consent to be the architect on those conditions ? 
Tell me , and tell the truth . '' 
`` No , I would n't consent , '' said Alyosha softly . 
`` And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it would agree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated blood of a little victim ? 
And accepting it would remain happy for ever ? '' 
`` No , I ca n't admit it . 
Brother , '' said Alyosha suddenly , with flashing eyes , `` you said just now , is there a being in the whole world who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
But there is a Being and He can forgive everything , all and for all , because He gave His innocent blood for all and everything . 
You have forgotten Him , and on Him is built the edifice , and it is to Him they cry aloud , ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed ! ' 
`` Ah ! 
the One without sin and His blood ! 
No , I have not forgotten Him ; on the contrary I 've been wondering all the time how it was you did not bring Him in before , for usually all arguments on your side put Him in the foreground . 
Do you know , Alyosha - do n't laugh I made a poem about a year ago . 
If you can waste another ten minutes on me , I 'll tell it to you . '' 
`` You wrote a poem ? '' 
`` Oh , no , I did n't write it , '' laughed Ivan , and I 've never written two lines of poetry in my life . 
But I made up this poem in prose and I remembered it . 
I was carried away when I made it up . 
You will be my first reader - that is listener . 
Why should an author forego even one listener ? '' 
smiled Ivan . 
`` Shall I tell it to you ? '' 
`` I am all attention . '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` My poem is called The Grand Inquisitor ; it 's a ridiculous thing , but I want to tell it to you . 
The Grand Inquisitor `` EVEN this must have a preface - that is , a literary preface , '' laughed Ivan , `` and I am a poor hand at making one . 
You see , my action takes place in the sixteenth century , and at that time , as you probably learnt at school , it was customary in poetry to bring down heavenly powers on earth . 
Not to speak of Dante , in France , clerks , as well as the monks in the monasteries , used to give regular performances in which the Madonna , the saints , the angels , Christ , and God Himself were brought on the stage . 
In those days it was done in all simplicity . 
In Victor Hugo 's Notre Dame de Paris an edifying and gratuitous spectacle was provided for the people in the Hotel de Ville of Paris in the reign of Louis XI in honour of the birth of the dauphin . 
It was called Le bon jugement de la tres sainte et gracieuse Vierge Marie , and she appears herself on the stage and pronounces her bon jugement . 
Similar plays , chiefly from the Old Testament , were occasionally performed in Moscow too , up to the times of Peter the Great . 
But besides plays there were all sorts of legends and ballads scattered about the world , in which the saints and angels and all the powers of Heaven took part when required . 
In our monasteries the monks busied themselves in translating , copying , and even composing such poems - and even under the Tatars . 
There is , for instance , one such poem -LRB- of course , from the Greek -RRB- , The Wanderings of Our Lady through Hell , with descriptions as bold as Dante 's . 
Our Lady visits hell , and the Archangel Michael leads her through the torments . 
She sees the sinners and their punishment . 
There she sees among others one noteworthy set of sinners in a burning lake ; some of them sink to the bottom of the lake so that they ca n't swim out , and ` these God forgets ' - an expression of extraordinary depth and force . 
And so Our Lady , shocked and weeping , falls before the throne of God and begs for mercy for all in hell - for all she has seen there , indiscriminately . 
Her conversation with God is immensely interesting . 
She beseeches Him , she will not desist , and when God points to the hands and feet of her Son , nailed to the Cross , and asks , ` How can I forgive His tormentors ? ' 
she bids all the saints , all the martyrs , all the angels and archangels to fall down with her and pray for mercy on all without distinction . 
It ends by her winning from God a respite of suffering every year from Good Friday till Trinity Day , and the sinners at once raise a cry of thankfulness from hell , chanting , ` Thou art just , O Lord , in this judgment . ' 
Well , my poem would have been of that kind if it had appeared at that time . 
He comes on the scene in my poem , but He says nothing , only appears and passes on . 
Fifteen centuries have passed since He promised to come in His glory , fifteen centuries since His prophet wrote , ` Behold , I come quickly ' ; ` Of that day and that hour knoweth no man , neither the Son , but the Father , ' as He Himself predicted on earth . 
But humanity awaits him with the same faith and with the same love . 
Oh , with greater faith , for it is fifteen centuries since man has ceased to see signs from heaven . 
No signs from heaven come to-day To add to what the heart doth say . 
There was nothing left but faith in what the heart doth say . 
It is true there were many miracles in those days . 
There were saints who performed miraculous cures ; some holy people , according to their biographies , were visited by the Queen of Heaven herself . 
But the devil did not slumber , and doubts were already arising among men of the truth of these miracles . 
And just then there appeared in the north of Germany a terrible new heresy . ' 
A huge star like to a torch ' -LRB- that is , to a church -RRB- ` fell on the sources of the waters and they became bitter . ' 
These heretics began blasphemously denying miracles . 
But those who remained faithful were all the more ardent in their faith . 
The tears of humanity rose up to Him as before , awaited His coming , loved Him , hoped for Him , yearned to suffer and die for Him as before . 
And so many ages mankind had prayed with faith and fervour , ' O Lord our God , hasten Thy coming ' ; so many ages called upon Him , that in His infinite mercy He deigned to come down to His servants . 
Before that day He had come down , He had visited some holy men , martyrs , and hermits , as is written in their lives . 
Among us , Tyutchev , with absolute faith in the truth of his words , bore witness that Bearing the Cross , in slavish dress , Weary and worn , the Heavenly King Our mother , Russia , came to bless , And through our land went wandering . 
And that certainly was so , I assure you . 
`` And behold , He deigned to appear for a moment to the people , to the tortured , suffering people , sunk in iniquity , but loving Him like children . 
My story is laid in Spain , in Seville , in the most terrible time of the Inquisition , when fires were lighted every day to the glory of God , and ` in the splendid auto da fe the wicked heretics were burnt . ' 
Oh , of course , this was not the coming in which He will appear , according to His promise , at the end of time in all His heavenly glory , and which will be sudden ` as lightning flashing from east to west . ' 
No , He visited His children only for a moment , and there where the flames were crackling round the heretics . 
In His infinite mercy He came once more among men in that human shape in which He walked among men for thirty-three years fifteen centuries ago . 
He came down to the ` hot pavements ' of the southern town in which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had , ad majorem gloriam Dei , been burnt by the cardinal , the Grand Inquisitor , in a magnificent auto da fe , in the presence of the king , the court , the knights , the cardinals , the most charming ladies of the court , and the whole population of Seville . 
`` He came softly , unobserved , and yet , strange to say , everyone recognised Him . 
That might be one of the best passages in the poem . 
I mean , why they recognised Him . 
The people are irresistibly drawn to Him , they surround Him , they flock about Him , follow Him . 
He moves silently in their midst with a gentle smile of infinite compassion . 
The sun of love burns in His heart , and power shine from His eyes , and their radiance , shed on the people , stirs their hearts with responsive love . 
He holds out His hands to them , blesses them , and a healing virtue comes from contact with Him , even with His garments . 
An old man in the crowd , blind from childhood , cries out , ' O Lord , heal me and I shall see Thee ! ' 
and , as it were , scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him . 
The crowd weeps and kisses the earth under His feet . 
Children throw flowers before Him , sing , and cry hosannah . 
` It is He - it is He ! ' 
repeat . 
` It must be He , it can be no one but Him ! ' 
He stops at the steps of the Seville cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little open white coffin . 
In it lies a child of seven , the only daughter of a prominent citizen . 
The dead child lies hidden in flowers . 
` He will raise your child , ' the crowd shouts to the weeping mother . 
The priest , coming to meet the coffin , looks perplexed , and frowns , but the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet with a wail . 
` If it is Thou , raise my child ! ' 
she cries , holding out her hands to Him . 
The procession halts , the coffin is laid on the steps at His feet . 
He looks with compassion , and His lips once more softly pronounce , ` Maiden , arise ! ' 
and the maiden arises . 
The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round , smiling with wide-open wondering eyes , holding a bunch of white roses they had put in her hand . 
`` There are cries , sobs , confusion among the people , and at that moment the cardinal himself , the Grand Inquisitor , passes by the cathedral . 
He is an old man , almost ninety , tall and erect , with a withered face and sunken eyes , in which there is still a gleam of light . 
He is not dressed in his gorgeous cardinal 's robes , as he was the day before , when he was burning the enemies of the Roman Church - at this moment he is wearing his coarse , old , monk 's cassock . 
At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants and slaves and the ` holy guard . ' 
He stops at the sight of the crowd and watches it from a distance . 
He sees everything ; he sees them set the coffin down at His feet , sees the child rise up , and his face darkens . 
He knits his thick grey brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire . 
He holds out his finger and bids the guards take Him . 
And such is his power , so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him , that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards , and in the midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead him away . 
The crowd instantly bows down to the earth , like one man , before the old Inquisitor . 
He blesses the people in silence and passes on ' The guards lead their prisoner to the close , gloomy vaulted prison - in the ancient palace of the Holy , inquisition and shut him in it . 
The day passes and is followed by the dark , burning , ` breathless ' night of Seville . 
The air is ` fragrant with laurel and lemon . ' 
In the pitch darkness the iron door of the prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes in with a light in his hand . 
He is alone ; the door is closed at once behind him . 
He stands in the doorway and for a minute or two gazes into His face . 
At last he goes up slowly , sets the light on the table and speaks . '' 
` Is it Thou ? 
Thou ? ' 
but receiving no answer , he adds at once . 
` Do n't answer , be silent . 
What canst Thou say , indeed ? 
I know too well what Thou wouldst say . 
And Thou hast no right to add anything to what Thou hadst said of old . 
Why , then , art Thou come to hinder us ? 
For Thou hast come to hinder us , and Thou knowest that . 
But dost thou know what will be to-morrow ? 
I know not who Thou art and care not to know whether it is Thou or only a semblance of Him , but to-morrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Thee at the stake as the worst of heretics . 
And the very people who have to-day kissed Thy feet , to-morrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heap up the embers of Thy fire . 
Knowest Thou that ? 
Yes , maybe Thou knowest it , ' he added with thoughtful penetration , never for a moment taking his eyes off the Prisoner . '' 
`` I do n't quite understand , Ivan . 
What does it mean ? '' 
Alyosha , who had been listening in silence , said with a smile . 
`` Is it simply a wild fantasy , or a mistake on the part of the old man - some impossible quid pro quo ? '' 
`` Take it as the last , '' said Ivan , laughing , `` if you are so corrupted by modern realism and ca n't stand anything fantastic . 
If you like it to be a case of mistaken identity , let it be so . 
It is true , '' he went on , laughing , `` the old man was ninety , and he might well be crazy over his set idea . 
He might have been struck by the appearance of the Prisoner . 
It might , in fact , be simply his ravings , the delusion of an old man of ninety , over-excited by the auto da fe of a hundred heretics the day before . 
But does it matter to us after all whether it was a mistake of identity or a wild fantasy ? 
All that matters is that the old man should speak out , that he should speak openly of what he has thought in silence for ninety years . '' 
`` And the Prisoner too is silent ? 
Does He look at him and not say a word ? '' 
`` That 's inevitable in any case , '' Ivan laughed again . 
`` The old man has told Him He has n't the right to add anything to what He has said of old . 
One may say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism , in my opinion at least . 
` All has been given by Thee to the Pope , ' they say , ` and all , therefore , is still in the Pope 's hands , and there is no need for Thee to come now at all . 
Thou must not meddle for the time , at least . ' 
That 's how they speak and write too - the Jesuits , at any rate . 
I have read it myself in the works of their theologians . 
` Hast Thou the right to reveal to us one of the mysteries of that world from which Thou hast come ? ' 
my old man asks Him , and answers the question for Him . 
` No , Thou hast not ; that Thou mayest not add to what has been said of old , and mayest not take from men the freedom which Thou didst exalt when Thou wast on earth . 
Whatsoever Thou revealest anew will encroach on men 's freedom of faith ; for it will be manifest as a miracle , and the freedom of their faith was dearer to Thee than anything in those days fifteen hundred years ago . 
Didst Thou not often say then , `` I will make you free '' ? 
But now Thou hast seen these `` free '' men , ' the old man adds suddenly , with a pensive smile . 
` Yes , we 've paid dearly for it , ' he goes on , looking sternly at Him , ` but at last we have completed that work in Thy name . 
For fifteen centuries we have been wrestling with Thy freedom , but now it is ended and over for good . 
Dost Thou not believe that it 's over for good ? 
Thou lookest meekly at me and deignest not even to be wroth with me . 
But let me tell Thee that now , to-day , people are more persuaded than ever that they have perfect freedom , yet they have brought their freedom to us and laid it humbly at our feet . 
But that has been our doing . 
Was this what Thou didst ? 
Was this Thy freedom ? ' '' 
`` I do n't understand again . '' 
Alyosha broke in . 
`` Is he ironical , is he jesting ? '' 
`` Not a bit of it ! 
He claims it as a merit for himself and his Church that at last they have vanquished freedom and have done so to make men happy . 
` For now ' -LRB- he is speaking of the Inquisition , of course -RRB- ` for the first time it has become possible to think of the happiness of men . 
Man was created a rebel ; and how can rebels be happy ? 
Thou wast warned , ' he says to Him . 
` Thou hast had no lack of admonitions and warnings , but Thou didst not listen to those warnings ; Thou didst reject the only way by which men might be made happy . 
But , fortunately , departing Thou didst hand on the work to us . 
Thou hast promised , Thou hast established by Thy word , Thou hast given to us the right to bind and to unbind , and now , of course , Thou canst not think of taking it away . 
Why , then , hast Thou come to hinder us ? ' '' 
`` And what 's the meaning of ` no lack of admonitions and warnings ' ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Why , that 's the chief part of what the old man must say . '' 
` The wise and dread spirit , the spirit of self-destruction and non-existence , ' the old man goes on , great spirit talked with Thee in the wilderness , and we are told in the books that he `` tempted '' Thee . 
Is that so ? 
And could anything truer be said than what he revealed to Thee in three questions and what Thou didst reject , and what in the books is called `` the temptation '' ? 
And yet if there has ever been on earth a real stupendous miracle , it took place on that day , on the day of the three temptations . 
The statement of those three questions was itself the miracle . 
If it were possible to imagine simply for the sake of argument that those three questions of the dread spirit had perished utterly from the books , and that we had to restore them and to invent them anew , and to do so had gathered together all the wise men of the earth - rulers , chief priests , learned men , philosophers , poets - and had set them the task to invent three questions , such as would not only fit the occasion , but express in three words , three human phrases , the whole future history of the world and of humanity - dost Thou believe that all the wisdom of the earth united could have invented anything in depth and force equal to the three questions which were actually put to Thee then by the wise and mighty spirit in the wilderness ? 
From those questions alone , from the miracle of their statement , we can see that we have here to do not with the fleeting human intelligence , but with the absolute and eternal . 
For in those three questions the whole subsequent history of mankind is , as it were , brought together into one whole , and foretold , and in them are united all the unsolved historical contradictions of human nature . 
At the time it could not be so clear , since the future was unknown ; but now that fifteen hundred years have passed , we see that everything in those three questions was so justly divined and foretold , and has been so truly fulfilled , that nothing can be added to them or taken from them . 
`` Judge Thyself who was right - Thou or he who questioned Thee then ? 
Remember the first question ; its meaning , in other words , was this : `` Thou wouldst go into the world , and art going with empty hands , with some promise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their natural unruliness can not even understand , which they fear and dread - for nothing has ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society than freedom . 
But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barren wilderness ? 
Turn them into bread , and mankind will run after Thee like a flock of sheep , grateful and obedient , though for ever trembling , lest Thou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread . '' 
But Thou wouldst not deprive man of freedom and didst reject the offer , thinking , what is that freedom worth if obedience is bought with bread ? 
Thou didst reply that man lives not by bread alone . 
But dost Thou know that for the sake of that earthly bread the spirit of the earth will rise up against Thee and will strive with Thee and overcome Thee , and all will follow him , crying , `` Who can compare with this beast ? 
He has given us fire from heaven ! '' 
Dost Thou know that the ages will pass , and humanity will proclaim by the lips of their sages that there is no crime , and therefore no sin ; there is only hunger ? 
`` Feed men , and then ask of them virtue ! '' 
that 's what they 'll write on the banner , which they will raise against Thee , and with which they will destroy Thy temple . 
Where Thy temple stood will rise a new building ; the terrible tower of Babel will be built again , and though , like the one of old , it will not be finished , yet Thou mightest have prevented that new tower and have cut short the sufferings of men for a thousand years ; for they will come back to us after a thousand years of agony with their tower . 
They will seek us again , hidden underground in the catacombs , for we shall be again persecuted and tortured . 
They will find us and cry to us , `` Feed us , for those who have promised us fire from heaven have n't given it ! '' 
And then we shall finish building their tower , for he finishes the building who feeds them . 
And we alone shall feed them in Thy name , declaring falsely that it is in Thy name . 
Oh , never , never can they feed themselves without us ! 
No science will give them bread so long as they remain free . 
In the end they will lay their freedom at our feet , and say to us , `` Make us your slaves , but feed us . '' 
They will understand themselves , at last , that freedom and bread enough for all are inconceivable together , for never , never will they be able to share between them ! 
They will be convinced , too , that they can never be free , for they are weak , vicious , worthless , and rebellious . 
Thou didst promise them the bread of Heaven , but , I repeat again , can it compare with earthly bread in the eyes of the weak , ever sinful and ignoble race of man ? 
And if for the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands shall follow Thee , what is to become of the millions and tens of thousands of millions of creatures who will not have the strength to forego the earthly bread for the sake of the heavenly ? 
Or dost Thou care only for the tens of thousands of the great and strong , while the millions , numerous as the sands of the sea , who are weak but love Thee , must exist only for the sake of the great and strong ? 
No , we care for the weak too . 
They are sinful and rebellious , but in the end they too will become obedient . 
They will marvel at us and look on us as gods , because we are ready to endure the freedom which they have found so dreadful and to rule over them - so awful it will seem to them to be free . 
But we shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them in Thy name . 
We shall deceive them again , for we will not let Thee come to us again . 
That deception will be our suffering , for we shall be forced to lie . '' 
` This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness , and this is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which Thou hast exalted above everything . 
Yet in this question lies hid the great secret of this world . 
Choosing `` bread , '' Thou wouldst have satisfied the universal and everlasting craving of humanity - to find someone to worship . 
So long as man remains free he strives for nothing so incessantly and so painfully as to find someone to worship . 
But man seeks to worship what is established beyond dispute , so that all men would agree at once to worship it . 
For these pitiful creatures are concerned not only to find what one or the other can worship , but to find community of worship is the chief misery of every man individually and of all humanity from the beginning of time . 
For the sake of common worship they 've slain each other with the sword . 
They have set up gods and challenged one another , `` Put away your gods and come and worship ours , or we will kill you and your gods ! '' 
And so it will be to the end of the world , even when gods disappear from the earth ; they will fall down before idols just the same . 
Thou didst know , Thou couldst not but have known , this fundamental secret of human nature , but Thou didst reject the one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow down to Thee alone - the banner of earthly bread ; and Thou hast rejected it for the sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven . 
Behold what Thou didst further . 
And all again in the name of freedom ! 
I tell Thee that man is tormented by no greater anxiety than to find someone quickly to whom he can hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill-fated creature is born . 
But only one who can appease their conscience can take over their freedom . 
In bread there was offered Thee an invincible banner ; give bread , and man will worship thee , for nothing is more certain than bread . 
But if someone else gains possession of his conscience - Oh ! 
then he will cast away Thy bread and follow after him who has ensnared his conscience . 
In that Thou wast right . 
For the secret of man 's being is not only to live but to have something to live for . 
Without a stable conception of the object of life , man would not consent to go on living , and would rather destroy himself than remain on earth , though he had bread in abundance . 
That is true . 
But what happened ? 
Instead of taking men 's freedom from them , Thou didst make it greater than ever ! 
Didst Thou forget that man prefers peace , and even death , to freedom of choice in the knowledge of good and evil ? 
Nothing is more seductive for man than his freedom of conscience , but nothing is a greater cause of suffering . 
And behold , instead of giving a firm foundation for setting the conscience of man at rest for ever , Thou didst choose all that is exceptional , vague and enigmatic ; Thou didst choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men , acting as though Thou didst not love them at all - Thou who didst come to give Thy life for them ! 
Instead of taking possession of men 's freedom , Thou didst increase it , and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind with its sufferings for ever . 
Thou didst desire man 's free love , that he should follow Thee freely , enticed and taken captive by Thee . 
In place of the rigid ancient law , man must hereafter with free heart decide for himself what is good and what is evil , having only Thy image before him as his guide . 
But didst Thou not know that he would at last reject even Thy image and Thy truth , if he is weighed down with the fearful burden of free choice ? 
They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in Thee , for they could not have been left in greater confusion and suffering than Thou hast caused , laying upon them so many cares and unanswerable problems . '' 
` So that , in truth , Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for the destruction of Thy kingdom , and no one is more to blame for it . 
Yet what was offered Thee ? 
There are three powers , three powers alone , able to conquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these impotent rebels for their happiness those forces are miracle , mystery and authority . 
Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doing so . 
When the wise and dread spirit set Thee on the pinnacle of the temple and said to Thee , `` If Thou wouldst know whether Thou art the Son of God then cast Thyself down , for it is written : the angels shall hold him up lest he fall and bruise himself , and Thou shalt know then whether Thou art the Son of God and shalt prove then how great is Thy faith in Thy Father . '' 
But Thou didst refuse and wouldst not cast Thyself down . 
Oh , of course , Thou didst proudly and well , like God ; but the weak , unruly race of men , are they gods ? 
Oh , Thou didst know then that in taking one step , in making one movement to cast Thyself down , Thou wouldst be tempting God and have lost all Thy faith in Him , and wouldst have been dashed to pieces against that earth which Thou didst come to save . 
And the wise spirit that tempted Thee would have rejoiced . 
But I ask again , are there many like Thee ? 
And couldst Thou believe for one moment that men , too , could face such a temptation ? 
Is the nature of men such , that they can reject miracle , and at the great moments of their life , the moments of their deepest , most agonising spiritual difficulties , cling only to the free verdict of the heart ? 
Oh , Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books , would be handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth , and Thou didst hope that man , following Thee , would cling to God and not ask for a miracle . 
But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he rejects God too ; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous . 
And as man can not bear to be without the miraculous , he will create new miracles of his own for himself , and will worship deeds of sorcery and witchcraft , though he might be a hundred times over a rebel , heretic and infidel . 
Thou didst not come down from the Cross when they shouted to Thee , mocking and reviling Thee , `` Come down from the cross and we will believe that Thou art He . '' 
Thou didst not come down , for again Thou wouldst not enslave man by a miracle , and didst crave faith given freely , not based on miracle . 
Thou didst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave before the might that has overawed him for ever . 
But Thou didst think too highly of men therein , for they are slaves , of course , though rebellious by nature . 
Look round and judge ; fifteen centuries have passed , look upon them . 
Whom hast Thou raised up to Thyself ? 
I swear , man is weaker and baser by nature than Thou hast believed him ! 
Can he , can he do what Thou didst ? 
By showing him so much respect , Thou didst , as it were , cease to feel for him , for Thou didst ask far too much from him - Thou who hast loved him more than Thyself ! 
Respecting him less , Thou wouldst have asked less of him . 
That would have been more like love , for his burden would have been lighter . 
He is weak and vile . 
What though he is everywhere now rebelling against our power , and proud of his rebellion ? 
It is the pride of a child and a schoolboy . 
They are little children rioting and barring out the teacher at school . 
But their childish delight will end ; it will cost them dear . 
Mankind as a whole has always striven to organise a universal state . 
There have been many great nations with great histories , but the more highly they were developed the more unhappy they were , for they felt more acutely than other people the craving for world-wide union . 
The great conquerors , Timours and Ghenghis-Khans , whirled like hurricanes over the face of the earth striving to subdue its people , and they too were but the unconscious expression of the same craving for universal unity . 
Hadst Thou taken the world and Caesar 's purple , Thou wouldst have founded the universal state and have given universal peace . 
For who can rule men if not he who holds their conscience and their bread in his hands ? 
We have taken the sword of Caesar , and in taking it , of course , have rejected Thee and followed him . 
Oh , ages are yet to come of the confusion of free thought , of their science and cannibalism . 
For having begun to build their tower of Babel without us , they will end , of course , with cannibalism . 
But then the beast will crawl to us and lick our feet and spatter them with tears of blood . 
And we shall sit upon the beast and raise the cup , and on it will be written , `` Mystery . '' 
But then , and only then , the reign of peace and happiness will come for men . 
Thou art proud of Thine elect , but Thou hast only the elect , while we give rest to all . 
And besides , how many of those elect , those mighty ones who could become elect , have grown weary waiting for Thee , and have transferred and will transfer the powers of their spirit and the warmth of their heart to the other camp , and end by raising their free banner against Thee . 
Thou didst Thyself lift up that banner . 
But with us all will be happy and will no more rebel nor destroy one another as under Thy freedom . 
Oh , we shall persuade them that they will only become free when they renounce their freedom to us and submit to us . 
And shall we be right or shall we be lying ? 
They will be convinced that we are right , for they will remember the horrors of slavery and confusion to which Thy freedom brought them . 
Freedom , free thought , and science will lead them into such straits and will bring them face to face with such marvels and insoluble mysteries , that some of them , the fierce and rebellious , will destroy themselves , others , rebellious but weak , will destroy one another , while the rest , weak and unhappy , will crawl fawning to our feet and whine to us : `` Yes , you were right , you alone possess His mystery , and we come back to you , save us from ourselves ! '' '' 
` Receiving bread from us , they will see clearly that we take the bread made by their hands from them , to give it to them , without any miracle . 
They will see that we do not change the stones to bread , but in truth they will be more thankful for taking it from our hands than for the bread itself ! 
For they will remember only too well that in old days , without our help , even the bread they made turned to stones in their hands , while since they have come back to us , the very stones have turned to bread in their hands . 
Too , too well will they know the value of complete submission ! 
And until men know that , they will be unhappy . 
Who is most to blame for their not knowing it ? 
- speak ! 
Who scattered the flock and sent it astray on unknown paths ? 
But the flock will come together again and will submit once more , and then it will be once for all . 
Then we shall give them the quiet humble happiness of weak creatures such as they are by nature . 
Oh , we shall persuade them at last not to be proud , for Thou didst lift them up and thereby taught them to be proud . 
We shall show them that they are weak , that they are only pitiful children , but that childlike happiness is the sweetest of all . 
They will become timid and will look to us and huddle close to us in fear , as chicks to the hen . 
They will marvel at us and will be awe-stricken before us , and will be proud at our being so powerful and clever that we have been able to subdue such a turbulent flock of thousands of millions . 
They will tremble impotently before our wrath , their minds will grow fearful , they will be quick to shed tears like women and children , but they will be just as ready at a sign from us to pass to laughter and rejoicing , to happy mirth and childish song . 
Yes , we shall set them to work , but in their leisure hours we shall make their life like a child 's game , with children 's songs and innocent dance . 
Oh , we shall allow them even sin , they are weak and helpless , and they will love us like children because we allow them to sin . 
We shall tell them that every sin will be expiated , if it is done with our permission , that we allow them to sin because we love them , and the punishment for these sins we take upon ourselves . 
And we shall take it upon ourselves , and they will adore us as their saviours who have taken on themselves their sins before God . 
