Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join their hands , and he felt fearfully ashamed again . 
`` Though I acted quite sincerely , I must be more sensible in the future , '' he concluded suddenly , and did not even smile at his conclusion . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's commission took him to Lake Street , and his brother Dmitri lived close by , in a turning out of Lake Street . 
Alyosha decided to go to him in any case before going to the captain , though he had a presentiment that he would not find his brother . 
He suspected that he would intentionally keep out of his way now , but he must find him anyhow . 
Time was passing : the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha for one minute from the time he set off from the monastery . 
There was one point which interested him particularly about Katerina Ivanovna 's commission ; when she had mentioned the captain 's son , the little schoolboy who had run beside his father crying , the idea had at once struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten his finger when he , Alyosha , asked him what he had done to hurt him . 
Now Alyosha felt practically certain of this , though he could not have said why . 
Thinking of another subject was a relief , and he resolved to think no more about the `` mischief '' he had done , and not to torture himself with remorse , but to do what he had to do , let come what would . 
At that thought he was completely comforted . 
Turning to the street where Dmitri lodged , he felt hungry , and taking out of his pocket the roll he had brought from his father 's , he ate it . 
It made him feel stronger . 
Dmitri was not at home . 
The people of the house , an old cabinet-maker , his son , and his old wife , looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha . 
`` He has n't slept here for the last three nights . 
Maybe he has gone away , '' the old man said in answer to Alyosha 's persistent inquiries . 
Alyosha saw that he was answering in accordance with instructions . 
When he asked whether he were not at Grushenka 's or in hiding at Foma 's -LRB- Alyosha spoke so freely on purpose -RRB- , all three looked at him in alarm . 
`` They are fond of him , they are doing their best for him , '' thought Alyosha . 
`` That 's good . '' 
At last he found the house in Lake Street . 
It was a decrepit little house , sunk on one side , with three windows looking into the street , and with a muddy yard , in the middle of which stood a solitary cow . 
He crossed the yard and found the door opening into the passage . 
On the left of the passage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter . 
Both seemed to be deaf . 
In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain , one of them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers , and pointed to a door across the passage . 
The captain 's lodging turned out to be a simple cottage room . 
Alyosha had his hand on the iron latch to open the door , when he was struck by the strange hush within . 
Yet he knew from Katerina Ivanovna 's words that the man had a family . 
`` Either they are all asleep or perhaps they have heard me coming and are waiting for me to open the door . 
I 'd better knock first , '' and he knocked . 
An answer came , but not at once , after an interval of perhaps ten seconds . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
shouted someone in a loud and very angry voice . 
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold . 
He found himself in a regular peasant 's room . 
Though it was large , it was cumbered up with domestic belongings of all sorts , and there were several people in it . 
On the left was a large Russian stove . 
From the stove to the window on the left was a string running across the room , and on it there were rags hanging . 
There was a bedstead against the wall on each side , right and left , covered with knitted quilts . 
On the one on the left was a pyramid of four print-covered pillows , each smaller than the one beneath . 
On the other there was only one very small pillow . 
The opposite corner was screened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string . 
Behind this curtain could be seen a bed made up on a bench and a chair . 
The rough square table of plain wood had been moved into the middle window . 
The three windows , which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes , gave little light , and were close shut , so that the room was not very light and rather stuffy . 
On the table was a frying pan with the remains of some fried eggs , a half-eaten piece of bread , and a small bottle with a few drops of vodka . 
A woman of genteel appearance , wearing a cotton gown , was sitting on a chair by the bed on the left . 
Her face was thin and yellow , and her sunken cheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill . 
But what struck Alyosha most was the expression in the poor woman 's eyes - a look of surprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride . 
And while he was talking to her husband , her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other with the same haughty and questioning expression . 
Beside her at the window stood a young girl , rather plain , with scanty reddish hair , poorly but very neatly dressed . 
She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in . 
Beside the other bed was sitting another female figure . 
She was a very sad sight , a young girl of about twenty , but hunchback and crippled `` with withered legs , '' as Alyosha was told afterwards . 
Her crutches stood in the corner close by . 
The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poor girl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha . 
A man of forty-five was sitting at the table , finishing the fried eggs . 
He was spare , small , and weakly built . 
He had reddish hair and a scanty light-coloured beard , very much like a wisp of tow -LRB- this comparison and the phrase `` a wisp of tow '' flashed at once into Alyosha 's mind for some reason , he remembered it afterwards -RRB- . 
It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him , as there was no other man in the room . 
But when Alyosha went in , he leapt up from the bench on which he was sitting , and , hastily wiping his mouth with a ragged napkin , darted up to Alyosha . 
`` It 's a monk come to beg for the monastery . 
A nice place to come to ! '' 
the girl standing in the left corner said aloud . 
The man spun round instantly towards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice : `` No , Varvara , you are wrong . 
Allow me to ask , '' he turned again to Alyosha , `` what has brought you to our retreat ? '' 
Alyosha looked attentively at him . 
It was the first time he had seen him . 
There was something angular , flurried and irritable about him . 
Though he had obviously just been drinking , he was not drunk . 
There was extraordinary impudence in his expression , and yet , strange to say , at the same time there was fear . 
He looked like a man who had long been kept in subjection and had submitted to it , and now had suddenly turned and was trying to assert himself . 
Or , better still , like a man who wants dreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him . 
In his words and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazy humour , at times spiteful and at times cringing , and continually shifting from one tone to another . 
The question about `` our retreat '' he had asked , as it were , quivering all over , rolling his eyes , and skipping up so close to Alyosha that he instinctively drew back a step . 
He was dressed in a very shabby dark cotton coat , patched and spotted . 
He wore checked trousers of an extremely light colour , long out of fashion , and of very thin material . 
They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grown out of them like a boy . 
`` I am Alexey Karamazov , '' Alyosha began in reply . 
`` I quite understand that , sir , '' the gentleman snapped out at once to assure him that he knew who he was already . 
`` I am Captain Snegiryov , sir , but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you - '' `` Oh , I 've come for nothing special . 
I wanted to have a word with you - if only you allow me . '' 
`` In that case , here is a chair , sir ; kindly be seated . 
That 's what they used to say in the old comedies , ` kindly be seated , ' '' and with a rapid gesture he seized an empty chair -LRB- it was a rough wooden chair , not upholstered -RRB- and set it for him almost in the middle of the room ; then , taking another similar chair for himself , he sat down facing Alyosha , so close to him that their knees almost touched . 
`` Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov , sir , formerly a captain in the Russian infantry , put to shame for his vices , but still a captain . 
Though I might not be one now for the way I talk ; for the last half of my life I 've learnt to say ` sir . ' 
It 's a word you use when you 've come down in the world . '' 
`` That 's very true , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But is it used involuntarily or on purpose ? '' 
`` As God 's above , it 's involuntary , and I use n't to use it ! 
I did n't use the word ` sir ' all my life , but as soon as I sank into low water I began to say ` sir . ' 
It 's the work of a higher power . 
I see you are interested in contemporary questions , but how can I have excited your curiosity , living as I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality ? '' 
`` I 've come - about that business . '' 
`` About what business ? '' 
the captain interrupted impatiently . 
`` About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Alyosha blurted out awkwardly . 
`` What meeting , sir ? 
You do n't mean that meeting ? 
About my ` wisp of tow , ' then ? '' 
He moved closer so that his knees positively knocked against Alyosha . 
His lips were strangely compressed like a thread . 
`` What wisp of tow ? '' 
muttered Alyosha . 
`` He is come to complain of me , father ! '' 
cried a voice familiar to Alyosha - the voice of the schoolboy - from behind the curtain . 
`` I bit his finger just now . '' 
The curtain was pulled , and Alyosha saw his assailant lying on a little bed made up on the bench and the chair in the corner under the ikons . 
The boy lay covered by his coat and an old wadded quilt . 
He was evidently unwell , and , judging by his glittering eyes , he was in a fever . 
He looked at Alyosha without fear , as though he felt he was at home and could not be touched . 
`` What ! 
Did he bite your finger ? '' 
The captain jumped up from his chair . 
`` Was it your finger he bit ? '' 
`` Yes . 
He was throwing stones with other schoolboys . 
There were six of them against him alone . 
I went up to him , and he threw a stone at me and then another at my head . 
I asked him what I had done to him . 
And then he rushed at me and bit my finger badly , I do n't know why . '' 
`` I 'll thrash him , sir , at once - this minute ! '' 
The captain jumped up from his seat . 
`` But I am not complaining at all , I am simply telling you ... . 
I do n't want him to be thrashed . 
Besides , he seems to be ill . '' 
`` And do you suppose I 'd thrash him ? 
That I 'd take my Ilusha and thrash him before you for your satisfaction ? 
Would you like it done at once , sir ? '' 
said the captain , suddenly turning to Alyosha , as though he were going to attack him . 
`` I am sorry about your finger , sir ; but instead of thrashing Ilusha , would you like me to chop off my four fingers with this knife here before your eyes to satisfy your just wrath ? 
I should think four fingers would be enough to satisfy your thirst for vengeance . 
You wo n't ask for the fifth one too ? '' 
He stopped short with a catch in his throat . 
Every feature in his face was twitching and working ; he looked extremely defiant . 
He was in a sort of frenzy . 
`` I think I understand it all now , '' said Alyosha gently and sorrowfully , still keeping his seat . 
`` So your boy is a good boy , he loves his father , and he attacked me as the brother of your assailant ... . 
Now I understand it , '' he repeated thoughtfully . 
`` But my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch regrets his action , I know that , and if only it is possible for him to come to you , or better still , to meet you in that same place , he will ask your forgiveness before everyone - if you wish it . '' 
`` After pulling out my beard , you mean , he will ask my forgiveness ? 
And he thinks that will be a satisfactory finish , does n't he ? '' 
`` Oh , no ! 
On the contrary , he will do anything you like and in any way you like . '' 
`` So if I were to ask his highness to go down on his knees before me in that very tavern - ` The Metropolis ' it 's called - or in the marketplace , he would do it ? '' 
`` Yes , he would even go down on his knees . '' 
`` You 've pierced me to the heart , sir . 
Touched me to tears and pierced me to the heart ! 
I am only too sensible of your brother 's generosity . 
Allow me to introduce my family , my two daughters and my son - my litter . 
If I die , who will care for them , and while I live who but they will care for a wretch like me ? 
That 's a great thing the Lord has ordained for every man of my sort , sir . 
For there must be someone able to love even a man like me . '' 
`` Ah , that 's perfectly true ! '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
`` Oh , do leave off playing the fool ! 
Some idiot comes in , and you put us to shame ! '' 
cried the girl by the window , suddenly turning to her father with a disdainful and contemptuous air . 
`` Wait a little , Varvara ! '' 
cried her father , speaking peremptorily but looking at them quite approvingly . 
`` That 's her character , '' he said , addressing Alyosha again . 
`` And in all nature there was naught That could find favour in his eyes - or rather in the feminine - that could find favour in her eyes - . 
But now let me present you to my wife , Arina Petrovna . 
She is crippled , she is forty-three ; she can move , but very little . 
She is of humble origin . 
Arina Petrovna , compose your countenance . 
This is Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
Get up , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
He took him by the hand and with unexpected force pulled him up . 
`` You must stand up to be introduced to a lady . 
It 's not the Karamazov , mamma , who ... h 'm ... etcetera , but his brother , radiant with modest virtues . 
Come , Arina Petrovna , come , mamma , first your hand to be kissed . '' 
And he kissed his wife 's hand respectfully and even tenderly . 
The girl at the window turned her back indignantly on the scene ; an expression of extraordinary cordiality came over the haughtily inquiring face of the woman . 
`` Good morning ! 
Sit down , Mr. Tchernomazov , '' she said . 
`` Karamazov , mamma , Karamazov . 
We are of humble origin , '' he whispered again . 
`` Well , Karamazov , or whatever it is , but I always think of Tchermomazov ... . 
Sit down . 
Why has he pulled you up ? 
He calls me crippled , but I am not , only my legs are swollen like barrels , and I am shrivelled up myself . 
Once I used to be so fat , but now it 's as though I had swallowed a needle . '' 
`` We are of humble origin , '' the captain muttered again . 
`` Oh , father , father ! '' 
the hunchback girl , who had till then been silent on her chair , said suddenly , and she hid her eyes in her handkerchief . 
`` Buffoon ! '' 
blurted out the girl at the window . 
`` Have you heard our news ? '' 
said the mother , pointing at her daughters . 
`` It 's like clouds coming over ; the clouds pass and we have music again . 
When we were with the army , we used to have many such guests . 
I do n't mean to make any comparisons ; everyone to their taste . 
The deacon 's wife used to come then and say , ` Alexandr Alexandrovitch is a man of the noblest heart , but Nastasya Petrovna , ' she would say , ` is of the brood of hell . ' 
` Well , ' I said , ` that 's a matter of taste ; but you are a little spitfire . ' 
` And you want keeping in your place ; ' says she . 
` You black sword , ' said I , ` who asked you to teach me ? ' 
` But my breath , ' says she , ` is clean , and yours is unclean . ' 
` You ask all the officers whether my breath is unclean . ' 
And ever since then I had it in my mind . 
Not long ago I was sitting here as I am now , when I saw that very general come in who came here for Easter , and I asked him : ` Your Excellency , ' said I , ` can a lady 's breath be unpleasant ? ' 
` Yes , ' he answered ; ` you ought to open a window-pane or open the door , for the air is not fresh here . ' 
And they all go on like that ! 
And what is my breath to them ? 
The dead smell worse still ! . ' 
I wo n't spoil the air , ' said I , ` I 'll order some slippers and go away . ' 
My darlings , do n't blame your own mother ! 
Nikolay Ilyitch , how is it I ca n't please you ? 
There 's only Ilusha who comes home from school and loves me . 
Yesterday he brought me an apple . 
Forgive your own mother - forgive a poor lonely creature ! 
Why has my breath become unpleasant to you ? '' 
And the poor mad woman broke into sobs , and tears streamed down her cheeks . 
The captain rushed up to her . 
`` Mamma , mamma , my dear , give over ! 
You are not lonely . 
Everyone loves you , everyone adores you . '' 
He began kissing both her hands again and tenderly stroking her face ; taking the dinner-napkin , he began wiping away her tears . 
Alyosha fancied that he too had tears in his eyes . 
`` There , you see , you hear ? '' 
he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha , pointing to the poor imbecile . 
`` I see and hear , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Father , father , how can you - with him ! 
Let him alone ! '' 
cried the boy , sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes . 
`` Do give over fooling , showing off your silly antics which never lead to anything ! 
shouted Varvara , stamping her foot with passion . 
`` Your anger is quite just this time , Varvara , and I 'll make haste to satisfy you . 
Come , put on your cap , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and I 'll put on mine . 
We will go out . 
I have a word to say to you in earnest , but not within these walls . 
This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina ; I forgot to introduce her to you . 
She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has flown down to us mortals , ... if you can understand . '' 
`` There he is shaking all over , as though he is in convulsions ! '' 
Varvara went on indignantly . 
`` And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now , she is a heavenly angel incarnate too , and she has good reason to call me so . 
Come along , Alexey Fyodorovitch , we must make an end . '' 
And , snatching Alyosha 's hand , he drew him out of the room into the street . 
And in the Open Air `` THE air is fresh , but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of the word . 
Let us walk slowly , sir . 
I should be glad of your kind interest . '' 
`` I too have something important to say to you , '' observed Alyosha , `` only I do n't know how to begin . '' 
`` To be sure you must have business with me . 
You would never have looked in upon me without some object . 
Unless you come simply to complain of the boy , and that 's hardly likely . 
And , by the way , about the boy : I could not explain to you in there , but here I will describe that scene to you . 
My tow was thicker a week ago - I mean my beard . 
That 's the nickname they give to my beard , the schoolboys most of all . 
Well , your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard , I 'd done nothing , he was in a towering rage and happened to come upon me . 
He dragged me out of the tavern into the market place ; at that moment the boys were coming out of school , and with them Ilusha . 
As soon as he saw me in such a state he rushed up to me . 
` Father , ' he cried , ` father ! ' 
He caught hold of me , hugged me , tried to pull me away , crying to my assailant , ` Let go , let go , it 's my father , forgive him ! ' 
- yes , he actually cried ` forgive him . ' 
He clutched at that hand , that very hand , in his little hands and kissed it ... . 
I remember his little face at that moment , I have n't forgotten it and I never shall ! '' 
`` I swear , '' cried Alyosha , `` that my brother will express his most deep and sincere regret , even if he has to go down on his knees in that same market-place ... . 
I 'll make him or he is no brother of mine ! 
`` Aha , then it 's only a suggestion ! 
And it does not come from him but simply from the generosity of your own warm heart . 
You should have said so . 
No , in that case allow me to tell you of your brother 's highly chivalrous soldierly generosity , for he did give expression to it at the time . 
He left off dragging me by my beard and released me : ` You are an officer , ' he said , ` and I am an officer , if you can find a decent man to be your second send me your challenge . 
I will give satisfaction , though you are a scoundrel . ' 
That 's what he said . 
A chivalrous spirit indeed ! 
I retired with Ilusha , and that scene is a family record imprinted forever on Ilusha 's soul . 
No , it 's not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen . 
Judge for yourself . 
You 've just been in our mansion , what did you see there ? 
Three ladies , one a cripple and weak-minded , another a cripple and hunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever . 
She is a student , dying to get back to Petersburg , to work for the emancipation of the Russian woman on the banks of the Neva . 
I wo n't speak of Ilusha , he is only nine . 
I am alone in the world , and if I die , what will become of all of them ? 
I simply ask you that . 
And if I challenge him and he kills me on the spot , what then ? 
What will become of them ? 
And worse still , if he does n't kill me but only cripples me : I could n't work , but I should still be a mouth to feed . 
Who would feed it and who would feed them all ? 
Must I take Ilusha from school and send him to beg in the streets ? 
That 's what it means for me to challenge him to a duel . 
It 's silly talk and nothing else . '' 
`` He will beg your forgiveness , he will bow down at your feet in the middle of the marketplace , '' cried Alyosha again , with glowing eyes . 
`` I did think of prosecuting him , '' the captain went on , `` but look in our code , could I get much compensation for a personal injury ? 
And then Agrafena Alexandrovna * sent for me and shouted at me : ` Do n't dare to dream of it ! 
If you proceed against him , I 'll publish it to all the world that he beat you for your dishonesty , and then you will be prosecuted . ' 
I call God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands I acted , was n't it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
And what 's more , ' she went on , ` I 'll dismiss you for good and you 'll never earn another penny from me . 
I 'll speak to my merchant too ' -LRB- that 's what she calls her old man -RRB- ` and he will dismiss you ! ' 
And if he dismisses me , what can I earn then from anyone ? 
Those two are all I have to look to , for your Fyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me , for another reason , but he means to make use of papers I 've signed to go to law against me . 
And so I kept quiet , and you have seen our retreat . 
But now let me ask you : did Ilusha hurt your finger much ? 
I did n't like to go into it in our mansion before him . '' 
* Grushenka . 
`` Yes , very much , and he was in a great fury . 
He was avenging you on me as a Karamazov , I see that now . 
But if only you had seen how he was throwing stones at his schoolfellows ! 
It 's very dangerous . 
They might kill him . 
They are children and stupid . 
A stone may be thrown and break somebody 's head . '' 
`` That 's just what has happened . 
He has been bruised by a stone to-day . 
Not on the head but on the chest , just above the heart . 
He came home crying and groaning and now he is ill . '' 
`` And you know he attacks them first . 
He is bitter against them on your account . 
They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a penknife not long ago . '' 
`` I 've heard about that too , it 's dangerous . 
Krassotkin is an official here , we may hear more about it . '' 
`` I would advise you , '' Alyosha went on warmly , `` not to send him to school at all for a time till he is calmer . 
and his anger is passed . '' 
`` Anger ! '' 
the captain repeated , `` that 's just what it is . 
He is a little creature , but it 's a mighty anger . 
You do n't know all , sir . 
Let me tell you more . 
Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the ` wisp of tow . ' 
Schoolboys are a merciless race , individually they are angels , but together , especially in schools , they are often merciless . 
Their teasing has stiffed up a gallant spirit in Ilusha . 
An ordinary boy , a weak son , would have submitted , have felt ashamed of his father , sir , but he stood up for his father against them all . 
For his father and for truth and justice . 
For what he suffered when he kissed your brother 's hand and cried to him ` Forgive father , forgive him , ' - that only God knows - and I , his father . 
For our children - not your children , but ours - the children of the poor gentlemen looked down upon by everyone - know what justice means , sir , even at nine years old . 
How should the rich know ? 
They do n't explore such depths once in their lives . 
But at that moment in the square when he kissed his hand , at that moment my Ilusha had grasped all that justice means . 
That truth entered into him and crushed him for ever , sir , '' the captain said hotly again with a sort of frenzy , and he struck his right fist against his left palm as though he wanted to show how `` the truth '' crushed Ilusha . 
`` That very day , sir , he fell ill with fever and was delirious all night . 
All that day he hardly said a word to me , but I noticed he kept watching me from the corner , though he turned to the window and pretended to be learning his lessons . 
But I could see his mind was not on his lessons . 
Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles , sinful man as I am , and I do n't remember much . 
Mamma began crying , too - I am very fond of mamma - well , I spent my last penny drowning my troubles . 
Do n't despise me for that , sir , in Russia men who drink are the best . 
The best men amongst us are the greatest drunkards . 
I lay down and I do n't remember about Ilusha , though all that day the boys had been jeering at him at school . 
` Wisp of tow , ' they shouted , ` your father was pulled out of the tavern by his wisp of tow , you ran by and begged forgiveness . ' 
`` On the third day when he came back from school , I saw he looked pale and wretched . 
` What is it ? ' 
I asked . 
He would n't answer . 
Well , there 's no talking in our mansion without mamma and the girls taking part in it . 
What 's more , the girls had heard about it the very first day . 
Varvara had begun snarling . 
` You fools and buffoons , can you ever do anything rational ? ' 
` Quite so , ' I said , ` can we ever do anything rational ? ' 
For the time I turned it off like that . 
So in the evening I took the boy out for a walk , for you must know we go for a walk every evening , always the same way , along which we are going now - from our gate to that great stone which lies alone in the road under the hurdle , which marks the beginning of the town pasture . 
A beautiful and lonely spot , sir . 
Ilusha and I walked along hand in hand as usual . 
He has a little hand , his fingers are thin and cold - he suffers with his chest , you know . 
` Father , ' said he , ` father ! ' 
` Well ? ' 
said I. I saw his eyes flashing . 
` Father , how he treated you then ! ' 
` It ca n't be helped , Ilusha , ' I said . 
` Do n't forgive him , father , do n't forgive him ! 
At school they say that he has paid you ten roubles for it . ' 
` No Ilusha , ' said I , ' I would not take money from him for anything . ' 
he began trembling all over , took my hand in both his and kissed it again . 
` Father , ' he said , ` father , challenge him to a duel , at school they say you are a coward and wo n't challenge him , and that you 'll accept ten roubles from him . ' ' 
I ca n't challenge him to a duel , Ilusha , ' I answered . 
And I told briefly what I 've just told you . 
He listened . 
` Father , ' he said , anyway do n't forgive it . 
When I grow up I 'll call him out myself and kill him . ' 
His eyes shone and glowed . 
And of course I am his father , and I had to put in a word : ` It 's a sin to kill , ' I said , ` even in a duel . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ` when I grow up , I 'll knock him down , knock the sword out of his hand , I 'll fall on him , wave my sword over him and say : `` I could kill you , but I forgive you , so there ! '' ' 
You see what the workings of his little mind have been during these two days ; he must have been planning that vengeance all day , and raving about it at night . 
`` But he began to come home from school badly beaten , I found out about it the day before yesterday , and you are right , I wo n't send him to that school any more . 
I heard that he was standing up against all the class alone and defying them all , that his heart was full of resentment , of bitterness - I was alarmed about him . 
We went for another walk . 
` Father , ' he asked , ` are the rich people stronger than anyone else on earth ? ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` there are no people on earth stronger than the rich . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ' I will get rich , I will become an officer and conquer everybody . 
The Tsar will reward me , I will come back here and then no one will dare - ' Then he was silent and his lips still kept trembling . 
` Father , ' he said , ` what a horrid town this is . ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` it is n't a very nice town . ' 
` Father , let us move into another town , a nice one , ' he said , ` where people do n't know about us . ' 
` We will move , we will , Ilusha , ' said I , ` only I must save up for it . ' 
I was glad to be able to turn his mind from painful thoughts , and we began to dream of how we would move to another town , how we would buy a horse and cart . 
` We will put mamma and your sisters inside , we will cover them up and we 'll walk , you shall have a lift now and then , and I 'll walk beside , for we must take care of our horse , we ca n't all ride . 
That 's how we 'll go . ' 
He was enchanted at that , most of all at the thought of having a horse and driving him . 
For of course a Russian boy is born among horses . 
We chattered a long while . 
Thank God , I thought , I have diverted his mind and comforted him . 
`` That was the day before yesterday , in the evening , but last night everything was changed . 
He had gone to school in the morning , he came back depressed , terribly depressed . 
In the evening I took him by the hand and we went for a walk ; he would not talk . 
There was a wind blowing and no sun , and a feeling of autumn ; twilight was coming on . 
We walked along , both of us depressed . 
` Well , my boy , ' said I , ` how about our setting off on our travels ? ' 
I thought I might bring him back to our talk of the day before . 
He did n't answer , but I felt his fingers trembling in my hand . 
Ah , I thought , it 's a bad job ; there 's something fresh . 
We had reached the stone where we are now . 
I sat down on the stone . 
And in the air there were lots of kites flapping and whirling . 
There were as many as thirty in sight . 
Of course , it 's just the season for the kites . 
` Look , Ilusha , ' said I , ` it 's time we got out our last year 's kite again . 
I 'll mend it ; where have you put it away ? ' 
My boy made no answer . 
He looked away and turned sideways to me . 
And then a gust of wind blew up the sand . 
He suddenly fell on me , threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight . 
You know , when children are silent and proud , and try to keep back their tears when they are in great trouble and suddenly break down , their tears fall in streams . 
With those warm streams of tears , he suddenly wetted my face . 
He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions , and squeezed up against me as I sat on the stone . 
` Father , ' he kept crying , ` dear father , how he insulted you ! ' 
And I sobbed too . 
We sat shaking in each other 's arms . 
` Ilusha , ' I said to him , ` Ilusha , darling . ' 
No one saw us then . 
God alone saw us ; I hope He will record it to my credit . 
You must thank your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
No , sir , I wo n't thrash my boy for your satisfaction . '' 
He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery . 
Alyosha felt , though , that he trusted him , and that if there had been someone else in his , Alyosha 's place , the man would not have spoken so openly and would not have told what he had just told . 
This encouraged Alyosha , whose heart was trembling on the verge of tears . 
`` Ah , how I would like to make friends with your boy ! '' 
he cried . 
`` If you could arrange it - '' `` Certainly , sir , '' muttered the captain . 
`` But now listen to something quite different ! '' 
Alyosha went on . 
`` I have a message for you . 
That same brother of mine , Dmitri , has insulted his betrothed , too , a noble-hearted girl of whom you have probably heard . 
I have a right to tell you of her wrong ; I ought to do so , in fact , for , hearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunate position , she commissioned me at once - just now - to bring you this help from her - but only from her alone , not from Dmitri , who has abandoned her . 
Nor from me , his brother , nor from anyone else , but from her , only from her ! 
She entreats you to accept her help ... You have both been insulted by the same man . 
She thought of you only when she had just received a similar insult from him - similar in its cruelty , I mean . 
She comes like a sister to help a brother in misfortune ... . 
She told me to persuade you to take these two hundred roubles from her , as from a sister , knowing that you are in such need . 
No one will know of it , it can give rise to no unjust slander . 
There are the two hundred roubles , and I swear you must take them unless - unless all men are to be enemies on earth ! 
But there are brothers even on earth ... . 
You have a generous heart ... you must see that , you must , '' and Alyosha held out two new rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes . 
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence , and there was no one near . 
The notes seemed to produce a tremendous impression on the captain . 
He started , but at first only from astonishment . 
Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing he expected . 
Nothing could have been farther from his dreams than help from anyone - and such a sum ! 
He took the notes , and for a minute he was almost unable to answer , quite a new expression came into his face . 
`` That for me ? 
So much money - two hundred roubles ! 
Good heavens ! 
Why , I have n't seen so much money for the last four years ! 
Mercy on us ! 
And she says she is a sister ... . 
And is that the truth ? '' 
`` I swear that all I told you is the truth , `` cried Alyosha . 
The captain flushed red . 
`` Listen , my dear , listen . 
If I take it , I sha n't be behaving like a scoundrel ? 
In your eyes , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I sha n't be a scoundrel ? 
No , Alexey Fyodorovitch , listen , listen , '' he hurried , touching Alyosha with both his hands . 
`` You are persuading me to take it , saying that it 's a sister sends it , but inwardly , in your heart wo n't you feel contempt for me if I take it , eh ? '' 
`` No , no , on my salvation I swear I sha n't ! 
And no one will ever know but me - I , you and she , and one other lady , her great friend . '' 
`` Never mind the lady ! 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , at a moment like this you must listen , for you ca n't understand what these two hundred roubles mean to me now . '' 
The poor fellow went on rising gradually into a sort of incoherent , almost wild enthusiasm . 
He was thrown off his balance and talked extremely fast , as though afraid he would not be allowed to say all he had to say . 
`` Besides its being honestly acquired from a ` sister , ' so highly respected and revered , do you know that now I can look after mamma and Nina , my hunchback angel daughter ? 
Doctor Herzenstube came to me in the kindness of his heart and was examining them both for a whole hour . ' 
I can make nothing of it , ' said he , but he prescribed a mineral water which is kept at a chemist 's here . 
He said it would be sure to do her good , and he ordered baths , too , with some medicine in them . 
The mineral water costs thirty copecks , and she 'd need to drink forty bottles perhaps : so I took the prescription and laid it on the shelf under the ikons , and there it lies . 
And he ordered hot baths for Nina with something dissolved in them , morning and evening . 
But how can we carry out such a cure in our mansion , without servants , without help , without a bath , and without water ? 
Nina is rheumatic all over , I do n't think I told you that . 
All her right side aches at night , she is in agony , and , would you believe it , the angel bears it without groaning for fear of waking us . 
We eat what we can get , and she 'll only take the leavings , what you 'd scarcely give to a dog . ' 
I am not worth it , I am taking it from you , I am a burden on you , ' that 's what her angel eyes try to express . 
We wait on her , but she does n't like it . ' 
I am a useless cripple , no good to anyone . ' 
As though she were not worth it , when she is the saving of all of us with her angelic sweetness . 
Without her , without her gentle word it would be hell among us ! 
She softens even Varvara . 
And do n't judge Varvara harshly either , she is an angel too , she , too , has suffered wrong . 
She came to us for the summer , and she brought sixteen roubles she had earned by lessons and saved up , to go back with to Petersburg in September , that is now . 
But we took her money and lived on it , so now she has nothing to go back with . 
Though indeed she could n't go back , for she has to work for us like a slave . 
She is like an overdriven horse with all of us on her back . 
She waits on us all , mends and washes , sweeps the floor , puts mamma to bed . 
And mamma is capricious and tearful and insane ! 
And now I can get a servant with this money , you understand , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I can get medicines for the dear creatures , I can send my student to Petersburg , I can buy beef , I can feed them properly . 
Good Lord , but it 's a dream ! '' 
Alyosha was delighted that he had brought him such happiness and that the poor fellow had consented to be made happy . 
`` Stay , Alexey Fyodorovitch , stay , '' the captain began to talk with frenzied rapidity , carried away by a new day-dream . 
`` Do you know that Ilusha and I will perhaps really carry out our dream . 
We will buy a horse and cart , a black horse , he insists on its being black , and we will set off as we pretended the other day . 
I have an old friend , a lawyer in K. province , and I heard through a trustworthy man that if I were to go he 'd give me a place as clerk in his office , so , who knows , maybe he would . 
So I 'd just put mamma and Nina in the cart , and Ilusha could drive , and I 'd walk , I 'd walk ... . 
Why , if I only succeed in getting one debt paid that 's owing me , I should have perhaps enough for that too ! '' 
`` There would be enough ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna will send you as much more as you need , and you know , I have money too , take what you want , as you would from a brother , from a friend , you can give it back later ... -LRB- You 'll get rich . 
you 'll get rich ! -RRB- 
And you know you could n't have a better idea than to move to another province ! 
It would be the saving of you , especially of your boy and you ought to go quickly , before the winter , before the cold . 
You must write to us when you are there , and we will always be brothers ... No , it 's not a dream ! '' 
Alyosha could have hugged him , he was so pleased . 
But glancing at him he stopped short . 
The man was standing with his neck outstretched and his lips protruding , with a pale and frenzied face . 
His lips were moving as though trying to articulate something ; no sound came , but still his lips moved . 
It was uncanny . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Alyosha , startled . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch ... I. . . 
you , '' muttered the captain , faltering , looking at him with a strange , wild , fixed stare , and an air of desperate resolution . 
At the same time there was a sort of grin on his lips . 
`` I. . . 
you , sir ... would n't you like me to show you a little trick I know ? '' 
he murmured , suddenly , in a firm rapid whisper , his voice no longer faltering . 
`` What trick ? '' 
`` A pretty trick , '' whispered the captain . 
His mouth was twisted on the left side , his left eye was screwed up . 
He still stared at Alyosha . 
`` What is the matter ? 
What trick ? '' 
Alyosha cried , now thoroughly alarmed . 
`` Why , look , '' squealed the captain suddenly , and showing him the two notes which he had been holding by one corner between his thumb and forefinger during the conversation , he crumpled them up savagely and squeezed them tight in his right hand . 
`` Do you see , do you see ? '' 
he shrieked , pale and infuriated . 
And suddenly flinging up his hand , he threw the crumpled notes on the sand . 
`` Do you see ? '' 
he shrieked again , pointing to them . 
`` Look there ! '' 
And with wild fury he began trampling them under his heel , gasping and exclaiming as he did so : `` So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! '' 
Suddenly he darted back and drew himself up before Alyosha , and his whole figure expressed unutterable pride . 
`` Tell those who sent you that the wisp of tow does not sell his honour , '' he cried , raising his arm in the air . 
Then he turned quickly and began to run ; but he had not run five steps before he turned completely round and kissed his hand to Alyosha . 
He ran another five paces and then turned round for the last time . 
This time his face was not contorted with laughter , but quivering all over with tears . 
In a tearful , faltering , sobbing voice he cried : `` What should I say to my boy if I took money from you for our shame ? '' 
And then he ran on without turning . 
Alyosha looked after him , inexpressibly grieved . 
Oh , he saw that till the very last moment the man had not known he would crumple up and fling away the notes . 
He did not turn back . 
Alyosha knew he would not . 
He would not follow him and call him back , he knew why . 
When he was out of sight , Alyosha picked up the two notes . 
They were very much crushed and crumpled , and had been pressed into the sand , but were uninjured and even rustled like new ones when Alyosha unfolded them and smoothed them out . 
After smoothing them out , he folded them up , put them in his pocket and went to Katerina Ivanovna to report on the success of her commission . 
Pro and Contra The Engagement MADAME HOHLAKOV was again the first to meet Alyosha . 
She was flustered ; something important had happened . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's hysterics had ended in a fainting fit , and then `` a terrible , awful weakness had followed , she lay with her eyes turned up and was delirious . 
Now she was in a fever . 
They had sent for Herzenstube ; they had sent for the aunts . 
The aunts were already here , but Herzenstube had not yet come . 
They were all sitting in her room , waiting . 
She was unconscious now , and what if it turned to brain fever ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov looked gravely alarmed . 
`` This is serious , serious , '' she added at every word , as though nothing that had happened to her before had been serious . 
Alyosha listened with distress , and was beginning to describe his adventures , but she interrupted him at the first words . 
She had not time to listen . 
She begged him to sit with Lise and wait for her there . 
`` Lise , '' she whispered almost in his ear , `` Lise has greatly surprised me just now , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
She touched me , too , and so my heart forgives her everything . 
Only fancy , as soon as you had gone , she began to be truly remorseful for having laughed at you to-day and yesterday , though she was not laughing at you , but only joking . 
But she was seriously sorry for it , almost ready to cry , so that I was quite surprised . 
She has never been really sorry for laughing at me , but has only made a joke of it . 
And you know she is laughing at me every minute . 
But this time she was in earnest She thinks a great deal of your opinion , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and do n't take offence or be wounded by her if you can help it . 
I am never hard upon her , for she 's such a clever little thing . 
Would you believe it ? 
She said just now that you were a friend of her childhood , ` the greatest friend of her childhood ' - just think of that - ` greatest friend ' - and what about me ? 
She has very strong feelings and memories , and , what 's more , she uses these phrases , most unexpected words , which come out all of a sudden when you least expect them . 
She spoke lately about a pine-tree , for instance : there used to be a pine-tree standing in our garden in her early childhood . 
Very likely it 's standing there still ; so there 's no need to speak in the past tense . 
Pine-trees are not like people , Alexey Fyodorovitch , they do n't change quickly . 
` Mamma , ' she said , ' I remember this pine tree as in a dream , ' only she said something so original about it that I ca n't repeat it . 
Besides , I 've forgotten it . 
Well , good-bye ! 
I am so worried I feel I shall go out of my mind . 
Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I 've been out of my mind twice in my life . 
Go to Lise , cheer her up , as you always can so charmingly . 
Lise , '' she cried , going to her door , `` here I 've brought you Alexey Fyodorovitch , whom you insulted so . 
He is not at all angry , I assure you ; on the contrary , he is surprised that you could suppose so . '' 
`` Merci , maman . 
Come in , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
Alyosha went in . 
Lise looked rather embarrassed , and at once flushed crimson . 
She was evidently ashamed of something , and , as people always do in such cases , she began immediately talking of other things , as though they were of absorbing interest to her at the moment . 
`` Mamma has just told me all about the two hundred roubles , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and your taking them to that poor officer ... and she told me all the awful story of how he had been insulted ... and you know , although mamma muddles things ... she always rushes from one thing to another ... I cried when I heard . 
Well , did you give him the money and how is that poor man getting on ? '' 
`` The fact is I did n't give it to him , and it 's a long story , '' answered Alyosha , as though he , too , could think of nothing but his regret at having failed , yet Lise saw perfectly well that he , too , looked away , and that he , too , was trying to talk of other things . 
Alyosha sat down to the table and began to tell his story , but at the first words he lost his embarrassment and gained the whole of Lise 's attention as well . 
He spoke with deep feeling , under the influence of the strong impression he had just received , and he succeeded in telling his story well and circumstantially . 
In old days in Moscow he had been fond of coming to Lise and describing to her what had just happened to him , what he had read , or what he remembered of his childhood . 
Sometimes they had made day-dreams and woven whole romances together - generally cheerful and amusing ones . 
Now they both felt suddenly transported to the old days in Moscow , two years before . 
Lise was extremely touched by his story . 
Alyosha described Ilusha with warm feeling . 
When he finished describing how the luckless man trampled on the money , Lise could not help clasping her hands and crying out : `` So you did n't give him the money ! 
So you let him run away ! 
Oh , dear , you ought to have run after him ! '' 
`` No , Lise ; it 's better I did n't run after him , '' said Alyosha , getting up from his chair and walking thoughtfully across the room . 
`` How so ? 
How is it better ? 
Now they are without food and their case is hopeless . '' 
`` Not hopeless , for the two hundred roubles will still come to them . 
He 'll take the money to-morrow . 
To-morrow he will be sure to take it , '' said Alyosha , pacing up and down , pondering . 
`` You see , Lise , '' he went on , stopping suddenly before her , `` I made one blunder , but that , even that , is all for the best . '' 
`` What blunder , and why is it for the best ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
He is a man of weak and timorous character ; he has suffered so much and is very good-natured . 
I keep wondering why he took offence so suddenly , for I assure you , up to the last minute , he did not know that he was going to trample on the notes . 
And I think now that there was a great deal to offend him ... and it could not have been otherwise in his position ... . 
To begin with , he was sore at having been so glad of the money in my presence and not having concealed it from me . 
If he had been pleased , but not so much ; if he had not shown it ; if he had begun affecting scruples and difficulties , as other people do when they take money , he might still endure - to take it . 
But he was too genuinely delighted , and that was mortifying . 
Ah , Lise , he is a good and truthful man - that 's the worst of the whole business . 
All the while he talked , his voice was so weak , so broken , he talked so fast , so fast , he kept laughing such a laugh , or perhaps he was crying - yes , I am sure he was crying , he was so delighted - and he talked about his daughters - and about the situation he could get in another town ... . 
And when he had poured out his heart , he felt ashamed at having shown me his inmost soul like that . 
So he began to hate me at once . 
He is one of those awfully sensitive poor people . 
What had made him feel most ashamed was that he had given in too soon and accepted me as a friend , you see . 
At first he almost flew at me and tried to intimidate me , but as soon as he saw the money he had begun embracing me ; he kept touching me with his hands . 
This must have been how he came to feel it all so humiliating , and then I made that blunder , a very important one . 
I suddenly said to him that if he had not money enough to move to another town , we would give it to him , and , indeed , I myself would give him as much as he wanted out of my own money . 
That struck him all at once . 
Why , he thought , did I put myself forward to help him ? 
You know , Lise , it 's awfully hard for a man who has been injured , when other people look at him as though they were his benefactors ... . 
I 've heard that ; Father Zossima told me so . 
I do n't know how to put it , but I have often seen it myself . 
And I feel like that myself , too . 
And the worst of it was that though he did not know , to the very last minute , that he would trample on the notes , he had a kind of presentiment of it , I am sure of that . 
That 's just what made him so ecstatic , that he had that presentiment ... . 
And though it 's so dreadful , it 's all for the best . 
In fact , I believe nothing better could have happened . '' 
`` Why , why could nothing better have happened ? '' 
cried Lise , looking with great surprise at Alyosha . 
`` Because if he had taken the money , in an hour after getting home , he would be crying with mortification , that 's just what would have happened . 
And most likely he would have come to me early to-morrow , and perhaps have flung the notes at me and trampled upon them as he did just now . 
But now he has gone home awfully proud and triumphant , though he knows he has ` ruined himself . ' 
So now nothing could be easier than to make him accept the two hundred roubles by to-morrow , for he has already vindicated his honour , tossed away the money , and trampled it under foot ... . 
He could n't know when he did it that I should bring it to him again to-morrow , and yet he is in terrible need of that money . 
Though he is proud of himself now , yet even to-day he 'll be thinking what a help he has lost . 
He will think of it more than ever at night , will dream of it , and by to-morrow morning he may be ready to run to me to ask forgiveness . 
It 's just then that I 'll appear . 
` Here , you are a proud man , ' I shall say : ` you have shown it ; but now take the money and forgive us ! ' 
And then he will take it ! 
Alyosha was carried away with joy as he uttered his last words , `` And then he will take it ! '' 
Lise clapped her hands . 
`` Ah , that 's true ! 
I understand that perfectly now . 
Ah , Alyosha , how do you know all this ? 
So young and yet he knows what 's in the heart ... . 
I should never have worked it out . '' 
`` The great thing now is to persuade him that he is on an equal footing with us , in spite of his taking money from us , '' Alyosha went on in his excitement , `` and not only on an equal , but even on a higher footing . '' '' 
` On a higher footing ' is charming , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; but go on , go on ! '' 
`` You mean there is n't such an expression as ` on a higher footing ' ; but that does n't matter because - '' `` Oh , no , of course it does n't matter . 
Forgive me , Alyosha , dear ... . 
You know , I scarcely respected you till now - that is I respected you but on an equal footing ; but now I shall begin to respect you on a higher footing . 
Do n't be angry , dear , at my joking , '' she put in at once , with strong feeling . 
`` I am absurd and small , but you , you ! 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
Is n't there in all our analysis - I mean your analysis ... no , better call it ours - are n't we showing contempt for him , for that poor man - in analysing his soul like this , as it were , from above , eh ? 
In deciding so certainly that he will take the money ? '' 
`` No , Lise , it 's not contempt , '' Alyosha answered , as though he had prepared himself for the question . 
`` I was thinking of that on the way here . 
How can it be contempt when we are all like him , when we are all just the same as he is ? 
For you know we are just the same , no better . 
If we are better , we should have been just the same in his place ... . 
I do n't know about you , Lise , but I consider that I have a sordid soul in many ways , and his soul is not sordid ; on the contrary , full of fine feeling ... . 
No , Lise , I have no contempt for him . 
Do you know , Lise , my elder told me once to care for most people exactly as one would for children , and for some of them as one would for the sick in hospitals . '' 
`` Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
dear , let us care for people as we would for the sick ! '' 
`` Let us , Lise ; I am ready . 
Though I am not altogether ready in myself . 
I am sometimes very impatient and at other times I do n't see things . 
It 's different with you . '' 
`` Ah , I do n't believe it ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , how happy I am ! '' 
`` I am so glad you say so , Lise . '' 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , you are wonderfully good , but you are sometimes sort of formal ... . 
And yet you are not a bit formal really . 
Go to the door , open it gently , and see whether mamma is listening , '' said Lise , in a nervous , hurried whisper . 
Alyosha went , opened the door , and reported that no one was listening . 
`` Come here , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' Lise went on , flushing redder and redder . 
`` Give me your hand - that 's right . 
I have to make a great confession . 
I did n't write to you yesterday in joke , but in earnest , '' and she hid her eyes with her hand . 
It was evident that she was greatly ashamed of the confession . 
Suddenly she snatched his hand and impulsively kissed it three times . 
`` Ah , Lise , what a good thing ! '' 
cried Alyosha joyfully . 
`` You know , I was perfectly sure you were in earnest . '' 
`` Sure ? 
Upon my word ! 
She put aside his hand , but did not leave go of it , blushing hotly , and laughing a little happy laugh . 
`` I kiss his hand and he says , ` What a good thing ! ' '' 
But her reproach was undeserved . 
Alyosha , too , was greatly overcome . 
`` I should like to please you always , Lise , but do n't know how to do it . '' 
he muttered , blushing too . 
`` Alyosha , dear , you are cold and rude . 
Do you see ? 
He has chosen me as his wife and is quite settled about it . 
He is sure I was in earnest . 
What a thing to say ! 
Why , that 's impertinence - that 's what it is . '' 
`` Why , was it wrong of me to feel sure ? '' 
Alyosha asked , laughing suddenly . 
`` Ah , Alyosha , on the contrary , it was delightfully right , '' cried Lise , looking tenderly and happily at him . 
Alyosha stood still , holding her hand in his . 
Suddenly he stooped down and kissed her on her lips . 
`` Oh , what are you doing ? '' 
cried Lise . 
Alyosha was terribly abashed . 
`` Oh , forgive me if I should n't ... . 
Perhaps I 'm awfully stupid ... . 
You said I was cold , so I kissed you ... . 
But I see it was stupid . '' 
Lise laughed , and hid her face in her hands . 
`` And in that dress ! '' 
she ejaculated in the midst of her mirth . 
But she suddenly ceased laughing and became serious , almost stern . 
`` Alyosha , we must put off kissing . 
We are not ready for that yet , and we shall have a long time to wait , '' she ended suddenly . 
`` Tell me rather why you who are so clever , so intellectual , so observant , choose a little idiot , an invalid like me ? 
Ah , Alyosha , I am awfully happy , for I do n't deserve you a bit . '' 
`` You do , Lise . 
I shall be leaving the monastery altogether in a few days . 
If I go into the world , I must marry . 
I know that . 
He told me to marry , too . 
Whom could I marry better than you - and who would have me except you ? 
I have been thinking it over . 
In the first place , you 've known me from a child and you 've a great many qualities I have n't . 
You are more light-hearted than I am ; above all , you are more innocent than I am . 
I have been brought into contact with many , many things already ... . 
Ah , you do n't know , but I , too , am a Karamazov . 
What does it matter if you do laugh and make jokes , and at me , too ? 
Go on laughing . 
I am so glad you do . 
You laugh like a little child , but you think like a martyr . '' 
`` Like a martyr ? 
How ? '' 
`` Yes , Lise , your question just now : whether we were n't showing contempt for that poor man by dissecting his soul - that was the question of a sufferer ... . 
You see , I do n't know how to express it , but anyone who thinks of such questions is capable of suffering . 
Sitting in your invalid chair you must have thought over many things already . '' 
`` Alyosha , give me your hand . 
Why are you taking it away ? '' 
murmured Lise in a failing voice , weak with happiness . 
`` Listen , Alyosha . 
What will you wear when you come out of the monastery ? 
What sort of suit ? 
Do n't laugh , do n't be angry , it 's very , very important to me . '' 
`` I have n't thought about the suit , Lise ; But I 'll wear whatever you like . '' 
`` I should like you to have a dark blue velvet coat , a white pique waistcoat , and a soft grey felt hat ... . 
Tell me , did you believe that I did n't care for you when I said I did n't mean what I wrote ? '' 
`` No , I did n't believe it . '' 
`` Oh , you insupportable person , you are incorrigible . '' 
`` You see , I knew that you seemed to care for me , but I pretended to believe that you did n't care for me to make it easier for you . '' 
`` That makes it worse ! 
Worse and better than all ! 
Alyosha , I am awfully fond of you . 
Just before you came this morning , I tried my fortune . 
I decided I would ask you for my letter , and if you brought it out calmly and gave it to me -LRB- as might have been expected from you -RRB- it would mean that you did not love me at all , that you felt nothing , and were simply a stupid boy , good for nothing , and that I am ruined . 
But you left the letter at home and that cheered me . 
You left it behind on purpose , so as not to give it back , because you knew I would ask for it ? 
That was it , was n't it ? '' 
`` Ah , Lise , it was not so a bit . 
The letter is with me now , and it was this morning , in this pocket . 
Here it is . '' 
Alyosha pulled the letter out laughing , and showed it her at a distance . 
`` But I am not going to give it to you . 
Look at it from here . '' 
`` Why , then you told a lie ? 
You , a monk , told a lie ! '' 
`` I told a lie if you like , '' Alyosha laughed , too . 
`` I told a lie so as not to give you back the letter . 
It 's very precious to me , '' he added suddenly , with strong feeling , and again he flushed . 
`` It always will be , and I wo n't give it up to anyone ! '' 
Lise looked at him joyfully . 
`` Alyosha , '' she murmured again , `` look at the door . 
Is n't mamma listening ? '' 
`` Very well , Lise , I 'll look ; but would n't it be better not to look ? 
Why suspect your mother of such meanness ? '' 
`` What meanness ? 
As for her spying on her daughter , it 's her right , it 's not meanness ! '' 
cried Lise , firing up . 
`` You may be sure , Alexey Fyodorovitch , that when I am a mother , if I have a daughter like myself I shall certainly spy on her ! '' 
`` Really , Lise ? 
That 's not right . '' 
`` Oh , my goodness ! 
What has meanness to do with it ? 
If she were listening to some ordinary worldly conversation , it would be meanness , but when her own daughter is shut up with a young man ... Listen , Alyosha , do you know I shall spy upon you as soon as we are married , and let me tell you I shall open all your letters and read them , so you may as well be prepared . '' 
`` Yes , of course , if so - '' muttered Alyosha , `` only it 's not right . '' 
`` Ah , how contemptuous ! 
Alyosha , dear , we wo n't quarrel the very first day . 
I 'd better tell you the whole truth . 
Of course , it 's very wrong to spy on people , and , of course , I am not right and you are , only I shall spy on you all the same . '' 
`` Do , then ; you wo n't find out anything , '' laughed Alyosha . 
`` And Alyosha , will you give in to me ? 
We must decide that too . '' 
`` I shall be delighted to , Lise , and certain to , only not in the most important things . 
Even if you do n't agree with me , I shall do my duty in the most important things . '' 
`` That 's right ; but let me tell you I am ready to give in to you not only in the most important matters , but in everything . 
And I am ready to vow to do so now - in everything , and for all my life ! '' 
cried Lise fervently , `` and I 'll do it gladly , gladly ! 
What 's more , I 'll swear never to spy on you , never once , never to read one of your letters . 
For you are right and I am not . 
And though I shall be awfully tempted to spy , I know that I wo n't do it since you consider it dishonourable . 
You are my conscience now ... . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , why have you been so sad lately - both yesterday and to-day ? 
I know you have a lot of anxiety and trouble , but I see you have some special grief besides , some secret one , perhaps ? '' 
`` Yes , Lise , I have a secret one , too , '' answered Alyosha mournfully . 
`` I see you love me , since you guessed that . '' 
`` What grief ? 
What about ? 
Can you tell me ? '' 
asked Lise with timid entreaty . 
`` I 'll tell you later , Lise - afterwards , '' said Alyosha , confused . 
`` Now you would n't understand it perhaps - and perhaps I could n't explain it . '' 
`` I know your brothers and your father are worrying you , too . '' 
`` Yes , my brothers too , '' murmured Alyosha , pondering . 
`` I do n't like your brother Ivan , Alyosha , '' said Lise suddenly . 
He noticed this remark with some surprise , but did not answer it . 
`` My brothers are destroying themselves , '' he went on , `` my father , too . 
And they are destroying others with them . 
It 's ` the primitive force of the Karamazovs , ' as father Paissy said the other day , a crude , unbridled , earthly force . 
Does the spirit of God move above that force ? 
Even that I do n't know . 
I only know that I , too , am a Karamazov ... . 
Me a monk , a monk ! 
Am I a monk , Lise ? 
You said just now that I was . '' 
`` Yes , I did . '' 
`` And perhaps I do n't even believe in God . '' 
`` You do n't believe ? 
What is the matter ? '' 
said Lise quietly and gently . 
But Alyosha did not answer . 
There was something too mysterious , too subjective in these last words of his , perhaps obscure to himself , but yet torturing him . 
`` And now on the top of it all , my friend , the best man in the world is going , is leaving the earth ! 
If you knew , Lise , how bound up in soul I am with him ! 
And then I shall be left alone ... . 
I shall come to you , Lise ... . 
For the future we will be together . '' 
`` Yes , together , together ! 
Henceforward we shall be always together , all our lives ! 
Listen , kiss me , I allow you . '' 
Alyosha kissed her . 
`` Come , now go . 
Christ be with you ! '' 
and she made the sign of the cross over him . 
`` Make haste back to him while he is alive . 
I see I 've kept you cruelly . 
I 'll pray to-day for him and you . 
Alyosha , we shall be happy ! 
Shall we be happy , shall we ? '' 
`` I believe we shall , Lise . '' 
Alyosha thought it better not to go in to Madame Hohlakov and was going out of the house without saying good-bye to her . 
But no sooner had he opened the door than he found Madame Hohlakov standing before him . 
From the first word Alyosha guessed that she had been waiting on purpose to meet him . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , this is awful . 
This is all childish nonsense and ridiculous . 
I trust you wo n't dream - It 's foolishness , nothing but foolishness ! '' 
she said , attacking him at once . 
`` Only do n't tell her that , '' said Alyosha , `` or she will be upset , and that 's bad for her now . '' 
`` Sensible advice from a sensible young man . 
Am I to understand that you only agreed with her from compassion for her invalid state , because you did n't want to irritate her by contradiction ? '' 
`` Oh no , not at all . 
I was quite serious in what I said , '' Alyosha declared stoutly . 
`` To be serious about it is impossible , unthinkable , and in the first place I shall never be at home to you again , and I shall take her away , you may be sure of that . '' 
`` But why ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` It 's all so far off . 
We may have to wait another year and a half . '' 
`` Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch , that 's true , of course , and you 'll have time to quarrel and separate a thousand times in a year and a half . 
But I am so unhappy ! 
Though it 's such nonsense , it 's a great blow to me . 
I feel like Famusov in the last scene of Sorrow from Wit . 
You are Tchatsky and she is Sofya , and , only fancy , I 've run down to meet you on the stairs , and in the play the fatal scene takes place on the staircase . 
I heard it all ; I almost dropped . 
So this is the explanation of her dreadful night and her hysterics of late ! 
It means love to the daughter but death to the mother . 
I might as well be in my grave at once . 
And a more serious matter still , what is this letter she has written ? 
Show it me at once , at once ! '' 
`` No , there 's no need . 
Tell me , how is Katerina Ivanovna now ? 
I must know . '' 
`` She still lies in delirium ; she has not regained consciousness . 
Her aunts are here ; but they do nothing but sigh and give themselves airs . 
Herzenstube came , and he was so alarmed that I did n't know what to do for him . 
I nearly sent for a doctor to look after him . 
He was driven home in my carriage . 
And on the top of it all , you and this letter ! 
It 's true nothing can happen for a year and a half . 
In the name of all that 's holy , in the name of your dying elder , show me that letter , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm her mother . 
Hold it in your hand , if you like , and I will read it so . '' 
`` No , I wo n't show it to you . 
Even if she sanctioned it , I would n't . 
I am coming to-morrow , and if you like , we can talk over many things , but now good-bye ! '' 
And Alyosha ran downstairs and into the street . 
Smerdyakov with a Guitar HE had no time to lose indeed . 
Even while he was saying good-bye to Lise , the thought had struck him that he must attempt some stratagem to find his brother Dmitri , who was evidently keeping out of his way . 
It was getting late , nearly three o'clock . 
Alyosha 's whole soul turned to the monastery , to his dying saint , but the necessity of seeing Dmitri outweighed everything . 
The conviction that a great inevitable catastrophe was about to happen grew stronger in Alyosha 's mind with every hour . 
What that catastrophe was , and what he would say at that moment to his brother , he could perhaps not have said definitely . 
`` Even if my benefactor must die without me , anyway I wo n't have to reproach myself all my life with the thought that I might have saved something and did not , but passed by and hastened home . 
If I do as I intend , I shall be following his great precept . '' 
His plan was to catch his brother Dmitri unawares , to climb over the fence , as he had the day before , get into the garden and sit in the summer-house . 
If Dmitri were not there , thought Alyosha , he would not announce himself to Foma or the women of the house , but would remain hidden in the summer-house , even if he had to wait there till evening . 
If , as before , Dmitri were lying in wait for Grushenka to come , he would be very likely to come to the summer-house . 
Alyosha did not , however , give much thought to the details of his plan , but resolved to act upon it , even if it meant not getting back to the monastery that day . 
Everything happened without hindrance , he climbed over the hurdle almost in the same spot as the day before , and stole into the summer-house unseen . 
He did not want to be noticed . 
The woman of the house and Foma too , if he were here , might be loyal to his brother and obey his instructions , and so refuse to let Alyosha come into the garden , or might warn Dmitri that he was being sought and inquired for . 
There was no one in the summer-house . 
Alyosha sat down and began to wait . 
He looked round the summer-house , which somehow struck him as a great deal more ancient than before . 
Though the day was just as fine as yesterday , it seemed a wretched little place this time . 
There was a circle on the table , left no doubt from the glass of brandy having been spilt the day before . 
Foolish and irrelevant ideas strayed about his mind , as they always do in a time of tedious waiting . 
He wondered , for instance , why he had sat down precisely in the same place as before , why not in the other seat . 
At last he felt very depressed - depressed by suspense and uncertainty . 
But he had not sat there more than a quarter of an hour , when he suddenly heard the thrum of a guitar somewhere quite close . 
People were sitting , or had only just sat down , somewhere in the bushes not more than twenty paces away . 
Alyosha suddenly recollected that on coming out of the summer-house the day before , he had caught a glimpse of an old green low garden-seat among the bushes on the left , by the fence . 
The people must be sitting on it now . 
Who were they ? 
A man 's voice suddenly began singing in a sugary falsetto , accompanying himself on the guitar : With invincible force I am bound to my dear . 
O Lord , have mercy On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
The voice ceased . 
It was a lackey 's tenor and a lackey 's song . 
Another voice , a woman 's , suddenly asked insinuatingly and bashfully , though with mincing affectation : `` Why have n't you been to see us for so long , Pavel Fyodorovitch ? 
Why do you always look down upon us ? '' 
`` Not at all answered a man 's voice politely , but with emphatic dignity . 
It was clear that the man had the best of the position , and that the woman was making advances . 
`` I believe the man must be Smerdyakov , '' thought Alyosha , `` from his voice . 
And the lady must be the daughter of the house here , who has come from Moscow , the one who wears the dress with a tail and goes to Marfa for soup . '' 
`` I am awfully fond of verses of all kinds , if they rhyme , '' the woman 's voice continued . 
`` Why do n't you go on ? '' 
The man sang again : What do I care for royal wealth If but my dear one be in health ? 
Lord have mercy On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
`` It was even better last time , '' observed the woman 's voice . 
`` You sang ` If my darling be in health ' ; it sounded more tender . 
I suppose you 've forgotten to-day . '' 
`` Poetry is rubbish ! '' 
said Smerdyakov curtly . 
`` Oh , no ! 
I am very fond of poetry . '' 
`` So far as it 's poetry , it 's essential rubbish . 
Consider yourself , who ever talks in rhyme ? 
And if we were all to talk in rhyme , even though it were decreed by government , we should n't say much , should we ? 
Poetry is no good , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` How clever you are ! 
How is it you 've gone so deep into everything ? '' 
The woman 's voice was more and more insinuating . 
`` I could have done better than that . 
I could have known more than that , if it had not been for my destiny from my childhood up . 
I would have shot a man in a duel if he called me names because I am descended from a filthy beggar and have no father . 
And they used to throw it in my teeth in Moscow . 
It had reached them from here , thanks to Grigory Vassilyevitch . 
Grigory Vassilyevitch blames me for rebelling against my birth , but I would have sanctioned their killing me before I was born that I might not have come into the world at all . 
They used to say in the market , and your mamma too , with great lack of delicacy , set off telling me that her hair was like a mat on her head , and that she was short of five foot by a wee bit . 
Why talk of a wee bit while she might have said ' a little bit , ' like everyone else ? 
She wanted to make it touching , a regular peasant 's feeling . 
Can a Russian peasant be said to feel , in comparison with an educated man ? 
He ca n't be said to have feeling at all , in his ignorance . 
From my childhood up when I hear ' a wee bit , ' I am ready to burst with rage . 
I hate all Russia , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` If you 'd been a cadet in the army , or a young hussar , you would n't have talked like that , but would have drawn your sabre to defend all Russia . '' 
`` I do n't want to be a hussar , Marya Kondratyevna , and , what 's more , I should like to abolish all soldiers . '' 
`` And when an enemy comes , who is going to defend us ? '' 
`` There 's no need of defence . 
In 1812 there was a great invasion of Russia by Napoleon , first Emperor of the French , father of the present one , and it would have been a good thing if they had conquered us . 
A clever nation would have conquered a very stupid one and annexed it . 
We should have had quite different institutions . '' 
`` Are they so much better in their own country than we are ? 
I would n't change a dandy I know of for three young englishmen , '' observed Marya Kondratyevna tenderly , doubtless accompanying her words with a most languishing glance . 
`` That 's as one prefers . '' 
`` But you are just like a foreigner - just like a most gentlemanly foreigner . 
I tell you that , though it makes me bashful . '' 
`` If you care to know , the folks there and ours here are just alike in their vice . 
They are swindlers , only there the scoundrel wears polished boots and here he grovels in filth and sees no harm in it . 
The Russian people want thrashing , as Fyodor Pavlovitch said very truly yesterday , though he is mad , and all his children . '' 
`` You said yourself you had such a respect for Ivan Fyodorovitch . '' 
