Yes , it 's worth saying a word or two about that envelope . 
I was somewhat surprised just now to hear the highly talented prosecutor declare of himself - of himself , observe - that but for that envelope , but for its being left on the floor , no one in the world would have known of the existence of that envelope and the notes in it , and therefore of the prisoner 's having stolen it . 
And so that torn scrap of paper is , by the prosecutor 's own admission , the sole proof on which the charge of robbery rests , ` otherwise no one would have known of the robbery , nor perhaps even of the money . ' 
But is the mere fact that that scrap of paper was lying on the floor a proof that there was money in it , and that that money had been stolen ? 
Yet , it will be objected , Smerdyakov had seen the money in the envelope . 
But when , when had he seen it for the last time , I ask you that ? 
I talked to Smerdyakov , and he told me that he had seen the notes two days before the catastrophe . 
Then why not imagine that old Fyodor Pavlovitch , locked up alone in impatient and hysterical expectation of the object of his adoration , may have whiled away the time by breaking open the envelope and taking out the notes . 
` What 's the use of the envelope ? ' 
he may have asked himself . 
` She wo n't believe the notes are there , but when I show her the thirty rainbow-coloured notes in one roll , it will make more impression , you may be sure , it will make her mouth water . ' 
And so he tears open the envelope , takes out the money , and flings the envelope on the floor , conscious of being the owner and untroubled by any fears of leaving evidence . 
`` Listen , gentlemen , could anything be more likely than this theory and such an action ? 
Why is it out of the question ? 
But if anything of the sort could have taken place , the charge of robbery falls to the ground ; if there was no money , there was no theft of it . 
If the envelope on the floor may be taken as evidence that there had been money in it , why may I not maintain the opposite , that the envelope was on the floor because the money had been taken from it by its owner ? 
`` But I shall be asked what became of the money if Fyodor Pavlovitch took it out of the envelope since it was not found when the police searched the house ? 
In the first place , part of the money was found in the cash-box , and secondly , he might have taken it out that morning or the evening before to make some other use of it , to give or send it away ; he may have changed his idea , his plan of action completely , without thinking it necessary to announce the fact to Smerdyakov beforehand . 
And if there is the barest possibility of such an explanation , how can the prisoner be so positively accused of having committed murder for the sake of robbery , and of having actually carried out that robbery ? 
This is encroaching on the domain of romance . 
If it is maintained that something has been stolen , the thing must be produced , or at least its existence must be proved beyond doubt . 
Yet no one had ever seen these notes . 
`` Not long ago in Petersburg a young man of eighteen , hardly more than a boy , who carried on a small business as a costermonger , went in broad daylight into a moneychanger 's shop with an axe , and with extraordinary , typical audacity killed the master of the shop and carried off fifteen hundred roubles . 
Five hours later he was arrested , and , except fifteen roubles he had already managed to spend , the whole sum was found on him . 
Moreover , the shopman , on his return to the shop after the murder , informed the police not only of the exact sum stolen , but even of the notes and gold coins of which that sum was made up , and those very notes and coins were found on the criminal . 
This was followed by a full and genuine confession on the part of the murderer . 
That 's what I call evidence , gentlemen of the jury ! 
In that case I know , I see , I touch the money , and can not deny its existence . 
Is it the same in the present case ? 
And yet it is a question of life and death . 
`` Yes , I shall be told , but he was carousing that night , squandering money ; he was shown to have had fifteen hundred roubles - where did he get the money ? 
But the very fact that only fifteen hundred could be found , and the other half of the sum could nowhere be discovered , shows that that money was not the same , and had never been in any envelope . 
By strict calculation of time it was proved at the preliminary inquiry that the prisoner ran straight from those women servants to Perhotin 's without going home , and that he had been nowhere . 
So he had been all the time in company and therefore could not have divided the three thousand in half and hidden half in the town . 
It 's just this consideration that has led the prosecutor to assume that the money is hidden in some crevice at Mokroe . 
Why not in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho , gentlemen ? 
Is n't this supposition really too fantastic and too romantic ? 
And observe , if that supposition breaks down , the whole charge of robbery is scattered to the winds , for in that case what could have become of the other fifteen hundred roubles ? 
By what miracle could they have disappeared , since it 's proved the prisoner went nowhere else ? 
And we are ready to ruin a man 's life with such tales ! 
`` I shall be told that he could not explain where he got the fifteen hundred that he had . 
and everyone knew that he was without money before that night . 
Who knew it , pray ? 
The prisoner has made a clear and unflinching statement of the source of that money , and if you will have it so , gentlemen of the jury , nothing can be more probable than that statement , and more consistent with the temper and spirit of the prisoner . 
The prosecutor is charmed with his own romance . 
A man of weak will , who had brought himself to take the three thousand so insultingly offered by his betrothed , could not , we are told , have set aside half and sewn it up , but would , even if he had done so , have unpicked it every two days and taken out a hundred , and so would have spent it all in a month . 
All this , you will remember , was put forward in a tone what brooked no contradiction . 
But what if the thing happened quite differently ? 
What if you 've been weaving a romance , and about quite a different kind of man ? 
That 's just it , you have invented quite a different man ! 
`` I shall be told , perhaps , there are witnesses that he spent on one day all that three thousand given him by his betrothed a month before the catastrophe , so he could not have divided the sum in half . 
But who are these witnesses ? 
The value of their evidence has been shown in court already . 
Besides , in another man 's hand a crust always seems larger , and no one of these witnesses counted that money ; they all judged simply at sight . 
And the witness Maximov has testified that the prisoner had twenty thousand in his hand . 
You see , gentlemen of the jury , psychology is a two edged weapon . 
Let me turn the other edge now and see what comes of it . 
`` A month before the catastrophe the prisoner was entrusted by Katerina Ivanovna with three thousand roubles to send off by post . 
But the question is : is it true that they were entrusted to him in such an insulting and degrading way as was proclaimed just now ? 
The first statement made by the young lady on the subject was different , perfectly different . 
In the second statement we heard only cries of resentment and revenge , cries of long-concealed hatred . 
And the very fact that the witness gave her first evidence incorrectly gives us a right to conclude that her second piece of evidence may have been incorrect also . 
The prosecutor will not , dare not -LRB- his own words -RRB- touch on that story . 
So be it . 
I will not touch on it either , but will only venture to observe that if a lofty and high-principled person , such as that highly respected young lady unquestionably is , if such a person , I say , allows herself suddenly in court to contradict her first statement , with the obvious motive of ruining the prisoner , it is clear that this evidence has been given not impartially , not coolly . 
Have not we the right to assume that a revengeful woman might have exaggerated much ? 
Yes , she may well have exaggerated , in particular , the insult and humiliation of her offering him the money . 
No , it was offered in such a way that it was possible to take it , especially for a man so easygoing as the prisoner , above all , as he expected to receive shortly from his father the three thousand roubles that he reckoned was owing to him . 
It was unreflecting of him , but it was just his irresponsible want of reflection that made him so confident that his father would give him the money , that he would get it , and so could always dispatch the money entrusted to him and repay the debt . 
`` But the prosecutor refuses to allow that he could the same day have set aside half the money and sewn it up in a little bag . 
That 's not his character , he tells us , he could n't have had such feelings . 
But yet he talked himself of the broad Karamazov nature ; he cried out about the two extremes which a Karamazov can contemplate at once . 
Karamazov is just such a two-sided nature , fluctuating between two extremes , that even when moved by the most violent craving for riotous gaiety , he can pull himself up , if something strikes him on the other side . 
And on the other side is love that new love which had flamed up in his heart , and for that love he needed money ; oh , far more than for carousing with his mistress . 
If she were to say to him , ' I am yours , I wo n't have Fyodor Pavlovitch , ' then he must have money to take her away . 
That was more important than carousing . 
Could a Karamazov fail to understand it ? 
That anxiety was just what he was suffering from - what is there improbable in his laying aside that money and concealing it in case of emergency ? 
`` But time passed , and Fyodor Pavlovitch did not give the prisoner the expected three thousand ; on the contrary , the latter heard that he meant to use this sum to seduce the woman he , the prisoner , loved . 
` If Fyodor Pavlovitch does n't give the money , ' he thought , ' I shall be put in the position of a thief before Katerina Ivanovna . ' 
And then the idea presented itself to him that he would go to Katerina Ivanovna , lay before her the fifteen hundred roubles he still carried round his neck , and say , ' I am a scoundrel , but not a thief . ' 
So here we have already a twofold reason why he should guard that sum of money as the apple of his eye , why he should n't unpick the little bag , and spend it a hundred at a time . 
Why should you deny the prisoner a sense of honour ? 
Yes , he has a sense of honour , granted that it 's misplaced , granted it 's often mistaken , yet it exists and amounts to a passion , and he has proved that . 
`` But now the affair becomes even more complex ; his jealous torments reach a climax , and those same two questions torture his fevered brain more and more : ` If I repay Katerina Ivanovna , where can I find the means to go off with Grushenka ? ' 
If he behaved wildly , drank , and made disturbances in the taverns in the course of that month , it was perhaps because he was wretched and strained beyond his powers of endurance . 
These two questions became so acute that they drove him at last to despair . 
He sent his younger brother to beg for the last time for the three thousand roubles , but without waiting for a reply , burst in himself and ended by beating the old man in the presence of witnesses . 
After that he had no prospect of getting it from anyone ; his father would not give it him after that beating . 
`` The same evening he struck himself on the breast , just on the upper part of the breast where the little bag was , and swore to his brother that he had the means of not being a scoundrel , but that still he would remain a scoundrel , for he foresaw that he would not use that means , that he would n't have the character , that he would n't have the will-power to do it . 
Why , why does the prosecutor refuse to believe the evidence of Alexey Karamazov , given so genuinely and sincerely , so spontaneously and convincingly ? 
And why , on the contrary , does he force me to believe in money hidden in a crevice , in the dungeons of the castle of Udolpho ? 
`` The same evening , after his talk with his brother , the prisoner wrote that fatal letter , and that letter is the chief , the most stupendous proof of the prisoner having committed robbery ! ' 
I shall beg from everyone , and if I do n't get it I shall murder my father and shall take the envelope with the pink ribbon on it from under his mattress as soon as Ivan has gone . ' 
A full programme of the murder , we are told , so it must have been he . 
` It has all been done as he wrote , ' cries the prosecutor . 
`` But in the first place , it 's the letter of a drunken man and written in great irritation ; secondly , he writes of the envelope from what he has heard from Smerdyakov again , for he has not seen the envelope himself ; and thirdly , he wrote it indeed , but how can you prove that he did it ? 
Did the prisoner take the envelope from under the pillow , did he find the money , did that money exist indeed ? 
And was it to get money that the prisoner ran off , if you remember ? 
He ran off post-haste not to steal , but to find out where she was , the woman who had crushed him . 
He was not running to carry out a programme , to carry out what he had written , that is , not for an act of premeditated robbery , but he ran suddenly , spontaneously , in a jealous fury . 
Yes ! 
I shall be told , but when he got there and murdered him he seized the money , too . 
But did he murder him after all ? 
The charge of robbery I repudiate with indignation . 
A man can not be accused of robbery , if it 's impossible to state accurately what he has stolen ; that 's an axiom . 
But did he murder him without robbery , did he murder him at all ? 
Is that proved ? 
Is n't that , too , a romance ? '' 
And There Was No Murder Either `` ALLOW me , gentlemen of the jury , to remind you that a man 's life is at stake and that you must be careful . 
We have heard the prosecutor himself admit that until to-day he hesitated to accuse the prisoner of a full and conscious premeditation of the crime ; he hesitated till he saw that fatal drunken letter which was produced in court to-day . 
` All was done as written . ' 
But , I repeat again , he was running to her , to seek her , solely to find out where she was . 
That 's a fact that ca n't be disputed . 
Had she been at home , he would not have run away , but would have remained at her side , and so would not have done what he promised in the letter . 
He ran unexpectedly and accidentally , and by that time very likely he did not even remember his drunken letter . 
` He snatched up the pestle , ' they say , and you will remember how a whole edifice of psychology was built on that pestle - why he was bound to look at that pestle as a weapon , to snatch it up , and so on , and so on . 
A very commonplace idea occurs to me at this point : What if that pestle had not been in sight , had not been lying on the shelf from which it was snatched by the prisoner , but had been put away in a cupboard ? 
It would not have caught the prisoner 's eye , and he would have run away without a weapon , with empty hands , and then he would certainly not have killed anyone . 
How then can I look upon the pestle as a proof of premeditation ? 
`` Yes , but he talked in the taverns of murdering his father , and two days before , on the evening when he wrote his drunken letter , he was quiet and only quarrelled with a shopman in the tavern , because a Karamazov could not help quarrelling , forsooth ! 
But my answer to that is , that , if he was planning such a murder in accordance with his letter , he certainly would not have quarrelled even with a shopman , and probably would not have gone into the tavern at all , because a person plotting such a crime seeks quiet and retirement , seeks to efface himself , to avoid being seen and heard , and that not from calculation , but from instinct . 
Gentlemen of the jury , the psychological method is a two-edged weapon , and we , too , can use it . 
As for all this shouting in taverns throughout the month , do n't we often hear children , or drunkards coming out of taverns shout , ` I 'll kill you ' ? 
but they do n't murder anyone . 
And that fatal letter - is n't that simply drunken irritability , too ? 
Is n't that simply the shout of the brawler outside the tavern , ` I 'll kill you ! 
I 'll kill the lot of you ! ' 
Why not , why could it not be that ? 
What reason have we to call that letter ` fatal ' rather than absurd ? 
Because his father has been found murdered , because a witness saw the prisoner running out of the garden with a weapon in his hand , and was knocked down by him : therefore , we are told , everything was done as he had planned in writing , and the letter was not ` absurd , ' but ` fatal . ' 
`` Now , thank God ! 
we 've come to the real point : ` since he was in the garden , he must have murdered him . ' 
In those few words : ` since he was , then he must ' lies the whole case for the prosecution . 
He was there , so he must have . 
And what if there is no must about it , even if he was there ? 
Oh , I admit that the chain of evidence - the coincidences - are really suggestive . 
But examine all these facts separately , regardless of their connection . 
Why , for instance , does the prosecution refuse to admit the truth of the prisoner 's statement that he ran away from his father 's window ? 
Remember the sarcasms in which the prosecutor indulged at the expense of the respectful and ` pious ' sentiments which suddenly came over the murderer . 
But what if there were something of the sort , a feeling of religious awe , if not of filial respect ? 
` My mother must have been praying for me at that moment , ' were the prisoner 's words at the preliminary inquiry , and so he ran away as soon as he convinced himself that Madame Svyetlov was not in his father 's house . 
` But he could not convince himself by looking through the window , ' the prosecutor objects . 
But why could n't he ? 
Why ? 
The window opened at the signals given by the prisoner . 
Some word might have been uttered by Fyodor Pavlovitch , some exclamation which showed the prisoner that she was not there . 
Why should we assume everything as we imagine it , as we make up our minds to imagine it ? 
A thousand things may happen in reality which elude the subtlest imagination . '' 
` Yes , but Grigory saw the door open and so the prisoner certainly was in the house , therefore he killed him . ' 
Now about that door , gentlemen of the jury ... . 
Observe that we have only the statement of one witness as to that door , and he was at the time in such a condition , that - but supposing the door was open ; supposing the prisoner has lied in denying it , from an instinct of self-defence , natural in his position ; supposing he did go into the house - well , what then ? 
How does it follow that because he was there he committed the murder ? 
He might have dashed in , run through the rooms ; might have pushed his father away ; might have struck him ; but as soon as he had made sure Madame Svyetlov was not there , he may have run away rejoicing that she was not there and that he had not killed his father . 
And it was perhaps just because he had escaped from the temptation to kill his father , because he had a clear conscience and was rejoicing at not having killed him , that he was capable of a pure feeling , the feeling of pity and compassion , and leapt off the fence a minute later to the assistance of Grigory after he had , in his excitement , knocked him down . 
`` With terrible eloquence the prosecutor has described to us the dreadful state of the prisoner 's mind at Mokroe when love again lay before him calling him to new life , while love was impossible for him because he had his father 's bloodstained corpse behind him and beyond that corpse - retribution . 
And yet the prosecutor allowed him love , which he explained , according to his method , talking about this drunken condition , about a criminal being taken to execution , about it being still far off , and so on and so on . 
But again I ask , Mr. Prosecutor , have you not invented a new personality ? 
Is the prisoner so coarse and heartless as to be able to think at that moment of love and of dodges to escape punishment , if his hands were really stained with his father 's blood ? 
No , no , no ! 
As soon as it was made plain to him that she loved him and called him to her side , promising him new happiness , oh ! 
then , I protest he must have felt the impulse to suicide doubled , trebled , and must have killed himself , if he had his father 's murder on his conscience . 
Oh , no ! 
he would not have forgotten where his pistols lay ! 
I know the prisoner : the savage , stony heartlessness ascribed to him by the prosecutor is inconsistent with his character . 
He would have killed himself , that 's certain . 
He did not kill himself just because ` his mother 's prayers had saved him , ' and he was innocent of his father 's blood . 
He was troubled , he was grieving that night at Mokroe only about old Grigory and praying to God that the old man would recover , that his blow had not been fatal , and that he would not have to suffer for it . 
Why not accept such an interpretation of the facts ? 
What trustworthy proof have we that the prisoner is lying ? 
`` But we shall be told at once again , ` There is his father 's corpse ! 
If he ran away without murdering him , who did murder him ? ' 
Here , I repeat , you have the whole logic of the prosecution . 
Who murdered him , if not he ? 
There 's no one to put in his place . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , is that really so ? 
Is it positively , actually true that there is no one else at all ? 
We 've heard the prosecutor count on his fingers all the persons who were in that house that night . 
They were five in number ; three of them , I agree , could not have been responsible - the murdered man himself , old Grigory , and his wife . 
There are left then the prisoner and Smerdyakov , and the prosecutor dramatically exclaims that the prisoner pointed to Smerdyakov because he had no one else to fix on , that had there been a sixth person , even a phantom of a sixth person , he would have abandoned the charge against Smerdyakov at once in shame and have accused that other . 
But , gentlemen of the jury , why may I not draw the very opposite conclusion ? 
There are two persons - the prisoner and Smerdyakov . 
Why can I not say that you accuse my client , simply because you have no one else to accuse ? 
And you have no one else only because you have determined to exclude Smerdyakov from all suspicion . 
`` It 's true , indeed , Smerdyakov is accused only by the prisoner , his two brothers , and Madame Svyetlov . 
But there are others who accuse him : there are vague rumours of a question , of a suspicion , an obscure report , a feeling of expectation . 
Finally , we have the evidence of a combination of facts very suggestive , though , I admit , inconclusive . 
In the first place we have precisely on the day of the catastrophe that fit , for the genuineness of which the prosecutor , for some reason , has felt obliged to make a careful defence . 
Then Smerdyakov 's sudden suicide on the eve of the trial . 
Then the equally startling evidence given in court to-day by the elder of the prisoner 's brothers , who had believed in his guilt , but has to-day produced a bundle of notes and proclaimed Smerdyakov as the murderer . 
Oh , I fully share the court 's and the prosecutor 's conviction that Ivan Karamazov is suffering from brain fever , that his statement may really be a desperate effort , planned in delirium , to save his brother by throwing the guilt on the dead man . 
But again Smerdyakov 's name is pronounced , again there is a suggestion of mystery . 
There is something unexplained , incomplete . 
And perhaps it may one day be explained . 
But we wo n't go into that now . 
Of that later . 
`` The court has resolved to go on with the trial , but , meantime , I might make a few remarks about the character-sketch of Smerdyakov drawn with subtlety and talent by the prosecutor . 
But while I admire his talent I can not agree with him . 
I have visited Smerdyakov , I have seen him and talked to him , and he made a very different impression on me . 
He was weak in health , it is true ; but in character , in spirit , he was by no means the weak man the prosecutor has made him out to be . 
I found in him no trace of the timidity on which the prosecutor so insisted . 
There was no simplicity about him , either . 
I found in him , on the contrary , an extreme mistrustfulness concealed under a mask of naivete , and an intelligence of considerable range . 
The prosecutor was too simple in taking him for weak-minded . 
He made a very definite impression on me : I left him with the conviction that he was a distinctly spiteful creature , excessively ambitious , vindictive , and intensely envious . 
I made some inquiries : he resented his parentage , was ashamed of it , and would clench his teeth when he remembered that he was the son of ` stinking Lizaveta . ' 
He was disrespectful to the servant Grigory and his wife , who had cared for him in his childhood . 
He cursed and jeered at Russia . 
He dreamed of going to France and becoming a Frenchman . 
He used often to say that he had n't the means to do so . 
I fancy he loved no one but himself and had a strangely high opinion of himself . 
His conception of culture was limited to good clothes , clean shirt-fronts and polished boots . 
Believing himself to be the illegitimate son of Fyodor Pavlovitch -LRB- there is evidence of this -RRB- , he might well have resented his position , compared with that of his master 's legitimate sons . 
They had everything , he nothing . 
They had all the rights , they had the inheritance , while he was only the cook . 
He told me himself that he had helped Fyodor Pavlovitch to put the notes in the envelope . 
The destination of that sum - a sum which would have made his career - must have been hateful to him . 
Moreover , he saw three thousand roubles in new rainbow-coloured notes . 
-LRB- I asked him about that on purpose . -RRB- 
Oh , beware of showing an ambitious and envious man a large sum of money at once ! 
And it was the first time he had seen so much money in the hands of one man . 
The sight of the rainbow-coloured notes may have made a morbid impression on his imagination , but with no immediate results . 
`` The talented prosecutor , with extraordinary subtlety , sketched for us all the arguments for and against the hypothesis of Smerdyakov 's guilt , and asked us in particular what motive he had in feigning a fit . 
But he may not have been feigning at all , the fit may have happened quite naturally , but it may have passed off quite naturally , and the sick man may have recovered , not completely perhaps , but still regaining consciousness , as happens with epileptics . 
`` The prosecutor asks at what moment could Smerdyakov have committed the murder . 
But it is very easy to point out that moment . 
He might have waked up from deep sleep -LRB- for he was only asleep - an epileptic fit is always followed by a deep sleep -RRB- at that moment when the old Grigory shouted at the top of his voice ` Parricide ! ' 
That shout in the dark and stillness may have waked Smerdyakov whose sleep may have been less sound at the moment : he might naturally have waked up an hour before . 
`` Getting out of bed , he goes almost unconsciously and with no definite motive towards the sound to see what 's the matter . 
His head is still clouded with his attack , his faculties are half asleep ; but , once in the garden , he walks to the lighted windows and he hears terrible news from his master , who would be , of course , glad to see him . 
His mind sets to work at once . 
He hears all the details from his frightened master , and gradually in his disordered brain there shapes itself an idea - terrible , but seductive and irresistibly logical . 
To kill the old man , take the three thousand , and throw all the blame on to his young master . 
A terrible lust of money , of booty , might seize upon him as he realised his security from detection . 
Oh ! 
these sudden and irresistible impulses come so often when there is a favourable opportunity , and especially with murderers who have had no idea of committing a murder beforehand . 
And Smerdyakov may have gone in and carried out his plan . 
With what weapon ? 
Why , with any stone picked up in the garden . 
But what for , with what object ? 
Why , the three thousand which means a career for him . 
Oh , I am not contradicting myself - the money may have existed . 
And perhaps Smerdyakov alone knew where to find it , where his master kept it . 
And the covering of the money - the torn envelope on the floor ? 
`` Just now , when the prosecutor was explaining his subtle theory that only an inexperienced thief like Karamazov would have left the envelope on the floor , and not one like Smerdyakov , who would have avoided leaving a piece of evidence against himself , I thought as I listened that I was hearing something very familiar , and , would you believe it , I have heard that very argument , that very conjecture , of how Karamazov would have behaved , precisely two days before , from Smerdyakov himself . 
What 's more , it struck me at the time . 
I fancied that there was an artificial simplicity about him ; that he was in a hurry to suggest this idea to me that I might fancy it was my own . 
He insinuated it , as it were . 
Did he not insinuate the same idea at the inquiry and suggest it to the talented prosecutor ? 
`` I shall be asked , ` What about the old woman , Grigory 's wife ? 
She heard the sick man moaning close by , all night . ' 
Yes , she heard it , but that evidence is extremely unreliable . 
I knew a lady who complained bitterly that she had been kept awake all night by a dog in the yard . 
Yet the poor beast , it appeared , had only yelped once or twice in the night . 
And that 's natural . 
If anyone is asleep and hears a groan he wakes up , annoyed at being waked , but instantly falls asleep again . 
Two hours later , again a groan , he wakes up and falls asleep again ; and the same thing again two hours later - three times altogether in the night . 
Next morning the sleeper wakes up and complains that someone has been groaning all night and keeping him awake . 
And it is bound to seem so to him : the intervals of two hours of sleep he does not remember , he only remembers the moments of waking , so he feels he has been waked up all night . 
`` But why , why , asks the prosecutor , did not Smerdyakov confess in his last letter ? 
Why did his conscience prompt him to one step and not to both ? 
But , excuse me , conscience implies penitence , and the suicide may not have felt penitence , but only despair . 
Despair and penitence are two very different things . 
Despair may be vindictive and irreconcilable , and the suicide , laying his hands on himself , may well have felt redoubled hatred for those whom he had envied all his life . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , beware of a miscarriage of justice ! 
What is there unlikely in all I have put before you just now ? 
Find the error in my reasoning ; find the impossibility , the absurdity . 
And if there is but a shade of possibility , but a shade of probability in my propositions , do not condemn him . 
And is there only a shade ? 
I swear by all that is sacred , I fully believe in the explanation of the murder I have just put forward . 
What troubles me and makes me indignant is that of all the mass of facts heaped up by the prosecution against the prisoner , there is not a single one certain and irrefutable . 
And yet the unhappy man is to be ruined by the accumulation of these facts . 
Yes , the accumulated effect is awful : the blood , the blood dripping from his fingers , the bloodstained shirt , the dark night resounding with the shout ` Parricide ! ' 
and the old man falling with a broken head . 
And then the mass of phrases , statements , gestures , shouts ! 
Oh ! 
this has so much influence , it can so bias the mind ; but , gentlemen of the jury , can it bias your minds ? 
Remember , you have been given absolute power to bind and to loose , but the greater the power , the more terrible its responsibility . 
`` I do not draw back one iota from what I have said just now , but suppose for one moment I agreed with the prosecution that my luckless client had stained his hands with his father 's blood . 
This is only hypothesis , I repeat ; I never for one instant doubt of his innocence . 
But , so be it , I assume that my client is guilty of parricide . 
Even so , hear what I have to say . 
I have it in my heart to say something more to you , for I feel that there must be a great conflict in your hearts and minds ... . 
Forgive my referring to your hearts and minds , gentlemen of the jury , but I want to be truthful and sincere to the end . 
Let us all be sincere ! '' 
At this point the speech was interrupted by rather loud applause . 
The last words , indeed , were pronounced with a note of such sincerity that everyone felt that he really might have something to say , and that what he was about to say would be of the greatest consequence . 
But the President , hearing the applause , in a loud voice threatened to clear the court if such an incident were repeated . 
Every sound was hushed and Fetyukovitch began in a voice full of feeling quite unlike the tone he had used hitherto . 
A Corrupter of Thought `` IT 'S not only the accumulation of facts that threatens my client with ruin , gentlemen of the jury , '' he began , `` what is really damning for my client is one fact - the dead body of his father . 
Had it been an ordinary case of murder you would have rejected the charge in view of the triviality , the incompleteness , and the fantastic character of the evidence , if you examine each part of it separately ; or , at least , you would have hesitated to ruin a man 's life simply from the prejudice against him which he has , alas ! 
only too well deserved . 
But it 's not an ordinary case of murder , it 's a case of parricide . 
That impresses men 's minds , and to such a degree that the very triviality and incompleteness of the evidence becomes less trivial and less incomplete even to an unprejudiced mind . 
How can such a prisoner be acquitted ? 
What if he committed the murder and gets off unpunished ? 
That is what everyone , almost involuntarily , instinctively , feels at heart . 
`` Yes , it 's a fearful thing to shed a father 's blood - the father who has begotten me , loved me , not spared his life for me , grieved over my illnesses from childhood up , troubled all his life for my happiness , and has lived in my joys , in my successes . 
To murder such a father - that 's inconceivable . 
Gentlemen of the jury , what is a father - a real father ? 
What is the meaning of that great word ? 
What is the great idea in that name ? 
We have just indicated in part what a true father is and what he ought to be . 
In the case in which we are now so deeply occupied and over which our hearts are aching - in the present case , the father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , did not correspond to that conception of a father to which we have just referred . 
That 's the misfortune . 
And indeed some fathers are a misfortune . 
Let us examine this misfortune rather more closely : we must shrink from nothing , gentlemen of the jury , considering the importance of the decision you have to make . 
It 's our particular duty not to shrink from any idea , like children or frightened women , as the talented prosecutor happily expresses it . 
`` But in the course of his heated speech my esteemed opponent -LRB- and he was my opponent before I opened my lips -RRB- exclaimed several times , ` Oh , I will not yield the defence of the prisoner to the lawyer who has come down from Petersburg . 
I accuse , but I defend also ! ' 
He exclaimed that several times , but forgot to mention that if this terrible prisoner was for twenty-three years so grateful for a mere pound of nuts given him by the only man who had been kind to him , as a child in his father 's house , might not such a man well have remembered for twenty-three years how he ran in his father 's back-yard , without boots on his feet and with his little trousers hanging by one button ' - to use the expression of the kindhearted doctor , Herzenstube ? 
`` Oh , gentlemen of the jury , why need we look more closely at this misfortune , why repeat what we all know already ? 
What did my client meet with when he arrived here , at his father 's house , and why depict my client as a heartless egoist and monster ? 
He is uncontrolled , he is wild and unruly - we are trying him now for that - but who is responsible for his life ? 
Who is responsible for his having received such an unseemly bringing up , in spite of his excellent disposition and his grateful and sensitive heart ? 
Did anyone train him to be reasonable ? 
Was he enlightened by study ? 
Did anyone love him ever so little in his childhood ? 
My client was left to the care of Providence like a beast of the field . 
He thirsted perhaps to see his father after long years of separation . 
A thousand times perhaps he may , recalling his childhood , have driven away the loathsome phantoms that haunted his childish dreams and with all his heart he may have longed to embrace and to forgive his father ! 
And what awaited him ? 
He was met by cynical taunts , suspicions and wrangling about money . 
He heard nothing but revolting talk and vicious precepts uttered daily over the brandy , and at last he saw his father seducing his mistress from him with his own money . 
Oh , gentlemen of the jury , that was cruel and revolting ! 
And that old man was always complaining of the disrespect and cruelty of his son . 
He slandered him in society , injured him , calumniated him , bought up his unpaid debts to get him thrown into prison . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , people like my client , who are fierce , unruly , and uncontrolled on the surface , are sometimes , most frequently indeed , exceedingly tender-hearted , only they do n't express it . 
Do n't laugh , do n't laugh at my idea ! 
The talented prosecutor laughed mercilessly just now at my client for loving Schiller - loving the sublime and beautiful ! 
I should not have laughed at that in his place . 
Yes , such natures - oh , let me speak in defence of such natures , so often and so cruelly misunderstood - these natures often thirst for tenderness , goodness , and justice , as it were , in contrast to themselves , their unruliness , their ferocity - they thirst for it unconsciously . 
Passionate and fierce on the surface , they are painfully capable of loving woman , for instance , and with a spiritual and elevated love . 
Again do not laugh at me , this is very often the case in such natures . 
But they can not hide their passions - sometimes very coarse - and that is conspicuous and is noticed , but the inner man is unseen . 
Their passions are quickly exhausted ; but , by the side of a noble and lofty creature that seemingly coarse and rough man seeks a new life , seeks to correct himself , to be better , to become noble and honourable , ` sublime and beautiful , ' however much the expression has been ridiculed . 
`` I said just now that I would not venture to touch upon my client 's engagement . 
But I may say half a word . 
What we heard just now was not evidence , but only the scream of a frenzied and revengeful woman , and it was not for her - oh , not for her ! 
- to reproach him with treachery , for she has betrayed him ! 
If she had had but a little time for reflection she would not have given such evidence . 
Oh , do not believe her ! 
No , my client is not a monster , as she called him ! 
`` The Lover of Mankind on the eve of His Crucifixion said : ' I am the Good Shepherd . 
The good shepherd lays down his life for his sheep , so that not one of them might be lost . ' 
Let not a man 's soul be lost through us ! 
`` I asked just now what does ` father ' mean , and exclaimed that it was a great word , a precious name . 
But one must use words honestly , gentlemen , and I venture to call things by their right names : such a father as old Karamazov can not be called a father and does not deserve to be . 
Filial love for an unworthy father is an absurdity , an impossibility . 
Love can not be created from nothing : only God can create something from nothing . '' 
` Fathers , provoke not your children to wrath , ' the apostle writes , from a heart glowing with love . 
It 's not for the sake of my client that I quote these sacred words , I mention them for all fathers . 
Who has authorised me to preach to fathers ? 
No one . 
But as a man and a citizen I make my appeal - vivos voco ! 
We are not long on earth , we do many evil deeds and say many evil words . 
So let us all catch a favourable moment when we are all together to say a good word to each other . 
That 's what I am doing : while I am in this place I take advantage of my opportunity . 
Not for nothing is this tribune given us by the highest authority - all Russia hears us ! 
I am not speaking only for the fathers here present , I cry aloud to all fathers : ` Fathers , provoke not your children to wrath . ' 
Yes , let us first fulfil Christ 's injunction ourselves and only then venture to expect it of our children . 
Otherwise we are not fathers , but enemies of our children , and they are not our children , but our enemies , and we have made them our enemies ourselves . 
` What measure ye mete it shall be measured unto you again ' - it 's not I who say that , it 's the Gospel precept , measure to others according as they measure to you . 
How can we blame children if they measure us according to our measure ? 
`` Not long ago a servant girl in Finland was suspected of having secretly given birth to a child . 
She was watched , and a box of which no one knew anything was found in the corner of the loft , behind some bricks . 
It was opened and inside was found the body of a new-born child which she had killed . 
In the same box were found the skeletons of two other babies which , according to her own confession , she had killed at the moment of their birth . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , was she a mother to her children ? 
She gave birth to them , indeed ; but was she a mother to them ? 
Would anyone venture to give her the sacred name of mother ? 
Let us be bold , gentlemen , let us be audacious even : it 's our duty to be so at this moment and not to be afraid of certain words and ideas like the Moscow women in Ostrovsky 's play , who are scared at the sound of certain words . 
No , let us prove that the progress of the last few years has touched even us , and let us say plainly , the father is not merely he who begets the child , but he who begets it and does his duty by it . 
`` Oh , of course , there is the other meaning , there is the other interpretation of the word ` father , ' which insists that any father , even though he be a monster , even though he be the enemy of his children , still remains my father simply because he begot me . 
But this is , so to say , the mystical meaning which I can not comprehend with my intellect , but can only accept by faith , or , better to say , on faith , like many other things which I do not understand , but which religion bids me believe . 
But in that case let it be kept outside the sphere of actual life . 
In the sphere of actual life , which has , indeed , its own rights , but also lays upon us great duties and obligations , in that sphere , if we want to be humane - Christian , in fact - we must , or ought to , act only upon convictions justified by reason and experience , which have been passed through the crucible of analysis ; in a word , we must act rationally , and not as though in dream and delirium , that we may not do harm , that we may not ill-treat and ruin a man . 
Then it will be real Christian work , not only mystic , but rational and philanthropic ... '' There was violent applause at this passage from many parts of the court , but Fetyukovitch waved his hands as though imploring them to let him finish without interruption . 
The court relapsed into silence at once . 
The orator went on . 
`` Do you suppose , gentlemen , that our children as they grow up and begin to reason can avoid such questions ? 
No , they can not , and we will not impose on them an impossible restriction . 
The sight of an unworthy father involuntarily suggests tormenting questions to a young creature , especially when he compares him with the excellent fathers of his companions . 
The conventional answer to this question is : ` He begot you , and you are his flesh and blood , and therefore you are bound to love him . ' 
The youth involuntarily reflects : ` But did he love me when he begot me ? ' 
he asks , wondering more and more . 
` Was it for my sake he begot me ? 
He did not know me , not even my sex , at that moment , at the moment of passion , perhaps , inflamed by wine , and he has only transmitted to me a propensity to drunkenness - that 's all he 's done for me ... . 
Why am I bound to love him simply for begetting me when he has cared nothing for me all my life after ? ' 
`` Oh , perhaps those questions strike you as coarse and cruel , but do not expect an impossible restraint from a young mind . 
` Drive nature out of the door and it will fly in at the window , ' and , above all , let us not be afraid of words , but decide the question according to the dictates of reason and humanity and not of mystic ideas . 
How shall it be decided ? 
Why , like this . 
Let the son stand before his father and ask him , ` Father , tell me , why must I love you ? 
Father , show me that I must love you , ' and if that father is able to answer him and show him good reason , we have a real , normal , parental relation , not resting on mystical prejudice , but on a rational , responsible and strictly humanitarian basis . 
But if he does not , there 's an end to the family tie . 
He is not a father to him , and the son has a right to look upon him as a stranger , and even an enemy . 
Our tribune , gentlemen of the jury , ought to be a school of true and sound ideas . '' 
-LRB- Here the orator was interrupted by irrepressible and almost frantic applause . 
Of course , it was not the whole audience , but a good half of it applauded . 
The fathers and mothers present applauded . 
Shrieks and exclamations were heard from the gallery , where the ladies were sitting . 
Handkerchiefs were waved . 
The President began ringing his bell with all his might . 
He was obviously irritated by the behaviour of the audience , but did not venture to clear the court as he had threatened . 
Even persons of high position , old men with stars on their breasts , sitting on specially reserved seats behind the judges , applauded the orator and waved their handkerchiefs . 
So that when the noise died down , the President confined himself to repeating his stern threat to clear the court , and Fetyukovitch , excited and triumphant , continued his speech . -RRB- 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , you remember that awful night of which so much has been said to-day , when the son got over the fence and stood face to face with the enemy and persecutor who had begotten him . 
I insist most emphatically it was not for money he ran to his father 's house : the charge of robbery is an absurdity , as I proved before . 
And it was not to murder him he broke into the house , oh , no ! 
If he had had that design he would , at least , have taken the precaution of arming himself beforehand . 
The brass pestle he caught up instinctively without knowing why he did it . 
Granted that he deceived his father by tapping at the window , granted that he made his way in - I 've said already that I do not for a moment believe that legend , but let it be so , let us suppose it for a moment . 
Gentlemen , I swear to you by all that 's holy , if it had not been his father , but an ordinary enemy , he would , after running through the rooms and satisfying himself that the woman was not there , have made off , post-haste , without doing any harm to his rival . 
He would have struck him , pushed him away perhaps , nothing more , for he had no thought and no time to spare for that . 
What he wanted to know was where she was . 
But his father , his father ! 
The mere sight of the father who had hated him from his childhood , had been his enemy , his persecutor , and now his unnatural rival , was enough ! 
A feeling of hatred came over him involuntarily , irresistibly , clouding his reason . 
It all surged up in one moment ! 
It was an impulse of madness and insanity , but also an impulse of nature , irresistibly and unconsciously -LRB- like everything in nature -RRB- avenging the violation of its eternal laws . 
`` But the prisoner even then did not murder him - I maintain that , I cry that aloud ! 
- no , he only brandished the pestle in a burst of indignant disgust , not meaning to kill him , not knowing that he would kill him . 
Had he not had this fatal pestle in his hand , he would have only knocked his father down perhaps , but would not have killed him . 
As he ran away , he did not know whether he had killed the old man . 
Such a murder is not a murder . 
Such a murder is not a parricide . 
No , the murder of such a father can not be called parricide . 
Such a murder can only be reckoned parricide by prejudice . 
`` But I appeal to you again and again from the depths of my soul ; did this murder actually take place ? 
Gentlemen of the jury , if we convict and punish him , he will say to himself : ` These people have done nothing for my bringing up , for my education , nothing to improve my lot , nothing to make me better , nothing to make me a man . 
These people have not given me to eat and to drink , have not visited me in prison and nakedness , and here they have sent me to penal servitude . 
I am quits , I owe them nothing now , and owe no one anything for ever . 
They are wicked and I will be wicked . 
They are cruel and I will be cruel . ' 
That is what he will say , gentlemen of the jury . 
And I swear , by finding him guilty you will only make it easier for him : you will ease his conscience , he will curse the blood he has shed and will not regret it . 
At the same time you will destroy in him the possibility of becoming a new man , for he will remain in his wickedness and blindness all his life . 
`` But do you want to punish him fearfully , terribly , with the most awful punishment that could be imagined , and at the same time to save him and regenerate his soul ? 
If so , overwhelm him with your mercy ! 
You will see , you will hear how he will tremble and be horror-struck . 
` How can I endure this mercy ? 
How can I endure so much love ? 
Am I worthy of it ? ' 
That 's what he will exclaim . 
`` Oh , I know , I know that heart , that wild but grateful heart , gentlemen of the jury ! 
It will bow before your mercy ; it thirsts for a great and loving action , it will melt and mount upwards . 
There are souls which , in their limitation , blame the whole world . 
But subdue such a soul with mercy , show it love , and it will curse its past , for there are many good impulses in it . 
Such a heart will expand and see that God is merciful and that men are good and just . 
He will be horror-stricken ; he will be crushed by remorse and the vast obligation laid upon him henceforth . 
And he will not say then , ' I am quits , ' but will say , ' I am guilty in the sight of all men and am more unworthy than all . ' 
With tears of penitence and poignant , tender anguish , he will exclaim : ` Others are better than I , they wanted to save me , not to ruin me ! ' 
Oh , this act of mercy is so easy for you , for in the absence of anything like real evidence it will be too awful for you to pronounce : ` Yes , he is guilty . ' 
`` Better acquit ten guilty men than punish one innocent man ! 
Do you hear , do you hear that majestic voice from the past century of our glorious history ? 
It is not for an insignificant person like me to remind you that the Russian court does not exist for the punishment only , but also for the salvation of the criminal ! 
Let other nations think of retribution and the letter of the law , we will cling to the spirit and the meaning - the salvation and the reformation of the lost . 
If this is true , if Russia and her justice are such , she may go forward with good cheer ! 
Do not try to scare us with your frenzied troikas from which all the nations stand aside in disgust . 
Not a runaway troika , but the stately chariot of Russia will move calmly and majestically to its goal . 
In your hands is the fate of my client , in your hands is the fate of Russian justice . 
You will defend it , you will save it , you will prove that there are men to watch over it , that it is in good hands ! '' 
The Peasants Stand Firm THIS was how Fetyukovitch concluded his speech , and the enthusiasm of the audience burst like an irresistible storm . 
It was out of the question to stop it : the women wept , many of the men wept too , even two important personages shed tears . 
The President submitted , and even postponed ringing his bell . 
The suppression of such an enthusiasm would be the suppression of something sacred , as the ladies cried afterwards . 
The orator himself was genuinely touched . 
And it was at this moment that Ippolit Kirillovitch got up to make certain objections . 
People looked at him with hatred . 
`` What ? 
What 's the meaning of it ? 
He positively dares to make objections , '' the ladies babbled . 
But if the whole world of ladies , including his wife , had protested he could not have been stopped at that moment . 
He was pale , he was shaking with emotion , his first phrases were even unintelligible , he gasped for breath , could hardly speak clearly , lost the thread . 
But he soon recovered himself . 
Of this new speech of his I will quote only a few sentences . '' 
... I am reproached with having woven a romance . 
But what is this defence if not one romance on the top of another ? 
All that was lacking was poetry . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , while waiting for his mistress , tears open the envelope and throws it on the floor . 
We are even told what he said while engaged in this strange act . 
Is not this a flight of fancy ? 
And what proof have we that he had taken out the money ? 
Who heard what he said ? 
The weak-minded idiot , Smerdyakov , transformed into a Byronic hero , avenging society for his illegitimate birth - is n't this a romance in the Byronic style ? 
And the son who breaks into his father 's house and murders him without murdering him is not even a romance - this is a sphinx setting us a riddle which he can not solve himself . 
If he murdered him , he murdered him , and what 's the meaning of his murdering him without having murdered him - who can make head or tail of this ? 
`` Then we are admonished that our tribune is a tribune of true and sound ideas and from this tribune of ` sound ideas ' is heard a solemn declaration that to call the murder of a father ` parricide ' is nothing but a prejudice ! 
But if parricide is a prejudice , and if every child is to ask his father why he is to love him , what will become of us ? 
What will become of the foundations of society ? 
What will become of the family ? 
Parricide , it appears , is only a bogy of Moscow merchants ' wives . 
The most precious , the most sacred guarantees for the destiny and future of Russian justice are presented to us in a perverted and frivolous form , simply to attain an object - to obtain the justification of something which can not be justified . 
` Oh , crush him by mercy , ' cries the counsel for the defence ; but that 's all the criminal wants , and to-morrow it will be seen how much he is crushed . 
And is not the counsel for the defence too modest in asking only for the acquittal of the prisoner ? 
Why not found a charity in the honour of the parricide to commemorate his exploit among future generations ? 
Religion and the Gospel are corrected - that 's all mysticism , we are told , and ours is the only true Christianity which has been subjected to the analysis of reason and common sense . 
And so they set up before us a false semblance of Christ ! 
` What measure ye mete so it shall be meted unto you again , ' cried the counsel for the defence , and instantly deduces that Christ teaches us to measure as it is measured to us and this from the tribune of truth and sound sense ! 
We peep into the Gospel only on the eve of making speeches , in order to dazzle the audience by our acquaintance with what is , anyway , a rather original composition , which may be of use to produce a certain effect - all to serve the purpose ! 
But what Christ commands us is something very different : He bids us beware of doing this , because the wicked world does this , but we ought to forgive and to turn the other cheek , and not to measure to our persecutors as they measure to us . 
This is what our God has taught us and not that to forbid children to murder their fathers is a prejudice . 
And we will not from the tribune of truth and good sense correct the Gospel of our Lord , Whom the counsel for the defence deigns to call only ` the crucified lover of humanity , ' in opposition to all orthodox Russia , which calls to Him , ` For Thou art our God ! ' '' 
At this the President intervened and checked the over-zealous speaker , begging him not to exaggerate , not to overstep the bounds , and so on , as presidents always do in such cases . 
The audience , too , was uneasy . 
The public was restless : there were even exclamations of indignation . 
Fetyukovitch did not so much as reply ; he only mounted the tribune to lay his hand on his heart and , with an offended voice , utter a few words full of dignity . 
He only touched again , lightly and ironically , on `` romancing '' and `` psychology , '' and in an appropriate place quoted , `` Jupiter , you are angry , therefore you are wrong , '' which provoked a burst of approving laughter in the audience , for Ippolit Kirillovitch was by no means like Jupiter . 
Then , a propos of the accusation that he was teaching the young generation to murder their fathers , Fetyukovitch observed , with great dignity , that he would not even answer . 
As for the prosecutor 's charge of uttering unorthodox opinions , Fetyukovitch hinted that it was a personal insinuation and that he had expected in this court to be secure from accusations `` damaging to my reputation as a citizen and a loyal subject . '' 
But at these words the President pulled him up , too , and Fetyukovitch concluded his speech with a bow , amid a hum of approbation in the court . 
And Ippolit Kirillovitch was , in the opinion of our ladies , `` crushed for good . '' 
Then the prisoner was allowed to speak . 
Mitya stood up , but said very little . 
He was fearfully exhausted , physically and mentally . 
The look of strength and independence with which he had entered in the morning had almost disappeared . 
He seemed as though he had passed through an experience that day , which had taught him for the rest of his life something very important he had not understood till then . 
His voice was weak , he did not shout as before . 
In his words there was a new note of humility , defeat and submission . 
`` What am I to say , gentlemen of the jury ? 
The hour of judgment has come for me , I feel the hand of God upon me ! 
The end has come to an erring man ! 
But , before God , I repeat to you , I am innocent of my father 's blood ! 
For the last time I repeat , it was n't I killed him ! 
I was erring , but I loved what is good . 
Every instant I strove to reform , but I lived like a wild beast . 
I thank the prosecutor , he told me many things about myself that I did not know ; but it 's not true that I killed my father , the prosecutor is mistaken . 
I thank my counsel , too . 
I cried listening to him ; but it 's not true that I killed my father , and he need n't have supposed it . 
And do n't believe the doctors . 
I am perfectly sane , only my heart is heavy . 
If you spare me , if you let me go , I will pray for you . 
I will be a better man . 
I give you my word before God I will ! 
And if you will condemn me , I 'll break my sword over my head myself and kiss the pieces . 
But spare me , do not rob me of my God ! 
I know myself , I shall rebel ! 
My heart is heavy , gentlemen ... spare me ! '' 
He almost fell back in his place : his voice broke : he could hardly articulate the last phrase . 
Then the judges proceeded to put the questions and began to ask both sides to formulate their conclusions . 
But I will not describe the details . 
At last the jury rose to retire for consultation . 
The President was very tired , and so his last charge to the jury was rather feeble . 
`` Be impartial , do n't be influenced by the eloquence of the defence , but yet weigh the arguments . 
Remember that there is a great responsibility laid upon you , '' and so on and so on . 
The jury withdrew and the court adjourned . 
People could get up , move about , exchange their accumulated impressions , refresh themselves at the buffet . 
It was very late , almost one o'clock in the night , but nobody went away : the strain was so great that no one could think of repose . 
All waited with sinking hearts ; though that is , perhaps , too much to say , for the ladies were only in a state of hysterical impatience and their hearts were untroubled . 
An acquittal , they thought , was inevitable . 
They all prepared themselves for a dramatic moment of general enthusiasm . 
I must own there were many among the men , too , who were convinced that an acquittal was inevitable . 
Some were pleased , others frowned , while some were simply dejected , not wanting him to be acquitted . 
Fetyukovitch himself was confident of his success . 
He was surrounded by people congratulating him and fawning upon him . 
`` There are , '' he said to one group , as I was told afterwards , `` there are invisible threads binding the counsel for the defence with the jury . 
One feels during one 's speech if they are being formed . 
I was aware of them . 
They exist . 
Our cause is won . 
Set your mind at rest . '' 
`` What will our peasants say now ? '' 
said one stout , cross-looking , pock-marked gentleman , a landowner of the neighbourhood , approaching a group of gentlemen engaged in conversation . 
`` But they are not all peasants . 
There are four government clerks among them . '' 
`` Yes , there are clerks , '' said a member of the district council , joining the group . 
`` And do you know that Nazaryev , the merchant with the medal , a juryman ? '' 
`` What of him ? '' 
`` He is a man with brains . '' 
`` But he never speaks . '' 
`` He is no great talker , but so much the better . 
There 's no need for the Petersburg man to teach him : he could teach all Petersburg himself . 
He 's the father of twelve children . 
Think of that ! '' 
`` Upon my word , you do n't suppose they wo n't acquit him ? '' 
one of our young officials exclaimed in another group . 
`` They 'll acquit him for certain , '' said a resolute voice . 
`` It would be shameful , disgraceful , not to acquit him cried the official . 
`` Suppose he did murder him - there are fathers and fathers ! 
And , besides , he was in such a frenzy ... . 
He really may have done nothing but swing the pestle in the air , and so knocked the old man down . 
But it was a pity they dragged the valet in . 
That was simply an absurd theory ! 
If I 'd been in Fetyukovitch 's place , I should simply have said straight out : ` He murdered him ; but he is not guilty , hang it all ! ' 
`` That 's what he did , only without saying , ` Hang it all ! ' '' 
`` No , Mihail Semyonovitch , he almost said that , too , '' put in a third voice . 
`` Why , gentlemen , in Lent an actress was acquitted in our town who had cut the throat of her lover 's lawful wife . '' 
`` Oh , but she did not finish cutting it . '' 
`` That makes no difference . 
She began cutting it . '' 
`` What did you think of what he said about children ? 
Splendid , was n't it ? '' 
`` Splended ! '' 
`` And about mysticism , too ! '' 
`` Oh , drop mysticism , do ! '' 
cried someone else ; `` think of Ippolit and his fate from this day forth . 
His wife will scratch his eyes out to-morrow for Mitya 's sake . '' 
`` Is she here ? '' 
`` What an idea ! 
If she 'd been here she 'd have scratched them out in court . 
She is at home with toothache . 
He he he ! '' 
`` He he he ! '' 
In a third group : `` I dare say they will acquit Mitenka , after all . '' 
`` I should not be surprised if he turns the Metropolis upside down to-morrow . 
He will be drinking for ten days ! '' 
`` Oh , the devil ! '' 
`` The devil 's bound to have a hand in it . 
Where should he be if not here ? '' 
`` Well , gentlemen , I admit it was eloquent . 
But still it 's not the thing to break your father 's head with a pestle ! 
Or what are we coming to ? '' 
`` The chariot ! 
Do you remember the chariot ? '' 
`` Yes ; he turned a cart into a chariot ! '' 
`` And to-morrow he will turn a chariot into a cart , just to suit his purpose . '' 
`` What cunning chaps there are nowadays ! 
Is there any justice to be had in Russia ? '' 
But the bell rang . 
The jury deliberated for exactly an hour , neither more nor less . 
A profound silence reigned in the court as soon as the public had taken their seats . 
I remember how the jurymen walked into the court . 
At last ! 
I wo n't repeat the questions in order , and , indeed , I have forgotten them . 
I remember only the answer to the President 's first and chief question : `` Did the prisoner commit the murder for the sake of robbery and with premeditation ? '' 
-LRB- I do n't remember the exact words . -RRB- 
There was a complete hush . 
The foreman of the jury , the youngest of the clerks , pronounced , in a clear , loud voice , amidst the deathlike stillness of the court : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
And the same answer was repeated to every question : `` Yes , guilty ! '' 
and without the slightest extenuating comment . 
This no one had expected ; almost everyone had reckoned upon a recommendation to mercy , at least . 
The death-like silence in the court was not broken - all seemed petrified : those who desired his conviction as well as those who had been eager for his acquittal . 
But that was only for the first instant , and it was followed by a fearful hubbub . 
Many of the men in the audience were pleased . 
Some were rubbing their hands with no attempt to conceal their joy . 
Those who disagreed with the verdict seemed crushed , shrugged their shoulders , whispered , but still seemed unable to realise this . 
But how shall I describe the state the ladies were in ? 
I thought they would create a riot . 
At first they could scarcely believe their ears . 
Then suddenly the whole court rang with exclamations : `` What 's the meaning of it ? 
What next ? '' 
They leapt up from their places . 
They seemed to fancy that it might be at once reconsidered and reversed . 
At that instant Mitya suddenly stood up and cried in a heart-rending voice , stretching his hands out before him : `` I swear by God and the dreadful Day of Judgment I am not guilty of my father 's blood ! 
Katya , I forgive you ! 
Brothers , friends , have pity on the other woman ! '' 
He could not go on , and broke into a terrible sobbing wail that was heard all over the court in a strange , unnatural voice unlike his own . 
From the farthest corner at the back of the gallery came a piercing shriek - it was Grushenka . 
She had succeeded in begging admittance to the court again before the beginning of the lawyers ' speeches . 
Mitya was taken away . 
The passing of the sentence was deferred till next day . 
The whole court was in a hubbub but I did not wait to hear . 
I only remember a few exclamations I heard on the steps as I went out . 
`` He 'll have a twenty years ' trip to the mines ! '' 
`` Not less . '' 
`` Well , our peasants have stood firm . '' 
`` And have done for our Mitya . '' 
EPILOGUE Plans for Mitya 's Escape VERY early , at nine o'clock in the morning , five days after the trial , Alyosha went to Katerina Ivanovna 's to talk over a matter of great importance to both of them , and to give her a message . 
She sat and talked to him in the very room in which she had once received Grushenka . 
In the next room Ivan Fyodorovitch lay unconscious in a high fever . 
Katerina Ivanovna had immediately after the scene at the trial ordered the sick and unconscious man to be carried to her house , disregarding the inevitable gossip and general disapproval of the public . 
One of two relations who lived with her had departed to Moscow immediately after the scene in court , the other remained . 
But if both had gone away , Katerina Ivanovna would have adhered to her resolution , and would have gone on nursing the sick man and sitting by him day and night . 
Varvinsky and Herzenstube were attending him . 
The famous doctor had gone back to Moscow , refusing to give an opinion as to the probable end of the illness . 
Though the doctors encouraged Katerina Ivanovna and Alyosha , it was evident that they could not yet give them positive hopes of recovery . 
Alyosha came to see his sick brother twice a day . 
But this time he had specially urgent business , and he foresaw how difficult it would be to approach the subject , yet he was in great haste . 
He had another engagement that could not be put off for that same morning , and there was need of haste . 
They had been talking for a quarter of an hour . 
Katerina Ivanovna was pale and terribly fatigued , yet at the same time in a state of hysterical excitement . 
She had a presentiment of the reason why Alyosha had come to her . 
`` Do n't worry about his decision , '' she said , with confident emphasis to Alyosha . 
`` One way or another he is bound to come to it . 
He must escape . 
That unhappy man , that hero of honour and principle - not he , not Dmitri Fyodorovitch , but the man lying the other side of that door , who has sacrificed himself for his brother , '' Katya added , with flashing eyes - `` told me the whole plan of escape long ago . 
You know he has already entered into negotiations ... . 
I 've told you something already ... . 
You see , it will probably come off at the third etape from here , when the party of prisoners is being taken to Siberia . 
Oh , it 's a long way off yet . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch has already visited the superintendent of the third etape . 
But we do n't know yet who will be in charge of the party , and it 's impossible to find that out so long beforehand . 
To-morrow , perhaps , I will show you in detail the whole plan which Ivan Fyodorovitch left me on the eve of the trial in case of need ... . 
That was when - do you remember ? 
- you found us quarrelling . 
He had just gone downstairs , but seeing you I made him come back ; do you remember ? 
Do you know what we were quarrelling about then ? '' 
`` No , I do n't , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Of course he did not tell you . 
It was about that plan of escape . 
He had told me the main idea three days before , and we began quarrelling about it at once and quarrelled for three days . 
We quarrelled because , when he told me that if Dmitri Fyodorovitch were convicted he would escape abroad with that creature , I felt furious at once - I ca n't tell you why , I do n't know myself why ... . 
Oh , of course , I was furious then about that creature , and that she , too , should go abroad with Dmitri ! '' 
Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly , her lips quivering with anger . 
`` As soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch saw that I was furious about that woman , he instantly imagined I was jealous of Dmitri and that I still loved Dmitri . 
That is how our first quarrel began . 
I would not give an explanation , I could not ask forgiveness . 
I could not bear to think that such a man could suspect me of still loving that ... and when I myself had told him long before that I did not love Dmitri , that I loved no one but him ! 
It was only resentment against that creature that made me angry with him . 
Three days later , on the evening you came , he brought me a sealed envelope , which I was to open at once , if anything happened to him . 
Oh , he foresaw his illness ! 
He told me that the envelope contained the details of the escape , and that if he died or was taken dangerously ill , I was to save Mitya alone . 
Then he left me money , nearly ten thousand - those notes to which the prosecutor referred in his speech , having learnt from someone that he had sent them to be changed . 
I was tremendously impressed to find that Ivan Fyodorovitch had not given up his idea of saving his brother , and was confiding this plan of escape to me , though he was still jealous of me and still convinced that I loved Mitya . 
Oh , that was a sacrifice ! 
No , you can not understand the greatness of such self-sacrifice , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I wanted to fall at his feet in reverence , but I thought at once that he would take it only for my joy at the thought of Mitya 's being saved -LRB- and he certainly would have imagined that ! -RRB- 
, and I was so exasperated at the mere possibility of such an unjust thought on his part that I lost my temper again , and instead of kissing his feet , flew into a fury again ! 
Oh , I am unhappy ! 
It 's my character , my awful , unhappy character ! 
Oh , you will see , I shall end by driving him , too , to abandon me for another with whom he can get on better , like Dmitri . 
But ... no , I could not bear it , I should kill myself . 
And when you came in then , and when I called to you and told him to come back , I was so enraged by the look of contempt and hatred he turned on me that do you remember ? 
- I cried out to you that it was he , he alone who had persuaded me that his brother Dmitri was a murderer ! 
I said that malicious thing on purpose to wound him again . 
He had never , never persuaded me that his brother was a murderer . 
On the contrary , it was I who persuaded him ! 
Oh , my vile temper was the cause of everything ! 
I paved the way to that hideous scene at the trial . 
He wanted to show me that he was an honourable man , and that , even if I loved his brother , he would not ruin him for revenge or jealousy . 
So he came to the court ... I am the cause of it all , I alone am to blame ! '' 
Katya never had made such confessions to Alyosha before , and he felt that she was now at that stage of unbearable suffering when even the proudest heart painfully crushes its pride and falls vanquished by grief . 
Oh , Alyosha knew another terrible reason of her present misery , though she had carefully concealed it from him during those days since the trial ; but it would have been , for some reason , too painful to him if she had been brought so low as to speak to him now about that . 
She was suffering for her `` treachery '' at the trial , and Alyosha felt that her conscience was impelling her to confess it to him , to him , Alyosha , with tears and cries and hysterical writhings on the floor . 
But he dreaded that moment and longed to spare her . 
It made the commission on which he had come even more difficult . 
He spoke of Mitya again . 
`` It 's all right , it 's all right , do n't be anxious about him ! 
she began again , sharply and stubbornly . 
`` All that is only momentary , I know him , I know his heart only too well . 
You may be sure he will consent to escape . 
It 's not as though it would be immediately ; he will have time to make up his mind to it . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch will be well by that time and will manage it all himself , so that I shall have nothing to do with it . 
Do n't be anxious ; he will consent to run away . 
He has agreed already : do you suppose he would give up that creature ? 
And they wo n't let her go to him , so he is bound to escape . 
It 's you he 's most afraid of , he is afraid you wo n't approve of his escape on moral grounds . 
But you must generously allow it , if your sanction is so necessary , '' Katya added viciously . 
She paused and smiled . 
`` He talks about some hymn , '' she went on again , `` some cross he has to bear , some duty ; I remember Ivan Fyodorovitch told me a great deal about it , and if you knew how he talked ! 
Katya cried suddenly , with feeling she could not repress , `` If you knew how he loved that wretched man at the moment he told me , and how he hated him , perhaps , at the same moment . 
And I heard his story and his tears with sneering disdain . 
Brute ! 
Yes , I am a brute . 
I am responsible for his fever . 
But that man in prison is incapable of suffering , '' Katya concluded irritably . 
`` Can such a man suffer ? 
Men like him never suffer ! '' 
There was a note of hatred and contemptuous repulsion in her words . 
And yet it was she who had betrayed him . 
`` Perhaps because she feels how she 's wronged him she hates him at moments , '' Alyosha thought to himself . 
He hoped that it was only `` at moments . '' 
In Katya 's last words he detected a challenging note , but he did not take it up . 
`` I sent for you this morning to make you promise to persuade him yourself . 
Or do you , too , consider that to escape would be dishonourable , cowardly , or something ... unchristian , perhaps ? '' 
Katya added , even more defiantly . 
`` Oh , no . 
I 'll tell him everything , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` He asks you to come and see him to-day , '' he blurted out suddenly , looking her steadily in the face . 
She started , and drew back a little from him on the sofa . 
`` Me ? 
Can that be ? '' 
She faltered , turning pale . 
`` It can and ought to be ! '' 
Alyosha began emphatically , growing more animated . 
`` He needs you particularly just now . 
I would not have opened the subject and worried you , if it were not necessary . 
He is ill , he is beside himself , he keeps asking for you . 
It is not to be reconciled with you that he wants you , but only that you would go and show yourself at his door . 
So much has happened to him since that day . 
He realises that he has injured you beyond all reckoning . 
He does not ask your forgiveness - ` It 's impossible to forgive me , ' he says himself - but only that you would show yourself in his doorway . '' 
`` It 's so sudden ... '' faltered Katya . 
`` I 've had a presentiment all these days that you would come with that message . 
I knew he would ask me to come . 
It 's impossible ! '' 
`` Let it be impossible , but do it . 
Only think , he realises for the first time how he has wounded you , the first time in his life ; he had never grasped it before so fully . 
He said , ` If she refuses to come I shall be unhappy all my life . ' 
you hear ? 
though he is condemned to penal servitude for twenty years , he is still planning to be happy - is not that piteous ? 
Think - you must visit him ; though he is ruined , he is innocent , '' broke like a challenge from Alyosha . 
`` His hands are clean , there is no blood on them ! 
For the sake of his infinite sufferings in the future visit him now . 
Go , greet him on his way into the darkness - stand at his door , that is all ... . 
You ought to do it , you ought to ! '' 
Alyosha concluded , laying immense stress on the word `` ought . '' 
`` I ought to ... but I can not ... '' Katya moaned . 
`` He will look at me ... . 
I ca n't . '' 
`` Your eyes ought to meet . 
How will you live all your life , if you do n't make up your mind to do it now ? '' 
`` Better suffer all my life . '' 
`` You ought to go , you ought to go , '' Alyosha repeated with merciless emphasis . 
`` But why to-day , why at once ? 
... I ca n't leave our patient - '' `` You can for a moment . 
It will only be a moment . 
If you do n't come , he will be in delirium by to-night . 
I would not tell you a lie ; have pity on him ! '' 
`` Have pity on me ! '' 
Katya said , with bitter reproach , and she burst into tears . 
`` Then you will come , '' said Alyosha firmly , seeing her tears . 
`` I 'll go and tell him you will come directly . '' 
`` No , do n't tell him so on any account , '' cried Katya in alarm . 
`` I will come , but do n't tell him beforehand , for perhaps I may go , but not go in ... I do n't know yet - '' Her voice failed her . 
She gasped for breath . 
Alyosha got up to go . 
`` And what if I meet anyone ? '' 
she said suddenly , in a low voice , turning white again . 
`` That 's just why you must go now , to avoid meeting anyone . 
There will be no one there , I can tell you that for certain . 
We will expect you , '' he concluded emphatically , and went out of the room . 
For a Moment the Lie Becomes Truth HE hurried to the hospital where Mitya was lying now . 
The day after his fate was determined , Mitya had fallen ill with nervous fever , and was sent to the prison division of the town hospital . 
But at the request of several persons -LRB- Alyosha , Madame Hohlakov , Lise , etc. -RRB- , Doctor Varvinsky had put Mitya not with other prisoners , but in a separate little room , the one where Smerdyakov had been . 
It is true that there was a sentinel at the other end of the corridor , and there was a grating over the window , so that Varvinsky could be at ease about the indulgence he had shown , which was not quite legal , indeed ; but he was a kind-hearted and compassionate young man . 
He knew how hard it would be for a man like Mitya to pass at once so suddenly into the society of robbers and murderers , and that he must get used to it by degrees . 
The visits of relations and friends were informally sanctioned by the doctor and overseer , and even by the police captain . 
But only Alyosha and Grushenka had visited Mitya . 
Rakitin had tried to force his way in twice , but Mitya persistently begged Varvinsky not to admit him . 
Alyosha found him sitting on his bed in a hospital dressing gown , rather feverish , with a towel , soaked in vinegar and water , on his head . 
He looked at Alyosha as he came in with an undefined expression , but there was a shade of something like dread discernible in it . 
He had become terribly preoccupied since the trial ; sometimes he would be silent for half an hour together , and seemed to be pondering something heavily and painfully , oblivious of everything about him . 
If he roused himself from his brooding and began to talk , he always spoke with a kind of abruptness and never of what he really wanted to say . 
He looked sometimes with a face of suffering at his brother . 
He seemed to be more at ease with Grushenka than with Alyosha . 
It is true , he scarcely spoke to her at all , but as soon as she came in , his whole face lighted up with joy . 
Alyosha sat down beside him on the bed in silence . 
This time Mitya was waiting for Alyosha in suspense , but he did not dare ask him a question . 
He felt it almost unthinkable that Katya would consent to come , and at the same time he felt that if she did not come , something inconceivable would happen . 
Alyosha understood his feelings . 
`` Trifon Borissovitch , '' Mitya began nervously , `` has pulled his whole inn to pieces , I am told . 
He 's taken up the flooring , pulled apart the planks , split up all the gallery , I am told . 
He is seeking treasure all the time - the fifteen hundred roubles which the prosecutor said I 'd hidden there . 
He began playing these tricks , they say , as soon as he got home . 
Serve him right , the swindler ! 
The guard here told me yesterday ; he comes from there . '' 
`` Listen , '' began Alyosha . 
`` She will come , but I do n't know when . 
Perhaps to-day , perhaps in a few days , that I ca n't tell . 
But she will come , she will , that 's certain . '' 
Mitya started , would have said something , but was silent . 
The news had a tremendous effect on him . 
It was evident that he would have liked terribly to know what had been said , but he was again afraid to ask . 
Something cruel and contemptuous from Katya would have cut him like a knife at that moment . 
`` This was what she said among other things ; that I must be sure to set your conscience at rest about escaping . 
If Ivan is not well by then she will see to it all herself . '' 
`` You 've spoken of that already , '' Mitya observed musingly . 
`` And you have repeated it to Grusha , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` Yes , '' Mitya admitted . 
`` She wo n't come this morning . '' 
He looked timidly at his brother . 
`` She wo n't come till the evening . 
When I told her yesterday that Katya was taking measures , she was silent , but she set her mouth . 
She only whispered , ` Let her ! ' 
She understood that it was important . 
I did not dare to try her further . 
She understands now , I think , that Katya no longer cares for me , but loves Ivan . '' 
`` Does she ? '' 
broke from Alyosha . 
`` Perhaps she does not . 
Only she is not coming this morning , '' Mitya hastened to explain again ; `` I asked her to do something for me . 
You know , Ivan is superior to all of us . 
He ought to live , not us . 
He will recover . '' 
`` Would you believe it , though Katya is alarmed about him , she scarcely doubts of his recovery , '' said Alyosha . 
`` That means that she is convinced he will die . 
It 's because she is frightened she 's so sure he will get well . '' 
`` Ivan has a strong constitution , and I , too , believe there 's every hope that he will get well , '' Alyosha observed anxiously . 
`` Yes , he will get well . 
But she is convinced that he will die . 
She has a great deal of sorrow to bear ... '' A silence followed . 
A grave anxiety was fretting Mitya . 
`` Alyosha , I love Grusha terribly , '' he said suddenly in a shaking voice , full of tears . 
`` They wo n't let her go out there to you , '' Alyosha put in at once . 
`` And there is something else I wanted tell you , '' Mitya went on , with a sudden ring in his voice . 
`` If they beat me on the way or out there , I wo n't submit to it . 
I shall kill someone , and shall be shot for it . 
And this will be going on for twenty years ! 
They speak to me rudely as it is . 
I 've been lying here all night , passing judgment on myself . 
I am not ready ! 
I am not able to resign myself . 
I wanted to sing a ` hymn ' ; but if a guard speaks rudely to me , I have not the strength to bear it . 
For Grusha I would bear anything ... anything except blows ... . 
But she wo n't be allowed to come there . '' 
Alyosha smiled gently . 
`` Listen , brother , once for all , '' he said . 
`` This is what I think about it . 
And you know that I would not tell you a lie . 
Listen : you are not ready , and such a cross is not for you . 
What 's more , you do n't need such a martyr 's cross when you are not ready for it . 
If you had murdered our father , it would grieve me that you should reject your punishment . 
But you are innocent , and such a cross is too much for you . 
You wanted to make yourself another man by suffering . 
I say , only remember that other man always , all your life and wherever you go ; and that will be enough for you . 
Your refusal of that great cross will only serve to make you feel all your life even greater duty , and that constant feeling will do more to make you a new man , perhaps , than if you went there . 
For there you would not endure it and would repine , and perhaps at last would say : ' I am quits . ' 
The lawyer was right about that . 
Such heavy burdens are not for all men . 
For some they are impossible . 
These are my thoughts about it , if you want them so much . 
If other men would have to answer for your escape , officers or soldiers , then I would not have ` allowed ' you , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But they declare - the superintendent of that etape * told Ivan himself - that if it 's well managed there will be no great inquiry , and that they can get off easily . 
Of course , bribing is dishonest even in such a case , but I ca n't undertake to judge about it , because if Ivan and Katya commissioned me to act for you , I know I should go and give bribes . 
I must tell you the truth . 
And so I ca n't judge of your own action . 
But let me assure you that I shall never condemn you . 
And it would be a strange thing if I could judge you in this . 
Now I think I 've gone into everything . '' 
* Stockade . 
`` But I do condemn myself ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I shall escape , that was settled apart from you ; could Mitya Karamazov do anything but run away ? 
But I shall condemn myself , and I will pray for my sin for ever . 
That 's how the Jesuits talk , is n't it ? 
Just as we are doing ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
Alyosha smiled gently . 
`` I love you for always telling the whole truth and never hiding anything , '' cried Mitya , with a joyful laugh . 
`` So I 've caught my Alyosha being Jesuitical . 
I must kiss you for that . 
Now listen to the rest ; I 'll open the other side of my heart to you . 
This is what I planned and decided . 
If I run away , even with money and a passport , and even to America , I should be cheered up by the thought that I am not running away for pleasure , not for happiness , but to another exile as bad , perhaps , as Siberia . 
It is as bad , Alyosha , it is ! 
I hate that America , damn it , already . 
Even though Grusha will be with me . 
Just look at her ; is she an American ? 
She is Russian , Russian to the marrow of her bones ; she will be homesick for the mother country , and I shall see every hour that she is suffering for my sake , that she has taken up that cross for me . 
And what harm has she done ? 
And how shall I , too , put up with the rabble out there , though they may be better than I , every one of them ? 
I hate that America already ! 
And though they may be wonderful at machinery , every one of them , damn them , they are not of my soul . 
I love Russia , Alyosha , I love the Russian God , though I am a scoundrel myself . 
I shall choke there ! '' 
he exclaimed , his eyes suddenly flashing . 
His voice was trembling with tears . 
`` So this is what I 've decided , Alyosha , listen , '' he began again , mastering his emotion . 
`` As soon as I arrive there with Grusha , we will set to work at once on the land , in solitude , somewhere very remote , with wild bears . 
There must be some remote parts even there . 
I am told there are still Redskins there , somewhere , on the edge of the horizon . 
So to the country of the Last of the Mohicans , and there we 'll tackle the grammar at once , Grusha and I. Work and grammar - that 's how we 'll spend three years . 
And by that time we shall speak English like any Englishman . 
And as soon as we 've learnt it - good-bye to America ! 
We 'll run here to Russia as American citizens . 
Do n't be uneasy - we would not come to this little town . 
We 'd hide somewhere , a long way off , in the north or in the south . 
I shall be changed by that time , and she will , too , in America . 
The doctors shall make me some sort of wart on my face - what 's the use of their being so mechanical ! 
- or else I 'll put out one eye , let my beard grow a yard , and I shall turn grey , fretting for Russia . 
I dare say they wo n't recognise us . 
And if they do , let them send us to Siberia - I do n't care . 
It will show it 's our fate . 
We 'll work on the land here , too , somewhere in the wilds , and I 'll make up as an American all my life . 
But we shall die on our own soil . 
That 's my plan , and it sha n't be altered . 
Do you approve ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Alyosha , not wanting to contradict him . 
Mitya paused for a minute and said suddenly : `` And how they worked it up at the trial ! 
Did n't they work it up ! '' 
`` If they had not , you would have been convicted just the same , '' said Alyosha , with a sigh . 
`` Yes , people are sick of me here ! 
God bless them , but it 's hard , '' Mitya moaned miserably . 
Again there was silence for a minute . 
`` Alyosha , put me out of my misery at once ! '' 
he exclaimed suddenly . 
`` Tell me , is she coming now , or not ? 
Tell me ? 
What did she say ? 
How did she say it ? '' 
`` She said she would come , but I do n't know whether she will come to-day . 
It 's hard for her , you know , '' Alyosha looked timidly at his brother . 
`` I should think it is hard for her ! 
Alyosha , it will drive me out of my mind . 
Grusha keeps looking at me . 
She understands . 
My God , calm my heart : what is it I want ? 
I want Katya ! 
Do I understand what I want ? 
It 's the headstrong , evil Karamazov spirit ! 
No , I am not fit for suffering . 
I am a scoundrel , that 's all one can say . '' 
`` Here she is ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
At that instant Katya appeared in the doorway . 
For a moment she stood still , gazing at Mitya with a dazed expression . 
He leapt pulsively to his feet , and a scared look came into his face . 
He turned pale , but a timid , pleading smile appeared on his lips at once , and with an irresistible impulse he held out both hands to Katya . 
Seeing it , she flew impetuously to him . 
She seized him by the hands , and almost by force made him sit down on the bed . 
She sat down beside him , and still keeping his hands pressed them violently . 
Several times they both strove to speak , but stopped short and again gazed speechless with a strange smile , their eyes fastened on one another . 
So passed two minutes . 
`` Have you forgiven me ? '' 
Mitya faltered at last , and at the same moment turning to Alyosha , his face working with joy , he cried , `` Do you hear what I am asking , do you hear ? '' 
`` That 's what I loved you for , that you are generous at heart ! '' 
broke from Katya . 
`` My forgiveness is no good to you , nor yours to me ; whether you forgive me or not , you will always be a sore place in my heart , and I in yours - so it must be ... '' She stopped to take breath . 
