I paid no attention to her at all , but all at once , when the minute came , I 'd be all devotion to her , crawl on my knees , kiss her feet , and I always , always - I remember it as though it were to-day - reduced her to that tinkling , quiet , nervous , queer little laugh . 
It was peculiar to her . 
I knew her attacks always used to begin like that . 
The next day she would begin shrieking hysterically , and this little laugh was not a sign of delight , though it made a very good counterfeit . 
That 's the great thing , to know how to take everyone . 
Once Belyavsky - he was a handsome fellow , and rich - used to like to come here and hang about her - suddenly gave me a slap in the face in her presence . 
And she - such a mild sheep - why , I thought she would have knocked me down for that blow . 
How she set on me ! 
` You 're beaten , beaten now , ' she said , ` You 've taken a blow from him . 
You have been trying to sell me to him , ' she said ... ` And how dared he strike you in my presence ! 
Do n't dare come near me again , never , never ! 
Run at once , challenge him to a duel ! ' 
... I took her to the monastery then to bring her to her senses . 
The holy Fathers prayed her back to reason . 
But I swear , by God , Alyosha , I never insulted the poor crazy girl ! 
Only once , perhaps , in the first year ; then she was very fond of praying . 
She used to keep the feasts of Our Lady particularly and used to turn me out of her room then . 
I 'll knock that mysticism out of her , thought I ! 
` Here , ' said I , ` you see your holy image . 
Here it is . 
Here I take it down . 
You believe it 's miraculous , but here , I 'll spit on it directly and nothing will happen to me for it ! ' 
... When she saw it , good Lord ! 
I thought she would kill me . 
But she only jumped up , wrung her hands , then suddenly hid her face in them , began trembling all over and fell on the floor ... fell all of a heap . 
Alyosha , Alyosha , what 's the matter ? '' 
The old man jumped up in alarm . 
From the time he had begun speaking about his mother , a change had gradually come over Alyosha 's face . 
He flushed crimson , his eyes glowed , his lips quivered . 
The old sot had gone spluttering on , noticing nothing , till the moment when something very strange happened to Alyosha . 
Precisely what he was describing in the crazy woman was suddenly repeated with Alyosha . 
He jumped up from his seat exactly as his mother was said to have done , wrung his hands , hid his face in them , and fell back in his chair , shaking all over in an hysterical paroxysm of sudden violent , silent weeping . 
His extraordinary resemblance to his mother particularly impressed the old man . 
`` Ivan , Ivan ! 
Water , quickly ! 
It 's like her , exactly as she used to be then , his mother . 
Spurt some water on him from your mouth , that 's what I used to do to her . 
He 's upset about his mother , his mother , '' he muttered to Ivan . 
`` But she was my mother , too , I believe , his mother . 
Was she not ? '' 
said Ivan , with uncontrolled anger and contempt . 
The old man shrank before his flashing eyes . 
But something very strange had happened , though only for a second ; it seemed really to have escaped the old man 's mind that Alyosha 's mother actually was the mother of Ivan too . 
`` Your mother ? '' 
he muttered , not understanding . 
`` What do you mean ? 
What mother are you talking about ? 
Was she ? 
... Why , damn it ! 
of course she was yours too ! 
Damn it ! 
My mind has never been so darkened before . 
Excuse me , why , I was thinking Ivan ... He he he ! '' 
He stopped . 
A broad , drunken , half senseless grin overspread his face . 
At that moment a fearful noise , and clamour was heard in the hall , there were violent shouts , the door was flung open , and Dmitri burst into the room . 
The old man rushed to Ivan in terror . 
`` He 'll kill me ! 
He 'll kill me ! 
Do n't let him get at me ! '' 
he screamed , clinging to the skirt of Ivan 's coat . 
The Sensualists GRIGORY and Smerdyakov ran into the room after Dmitri . 
They had been struggling with him in the passage , refusing to admit him , acting on instructions given them by Fyodor Pavlovitch some days before . 
Taking advantage of the fact that Dmitri stopped a moment on entering the room to look about him , Grigory ran round the table , closed the double doors on the opposite side of the room leading to the inner apartments , and stood before the closed doors , stretching wide his arms , prepared to defend the entrance , so to speak , with the last drop of his blood . 
Seeing this , Dmitri uttered a scream rather than a shout and rushed at Grigory . 
`` Then she 's there ! 
She 's hidden there ! 
Out of the way , scoundrel ! '' 
He tried to pull Grigory away , but the old servant pushed him back . 
Beside himself with fury , Dmitri struck out , and hit Grigory with all his might . 
The old man fell like a log , and Dmitri , leaping over him , broke in the door . 
Smerdyakov remained pale and trembling at the other end of the room , huddling close to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` She 's here ! '' 
shouted Dmitri . 
`` I saw her turn towards the house just now , but I could n't catch her . 
Where is she ? 
Where is she ? '' 
That shout , `` She 's here ! '' 
produced an indescribable effect on Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
All his terror left him . 
`` Hold him ! 
Hold him ! '' 
he cried , and dashed after Dmitri . 
Meanwhile Grigory had got up from the floor , but still seemed stunned . 
Ivan and Alyosha ran after their father . 
In the third room something was heard to fall on the floor with a ringing crash : it was a large glass vase - not an expensive one - on a marble pedestal which Dmitri had upset as he ran past it . 
`` At him ! '' 
shouted the old man . 
`` Help ! '' 
Ivan and Alyosha caught the old man and were forcibly bringing him back . 
`` Why do you run after him ? 
He 'll murder you outright , '' Ivan cried wrathfully at his father . 
`` Ivan ! 
Alyosha ! 
She must be here . 
Grushenka 's here . 
He said he saw her himself , running . '' 
He was choking . 
He was not expecting Grushenka at the time , and the sudden news that she was here made him beside himself . 
He was trembling all over . 
He seemed frantic . 
`` But you 've seen for yourself that she has n't come , '' cried Ivan . 
`` But she may have come by that other entrance . '' 
`` You know that entrance is locked , and you have the key . '' 
Dmitri suddenly reappeared in the drawing-room . 
He had , of course , found the other entrance locked , and the key actually was in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's pocket . 
The windows of all rooms were also closed , so Grushenka could not have come in anywhere nor have run out anywhere . 
`` Hold him ! '' 
shrieked Fyodor Pavlovitch , as soon as he saw him again . 
`` He 's been stealing money in my bedroom . '' 
And tearing himself from Ivan he rushed again at Dmitri . 
But Dmitri threw up both hands and suddenly clutched the old man by the two tufts of hair that remained on his temples , tugged at them , and flung him with a crash on the floor . 
He kicked him two or three times with his heel in the face . 
The old man moaned shrilly . 
Ivan , though not so strong as Dmitri , threw his arms round him , and with all his might pulled him away . 
Alyosha helped him with his slender strength , holding Dmitri in front . 
`` Madman ! 
You 've killed him ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` Serve him right ! '' 
shouted Dmitri breathlessly . 
`` If I have n't killed him , I 'll come again and kill him . 
You ca n't protect him ! '' 
`` Dmitri ! 
Go away at once ! '' 
cried Alyosha commandingly . 
`` Alexey ! 
You tell me . 
It 's only you I can believe ; was she here just now , or not ? 
I saw her myself creeping this way by the fence from the lane . 
I shouted , she ran away . '' 
`` I swear she 's not been here , and no one expected her . '' 
`` But I saw her ... . 
So she must ... I 'll find out at once where she is ... . 
Good-bye , Alexey ! 
Not a word to Aesop about the money now . 
But go to Katerina Ivanovna at once and be sure to say , ` He sends his compliments to you ! ' 
Compliments , his compliments ! 
just compliments and farewell ! 
Describe the scene to her . '' 
Meanwhile Ivan and Grigory had raised the old man and seated him in an arm-chair . 
His face was covered with blood , but he was conscious and listened greedily to Dmitri 's cries . 
He was still fancying that Grushenka really was somewhere in the house . 
Dmitri looked at him with hatred as he went out . 
`` I do n't repent shedding your blood ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Beware , old man , beware of your dream , for I have my dream , too . 
I curse you , and disown you altogether . '' 
He ran out of the room . 
`` She 's here . 
She must be here . 
Smerdyakov ! 
Smerdyakov ! '' 
the old man wheezed , scarcely audibly , beckoning to him with his finger . 
`` No , she 's not here , you old lunatic ! '' 
Ivan shouted at him angrily . 
`` Here , he 's fainting ? 
Water ! 
A towel ! 
Make haste , Smerdyakov ! '' 
Smerdyakov ran for water . 
At last they got the old man undressed , and put him to bed . 
They wrapped a wet towel round his head . 
Exhausted by the brandy , by his violent emotion , and the blows he had received , he shut his eyes and fell asleep as soon as his head touched the pillow . 
Ivan and Alyosha went back to the drawing-room . 
Smerdyakov removed the fragments of the broken vase , while Grigory stood by the table looking gloomily at the floor . 
`` Should n't you put a wet bandage on your head and go to bed , too ? '' 
Alyosha said to him . 
`` We 'll look after him . 
My brother gave you a terrible blow - on the head . '' 
`` He 's insulted me ! '' 
Grigory articulated gloomily and distinctly . 
`` He 's ` insulted ' his father , not only you , '' observed Ivan with a forced smile . 
`` I used to wash him in his tub . 
He 's insulted me , '' repeated Grigory . 
`` Damn it all , if I had n't pulled him away perhaps he 'd have murdered him . 
It would n't take much to do for Aesop , would it ? '' 
whispered Ivan to Alyosha . 
`` God forbid ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Why should He forbid ? '' 
Ivan went on in the same whisper , with a malignant grimace . 
`` One reptile will devour the other . 
And serve them both right , too . '' 
Alyosha shuddered . 
`` Of course I wo n't let him be murdered as I did n't just now . 
Stay here , Alyosha , I 'll go for a turn in the yard . 
My head 's begun to ache . '' 
Alyosha went to his father 's bedroom and sat by his bedside behind the screen for about an hour . 
The old man suddenly opened his eyes and gazed for a long while at Alyosha , evidently remembering and meditating . 
All at once his face betrayed extraordinary excitement . 
`` Alyosha , '' he whispered apprehensively , `` where 's Ivan ? '' 
`` In the yard . 
He 's got a headache . 
He 's on the watch . '' 
`` Give me that looking-glass . 
It stands over there . 
Give it me . '' 
Alyosha gave him a little round folding looking-glass which stood on the chest of drawers . 
The old man looked at himself in it ; his nose was considerably swollen , and on the left side of his forehead there was a rather large crimson bruise . 
`` What does Ivan say ? 
Alyosha , my dear , my only son , I 'm afraid of Ivan . 
I 'm more afraid of Ivan than the other . 
You 're the only one I 'm not afraid of ... '' `` Do n't be afraid of Ivan either . 
He is angry , but he 'll defend you . '' 
`` Alyosha , and what of the other ? 
He 's run to Grushenka . 
My angel , tell me the truth , was she here just now or not ? '' 
`` No one has seen her . 
It was a mistake . 
She has not been here . '' 
`` You know Mitya wants to marry her , to marry her . '' 
`` She wo n't marry him . '' 
`` She wo n't . 
She wo n't . 
She wo n't . 
She wo n't on any account ! '' 
The old man fairly fluttered with joy , as though nothing more comforting could have been said to him . 
In his delight he seized Alyosha 's hand and pressed it warmly to his heart . 
Tears positively glittered in his eyes . 
`` That image of the Mother of God of which I was telling you just now , '' he said . 
`` Take it home and keep it for yourself . 
And I 'll let you go back to the monastery ... . 
I was joking this morning , do n't be angry with me . 
My head aches , Alyosha ... . 
Alyosha , comfort my heart . 
Be an angel and tell me the truth ! '' 
`` You 're still asking whether she has been here or not ? '' 
Alyosha said sorrowfully . 
`` No , no , no . 
I believe you . 
I 'll tell you what it is : you go to Grushenka yourself , or see her somehow ; make haste and ask her ; see for yourself , which she means to choose , him or me . 
Eh ? 
What ? 
Can you ? '' 
`` If I see her I 'll ask her , '' Alyosha muttered , embarrassed . 
`` No , she wo n't tell you , '' the old man interrupted , `` she 's a rogue . 
She 'll begin kissing you and say that it 's you she wants . 
She 's a deceitful , shameless hussy . 
You must n't go to her , you must n't ! '' 
`` No father , and it would n't be suitable , it would n't be right at all . '' 
`` Where was he sending you just now ? 
He shouted ` Go ' as he ran away . '' 
`` For money ? 
To ask her for money ? '' 
`` No . 
Not for money . '' 
`` He 's no money ; not a farthing . 
I 'll settle down for the night , and think things over , and you can go . 
Perhaps you 'll meet her ... . 
Only be sure to come to me to-morrow in the morning . 
Be sure to . 
I have a word to say to you to-morrow . 
Will you come ? '' 
`` When you come , pretend you 've come of your own accord to ask after me . 
Do n't tell anyone I told you to . 
Do n't say a word to Ivan . '' 
`` Very well . '' 
`` Good-bye , my angel . 
You stood up for me , just now . 
I shall never forget it . 
I 've a word to say to you to-morrow - but I must think about it . '' 
`` And how do you feel now ? '' 
`` I shall get up to-morrow and go out , perfectly well , perfectly well ! '' 
Crossing the yard Alyosha found Ivan sitting on the bench at the gateway . 
He was sitting writing something in pencil in his notebook . 
Alyosha told Ivan that their father had waked up , was conscious , and had let him go back to sleep at the monastery . 
`` Alyosha , I should be very glad to meet you to-morrow morning , '' said Ivan cordially , standing up . 
His cordiality was a complete surprise to Alyosha . 
`` I shall be at the Hohlakovs ' to-morrow , '' answered Alyosha , `` I may be at Katerina Ivanovna 's , too , if I do n't find her now . '' 
`` But you 're going to her now , anyway ? 
For that ` compliments and farewell , ' '' said Ivan smiling . 
Alyosha was disconcerted . 
`` I think I quite understand his exclamations just now , and part of what went before . 
Dmitri has asked you to go to her and say that he - well , in fact - takes his leave of her ? '' 
`` Brother , how will all this horror end between father and Dmitri ? '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
`` One ca n't tell for certain . 
Perhaps in nothing : it may all fizzle out . 
That woman is a beast . 
In any case we must keep the old man indoors and not let Dmitri in the house . '' 
`` Brother , let me ask one thing more : has any man a right to look at other men and decide which is worthy to live ? '' 
`` Why bring in the question of worth ? 
The matter is most often decided in men 's hearts on other grounds much more natural . 
And as for rights - who has not the right to wish ? '' 
`` Not for another man 's death ? '' 
`` What even if for another man 's death ? 
Why lie to oneself since all men live so and perhaps can not help living so . 
Are you referring to what I said just now - that one reptile will devour the other ? 
In that case let me ask you , do you think me like Dmitri capable of shedding Aesop 's blood , murdering him , eh ? '' 
`` What are you saying , Ivan ? 
Such an idea never crossed my mind . 
I do n't think Dmitri is capable of it , either . '' 
`` Thanks , if only for that , '' smiled Ivan . 
`` Be sure , I should always defend him . 
But in my wishes I reserve myself full latitude in this case . 
Good-bye till to-morrow . 
Do n't condemn me , and do n't look on me as a villain , '' he added with a smile . 
They shook hands warmly as they had never done before . 
Alyosha felt that his brother had taken the first step towards him , and that he had certainly done this with some definite motive . 
Both Together ALYOSHA left his father 's house feeling even more exhausted and dejected in spirit than when he had entered it . 
His mind too seemed shattered and unhinged , while he felt that he was afraid to put together the disjointed fragments and form a general idea from all the agonising and conflicting experiences of the day . 
He felt something bordering upon despair , which he had never known till then . 
Towering like a mountain above all the rest stood the fatal , insoluble question : How would things end between his father and his brother Dmitri with this terrible woman ? 
Now he had himself been a witness of it , he had been present and seen them face to face . 
Yet only his brother Dmitri could be made unhappy , terribly , completely unhappy : there was trouble awaiting him . 
It appeared too that there were other people concerned , far more so than Alyosha could have supposed before . 
There was something positively mysterious in it , too . 
Ivan had made a step towards him , which was what Alyosha had been long desiring . 
Yet now he felt for some reason that he was frightened at it . 
And these women ? 
Strange to say , that morning he had set out for Katerina Ivanovna 's in the greatest embarrassment ; now he felt nothing of the kind . 
On the contrary , he was hastening there as though expecting to find guidance from her . 
Yet to give her this message was obviously more difficult than before . 
The matter of the three thousand was decided irrevocably , and Dmitri , feeling himself dishonoured and losing his last hope , might sink to any depth . 
He had , moreover , told him to describe to Katerina Ivanovna the scene which had just taken place with his father . 
It was by now seven o'clock , and it was getting dark as Alyosha entered the very spacious and convenient house in the High Street occupied by Katerina Ivanovna . 
Alyosha knew that she lived with two aunts . 
One of them , a woman of little education , was that aunt of her half-sister Agafya Ivanovna who had looked after her in her father 's house when she came from boarding-school . 
The other aunt was a Moscow lady of style and consequence , though in straitened circumstances . 
It was said that they both gave way in everything to Katerina Ivanovna , and that she only kept them with her as chaperons . 
Katerina Ivanovna herself gave way to no one but her benefactress , the general 's widow , who had been kept by illness in Moscow , and to whom she was obliged to write twice a week a full account of all her doings . 
When Alyosha entered the hall and asked the maid who opened the door to him to take his name up , it was evident that they were already aware of his arrival . 
Possibly he had been noticed from the window . 
At least , Alyosha heard a noise , caught the sound of flying footsteps and rustling skirts . 
Two or three women , perhaps , had run out of the room . 
Alyosha thought it strange that his arrival should cause such excitement . 
He was conducted , however , to the drawing-room at once . 
It was a large room , elegantly and amply furnished , not at all in provincial style . 
There were many sofas , lounges , settees , big and little tables . 
There were pictures on the walls , vases and lamps on the tables , masses of flowers , and even an aquarium in the window . 
It was twilight and rather dark . 
Alyosha made out a silk mantle thrown down on the sofa , where people had evidently just been sitting ; and on a table in front of the sofa were two unfinished cups of chocolate , cakes , a glass saucer with blue raisins , and another with sweetmeats . 
Alyosha saw that he had interrupted visitors , and frowned . 
But at that instant the portiere was raised , and with rapid , hurrying footsteps Katerina Ivanovna came in , holding out both hands to Alyosha with a radiant smile of delight . 
At the same instant a servant brought in two lighted candles and set them on the table . 
`` Thank God ! 
At last you have come too ! 
I 've been simply praying for you all day ! 
Sit down . '' 
Alyosha had been struck by Katerina Ivanovna 's beauty when , three weeks before , Dmitri had first brought him , at Katerina Ivanovna 's special request , to be introduced to her . 
There had been no conversation between them at that interview , however . 
Supposing Alyosha to be very shy , Katerina Ivanovna had talked all the time to Dmitri to spare him . 
Alyosha had been silent , but he had seen a great deal very clearly . 
He was struck by the imperiousness , proud ease , and self-confidence of the haughty girl . 
And all that was certain , Alyosha felt that he was not exaggerating it . 
He thought her great glowing black eyes were very fine , especially with her pale , even rather sallow , longish face . 
But in those eyes and in the lines of her exquisite lips there was something with which his brother might well be passionately in love , but which perhaps could not be loved for long . 
He expressed this thought almost plainly to Dmitri when , after the visit , his brother besought and insisted that he should not conceal his impressions on seeing his betrothed . 
`` You 'll be happy with her , but perhaps not tranquilly happy . '' 
`` Quite so , brother . 
Such people remain always the same . 
They do n't yield to fate . 
So you think I sha n't love her for ever . '' 
`` No ; perhaps you will love her for ever . 
But perhaps you wo n't always be happy with her . '' 
Alyosha had given his opinion at the time , blushing , and angry with himself for having yielded to his brother 's entreaties and put such `` foolish '' ideas into words . 
For his opinion had struck him as awfully foolish immediately after he had uttered it . 
He felt ashamed too of having given so confident an opinion about a woman . 
It was with the more amazement that he felt now , at the first glance at Katerina Ivanovna as she ran in to him , that he had perhaps been utterly mistaken . 
This time her face was beaming with spontaneous good-natured kindliness , and direct warm-hearted sincerity . 
The `` pride and haughtiness , '' which had struck Alyosha so much before , was only betrayed now in a frank , generous energy and a sort of bright , strong faith in herself . 
Alyosha realised at the first glance , at the first word , that all the tragedy of her position in relation to the man she loved so dearly was no secret to her ; that she perhaps already knew everything , positively everything . 
And yet , in spite of that , there was such brightness in her face , such faith in the future . 
Alyosha felt at once that he had gravely wronged her in his thoughts . 
He was conquered and captivated immediately . 
Besides all this , he noticed at her first words that she was in great excitement , an excitement perhaps quite exceptional and almost approaching ecstasy . 
`` I was so eager to see you , because I can learn from you the whole truth - from you and no one else . '' 
`` I have come , '' muttered Alyosha confusedly , `` I - he sent me . '' 
`` Ah , he sent you I foresaw that . 
Now I know everything - everything ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , her eyes flashing . 
`` Wait a moment , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I 'll tell you why I 've been so longing to see you . 
You see , I know perhaps far more than you do yourself , and there 's no need for you to tell me anything . 
I 'll tell you what I want from you . 
I want to know your own last impression of him . 
I want you to tell me most directly , plainly , coarsely even -LRB- oh , as coarsely as you like ! -RRB- 
, what you thought of him just now and of his position after your meeting with him to-day . 
That will perhaps be better than if I had a personal explanation with him , as he does not want to come to me . 
Do you understand what I want from you ? 
Now , tell me simply , tell me every word of the message he sent you with -LRB- I knew he would send you -RRB- . '' 
`` He told me to give you his compliments and to say that he would never come again but to give you his compliments . '' 
`` His compliments ? 
Was that what he said his own expression ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Accidentally perhaps he made a mistake in the word , perhaps he did not use the right word ? '' 
`` No ; he told me precisely to repeat that word . 
He begged me two or three times not to forget to say so . '' 
Katerina Ivanovna flushed hotly . 
`` Help me now , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
Now I really need your help . 
I 'll tell you what I think , and you must simply say whether it 's right or not . 
Listen ! 
If he had sent me his compliments in passing , without insisting on your repeating the words , without emphasising them , that would be the end of everything ! 
But if he particularly insisted on those words , if he particularly told you not to forget to repeat them to me , then perhaps he was in excitement , beside himself . 
He had made his decision and was frightened at it . 
He was n't walking away from me with a resolute step , but leaping headlong . 
The emphasis on that phrase may have been simply bravado . '' 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
cried Alyosha warmly . 
`` I believe that is it . '' 
`` And , if so , he 's not altogether lost . 
I can still save him . 
Stay ! 
Did he not tell you anything about money - about three thousand roubles ? '' 
`` He did speak about it , and it 's that more than anything that 's crushing him . 
He said he had lost his honour and that nothing matters now , '' Alyosha answered warmly , feeling a rush of hope in his heart and believing that there really might be a way of escape and salvation for his brother . 
`` But do you know about the money ? '' 
he added , and suddenly broke off . 
`` I 've known of it a long time ; I telegraphed to Moscow to inquire , and heard long ago that the money had not arrived . 
He had n't sent the money , but I said nothing . 
Last week I learnt that he was still in need of money . 
My only object in all this was that he should know to whom to turn , and who was his true friend . 
No , he wo n't recognise that I am his truest friend ; he wo n't know me , and looks on me merely as a woman . 
I 've been tormented all the week , trying to think how to prevent him from being ashamed to face me because he spent that three thousand . 
Let him feel ashamed of himself , let him be ashamed of other people 's knowing , but not of my knowing . 
He can tell God everything without shame . 
Why is it he still does not understand how much I am ready to bear for his sake ? 
Why , why does n't he know me ? 
How dare he not know me after all that has happened ? 
I want to save him for ever . 
Let him forget me as his betrothed . 
And here he fears that he is dishonoured in my eyes . 
Why , he was n't afraid to be open with you , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
How is it that I do n't deserve the same ? '' 
The last words she uttered in tears . 
Tears gushed from her eyes . 
`` I must tell you , '' Alyosha began , his voice trembling too , `` what happened just now between him and my father . '' 
And he described the whole scene , how Dmitri had sent him to get the money , how he had broken in , knocked his father down , and after that had again specially and emphatically begged him to take his compliments and farewell . 
`` He went to that woman , '' Alyosha added softly . 
`` And do you suppose that I ca n't put up with that woman ? 
Does he think I ca n't ? 
But he wo n't marry her , '' she suddenly laughed nervously . 
`` Could such a passion last for ever in a Karamazov ? 
It 's passion , not love . 
He wo n't marry her because she wo n't marry him . '' 
Again Katerina Ivanovna laughed strangely . 
`` He may marry her , '' said Alyosha mournfully , looking down . 
`` He wo n't marry her , I tell you . 
That girl is an angel . 
Do you know that ? 
Do you know that ? '' 
Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed suddenly with extraordinary warmth . 
`` She is one of the most fantastic of fantastic creatures . 
I know how bewitching she is , but I know too that she is kind , firm , and noble . 
Why do you look at me like that , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? 
Perhaps you are wondering at my words , perhaps you do n't believe me ? 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , my angel ! '' 
she cried suddenly to someone , peeping into the next room , `` come in to us . 
This is a friend . 
This is Alyosha . 
He knows all about our affairs . 
Show yourself to him . '' 
`` I 've only been waiting behind the curtain for you to call me , '' said a soft , one might even say sugary , feminine voice . 
The portiere was raised and Grushenka herself , smiling and beaming , came up to the table . 
A violent revulsion passed over Alyosha . 
He fixed his eyes on her and could not take them off . 
Here she was , that awful woman , the `` beast , '' as Ivan had called her half an hour before . 
And yet one would have thought the creature standing before him most simple and ordinary , a good-natured , kind woman , handsome certainly , but so like other handsome ordinary women ! 
It is true she was very , very good-looking with that Russian beauty so passionately loved by many men . 
She was a rather tall woman , though a little shorter than Katerina Ivanovna , who was exceptionally tall . 
She had a full figure , with soft , as it were , noiseless , movements , softened to a peculiar over-sweetness , like her voice . 
She moved , not like Katerina Ivanovna , with a vigorous , bold step , but noiselessly . 
Her feet made absolutely no sound on the floor . 
She sank softly into a low chair , softly rustling her sumptuous black silk dress , and delicately nestling her milk-white neck and broad shoulders in a costly cashmere shawl . 
She was twenty-two years old , and her face looked exactly that age . 
She was very white in the face , with a pale pink tint on her cheeks . 
The modelling of her face might be said to be too broad , and the lower jaw was set a trifle forward . 
Her upper lip was thin , but the slightly prominent lower lip was at least twice as full , and looked pouting . 
But her magnificent , abundant dark brown hair , her sable-coloured eyebrows and charming greyblue eyes with their long lashes would have made the most indifferent person , meeting her casually in a crowd in the street , stop at the sight of her face and remember it long after . 
What struck Alyosha most in that face was its expression of childlike good nature . 
There was a childlike look in her eyes , a look of childish delight . 
She came up to the table , beaming with delight and seeming to expect something with childish , impatient , and confiding curiosity . 
The light in her eyes gladdened the soul - Alyosha felt that . 
There was something else in her which he could not understand , or would not have been able to define , and which yet perhaps unconsciously affected him . 
It was that softness , that voluptuousness of her bodily movements , that catlike noiselessness . 
Yet it was a vigorous , ample body . 
Under the shawl could be seen full broad shoulders , a high , still quite girlish bosom . 
Her figure suggested the lines of the Venus of Milo , though already in somewhat exaggerated proportions . 
That could be divined . 
Connoisseurs of Russian beauty could have foretold with certainty that this fresh , still youthful beauty would lose its harmony by the age of thirty , would `` spread '' ; that the face would become puffy , and that wrinkles would very soon appear upon her forehead and round the eyes ; the complexion would grow coarse and red perhaps - in fact , that it was the beauty of the moment , the fleeting beauty which is so often met with in Russian women . 
Alyosha , of course , did not think of this ; but though he was fascinated , yet he wondered with an unpleasant sensation , and as it were regretfully , why she drawled in that way and could not speak naturally . 
She did so , evidently feeling there was a charm in the exaggerated , honeyed modulation of the syllables . 
It was , of course , only a bad , underbred habit that showed bad education and a false idea of good manners . 
And yet this intonation and manner of speaking impressed Alyosha as almost incredibly incongruous with the childishly simple and happy expression of her face , the soft , babyish joy in her eyes . 
Katerina Ivanovna at once made her sit down in an arm-chair facing Alyosha , and ecstatically kissed her several times on her smiling lips . 
She seemed quite in love with her . 
`` This is the first time we 've met , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she said rapturously . 
`` I wanted to know her , to see her . 
I wanted to go to her , but I 'd no sooner expressed the wish than she came to me . 
I knew we should settle everything together - everything . 
My heart told me so - I was begged not to take the step , but I foresaw it would be a way out of the difficulty , and I was not mistaken . 
Grushenka has explained everything to me , told me all she means to do . 
She flew here like an angel of goodness and brought us peace and joy . '' 
`` You did not disdain me , sweet , excellent young lady , '' drawled Grushenka in her singsong voice , still with the same charming smile of delight . 
`` Do n't dare to speak to me like that , you sorceress , you witch ! 
Disdain you ! 
Here , I must kiss your lower lip once more . 
It looks as though it were swollen , and now it will be more so , and more and more . 
Look how she laughs , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
Alyosha flushed , and faint , imperceptible shivers kept running down him . 
`` You make so much of me , dear young lady , and perhaps I am not at all worthy of your kindness . '' 
`` Not worthy ! 
She 's not worthy of it ! '' 
Katerina Ivanovna cried again with the same warmth . 
`` You know , Alexey Fyodorovitch , we 're fanciful , we 're self-willed , but proudest of the proud in our little heart . 
We 're noble , we 're generous , Alexey Fyodorovitch , let me tell you . 
We have only been unfortunate . 
We were too ready to make every sacrifice for an unworthy , perhaps , or fickle man . 
There was one man - one , an officer too , we loved him , we sacrificed everything to him . 
That was long ago , five years ago , and he has forgotten us , he has married . 
Now he is a widower , he has written , he is coming here , and , do you know , we 've loved him , none but him , all this time , and we 've loved him all our life ! 
He will come , and Grushenka will be happy again . 
For the last five years she 's been wretched . 
But who can reproach her , who can boast of her favour ? 
Only that bedridden old merchant , but he is more like her father , her friend , her protector . 
He found her then in despair , in agony , deserted by the man she loved . 
She was ready to drown herself then , but the old merchant saved her - saved her ! '' 
`` You defend me very kindly , dear young lady . 
You are in a great hurry about everything , '' Grushenka drawled again . 
`` Defend you ! 
Is it for me to defend you ? 
Should I dare to defend you ? 
Grushenka , angel , give me your hand . 
Look at that charming soft little hand , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
Look at it ! 
It has brought me happiness and has lifted me up , and I 'm going to kiss it , outside and inside , here , here , here ! '' 
And three times she kissed the certainly charming , though rather fat , hand of Grushenka in a sort of rapture . 
She held out her hand with a charming musical , nervous little laugh , watched the `` sweet young lady , '' and obviously liked having her hand kissed . 
`` Perhaps there 's rather too much rapture , '' thought Alyosha . 
He blushed . 
He felt a peculiar uneasiness at heart the whole time . 
`` You wo n't make me blush , dear young lady , kissing my hand like this before Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` Do you think I meant to make you blush ? '' 
said Katerina Ivanovna , somewhat surprised . 
`` Ah my dear , how little you understand me ! 
`` Yes , and you too perhaps quite misunderstand me , dear young lady . 
Maybe I 'm not so good as I seem to you . 
I 've a bad heart ; I will have my own way . 
I fascinated poor Dmitri Fyodorovitch that day simply for fun . '' 
`` But now you 'll save him . 
You 've given me your word . 
You 'll explain it all to him . 
You 'll break to him that you have long loved another man , who is now offering you his hand . '' 
`` Oh , no I did n't give you my word to do that . 
It was you kept talking about that . 
I did n't give you my word . '' 
`` Then I did n't quite understand you , '' said Katerina Ivanovna slowly , turning a little pale . 
`` You promised - '' `` Oh no , angel lady , I 've promised nothing , '' Grushenka interrupted softly and evenly , still with the same gay and simple expression . 
`` You see at once , dear young lady , what a wilful wretch I am compared with you . 
If I want to do a thing I do it . 
I may have made you some promise just now . 
But now again I 'm thinking : I may take Mitya again . 
I liked him very much once - liked him for almost a whole hour . 
Now maybe I shall go and tell him to stay with me from this day forward . 
You see , I 'm so changeable . '' 
`` Just now you said - something quite different , '' Katerina Ivanovna whispered faintly . 
`` Ah , just now ! 
But , you know , I 'm such a soft-hearted , silly creature . 
Only think what he 's gone through on my account ! 
What if when I go home I feel sorry for him ? 
What then ? '' 
`` I never expected - '' `` Ah , young lady , how good and generous you are compared with me ! 
Now perhaps you wo n't care for a silly creature like me , now you know my character . 
Give me your sweet little hand , angelic lady , '' she said tenderly , and with a sort of reverence took Katerina Ivanovna 's hand . 
`` Here , dear young lady , I 'll take your hand and kiss it as you did mine . 
You kissed mine three times , but I ought to kiss yours three hundred times to be even with you . 
Well , but let that pass . 
And then it shall be as God wills . 
Perhaps I shall be your slave entirely and want to do your bidding like a slave . 
Let it be as God wills , without any agreements and promises . 
What a sweet hand - what a sweet hand you have ! 
You sweet young lady , you incredible beauty ! '' 
She slowly raised the hands to her lips , with the strange object indeed of `` being even '' with her in kisses . 
Katerina Ivanovna did not take her hand away . 
She listened with timid hope to the last words , though Grushenka 's promise to do her bidding like a slave was very strangely expressed . 
She looked intently into her eyes ; she still saw in those eyes the same simple-hearted , confiding expression , the same bright gaiety . 
`` She 's perhaps too naive , '' thought Katerina Ivanovna , with a gleam of hope . 
Grushenka meanwhile seemed enthusiastic over the `` sweet hand . '' 
She raised it deliberately to her lips . 
But she held it for two or three minutes near her lips , as though reconsidering something . 
`` Do you know , angel lady , '' she suddenly drawled in an even more soft and sugary voice , `` do you know , after all , I think I wo n't kiss your hand ? '' 
And she laughed a little merry laugh . 
`` As you please . 
What 's the matter with you ? '' 
said Katerina Ivanovna , starting suddenly . 
`` So that you may be left to remember that you kissed my hand , but I did n't kiss yours . '' 
There was a sudden gleam in her eyes . 
She looked with awful intentness at Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` Insolent creature ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , as though suddenly grasping something . 
She flushed all over and leapt up from her seat . 
Grushenka too got up , but without haste . 
`` So I shall tell Mitya how you kissed my hand , but I did n't kiss yours at all . 
And how he will laugh ! '' 
`` Vile slut ! 
Go away ! '' 
`` Ah , for shame , young lady ! 
Ah , for shame ! 
That 's unbecoming for you , dear young lady , a word like that . '' 
`` Go away ! 
You 're a creature for sale '' screamed Katerina Ivanovna . 
Every feature was working in her utterly distorted face . 
`` For sale indeed ! 
You used to visit gentlemen in the dusk for money once ; you brought your beauty for sale . 
You see , I know . '' 
Katerina Ivanovna shrieked , and would have rushed at her , but Alyosha held her with all his strength . 
`` Not a step , not a word ! 
Do n't speak , do n't answer her . 
She 'll go away - she 'll go at once . '' 
At that instant Katerina Ivanovna 's two aunts ran in at her cry , and with them a maid-servant . 
All hurried to her . 
`` I will go away , '' said Grushenka , taking up her mantle from the sofa . 
`` Alyosha , darling , see me home ! '' 
`` Go away - go away , make haste ! '' 
cried Alyosha , clasping his hands imploringly . 
`` Dear little Alyosha , see me home ! 
I 've got a pretty little story to tell you on the way . 
I got up this scene for your benefit , Alyosha . 
See me home , dear , you 'll be glad of it afterwards . '' 
Alyosha turned away , wringing his hands . 
Grushenka ran out of the house , laughing musically . 
Katerina Ivanovna went into a fit of hysterics . 
She sobbed , and was shaken with convulsions . 
Everyone fussed round her . 
`` I warned you , '' said the elder of her aunts . 
`` I tried to prevent your doing this . 
You 're too impulsive . 
How could you do such a thing ? 
You do n't know these creatures , and they say she 's worse than any of them . 
You are too self-willed . '' 
`` She 's a tigress ! '' 
yelled Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` Why did you hold me , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? 
I 'd have beaten her - beaten her ! '' 
She could not control herself before Alyosha ; perhaps she did not care to , indeed . 
`` She ought to be flogged in public on a scaffold ! '' 
Alyosha withdrew towards the door . 
`` But , my God ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , clasping her hands . 
`` He ! 
He ! 
He could be so dishonourable , so inhuman ! 
Why , he told that creature what happened on that fatal , accursed day ! 
` You brought your beauty for sale , dear young lady . ' 
She knows it ! 
Your brother 's a scoundrel , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
Alyosha wanted to say something , but he could n't find a word . 
His heart ached . 
`` Go away , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
It 's shameful , it 's awful for me ! 
To-morrow , I beg you on my knees , come to-morrow . 
Do n't condemm me . 
Forgive me . 
I do n't know what I shall do with myself now ! '' 
Alyosha walked out into the street reeling . 
He could have wept as she did . 
Suddenly he was overtaken by the maid . 
`` The young lady forgot to give you this letter from Madame Hohlakov ; it 's been left with us since dinner-time . '' 
Alyosha took the little pink envelope mechanically and put it , almost unconsciously , into his pocket . 
Another Reputation Ruined IT was not much more than three-quarters of a mile from the town to the monastery . 
Alyosha walked quickly along the road , at that hour deserted . 
It was almost night , and too dark to see anything clearly at thirty paces ahead . 
There were cross-roads half-way . 
A figure came into sight under a solitary willow at the cross-roads . 
As soon as Alyosha reached the cross-roads the figure moved out and rushed at him , shouting savagely : `` Your money or your life ! '' 
`` So it 's you , Mitya , '' cried Alyosha , in surprise , violently startled however . 
`` Ha ha ha ! 
You did n't expect me ? 
I wondered where to wait for you . 
By her house ? 
There are three ways from it , and I might have missed you . 
At last I thought of waiting here , for you had to pass here , there 's no other way to the monastery . 
Come , tell me the truth . 
Crush me like a beetle . 
But what 's the matter ? '' 
`` Nothing , brother - it 's the fright you gave me . 
Oh , Dmitri ! 
Father 's blood just now . '' 
-LRB- Alyosha began to cry , he had been on the verge of tears for a long time , and now something seemed to snap in his soul . -RRB- 
`` You almost killed him - cursed him - and now - here - you 're making jokes - ` Your money or your life ! ' '' 
`` Well , what of that ? 
It 's not seemly - is that it ? 
Not suitable in my position ? '' 
`` No - I only - '' `` Stay . 
Look at the night . 
You see what a dark night , what clouds , what a wind has risen . 
I hid here under the willow waiting for you . 
And as God 's above , I suddenly thought , why go on in misery any longer , what is there to wait for ? 
Here I have a willow , a handkerchief , a shirt , I can twist them into a rope in a minute , and braces besides , and why go on burdening the earth , dishonouring it with my vile presence ? 
And then I heard you coming - Heavens , it was as though something flew down to me suddenly . 
So there is a man , then , whom I love . 
Here he is , that man , my dear little brother , whom I love more than anyone in the world , the only one I love in the world . 
And I loved you so much , so much at that moment that I thought , ` I 'll fall on his neck at once . ' 
Then a stupid idea struck me , to have a joke with you and scare you . 
I shouted , like a fool , ` Your money ! ' 
Forgive my foolery - it was only nonsense , and there 's nothing unseemly in my soul ... . 
Damn it all , tell me what 's happened . 
What did she say ? 
Strike me , crush me , do n't spare me ! 
Was she furious ? '' 
`` No , not that ... . 
There was nothing like that , Mitya . 
There - I found them both there . '' 
`` Both ? 
Whom ? '' 
`` Grushenka at Katerina Ivanovna 's . '' 
Dmitri was struck dumb . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You 're raving ! 
Grushenka with her ? '' 
Alyosha described all that had happened from the moment he went in to Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
He was ten minutes telling his story . 
ca n't be said to have told it fluently and consecutively , but he seemed to make it clear , not omitting any word or action of significance , and vividly describing , often in one word , his own sensations . 
Dmitri listened in silence , gazing at him with a terrible fixed stare , but it was clear to Alyosha that he understood it all , and had grasped every point . 
But as the story went on , his face became not merely gloomy , but menacing . 
He scowled , he clenched his teeth , and his fixed stare became still more rigid , more concentrated , more terrible , when suddenly , with incredible rapidity , his wrathful , savage face changed , his tightly compressed lips parted , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch broke into uncontrolled , spontaneous laughter . 
He literally shook with laughter . 
For a long time he could not speak . 
`` So she would n't kiss her hand ! 
So she did n't kiss it ; so she ran away ! '' 
he kept exclaiming with hysterical delight ; insolent delight it might had been called , if it had not been so spontaneous . 
`` So the other one called her tigress ! 
And a tigress she is ! 
So she ought to be flogged on a scaffold ? 
Yes , yes , so she ought . 
That 's just what I think ; she ought to have been long ago . 
It 's like this , brother , let her be punished , but I must get better first . 
I understand the queen of impudence . 
That 's her all over ! 
You saw her all over in that hand-kissing , the she-devil ! 
She 's magnificent in her own line ! 
So she ran home ? 
I 'll go - ah - I 'll run to her ! 
Alyosha , do n't blame me , I agree that hanging is too good for her . '' 
`` But Katerina Ivanovna ! '' 
exclaimed Alyosha sorrowfully . 
`` I see her , too ! 
I see right through her , as I 've never done before ! 
It 's a regular discovery of the four continents of the world , that is , of the five ! 
What a thing to do ! 
That 's just like Katya , who was not afraid to face a coarse , unmannerly officer and risk a deadly insult on a generous impulse to save her father ! 
But the pride , the recklessness , the defiance of fate , the unbounded defiance ! 
You say that aunt tried to stop her ? 
That aunt , you know , is overbearing , herself . 
She 's the sister of the general 's widow in Moscow , and even more stuck-up than she . 
But her husband was caught stealing government money . 
He lost everything , his estate and all , and the proud wife had to lower her colours , and has n't raised them since . 
So she tried to prevent Katya , but she would n't listen to her ! 
She thinks she can overcome everything , that everything will give way to her . 
She thought she could bewitch Grushenka if she liked , and she believed it herself : she plays a part to herself , and whose fault is it ? 
Do you think she kissed Grushenka 's hand first , on purpose , with a motive ? 
No , she really was fascinated by Grushenka , that 's to say , not by Grushenka , but by her own dream , her own delusion - because it was her dream , her delusion ! 
Alyosha , darling , how did you escape from them , those women ? 
Did you pick up your cassock and run ? 
Ha ha ha ! '' 
`` Brother , you do n't seem to have noticed how you 've insulted Katerina Ivanovna by telling Grushenka about that day . 
And she flung it in her face just now that she had gone to gentlemen in secret to sell her beauty ! 
Brother , what could be worse than that insult ? '' 
What worried Alyosha more than anything was that , incredible as it seemed , his brother appeared pleased at Katerina Ivanovna 's humiliation . 
`` Bah ! '' 
Dmitri frowned fiercely , and struck his forehead with his hand . 
He only now realised it , though Alyosha had just told him of the insult , and Katerina Ivanovna 's cry : `` Your brother is a scoundrel '' `` Yes , perhaps , I really did tell Grushenka about that ` fatal day , ' as Katya calls it . 
Yes , I did tell her , I remember ! 
It was that time at Mokroe . 
I was drunk , the Gypsies were singing ... But I was sobbing . 
I was sobbing then , kneeling and praying to Katya 's image , and Grushenka understood it . 
She understood it all then . 
I remember , she cried herself ... . 
Damn it all ! 
But it 's bound to be so now ... . 
Then she cried , but now ` the dagger in the heart ' ! 
That 's how women are . '' 
He looked down and sank into thought . 
`` Yes , I am a scoundrel , a thorough scoundrel '' he said suddenly , in a gloomy voice . 
`` It does n't matter whether I cried or not , I 'm a scoundrel ! 
Tell her I accept the name , if that 's any comfort . 
Come , that 's enough . 
Good-bye . 
It 's no use talking ! 
It 's not amusing . 
You go your way and I mine . 
And I do n't want to see you again except as a last resource . 
Good-bye , Alexey ! '' 
He warmly pressed Alyosha 's hand , and still looking down , without raising his head , as though tearing himself away , turned rapidly towards the town . 
Alyosha looked after him , unable to believe he would go away so abruptly . 
`` Stay , Alexey , one more confession to you alone '' cried Dmitri , suddenly turning back . 
`` Look at me . 
Look at me well . 
You see here , here - there 's terrible disgrace in store for me . '' 
-LRB- As he said `` here , '' Dmitri struck his chest with his fist with a strange air , as though the dishonour lay precisely on his chest , in some spot , in a pocket , perhaps , or hanging round his neck . -RRB- 
`` You know me now , a scoundrel , an avowed scoundrel , but let me tell you that I 've never done anything before and never shall again , anything that can compare in baseness with the dishonour which I bear now at this very minute on my breast , here , here , which will come to pass , though I 'm perfectly free to stop it . 
I can stop it or carry it through , note that . 
Well , let me tell you , I shall carry it through . 
I sha n't stop it . 
I told you everything just now , but I did n't tell you this , because even I had not brass enough for it . 
I can still pull up ; if I do , I can give back the full half of my lost honour to-morrow . 
But I sha n't pull up . 
I shall carry out my base plan , and you can bear witness that I told so beforehand . 
Darkness and destruction ! 
No need to explain . 
You 'll find out in due time . 
The filthy back-alley and the she-devil . 
Good-bye . 
Do n't pray for me , I 'm not worth it . 
And there 's no need , no need at all ... . 
I do n't need it ! 
Away ! '' 
And he suddenly retreated , this time finally . 
Alyosha went towards the monastery . 
`` What ? 
I shall never see him again ! 
What is he saying ? '' 
he wondered wildly . 
`` Why , I shall certainly see him to-morrow . 
I shall look him up . 
I shall make a point of it . 
What does he mean ? '' 
He went round the monastery , and crossed the pine-wood to the hermitage . 
The door was opened to him , though no one was admitted at that hour . 
There was a tremor in his heart as he went into Father Zossima 's cell . 
`` Why , why , had he gone forth ? 
Why had he sent him into the world ? 
Here was peace . 
Here was holiness . 
But there was confusion , there was darkness in which one lost one 's way and went astray at once ... '' In the cell he found the novice Porfiry and Father Paissy , who came every hour to inquire after Father Zossima . 
Alyosha learnt with alarm that he was getting worse and worse . 
Even his usual discourse with the brothers could not take place that day . 
As a rule every evening after service the monks flocked into Father Zossima 's cell , and all confessed aloud their sins of the day , their sinful thoughts and temptations ; even their disputes , if there had been any . 
Some confessed kneeling . 
The elder absolved , reconciled , exhorted , imposed penance , blessed , and dismissed them . 
It was against this general `` confession '' that the opponents of `` elders '' protested , maintaining that it was a profanation of the sacrament of confession , almost a sacrilege , though this was quite a different thing . 
They even represented to the diocesan authorities that such confessions attained no good object , but actually to a large extent led to sin and temptation . 
Many of the brothers disliked going to the elder , and went against their own will because everyone went , and for fear they should be accused of pride and rebellious ideas . 
People said that some of the monks agreed beforehand , saying , `` I 'll confess I lost my temper with you this morning , and you confirm it , '' simply in order to have something to say . 
Alyosha knew that this actually happened sometimes . 
He knew , too , that there were among the monks some who deep resented the fact that letters from relations were habitually taken to the elder , to be opened and read by him before those to whom they were addressed . 
It was assumed , of course , that all this was done freely , and in good faith , by way of voluntary submission and salutary guidance . 
But , in fact , there was sometimes no little insincerity , and much that was false and strained in this practice . 
Yet the older and more experienced of the monks adhered to their opinion , arguing that `` for those who have come within these walls sincerely seeking salvation , such obedience and sacrifice will certainly be salutary and of great benefit ; those , on the other hand , who find it irksome , and repine , are no true monks , and have made a mistake in entering the monastery - their proper place is in the world . 
Even in the temple one can not be safe from sin and the devil . 
So it was no good taking it too much into account . '' 
`` He is weaker , a drowsiness has come over him , '' Father Paissy whispered to Alyosha , as he blessed him . 
`` It 's difficult to rouse him . 
And he must not be roused . 
He waked up for five minutes , sent his blessing to the brothers , and begged their prayers for him at night . 
He intends to take the sacrament again in the morning . 
He remembered you , Alexey . 
He asked whether you had gone away , and was told that you were in the town . ' 
I blessed him for that work , ' he said , ` his place is there , not here , for awhile . ' 
Those were his words about you . 
He remembered you lovingly , with anxiety ; do you understand how he honoured you ? 
But how is it that he has decided that you shall spend some time in the world ? 
He must have foreseen something in your destiny ! 
Understand , Alexey , that if you return to the world , it must be to do the duty laid upon you by your elder , and not for frivolous vanity and worldly pleasures . '' 
Father Paissy went out . 
Alyosha had no doubt that Father Zossima was dying , though he might live another day or two . 
Alyosha firmly and ardently resolved that in spite of his promises to his father , the Hohlakovs , and Katerina Ivanovna , he would not leave the monastery next day , but would remain with his elder to the end . 
His heart glowed with love , and he reproached himself bitterly for having been able for one instant to forget him whom he had left in the monastery on his death bed , and whom he honoured above everyone in the world . 
He went into Father Zossima 's bedroom , knelt down , and bowed to the ground before the elder , who slept quietly without stirring , with regular , hardly audible breathing and a peaceful face . 
Alyosha returned to the other room , where Father Zossima received his guests in the morning . 
Taking off his boots , he lay down on the hard , narrow , leathern sofa , which he had long used as a bed , bringing nothing but a pillow . 
The mattress , about which his father had shouted to him that morning , he had long forgotten to lie on . 
He took off his cassock , which he used as a covering . 
But before going to bed , he fell on his knees and prayed a long time . 
In his fervent prayer he did not beseech God to lighten his darkness but only thirsted for the joyous emotion , which always visited his soul after the praise and adoration , of which his evening prayer usually consisted . 
That joy always brought him light untroubled sleep . 
As he was praying , he suddenly felt in his pocket the little pink note the servant had handed him as he left Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
He was disturbed , but finished his prayer . 
Then , after some hesitation , he opened the envelope . 
In it was a letter to him , signed by Lise , the young daughter of Madame Hohlakov , who had laughed at him before the elder in the morning . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she wrote , `` I am writing to you without anyone 's knowledge , even mamma 's , and I know how wrong it is . 
But I can not live without telling you the feeling that has sprung up in my heart , and this no one but us two must know for a time . 
But how am I to say what I want so much to tell you ? 
Paper , they say , does not blush , but I assure you it 's not true and that it 's blushing just as I am now , all over . 
Dear Alyosha , I love you , I 've loved you from my childhood , since our Moscow days , when you were very different from what you are now , and I shall love you all my life . 
My heart has chosen you , to unite our lives , and pass them together till our old age . 
Of course , on condition that you will leave the monastery . 
As for our age we will wait for the time fixed by the law . 
By that time I shall certainly be quite strong , I shall be walking and dancing . 
There can be no doubt of that . 
`` You see how I 've thought of everything . 
There 's only one thing I ca n't imagine : what you 'll think of me when you read this . 
I 'm always laughing and being naughty . 
I made you angry this morning , but I assure you before I took up my pen , I prayed before the Image of the Mother of God , and now I 'm praying , and almost crying . 
`` My secret is in your hands . 
When you come to-morrow , I do n't know how I shall look at you . 
Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch , what if I ca n't restrain myself like a silly and laugh when I look at you as I did to-day . 
You 'll think I 'm a nasty girl making fun of you , and you wo n't believe my letter . 
And so I beg you , dear one , if you 've any pity for me , when you come to-morrow , do n't look me straight in the face , for if I meet your eyes , it will be sure to make me laugh , especially as you 'll be in that long gown . 
I feel cold all over when I think of it , so when you come , do n't look at me at all for a time , look at mamma or at the window ... `` Here I 've written you a love-letter . 
Oh , dear , what have I done ? 
Alyosha , do n't despise me , and if I 've done something very horrid and wounded you , forgive me . 
Now the secret of my reputation , ruined perhaps for ever , is in your hands . 
`` I shall certainly cry to-day . 
Good-bye till our meeting , our awful meeting . 
- Lise . 
`` P.S. - Alyosha ! 
You must , must , must come ! 
- Lise . 
Alyosha read the note in amazement , read it through twice , thought a little , and suddenly laughed a soft , sweet laugh . 
He started . 
That laugh seemed to him sinful . 
But a minute later he laughed again just as softly and happily . 
He slowly replaced the note in the envelope , crossed himself and lay down . 
The agitation in his heart passed at once . 
`` God , have mercy upon all of them , have all these unhappy and turbulent souls in Thy keeping , and set them in the right path . 
All ways are Thine . 
Save them according to Thy wisdom . 
Thou art love . 
Thou wilt send joy to all ! '' 
Alyosha murmured , crossing himself , and falling into peaceful sleep . 
Father Ferapont ALYOSHA was roused early , before daybreak . 
Father Zossima woke up feeling very weak , though he wanted to get out of bed and sit up in a chair . 
His mind was quite clear ; his face looked very tired , yet bright and almost joyful . 
It wore an expression of gaiety , kindness and cordiality . 
`` Maybe I shall not live through the coming day , '' he said to Alyosha . 
Then he desired to confess and take the sacrament at once . 
He always confessed to Father Paissy . 
After taking the communion , the service of extreme unction followed . 
The monks assembled and the cell was gradually filled up by the inmates of the hermitage . 
Meantime it was daylight . 
People began coming from the monastery . 
After the service was over the elder desired to kiss and take leave of everyone . 
As the cell was so small the earlier visitors withdrew to make room for others . 
Alyosha stood beside the elder , who was seated again in his arm-chair . 
He talked as much as he could . 
Though his voice was weak , it was fairly steady . 
`` I 've been teaching you so many years , and therefore I 've been talking aloud so many years , that I 've got into the habit of talking , and so much so that it 's almost more difficult for me to hold my tongue than to talk , even now , in spite of my weakness , dear Fathers and brothers , '' he jested , looking with emotion at the group round him . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards something of what he said to them . 
But though he spoke out distinctly and his voice was fairly steady , his speech was somewhat disconnected . 
He spoke of many things , he seemed anxious before the moment of death to say everything he had not said in his life , and not simply for the sake of instructing them , but as though thirsting to share with all men and all creation his joy and ecstasy , and once more in his life to open his whole heart . 
`` Love one another , Fathers , '' said Father Zossima , as far as Alyosha could remember afterwards . 
`` Love God 's people . 
Because we have come here and shut ourselves within these walls , we are no holier than those that are outside , but on the contrary , from the very fact of coming here , each of us has confessed to himself that he is worse than others , than all men on earth ... . 
And the longer the monk lives in his seclusion , the more keenly he must recognise that . 
Else he would have had no reason to come here . 
When he realises that he is not only worse than others , but that he is responsible to all men for all and everything , for all human sins , national and individual , only then the aim of our seclusion is attained . 
For know , dear ones , that every one of us is undoubtedly responsible for all men - and everything on earth , not merely through the general sinfulness of creation , but each one personally for all mankind and every individual man . 
This knowledge is the crown of life for the monk and for every man . 
For monks are not a special sort of men , but only what all men ought to be . 
Only through that knowledge , our heart grows soft with infinite , universal , inexhaustible love . 
Then every one of you will have the power to win over the whole world by love and to wash away the sins of the world with your tears ... Each of you keep watch over your heart and confess your sins to yourself unceasingly . 
Be not afraid of your sins , even when perceiving them , if only there be penitence , but make no conditions with God . 
Again , I say , be not proud . 
Be proud neither to the little nor to the great . 
Hate not those who reject you , who insult you , who abuse and slander you . 
Hate not the atheists , the teachers of evil , the materialists - and I mean not only the good ones - for there are many good ones among them , especially in our day - hate not even the wicked ones . 
Remember them in your prayers thus : Save , O Lord , all those who have none to pray for them , save too all those who will not pray . 
And add : it is not in pride that I make this prayer , O Lord , for I am lower than all men ... . 
Love God 's people , let not strangers draw away the flock , for if you slumber in your slothfulness and disdainful pride , or worse still , in covetousness , they will come from all sides and draw away your flock . 
Expound the Gospel to the people unceasingly ... be not extortionate ... . 
Do not love gold and silver , do not hoard them ... . 
Have faith . 
Cling to the banner and raise it on high . '' 
But the elder spoke more disconnectedly than Alyosha reported his words afterwards . 
Sometimes he broke off altogether , as though to take breath and recover his strength , but he was in a sort of ecstasy . 
They heard him with emotion , though many wondered at his words and found them obscure ... . 
Afterwards all remembered those words . 
When Alyosha happened for a moment to leave the cell , he was struck by the general excitement and suspense in the monks who were crowding about it . 
This anticipation showed itself in some by anxiety , in others by devout solemnity . 
All were expecting that some marvel would happen immediately after the elder 's death . 
Their suspense was , from one point of view , almost frivolous , but even the most austere of the monks were affected by it . 
Father Paissy 's face looked the gravest of all . 
Alyosha was mysteriously summoned by a monk to see Rakitin , who had arrived from town with a singular letter for him from Madame Hohlakov . 
In it she informed Alyosha of a strange and very opportune incident . 
It appeared that among the women who had come on the previous day to receive Father Zossima 's blessing , there had been an old woman from the town , a sergeant 's widow , called Prohorovna . 
She had inquired whether she might pray for the rest of the soul of her son , Vassenka , who had gone to Irkutsk , and had sent her no news for over a year . 
To which Father Zossima had answered sternly , forbidding her to do so , and saying that to pray for the living as though they were dead was a kind of sorcery . 
He afterwards forgave her on account of her ignorance , and added , `` as though reading the book of the future '' -LRB- this was Madame Hohlakov 's expression -RRB- , words of comfort : `` that her son Vassya was certainly alive and he would either come himself very shortly or send a letter , and that she was to go home and expect him . '' 
And `` Would you believe it ? '' 
exclaimed Madame Hohlakov enthusiastically , `` the prophecy has been fulfilled literally indeed , and more than that . '' 
Scarcely had the old woman reached home when they gave her a letter from Siberia which had been awaiting her . 
But that was not all ; in the letter written on the road from Ekaterinenburg , Vassya informed his mother that he was returning to Russia with an official , and that three weeks after her receiving the letter he hoped `` to embrace his mother . '' 
Madame Hohlakov warmly entreated Alyosha to report this new `` miracle of prediction '' to the Superior and all the brotherhood . 
`` All , all , ought to know of it '' she concluded . 
The letter had been written in haste , the excitement of the writer was apparent in every line of it . 
But Alyosha had no need to tell the monks , for all knew of it already . 
Rakitin had commissioned the monk who brought his message `` to inform most respectfully his reverence Father Paissy , that he , Rakitin , has a matter to speak of with him , of such gravity that he dare not defer it for a moment , and humbly begs forgiveness for his presumption . '' 
As the monk had given the message to Father Paissy , before that to Alyosha , the latter found after reading the letter , there was nothing left for him to do but to hand it to Father Paissy in confirmation of the story . 
And even that austere and cautious man , though he frowned as he read the news of the `` miracle , '' could not completely restrain some inner emotion . 
His eyes gleamed , and a grave and solemn smile came into his lips . 
`` We shall see greater things ! '' 
broke from him . 
`` We shall see greater things , greater things yet ! '' 
the monks around repeated . 
But Father Paissy , frowning again , begged all of them , at least for a time , not to speak of the matter `` till it be more fully confirmed , seeing there is so much credulity among those of this world , and indeed this might well have chanced naturally , '' he added , prudently , as it were to satisfy his conscience , though scarcely believing his own disavowal , a fact his listeners very clearly perceived . 
Within the hour the `` miracle '' was of course known to the whole monastery , and many visitors who had come for the mass . 
No one seemed more impressed by it than the monk who had come the day before from St. Sylvester , from the little monastery of Obdorsk in the far North . 
It was he who had been standing near Madame Hohlakov the previous day and had asked Father Zossima earnestly , referring to the `` healing '' of the lady 's daughter , `` How can you presume to do such things ? '' 
He was now somewhat puzzled and did not know whom to believe . 
The evening before he had visited Father Ferapont in his cell apart , behind the apiary , and had been greatly impressed and overawed by the visit . 
This Father Ferapont was that aged monk so devout in fasting and observing silence who has been mentioned already , as antagonistic to Father Zossima and the whole institution of `` elders , '' which he regarded as a pernicious and frivolous innovation . 
He was a very formidable opponent , although from his practice of silence he scarcely spoke a word to anyone . 
What made him formidable was that a number of monks fully shared his feeling , and many of the visitors looked upon him as a great saint and ascetic , although they had no doubt that he was crazy . 
But it was just his craziness attracted them . 
Father Ferapont never went to see the elder . 
Though he lived in the hermitage they did not worry him to keep its regulations , and this too because he behaved as though he were crazy . 
He was seventy-five or more , and he lived in a corner beyond the apiary in an old decaying wooden cell which had been built long ago for another great ascetic , Father Iona , who had lived to be a hundred and five , and of whose saintly doings many curious stories were still extant in the monastery and the neighbourhood . 
