`` That 's just it . 
I have no proof . 
That cur Smerdyakov wo n't send you proofs from the other world ... in an envelope . 
You think of nothing but envelopes - one is enough . 
I 've no witnesses ... except one , perhaps , '' he smiled thoughtfully . 
`` Who is your witness ? '' 
`` He has a tail , your excellency , and that would be irregular ! 
Le diable n'existe point ! 
Do n't pay attention : he is a paltry , pitiful devil , '' he added suddenly . 
He ceased laughing and spoke as it were , confidentially . 
`` He is here somewhere , no doubt - under that table with the material evidence on it , perhaps . 
Where should he sit if not there ? 
You see , listen to me . 
I told him I do n't want to keep quiet , and he talked about the geological cataclysm ... idiocy ! 
Come , release the monster ... he 's been singing a hymn . 
That 's because his heart is light ! 
It 's like a drunken man in the street bawling how ` Vanka went to Petersburg , ' and I would give a quadrillion quadrillions for two seconds of joy . 
You do n't know me ! 
Oh , how stupid all this business is ! 
Come , take me instead of him ! 
I did n't come for nothing ... . 
Why , why is everything so stupid ? 
... '' And he began slowly , and as it were reflectively , looking round him again . 
But the court was all excitement by now . 
Alyosha rushed towards him , but the court usher had already seized Ivan by the arm . 
`` What are you about ? '' 
he cried , staring into the man 's face , and suddenly seizing him by the shoulders , he flung him violently to the floor . 
But the police were on the spot and he was seized . 
He screamed furiously . 
And all the time he was being removed , he yelled and screamed something incoherent . 
The whole court was thrown into confusion . 
I do n't remember everything as it happened . 
I was excited myself and could not follow . 
I only know that afterwards , when everything was quiet again and everyone understood what had happened , the court usher came in for a reprimand , though he very reasonably explained that the witness had been quite well , that the doctor had seen him an hour ago , when he had a slight attack of giddiness , but that , until he had come into the court , he had talked quite consecutively , so that nothing could have been foreseen - that he had , in fact , insisted on giving evidence . 
But before everyone had completely regained their composure and recovered from this scene , it was followed by another . 
Katerina Ivanovna had an attack of hysterics . 
She sobbed , shrieking loudly , but refused to leave the court , struggled , and besought them not to remove her . 
Suddenly she cried to the President : `` There is more evidence I must give at once ... at once ! 
Here is a document , a letter ... take it , read it quickly , quickly ! 
It 's a letter from that monster ... that man there , there ! '' 
she pointed to Mitya . 
`` It was he killed his father , you will see that directly . 
He wrote to me how he would kill his father ! 
But the other one is ill , he is ill , he is delirious ! '' 
she kept crying out , beside herself . 
The court usher took the document she held out to the President , and she , dropping into her chair , hiding her face in her hands , began convulsively and noiselessly sobbing , shaking all over , and stifling every sound for fear she should be ejected from the court . 
The document she had handed up was that letter Mitya had written at the Metropolis tavern , which Ivan had spoken of as a `` mathematical proof . '' 
Alas ! 
its mathematical conclusiveness was recognised , and had it not been for that letter , Mitya might have escaped his doom or , at least , that doom would have been less terrible . 
It was , I repeat , difficult to notice every detail . 
What followed is still confused to my mind . 
The President must , I suppose , have at once passed on the document to the judges , the jury , and the lawyers on both sides . 
I only remember how they began examining the witness . 
On being gently asked by the President whether she had recovered sufficiently , Katerina Ivanovna exclaimed impetuously : `` I am ready , I am ready ! 
I am quite equal to answering you , '' she added , evidently still afraid that she would somehow be prevented from giving evidence . 
She was asked to explain in detail what this letter was and under what circumstances she received it . 
`` I received it the day before the crime was committed , but he wrote it the day before that , at the tavern - that is , two days before he committed the crime . 
Look , it is written on some sort of bill ! '' 
she cried breathlessly . 
`` He hated me at that time , because he had behaved contemptibly and was running after that creature ... and because he owed me that three thousand ... . 
Oh ! 
he was humiliated by that three thousand on account of his own meanness ! 
This is how it happened about that three thousand . 
I beg you , I beseech you , to hear me . 
Three weeks before he murdered his father , he came to me one morning . 
I knew he was in want of money , and what he wanted it for . 
Yes , yes - to win that creature and carry her off . 
I knew then that he had been false to me and meant to abandon me , and it was I , I , who gave him that money , who offered it to him on the pretext of his sending it to my sister in Moscow . 
And as I gave it him , I looked him in the face and said that he could send it when he liked , ` in a month 's time would do . ' 
How , how could he have failed to understand that I was practically telling him to his face , ` You want money to be false to me with your creature , so here 's the money for you . 
I give it to you myself . 
Take it , if you have so little honour as to take it ! ' 
I wanted to prove what he was , and what happened ? 
He took it , he took it , and squandered it with that creature in one night ... . 
But he knew , he knew that I knew all about it . 
I assure you he understood , too , that I gave him that money to test him , to see whether he was so lost to all sense of honour as to take it from me . 
I looked into his eyes and he looked into mine , and he understood it all and he took it - he carried off my money ! 
`` That 's true , Katya , '' Mitya roared suddenly , `` I looked into your eyes and I knew that you were dishonouring me , and yet I took your money . 
Despise me as a scoundrel , despise me , all of you ! 
I 've deserved it ! '' 
`` Prisoner , '' cried the President , `` another word and I will order you to be removed . '' 
`` That money was a torment to him , '' Katya went on with impulsive haste . 
`` He wanted to repay it me . 
He wanted to , that 's true ; but he needed money for that creature , too . 
So he murdered his father , but he did n't repay me , and went off with her to that village where he was arrested . 
There , again , he squandered the money he had stolen after the murder of his father . 
And a day before the murder he wrote me this letter . 
He was drunk when he wrote it . 
I saw it at once , at the time . 
He wrote it from spite , and feeling certain , positively certain , that I should never show it to anyone , even if he did kill him , or else he would n't have written it . 
For he knew I should n't want to revenge myself and ruin him ! 
But read it , read it attentively - more attentively , please - and you will see that he had described it all in his letter , all beforehand , how he would kill his father and where his money was kept . 
Look , please , do n't overlook that , there 's one phrase there , ' I shall kill him as soon as Ivan has gone away . ' 
he thought it all out beforehand how he would kill him , '' Katerina Ivanovna pointed out to the court with venomous and malignant triumph . 
Oh ! 
it was clear she had studied every line of that letter and detected every meaning underlining it . 
`` If he had n't been drunk , he would n't have written to me ; but , look , everything is written there beforehand , just as he committed the murder after . 
A complete programme of it ! '' 
she exclaimed frantically . 
She was reckless now of all consequences to herself , though , no doubt , she had foreseen them even a month ago , for even then , perhaps , shaking with anger , she had pondered whether to show it at the trial or not . 
Now she had taken the fatal plunge . 
I remember that the letter was read aloud by the clerk , directly afterwards , I believe . 
It made an overwhelming impression . 
They asked Mitya whether he admitted having written the letter . 
`` It 's mine , mine ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` I should n't have written it if I had n't been drunk ! 
... We 've hated each other for many things , Katya , but I swear , I swear I loved you even while I hated you , and you did n't love me ! '' 
He sank back on his seat , wringing his hands in despair . 
The prosecutor and counsel for the defence began cross-examining her , chiefly to ascertain what had induced her to conceal such a document and to give her evidence in quite a different tone and spirit just before . 
`` Yes , yes . 
I was telling lies just now . 
I was lying against my honour and my conscience , but I wanted to save him , for he has hated and despised me so ! '' 
Katya cried madly . 
`` Oh , he has despised me horribly , he has always despised me , and do you know , he has despised me from the very moment that I bowed down to him for that money . 
I saw that ... . 
I felt it at once at the time , but for a long time I would n't believe it . 
How often I have read it in his eyes , ` You came of yourself , though . ' 
Oh , he did n't understand , he had no idea why I ran to him , he can suspect nothing but baseness , he judged me by himself , he thought everyone was like himself ! '' 
Katya hissed furiously , in a perfect frenzy . 
`` And he only wanted to marry me , because I 'd inherited a fortune , because of that , because of that ! 
I always suspected it was because of that ! 
Oh , he is a brute ! 
He was always convinced that I should be trembling with shame all my life before him , because I went to him then , and that he had a right to despise me forever for it , and so to be superior to me - that 's why he wanted to marry me ! 
That 's so , that 's all so ! 
I tried to conquer him by my love - a love that knew no bounds . 
I even tried to forgive his faithlessness ; but he understood nothing , nothing ! 
How could he understand indeed ? 
He is a monster ! 
I only received that letter the next evening : it was brought me from the tavern - and only that morning , only that morning I wanted to forgive him everything , everything - even his treachery ! '' 
The President and the prosecutor , of course , tried to calm her . 
I ca n't help thinking that they felt ashamed of taking advantage of her hysteria and of listening to such avowals . 
I remember hearing them say to her , `` We understand how hard it is for you ; be sure we are able to feel for you , '' and so on , and so on . 
And yet they dragged the evidence out of the raving , hysterical woman . 
She described at last with extraordinary clearness , which is so often seen , though only for a moment , in such overwrought states , how Ivan had been nearly driven out of his mind during the last two months trying to save `` the monster and murderer , '' his brother . 
`` He tortured himself , '' she exclaimed , `` he was always trying to minimise his brother 's guilt and confessing to me that he , too , had never loved his father , and perhaps desired his death himself . 
Oh , he has a tender , over-tender conscience ! 
He tormented himself with his conscience ! 
He told me everything , everything ! 
He came every day and talked to me as his only friend . 
I have the honour to be his only friend ! '' 
she cried suddenly with a sort of defiance , and her eyes flashed . 
`` He had been twice to see Smerdyakov . 
One day he came to me and said , ` If it was not my brother , but Smerdyakov committed the murder ' -LRB- for the legend was circulating everywhere that Smerdyakov had done it -RRB- , ` perhaps I too am guilty , for Smerdyakov knew I did n't like my father and perhaps believed that I desired my father 's death . ' 
Then I brought out that letter and showed it him . 
He was entirely convinced that his brother had done it , and he was overwhelmed by it . 
He could n't endure the thought that his own brother was a parricide ! 
Only a week ago I saw that it was making him ill . 
During the last few days he has talked incoherently in my presence . 
I saw his mind was giving way . 
He walked about , raving ; he was seen muttering in the streets . 
The doctor from Moscow , at my request , examined him the day before yesterday and told me that he was on the eve of brain fever - and all on his account , on account of this monster ! 
And last night he learnt that Smerdyakov was dead ! 
It was such a shock that it drove him out of his mind ... and all through this monster , all for the sake of saving the monster ! '' 
Oh , of course , such an outpouring , such an avowal is only possible once in a lifetime - at the hour of death , for instance , on the way to the scaffold ! 
But it was in Katya 's character , and it was such a moment in her life . 
It was the same impetuous Katya who had thrown herself on the mercy of a young profligate to save her father ; the same Katya who had just before , in her pride and chastity , sacrificed herself and her maidenly modesty before all these people , telling of Mitya 's generous conduct , in the hope of softening his fate a little . 
And now , again , she sacrificed herself ; but this time it was for another , and perhaps only now - perhaps only at this moment - she felt and knew how dear that other was to her ! 
She had sacrificed herself in terror for him ; conceiving all of a sudden that he had ruined himself by his confession that it was he who had committed the murder , not his brother , she had sacrificed herself to save him , to save his good name , his reputation ! 
And yet one terrible doubt occurred to one - was she lying in her description of her former relations with Mitya ? 
- that was the question . 
No , she had not intentionally slandered him when she cried that Mitya despised her for her bowing down to him ! 
She believed it herself . 
She had been firmly convinced , perhaps ever since that bow , that the simplehearted Mitya , who even then adored her , was laughing at her and despising her . 
She had loved him with an hysterical , `` lacerated '' love only from pride , from wounded pride , and that love was not like love , but more like revenge . 
Oh ! 
perhaps that lacerated love would have grown into real love , perhaps Katya longed for nothing more than that , but Mitya 's faithlessness had wounded her to the bottom of her heart , and her heart could not forgive him . 
The moment of revenge had come upon her suddenly , and all that had been accumulating so long and so painfully in the offended woman 's breast burst out all at once and unexpectedly . 
She betrayed Mitya , but she betrayed herself , too . 
And no sooner had she given full expression to her feelings than the tension of course was over and she was overwhelmed with shame . 
Hysterics began again : she fell on the floor , sobbing and screaming . 
She was carried out . 
At that moment Grushenka , with a wail , rushed towards Mitya before they had time to prevent her . 
`` Mitya , '' she wailed , `` your serpent has destroyed you ! 
There , she has shown you what she is ! '' 
she shouted to the judges , shaking with anger . 
At a signal from the President they seized her and tried to remove her from the court . 
She would n't allow it . 
She fought and struggled to get back to Mitya . 
Mitya uttered a cry and struggled to get to her . 
He was overpowered . 
Yes , I think the ladies who came to see the spectacle must have been satisfied - the show had been a varied one . 
Then I remember the Moscow doctor appeared on the scene . 
I believe the President had previously sent the court usher to arrange for medical aid for Ivan . 
The doctor announced to the court that the sick man was suffering from a dangerous attack of brain fever , and that he must be at once removed . 
In answer to questions from the prosecutor and the counsel for the defence he said that the patient had come to him of his own accord the day before yesterday and that he had warned him that he had such an attack coming on , but he had not consented to be looked after . 
`` He was certainly not in a normal state of mind : he told me himself that he saw visions when he was awake , that he met several persons in the street , who were dead , and that Satan visited him every evening , '' said the doctor , in conclusion . 
Having given his evidence , the celebrated doctor withdrew . 
The letter produced by Katerina Ivanovna was added to the material proofs . 
After some deliberation , the judges decided to proceed with the trial and to enter both the unexpected pieces of evidence -LRB- given by Ivan and Katerina Ivanovna -RRB- on the protocol . 
But I will not detail the evidence of the other witnesses , who only repeated and confirmed what had been said before , though all with their characteristic peculiarities . 
I repeat , all was brought together in the prosecutor 's speech , which I shall quote immediately . 
Everyone was excited , everyone was electrified by the late catastrophe , and all were awaiting the speeches for the prosecution and the defence with intense impatience . 
Fetyukovitch was obviously shaken by Katerina Ivanovna 's evidence . 
But the prosecutor was triumphant . 
When all the evidence had been taken , the court was adjourned for almost an hour . 
I believe it was just eight o'clock when the President returned to his seat and our prosecutor , Ippolit Kirillovitch , began his speech . 
The Prosecutor 's Speech . 
Sketches of Character IPPOLIT KIRILLOVITCH began his speech , trembling with nervousness , with cold sweat on his forehead , feeling hot and cold all over by turns . 
He described this himself afterwards . 
He regarded this speech as his chef-d'oeuvre , the chef-d'oeuvre of his whole life , as his swan-song . 
He died , it is true , nine months later of rapid consumption , so that he had the right , as it turned out , to compare himself to a swan singing his last song . 
He had put his whole heart and all the brain he had into that speech . 
And poor Ippolit Kirillovitch unexpectedly revealed that at least some feeling for the public welfare and `` the eternal question '' lay concealed in him . 
Where his speech really excelled was in its sincerity . 
He genuinely believed in the prisoner 's guilt ; he was accusing him not as an official duty only , and in calling for vengeance he quivered with a genuine passion `` for the security of society . '' 
Even the ladies in thee audience , though they remained hostile to Ippolit Kirillovitch , admitted that he made an extraordinary impression on them . 
He began in a breaking voice , but it soon gained strength and filled the court to the end of his speech . 
But as soon as he had finished , he almost fainted . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , '' began the prosecutor , `` this case has made a stir throughout Russia . 
But what is there to wonder at , what is there so peculiarly horrifying in it for us ? 
We are so accustomed to such crimes ! 
That 's what 's so horrible , that such dark deeds have ceased to horrify us . 
What ought to horrify us is that we are so accustomed to it , and not this or that isolated crime . 
What are the causes of our indifference , our lukewarm attitude to such deeds , to such signs of the times , ominous of an unenviable future ? 
Is it our cynicism , is it the premature exhaustion of intellect and imagination in a society that is sinking into decay , in spite of its youth ? 
Is it that our moral principles are shattered to their foundations , or is it , perhaps , a complete lack of such principles among us ? 
I can not answer such questions ; nevertheless they are disturbing , and every citizen not only must , but ought to be harassed by them . 
Our newborn and still timid press has done good service to the public already , for without it we should never have heard of the horrors of unbridled violence and moral degradation which are continually made known by the press , not merely to those who attend the new jury courts established in the present reign , but to everyone . 
And what do we read almost daily ? 
Of things beside which the present case grows pale , and seems almost commonplace . 
But what is most important is that the majority of our national crimes of violence bear witness to a widespread evil , now so general among us that it is difficult to contend against it . 
`` One day we see a brilliant young officer of high society , at the very outset of his career , in a cowardly underhand way , without a pang of conscience , murdering an official who had once been his benefactor , and the servant girl , to steal his own I O U and what ready money he could find on him ; ` it will come in handy for my pleasures in the fashionable world and for my career in the future . ' 
After murdering them , he puts pillows under the head of each of his victims ; he goes away . 
Next , a young hero ` decorated for bravery ' kills the mother of his chief and benefactor , like a highwayman , and to urge his companions to join him he asserts that ` she loves him like a son , and so will follow all his directions and take no precautions . ' 
Granted that he is a monster , yet I dare not say in these days that he is unique . 
Another man will not commit the murder , but will feel and think like him , and is as dishonourable in soul . 
In silence , alone with his conscience , he asks himself perhaps , ` What is honour , and is n't the condemnation of bloodshed a prejudice ? ' 
`` Perhaps people will cry out against me that I am morbid , hysterical , that it is a monstrous slander , that I am exaggerating . 
Let them say so - and heavens ! 
I should be the first to rejoice if it were so ! 
Oh , do n't believe me , think of me as morbid , but remember my words ; if only a tenth , if only a twentieth part of what I say is true - even so it 's awful ! 
Look how our young people commit suicide , without asking themselves Hamlet 's question what there is beyond , without a sign of such a question , as though all that relates to the soul and to what awaits us beyond the grave had long been erased in their minds and buried under the sands . 
Look at our vice , at our profligates . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , the luckless victim in the present case , was almost an innocent babe compared with many of them . 
And yet we all knew him , ` he lived among us ! ' 
... `` Yes , one day perhaps the leading intellects of Russia and of Europe will study the psychology of Russian crime , for the subject is worth it . 
But this study will come later , at leisure , when all the tragic topsy-turvydom of to-day is farther behind us , so that it 's possible to examine it with more insight and more impartiality than I can do . 
Now we are either horrified or pretend to be horrified , though we really gloat over the spectacle , and love strong and eccentric sensations which tickle our cynical , pampered idleness . 
Or , like little children , we brush the dreadful ghosts away and hide our heads in the pillow so as to return to our sports and merriment as soon as they have vanished . 
But we must one day begin life in sober earnest , we must look at ourselves as a society ; it 's time we tried to grasp something of our social position , or at least to make a beginning in that direction . 
`` A great writer * of the last epoch , comparing Russia to a swift troika galloping to an unknown goal , exclaims , ` Oh , troika , birdlike troika , who invented thee ! ' 
and adds , in proud ecstasy , that all the peoples of the world stand aside respectfully to make way for the recklessly galloping troika to pass . 
That may be , they may stand aside , respectfully or no , but in my poor opinion the great writer ended his book in this way either in an excess of childish and naive optimism , or simply in fear of the censorship of the day . 
For if the troika were drawn by his heroes , Sobakevitch , Nozdryov , Tchitchikov , it could reach no rational goal , whoever might be driving it . 
And those were the heroes of an older generation , ours are worse specimens still ... '' * Gogol . 
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch 's speech was interrupted by applause . 
The liberal significance of this simile was appreciated . 
The applause was , it 's true , of brief duration , so that the President did not think it necessary to caution the public , and only looked severely in the direction of the offenders . 
But Ippolit Kirillovitch was encouraged ; he had never been applauded before ! 
He had been all his life unable to get a hearing , and now he suddenly had an opportunity of securing the ear of all Russia . 
`` What , after all , is this Karamazov family , which has gained such an unenviable notoriety throughout Russia ? '' 
he continued . 
`` Perhaps I am exaggerating , but it seems to me that certain fundamental features of the educated class of to-day are reflected in this family picture - only , of course , in miniature , ` like the sun in a drop of water . ' 
Think of that unhappy , vicious , unbridled old man , who has met with such a melancholy end , the head of a family ! 
Beginning life of noble birth , but in a poor dependent position , through an unexpected marriage he came into a small fortune . 
A petty knave , a toady and buffoon , of fairly good , though undeveloped , intelligence , he was , above all , a moneylender , who grew bolder with growing prosperity . 
His abject and servile characteristics disappeared , his , malicious and sarcastic cynicism was all that remained . 
On the spiritual side he was undeveloped , while his vitality was excessive . 
He saw nothing in life but sensual pleasure , and he brought his children up to be the same . 
He had no feelings for his duties as a father . 
He ridiculed those duties . 
He left his little children to the servants , and was glad to be rid of them , forgot about them completely . 
The old man 's maxim was Apres moi le deluge . 
* He was an example of everything that is opposed to civic duty , of the most complete and malignant individualism . 
` The world may burn for aught I care , so long as I am all right , ' and he was all right ; he was content , he was eager to go on living in the same way for another twenty or thirty years . 
He swindled his own son and spent his money , his maternal inheritance , on trying to get his mistress from him . 
No , I do n't intend to leave the prisoner 's defence altogether to my talented colleague from Petersburg . 
I will speak the truth myself , I can well understand what resentment he had heaped up in his son 's heart against him . 
* After me , the deluge . 
`` But enough , enough of that unhappy old man ; he has paid the penalty . 
Let us remember , however , that he was a father , and one of the typical fathers of to-day . 
Am I unjust , indeed , in saying that he is typical of many modern fathers ? 
Alas ! 
many of them only differ in not openly professing such cynicism , for they are better educated , more cultured , but their philosophy is essentially the same as his . 
Perhaps I am a pessimist , but you have agreed to forgive me . 
Let us agree beforehand , you need not believe me , but let me speak . 
Let me say what I have to say , and remember something of my words . 
`` Now for the children of this father , this head of a family . 
One of them is the prisoner before us , all the rest of my speech will deal with him . 
Of the other two I will speak only cursorily . 
`` The elder is one of those modern young men of brilliant education and vigorous intellect , who has lost all faith in everything . 
He has denied and rejected much already , like his father . 
We have all heard him , he was a welcome guest in local society . 
He never concealed his opinions , quite the contrary in fact , which justifies me in speaking rather openly of him now , of course , not as an individual , but as a member of the Karamazov family . 
Another personage closely connected with the case died here by his own hand last night . 
I mean an afflicted idiot , formerly the servant , and possibly the illegitimate son , of Fyodor Pavlovitch , Smerdyakov . 
At the preliminary inquiry , he told me with hysterical tears how the young Ivan Karamazov had horrified him by his spiritual audacity . 
` Everything in the world is lawful according to him , and nothing must be forbidden in the future - that is what he always taught me . ' 
I believe that idiot was driven out of his mind by this theory , though , of course , the epileptic attacks from which he suffered , and this terrible catastrophe , have helped to unhinge his faculties . 
But he dropped one very interesting observation , which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer , and that is , indeed , why I 've mentioned it : ` If there is one of the sons that is like Fyodor Pavlovitch in character , it is Ivan Fyodorovitch . ' 
`` With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character , feeling it indelicate to continue further . 
Oh , I do n't want to draw any further conclusions and croak like a raven over the young man 's future . 
We 've seen to-day in this court that there are still good impulses in his young heart , that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faith and cynicism , which have come to him rather by inheritance than by the exercise of independent thought . 
`` Then the third son . 
Oh , he is a devout and modest youth , who does not share his elder brother 's gloomy and destructive theory of life . 
He has sought to cling to the ` ideas of the people , ' or to what goes by that name in some circles of our intellectual classes . 
He clung to the monastery , and was within an ace of becoming a monk . 
He seems to me to have betrayed unconsciously , and so early , that timid despair which leads so many in our unhappy society , who dread cynicism and its corrupting influences , and mistakenly attribute all the mischief to European enlightenment , to return to their ` native soil , ' as they say , to the bosom , so to speak , of their mother earth , like frightened children , yearning to fall asleep on the withered bosom of their decrepit mother , and to sleep there for ever , only to escape the horrors that terrify them . 
`` For my part I wish the excellent and gifted young man every success ; I trust that youthful idealism and impulse towards the ideas of the people may never degenerate , as often happens , on the moral side into gloomy mysticism , and on the political into blind chauvinism - two elements which are even a greater menace to Russia than the premature decay , due to misunderstanding and gratuitous adoption of European ideas , from which his elder brother is suffering . '' 
Two or three people clapped their hands at the mention of chauvinism and mysticism . 
Ippolit Kirillovitch had been , indeed , carried away by his own eloquence . 
All this had little to do with the case in hand , to say nothing of the fact of its being somewhat vague , but the sickly and consumptive man was overcome by the desire to express himself once in his life . 
People said afterwards that he was actuated by unworthy motives in his criticism of Ivan , because the latter had on one or two occasions got the better of him in argument , and Ippolit Kirillovitch , remembering it , tried now to take his revenge . 
But I do n't know whether it was true . 
All this was only introductory , however , and the speech passed to more direct consideration of the case . 
`` But to return to the eldest son , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch went on . 
`` He is the prisoner before us . 
We have his life and his actions , too , before us ; the fatal day has come and all has been brought to the surface . 
While his brothers seem to stand for ` Europeanism ' and ` the principles of the people , ' he seems to represent Russia as she is . 
Oh , not all Russia , not all ! 
God preserve us , if it were ! 
Yet , here we have her , our mother Russia , the very scent and sound of her . 
Oh , he is spontaneous , he is a marvellous mingling of good and evil , he is a lover of culture and Schiller , yet he brawls in taverns and plucks out the beards of his boon companions . 
Oh , he , too , can be good and noble , but only when all goes well with him . 
What is more , he can be carried off his feet , positively carried off his feet by noble ideals , but only if they come of themselves , if they fall from heaven for him , if they need not be paid for . 
He dislikes paying for anything , but is very fond of receiving , and that 's so with him in everything . 
Oh , give him every possible good in life -LRB- he could n't be content with less -RRB- , and put no obstacle in his way , and he will show that he , too , can be noble . 
He is not greedy , no , but he must have money , a great deal of money , and you will see how generously , with what scorn of filthy lucre , he will fling it all away in the reckless dissipation of one night . 
But if he has not money , he will show what he is ready to do to get it when he is in great need of it . 
But all this later , let us take events in their chronological order . 
`` First , we have before us a poor abandoned child , running about the back-yard ` without boots on his feet , ' as our worthy and esteemed fellow citizen , of foreign origin , alas ! 
expressed it just now . 
I repeat it again , I yield to no one the defence of the criminal . 
I am here to accuse him , but to defend him also . 
Yes , I , too , am human ; I , too , can weigh the influence of home and childhood on the character . 
But the boy grows up and becomes an officer ; for a duel and other reckless conduct he is exiled to one of the remote frontier towns of Russia . 
There he led a wild life as an officer . 
And , of course , he needed money , money before all things , and so after prolonged disputes he came to a settlement with his father , and the last six thousand was sent him . 
A letter is in existence in which he practically gives up his claim to the rest and settles his conflict with his father over the inheritance on the payment of this six thousand . 
`` Then came his meeting with a young girl of lofty character and brilliant education . 
Oh , I do not venture to repeat the details ; you have only just heard them . 
Honour , self-sacrifice were shown there , and I will be silent . 
The figure of the young officer , frivolous and profligate , doing homage to true nobility and a lofty ideal , was shown in a very sympathetic light before us . 
But the other side of the medal was unexpectedly turned to us immediately after in this very court . 
Again I will not venture to conjecture why it happened so , but there were causes . 
The same lady , bathed in tears of long-concealed indignation , alleged that he , he of all men , had despised her for her action , which , though incautious , reckless perhaps , was still dictated by lofty and generous motives . 
He , he , the girl 's betrothed , looked at her with that smile of mockery , which was more insufferable from him than from anyone . 
And knowing that he had already deceived her -LRB- he had deceived her , believing that she was bound to endure everything from him , even treachery -RRB- , she intentionally offered him three thousand roubles , and clearly , too clearly , let him understand that she was offering him money to deceive her . 
` Well , will you take it or not , are you so lost to shame ? ' 
was the dumb question in her scrutinising eyes . 
He looked at her , saw clearly what was in her mind -LRB- he 's admitted here before you that he understood it all -RRB- , appropriated that three thousand unconditionally , and squandered it in two days with the new object of his affections . 
`` What are we to believe then ? 
The first legend of the young officer sacrificing his last farthing in a noble impulse of generosity and doing reverence to virtue , or this other revolting picture ? 
As a rule , between two extremes one has to find the mean , but in the present case this is not true . 
The probability is that in the first case he was genuinely noble , and in the second as genuinely base . 
And why ? 
Because he was of the broad Karamazov character - that 's just what I am leading up to - capable of combining the most incongruous contradictions , and capable of the greatest heights and of the greatest depths . 
Remember the brilliant remark made by a young observer who has seen the Karamazov family at close quarters - Mr. Rakitin : ` The sense of their own degradation is as essential to those reckless , unbridled natures as the sense of their lofty generosity . ' 
And that 's true , they need continually this unnatural mixture . 
Two extremes at the same moment , or they are miserable and dissatisfied and their existence is incomplete . 
They are wide , wide as mother Russia ; they include everything and put up with everything . 
`` By the way , gentlemen of the jury , we 've just touched upon that three thousand roubles , and I will venture to anticipate things a little . 
Can you conceive that a man like that , on receiving that sum and in such a way , at the price of such shame , such disgrace , such utter degradation , could have been capable that very day of setting apart half that sum , that very day , and sewing it up in a little bag , and would have had the firmness of character to carry it about with him for a whole month afterwards , in spite of every temptation and his extreme need of it ! 
Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns , nor when he was flying into the country , trying to get from God knows whom , the money so essential to him to remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father , did he bring himself to touch that little bag ! 
Why , if only to avoid abandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous , he would have been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home to keep watch over her , and to await the moment when she would say to him at last ' I am yours , ' and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings . 
`` But no , he did not touch his talisman , and what is the reason he gives for it ? 
The chief reason , as I have just said , was that when she would say ' I am yours , take me where you will , ' he might have the wherewithal to take her . 
But that first reason , in the prisoner 's own words , was of little weight beside the second . 
While I have that money on me , he said , I am a scoundrel , not a thief , for I can always go to my insulted betrothed , and , laying down half the sum I have fraudulently appropriated , I can always say to her , ` You see , I 've squandered half your money , and shown I am a weak and immoral man , and , if you like , a scoundrel ' -LRB- I use the prisoner 's own expressions -RRB- , ` but though I am a scoundrel , I am not a thief , for if I had been a thief , I should n't have brought you back this half of the money , but should have taken it as I did the other half ! ' 
A marvellous explanation ! 
This frantic , but weak man , who could not resist the temptation of accepting the three thousand roubles at the price of such disgrace , this very man suddenly develops the most stoical firmness , and carries about a thousand roubles without daring to touch it . 
Does that fit in at all with the character we have analysed ? 
No , and I venture to tell you how the real Dmitri Karamazov would have behaved in such circumstances , if he really had brought himself to put away the money . 
`` At the first temptation - for instance , to entertain the woman with whom he had already squandered half the money - he would have unpicked his little bag and have taken out some hundred roubles , for why should he have taken back precisely half the money , that is , fifteen hundred roubles ? 
Why not fourteen hundred ? 
He could just as well have said then that he was not a thief , because he brought back fourteen hundred roubles . 
Then another time he would have unpicked it again and taken out another hundred , and then a third , and then a fourth , and before the end of the month he would have taken the last note but one , feeling that if he took back only a hundred it would answer the purpose , for a thief would have stolen it all . 
And then he would have looked at this last note , and have said to himself , ` It 's really not worth while to give back one hundred ; let 's spend that , too ! ' 
That 's how the real Dmitri Karamazov , as we know him , would have behaved . 
One can not imagine anything more incongruous with the actual fact than this legend of the little bag . 
Nothing could be more inconceivable . 
But we shall return to that later . '' 
After touching upon what had come out in the proceedings concerning the financial relations of father and son , and arguing again and again that it was utterly impossible , from the facts known , to determine which was in the wrong , Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to the evidence of the medical experts in reference to Mitya 's fixed idea about the three thousand owing him . 
An Historical Survey `` THE medical experts have striven to convince us that the prisoner is out of his mind and , in fact , a maniac . 
I maintain that he is in his right mind , and that if he had not been , he would have behaved more cleverly . 
As for his being a maniac , that I would agree with , but only in one point , that is , his fixed idea about the three thousand . 
Yet I think one might find a much simpler cause than his tendency to insanity . 
For my part I agree thoroughly with the young doctor who maintained that the prisoner 's mental faculties have always been normal , and that he has only been irritable and exasperated . 
The object of the prisoner 's continual and violent anger was not the sum itself ; there was a special motive at the bottom of it . 
That motive is jealousy ! '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch described at length the prisoner 's fatal passion for Grushenka . 
He began from the moment when the prisoner went to the `` young person 's '' lodgings `` to beat her '' - `` I use his own expression , '' the prosecutor explained - `` but instead of beating her , he remained there , at her feet . 
That was the beginning of the passion . 
At the same time the prisoner 's father was captivated by the same young person - a strange and fatal coincidence , for they both lost their hearts to her simultaneously , though both had known her before . 
And she inspired in both of them the most violent , characteristically Karamazov passion . 
We have her own confession : ' I was laughing at both of them . ' 
Yes , the sudden desire to make a jest of them came over her , and she conquered both of them at once . 
The old man , who worshipped money , at once set aside three thousand roubles as a reward for one visit from her , but soon after that , he would have been happy to lay his property and his name at her feet , if only she would become his lawful wife . 
We have good evidence of this . 
As for the prisoner , the tragedy of his fate is evident ; it is before us . 
But such was the young person 's ` game . ' 
The enchantress gave the unhappy young man no hope until the last moment , when he knelt before her , stretching out hands that were already stained with the blood of his father and rival . 
It was in that position that he was arrested . 
` Send me to Siberia with him , I have brought him to this , I am most to blame , ' the woman herself cried , in genuine remorse at the moment of his arrest . 
`` The talented young man , to whom I have referred already , Mr. Rakitin , characterised this heroine in brief and impressive terms : ` She was disillusioned early in life , deceived and ruined by a betrothed , who seduced and abandoned her . 
She was left in poverty , cursed by her respectable family and taken under the protection of a wealthy old man , whom she still , however , considers as her benefactor . 
There was perhaps much that was good in her young heart , but it was embittered too early . 
She became prudent and saved money . 
She grew sarcastic and resentful against society . ' 
After this sketch of her character it may well be understood that she might laugh at both of them simply from mischief , from malice . 
`` After a month of hopeless love and moral degradation , during which he betrayed his betrothed and appropriated money entrusted to his honour , the prisoner was driven almost to frenzy , almost to madness by continual jealousy - and of whom ? 
His father ! 
And the worst of it was that the crazy old man was alluring and enticing the object of his affection by means of that very three thousand roubles , which the son looked upon as his own property , part of his inheritance from his mother , of which his father was cheating him . 
Yes , I admit it was hard to bear ! 
It might well drive a man to madness . 
It was not the money , but the fact that this money was used with such revolting cynicism to ruin his happiness ! '' 
Then the prosecutor went on to describe how the idea of murdering his father had entered the prisoner 's head , and illustrated his theory with facts . 
`` At first he only talked about it in taverns - he was talking about it all that month . 
Ah , he likes being always surrounded with company , and he likes to tell his companions everything , even his most diabolical and dangerous ideas ; he likes to share every thought with others , and expects , for some reason , that those he confides in will meet him with perfect sympathy , enter into all his troubles and anxieties , take his part and not oppose him in anything . 
If not , he flies into a rage and smashes up everything in the tavern . 
-LRB- Then followed the anecdote about Captain Snegiryov . -RRB- 
Those who heard the prisoner began to think at last that he might mean more than threats , and that such a frenzy might turn threats into actions . '' 
Here the prosecutor described the meeting of the family at the monastery , the conversations with Alyosha , and the horrible scene of violence when the prisoner had rushed into his father 's house just after dinner . 
`` I can not positively assert , '' the prosecutor continued , `` that the prisoner fully intended to murder his father before that incident . 
Yet the idea had several times presented itself to him , and he had deliberated on it - for that we have facts , witnesses , and his own words . 
I confess , gentlemen of the jury , '' he added , `` that till to-day I have been uncertain whether to attribute to the prisoner conscious premeditation . 
I was firmly convinced that he had pictured the fatal moment beforehand , but had only pictured it , contemplating it as a possibility . 
He had not definitely considered when and how he might commit the crime . 
`` But I was only uncertain till to-day , till that fatal document was presented to the court just now . 
You yourselves heard that young lady 's exclamation , ` It is the plan , the programme of the murder ! ' 
That is how she defined that miserable , drunken letter of the unhappy prisoner . 
And , in fact , from that letter we see that the whole fact of the murder was premeditated . 
It was written two days before , and so we know now for a fact that , forty-eight hours before the perpetration of his terrible design , the prisoner swore that , if he could not get money next day , he would murder his father in order to take the envelope with the notes from under his pillow , as soon as Ivan had left . 
` As soon as Ivan had gone away ' - you hear that ; so he had thought everything out , weighing every circumstance , and he carried it all out just as he had written it . 
The proof of premeditation is conclusive ; the crime must have been committed for the sake of the money , that is stated clearly , that is written and signed . 
The prisoner does not deny his signature . 
`` I shall be told he was drunk when he wrote it . 
But that does not diminish the value of the letter , quite the contrary ; he wrote when drunk what he had planned when sober . 
Had he not planned it when sober , he would not have written it when drunk . 
I shall be asked : Then why did he talk about it in taverns ? 
A man who premeditates such a crime is silent and keeps it to himself . 
Yes , but he talked about it before he had formed a plan , when he had only the desire , only the impulse to it . 
Afterwards he talked less about it . 
On the evening he wrote that letter at the Metropolis tavern , contrary to his custom he was silent , though he had been drinking . 
He did not play billiards , he sat in a corner , talked to no one . 
He did indeed turn a shopman out of his seat , but that was done almost unconsciously , because he could never enter a tavern without making a disturbance . 
It is true that after he had taken the final decision , he must have felt apprehensive that he had talked too much about his design beforehand , and that this might lead to his arrest and prosecution afterwards . 
But there was nothing for it ; he could not take his words back , but his luck had served him before , it would serve him again . 
He believed in his star , you know ! 
I must confess , too , that he did a great deal to avoid the fatal catastrophe . 
` To-morrow I shall try and borrow the money from everyone , ' as he writes in his peculiar language , ' and if they wo n't give it to me , there will be bloodshed . ' '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to a detailed description of all Mitya 's efforts to borrow the money . 
He described his visit to Samsonov , his journey to Lyagavy . 
`` Harassed , jeered at , hungry , after selling his watch to pay for the journey -LRB- though he tells us he had fifteen hundred roubles on him - a likely story -RRB- , tortured by jealousy at having left the object of his affections in the town , suspecting that she would go to Fyodor Pavlovitch in his absense , he returned at last to the town , to find , to his joy , that she had not been near his father . 
He accompanied her himself to her protector . 
-LRB- Strange to say , he does n't seem to have been jealous of Samsonov , which is psychologically interesting . -RRB- 
Then he hastens back to his ambush in the back gardens , and then learns that Smerdyakov is in a fit , that the other servant is ill - the coast is clear and he knows the ` signals ' - what a temptation ! 
Still he resists it ; he goes off to a lady who has for some time been residing in the town , and who is highly esteemed among us , Madame Hohlakov . 
That lady , who had long watched his career with compassion , gave him the most judicious advice , to give up his dissipated life , his unseemly love-affair , the waste of his youth and vigour in pot-house debauchery , and to set off to Siberia to the gold mines : ` that would be an outlet for your turbulent energies , your romantic character , your thirst for adventure . ' '' 
After describing the result of this conversation and the moment when the prisoner learnt that Grushenka had not remained at Samsonov 's , the sudden frenzy of the luckless man worn out with jealousy and nervous exhaustion , at the thought that she had deceived him and was now with his father , Ippolit Kirillovitch concluded by dwelling upon the fatal influence of chance . 
`` Had the maid told him that her mistress was at Mokroe with her former lover , nothing would have happened . 
But she lost her head , she could only swear and protest her ignorance , and if the prisoner did not kill her on the spot , it was only because he flew in pursuit of his false mistress . 
`` But note , frantic as he was , he took with him a brass pestle . 
Why that ? 
Why not some other weapon ? 
But since he had been contemplating his plan and preparing himself for it for a whole month , he would snatch up anything like a weapon that caught his eye . 
He had realised for a month past that any object of the kind would serve as a weapon , so he instantly , without hesitation , recognised that it would serve his purpose . 
So it was by no means unconsciously , by no means involuntarily , that he snatched up that fatal pestle . 
And then we find him in his father 's garden - the coast is clear , there are no witnesses , darkness and jealousy . 
The suspicion that she was there , with him , with his rival , in his arms , and perhaps laughing at him at that moment - took his breath away . 
And it was not mere suspicion , the deception was open , obvious . 
She must be there , in that lighted room , she must be behind the screen ; and the unhappy man would have us believe that he stole up to the window , peeped respectfully in , and discreetly withdrew , for fear something terrible and immoral should happen . 
And he tries to persuade us of that , us , who understand his character , who know his state of mind at the moment , and that he knew the signals by which he could at once enter the house . '' 
At this point Ippolit Kirillovitch broke off to discuss exhaustively the suspected connection of Smerdyakov with the murder . 
He did this very circumstantially , and everyone realised that , although he professed to despise that suspicion , he thought the subject of great importance . 
A Treatise on Smerdyakov `` TO begin with , what was the source of this suspicion ? '' 
-LRB- Ippolit Kirillovitch began -RRB- . 
`` The first person who cried out that Smerdyakov had committed the murder was the prisoner himself at the moment of his arrest , yet from that time to this he had not brought forward a single fact to confirm the charge , nor the faintest suggestion of a fact . 
The charge is confirmed by three persons only - the two brothers of the prisoner and Madame Svyetlov . 
The elder of these brothers expressed his suspicions only to-day , when he was undoubtedly suffering from brain fever . 
But we know that for the last two months he has completely shared our conviction of his brother 's guilt and did not attempt to combat that idea . 
But of that later . 
The younger brother has admitted that he has not the slightest fact to support his notion of Smerdyakov 's guilt , and has only been led to that conclusion from the prisoner 's own words and the expression of his face . 
Yes , that astounding piece of evidence has been brought forward twice to-day by him . 
Madame Svyetslov was even more astounding . 
` What the prisoner tells you , you must believe ; he is not a man to tell a lie . ' 
That is all the evidence against Smerdyakov produced by these three persons . 
who are all deeply concerned in the prisoner 's fate . 
And yet the theory of Smerdyakov 's guilt has been noised about , has been and is still maintained . 
Is it credible ? 
Is it conceivable ? '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch thought it necessary to describe the personality of Smerdyakov , `` who had cut short his life in a fit of insanity . '' 
He depicted him as a man of weak intellect , with a smattering of education , who had been thrown off his balance by philosophical ideas above his level and certain modern theories of duty , which he learnt in practice from the reckless life of his master , who was also perhaps his father - Fyodor Pavlovitch ; and , theoretically , from various strange philosophical conversations with his master 's elder son , Ivan Fyodorovitch , who readily indulged in this diversion , probably feeling dull or wishing to amuse himself at the valet 's expense . 
`` He spoke to me himself of his spiritual condition during the last few days at his father 's house , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch explained ; `` but others too have borne witness to it - the prisoner himself , his brother , and the servant Grigory - that is , all who knew him well . 
`` Moreover , Smerdyakov , whose health was shaken by his attacks of epilepsy , had not the courage of a chicken . 
` He fell at my feet and kissed them , ' the prisoner himself has told us , before he realised how damaging such a statement was to himself . 
` He is an epileptic chicken , ' he declared about him in his characteristic language . 
And the prisoner chose him for his confidant -LRB- we have his own word for it -RRB- and he frightened him into consenting at last to act as a spy for him . 
In that capacity he deceived his master , revealing to the prisoner the existence of the envelope with the notes in it and the signals by means of which he could get into the house . 
How could he help telling him , indeed ? 
` He would have killed me , I could see that he would have killed me , ' he said at the inquiry , trembling and shaking even before us , though his tormentor was by that time arrested and could do him no harm . 
` He suspected me at every instant . 
In fear and trembling I hastened to tell him every secret to pacify him , that he might see that I had not deceived him and let me off alive . ' 
Those are his own words . 
I wrote them down and I remember them . 
` When he began shouting at me , I would fall on my knees . ' 
`` He was naturally very honest and enjoyed the complete confidence of his master , ever since he had restored him some money he had lost . 
So it may be supposed that the poor fellow suffered pangs of remorse at having deceived his master , whom he loved as his benefactor . 
Persons severely afflicted with epilepsy are , so the most skilful doctors tell us , always prone to continual and morbid self-reproach . 
They worry over their ` wickedness , ' they are tormented by pangs of conscience , often entirely without cause ; they exaggerate and often invent all sorts of faults and crimes . 
And here we have a man of that type who had really been driven to wrongdoing by terror and intimidation . 
`` He had , besides , a strong presentiment that something terrible would be the outcome of the situation that was developing before his eyes . 
When Ivan Fyodorovitch was leaving for Moscow , just before the catastrophe , Smerdyakov besought him to remain , though he was too timid to tell him plainly what he feared . 
He confined himself to hints , but his hints were not understood . 
`` It must be observed that he looked on Ivan Fyodorovitch as a protector , whose presence in the house was a guarantee that no harm would come to pass . 
Remember the phrase in Dmitri Karamazov 's drunken letter , ' I shall kill the old man , if only Ivan goes away . ' 
So Ivan Fyodorovitch 's presence seemed to everyone a guarantee of peace and order in the house . 
`` But he went away , and within an hour of his young master 's departure Smerdyakov was taken with an epileptic fit . 
But that 's perfectly intelligible . 
Here I must mention that Smerdyakov , oppressed by terror and despair of a sort , had felt during those last few days that one of the fits from which he had suffered before at moments of strain , might be coming upon him again . 
The day and hour of such an attack can not , of course , be foreseen , but every epileptic can feel beforehand that he is likely to have one . 
So the doctors tell us . 
And so , as soon as Ivan Fyodorovitch had driven out of the yard , Smerdyakov , depressed by his lonely and unprotected position , went to the cellar . 
He went down the stairs wondering if he would have a fit or not , and what if it were to come upon him at once . 
And that very apprehension , that very wonder , brought on the spasm in his throat that always precedes such attacks , and he fell unconscious into the cellar . 
And in this perfectly natural occurrence people try to detect a suspicion , a hint that he was shamming an attack on purpose . 
But , if it were on purpose , the question arises at once , what was his motive ? 
What was he reckoning on ? 
What was he aiming at ? 
I say nothing about medicine : science , I am told , may go astray : the doctors were not able to discriminate between the counterfeit and the real . 
That may be so , but answer me one question : what motive had he for such a counterfeit ? 
Could he , had he been plotting the murder , have desired to attract the attention of the household by having a fit just before ? 
`` You see , gentlemen of the jury , on the night of the murder , there were five persons in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's - Fyodor Pavlovitch himself -LRB- but he did not kill himself , that 's evident -RRB- ; then his servant , Grigory , but he was almost killed himself ; the third person was Grigory 's wife , Marfa Ignatyevna , but it would be simply shameful to imagine her murdering her master . 
Two persons are left - the prisoner and Smerdyakov . 
But , if we are to believe the prisoner 's statement that he is not the murderer , then Smerdyakov must have been , for there is no other alternative , no one else can be found . 
That is what accounts for the artful , astounding accusation against the unhappy idiot who committed suicide yesterday . 
Had a shadow of suspicion rested on anyone else , had there been any sixth person , I am persuaded that even the prisoner would have been ashamed to accuse Smerdyakov , and would have accused that sixth person , for to charge Smerdyakov with that murder is perfectly absurd . 
`` Gentlemen , let us lay aside psychology , let us lay aside medicine , let us even lay aside logic , let us turn only to the facts and see what the facts tell us . 
If Smerdyakov killed him , how did he do it ? 
Alone or with the assistance of the prisoner ? 
Let us consider the first alternative - that he did it alone . 
If he had killed him it must have been with some object , for some advantage to himself . 
But not having a shadow of the motive that the prisoner had for the murder - hatred , jealousy , and so on - Smerdyakov could only have murdered him for the sake of gain , in order to appropriate the three thousand roubles he had seen his master put in the envelope . 
And yet he tells another person - and a person most closely interested , that is , the prisoner - everything about the money and the signals , where the envelope lay , what was written on it , what it was tied up with , and , above all , told him of those signals by which he could enter the house . 
Did he do this simply to betray himself , or to invite to the same enterprise one who would be anxious to get that envelope for himself ? 
` Yes , ' I shall be told , ` but he betrayed it from fear . ' 
But how do you explain this ? 
A man who could conceive such an audacious , savage act , and carry it out , tells facts which are known to no one else in the world , and which , if he held his tongue , no one would ever have guessed ! 
`` No , however cowardly he might be , if he had plotted such a crime , nothing would have induced him to tell anyone about the envelope and the signals , for that was as good as betraying himself beforehand . 
He would have invented something , he would have told some lie if he had been forced to give information , but he would have been silent about that . 
For , on the other hand , if he had said nothing about the money , but had committed the murder and stolen the money , no one in the world could have charged him with murder for the sake of robbery , since no one but he had seen the money , no one but he knew of its existence in the house . 
Even if he had been accused of the murder , it could only have been thought that he had committed it from some other motive . 
But since no one had observed any such motive in him beforehand , and everyone saw , on the contrary , that his master was fond of him and honoured him with his confidence , he would , of course , have been the last to be suspected . 
People would have suspected first the man who had a motive , a man who had himself declared he had such motives , who had made no secret of it ; they would , in fact , have suspected the son of the murdered man , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
Had Smerdyakov killed and robbed him , and the son been accused of it , that would , of course , have suited Smerdyakov . 
Yet are we to believe that , though plotting the murder , he told that son , Dmitri , about the money , the envelope , and the signals ? 
Is that logical ? 
Is that clear ? 
`` When the day of the murder planned by Smerdyakov came , we have him falling downstairs in a feigned fit - with what object ? 
In the first place that Grigory , who had been intending to take his medicine , might put it off and remain on guard , seeing there was no one to look after the house , and , in the second place , I suppose , that his master seeing that there was no one to guard him , and in terror of a visit from his son , might redouble his vigilance and precaution . 
And , most of all , I suppose that he , Smerdyakov , disabled by the fit , might be carried from the kitchen , where he always slept , apart from all the rest , and where he could go in and out as he liked , to Grigory 's room at the other end of the lodge , where he was always put , shut off by a screen three paces from their own bed . 
This was the immemorial custom established by his master and the kindhearted Marfa Ignatyevna , whenever he had a fit . 
There , lying behind the screen , he would most likely , to keep up the sham , have begun groaning , and so keeping them awake all night -LRB- as Grigory and his wife testified -RRB- . 
And all this , we are to believe , that he might more conveniently get up and murder his master ! 
`` But I shall be told that he shammed illness on purpose that he might not be suspected and that he told the prisoner of the money and the signals to tempt him to commit the murder , and when he had murdered him and had gone away with the money , making a noise , most likely , and waking people , Smerdyakov got up , am I to believe , and went in - what for ? 
To murder his master a second time and carry off the money that had already been stolen ? 
Gentlemen , are you laughing ? 
I am ashamed to put forward such suggestions , but , incredible as it seems , that 's just what the prisoner alleges . 
When he had left the house , had knocked Grigory down and raised an alarm , he tells us Smerdyakov got up , went in and murdered his master and stole the money ! 
I wo n't press the point that Smerdyakov could hardly have reckoned on this beforehand , and have foreseen that the furious and exasperated son would simply come to peep in respectfully , though he knew the signals , and beat a retreat , leaving Smerdyakov his booty . 
Gentlemen of the jury , I put this question to you in earnest : when was the moment when Smerdyakov could have committed his crime ? 
Name that moment , or you ca n't accuse him . 
`` But , perhaps , the fit was a real one , the sick man suddenly recovered , heard a shout , and went out . 
Well - what then ? 
He looked about him and said , ` Why not go and kill the master ? ' 
And how did he know what had happened , since he had been lying unconscious till that moment ? 
But there 's a limit to these flights of fancy . '' 
` Quite so , ' some astute people will tell me , ` but what if they were in agreement ? 
What if they murdered him together and shared the money - what then ? ' 
A weighty question , truly ! 
And the facts to confirm it are astounding . 
One commits the murder and takes all the trouble while his accomplice lies on one side shamming a fit , apparently to arouse suspicion in everyone , alarm in his master and alarm in Grigory . 
It would be interesting to know what motives could have induced the two accomplices to form such an insane plan . 
`` But perhaps it was not a case of active complicity on Smerdyakov 's part , but only of passive acquiescence ; perhaps Smerdyakov was intimidated and agreed not to prevent the murder , and foreseeing that he would be blamed for letting his master be murdered , without screaming for help or resisting , he may have obtained permission from Dmitri Karamazov to get out of the way by shamming a fit - ` you may murder him as you like ; it 's nothing to me . ' 
But as this attack of Smerdyakov 's was bound to throw the household into confusion , Dmitri Karamazov could never have agreed to such a plan . 
I will waive that point however . 
Supposing that he did agree , it would still follow that Dmitri Karamazov is the murderer and the instigator , and Smerdyakov is only a passive accomplice , and not even an accomplice , but merely acquiesced against his will through terror . 
`` But what do we see ? 
As soon as he is arrested the prisoner instantly throws all the blame on Smerdyakov , not accusing him of being his accomplice , but of being himself the murderer . 
` He did it alone , ' he says . 
` He murdered and robbed him . 
It was the work of his hands . ' 
Strange sort of accomplices who begin to accuse one another at once ! 
And think of the risk for Karamazov . 
After committing the murder while his accomplice lay in bed , he throws the blame on the invalid , who might well have resented it and in self-preservation might well have confessed the truth . 
For he might well have seen that the court would at once judge how far he was responsible , and so he might well have reckoned that if he were punished , it would be far less severely than the real murderer . 
But in that case he would have been certain to make a confession , yet he has not done so . 
Smerdyakov never hinted at their complicity , though the actual murderer persisted in accusing him and declaring that he had committed the crime alone . 
`` What 's more , Smerdyakov at the inquiry volunteered the statement that it was he who had told the prisoner of the envelope of notes and of the signals , and that , but for him , he would have known nothing about them . 
If he had really been a guilty accomplice , would he so readily have made this statement at the inquiry ? 
On the contrary , he would have tried to conceal it , to distort the facts or minimise them . 
But he was far from distorting or minimising them . 
No one but an innocent man , who had no fear of being charged with complicity , could have acted as he did . 
And in a fit of melancholy arising from his disease and this catastrophe he hanged himself yesterday . 
He left a note written in his peculiar language , ' I destroy myself of my own will and inclination so as to throw no blame on anyone . ' 
What would it have cost him to add : ' I am the murderer , not Karamazov ' ? 
But that he did not add . 
Did his conscience lead him to suicide and not to avowing his guilt ? 
`` And what followed ? 
Notes for three thousand roubles were brought into the court just now , and we were told that they were the same that lay in the envelope now on the table before us , and that the witness had received them from Smerdyakov the day before . 
But I need not recall the painful scene , though I will make one or two comments , selecting such trivial ones as might not be obvious at first sight to everyone , and so may be overlooked . 
In the first place , Smerdyakov must have given back the money and hanged himself yesterday from remorse . 
And only yesterday he confessed his guilt to Ivan Karamazov , as the latter informs us . 
If it were not so , indeed , why should Ivan Fyodorovitch have kept silence till now ? 
And so , if he has confessed , then why , I ask again , did he not avow the whole truth in the last letter he left behind , knowing that the innocent prisoner had to face this terrible ordeal the next day ? 
`` The money alone is no proof . 
A week ago , quite by chance , the fact came to the knowledge of myself and two other persons in this court that Ivan Fyodorovitch had sent two five per cent coupons of five thousand each - that is , ten thousand in all - to the chief town of the province to be changed . 
I only mention this to point out that anyone may have money , and that it ca n't be proved that these notes are the same as were in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's envelope . 
`` Ivan Karamazov , after receiving yesterday a communication of such importance from the real murderer , did not stir . 
Why did n't he report it at once ? 
Why did he put it all off till morning ? 
I think I have a right to conjecture why . 
His health had been giving way for a week past : he had admitted to a doctor and to his most intimate friends that he was suffering from hallucinations and seeing phantoms of the dead : he was on the eve of the attack of brain fever by which he has been stricken down to-day . 
In this condition he suddenly heard of Smerdyakov 's death , and at once reflected . 
` The man is dead , I can throw the blame on him and save my brother . 
I have money . 
I will take a roll of notes and say that Smerdyakov gave them me before his death . ' 
You will say that was dishonourable : it 's dishonourable to slander even the dead , and even to save a brother . 
True , but what if he slandered him unconsciously ? 
What if , finally unhinged by the sudden news of the valet 's death , he imagined it really was so ? 
You saw the recent scene : you have seen the witness 's condition . 
He was standing up and was speaking , but where was his mind ? 
`` Then followed the document , the prisoner 's letter written two days before the crime , and containing a complete programme of the murder . 
Why , then , are we looking for any other programme ? 
The crime was committed precisely according to this programme , and by no other than the writer of it . 
Yes , gentlemen of the jury , it went off without a hitch ! 
He did not run respectfully and timidly away from his father 's window , though he was firmly convinced that the object of his affections was with him . 
No , that is absurd and unlikely ! 
He went in and murdered him . 
Most likely he killed him in anger , burning with resentment , as soon as he looked on his hated rival . 
But having killed him , probably with one blow of the brass pestle , and having convinced himself , after careful search , that she was not there , he did not , however , forget to put his hand under the pillow and take out the envelope , the torn cover of which lies now on the table before us . 
`` I mention this fact that you may note one , to my thinking , very characteristic circumstance . 
Had he been an experienced murderer and had he committed the murder for the sake of gain only , would he have left the torn envelope on the floor as it was found , beside the corpse ? 
Had it been Smerdyakov , for instance , murdering his master to rob him , he would have simply carried away the envelope with him , without troubling himself to open it over his victim 's corpse , for he would have known for certain that the notes were in the envelope - they had been put in and sealed up in his presence - and had he taken the envelope with him , no one would ever have known of the robbery . 
I ask you , gentlemen , would Smerdyakov have behaved in that way ? 
Would he have left the envelope on the floor ? 
`` No , this was the action of a frantic murderer , a murderer who was not a thief and had never stolen before that day , who snatched the notes from under the pillow , not like a thief stealing them , but as though seizing his own property from the thief who had stolen it . 
For that was the idea which had become almost an insane obsession in Dmitri Karamazov in regard to that money . 
And pouncing upon the envelope , which he had never seen before , he tore it open to make sure whether the money was in it , and ran away with the money in his pocket , even forgetting to consider that he had left an astounding piece of evidence against himself in that torn envelope on the floor . 
All because it was Karamazov , not Smerdyakov , he did n't think , he did n't reflect , and how should he ? 
He ran away ; he heard behind him the servant cry out ; the old man caught him , stopped him and was felled to the ground by the brass pestle . 
`` The prisoner , moved by pity , leapt down to look at him . 
Would you believe it , he tells us that he leapt down out of pity , out of compassion , to see whether he could do anything for him . 
Was that a moment to show compassion ? 
No ; he jumped down simply to make certain whether the only witness of his crime were dead or alive . 
Any other feeling , any other motive would be unnatural . 
Note that he took trouble over Grigory , wiped his head with his handkerchief and , convincing himself he was dead , he ran to the house of his mistress , dazed and covered with blood . 
How was it he never thought that he was covered with blood and would be at once detected ? 
But the prisoner himself assures us that he did not even notice that he was covered with blood . 
That may be believed , that is very possible , that always happens at such moments with criminals . 
On one point they will show diabolical cunning , while another will escape them altogether . 
But he was thinking at that moment of one thing only - where was she ? 
He wanted to find out at once where she was , so he ran to her lodging and learnt an unexpected and astounding piece of news - she had gone off to Mokroe to meet her first lover . '' 
The Galloping Troika . 
The End of the Prosecutor 's Speech IPPOLIT KIRILLOVITCH had chosen the historial method of exposition , beloved by all nervous orators , who find in its limitation a check on their own eager rhetoric . 
At this moment in his speech he went off into a dissertation on Grushenka 's `` first lover , '' and brought forward several interesting thoughts on this theme . 
`` Karamazov , who had been frantically jealous of everyone , collapsed , so to speak , and effaced himself at once before this first lover . 
What makes it all the more strange is that he seems to have hardly thought of this formidable rival . 
But he had looked upon him as a remote danger , and Karamazov always lives in the present . 
Possibly he regarded him as a fiction . 
But his wounded heart grasped instantly that the woman had been concealing this new rival and deceiving him , because he was anything but a fiction to her , because he was the one hope of her life . 
Grasping this instantly , he resigned himself . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , I can not help dwelling on this unexpected trait in the prisoner 's character . 
He suddenly evinces an irresistible desire for justice , a respect for woman and a recognition of her right to love . 
And all this at the very moment when he had stained his hands with his father 's blood for her sake ! 
It is true that the blood he had shed was already crying out for vengeance , for , after having ruined his soul and his life in this world , he was forced to ask himself at that same instant what he was and what he could be now to her , to that being , dearer to him than his own soul , in comparison with that former lover who had returned penitent , with new love , to the woman he had once betrayed , with honourable offers , with the promise of a reformed and happy life . 
And he , luckless man , what could he give her now , what could he offer her ? 
`` Karamazov felt all this , knew that all ways were barred to him by his crime and that he was a criminal under sentence , and not a man with life before him ! 
This thought crushed him . 
And so he instantly flew to one frantic plan , which , to a man of Karamazov 's character , must have appeared the one inevitable way out of his terrible position . 
That way out was suicide . 
He ran for the pistols he had left in pledge with his friend Perhotin and on the way , as he ran , he pulled out of his pocket the money , for the sake of which he had stained his hands with his father 's gore . 
Oh , now he needed money more than ever . 
Karamazov would die , Karamazov would shoot himself and it should be remembered ! 
To be sure , he was a poet and had burnt the candle at both ends all his life . 
` To her , to her ! 
and there , oh , there I will give a feast to the whole world , such as never was before , that will be remembered and talked of long after ! 
In the midst of shouts of wild merriment , reckless gypsy songs and dances I shall raise the glass and drink to the woman I adore and her new-found happiness ! 
And then , on the spot , at her feet , I shall dash out my brains before her and punish myself ! 
She will remember Mitya Karamazov sometimes , she will see how Mitya loved her , she will feel for Mitya ! ' 
`` Here we see in excess a love of effect , a romantic despair and sentimentality , and the wild recklessness of the Karamazovs . 
Yes , but there is something else , gentlemen of the jury , something that cries out in the soul , throbs incessantly in the mind , and poisons the heart unto death - that something is conscience , gentlemen of the jury , its judgment , its terrible torments ! 
The pistol will settle everything , the pistol is the only way out ! 
But beyond - I do n't know whether Karamazov wondered at that moment ` What lies beyond , ' whether Karamazov could , like Hamlet , wonder ` What lies beyond . ' 
No , gentlemen of the jury , they have their Hamlets , but we still have our Karamazovs ! '' 
Here Ippolit Kirillovitch drew a minute picture of Mitya 's preparations , the scene at Perhotin 's , at the shop , with the drivers . 
He quoted numerous words and actions , confirmed by witnesses , and the picture made a terrible impression on the audience . 
The guilt of this harassed and desperate man stood out clear and convincing , when the facts were brought together . 
`` What need had he of precaution ? 
Two or three times he almost confessed , hinted at it , all but spoke out . '' 
-LRB- Then followed the evidence given by witnesses . -RRB- 
`` He even cried out to the peasant who drove him , ` Do you know , you are driving a murderer ! ' 
But it was impossible for him to speak out , he had to get to Mokroe and there to finish his romance . 
But what was awaiting the luckless man ? 
Almost from the first minute at Mokroe he saw that his invincible rival was perhaps by no means so invincible , that the toast to their new-found happiness was not desired and would not be acceptable . 
But you know the facts , gentlemen of the jury , from the preliminary inquiry . 
Karamazov 's triumph over his rival was complete and his soul passed into quite a new phase , perhaps the most terrible phase through which his soul has passed or will pass . 
`` One may say with certainty , gentlemen of the jury , '' the prosecutor continued , `` that outraged nature and the criminal heart bring their own vengeance more completely than any earthly justice . 
What 's more , justice and punishment on earth positively alleviate the punishment of nature and are , indeed , essential to the soul of the criminal at such moments , as its salvation from despair . 
For I can not imagine the horror and moral suffering of Karamazov when he learnt that she loved him , that for his sake she had rejected her first lover , that she was summoning him , Mitya , to a new life , that she was promising him happiness - and when ? 
When everything was over for him and nothing was possible ! 
`` By the way , I will note in parenthesis a point of importance for the light it throws on the prisoner 's position at the moment . 
This woman , this love of his , had been till the last moment , till the very instant of his arrest , a being unattainable , passionately desired by him but unattainable . 
Yet why did he not shoot himself then , why did he relinquish his design and even forget where his pistol was ? 
It was just that passionate desire for love and the hope of satisfying it that restrained him . 
Throughout their revels he kept close to his adored mistress , who was at the banquet with him and was more charming and fascinating to him than ever - he did not leave her side , abasing himself in his homage before her . 
`` His passion might well , for a moment , stifle not only the fear of arrest , but even the torments of conscience . 
For a moment , oh , only for a moment ! 
I can picture the state of mind of the criminal hopelessly enslaved by these influences - first , the influence of drink , of noise and excitement , of the thud of the dance and the scream of the song , and of her , flushed with wine , singing and dancing and laughing to him ! 
Secondly , the hope in the background that the fatal end might still be far off , that not till next morning , at least , they would come and take him . 
So he had a few hours and that 's much , very much ! 
In a few hours one can think of many things . 
I imagine that he felt something like what criminals feel when they are being taken to the scaffold . 
They have another long , long street to pass down and at walking pace , past thousands of people . 
Then there will be a turning into another street and only at the end of that street the dread place of execution ! 
I fancy that at the beginning of the journey the condemned man , sitting on his shameful cart , must feel that he has infinite life still before him . 
The houses recede , the cart moves on - oh , that 's nothing , it 's still far to the turning into the second street and he still looks boldly to right and to left at those thousands of callously curious people with their eyes fixed on him , and he still fancies that he is just such a man as they . 
But now the turning comes to the next street . 
Oh , that 's nothing , nothing , there 's still a whole street before him , and however many houses have been passed , he will still think there are many left . 
And so to the very end , to the very scaffold . 
`` This I imagine is how it was with Karamazov then . 
` They 've not had time yet , ' he must have thought , ' I may still find some way out , oh , there 's still time to make some plan of defence , and now , now - she is so fascinating ! ' 
`` His soul was full of confusion and dread , but he managed , however , to put aside half his money and hide it somewhere - I can not otherwise explain the disappearance of quite half of the three thousand he had just taken from his father 's pillow . 
He had been in Mokroe more than once before , he had caroused there for two days together already , he knew the old big house with all its passages and outbuildings . 
I imagine that part of the money was hidden in that house , not long before the arrest , in some crevice , under some floor , in some corner , under the roof . 
With what object ? 
I shall be asked . 
Why , the catastrophe may take place at once , of course ; he had n't yet considered how to meet it , he had n't the time , his head was throbbing and his heart was with her , but money - money was indispensable in any case ! 
With money a man is always a man . 
Perhaps such foresight at such a moment may strike you as unnatural ? 
But he assures us himself that a month before , at a critical and exciting moment , he had halved his money and sewn it up in a little bag . 
And though that was not true , as we shall prove directly , it shows the idea was a familiar one to Karamazov , he had contemplated it . 
What 's more , when he declared at the inquiry that he had put fifteen hundred roubles in a bag -LRB- which never existed -RRB- he may have invented that little bag on the inspiration of the moment , because he had two hours before divided his money and hidden half of it at Mokroe till morning , in case of emergency , simply not to have it on himself . 
Two extremes , gentlemen of the jury , remember that Karamazov can contemplate two extremes and both at once . 
`` We have looked in the house , but we have n't found the money . 
It may still be there or it may have disappeared next day and be in the prisoner 's hands now . 
In any case he was at her side , on his knees before her , she was lying on the bed , he had his hands stretched out to her and he had so entirely forgotten everything that he did not even hear the men coming to arrest him . 
He had n't time to prepare any line of defence in his mind . 
He was caught unawares and confronted with his judges , the arbiters of his destiny . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , there are moments in the execution of our duties when it is terrible for us to face a man , terrible on his account , too ! 
The moments of contemplating that animal fear , when the criminal sees that all is lost , but still struggles , still means to struggle , the moments when every instinct of self-preservation rises up in him at once and he looks at you with questioning and suffering eyes , studies you , your face , your thoughts , uncertain on which side you will strike , and his distracted mind frames thousands of plans in an instant , but he is still afraid to speak , afraid of giving himself away ! 
This purgatory of the spirit , this animal thirst for self-preservation , these humiliating moments of the human soul , are awful , and sometimes arouse horror and compassion for the criminal even in the lawyer . 
And this was what we all witnessed then . 
`` At first he was thunderstruck and in his terror dropped some very compromising phrases . 
` Blood ! 
I 've deserved it ! ' 
But he quickly restrained himself . 
He had not prepared what he was to say , what answer he was to make , he had nothing but a bare denial ready . ' 
I am not guilty of my father 's death . ' 
That was his fence for the moment and behind it he hoped to throw up a barricade of some sort . 
His first compromising exclamations he hastened to explain by declaring that he was responsible for the death of the servant Grigory only . 
` Of that bloodshed I am guilty , but who has killed my father , gentlemen , who has killed him ? 
Who can have killed him , if not I ? ' 
Do you hear , he asked us that , us , who had come to ask him that question ! 
Do you hear that uttered with such premature haste - ` if not I ' - the animal cunning , the naivete the Karamazov impatience of it ? ' 
I did n't kill him and you must n't think I did ! 
I wanted to kill him , gentlemen , I wanted to kill him , ' he hastens to admit -LRB- he was in a hurry , in a terrible hurry -RRB- , ` but still I am not guilty , it is not I murdered him . ' 
He concedes to us that he wanted to murder him , as though to say , you can see for yourselves how truthful I am , so you 'll believe all the sooner that I did n't murder him . 
Oh , in such cases the criminal is often amazingly shallow and credulous . 
`` At that point one of the lawyers asked him , as it were incidentally , the most simple question , ` Was n't it Smerdyakov killed him ? ' 
Then , as we expected , he was horribly angry at our having anticipated him and caught him unawares , before he had time to pave the way to choose and snatch the moment when it would be most natural to bring in Smerdyakov 's name . 
He rushed at once to the other extreme , as he always does , and began to assure us that Smerdyakov could not have killed him , was not capable of it . 
But do n't believe him , that was only his cunning ; he did n't really give up the idea of Smerdyakov ; on the contrary , he meant to bring him forward again ; for , indeed , he had no one else to bring forward , but he would do that later , because for the moment that line was spoiled for him . 
He would bring him forward perhaps next day , or even a few days later , choosing an opportunity to cry out to us , ` You know I was more sceptical about Smerdyakov than you , you remember that yourselves , but now I am convinced . 
He killed him , he must have done ! ' 
And for the present he falls back upon a gloomy and irritable denial . 
Impatience and anger prompted him , however , to the most inept and incredible explanation of how he looked into his father 's window and how he respectfully withdrew . 
The worst of it was that he was unaware of the position of affairs , of the evidence given by Grigory . 
`` We proceeded to search him . 
The search angered , but encouraged him , the whole three thousand had not been found on him , only half of it . 
And no doubt only at that moment of angry silence , the fiction of the little bag first occurred to him . 
No doubt he was conscious himself of the improbability of the story and strove painfully to make it sound more likely , to weave it into a romance that would sound plausible . 
In such cases the first duty , the chief task of the investigating lawyers , is to prevent the criminal being prepared , to pounce upon him unexpectedly so that he may blurt out his cherished ideas in all their simplicity , improbability and inconsistency . 
The criminal can only be made to speak by the sudden and apparently incidental communication of some new fact , of some circumstance of great importance in the case , of which he had no previous idea and could not have foreseen . 
We had such a fact in readiness - that was Grigory 's evidence about the open door through which the prisoner had run out . 
He had completely forgotten about that door and had not even suspected that Grigory could have seen it . 
`` The effect of it was amazing . 
He leapt up and shouted to us , ` Then Smerdyakov murdered him , it was Smerdyakov ! ' 
and so betrayed the basis of the defence he was keeping back , and betrayed it in its most improbable shape , for Smerdyakov could only have committed the murder after he had knocked Grigory down and run away . 
When we told him that Grigory saw the door was open before he fell down , and had heard Smerdyakov behind the screen as he came out of his bedroom - Karamazov was positively crushed . 
My esteemed and witty colleague , Nikolay Parfenovitch , told me afterwards that he was almost moved to tears at the sight of him . 
And to improve matters , the prisoner hastened to tell us about the much-talked-of little bag - so be it , you shall hear this romance ! 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , I have told you already why I consider this romance not only an absurdity , but the most improbable invention that could have been brought forward in the circumstances . 
If one tried for a bet to invent the most unlikely story , one could hardly find anything more incredible . 
The worst of such stories is that the triumphant romancers can always be put to confusion and crushed by the very details in which real life is so rich and which these unhappy and involuntary storytellers neglect as insignificant trifles . 
Oh , they have no thought to spare for such details , their minds are concentrated on their grand invention as a whole , and fancy anyone daring to pull them up for a trifle ! 
But that 's how they are caught . 
The prisoner was asked the question , ` Where did you get the stuff for your little bag and who made it for you ? ' ' 
I made it myself . ' 
` And where did you get the linen ? ' 
The prisoner was positively offended , he thought it almost insulting to ask him such a trivial question , and would you believe it , his resentment was genuine ! 
But they are all like that . ' 
I tore it off my shirt . 
`` Then we shall find that shirt among your linen to-morrow , with a piece torn off . ' 
And only fancy , gentlemen of the jury , if we really had found that torn shirt -LRB- and how could we have failed to find it in his chest of drawers or trunk ? -RRB- 
that would have been a fact , a material fact in support of his statement ! 
But he was incapable of that reflection . ' 
I do n't remember , it may not have been off my shirt , I sewed it up in one of my landlady 's caps . ' 
` What sort of a cap ? ' 
` It was an old cotton rag of hers lying about . ' 
` And do you remember that clearly ? ' 
` No , I do n't . ' 
And he was angry , very angry , and yet imagine not remembering it ! 
At the most terrible moments of man 's life , for instance when he is being led to execution , he remembers just such trifles . 
He will forget anything but some green roof that has flashed past him on the road , or a jackdaw on a cross - that he will remember . 
He concealed the making of that little bag from his household , he must have remembered his humiliating fear that someone might come in and find him needle in hand , how at the slightest sound he slipped behind the screen -LRB- there is a screen in his lodgings -RRB- . 
`` But , gentlemen of the jury , why do I tell you all this , all these details , trifles ? '' 
cried Ippolit Kirillovitch suddenly . 
`` Just because the prisoner still persists in these absurdities to this moment . 
He has not explained anything since that fatal night two months ago , he has not added one actual illuminating fact to his former fantastic statements ; all those are trivialities . 
` You must believe it on my honour . ' 
Oh , we are glad to believe it , we are eager to believe it , even if only on his word of honour ! 
Are we jackals thirsting for human blood ? 
Show us a single fact in the prisoner 's favour and we shall rejoice ; but let it be a substantial , real fact , and not a conclusion drawn from the prisoner 's expression by his own brother , or that when he beat himself on the breast he must have meant to point to the little bag , in the darkness , too . 
We shall rejoice at the new fact , we shall be the first to repudiate our charge , we shall hasten to repudiate it . 
But now justice cries out and we persist , we can not repudiate anything . '' 
Ippolit Kirillovitch passed to his final peroration . 
He looked as though he was in a fever , he spoke of the blood that cried for vengeance , the blood of the father murdered by his son , with the base motive of robbery ! 
He pointed to the tragic and glaring consistency of the facts . 
`` And whatever you may hear from the talented and celebrated counsel for the defence , '' Ippolit Kirillovitch could not resist adding , `` whatever eloquent and touching appeals may be made to your sensibilities , remember that at this moment you are in a temple of justice . 
Remember that you are the champions of our justice , the champions of our holy Russia , of her principles , her family , everything that she holds sacred ! 
Yes , you represent Russia here at this moment , and your verdict will be heard not in this hall only but will re-echo throughout the whole of Russia , and all Russia will hear you , as her champions and her judges , and she will be encouraged or disheartened by your verdict . 
Do not disappoint Russia and her expectations . 
Our fatal troika dashes on in her headlong flight perhaps to destruction and in all Russia for long past men have stretched out imploring hands and called a halt to its furious reckless course . 
And if other nations stand aside from that troika that may be , not from respect , as the poet would fain believe , but simply from horror . 
From horror , perhaps from disgust . 
And well it is that they stand aside , but maybe they will cease one day to do so and will form a firm wall confronting the hurrying apparition and will check the frenzied rush of our lawlessness , for the sake of their own safety , enlightenment and civilisation . 
Already we have heard voices of alarm from Europe , they already begin to sound . 
Do not tempt them ! 
Do not heap up their growing hatred by a sentence justifying the murder of a father by his son I Though Ippolit Kirillovitch was genuinely moved , he wound up his speech with this rhetorical appeal - and the effect produced by him was extraordinary . 
When he had finished his speech , he went out hurriedly and , as I have mentioned before , almost fainted in the adjoining room . 
There was no applause in the court , but serious persons were pleased . 
The ladies were not so well satisfied , though even they were pleased with his eloquence , especially as they had no apprehensions as to the upshot of the trial and had full trust in Fetyukovitch . 
`` He will speak at last and of course carry all before him . '' 
Everyone looked at Mitya ; he sat silent through the whole of the prosecutor 's speech , clenching his teeth , with his hands clasped , and his head bowed . 
Only from time to time he raised his head and listened , especially when Grushenka was spoken of . 
When the prosecutor mentioned Rakitin 's opinion of her , a smile of contempt and anger passed over his face and he murmured rather audibly , `` The Bernards ! '' 
When Ippolit Kirillovitch described how he had questioned and tortured him at Mokroe , Mitya raised his head and listened with intense curiosity . 
At one point he seemed about to jump up and cry out , but controlled himself and only shrugged his shoulders disdainfully . 
People talked afterwards of the end of the speech , of the prosecutor 's feat in examining the prisoner at Mokroe , and jeered at Ippolit Kirillovitch . 
`` The man could not resist boasting of his cleverness , '' they said . 
The court was adjourned , but only for a short interval , a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes at most . 
There was a hum of conversation and exclamations in the audience . 
I remember some of them . 
`` A weighty speech , '' a gentleman in one group observed gravely . 
`` He brought in too much psychology , '' said another voice . 
`` But it was all true , the absolute truth ! '' 
`` Yes , he is first rate at it . '' 
`` He summed it all up . '' 
`` Yes , he summed us up , too , '' chimed in another voice , `` Do you remember , at the beginning of his speech , making out we were all like Fyodor Pavlovitch ? '' 
`` And at the end , too . 
But that was all rot . '' 
`` And obscure too . '' 
`` He was a little too much carried away . '' 
`` It 's unjust , it 's unjust . '' 
`` No , it was smartly done , anyway . 
He 's had long to wait , but he 's had his say , ha ha ! '' 
`` What will the counsel for the defence say ? '' 
In another group I heard : `` He had no business to make a thrust at the Petersburg man like that ; ` appealing to your sensibilities ' - do you remember ? '' 
`` Yes , that was awkward of him . '' 
`` He was in too great a hurry . '' 
`` He is a nervous man . '' 
`` We laugh , but what must the prisoner be feeling ? '' 
`` Yes , what must it be for Mitya ? '' 
In a third group : `` What lady is that , the fat one , with the lorgnette , sitting at the end ? '' 
`` She is a general 's wife , divorced , I know her . '' 
`` That 's why she has the lorgnette . '' 
`` She is not good for much . '' 
`` Oh no , she is a piquante little woman . '' 
`` Two places beyond her there is a little fair woman , she is prettier . '' 
`` They caught him smartly at Mokroe , did n't they , eh ? '' 
`` Oh , it was smart enough . 
We 've heard it before , how often he has told the story at people 's houses ! 
`` And he could n't resist doing it now . 
That 's vanity . '' 
`` He is a man with a grievance , he he ! '' 
`` Yes , and quick to take offence . 
And there was too much rhetoric , such long sentences . '' 
`` Yes , he tries to alarm us , he kept trying to alarm us . 
Do you remember about the troika ? 
Something about ` They have Hamlets , but we have , so far , only Karamazovs ! ' 
That was cleverly said ! '' 
`` That was to propitiate the liberals . 
He is afraid of them . '' 
`` Yes , and he is afraid of the lawyer , too . '' 
`` Yes , what will Fetyukovitch say ? '' 
`` Whatever he says , he wo n't get round our peasants . '' 
`` Do n't you think so ? '' 
A fourth group : `` What he said about the troika was good , that piece about the other nations . '' 
`` And that was true what he said about other nations not standing it . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` Why , in the English Parliment a Member got up last week and speaking about the Nihilists asked the Ministry whether it was not high time to intervene , to educate this barbarous people . 
Ippolit was thinking of him , I know he was . 
He was talking about that last week . '' 
`` Not an easy job . '' 
`` Not an easy job ? 
Why not ? '' 
`` Why , we 'd shut up Kronstadt and not let them have any corn . 
Where would they get it ? '' 
`` In America . 
They get it from America now . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
But the bell rang , all rushed to their places . 
Fetyukovitch mounted the tribune . 
The Speech for the Defence . 
An Argument that Cuts Both Ways ALL was hushed as the first words of the famous orator rang out . 
The eyes of the audience were fastened upon him . 
He began very simply and directly , with an air of conviction , but not the slightest trace of conceit . 
He made no attempt at eloquence , at pathos , or emotional phrases . 
He was like a man speaking in a circle of intimate and sympathetic friends . 
His voice was a fine one , sonorous and sympathetic , and there was something genuine and simple in the very sound of it . 
But everyone realised at once that the speaker might suddenly rise to genuine pathos and `` pierce the heart with untold power . '' 
His language was perhaps more irregular than Ippolit Kirillovitch 's , but he spoke without long phrases , and indeed , with more precision . 
One thing did not please the ladies : he kept bending forward , especially at the beginning of his speech , not exactly bowing , but as though he were about to dart at his listeners , bending his long spine in half , as though there were a spring in the middle that enabled him to bend almost at right angles . 
At the beginning of his speech he spoke rather disconnectedly , without system , one may say , dealing with facts separately , though , at the end , these facts formed a whole . 
His speech might be divided into two parts , the first consisting of criticism in refutation of the charge , sometimes malicious and sarcastic . 
But in the second half he suddenly changed his tone , and even his manner , and at once rose to pathos . 
The audience seemed on the lookout for it , and quivered with enthusiasm . 
He went straight to the point , and began by saying that although he practised in Petersburg , he had more than once visited provincial towns to defend prisoners , of whose innocence he had a conviction or at least a preconceived idea . 
`` That is what has happened to me in the present case , '' he explained . 
`` From the very first accounts in the newspapers I was struck by something which strongly prepossessed me in the prisoner 's favour . 
What interested me most was a fact which often occurs in legal practice , but rarely , I think , in such an extreme and peculiar form as in the present case . 
I ought to formulate that peculiarity only at the end of my speech , but I will do so at the very beginning , for it is my weakness to go to work directly , not keeping my effects in reserve and economising my material . 
That may be imprudent on my part , but at least it 's sincere . 
What I have in my mind is this : there is an overwhelming chain of evidence against the prisoner , and at the same time not one fact that will stand criticism , if it is examined separately . 
As I followed the case more closely in the papers my idea was more and more confirmed , and I suddenly received from the prisoner 's relatives a request to undertake his defence . 
I at once hurried here , and here I became completely convinced . 
It was to break down this terrible chain of facts , and to show that each piece of evidence taken separately was unproved and fantastic , that I undertook the case . '' 
So Fetyukovitch began . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , '' he suddenly protested , `` I am new to this district . 
I have no preconceived ideas . 
The prisoner , a man of turbulent and unbridled temper , has not insulted me . 
But he has insulted perhaps hundreds of persons in this town , and so prejudiced many people against him beforehand . 
Of course I recognise that the moral sentiment of local society is justly excited against him . 
The prisoner is of turbulent and violent temper . 
Yet he was received in society here ; he was even welcome in the family of my talented friend , the prosecutor . '' 
-LRB- N.B. . 
At these words there were two or three laughs in the audience , quickly suppressed , but noticed by all . 
All of us knew that the prosecutor received Mitya against his will , solely because he had somehow interested his wife - a lady of the highest virtue and moral worth , but fanciful , capricious , and fond of opposing her husband , especially in trifles . 
Mitya 's visits , however , had not been frequent . -RRB- 
`` Nevertheless I venture to suggest , '' Fetyukovitch continued , `` that in spite of his independent mind and just character , my opponent may have formed a mistaken prejudice against my unfortunate client . 
Oh , that is so natural ; the unfortunate man has only too well deserved such prejudice . 
Outraged morality , and still more outraged taste , is often relentless . 
We have , in the talented prosecutor 's speech , heard a stern analysis of the prisoner 's character and conduct , and his severe critical attitude to the case was evident . 
And , what 's more , he went into psychological subtleties into which he could not have entered , if he had the least conscious and malicious prejudice against the prisoner . 
But there are things which are even worse , even more fatal in such cases , than the most malicious and consciously unfair attitude . 
It is worse if we are carried away by the artistic instinct , by the desire to create , so to speak , a romance , especially if God has endowed us with psychological insight . 
Before I started on my way here , I was warned in Petersburg , and was myself aware , that I should find here a talented opponent whose psychological insight and subtlety had gained him peculiar renown in legal circles of recent years . 
But profound as psychology is , it 's a knife that cuts both ways . '' 
-LRB- Laughter among the public . -RRB- 
`` You will , of course , forgive me my comparison ; I ca n't boast of eloquence . 
But I will take as an example any point in the prosecutor 's speech . 
`` The prisoner , running away in the garden in the dark , climbed over the fence , was seized by the servant , and knocked him down with a brass pestle . 
Then he jumped back into the garden and spent five minutes over the man , trying to discover whether he had killed him or not . 
And the prosecutor refuses to believe the prisoner 's statement that he ran to old Grigory out of pity . 
` No , ' he says , ` such sensibility is impossible at such a moment , that 's unnatural ; he ran to find out whether the only witness of his crime was dead or alive , and so showed that he had committed the murder , since he would not have run back for any other reason . ' 
`` Here you have psychology ; but let us take the same method and apply it to the case the other way round , and our result will be no less probable . 
The murderer , we are told , leapt down to find out , as a precaution , whether the witness was alive or not , yet he had left in his murdered father 's study , as the prosecutor himself argues , an amazing piece of evidence in the shape of a torn envelope , with an inscription that there had been three thousand roubles in it . 
` If he had carried that envelope away with him , no one in the world would have known of that envelope and of the notes in it , and that the money had been stolen by the prisoner . ' 
Those are the prosecutor 's own words . 
So on one side you see a complete absence of precaution , a man who has lost his head and run away in a fright , leaving that clue on the floor , and two minutes later , when he has killed another man , we are entitled to assume the most heartless and calculating foresight in him . 
But even admitting this was so , it is psychological subtlety , I suppose , that discerns that under certain circumstances I become as bloodthirsty and keen-sighted as a Caucasian eagle , while at the next I am as timid and blind as a mole . 
But if I am so bloodthirsty and cruelly calculating that when I kill a man I only run back to find out whether he is alive to witness against me , why should I spend five minutes looking after my victim at the risk of encountering other witnesses ? 
Why soak my handkerchief , wiping the blood off his head so that it may be evidence against me later ? 
If he were so cold-hearted and calculating , why not hit the servant on the head again and again with the same pestle so as to kill him outright and relieve himself of all anxiety about the witness ? 
`` Again , though he ran to see whether the witness was alive , he left another witness on the path , that brass pestle which he had taken from the two women , and which they could always recognise afterwards as theirs , and prove that he had taken it from them . 
And it is not as though he had forgotten it on the path , dropped it through carelessness or haste , no , he had flung away his weapon , for it was found fifteen paces from where Grigory lay . 
Why did he do so ? 
just because he was grieved at having killed a man , an old servant ; and he flung away the pestle with a curse , as a murderous weapon . 
That 's how it must have been , what other reason could he have had for throwing it so far ? 
And if he was capable of feeling grief and pity at having killed a man , it shows that he was innocent of his father 's murder . 
Had he murdered him , he would never have run to another victim out of pity ; then he would have felt differently ; his thoughts would have been centred on self-preservation . 
He would have had none to spare for pity , that is beyond doubt . 
On the contrary , he would have broken his skull instead of spending five minutes looking after him . 
There was room for pity and good-feeling just because his conscience had been clear till then . 
Here we have a different psychology . 
I have purposely resorted to this method , gentlemen of the jury , to show that you can prove anything by it . 
It all depends on who makes use of it . 
Psychology lures even most serious people into romancing , and quite unconsciously . 
I am speaking of the abuse of psychology , gentlemen . '' 
Sounds of approval and laughter , at the expense of the prosecutor , were again audible in the court . 
I will not repeat the speech in detail ; I will only quote some passages from it , some leading points . 
There Was No Money . 
There Was No Robbery THERE was one point that struck everyone in Fetyukovitch 's speech . 
He flatly denied the existence of the fatal three thousand roubles , and consequently , the possibility of their having been stolen . 
`` Gentlemen of the jury , '' he began . 
`` Every new and unprejudiced observer must be struck by a characteristic peculiarity in the present case , namely , the charge of robbery , and the complete impossibility of proving that there was anything to be stolen . 
We are told that money was stolen - three thousand roubles but whether those roubles ever existed , nobody knows . 
Consider , how have we heard of that sum , and who has seen the notes ? 
The only person who saw them , and stated that they had been put in the envelope , was the servant , Smerdyakov . 
He had spoken of it to the prisoner and his brother , Ivan Fyodorovitch , before the catastrophe . 
Madame Svyetlov , too , had been told of it . 
But not one of these three persons had actually seen the notes , no one but Smerdyakov had seen them . 
`` Here the question arises , if it 's true that they did exist , and that Smerdyakov had seen them , when did he see them for the last time ? 
What if his master had taken the notes from under his bed and put them back in his cash-box without telling him ? 
Note , that according to Smerdyakov 's story the notes were kept under the mattress ; the prisoner must have pulled them out , and yet the bed was absolutely unrumpled ; that is carefully recorded in the protocol . 
How could the prisoner have found the notes without disturbing the bed ? 
How could he have helped soiling with his blood-stained hands the fine and spotless linen with which the bed had been purposely made ? 
`` But I shall be asked : What about the envelope on the floor ? 
