shouted Father Ferapont crazily . 
`` I 've come here to drive out your visitors , the unclean devils . 
I 've come to see how many have gathered here while I have been away . 
I want to sweep them out with a birch broom . '' 
`` You cast out the evil spirit , but perhaps you are serving him yourself , '' Father Paissy went on fearlessly . 
`` And who can say of himself ' I am holy ' ? 
Can you , Father ? '' 
`` I am unclean , not holy . 
I would not sit in an arm-chair and would not have them bow down to me as an idol , '' thundered Father Ferapont . 
`` Nowadays folk destroy the true faith . 
The dead man , your saint , '' he turned to the crowd , pointing with his finger to the coffin , `` did not believe in devils . 
He gave medicine to keep off the devils . 
And so they have become as common as spiders in the corners . 
And now he has begun to stink himself . 
In that we see a great sign from God . '' 
The incident he referred to was this . 
One of the monks was haunted in his dreams and , later on , in waking moments , by visions of evil spirits . 
When in the utmost terror he confided this to Father Zossima , the elder had advised continual prayer and rigid fasting . 
But when that was of no use , he advised him while persisting in prayer and fasting , to take a special medicine . 
Many persons were shocked at the time and wagged their heads as they talked over it - and most of all Father Ferapont , to whom some of the censorious had hastened to report this `` extraordinary '' counsel on the part of the elder . 
`` Go away , Father ! '' 
said Father Paissy , in a commanding voice , `` it 's not for man to judge but for God . 
Perhaps we see here a ` sign ' which neither you , nor I , nor anyone of us is able to comprehend . 
Go , Father , and do not trouble the flock ! '' 
he repeated impressively . 
`` He did not keep the fasts according to the rule and therefore the sign has come . 
That is clear and it 's a sin to hide it , '' the fanatic , carried away by a zeal that outstripped his reason , would not be quieted . 
`` He was seduced by sweetmeats , ladies brought them to him in their pockets , he sipped tea , he worshipped his belly , filling it with sweet things and his mind with haughty thoughts ... . 
And for this he is put to shame ... '' `` You speak lightly , Father . '' 
Father Paissy , too , raised his voice . 
`` I admire your fasting and severities , but you speak lightly like some frivolous youth , fickle and childish . 
Go away , Father , I command you ! '' 
Father Paissy thundered in conclusion . 
`` I will go , '' said Ferapont , seeming somewhat taken aback , but still as bitter . 
`` You learned men ! 
You are so clever you look down upon my humbleness . 
I came hither with little learning and here I have forgotten what I did know ; God Himself has preserved me in my weakness from your subtlety . '' 
Father Paissy stood over him , waiting resolutely . 
Father Ferapont paused and , suddenly leaning his cheek on his hand despondently , pronounced in a sing-song , voice , looking at the coffin of the dead elder : `` To-morrow they will sing over him ` Our Helper and Defender ' - a splendid anthem - and over me when I die all they 'll sing will be ` What Earthly Joy ' - a little cantical , '' * he added with tearful regret . 
`` You are proud and puffed up , this is a vain place ! '' 
he shouted suddenly like a madman , and with a wave of his hand he turned quickly and quickly descended the steps . 
The crowd awaiting him below wavered ; some followed him at once and some lingered , for the cell was still open , and Father Paissy , following Father Ferapont on to the steps , stood watching him . 
the excited old fanatic was not completely silenced . 
Walking twenty steps away , he suddenly turned towards the setting sun , raised both his arms and , as though someone had cut him down , fell to the ground with a loud scream . 
* When a monk 's body is carried out from the cell to the church and from the church to the graveyard , the canticle `` What Earthly Joy ... '' is sung . 
If the deceased was a priest as well as a monk the canticle `` Our Helper and Defender '' is sung instead . 
`` My God has conquered ! 
Christ has conquered the setting sun ! '' 
he shouted frantically , stretching up his hands to the sun , and falling face downwards on the ground , he sobbed like a little child , shaken by his tears and spreading out his arms on the ground . 
Then all rushed up to him ; there were exclamations and sympathetic sobs ... a kind of frenzy seemed to take possession of them all . 
`` This is the one who is a saint ! 
This is the one who is a holy man ! '' 
some cried aloud , losing their fear . 
`` This is he who should be an elder , '' others added malignantly . 
`` He would n't be an elder ... he would refuse ... he would n't serve a cursed innovation ... he would n't imitate their foolery , '' other voices chimed in at once . 
And it is hard to say how far they might have gone , but at that moment the bell rang summoning them to service . 
All began crossing themselves at once . 
Father Ferapont , too , got up and crossing himself went back to his cell without looking round , still uttering exclamations which were utterly incoherent . 
A few followed him , but the greater number dispersed , hastening to service . 
Father Paissy let Father Iosif read in his place and went down . 
The frantic outcries of bigots could not shake him , but his heart was suddenly filled with melancholy for some special reason and he felt that . 
He stood still and suddenly wondered , `` Why am I sad even to dejection ? '' 
and immediately grasped with surprise that his sudden sadness was due to a very small and special cause . 
In the crowd thronging at the entrance to the cell , he had noticed Alyosha and he remembered that he had felt at once a pang at heart on seeing him . 
`` Can that boy mean so much to my heart now ? '' 
he asked himself , wondering . 
At that moment Alyosha passed him , hurrying away , but not in the direction of the church . 
Their eyes met . 
Alyosha quickly turned away his eyes and dropped them to the ground , and from the boy 's look alone , Father Paissy guessed what a great change was taking place in him at that moment . 
`` Have you , too , fallen into temptation ? '' 
cried Father Paissy . 
`` Can you be with those of little faith ? '' 
he added mournfully . 
Alyosha stood still and gazed vaguely at Father Paissy , but quickly turned his eyes away again and again looked on the ground . 
He stood sideways and did not turn his face to Father Paissy , who watched him attentively . 
`` Where are you hastening ? 
The bell calls to service , '' he asked again , but again Alyosha gave no answer . 
`` Are you leaving the hermitage ? 
What , without asking leave , without asking a blessing ? '' 
Alyosha suddenly gave a wry smile , cast a strange , very strange , look at the Father to whom his former guide , the former sovereign of his heart and mind , his beloved elder , had confided him as he lay dying . 
And suddenly , still without speaking , waved his hand , as though not caring even to be respectful , and with rapid steps walked towards the gates away from the hermitage . 
`` You will come back again ! '' 
murmured Father Paissy , looking after him with sorrowful surprise . 
A Critical Moment FATHER PAISSY , of course , was not wrong when he decided that his `` dear boy '' would come back again . 
Perhaps indeed , to some extent , he penetrated with insight into the true meaning of Alyosha 's spiritual condition . 
Yet I must frankly own that it would be very difficult for me to give a clear account of that strange , vague moment in the life of the young hero I love so much . 
To Father Paissy 's sorrowful question , `` Are you too with those of little faith ? '' 
I could , of course , confidently answer for Alyosha , `` No , he is not with those of little faith . 
Quite the contrary . '' 
Indeed , all his trouble came from the fact that he was of great faith . 
But still the trouble was there and was so agonising that even long afterwards Alyosha thought of that sorrowful day as one of the bitterest and most fatal days of his life . 
If the question is asked : `` Could all his grief and disturbance have been only due to the fact that his elder 's body had shown signs of premature decomposition instead of at once performing miracles ? '' 
I must answer without beating about the bush , `` Yes , it certainly was . '' 
I would only beg the reader not to be in too great a hurry to laugh at my young hero 's pure heart . 
I am far from intending to apologise for him or to justify his innocent faith on the ground of his youth , or the little progress he had made in his studies , or any such reason . 
I must declare , on the contrary , that I have genuine respect for the qualities of his heart . 
No doubt a youth who received impressions cautiously , whose love was lukewarm , and whose mind was too prudent for his age and so of little value , such a young man might , I admit , have avoided what happened to my hero . 
But in some cases it is really more creditable to be carried away by an emotion , however unreasonable , which springs from a great love , than to be unmoved . 
And this is even truer in youth , for a young man who is always sensible is to be suspected and is of little worth - that 's my opinion ! 
`` But , '' reasonable people will exclaim perhaps , `` every young man can not believe in such a superstition and your hero is no model for others . '' 
To this I reply again , `` Yes ! 
my hero had faith , a faith holy and steadfast , but still I am not going to apologise for him . '' 
Though I declared above , and perhaps too hastily , that I should not explain or justify my hero , I see that some explanation is necessary for the understanding of the rest of my story . 
Let me say then , it was not a question of miracles . 
There was no frivolous and impatient expectation of miracles in his mind . 
And Alyosha needed no miracles at the time , for the triumph of some preconceived idea - oh no , not at all - what he saw before all was one figure - the figure of his beloved elder , the figure of that holy man whom he revered with such adoration . 
The fact is that all the love that lay concealed in his pure young heart for everyone and everything had , for the past year , been concentrated - and perhaps wrongly so - on one being , his beloved elder . 
It is true that being had for so long been accepted by him as his ideal , that all his young strength and energy could not but turn towards that ideal , even to the forgetting at the moment `` of everyone and everything . '' 
He remembered afterwards how , on that terrible day , he had entirely forgotten his brother Dmitri , about whom he had been so anxious and troubled the day before ; he had forgotten , too , to take the two hundred roubles to Ilusha 's father , though he had so warmly intended to do so the preceding evening . 
But again it was not miracles he needed but only `` the higher justice '' which had been in his belief outraged by the blow that had so suddenly and cruelly wounded his heart . 
And what does it signify that this `` justice '' looked for by Alyosha inevitably took the shape of miracles to be wrought immediately by the ashes of his adored teacher ? 
Why , everyone in the monastery cherished the same thought and the same hope , even those whose intellects Alyosha revered , Father Paissy himself , for instance . 
And so Alyosha , untroubled by doubts , clothed his dreams too in the same form as all the rest . 
And a whole year of life in the monastery had formed the habit of this expectation in his heart . 
But it was justice , justice , he thirsted for , not simply miracles . 
And now the man who should , he believed , have been exalted above everyone in the whole world , that man , instead of receiving the glory that was his due , was suddenly degraded and dishonoured ! 
What for ? 
Who had judged him ? 
Who could have decreed this ? 
Those were the questions that wrung his inexperienced and virginal heart . 
He could not endure without mortification , without resentment even , that the holiest of holy men should have been exposed to the jeering and spiteful mockery of the frivolous crowd so inferior to him . 
Even had there been no miracles , had there been nothing marvellous to justify his hopes , why this indignity , why this humiliation , why this premature decay , `` in excess of nature , '' as the spiteful monks said ? 
Why this `` sign from heaven , '' which they so triumphantly acclaimed in company with Father Ferapont , and why did they believe they had gained the right to acclaim it ? 
Where is the finger of Providence ? 
Why did Providence hide its face `` at the most critical moment '' -LRB- so Alyosha thought it -RRB- , as though voluntarily submitting to the blind , dumb , pitiless laws of nature ? 
That was why Alyosha 's heart was bleeding , and , of course , as I have said already , the sting of it all was that the man he loved above everything on earth should be put to shame and humiliated ! 
This murmuring may have been shallow and unreasonable in my hero , but I repeat again for the third time - and am prepared to admit that it might be difficult to defend my feeling - I am glad that my hero showed himself not too reasonable at that moment , for any man of sense will always come back to reason in time , but , if love does not gain the upper hand in a boy 's heart at such an exceptional moment , when will it ? 
I will not , however , omit to mention something strange , which came for a time to the surface of Alyosha 's mind at this fatal and obscure moment . 
This new something was the harassing impression left by the conversation with Ivan , which now persistently haunted Alyosha 's mind . 
At this moment it haunted him . 
Oh , it was not that something of the fundamental , elemental , so to speak , faith of his soul had been shaken . 
He loved his God and believed in Him steadfastly , though he was suddenly murmuring against Him . 
Yet a vague but tormenting and evil impression left by his conversation with Ivan the day before , suddenly revived again now in his soul and seemed forcing its way to the surface of his consciousness . 
It had begun to get dusk when Rakitin , crossing the pine copse from the hermitage to the monastery , suddenly noticed Alyosha , lying face downwards on the ground under a tree , not moving and apparently asleep . 
He went up and called him by his name . 
`` You here , Alexey ? 
Can you have - '' he began wondering but broke off . 
He had meant to say , `` Can you have come to this ? '' 
Alyosha did not look at him , but from a slight movement Rakitin at once saw that he heard and understood him . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
he went on ; but the surprise in his face gradually passed into a smile that became more and more ironical . 
`` I say , I 've been looking for you for the last two hours . 
You suddenly disappeared . 
What are you about ? 
What foolery is this ? 
You might just look at me ... '' Alyosha raised his head , sat up and leaned his back against the tree . 
He was not crying , but there was a look of suffering and irritability in his face . 
He did not look at Rakitin , however , but looked away to one side of him . 
`` Do you know your face is quite changed ? 
There 's none of your famous mildness to be seen in it . 
Are you angry with someone ? 
Have they been ill-treating you ? '' 
`` Let me alone , '' said Alyosha suddenly , with a weary gesture of his hand , still looking away from him . 
`` Oho ! 
So that 's how we are feeling ! 
So you can shout at people like other mortals . 
That is a come-down from the angels . 
I say , Alyosha , you have surprised me , do you hear ? 
I mean it . 
It 's long since I 've been surprised at anything here . 
I always took you for an educated man . 
Alyosha at last looked at him , but vaguely , as though scarcely understanding what he said . 
`` Can you really be so upset simply because your old man has begun to stink ? 
You do n't mean to say you seriously believed that he was going to work miracles ? '' 
exclaimed Rakitin , genuinely surprised again . 
`` I believed , I believe , I want to believe , and I will believe , what more do you want ? '' 
cried Alyosha irritably . 
`` Nothing at all , my boy . 
Damn it all ! 
why , no schoolboy of thirteen believes in that now . 
But there ... So now you are in a temper with your God , you are rebelling against Him ; He has n't given promotion , He has n't bestowed the order of merit ! 
Eh , you are a set ! '' 
Alyosha gazed a long while with his eyes half closed at Rakitin , and there was a sudden gleam in his eyes ... but not of anger with Rakitin . 
`` I am not rebelling against my God ; I simply ` do n't accept His world . ' '' 
Alyosha suddenly smiled a forced smile . 
`` How do you mean , you do n't accept the world ? '' 
Rakitin thought a moment over his answer . 
`` What idiocy is this ? '' 
Alyosha did not answer . 
`` Come , enough nonsense , now to business . 
Have you had anything to eat to-day ? '' 
`` I do n't remember ... . 
I think I have . '' 
`` You need keeping up , to judge by your face . 
It makes one sorry to look at you . 
You did n't sleep all night either , I hear ; you had a meeting in there . 
And then all this bobbery afterwards . 
Most likely you 've had nothing to eat but a mouthful of holy bread . 
I 've got some sausage in my pocket ; I 've brought it from the town in case of need , only you wo n't eat sausage ... '' `` Give me some . '' 
`` I say ! 
You are going it ! 
Why , it 's a regular mutiny , with barricades ! 
Well , my boy , we must make the most of it . 
Come to my place ... should n't mind a drop of vodka myself , I am tired to death . 
Vodka is going too far for you , I suppose ... or would you like some ? '' 
`` Give me some vodka too . '' 
`` Hullo ! 
You surprise me , brother ! '' 
Rakitin looked at him in amazement . 
`` Well , one way or another , vodka or sausage , this is a jolly fine chance and must n't be missed . 
Come along . '' 
Alyosha got up in silence and followed Rakitin . 
`` If your little brother Ivan could see this would n't he be surprised ! 
By the way , your brother Ivan set off to Moscow this morning , did you know ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Alyosha listlessly , and suddenly the image of his brother Dmitri rose before his mind . 
But only for a minute , and though it reminded him of something that must not be put off for a moment , some duty , some terrible obligation , even that reminder made no impression on him , did not reach his heart and instantly faded out of his mind and was forgotten . 
But , a long while afterwards , Alyosha remembered this . 
`` Your brother Ivan declared once that I was a ` liberal booby with no talents whatsoever . ' 
Once you , too , could not resist letting me know I was ` dishonourable . ' 
Well ! 
I should like to see what your talents and sense of honour will do for you now . '' 
This phrase Rakitin finished to himself in a whisper . 
`` Listen ! '' 
he said aloud , `` Let 's go by the path beyond the monastery straight to the town . 
H 'm ! 
I ought to go to Madame Hohlakov 's by the way . 
Only fancy , I 've written to tell her everything that happened , and would you believe it , she answered me instantly in pencil -LRB- the lady has a passion for writing notes -RRB- that ` she would never have expected such conduct from a man of such a reverend character as Father Zossima . ' 
That was her very word : ` conduct . ' 
She is angry too . 
Eh , you are a set ! 
Stay ! '' 
he cried suddenly again . 
He suddenly stopped and taking Alyosha by the shoulder made him stop too . 
`` Do you know , Alyosha , '' he peeped inquisitively into his eyes , absorbed in a sudden new thought which had dawned on him , and though he was laughing outwardly he was evidently afraid to utter that new idea aloud , so difficult he still found it to believe in the strange and unexpected mood in which he now saw Alyosha . 
`` Alyosha , do you know where we had better go ? '' 
he brought out at last timidly , and insinuatingly . 
`` I do n't care ... where you like . '' 
`` Let 's go to Grushenka , eh ? 
Will you come ? '' 
pronounced Rakitin at last , trembling with timid suspense . 
`` Let 's go to Grushenka , '' Alyosha answered calmly , at once , and this prompt and calm agreement was such a surprise to Rakitin that he almost started back . 
`` Well ! 
I say ! '' 
he cried in amazement , but seizing Alyosha firmly by the arm be led him along the path , still dreading that he would change his mind . 
They walked along in silence ; Rakitin was positively afraid to talk . 
`` And how glad she will be , how delighted ! '' 
he muttered , but lapsed into silence again . 
And indeed it was not to please Grushenka he was taking Alyosha to her . 
He was a practical person and never undertook anything without a prospect of gain for himself . 
His object in this case was twofold , first a revengeful desire to see `` the downfall of the righteous , '' and Alyosha 's fall `` from the saints to the sinners , '' over which he was already gloating in his imagination , and in the second place he had in view a certain material gain for himself , of which more will be said later . 
`` So the critical moment has come , '' he thought to himself with spiteful glee , `` and we shall catch it on the hop , for it 's just what we want . '' 
An Onion GRUSHENKA lived in the busiest part of the town , near the cathedral square , in a small wooden lodge in the courtyard belonging to the house of the widow Morozov . 
The house was a large stone building of two stories , old and very ugly . 
The widow led a secluded life with her two unmarried nieces , who were also elderly women . 
She had no need to let her lodge , but everyone knew that she had taken in Grushenka as a lodger , four years before , solely to please her kinsman , the merchant Samsonov , who was known to the girl 's protector . 
It was said that the jealous old man 's object in placing his `` favourite '' with the widow Morozov was that the old woman should keep a sharp eye on her new lodger 's conduct . 
But this sharp eye soon proved to be unnecessary , and in the end the widow Morozov seldom met Grushenka and did not worry her by looking after her in any way . 
It is true that four years had passed since the old man had brought the slim , delicate , shy , timid , dreamy , and sad girl of eighteen from the chief town of the province , and much had happened since then . 
Little was known of the girl 's history in the town and that little was vague . 
Nothing more had been learnt during the last four years , even after many persons had become interested in the beautiful young woman into whom Agrafena Alexandrovna had meanwhile developed . 
There were rumours that she had been at seventeen betrayed by someone , some sort of officer , and immediately afterwards abandoned by him . 
The officer had gone away and afterwards married , while Grushenka had been left in poverty and disgrace . 
It was said , however , that though Grushenka had been raised from destitution by the old man , Samsonov , she came of a respectable family belonging to the clerical class , that she was the daughter of a deacon or something of the sort . 
And now after four years the sensitive , injured and pathetic little orphan had become a plump , rosy beauty of the Russian type , a woman of bold and determined character , proud and insolent . 
She had a good head for business , was acquisitive , saving and careful , and by fair means or foul had succeeded , it was said , in amassing a little fortune . 
There was only , one point on which all were agreed . 
Grushenka was not easily to be approached and , except her aged protector , there had not been one man who could boast of her favours during those four years . 
It was a positive fact , for there had been a good many , especially during the last two years , who had attempted to obtain those favours . 
But all their efforts had been in vain and some of these suitors had been forced to beat an undignified and even comic retreat , owing to the firm and ironical resistance they met from the strong-willed young person . 
It was known , too , that the young person had , especially of late , been given to what is called `` speculation , '' and that she had shown marked abilities in that direction , so that many people began to say that she was no better than a Jew . 
It was not that she lent money on interest , but it was known , for instance , that she had for some time past , in partnership with old Karamazov , actually invested in the purchase of bad debts for a trifle , a tenth of their nominal value , and afterwards had made out of them ten times their value . 
The old widower Samsonov , a man of large fortune , was stingy and merciless . 
He tyrannised over his grown-up sons , but , for the last year during which he had been ill and lost the use of his swollen legs , he had fallen greatly under the influence of his protegee , whom he had at first kept strictly and in humble surroundings , `` on Lenten fare , '' as the wits said at the time . 
But Grushenka had succeeded in emancipating herself , while she established in him a boundless belief in her fidelity . 
The old man , now long since dead , had had a large business in his day and was also a noteworthy character , miserly and hard as flint . 
Though Grushenka 's hold upon him was so strong that he could not live without her -LRB- it had been so especially for the last two years -RRB- , he did not settle any considerable fortune on her and would not have been moved to do so , if she had threatened to leave him . 
But he had presented her with a small sum , and even that was a surprise to everyone when it became known . 
`` You are a wench with brains , '' he said to her , when he gave her eight thousand roubles , `` and you must look after yourself , but let me tell you that except your yearly allowance as before , you 'll get nothing more from me to the day of my death , and I 'll leave you nothing in my will either . '' 
And he kept his word ; he died and left everything to his sons , whom , with their wives and children , he had treated all his life as servants . 
Grushenka was not even mentioned in his will . 
All this became known afterwards . 
He helped Grushenka with his advice to increase her capital and put business in her way . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch , who first came into contact with Grushenka over a piece of speculation , ended to his own surprise by falling madly in love with her , old Samsonov , gravely ill as he was , was immensely amused . 
It is remarkable that throughout their whole acquaintance Grushenka was absolutely and spontaneously open with the old man , and he seems to have been the only person in the world with whom she was so . 
Of late , when Dmitri too had come on the scene with his love , the old man left off laughing . 
On the contrary , he once gave Grushenka a stern and earnest piece of advice . 
`` If you have to choose between the two , father or son , you 'd better choose the old man , if only you make sure the old scoundrel will marry you and settle some fortune on you beforehand . 
But do n't keep on with the captain , you 'll get no good out of that . '' 
These were the very words of the old profligate , who felt already that his death was not far off and who actually died five months later . 
I will note too , in passing - that although many in our town knew of the grotesque and monstrous rivalry of the Karamazovs , father and son , the object of which was Grushenka , scarcely anyone understood what really underlay her attitude to both of them . 
Even Grushenka 's two servants -LRB- after the catastrophe of which we will speak later -RRB- testified in court that she received Dmitri Fyodorovitch simply from fear because `` he threatened to murder her . '' 
These servants were an old cook , invalidish and almost deaf , who came from Grushenka 's old home , and her granddaughter , a smart young girl of twenty , who performed the duties of a maid . 
Grushenka lived very economically and her surroundings were anything but luxurious . 
Her lodge consisted of three rooms furnished with mahogany furniture in the fashion of 1820 , belonging to her landlady . 
It was quite dark when Rakitin and Alyosha entered her rooms , yet they were not lighted up . 
Grushenka was lying down in her drawing-room on the big , hard , clumsy sofa , with a mahogany back . 
The sofa was covered with shabby and ragged leather . 
Under her head she had two white down pillows taken from her bed . 
She was lying stretched out motionless on her back with her hands behind her head . 
She was dressed as though expecting someone , in a black silk dress , with a dainty lace fichu on her head , which was very becoming . 
Over her shoulders was thrown a lace shawl pinned with a massive gold brooch . 
She certainly was expecting someone . 
She lay as though impatient and weary , her face rather pale and her lips and eyes hot , restlessly tapping the arm of the sofa with the tip of her right foot . 
The appearance of Rakitin and Alyosha caused a slight excitement . 
From the hall they could hear Grushenka leap up from the sofa and cry out in a frightened voice , `` Who 's there ? '' 
But the maid met the visitors and at once called back to her mistress . 
`` It 's not he , it 's nothing , only other visitors . '' 
`` What can be the matter ? '' 
muttered Rakitin , leading Alyosha into the drawing-room . 
Grushenka was standing by the sofa as though still alarmed . 
A thick coil of her dark brown hair escaped from its lace covering and fell on her right shoulder , but she did not notice it and did not put it back till she had gazed at her visitors and recognised them . 
`` Ah , it 's you , Rakitin ? 
You quite frightened me . 
Whom have you brought ? 
Who is this with you ? 
Good heavens , you have brought him ! '' 
she exclaimed , recognising Alyosha . 
`` Do send for candles ! '' 
said Rakitin , with the free-and-easy air of a most intimate friend , who is privileged to give orders in the house . 
`` Candles ... of course , candles ... . 
Fenya , fetch him a candle ... . 
Well , you have chosen a moment to bring him ! 
she exclaimed again , nodding towards Alyosha , and turning to the looking-glass she began quickly fastening up her hair with both hands . 
She seemed displeased . 
`` Have n't I managed to please you ? '' 
asked Rakitin , instantly almost offended . 
You frightened me , Rakitin , that 's what it is . '' 
Grushenka turned with a smile to Alyosha . 
`` Do n't be afraid of me , my dear Alyosha , you can not think how glad I am to see you , my unexpected visitor . 
But you frightened me , Rakitin , I thought it was Mitya breaking in . 
You see , I deceived him just now , I made him promise to believe me and I told him a lie . 
I told him that I was going to spend the evening with my old man , Kuzma Kuzmitch , and should be there till late counting up his money . 
I always spend one whole evening a week with him making up his accounts . 
We lock ourselves in and he counts on the reckoning beads while I sit and put things down in the book . 
I am the only person he trusts . 
Mitya believes that I am there , but I came back and have been sitting locked in here , expecting some news . 
How was it Fenya let you in ? 
Fenya , Fenya , run out to the gate , open it and look about whether the captain is to be seen ! 
Perhaps he is hiding and spying , I am dreadfully frightened . '' 
There 's no one there , Agrafena Alexandrovna , I 've just looked out ; I keep running to peep through the crack ; I am in fear and trembling myself . '' 
`` Are the shutters fastened , Fenya ? 
And we must draw the curtains - that 's better ! '' 
She drew the heavy curtains herself . 
`` He 'd rush in at once if he saw a light . 
I am afraid of your brother Mitya to-day , Alyosha . '' 
Grushenka spoke aloud , and , though she was alarmed , she seemed very happy about something . 
`` Why are you so afraid of Mitya to-day ? '' 
inquired Rakitin . 
`` I should have thought you were not timid with him , you 'd twist him round your little finger . '' 
`` I tell you , I am expecting news , priceless news , so I do n't want Mitya at all . 
And he did n't believe , I feel he did n't , that I should stay at Kuzma Kuzmitch 's . 
He must be in his ambush now , behind Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , in the garden , watching for me . 
And if he 's there , he wo n't come here , so much the better ! 
But I really have been to Kuzma Kuzmitch 's , Mitya escorted me there . 
I told him I should stay there till midnight , and I asked him to be sure to come at midnight to fetch me home . 
He went away and I sat ten minutes with Kuzma Kuzmitch and came back here again . 
Ugh , I was afraid , I ran for fear of meeting him . '' 
`` And why are you so dressed up ? 
What a curious cap you 've got on ! '' 
`` How curious you are yourself , Rakitin ! 
I tell you , I am expecting a message . 
If the message comes , I shall fly , I shall gallop away and you will see no more of me . 
That 's why I am dressed up , so as to be ready . '' 
`` And where are you flying to ? '' 
`` If you know too much , you 'll get old too soon . '' 
`` Upon my word ! 
You are highly delighted ... I 've never seen you like this before . 
You are dressed up as if you were going to a ball . '' 
Rakitin looked her up and down . 
`` Much you know about balls . '' 
`` And do you know much about them ? '' 
`` I have seen a ball . 
The year before last , Kuzma Kuzmitch 's son was married and I looked on from the gallery . 
Do you suppose I want to be talking to you , Rakitin , while a prince like this is standing here . 
Such a visitor ! 
Alyosha , my dear boy , I gaze at you and ca n't believe my eyes . 
Good heavens , can you have come here to see me ! 
To tell you the truth , I never had a thought of seeing you and I did n't think that you would ever come and see me . 
Though this is not the moment now , I am awfully glad to see you . 
Sit down on the sofa , here , that 's right , my bright young moon . 
I really ca n't take it in even now ... . 
Eh , Rakitin , if only you had brought him yesterday or the day before ! 
But I am glad as it is ! 
Perhaps it 's better he has come now , at such a moment , and not the day before yesterday . '' 
She gaily sat down beside Alyosha on the sofa , looking at him with positive delight . 
And she really was glad , she was not lying when she said so . 
Her eyes glowed , her lips laughed , but it was a good-hearted merry laugh . 
Alyosha had not expected to see such a kind expression in her face ... . 
He had hardly met her till the day before , he had formed an alarming idea of her , and had been horribly distressed the day before by the spiteful and treacherous trick she had played on Katerina Ivanovna . 
He was greatly surprised to find her now altogether different from what he had expected . 
And , crushed as he was by his own sorrow , his eyes involuntarily rested on her with attention . 
Her whole manner seemed changed for the better since yesterday , there was scarcely any trace of that mawkish sweetness in her speech , of that voluptuous softness in her movements . 
Everything was simple and good-natured , her gestures were rapid , direct , confiding , but she was greatly excited . 
`` Dear me , how everything comes together to-day ! '' 
she chattered on again . 
`` And why I am so glad to see you , Alyosha , I could n't say myself ! 
If you ask me , I could n't tell you . '' 
`` Come , do n't you know why you 're glad ? '' 
said Rakitin , grinning . 
`` You used to be always pestering me to bring him , you 'd some object , I suppose . '' 
`` I had a different object once , but now that 's over , this is not the moment . 
I say , I want you to have something nice . 
I am so good-natured now . 
You sit down , too , Rakitin ; why are you standing ? 
You 've sat down already ? 
There 's no fear of Rakitin 's forgetting to look after himself . 
Look , Alyosha , he 's sitting there opposite us , so offended that I did n't ask him to sit down before you . 
Ugh , Rakitin is such a one to take offence ! '' 
laughed Grushenka . 
`` Do n't be angry , Rakitin , I 'm kind to-day . 
Why are you so depressed , Alyosha ? 
Are you afraid of me ? '' 
She peeped into his eyes with merry mockery . 
`` He 's sad . 
The promotion has not been given , '' boomed Rakitin . 
`` His elder stinks . '' 
`` What ? 
You are talking some nonsense , you want to say something nasty . 
Be quiet , you stupid ! 
Let me sit on your knee , Alyosha , like this . '' 
She suddenly skipped forward and jumped , laughing , on his knee , like a nestling kitten , with her right arm about his neck . 
`` I 'll cheer you up , my pious boy . 
Yes , really , will you let me sit on your knee ? 
You wo n't be angry ? 
If you tell me , I 'll get off ? '' 
Alyosha did not speak . 
He sat afraid to move , he heard her words , `` If you tell me , I 'll get off , '' but he did not answer . 
But there was nothing in his heart such as Rakitin , for instance , watching him malignantly from his corner , might have expected or fancied . 
The great grief in his heart swallowed up every sensation that might have been aroused , and , if only he could have thought clearly at that moment , he would have realised that he had now the strongest armour to protect him from every lust and temptation . 
Yet in spite of the vague irresponsiveness of his spiritual condition and the sorrow that overwhelmed him , he could not help wondering at a new and strange sensation in his heart . 
This woman , this `` dreadful '' woman , had no terror for him now , none of that terror that had stirred in his soul at any passing thought of woman . 
On the contrary , this woman , dreaded above all women , sitting now on his knee , holding him in her arms , aroused in him now a quite different , unexpected , peculiar feeling , a feeling of the intensest and purest interest without a trace of fear , of his former terror . 
That was what instinctively surprised him . 
`` You 've talked nonsense enough , '' cried Rakitin , `` you 'd much better give us some champagne . 
You owe it me , you know you do ! '' 
`` Yes , I really do . 
Do you know , Alyosha , I promised him champagne on the top of everything , if he 'd bring you ? 
I 'll have some too ! 
Fenya , Fenya , bring us the bottle Mitya left ! 
Look sharp ! 
Though I am so stingy , I 'll stand a bottle , not for you , Rakitin , you 're a toadstool , but he is a falcon ! 
And though my heart is full of something very different , so be it , I 'll drink with you . 
I long for some dissipation . '' 
`` But what is the matter with you ? 
And what is this message , may I ask , or is it a secret ? '' 
Rakitin put in inquisitively , doing his best to pretend not to notice the snubs that were being continually aimed at him . 
`` Ech , it 's not a secret , and you know it , too , '' Grushenka said , in a voice suddenly anxious , turning her head towards Rakitin , and drawing a little away from Alyosha , though she still sat on his knee with her arm round his neck . 
`` My officer is coming , Rakitin , my officer is coming . '' 
`` I heard he was coming , but is he so near ? '' 
`` He is at Mokroe now ; he 'll send a messenger from there , so he wrote ; I got a letter from him to-day . 
I am expecting the messenger every minute . '' 
`` You do n't say so ! 
Why at Mokroe ? '' 
`` That 's a long story , I 've told you enough . '' 
`` Mitya 'll be up to something now - I say ! 
Does he know or does n't he ? '' 
`` He know ! 
Of course he does n't . 
If he knew , there would be murder . 
But I am not afraid of that now , I am not afraid of his knife . 
Be quiet , Rakitin , do n't remind me of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , he has bruised my heart . 
And I do n't want to think of that at this moment . 
I can think of Alyosha here , I can look at Alyosha ... smile at me , dear , cheer up , smile at my foolishness , at my pleasure ... . 
Ah , he 's smiling , he 's smiling ! 
How kindly he looks at me ! 
And you know , Alyosha , I 've been thinking all this time you were angry with me , because of the day before yesterday , because of that young lady . 
I was a cur , that 's the truth ... . 
But it 's a good thing it happened so . 
It was a horrid thing , but a good thing too . '' 
Grushenka smiled dreamily and a little cruel line showed in her smile . 
`` Mitya told me that she screamed out that I ` ought to be flogged . ' 
I did insult her dreadfully . 
She sent for me , she wanted to make a conquest of me , to win me over with her chocolate ... . 
No , it 's a good thing it did end like that . '' 
She smiled again . 
`` But I am still afraid of your being angry . '' 
`` Yes , that 's really true , '' Rakitin put in suddenly with genuine surprise . 
`` Alyosha , she is really afraid of a chicken like you . '' 
`` He is a chicken to you , Rakitin ... because you 've no conscience , that 's what it is ! 
You see , I love him with all my soul , that 's how it is ! 
Alyosha , do you believe I love you with all my soul ? '' 
`` Ah , you shameless woman ! 
She is making you a declaration , Alexey ! '' 
`` Well , what of it , I love him ! '' 
`` And what about your officer ? 
And the priceless message from Mokroe ? '' 
`` That is quite different . '' 
`` That 's a woman 's way of looking at it ! '' 
`` Do n't you make me angry , Rakitin . '' 
Grushenka caught him up hotly . 
`` This is quite different . 
I love Alyosha in a different way . 
It 's true , Alyosha , I had sly designs on you before . 
For I am a horrid , violent creature . 
But at other times I 've looked upon you , Alyosha , as my conscience . 
I 've kept thinking ` how anyone like that must despise a nasty thing like me . ' 
I thought that the day before yesterday , as I ran home from the young lady 's . 
I have thought of you a long time in that way , Alyosha , and Mitya knows ; I 've talked to him about it . 
Mitya understands . 
Would you believe it , I sometimes look at you and feel ashamed , utterly ashamed of myself ... . 
And how , and since when , I began to think about you like that , I ca n't say , I do n't remember ... '' Fenya came in and put a tray with an uncorked bottle and three glasses of champagne on the table . 
`` Here 's the champagne ! '' 
cried Rakitin . 
`` You 're excited , Agrafena Alexandrovna , and not yourself . 
When you 've had a glass of champagne , you 'll be ready to dance . 
Eh , they ca n't even do that properly , '' he added , looking at the bottle . 
`` The old woman 's poured it out in the kitchen and the bottle 's been brought in warm and without a cork . 
Well , let me have some , anyway . '' 
He went up to the table , took a glass , emptied it at one gulp and poured himself out another . 
`` One does n't often stumble upon champagne , '' he said , licking his lips . 
`` Now , Alyosha , take a glass , show what you can do ! 
What shall we drink to ? 
The gates of paradise ? 
Take a glass , Grushenka , you drink to the gates of paradise , too . '' 
`` What gates of paradise ? '' 
She took a glass , Alyosha took his , tasted it and put it back . 
`` No , I 'd better not , '' he smiled gently . 
`` And you bragged ! '' 
cried Rakitin . 
`` Well , if so , I wo n't either , '' chimed in Grushenka , `` I really do n't want any . 
You can drink the whole bottle alone , Rakitin . 
If Alyosha has some , I will . '' 
`` What touching sentimentality ! '' 
said Rakitin tauntingly ; `` and she 's sitting on his knee , too ! 
He 's got something to grieve over , but what 's the matter with you ? 
He is rebelling against his God and ready to eat sausage ... '' `` How so ? '' 
`` His elder died to-day , Father Zossima , the saint . '' 
`` So Father Zossima is dead , '' cried Grushenka . 
`` Good God , I did not know ! '' 
She crossed herself devoutly . 
`` Goodness , what have I been doing , sitting on his knee like this at such a moment ! 
She started up as though in dismay , instantly slipped off his knee and sat down on the sofa . 
Alyosha bent a long wondering look upon her and a light seemed to dawn in his face . 
`` Rakitin , '' he said suddenly , in a firm and loud voice ; `` do n't taunt me with having rebelled against God . 
I do n't want to feel angry with you , so you must be kinder , too ; I 've lost a treasure such as you have never had , and you can not judge me now . 
You had much better look at her - do you see how she has pity on me ? 
I came here to find a wicked soul - I felt drawn to evil because I was base and evil myself , and I 've found a true sister ; I have found a treasure - a loving heart . 
She had pity on me just now ... . 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , I am speaking of you . 
You 've raised my soul from the depths . '' 
Alyosha 's lips were quivering and he caught his breath . 
`` She has saved you , it seems , '' laughed Rakitin spitefully . 
`` And she meant to get you in her clutches , do your realise that ? '' 
`` Stay , Rakitin . '' 
Grushenka jumped up . 
`` Hush , both of you . 
Now I 'll tell you all about it . 
Hush , Alyosha , your words make me ashamed , for I am bad and not good - that 's what I am . 
And you hush , Rakitin , because you are telling lies . 
I had the low idea of trying to get him in my clutches , but now you are lying , now it 's all different . 
And do n't let me hear anything more from you , Rakitin . '' 
All this Grushenka said with extreme emotion . 
`` They are both crazy , '' said Rakitin , looking at them with amazement . 
`` I feel as though I were in a madhouse . 
They 're both getting so feeble they 'll begin crying in a minute . '' 
`` I shall begin to cry , I shall , '' repeated Grushenka . 
`` He called me his sister and I shall never forget that . 
Only let me tell you , Rakitin , though I am bad , I did give away an onion . '' 
`` An onion ? 
Hang it all , you really are crazy . '' 
Rakitin wondered at their enthusiasm . 
He was aggrieved and annoyed , though he might have reflected that each of them was just passing through a spiritual crisis such as does not come often in a lifetime . 
But though Rakitin was very sensitive about everything that concerned himself , he was very obtuse as regards the feelings and sensations of others - partly from his youth and inexperience , partly from his intense egoism . 
`` You see , Alyosha , '' Grushenka turned to him with a nervous laugh . 
`` I was boasting when I told Rakitin I had given away an onion , but it 's not to boast I tell you about it . 
It 's only a story , but it 's a nice story . 
I used to hear it when I was a child from Matryona , my cook , who is still with me . 
It 's like this . 
Once upon a time there was a peasant woman and a very wicked woman she was . 
And she died and did not leave a single good deed behind . 
The devils caught her and plunged her into the lake of fire . 
So her guardian angel stood and wondered what good deed of hers he could remember to tell to God ; ` She once pulled up an onion in her garden , ' said he , ` and gave it to a beggar woman . ' 
And God answered : ` You take that onion then , hold it out to her in the lake , and let her take hold and be pulled out . 
And if you can pull her out of the lake , let her come to Paradise , but if the onion breaks , then the woman must stay where she is . ' 
The angel ran to the woman and held out the onion to her . 
` Come , ' said he , ` catch hold and I 'll pull you out . ' 
he began cautiously pulling her out . 
He had just pulled her right out , when the other sinners in the lake , seeing how she was being drawn out , began catching hold of her so as to be pulled out with her . 
But she was a very wicked woman and she began kicking them . 
` I 'm to be pulled out , not you . 
It 's my onion , not yours . ' 
As soon as she said that , the onion broke . 
And the woman fell into the lake and she is burning there to this day . 
So the angel wept and went away . 
So that 's the story , Alyosha ; I know it by heart , for I am that wicked woman myself . 
I boasted to Rakitin that I had given away an onion , but to you I 'll say : ` I 've done nothing but give away one onion all my life , that 's the only good deed I 've done . ' 
do n't praise me , Alyosha , do n't think me good , I am bad , I am a wicked woman and you make me ashamed if you praise me . 
Eh , I must confess everything . 
Listen , Alyosha . 
I was so anxious to get hold of you that I promised Rakitin twenty-five roubles if he would bring you to me . 
Stay , Rakitin , wait ! '' 
She went with rapid steps to the table , opened a drawer , pulled out a purse and took from it a twenty-five rouble note . 
`` What nonsense ! 
What nonsense ! '' 
cried Rakitin , disconcerted . 
`` Take it . 
Rakitin , I owe it you , there 's no fear of your refusing it , you asked for it yourself . '' 
And she threw the note to him . 
`` Likely I should refuse it , '' boomed Rakitin , obviously abashed , but carrying off his confusion with a swagger . 
`` That will come in very handy ; fools are made for wise men 's profit . '' 
`` And now hold your tongue , Rakitin , what I am going to say now is not for your ears . 
Sit down in that corner and keep quiet . 
You do n't like us , so hold your tongue . '' 
`` What should I like you for ? '' 
Rakitin snarled , not concealing his ill-humour . 
He put the twenty-five rouble note in his pocket and he felt ashamed at Alyosha 's seeing it . 
He had reckoned on receiving his payment later , without Alyosha 's knowing of it , and now , feeling ashamed , he lost his temper . 
Till that moment he had thought it discreet not to contradict Grushenka too flatly in spite of her snubbing , since he had something to get out of her . 
But now he , too , was angry : `` One loves people for some reason , but what have either of you done for me ? '' 
`` You should love people without a reason , as Alyosha does . '' 
`` How does he love you ? 
How has he shown it , that you make such a fuss about it ? '' 
Grushenka was standing in the middle of the room ; she spoke with heat and there were hysterical notes in her voice . 
`` Hush , Rakitin , you know nothing about us ! 
And do n't dare to speak to me like that again . 
How dare you be so familiar ! 
Sit in that corner and be quiet , as though you were my footman ! 
And now , Alyosha , I 'll tell you the whole truth , that you may see what a wretch I am ! 
I am not talking to Rakitin , but to you . 
I wanted to ruin you , Alyosha , that 's the holy truth ; I quite meant to . 
I wanted to so much , that I bribed Rakitin to bring you . 
And why did I want to do such a thing ? 
You knew nothing about it , Alyosha , you turned away from me ; if you passed me , you dropped your eyes . 
And I 've looked at you a hundred times before to-day ; I began asking everyone about you . 
Your face haunted my heart . 
` He despises me , ' I thought ; ` he wo n't even look at me . ' 
And I felt it so much at last that I wondered at myself for being so frightened of a boy . 
I 'll get him in my clutches and laugh at him . 
I was full of spite and anger . 
Would you believe it , nobody here dares talk or think of coming to Agrafena Alexandrovna with any evil purpose . 
Old Kuzma is the only man I have anything to do with here ; I was bound and sold to him ; Satan brought us together , but there has been no one else . 
But looking at you , I thought , I 'll get him in my clutches and laugh at him . 
You see what a spiteful cur I am , and you called me your sister ! 
And now that man who wronged me has come ; I sit here waiting for a message from him . 
And do you know what that man has been to me ? 
Five years ago , when Kuzma brought me here , I used to shut myself up , that no one might have sight or sound of me . 
I was a silly slip of a girl ; I used to sit here sobbing ; I used to lie awake all night , thinking : ` Where is he now , the man who wronged me ? 
He is laughing at me with another woman , most likely . 
If only I could see him , if I could meet him again , I 'd pay him out , I 'd pay him out ! ' 
At night I used to lie sobbing into my pillow in the dark , and I used to brood over it ; I used to tear my heart on purpose and gloat over my anger . 
` I 'll pay him out , I 'll pay him out ! 
That 's what I used to cry out in the dark . 
And when I suddenly thought that I should really do nothing to him , and that he was laughing at me then , or perhaps had utterly forgotten me , I would fling myself on the floor , melt into helpless tears , and lie there shaking till dawn . 
In the morning I would get up more spiteful than a dog , ready to tear the whole world to pieces . 
And then what do you think ? 
I began saving money , I became hardhearted , grew stout - grew wiser , would you say ? 
No , no one in the whole world sees it , no one knows it , but when night comes on , I sometimes lie as I did five years ago , when I was a silly girl , clenching my teeth and crying all night , thinking , ` I 'll pay him out , I 'll pay him out ! ' 
Do you hear ? 
Well then , now you understand me . 
A month ago a letter came to me - he was coming , he was a widower , he wanted to see me . 
It took my breath away ; then I suddenly thought : ` If he comes and whistles to call me , I shall creep back to him like a beaten dog . ' 
I could n't believe myself . 
Am I so abject ? 
Shall I run to him or not ? 
And I 've been in such a rage with myself all this month that I am worse than I was five years ago . 
Do you see now , Alyosha , what a violent , vindictive creature I am ? 
I have shown you the whole truth ! 
I played with Mitya to keep me from running to that other . 
Hush , Rakitin , it 's not for you to judge me , I am not speaking to you . 
Before you came in , I was lying here waiting , brooding , deciding my whole future life , and you can never know what was in my heart . 
Yes , Alyosha , tell your young lady not to be angry with me for what happened the day before yesterday ... . 
Nobody in the whole world knows what I am going through now , and no one ever can know ... . 
For perhaps I shall take a knife with me to-day , I ca n't make up my mind ... '' And at this `` tragic '' phrase Grushenka broke down , hid her face in her hands , flung herself on the sofa pillows , and sobbed like a little child . 
Alyosha got up and went to Rakitin . 
`` Misha , '' he said , `` do n't be angry . 
She wounded you , but do n't be angry . 
You heard what she said just now ? 
You must n't ask too much of human endurance , one must be merciful . '' 
Alyosha said this at the instinctive prompting of his heart . 
He felt obliged to speak and he turned to Rakitin . 
If Rakitin had not been there , he would have spoken to the air . 
But Rakitin looked at him ironically and Alyosha stopped short . 
`` You were so primed up with your elder 's reading last night that now you have to let it off on me , Alexey , man of God ! '' 
said Rakitin , with a smile of hatred . 
`` Do n't laugh , Rakitin , do n't smile , do n't talk of the dead - he was better than anyone in the world ! '' 
cried Alyosha , with tears in his voice . 
`` I did n't speak to you as a judge but as the lowest of the judged . 
What am I beside her ? 
I came here seeking my ruin , and said to myself , ` What does it matter ? ' 
in my cowardliness , but she , after five years in torment , as soon as anyone says a word from the heart to her - it makes her forget everything , forgive everything , in her tears ! 
The man who has wronged her has come back , he sends for her and she forgives him everything , and hastens joyfully to meet him and she wo n't take a knife with her . 
She wo n't ! 
No , I am not like that . 
I do n't know whether you are , Misha , but I am not like that . 
It 's a lesson to me ... . 
She is more loving than we ... . 
Have you heard her speak before of what she has just told us ? 
No , you have n't ; if you had , you 'd have understood her long ago ... and the person insulted the day before yesterday must forgive her , too ! 
She will , when she knows ... and she shall know ... . 
This soul is not yet at peace with itself , one must be tender with ... there may be a treasure in that soul ... '' Alyosha stopped , because he caught his breath . 
In spite of his ill-humour Rakitin looked at him with astonishment . 
He had never expected such a tirade from the gentle Alyosha . 
`` She 's found someone to plead her cause ! 
Why , are you in love with her ? 
Agrafena Alexandrovna , our monk 's really in love with you , you 've made a conquest ! '' 
he cried , with a coarse laugh . 
Grushenka lifted her head from the pillow and looked at Alyosha with a tender smile shining on her tear-stained face . 
`` Let him alone , Alyosha , my cherub ; you see what he is , he is not a person for you to speak to . 
Mihail Osipovitch , '' she turned to Rakitin , `` I meant to beg your pardon for being rude to you , but now I do n't want to . 
Alyosha , come to me , sit down here . '' 
She beckoned to him with a happy smile . 
`` That 's right , sit here . 
Tell me , '' she took him by the hand and peeped into his face , smiling , `` tell me , do I love that man or not ? 
The man who wronged me , do I love him or not ? 
Before you came , I lay here in the dark , asking my heart whether I loved him . 
Decide for me , Alyosha , the time has come , it shall be as you say . 
Am I to forgive him or not ? '' 
`` But you have forgiven him already , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Yes , I really have forgiven him , '' Grushenka murmured thoughtfully . 
`` What an abject heart ! 
To my abject heart ! '' 
She snatched up a glass from the table , emptied it at a gulp , lifted it in the air and flung it on the floor . 
The glass broke with a crash . 
A little cruel line came into her smile . 
`` Perhaps I have n't forgiven him , though , '' she said , with a sort of menace in her voice , and she dropped her eyes to the ground as though she were talking to herself . 
`` Perhaps my heart is only getting ready to forgive . 
I shall struggle with my heart . 
You see , Alyosha , I 've grown to love my tears in these five years ... . 
Perhaps I only love my resentment , not him ... '' `` Well , I should n't care to be in his shoes , '' hissed Rakitin . 
`` Well , you wo n't be , Rakitin , you 'll never be in his shoes . 
You shall black my shoes , Rakitin , that 's the place you are fit for . 
You 'll never get a woman like me ... and he wo n't either , perhaps ... '' `` Wo n't he ? 
Then why are you dressed up like that ? '' 
said Rakitin , with a venomous sneer . 
`` Do n't taunt me with dressing up , Rakitin , you do n't know all that is in my heart ! 
If I choose to tear off my finery , I 'll tear it off at once , this minute , '' she cried in a resonant voice . 
`` You do n't know what that finery is for , Rakitin ! 
Perhaps I shall see him and say : ` Have you ever seen me look like this before ? ' 
He left me a thin , consumptive cry-baby of seventeen . 
I 'll sit by him , fascinate him and work him up . 
` Do you see what I am like now ? ' 
I 'll say to him ; ` well , and that 's enough for you , my dear sir , there 's many a slip twixt the cup and the lip ! 
That may be what the finery is for , Rakitin . '' 
Grushenka finished with a malicious laugh . 
`` I 'm violent and resentful , Alyosha , I 'll tear off my finery , I 'll destroy my beauty , I 'll scorch my face , slash it with a knife , and turn beggar . 
If I choose , I wo n't go anywhere now to see anyone . 
If I choose , I 'll send Kuzma back all he has ever given me , to-morrow , and all his money and I 'll go out charing for the rest of my life . 
You think I would n't do it , Rakitin , that I would not dare to do it ? 
I would , I would , I could do it directly , only do n't exasperate me ... and I 'll send him about his business , I 'll snap my fingers in his face , he shall never see me again ! '' 
She uttered the last words in an hysterical scream , but broke down again , hid her face in her hands , buried it in the pillow and shook with sobs . 
Rakitin got up . 
`` It 's time we were off , '' he said , `` it 's late , we shall be shut out of the monastery . '' 
Grushenka leapt up from her place . 
`` Surely you do n't want to go , Alyosha ! '' 
she cried , in mournful surprise . 
`` What are you doing to me ? 
You 've stirred up my feeling , tortured me , and now you 'll leave me to face this night alone ! '' 
`` He can hardly spend the night with you ! 
Though if he wants to , let him ! 
I 'll go alone , '' Rakitin scoffed jeeringly . 
`` Hush , evil tongue ! '' 
Grushenka cried angrily at him ; `` you never said such words to me as he has come to say . '' 
`` What has he said to you so special ? '' 
asked Rakitin irritably . 
`` I ca n't say , I do n't know . 
I do n't know what he said to me , it went straight to my heart ; he has wrung my heart ... . 
He is the first , the only one who has pitied me , that 's what it is . 
Why did you not come before , you angel ? '' 
She fell on her knees before him as though in a sudden frenzy . 
`` I 've been waiting all my life for someone like you , I knew that someone like you would come and forgive me . 
I believed that , nasty as I am , someone would really love me , not only with a shameful love ! '' 
`` What have I done to you ? '' 
answered Alyosha , bending over her with a tender smile , and gently taking her by the hands ; `` I only gave you an onion , nothing but a tiny little onion , that was all ! '' 
He was moved to tears himself as he said it . 
At that moment there was a sudden noise in the passage , someone came into the hall . 
Grushenka jumped up , seeming greatly alarmed . 
Fenya ran noisily into the room , crying out : `` Mistress , mistress darling , a messenger has galloped up , '' she cried , breathless and joyful . 
`` A carriage from Mokroe for you , Timofey the driver , with three horses , they are just putting in fresh horses ... . 
A letter , here 's the letter , mistress . '' 
A letter was in her hand and she waved it in the air all the while she talked . 
Grushenka snatched the letter from her and carried it to the candle . 
It was only a note , a few lines . 
She read it in one instant . 
`` He has sent for me , '' she cried , her face white and distorted , with a wan smile ; `` he whistles ! 
Crawl back , little dog ! '' 
But only for one instant she stood as though hesitating ; suddenly the blood rushed to her head and sent a glow to her cheeks . 
`` I will go , '' she cried ; `` five years of my life ! 
Good-bye ! 
Good-bye , Alyosha , my fate is sealed . 
Go , go , leave me all of you , do n't let me see you again ! 
Grushenka is flying to a new life ... . 
Do n't you remember evil against me either , Rakitin . 
I may be going to my death ! 
Ugh ! 
I feel as though I were drunk ! '' 
She suddenly left them and ran into her bedroom . 
`` Well , she has no thoughts for us now ! '' 
grumbled Rakitin . 
`` Let 's go , or we may hear that feminine shriek again . 
I am sick of all these tears and cries . '' 
Alyosha mechanically let himself be led out . 
In the yard stood a covered cart . 
Horses were being taken out of the shafts , men were running to and fro with a lantern . 
Three fresh horses were being led in at the open gate . 
But when Alyosha and Rakitin reached the bottom of the steps , Grushenka 's bedroom window was suddenly opened and she called in a ringing voice after Alyosha : `` Alyosha , give my greetings to your brother Mitya and tell him not to remember evil against me , though I have brought him misery . 
And tell him , too , in my words : ` Grushenka has fallen to a scoundrel , and not to you , noble heart . ' 
And add , too , that Grushenka loved him only one hour , only one short hour she loved him - so let him remember that hour all his life-say , ` Grushenka tells you to ! ' 
She ended in a voice full of sobs . 
The window was shut with a slam . 
`` H 'm , h 'm ! '' 
growled Rakitin , laughing , `` she murders your brother Mitya and then tells him to remember it all his life ! 
What ferocity ! '' 
Alyosha made no reply , he seemed not to have heard . 
He walked fast beside Rakitin as though in a terrible hurry . 
He was lost in thought and moved mechanically . 
Rakitin felt a sudden twinge as though he had been touched on an open wound . 
He had expected something quite different by bringing Grushenka and Alyosha together . 
Something very different from what he had hoped for had happened . 
`` He is a Pole , that officer of hers , '' he began again , restraining himself ; `` and indeed he is not an officer at all now . 
He served in the customs in Siberia , somewhere on the Chinese frontier , some puny little beggar of a Pole , I expect . 
Lost his job , they say . 
He 's heard now that Grushenka 's saved a little money , so he 's turned up again - that 's the explanation of the mystery . '' 
Again Alyosha seemed not to hear . 
Rakitin could not control himself . 
`` Well , so you 've saved the sinner ? '' 
he laughed spitefully . 
`` Have you turned the Magdalene into the true path ? 
Driven out the seven devils , eh ? 
So you see the miracles you were looking out for just now have come to pass ! '' 
`` Hush , Rakitin , '' Alyosha , answered with an aching heart . 
`` So you despise me now for those twenty-five roubles ? 
I 've sold my friend , you think . 
But you are not Christ , you know , and I am not Judas . '' 
`` Oh , Rakitin , I assure you I 'd forgotten about it , '' cried Alyosha , `` you remind me of it yourself ... '' But this was the last straw for Rakitin . 
`` Damnation take you all and each of you '' he cried suddenly , `` why the devil did I take you up ? 
I do n't want to know you from this time forward . 
Go alone , there 's your road ! '' 
And he turned abruptly into another street , leaving Alyosha alone in the dark . 
Alyosha came out of the town and walked across the fields to the monastery . 
Cana of Galilee IT was very late , according to the monastery ideas , when Alyosha returned to the hermitage ; the door-keeper let him in by a special entrance . 
It had struck nine o'clock - the hour of rest and repose after a day of such agitation for all . 
Alyosha timidly opened the door and went into the elder 's cell where his coffin was now standing . 
There was no one in the cell but Father Paissy , reading the Gospel in solitude over the coffin , and the young novice Porfiry , who , exhausted by the previous night 's conversation and the disturbing incidents of the day , was sleeping the deep sound sleep of youth on the floor of the other room . 
Though Father Paissy heard Alyosha come in , he did not even look in his direction . 
Alyosha turned to the right from the door to the corner , fell on his knees and began to pray . 
His soul was overflowing but with mingled feelings ; no single sensation stood out distinctly ; on the contrary , one drove out another in a slow , continual rotation . 
But there was a sweetness in his heart and , strange to say , Alyosha was not surprised at it . 
Again he saw that coffin before him , the hidden dead figure so precious to him , but the weeping and poignant grief of the morning was no longer aching in his soul . 
As soon as he came in , he fell down before the coffin as before a holy shrine , but joy , joy was glowing in his mind and in his heart . 
The one window of the cell was open , the air was fresh and cool . 
`` So the smell must have become stronger , if they opened the window , '' thought Alyosha . 
But even this thought of the smell of corruption , which had seemed to him so awful and humiliating a few hours before , no longer made him feel miserable or indignant . 
He began quietly praying , but he soon felt that he was praying almost mechanically . 
Fragments of thought floated through his soul , flashed like stars and went out again at once , to be succeeded by others . 
But yet there was reigning in his soul a sense of the wholeness of things - something steadfast and comforting - and he was aware of it himself . 
Sometimes he began praying ardently , he longed to pour out his thankfulness and love ... But when he had begun to pray , he passed suddenly to something else , and sank into thought , forgetting both the prayer and what had interrupted it . 
He began listening to what Father Paissy was reading , but worn out with exhaustion he gradually began to doze . 
`` And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee , '' read Father Paissy . 
`` And the mother of Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was there ; And both Jesus was called , and his disciples , to the marriage . '' 
`` Marriage ? 
What 's that ? 
... A marriage ! '' 
floated whirling through Alyosha 's mind . 
`` There is happiness for her , too ... She has gone to the feast ... . 
No , she has not taken the knife ... . 
That was only a tragic phrase ... . 
Well ... tragic phrases should be forgiven , they must be . 
Tragic phrases comfort the heart ... Without them , sorrow would be too heavy for men to bear . 
Rakitin has gone off to the back alley . 
As long as Rakitin broods over his wrongs , he will always go off to the back alley ... . 
But the high road ... The road is wide and straight and bright as crystal , and the sun is at the end of it ... . 
Ah ! 
... What 's being read ? '' 
... `` And when they wanted wine , the mother of Jesus saith unto him , They have no wine '' ... Alyosha heard . 
`` Ah , yes , I was missing that , and I did n't want to miss it , I love that passage : it 's Cana of Galilee , the first miracle ... . 
Ah , that miracle ! 
Ah , that sweet miracle ! 
It was not men 's grief , but their joy Christ visited , He worked His first miracle to help men 's gladness ... ` He who loves men loves their gladness , too ' ... He was always repeating that , it was one of his leading ideas ... ` There 's no living without joy , ' Mitya says ... . 
Yes , Mitya ... ` Everything that is true and good is always full of forgiveness , ' he used to say that , too '' ... `` Jesus saith unto her , Woman , what has it to do with thee or me ? 
Mine hour not yet come . 
`` His mother saith unto the servants , Whatsoever he saith unto you , do it '' ... `` Do it ... . 
Gladness , the gladness of some poor , very poor , people ... . 
Of course they were poor , since they had n't wine enough even at a wedding ... . 
The historians write that , in those days , the people living about the Lake of Gennesaret were the poorest that can possibly be imagined ... and another great heart , that other great being , His Mother , knew that He had come not only to make His great terrible sacrifice . 
She knew that His heart was open even to the simple , artless merrymaking of some obscure and unlearned people , who had warmly bidden Him to their poor wedding . 
` Mine hour is not yet come , ' He said , with a soft smile -LRB- He must have smiled gently to her -RRB- . 
And , indeed , was it to make wine abundant at poor weddings He had come down to earth ? 
And yet He went and did as she asked Him ... . 
Ah , he is reading again '' ... `` Jesus saith unto them , Fill the waterpots with water . 
And they filled them up to the brim . 
`` And he saith unto them , Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the feast . 
And they bear it . 
`` When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine , and knew not whence it was -LRB- but the servants which drew the water knew -RRB- ; the governor of the feast called the bridegroom , `` And saith unto him , Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine ; and when men have well drunk , that which is worse ; but thou hast kept the good wine until now . '' 
`` But what 's this , what 's this ? 
Why is the room growing wider ? 
... Ah , yes ... It 's the marriage , the wedding ... yes , of course . 
Here are the guests , here are the young couple sitting , and the merry crowd and ... Where is the wise governor of the feast ? 
But who is this ? 
Who ? 
Again the walls are receding ... . 
Who is getting up there from the great table ? 
What ! 
... He here , too ? 
But he 's in the coffin ... but he 's here , too . 
He has stood up , he sees me , he is coming here ... . 
God ! '' 
... Yes , he came up to him , to him , he , the little , thin old man , with tiny wrinkles on his face , joyful and laughing softly . 
There was no coffin now , and he was in the same dress as he had worn yesterday sitting with them , when the visitors had gathered about him . 
His face was uncovered , his eyes were shining . 
How was this , then ? 
He , too , had been called to the feast . 
He , too , at the marriage of Cana in Galilee ... `` Yes , my dear , I am called , too , called and bidden , '' he heard a soft voice saying over him . 
`` Why have you hidden yourself here , out of sight ? 
You come and join us too . '' 
It was his voice , the voice of Father Zossima . 
And it must be he , since he called him ! 
The elder raised Alyosha by the hand and he rose from his knees . 
`` We are rejoicing , '' the little , thin old man went on . 
`` We are drinking the new wine , the wine of new , great gladness ; do you see how many guests ? 
Here are the bride and bridegroom , here is the wise governor of the feast , he is tasting the new wine . 
Why do you wonder at me ? 
I gave an onion to a beggar , so I , too , am here . 
And many here have given only an onion each - only one little onion ... . 
What are all our deeds ? 
And you , my gentle one , you , my kind boy , you too have known how to give a famished woman an onion to-day . 
Begin your work , dear one , begin it , gentle one ! 
Do you see our Sun , do you see Him ? '' 
`` I am afraid ... I dare not look , '' whispered Alyosha . 
`` Do not fear Him . 
He is terrible in His greatness , awful in His sublimity , but infinitely merciful . 
He has made Himself like unto us from love and rejoices with us . 
He is changing the water into wine that the gladness of the guests may not be cut short . 
He is expecting new guests , He is calling new ones unceasingly for ever and ever ... . 
There they are bringing new wine . 
Do you see they are bringing the vessels ... '' Something glowed in Alyosha 's heart , something filled it till it ached , tears of rapture rose from his soul ... . 
He stretched out his hands , uttered a cry and waked up . 
Again the coffin , the open window , and the soft , solemn , distinct reading of the Gospel . 
But Alyosha did not listen to the reading . 
It was strange , he had fallen asleep on his knees , but now he was on his feet , and suddenly , as though thrown forward , with three firm rapid steps he went right up to the coffin . 
His shoulder brushed against Father Paissy without his noticing it . 
Father Paissy raised his eyes for an instant from his book , but looked away again at once , seeing that something strange was happening to the boy . 
Alyosha gazed for half a minute at the coffin , at the covered , motionless dead man that lay in the coffin , with the ikon on his breast and the peaked cap with the octangular cross on his head . 
He had only just been hearing his voice , and that voice was still ringing in his ears . 
He was listening , still expecting other words , but suddenly he turned sharply and went out of the cell . 
He did not stop on the steps either , but went quickly down ; his soul , overflowing with rapture , yearned for freedom , space , openness . 
The vault of heaven , full of soft , shining stars , stretched vast and fathomless above him . 
The Milky Way ran in two pale streams from the zenith to the horizon . 
The fresh , motionless , still night enfolded the earth . 
The white towers and golden domes of the cathedral gleamed out against the sapphire sky . 
The gorgeous autumn flowers , in the beds round the house , were slumbering till morning . 
The silence of earth seemed to melt into the silence of the heavens . 
The mystery of earth was one with the mystery of the stars ... . 
Alyosha stood , gazed , and suddenly threw himself down on the earth . 
He did not know why he embraced it . 
He could not have told why he longed so irresistibly to kiss it , to kiss it all . 
But he kissed it weeping , sobbing , and watering it with his tears , and vowed passionately to love it , to love it for ever and ever . 
`` Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears , '' echoed in his soul . 
What was he weeping over ? 
Oh ! 
in his rapture he was weeping even over those stars , which were shining to him from the abyss of space , and `` he was not ashamed of that ecstasy . '' 
There seemed to be threads from all those innumerable worlds of God , linking his soul to them , and it was trembling all over `` in contact with other worlds . '' 
He longed to forgive everyone and for everything , and to beg forgiveness . 
Oh , not for himself , but for all men , for all and for everything . 
`` And others are praying for me too , '' echoed again in his soul . 
But with every instant he felt clearly and , as it were , tangibly , that something firm and unshakable as that vault of heaven had entered into his soul . 
It was as though some idea had seized the sovereignty of his mind - and it was for all his life and for ever and ever . 
He had fallen on the earth a weak boy , but he rose up a resolute champion , and he knew and felt it suddenly at the very moment of his ecstasy . 
And never , never , his life long , could Alyosha forget that minute . 
`` Someone visited my soul in that hour , '' he used to say afterwards , with implicit faith in his words . 
Within three days he left the monastery in accordance with the words of his elder , who had bidden him `` sojourn in the world . '' 
Kuzma Samsonov BUT Dmitri , to whom Grushenka , flying away to a new life , had left her last greetings , bidding him remember the hour of her love for ever , knew nothing of what had happened to her , and was at that moment in a condition of feverish agitation and activity . 
For the last two days he had been in such an inconceivable state of mind that he might easily have fallen ill with brain fever , as he said himself afterwards . 
Alyosha had not been able to find him the morning before , and Ivan had not succeeded in meeting him at the tavern on the same day . 
The people at his lodgings , by his orders , concealed his movements . 
He had spent those two days literally rushing in all directions , `` struggling with his destiny and trying to save himself , '' as he expressed it himself afterwards , and for some hours he even made a dash out of the town on urgent business , terrible as it was to him to lose sight of Grushenka for a moment . 
All this was explained afterwards in detail , and confirmed by documentary evidence ; but for the present we will only note the most essential incidents of those two terrible days immediately preceding the awful catastrophe that broke so suddenly upon him . 
Though Grushenka had , it is true , loved him for an hour , genuinely and sincerely , yet she tortured him sometimes cruelly and mercilessly . 
The worst of it was that he could never tell what she meant to do . 
To prevail upon her by force or kindness was also impossible : she would yield to nothing . 
She would only have become angry and turned away from him altogether , he knew that well already . 
He suspected , quite correctly , that she , too , was passing through an inward struggle , and was in a state of extraordinary indecision , that she was making up her mind to something , and unable to determine upon it . 
And so , not without good reason , he divined , with a sinking heart , that at moments she must simply hate him and his passion . 
And so , perhaps , it was , but what was distressing Grushenka he did not understand . 
For him the whole tormenting question lay between him and Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Here , we must note , by the way , one certain fact : he was firmly persuaded that Fyodor Pavlovitch would offer , or perhaps had offered , Grushenka lawful wedlock , and did not for a moment believe that the old voluptuary hoped to gain his object for three thousand roubles . 
Mitya had reached this conclusion from his knowledge of Grushenka and her character . 
That was how it was that he could believe at times that all Grushenka 's uneasiness rose from not knowing which of them to choose , which was most to her advantage . 
Strange to say , during those days it never occurred to him to think of the approaching return of the `` officer , '' that is , of the man who had been such a fatal influence in Grushenka 's life , and whose arrival she was expecting with such emotion and dread . 
It is true that of late Grushenka had been very silent about it . 
Yet he was perfectly aware of a letter she had received a month ago from her seducer , and had heard of it from her own lips . 
He partly knew , too , what the letter contained . 
In a moment of spite Grushenka had shown him that letter , but to her astonishment he attached hardly any consequence to it . 
It would be hard to say why this was . 
Perhaps , weighed down by all the hideous horror of his struggle with his own father for this woman , he was incapable of imagining any danger more terrible , at any rate for the time . 
He simply did not believe in a suitor who suddenly turned up again after five years ' disappearance , still less in his speedy arrival . 
Moreover , in the `` officer 's '' first letter which had been shown to Mitya , the possibility of his new rival 's visit was very vaguely suggested . 
The letter was very indefinite , high-flown , and full of sentimentality . 
It must be noted that Grushenka had concealed from him the last lines of the letter , in which his return was alluded to more definitely . 
He had , besides , noticed at that moment , he remembered afterwards , a certain involuntary proud contempt for this missive from Siberia on Grushenka 's face . 
Grushenka told him nothing of what had passed later between her and this rival ; so that by degrees he had completely forgotten the officer 's existence . 
He felt that whatever might come later , whatever turn things might take , his final conflict with Fyodor Pavlovitch was close upon him , and must be decided before anything else . 
With a sinking heart he was expecting every moment Grushenka 's decision , always believing that it would come suddenly , on the impulse of the moment . 
All of a sudden she would say to him : `` Take me , I 'm yours for ever , '' and it would all be over . 
He would seize her and bear her away at once to the ends of the earth . 
Oh , then he would bear her away at once , as far , far away as possible ; to the farthest end of Russia , if not of the earth , then he would marry her , and settle down with her incognito , so that no one would know anything about them , there , here , or anywhere . 
Then , oh then , a new life would begin at once ! 
Of this different , reformed and `` virtuous '' life -LRB- `` it must , it must be virtuous '' -RRB- he dreamed feverishly at every moment . 
He thirsted for that reformation and renewal . 
The filthy morass , in which he had sunk of his own free will , was too revolting to him , and , like very many men in such cases , he put faith above all in change of place . 
If only it were not for these people , if only it were not for these circumstances , if only he could fly away from this accursed place - he would be altogether regenerated , would enter on a new path . 
That was what he believed in , and what he was yearning for . 
But all this could only be on condition of the first , the happy solution of the question . 
There was another possibility , a different and awful ending . 
Suddenly she might say to him : `` Go away . 
I have just come to terms with Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
I am going to marry him and do n't want you '' - and then ... but then ... But Mitya did not know what would happen then . 
Up to the last hour he did n't know . 
That must be said to his credit . 
He had no definite intentions , had planned no crime . 
He was simply watching and spying in agony , while he prepared himself for the first , happy solution of his destiny . 
