She deserves what she gets . 
I shall have my own story to tell , Alexey . '' 
He smiled bitterly again . 
`` Only ... only Grusha , Grusha ! 
Good Lord ! 
Why should she have such suffering to bear ? '' 
he exclaimed suddenly , with tears . 
`` Grusha 's killing me ; the thought of her 's killing me , killing me . 
She was with me just now ... '' `` She told me she was very much grieved by you to-day . '' 
`` I know . 
Confound my temper ! 
It was jealousy . 
I was sorry , I kissed her as she was going . 
I did n't ask her forgiveness . '' 
`` Why did n't you ? '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
Suddenly Mitya laughed almost mirthfully . 
`` God preserve you , my dear boy , from ever asking forgiveness for a fault from a woman you love . 
From one you love especially , however greatly you may have been in fault . 
For a woman - devil only knows what to make of a woman ! 
I know something about them , anyway . 
But try acknowledging you are in fault to a woman . 
Say , ' I am sorry , forgive me , ' and a shower of reproaches will follow ! 
Nothing will make her forgive you simply and directly , she 'll humble you to the dust , bring forward things that have never happened , recall everything , forget nothing , add something of her own , and only then forgive you . 
And even the best , the best of them do it . 
She 'll scrape up all the scrapings and load them on your head . 
They are ready to flay you alive , I tell you , every one of them , all these angels without whom we can not live ! 
I tell you plainly and openly , dear boy , every decent man ought to be under some woman 's thumb . 
That 's my conviction - not conviction , but feeling . 
A man ought to be magnanimous , and it 's no disgrace to a man ! 
No disgrace to a hero , not even a Caesar ! 
But do n't ever beg her pardon all the same for anything . 
Remember that rule given you by your brother Mitya , who 's come to ruin through women . 
No , I 'd better make it up to Grusha somehow , without begging pardon . 
I worship her , Alexey , worship her . 
Only she does n't see it . 
No , she still thinks I do n't love her enough . 
And she tortures me , tortures me with her love . 
The past was nothing ! 
In the past it was only those infernal curves of hers that tortured me , but now I 've taken all her soul into my soul and through her I 've become a man myself . 
Will they marry us ? 
If they do n't , I shall die of jealousy . 
I imagine something every day ... . 
What did she say to you about me ? '' 
Alyosha repeated all Grushenka had said to him that day . 
Mitya listened , made him repeat things , and seemed pleased . 
`` Then she is not angry at my being jealous ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` She is a regular woman ! 
` I 've a fierce heart myself ! ' 
Ah , I love such fierce hearts , though I ca n't bear anyone 's being jealous of me . 
I ca n't endure it . 
We shall fight . 
But I shall love her , I shall love her infinitely . 
Will they marry us ? 
Do they let convicts marry ? 
That 's the question . 
And without her I ca n't exist ... '' Mitya walked frowning across the room . 
It was almost dark . 
He suddenly seemed terribly worried . 
`` So there 's a secret , she says , a secret ? 
We have got up a plot against her , and Katya is mixed up in it , she thinks . 
No , my good Grushenka , that 's not it . 
You are very wide of the mark , in your foolish feminine way . 
Alyosha , darling , well , here goes ! 
I 'll tell you our secret ! '' 
He looked round , went close up quickly to Alyosha , who was standing before him , and whispered to him with an air of mystery , though in reality no one could hear them : the old warder was dozing in the corner , and not a word could reach the ears of the soldiers on guard . 
`` I will tell you all our secret , '' Mitya whispered hurriedly . 
`` I meant to tell you later , for how could I decide on anything without you ? 
You are everything to me . 
Though I say that Ivan is superior to us , you are my angel . 
It 's your decision will decide it . 
Perhaps it 's you that is superior and not Ivan . 
You see , it 's a question of conscience , question of the higher conscience - the secret is so important that I ca n't settle it myself , and I 've put it off till I could speak to you . 
But anyway it 's too early to decide now , for we must wait for the verdict . 
As soon as the verdict is given , you shall decide my fate . 
Do n't decide it now . 
I 'll tell you now . 
You listen , but do n't decide . 
Stand and keep quiet . 
I wo n't tell you everything . 
I 'll only tell you the idea , without details , and you keep quiet . 
Not a question , not a movement . 
You agree ? 
But , goodness , what shall I do with your eyes ? 
I 'm afraid your eyes will tell me your decision , even if you do n't speak . 
Oo ! 
I 'm afraid ! 
Alyosha , listen ! 
Ivan suggests my escaping . 
I wo n't tell you the details : it 's all been thought out : it can all be arranged . 
Hush , do n't decide . 
I should go to America with Grusha . 
You know I ca n't live without Grusha ! 
What if they wo n't let her follow me to Siberia ? 
Do they let convicts get married ? 
Ivan thinks not . 
And without Grusha what should I do there underground with a hammer ? 
I should only smash my skull with the hammer ! 
But , on the other hand , my conscience ? 
I should have run away from suffering . 
A sign has come , I reject the sign . 
I have a way of salvation and I turn my back on it . 
Ivan says that in America , ` with the goodwill , ' I can be of more use than underground . 
But what becomes of our hymn from underground ? 
What 's America ? 
America is vanity again ! 
And there 's a lot of swindling in America , too , I expect . 
I should have run away from crucifixion ! 
I tell you , you know , Alexey , because you are the only person who can understand this . 
There 's no one else . 
It 's folly , madness to others , all I 've told you of the hymn . 
They 'll say I 'm out of my mind or a fool . 
I am not out of my mind and I am not a fool . 
Ivan understands about the hymn , too . 
He understands , only he does n't answer - he does n't speak . 
He does n't believe in the hymn . 
Do n't speak , do n't speak . 
I see how you look ! 
You have already decided . 
Do n't decide , spare me ! 
I ca n't live without Grusha . 
Wait till after the trial ! '' 
Mitya ended beside himself . 
He held Alyosha with both hands on his shoulders , and his yearning , feverish eyes were fixed on his brother 's . 
`` They do n't let convicts marry , do they ? '' 
he repeated for the third time in a supplicating voice . 
Alyosha listened with extreme surprise and was deeply moved . 
`` Tell me one thing , '' he said . 
`` Is Ivan very keen on it , and whose idea was it ? '' 
`` His , his , and he is very keen on it . 
He did n't come to see me at first , then he suddenly came a week ago and he began about it straight away . 
He is awfully keen on it . 
He does n't ask me , but orders me to escape . 
He does n't doubt of my obeying him , though I showed him all my heart as I have to you , and told him about the hymn , too . 
He told me he 'd arrange it ; he 's found out about everything . 
But of that later . 
He 's simply set on it . 
It 's all a matter of money : he 'll pay ten thousand for escape and give me twenty thousand for America . 
And he says we can arrange a magnificent escape for ten thousand . '' 
`` And he told you on no account to tell me ? '' 
Alyosha asked again . 
`` To tell no one , and especially not you ; on no account to tell you . 
He is afraid , no doubt , that you 'll stand before me as my conscience . 
Do n't tell him I told you . 
Do n't tell him , for anything . '' 
`` You are right , '' Alyosha pronounced ; `` it 's impossible to decide anything before the trial is over . 
After the trial you 'll decide of yourself . 
Then you 'll find that new man in yourself and he will decide . '' 
`` A new man , or a Bernard who 'll decide a la Bernard , for I believe I 'm a contemptible Bernard myself , '' said Mitya , with a bitter grin . 
`` But , brother , have you no hope then of being acquitted ? '' 
Mitya shrugged his shoulders nervously and shook his head . 
`` Alyosha , darling , it 's time you were going , '' he said , with a sudden haste . 
`` There 's the superintendent shouting in the yard . 
He 'll be here directly . 
We are late ; it 's irregular . 
Embrace me quickly . 
Kiss me ! 
Sign me with the cross , darling , for the cross I have to bear to-morrow . '' 
They embraced and kissed . 
`` Ivan , '' said Mitya suddenly , `` suggests my escaping ; but , of course , he believes I did it . '' 
A mournful smile came on to his lips . 
`` Have you asked him whether he believes it ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` No , I have n't . 
I wanted to , but I could n't . 
I had n't the courage . 
But I saw it from his eyes . 
Well , good-bye ! '' 
Once more they kissed hurriedly , and Alyosha was just going out , when Mitya suddenly called him back . 
`` Stand facing me ! 
That 's right ! '' 
And again he seized Alyosha , putting both hands on his shoulders . 
His face became suddenly quite pale , so that it was dreadfully apparent , even through the gathering darkness . 
His lips twitched , his eyes fastened upon Alyosha . 
`` Alyosha , tell me the whole truth , as you would before God . 
Do you believe I did it ? 
Do you , do you in yourself , believe it ? 
The whole truth , do n't lie ! '' 
he cried desperately . 
Everything seemed heaving before Alyosha , and he felt something like a stab at his heart . 
`` Hush ! 
What do you mean ? '' 
he faltered helplessly . 
`` The whole truth , the whole , do n't lie ! '' 
repeated Mitya . 
`` I 've never for one instant believed that you were the murderer ! '' 
broke in a shaking voice from Alyosha 's breast , and he raised his right hand in the air , as though calling God to witness his words . 
Mitya 's whole face was lighted up with bliss . 
`` Thank you ! '' 
he articulated slowly , as though letting a sigh escape him after fainting . 
`` Now you have given me new life . 
Would you believe it , till this moment I 've been afraid to ask you , you , even you . 
Well , go ! 
You 've given me strength for to-morrow . 
God bless you ! 
Come , go along ! 
Love Ivan ! '' 
was Mitya 's last word . 
Alyosha went out in tears . 
Such distrustfulness in Mitya , such lack of confidence even to him , to Alyosha - all this suddenly opened before Alyosha an unsuspected depth of hopeless grief and despair in the soul of his unhappy brother . 
Intense , infinite compassion overwhelmed him instantly . 
There was a poignant ache in his torn heart . 
`` Love Ivan '' - he suddenly recalled Mitya 's words . 
And he was going to Ivan . 
He badly wanted to see Ivan all day . 
He was as much worried about Ivan as about Mitya , and more than ever now . 
Not You , Not You ! 
ON the way to Ivan he had to pass the house where Katerina Ivanovna was living . 
There was light in the windows . 
He suddenly stopped and resolved to go in . 
He had not seen Katerina Ivanovna for more than a week . 
But now it struck him that Ivan might be with her , especially on the eve of the terrible day . 
Ringing , and mounting the staircase , which was dimly lighted by a Chinese lantern , he saw a man coming down , and as they met , he recognised him as his brother . 
So he was just coming from Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` Ah , it 's only you , '' said Ivan dryly . 
`` Well , good-bye ! 
You are going to her ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` I do n't advise you to ; she 's upset and you 'll upset her more . '' 
A door was instantly flung open above , and a voice cried suddenly : `` No , no ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , have you come from him ? '' 
`` Yes , I have been with him . '' 
`` Has he sent me any message ? 
Come up , Alyosha , and you , Ivan Fyodorovitch , you must come back , you must . 
Do you hear ? '' 
There was such a peremptory note in Katya 's voice that Ivan , after a moment 's hesitation , made up his mind to go back with Alyosha . 
`` She was listening , '' he murmured angrily to himself , but Alyosha heard it . 
`` Excuse my keeping my greatcoat on , '' said Ivan , going into the drawing-room . 
`` I wo n't sit down . 
I wo n't stay more than a minute . '' 
`` Sit down , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' said Katerina Ivanovna , though she remained standing . 
She had changed very little during this time , but there was an ominous gleam in her dark eyes . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards that she had struck him as particularly handsome at that moment . 
`` What did he ask you to tell me ? '' 
`` Only one thing , '' said Alyosha , looking her straight in the face , `` that you would spare yourself and say nothing at the trial of what '' -LRB- he was a little confused -RRB- '' ... passed between you ... at the time of your first acquaintance ... in that town . '' 
`` Ah ! 
that I bowed down to the ground for that money ! '' 
She broke into a bitter laugh . 
`` Why , is he afraid for me or for himself ? 
He asks me to spare - whom ? 
Him or myself ? 
Tell me , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! '' 
Alyosha watched her intently , trying to understand her . 
`` Both yourself and him , '' he answered softly . 
`` I am glad to hear it , '' she snapped out maliciously , and she suddenly blushed . 
`` You do n't know me yet , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she said menacingly . 
`` And I do n't know myself yet . 
Perhaps you 'll want to trample me under foot after my examination to-morrow . '' 
`` You will give your evidence honourably , '' said Alyosha ; `` that 's all that 's wanted . '' 
`` Women are often dishonourable , '' she snarled . 
`` Only an hour ago I was thinking I felt afraid to touch that monster ... as though he were a reptile ... but no , he is still a human being to me ! 
But did he do it ? 
Is he the murderer ? '' 
she cried , all of a sudden , hysterically , turning quickly to Ivan . 
Alyosha saw at once that she had asked Ivan that question before , perhaps only a moment before he came in , and not for the first time , but for the hundredth , and that they had ended by quarrelling . 
`` I 've been to see Smerdyakov ... . 
It was you , you who persuaded me that he murdered his father . 
It 's only you I believed '' she continued , still addressing Ivan . 
He gave her a sort of strained smile . 
Alyosha started at her tone . 
He had not suspected such familiar intimacy between them . 
`` Well , that 's enough , anyway , '' Ivan cut short the conversation . 
`` I am going . 
I 'll come to-morrow . '' 
And turning at once , he walked out of the room and went straight downstairs . 
With an imperious gesture , Katerina Ivanovna seized Alyosha by both hands . 
`` Follow him ! 
Overtake him ! 
Do n't leave him alone for a minute ! '' 
she said , in a hurried whisper . 
`` He 's mad ! 
Do n't you know that he 's mad ? 
He is in a fever , nervous fever . 
The doctor told me so . 
Go , run after him ... '' Alyosha jumped up and ran after Ivan , who was not fifty paces ahead of him . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
He turned quickly on Alyosha , seeing that he was running after him . 
`` She told you to catch me up , because I 'm mad . 
I know it all by heart , '' he added irritably . 
`` She is mistaken , of course ; but she is right that you are ill , '' said Alyosha . 
`` I was looking at your face just now . 
You look very ill , Ivan . '' 
Ivan walked on without stopping . 
Alyosha followed him . 
`` And do you know , Alexey Fyodorovitch , how people do go out of their minds ? '' 
Ivan asked in a a voice suddenly quiet , without a trace of irritation , with a note of the simplest curiosity . 
`` No , I do n't . 
I suppose there are all kinds of insanity . '' 
`` And can one observe that one 's going mad oneself ? '' 
`` I imagine one ca n't see oneself clearly in such circumstances , '' Alyosha answered with surprise . 
Ivan paused for half a minute . 
`` If you want to talk to me , please change the subject , '' he said suddenly . 
`` Oh , while I think of it , I have a letter for you , '' said Alyosha timidly , and he took Lise 's note from his pocket and held it out to Ivan . 
They were just under a lamp-post . 
Ivan recognised the handwriting at once . 
`` Ah , from that little demon ! '' 
he laughed maliciously , and , without opening the envelope , he tore it into bits and threw it in the air . 
The bits were scattered by the wind . 
`` She 's not sixteen yet , I believe , and already offering herself , '' he said contemptuously , striding along the street again . 
`` How do you mean , offering herself ? '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
`` As wanton women offer themselves , to be sure . '' 
`` How can you , Ivan , how can you ? '' 
Alyosha cried warmly , in a grieved voice . 
`` She is a child ; you are insulting a child ! 
She is ill ; she is very ill , too . 
She is on the verge of insanity , too , perhaps ... . 
I had hoped to hear something from you ... that would save her . '' 
`` You 'll hear nothing from me . 
If she is a child , I am not her nurse . 
Be quiet , Alexey . 
Do n't go on about her . 
I am not even thinking about it . '' 
They were silent again for a moment . 
`` She will be praying all night now to the Mother of God to show her how to act to-morrow at the trial , '' he said sharply and angrily again . 
`` You ... you mean Katerina Ivanovna ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Whether she 's to save Mitya or ruin him . 
She 'll pray for light from above . 
She ca n't make up her mind for herself , you see . 
She has not had time to decide yet . 
She takes me for her nurse , too . 
She wants me to sing lullabies to her . '' 
`` Katerina Ivanovna loves you , brother , '' said Alyosha sadly . 
`` Perhaps ; but I am not very keen on her . '' 
`` She is suffering . 
Why do you ... sometimes say things to her that give her hope ? '' 
Alyosha went on , with timid reproach . 
`` I know that you 've given her hope . 
Forgive me for speaking to you like this , '' he added . 
`` I ca n't behave to her as I ought - break off altogether and tell her so straight out , '' said Ivan , irritably . 
`` I must wait till sentence is passed on the murderer . 
If I break off with her now , she will avenge herself on me by ruining that scoundrel to-morrow at the trial , for she hates him and knows she hates him . 
It 's all a lie - lie upon lie ! 
As long as I do n't break off with her , she goes on hoping , and she wo n't ruin that monster , knowing how I want to get him out of trouble . 
If only that damned verdict would come ! '' 
The words `` murderer '' and `` monster '' echoed painfully in Alyosha 's heart . 
`` But how can she ruin Mitya ? '' 
he asked , pondering on Ivan 's words . 
`` What evidence can she give that would ruin Mitya ? '' 
`` You do n't know that yet . 
She 's got a document in her hands , in Mitya 's own writing , that proves conclusively that he did murder Fyodor Pavlovitch . '' 
`` That 's impossible ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Why is it impossible ? 
I 've read it myself . '' 
`` There ca n't be such a document ! '' 
Alyosha repeated warmly . 
`` There ca n't be , because he 's not the murderer . 
It 's not he murdered father , not he ! '' 
Ivan suddenly stopped . 
`` Who is the murderer then , according to you ? '' 
he asked , with apparent coldness . 
There was even a supercilious note in his voice . 
`` You know who , '' Alyosha pronounced in a low , penetrating voice . 
`` Who ? 
You mean the myth about that crazy idiot , the epileptic , Smerdyakov ? '' 
Alyosha suddenly felt himself trembling all over . 
`` You know who , '' broke helplessly from him . 
He could scarcely breathe . 
`` Who ? 
Who ? '' 
Ivan cried almost fiercely . 
All his restraint suddenly vanished . 
`` I only know one thing , '' Alyosha went on , still almost in a whisper , `` it was n't you killed father . '' '' 
` Not you ' ! 
What do you mean by ` not you ' ? '' 
Ivan was thunderstruck . 
`` It was not you killed father , not you ! 
Alyosha repeated firmly . 
The silence lasted for half a minute . 
`` I know I did n't . 
Are you raving ? '' 
said Ivan , with a pale , distorted smile . 
His eyes were riveted on Alyosha . 
They were standing again under a lamp-post . 
`` No , Ivan . 
You 've told yourself several times that you are the murderer . '' 
`` When did I say so ? 
I was in Moscow ... . 
When have I said so ? '' 
Ivan faltered helplessly . 
`` You 've said so to yourself many times , when you 've been alone during these two dreadful months , '' Alyosha went on softly and distinctly as before . 
Yet he was speaking now , as it were , not of himself , not of his own will , but obeying some irresistible command . 
`` You have accused yourself and have confessed to yourself that you are the murderer and no one else . 
But you did n't do it : you are mistaken : you are not the murderer . 
Do you hear ? 
It was not you ! 
God has sent me to tell you so . '' 
They were both silent . 
The silence lasted a whole long minute . 
They were both standing still , gazing into each other 's eyes . 
They were both pale . 
Suddenly Ivan began trembling all over , and clutched Alyosha 's shoulder . 
`` You 've been in my room ! '' 
he whispered hoarsely . 
`` You 've been there at night , when he came ... . 
Confess ... have you seen him , have you seen him ? '' 
`` Whom do you mean - Mitya ? '' 
Alyosha asked , bewildered . 
`` Not him , damn the monster ! '' 
Ivan shouted , in a frenzy , `` Do you know that he visits me ? 
How did you find out ? 
Speak ! '' 
`` Who is he ? 
I do n't know whom you are talking about , '' Alyosha faltered , beginning to be alarmed . 
`` Yes , you do know . 
or how could you - ? 
It 's impossible that you do n't know . '' 
Suddenly he seemed to check himself . 
He stood still and seemed to reflect . 
A strange grin contorted his lips . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha began again , in a shaking voice , `` I have said this to you , because you 'll believe my word , I know that . 
I tell you once and for all , it 's not you . 
You hear , once for all ! 
God has put it into my heart to say this to you , even though it may make you hate me from this hour . '' 
But by now Ivan had apparently regained his self-control . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' he said , with a cold smile , `` I ca n't endure prophets and epileptics - messengers from God especially - and you know that only too well . 
I break off all relations with you from this moment and probably for ever . 
I beg you to leave me at this turning . 
It 's the way to your lodgings , too . 
You 'd better be particularly careful not to come to me to-day ! 
Do you hear ? '' 
He turned and walked on with a firm step , not looking back . 
`` Brother , '' Alyosha called after him , `` if anything happens to you to-day , turn to me before anyone ! '' 
But Ivan made no reply . 
Alyosha stood under the lamp-post at the cross roads , till Ivan had vanished into the darkness . 
Then he turned and walked slowly homewards . 
Both Alyosha and Ivan were living in lodgings ; neither of them was willing to live in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's empty house . 
Alyosha had a furnished room in the house of some working people . 
Ivan lived some distance from him . 
He had taken a roomy and fairly comfortable lodge attached to a fine house that belonged to a well-to-do lady , the widow of an official . 
But his only attendant was a deaf and rheumatic old crone who went to bed at six o'clock every evening and got up at six in the morning . 
Ivan had become remarkably indifferent to his comforts of late , and very fond of being alone . 
He did everything for himself in the one room he lived in , and rarely entered any of the other rooms in his abode . 
He reached the gate of the house and had his hand on the bell , when he suddenly stopped . 
He felt that he was trembling all over with anger . 
Suddenly he let go of the bell , turned back with a curse , and walked with rapid steps in the opposite direction . 
He walked a mile and a half to a tiny , slanting , wooden house , almost a hut , where Marya Kondratyevna , the neighbour who used to come to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's kitchen for soup and to whom Smerdyakov had once sung his songs and played on the guitar , was now lodging . 
She had sold their little house , and was now living here with her mother . 
Smerdyakov , who was ill - almost dying-had been with them ever since Fyodor Pavlovitch 's death . 
It was to him Ivan was going now , drawn by a sudden and irresistible prompting . 
The First Interview with Smerdyakov THIS was the third time that Ivan had been to see Smerdyakov since his return from Moscow . 
The first time he had seen him and talked to him was on the first day of his arrival , then he had visited him once more , a fortnight later . 
But his visits had ended with that second one , so that it was now over a month since he had seen him . 
And he had scarcely heard anything of him . 
Ivan had only returned five days after his father 's death , so that he was not present at the funeral , which took place the day before he came back . 
The cause of his delay was that Alyosha , not knowing his Moscow address , had to apply to Katerina Ivanovna to telegraph to him , and she , not knowing his address either , telegraphed to her sister and aunt , reckoning on Ivan 's going to see them as soon as he arrived in Moscow . 
But he did not go to them till four days after his arrival . 
When he got the telegram , he had , of course , set off post-haste to our town . 
The first to meet him was Alyosha , and Ivan was greatly surprised to find that , in opposition to the general opinion of the town , he refused to entertain a suspicion against Mitya , and spoke openly of Smerdyakov as the murderer . 
Later on , after seeing the police captain and the prosecutor , and hearing the details of the charge and the arrest , he was still more surprised at Alyosha , and ascribed his opinion only to his exaggerated brotherly feeling and sympathy with Mitya , of whom Alyosha , as Ivan knew , was very fond . 
By the way , let us say a word or two of Ivan 's feeling to his brother Dmitri . 
He positively disliked him ; at most , felt sometimes a compassion for him , and even that was mixed with great contempt , almost repugnance . 
Mitya 's whole personality , even his appearance , was extremely unattractive to him . 
Ivan looked with indignation on Katerina Ivanovna 's love for his brother . 
Yet he went to see Mitya on the first day of his arrival , and that interview , far from shaking Ivan 's belief in his guilt , positively strengthened it . 
He found his brother agitated , nervously excited . 
Mitya had been talkative , but very absent-minded and incoherent . 
He used violent language , accused Smerdyakov , and was fearfully muddled . 
He talked principally about the three thousand roubles , which he said had been `` stolen '' from him by his father . 
`` The money was mine , it was my money , '' Mitya kept repeating . 
`` Even if I had stolen it , I should have had the right . '' 
He hardly contested the evidence against him , and if he tried to turn a fact to his advantage , it was in an absurd and incoherent way . 
He hardly seemed to wish to defend himself to Ivan or anyone else . 
Quite the contrary , he was angry and proudly scornful of the charges against him ; he was continually firing up and abusing everyone . 
He only laughed contemptuously at Grigory 's evidence about the open door , and declared that it was `` the devil that opened it . '' 
But he could not bring forward any coherent explanation of the fact . 
He even succeeded in insulting Ivan during their first interview , telling him sharply that it was not for people who declared that `` everything was lawful , '' to suspect and question him . 
Altogether he was anything but friendly with Ivan on that occasion . 
Immediately after that interview with Mitya , Ivan went for the first time to see Smerdyakov . 
In the railway train on his way from Moscow , he kept thinking of Smerdyakov and of his last conversation with him on the evening before he went away . 
Many things seemed to him puzzling and suspicious . 
when he gave his evidence to the investigating lawyer Ivan said nothing , for the time , of that conversation . 
He put that off till he had seen Smerdyakov , who was at that time in the hospital . 
Doctor Herzenstube and Varvinsky , the doctor he met in the hospital , confidently asserted in reply to Ivan 's persistent questions , that Smerdyakov 's epileptic attack was unmistakably genuine , and were surprised indeed at Ivan asking whether he might not have been shamming on the day of the catastrophe . 
They gave him to understand that the attack was an exceptional one , the fits persisting and recurring several times , so that the patient 's life was positively in danger , and it was only now , after they had applied remedies , that they could assert with confidence that the patient would survive . 
`` Though it might well be , '' added Doctor Herzenstube , `` that his reason would be impaired for a considerable period , if not permanently . '' 
On Ivan 's asking impatiently whether that meant that he was now mad , they told him that this was not yet the case , in the full sense of the word , but that certain abnormalities were perceptible . 
Ivan decided to find out for himself what those abnormalities were . 
At the hospital he was at once allowed to see the patient . 
Smerdyakov was lying on a truckle-bed in a separate ward . 
There was only one other bed in the room , and in it lay a tradesman of the town , swollen with dropsy , who was obviously almost dying ; he could be no hindrance to their conversation . 
Smerdyakov grinned uncertainly on seeing Ivan , and for the first instant seemed nervous . 
So at least Ivan fancied . 
But that was only momentary . 
For the rest of the time he was struck , on the contrary , by Smerdyakov 's composure . 
From the first glance Ivan had no doubt that he was very ill . 
He was very weak ; he spoke slowly , seeming to move his tongue with difficulty ; he was much thinner and sallower.Throughout the interview , which lasted twenty minutes , he kept complaining of headache and of pain in all his limbs . 
His thin emasculate face seemed to have become so tiny ; his hair was ruffled , and his crest of curls in front stood up in a thin tuft . 
But in the left eye , which was screwed up and seemed to be insinuating something , Smerdyakov showed himself unchanged . 
`` It 's always worth while speaking to a clever man . '' 
Ivan was reminded of that at once . 
He sat down on the stool at his feet . 
Smerdyakov , with painful effort , shifted his position in bed , but he was not the first to speak . 
He remained dumb , and did not even look much interested . 
`` Can you . 
talk to me ? '' 
asked Ivan . 
`` I wo n't tire you much . '' 
`` Certainly I can , '' mumbled Smerdyakov , in a faint voice . 
`` Has your honour been back long ? '' 
he added patronisingly , as though encouraging a nervous visitor . 
`` I only arrived to-day ... . 
To see the mess you are in here . '' 
Smerdyakov sighed . 
`` Why do you sigh ? 
You knew of it all along , '' Ivan blurted out . 
Smerdyakov was stolidly silent for a while . 
`` How could I help knowing ? 
It was clear beforehand . 
But how could I tell it would turn out like that ? '' 
`` What would turn out ? 
Do n't prevaricate ! 
You 've foretold you 'd have a fit ; on the way down to the cellar , you know . 
You mentioned the very spot . '' 
`` Have you said so at the examination yet ? '' 
Smerdyakov queried with composure . 
Ivan felt suddenly angry . 
`` No , I have n't yet , but I certainly shall . 
You must explain a great deal to me , my man ; and let me tell you , I am not going to let you play with me ! '' 
`` Why should I play with you , when I put my whole trust in you , as in God Almighty ? '' 
said Smerdyakov , with the same composure , only for a moment closing his eyes . 
`` In the first place , '' began Ivan , `` I know that epileptic fits ca n't be told beforehand . 
I 've inquired ; do n't try and take me in . 
You ca n't foretell the day and the hour . 
How was it you told me the day and the hour beforehand , and about the cellar , too ? 
How could you tell that you would fall down the cellar stairs in a fit , if you did n't sham a fit on purpose ? '' 
`` I had to go to the cellar anyway , several times a day , indeed , '' Smerdyakov drawled deliberately . 
`` I fell from the garret just in the same way a year ago . 
It 's quite true you ca n't tell the day and hour of a fit beforehand , but you can always have a presentiment of it . '' 
`` But you did foretell the day and the hour ! '' 
`` In regard to my epilepsy , sir , you had much better inquire of the doctors here . 
You can ask them whether it was a real fit or a sham ; it 's no use my saying any more about it . '' 
`` And the cellar ? 
How could you know beforehand of the cellar ? '' 
`` You do n't seem able to get over that cellar ! 
As I was going down to the cellar , I was in terrible dread and doubt . 
What frightened me most was losing you and being left without defence in all the world . 
So I went down into the cellar thinking , ` Here , it 'll come on directly , it 'll strike me down directly , shall I fall ? ' 
And it was through this fear that I suddenly felt the spasm that always comes ... and so I went flying . 
All that and all my previous conversation with you at the gate the evening before , when I told you how frightened I was and spoke of the cellar , I told all that to Doctor Herzenstube and Nikolay Parfenovitch , the investigating lawyer , and it 's all been written down in the protocol . 
And the doctor here , Mr. Varvinsky , maintained to all of them that it was just the thought of it brought it on , the apprehension that I might fall . 
It was just then that the fit seized me . 
And so they 've written it down , that it 's just how it must have happened , simply from my fear . '' 
As he finished , Smerdyakov . 
drew a deep breath , as though exhausted . 
`` Then you have said all that in your evidence ? '' 
said Ivan , somewhat taken aback . 
He had meant to frighten him with the threat of repeating their conversation , and it appeared that Smerdyakov had already reported it all himself . 
`` What have I to be afraid of ? 
Let them write down the whole truth , '' Smerdyakov pronounced firmly . 
`` And have you told them every word of our conversation at the gate ? '' 
`` No , not to say every word . '' 
`` And did you tell them that you can sham fits , as you boasted then ? '' 
`` No , I did n't tell them that either . '' 
`` Tell me now , why did you send me then to Tchermashnya ? '' 
`` I was afraid you 'd go away to Moscow ; Tchermashnya is nearer , anyway . '' 
`` You are lying ; you suggested my going away yourself ; you told me to get out of the way of trouble . '' 
`` That was simply out of affection and my sincere devotion to you , foreseeing trouble in the house , to spare you . 
Only I wanted to spare myself even more . 
That 's why I told you to get out of harm 's way , that you might understand that there would be trouble in the house , and would remain at home to protect your father . '' 
`` You might have said it more directly , you blockhead ! '' 
Ivan suddenly fired up . 
`` How could I have said it more directly then ? 
It was simply my fear that made me speak , and you might have been angry , too . 
I might well have been apprehensive that Dmitri Fyodorovitch would make a scene and carry away that money , for he considered it as good as his own ; but who could tell that it would end in a murder like this ? 
I thought that he would only carry off the three thousand that lay under the master 's mattress in the envelope , and you see , he 's murdered him . 
How could you guess it either , sir ? '' 
`` But if you say yourself that it could n't be guessed , how could I have guessed and stayed at home ? 
You contradict yourself ! '' 
said Ivan , pondering . 
`` You might have guessed from my sending you to Tchermashnya and not to Moscow . '' 
`` How could I guess it from that ? '' 
Smerdyakov seemed much exhausted , and again he was silent for a minute . 
`` You might have guessed from the fact of my asking you not to go to Moscow , but to Tchermashnya , that I wanted to have you nearer , for Moscow 's a long way off , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch , knowing you are not far off , would not be so bold . 
And if anything had happened , you might have come to protect me , too , for I warned you of Grigory Vassilyevitch 's illness , and that I was afraid of having a fit . 
And when I explained those knocks to you , by means of which one could go in to the deceased , and that Dmitri Fyodorovitch knew them all through me , I thought that you would guess yourself that he would be sure to do something , and so would n't go to Tchermashnya even , but would stay . '' 
`` He talks very coherently , '' thought Ivan , `` though he does mumble ; what 's the derangement of his faculties that Herzenstube talked of ? '' 
`` You are cunning with me , damn you ! '' 
he exclaimed , getting angry . 
`` But I thought at the time that you quite guessed , '' Smerdyakov parried with the simplest air . 
`` If I 'd guessed , I should have stayed , '' cried Ivan . 
`` Why , I thought that it was because you guessed , that you went away in such a hurry , only to get out of trouble , only to run away and save yourself in your fright . '' 
`` You think that everyone is as great a coward as yourself ? '' 
`` Forgive me , I thought you were like me . '' 
`` Of course , I ought to have guessed , '' Ivan said in agitation ; `` and I did guess there was some mischief brewing on your part ... only you are lying , you are lying again , '' he cried , suddenly recollecting . 
`` Do you remember how you went up to the carriage and said to me , ` It 's always worth while speaking to a clever man ' ? 
So you were glad I went away , since you praised me ? '' 
Smerdyakov sighed again and again . 
A trace of colour came into his face . 
`` If I was pleased , '' he articulated rather breathlessly , `` it was simply because you agreed not to go to Moscow , but to Tchermashnya . 
For it was nearer , anyway . 
Only when I said these words to you , it was not by way of praise , but of reproach . 
You did n't understand it . '' 
`` What reproach ? '' 
`` Why , that foreseeing such a calamity you deserted your own father , and would not protect us , for I might have been taken up any time for stealing that three thousand . '' 
`` Damn you ! '' 
Ivan swore again . 
`` Stay , did you tell the prosecutor and the investigating lawyer about those knocks ? '' 
`` I told them everything just as it was . '' 
Ivan wondered inwardly again . 
`` If I thought of anything then , '' he began again , `` it was solely of some wickedness on your part . 
Dmitri might kill him , but that he would steal - I did not believe that then ... . 
But I was prepared for any wickedness from you . 
You told me yourself you could sham a fit . 
What did you say that for ? '' 
`` It was just through my simplicity , and I never have shammed a fit on purpose in my life . 
And I only said so then to boast to you . 
It was just foolishness . 
I liked you so much then , and was open-hearted with you . '' 
`` My brother directly accuses you of the murder and theft . '' 
`` What else is left for him to do ? '' 
said Smerdyakov , with a bitter grin . 
`` And who will believe him with all the proofs against him ? 
Grigory Vassilyevitch saw the door open . 
What can he say after that ? 
But never mind him ! 
He is trembling to save himself . '' 
He slowly ceased speaking ; then suddenly , as though on reflection , added : `` And look here again . 
He wants to throw it on me and make out that it is the work of my hands - I 've heard that already . 
But as to my being clever at shamming a fit : should I have told you beforehand that I could sham one , if I really had had such a design against your father ? 
If I had been planning such a murder could I have been such a fool as to give such evidence against myself beforehand ? 
And to his son , too ! 
Upon my word ! 
Is that likely ? 
As if that could be ; such a thing has never happened . 
No one hears this talk of ours now , except Providence itself , and if you were to tell of it to the prosecutor and Nikolay Parfenovitch you might defend me completely by doing so , for who would be likely to be such a criminal , if he is so open-hearted beforehand ? 
Anyone can see that . '' 
`` Well , '' and Ivan got up to cut short the conversation , struck by Smerdyakov 's last argument . 
`` I do n't suspect you at all , and I think it 's absurd , indeed , to suspect you . 
On the contrary , I am grateful to you for setting my mind at rest . 
Now I am going , but I 'll come again . 
Meanwhile , good-bye . 
Get well . 
Is there anything you want ? '' 
`` I am very thankful for everything . 
Marfa Ignatyevna does not forget me , and provides me anything I want , according to her kindness . 
Good people visit me every day . '' 
`` Good-bye . 
But I sha n't say anything of your being able to sham a fit , and I do n't advise you to , either , '' something made Ivan say suddenly . 
`` I quite understand . 
And if you do n't speak of that , I shall say nothing of that conversation of ours at the gate . '' 
Then it happened that Ivan went out , and only when he had gone a dozen steps along the corridor , he suddenly felt that there was an insulting significance in Smerdyakov 's last words . 
He was almost on the point of turning back , but it was only a passing impulse , and muttering , `` Nonsense ! '' 
he went out of the hospital . 
His chief feeling was one of relief at the fact that it was not Smerdyakov , but Mitya , who had committed the murder , though he might have been expected to feel the opposite . 
He did not want to analyse the reason for this feeling , and even felt a positive repugnance at prying into his sensations . 
He felt as though he wanted to make haste to forget something . 
In the following days he became convinced of Mitya 's guilt , as he got to know all the weight of evidence against him . 
There was evidence of people of no importance , Fenya and her mother , for instance , but the effect of it was almost overpowering . 
As to Perhotin , the people at the tavern , and at Plotnikov 's shop , as well as the witnesses at Mokroe , their evidence seemed conclusive . 
It was the details that were so damning . 
The secret of the knocks impressed the lawyers almost as much as Grigory 's evidence as to the open door . 
Grigory 's wife , Marfa , in answer to Ivan 's questions , declared that Smerdyakov had been lying all night the other side of the partition wall , `` He was not three paces from our bed , '' and that although she was a sound sleeper she waked several times and heard him moaning , `` He was moaning the whole time , moaning continually . '' 
Talking to Herzenstube , and giving it as his opinion that Smerdyakov was not mad , but only rather weak , Ivan only evoked from the old man a subtle smile . 
`` Do you know how he spends his time now ? '' 
he asked ; `` learning lists of French words by heart . 
He has an exercise-book under his pillow with the French words written out in Russian letters for him by someone , he he he ! '' 
Ivan ended by dismissing all doubts . 
He could not think of Dmitri without repulsion . 
Only one thing was strange , however . 
Alyosha persisted that Dmitri was not the murderer , and that `` in all probability '' Smerdyakov was . 
Ivan always felt that Alyosha 's opinion meant a great deal to him , and so he was astonished at it now . 
Another thing that was strange was that Alyosha did not make any attempt to talk about Mitya with Ivan , that he never began on the subject and only answered his questions . 
This , too , struck Ivan particularly . 
But he was very much preoccupied at that time with something quite apart from that . 
On his return from Moscow , he abandoned himself hopelessly to his mad and consuming passion for Katerina Ivanovna . 
This is not the time to begin to speak of this new passion of Ivan 's , which left its mark on all the rest of his life : this would furnish the subject for another novel , which I may perhaps never write . 
But I can not omit to mention here that when Ivan , on leaving Katerina Ivanovna with Alyosha , as I 've related already , told him , `` I am not keen on her , '' it was an absolute lie : he loved her madly , though at times he hated her so that he might have murdered her . 
Many causes helped to bring about this feeling . 
Shattered by what had happened with Mitya , she rushed on Ivan 's return to meet him as her one salvation . 
She was hurt , insulted and humiliated in her feelings . 
And here the man had come back to her , who had loved her so ardently before -LRB- oh ! 
she knew that very well -RRB- , and whose heart and intellect she considered so superior to her own . 
But the sternly virtuous girl did not abandon herself altogether to the man she loved , in spite of the Karamazov violence of his passions and the great fascination he had for her . 
She was continually tormented at the same time by remorse for having deserted Mitya , and in moments of discord and violent anger -LRB- and they were numerous -RRB- she told Ivan so plainly . 
This was what he had called to Alyosha `` lies upon lies . '' 
There was , of course , much that was false in it , and that angered Ivan more than anything ... . 
But of all this later . 
He did , in fact , for a time almost forget Smerdyakov 's existence , and yet , a fortnight after his first visit to him , he began to be haunted by the same strange thoughts as before . 
It 's enough to say that he was continually asking himself , why was it that on that last night in Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house he had crept out on to the stairs like a thief and listened to hear what his father was doing below ? 
Why had he recalled that afterwards with repulsion ? 
Why next morning , had he been suddenly so depressed on the journey ? 
Why , as he reached Moscow , had he said to himself , `` I am a scoundrel '' ? 
And now he almost fancied that these tormenting thoughts would make him even forget Katerina Ivanovna , so completely did they take possession of him again . 
It was just after fancying this , that he met Alyosha in the street . 
He stopped him at once , and put a question to him : `` Do you remember when Dmitri burst in after dinner and beat father , and afterwards I told you in the yard that I reserved ` the right to desire ' ? 
... Tell me , did you think then that I desired father 's death or not ? '' 
`` I did think so , '' answered Alyosha , softly . 
`` It was so , too ; it was not a matter of guessing . 
But did n't you fancy then that what I wished was just that one reptile should devour another ' ; that is , just that Dmitri should kill father , and as soon as possible ... and that I myself was even prepared to help to bring that about ? '' 
Alyosha turned rather pale , and looked silently into his brother 's face . 
`` Speak ! '' 
cried Ivan , `` I want above everything to know what you thought then . 
I want the truth , the truth ! '' 
He drew a deep breath , looking angrily at Alyosha before his answer came . 
`` Forgive me , I did think that , too , at the time , '' whispered Alyosha , and he did not add one softening phrase . 
`` Thanks , '' snapped Ivan , and , leaving Alyosha , he went quickly on his way . 
From that time Alyosha noticed that Ivan began obviously to avoid him and seemed even to have taken a dislike to him , so much so that Alyosha gave up going to see him . 
Immediately after that meeting with him , Ivan had not gone home , but went straight to Smerdyakov again . 
The Second Visit to Smerdyakov BY that time Smerdyakov had been discharged from the hospital . 
Ivan knew his new lodging , the dilapidated little wooden house , divided in two by a passage , on one side of which lived Marya Kondratyevna and her mother , and on the other , Smerdyakov . 
No one knew on what terms he lived with them , whether as a friend or as a lodger . 
It was supposed afterwards that he had come to stay with them as Marya Kondratyevna 's betrothed , and was living there for a time without paying for board or lodging . 
Both mother and daughter had the greatest respect for him and looked upon him as greatly superior to themselves . 
Ivan knocked , and , on the door being opened , went straight into the passage . 
By Marya Kondratyevna 's directions he went straight to the better room on the left , occupied by Smerdyakov . 
There was a tiled stove in the room and it was extremely hot . 
The walls were gay with blue paper , which was a good deal used however , and in the cracks under it cockroaches swarmed in amazing numbers , so that there was a continual rustling from them . 
The furniture was very scanty : two benches against each wall and two chairs by the table . 
The table of plain wood was covered with a cloth with pink patterns on it . 
There was a pot of geranium on each of the two little windows . 
In the corner there was a case of ikons . 
On the table stood a little copper samovar with many dents in it , and a tray with two cups . 
But Smerdyakov had finished tea and the samovar was out . 
He was sitting at the table on a bench . 
He was looking at an exercise-book and slowly writing with a pen . 
There was a bottle of ink by him and a flat iron candlestick , but with a composite candle . 
Ivan saw at once from Smerdyakov 's face that he had completely recovered from his illness . 
His face was fresher , fuller , his hair stood up jauntily in front , and was plastered down at the sides . 
He was sitting in a parti-coloured , wadded dressing-gown , rather dirty and frayed , however . 
He had spectacles on his nose , which Ivan had never seen him wearing before . 
This trifling circumstance suddenly redoubled Ivan 's anger : `` A creature like that and wearing spectacles ! '' 
Smerdyakov slowly raised his head and looked intently at his visitor through his spectacles ; then he slowly took them off and rose from the bench , but by no means respectfully , almost lazily , doing the least possible required by common civility . 
All this struck Ivan instantly ; he took it all in and noted it at once - most of all the look in Smerdyakov 's eyes , positively malicious , churlish and haughty . 
`` What do you want to intrude for ? '' 
it seemed to say ; `` we settled everything then ; why have you come again ? '' 
Ivan could scarcely control himself . 
`` It 's hot here , '' he said , still standing , and unbuttoned his overcoat . 
`` Take off your coat , '' Smerdyakov conceded . 
Ivan took off his coat and threw it on a bench with trembling hands . 
He took a chair , moved it quickly to the table and sat down . 
Smerdyakov managed to sit down on his bench before him . 
`` To begin with , are we alone ? '' 
Ivan asked sternly and impulsively . 
`` Can they overhear us in there ? '' 
`` No one can hear anything . 
You 've seen for yourself : there 's a passage . '' 
`` Listen , my good fellow ; what was that you babbled , as I was leaving the hospital , that if I said nothing about your faculty of shamming fits , you would n't tell the investigating lawyer all our conversation at the gate ? 
What do you mean by all ? 
What could you mean by it ? 
Were you threatening me ? 
Have I entered into some sort of compact with you ? 
Do you suppose I am afraid of you ? '' 
Ivan said this in a perfect fury , giving him to understand with obvious intention that he scorned any subterfuge or indirectness and meant to show his cards . 
Smerdyakov 's eyes gleamed resentfully , his left eye winked , and he at once gave his answer , with his habitual composure and deliberation . 
`` You want to have everything above-board ; very well , you shall have it , '' he seemed to say . 
`` This is what I meant then , and this is why I said that , that you , knowing beforehand of this murder of your own parent , left him to his fate , and that people might n't after that conclude any evil about your feelings and perhaps of something else , too - that 's what I promised not to tell the authorities . '' 
Though Smerdyakov spoke without haste and obviously controlling himself , yet there was something in his voice , determined and emphatic , resentful and insolently defiant . 
He stared impudently at Ivan . 
A mist passed before Ivan 's eyes for the first moment . 
`` How ? 
What ? 
Are you out of your mind ? '' 
`` I 'm perfectly in possession of all my faculties . '' 
`` Do you suppose I knew of the murder ? '' 
Ivan cried at last , and he brought his fist violently on the table . 
`` What do you mean by ` something else , too ' ? 
Speak , scoundrel ! '' 
Smerdyakov was silent and still scanned Ivan with the same insolent stare . 
`` Speak , you stinking rogue , what is that ` something else , too ' ? '' 
`` The ` something else ' I meant was that you probably , too , were very desirous of your parent 's death . '' 
Ivan jumped up and struck him with all his might on the shoulder , so that he fell back against the wall . 
In an instant his face was bathed in tears . 
Saying , `` It 's a shame , sir , to strike a sick man , '' he dried his eyes with a very dirty blue check handkerchief and sank into quiet weeping . 
A minute passed . 
`` That 's enough ! 
Leave off , '' Ivan said peremptorily , sitting down again . 
`` Do n't put me out of all patience . '' 
Smerdyakov took the rag from his eyes . 
Every line of his puckered face reflected the insult he had just received . 
`` So you thought then , you scoundrel , that together with Dmitri I meant to kill my father ? '' 
`` I did n't know what thoughts were in your mind then , '' said Smerdyakov resentfully ; `` and so I stopped you then at the gate to sound you on that very point . '' 
`` To sound what , what ? '' 
`` Why , that very circumstance , whether you wanted your father to be murdered or not . '' 
What infuriated Ivan more than anything was the aggressive , insolent tone to which Smerdyakov persistently adhered . 
`` It was you murdered him ? '' 
he cried suddenly . 
Smerdyakov smiled contemptuously . 
`` You know of yourself , for a fact , that it was n't I murdered him . 
And I should have thought that there was no need for a sensible man to speak of it again . '' 
`` But why , why had you such a suspicion about me at the time ? '' 
`` As you know already , it was simply from fear . 
For I was in such a position , shaking with fear , that I suspected everyone . 
I resolved to sound you , too , for I thought if you wanted the same as your brother , then the business was as good as settled and I should be crushed like a fly , too . '' 
`` Look here , you did n't say that a fortnight ago . '' 
`` I meant the same when I talked to you in the hospital , only I thought you 'd understand without wasting words , and that being such a sensible man you would n't care to talk of it openly . '' 
`` What next ! 
Come answer , answer , I insist : what was it ... what could I have done to put such a degrading suspicion into your mean soul ? '' 
`` As for the murder , you could n't have done that and did n't want to , but as for wanting someone else to do it , that was just what you did want . '' 
`` And how coolly , how coolly he speakst But why should I have wanted it ; what grounds had I for wanting it ? '' 
`` What grounds had you ? 
What about the inheritance ? '' 
said Smerdyakov sarcastically , and , as it were , vindictively . 
`` Why , after your parent 's death there was at least forty thousand to come to each of you , and very likely more , but if Fyodor Pavlovitch got married then to that lady , Agrafena Alexandrovna , she would have had all his capital made over to her directly after the wedding , for she 's plenty of sense , so that your parent would not have left you two roubles between the three of you . 
And were they far from a wedding , either ? 
Not a hair 's - breadth : that lady had only to lift her little finger and he would have run after her to church , with his tongue out . '' 
Ivan restrained himself with painful effort . 
`` Very good , '' he commented at last . 
`` You see , I have n't jumped up , I have n't knocked you down , I have n't killed you . 
Speak on . 
So , according to you , I had fixed on Dmitri to do it ; I was reckoning on him ? '' 
`` How could you help reckoning on him ? 
If he killed him , then he would lose all the rights of a nobleman , his rank and property , and would go off to exile ; so his share of the inheritance would come to you and your brother Alexey Fyodorovitch in equal parts ; so you 'd each have not forty , but sixty thousand each . 
There 's not a doubt you did reckon on Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` What I put up with from you ! 
Listen , scoundrel , if I had reckoned on anyone then , it would have been on you , not on Dmitri , and I swear I did expect some wickedness from you ... at the time ... . 
I remember my impression ! 
`` I thought , too , for a minute , at the time , that you were reckoning on me as well , '' said Smerdyakov , with a sarcastic grin . 
`` So that it was just by that more than anything you showed me what was in your mind . 
For if you had a foreboding about me and yet went away , you as good as said to me , ` You can murder my parent , I wo n't hinder you ! '' ' 
`` You scoundrel ! 
So that 's how you understood it ! '' 
`` It was all that going to Tchermashnya . 
Why ! 
You were meaning to go to Moscow and refused all your father 's entreaties to go to Tchermashnya - and simply at a foolish word from me you consented at once ! 
What reason had you to consent to Tchermashnya ? 
Since you went to Tchermashnya with no reason , simply at my word , it shows that you must have expected something from me . '' 
No , I swear I did n't ! '' 
shouted Ivan , grinding his teeth . 
`` You did n't ? 
Then you ought , as your father 's son , to have had me taken to the lock-up and thrashed at once for my words then ... or at least , to have given me a punch in the face on the spot , but you were not a bit angry , if you please , and at once in a friendly way acted on my foolish word and went away , which was utterly absurd , for you ought to have stayed to save your parent 's life . 
How could I help drawing my conclusions ? '' 
Ivan sat scowling , both his fists convulsively pressed on his knees . 
`` Yes , I am sorry I did n't punch you in the face , '' he said with a bitter smile . 
`` I could n't have taken you to the lock-up just then . 
Who would have believed me and what charge could I bring against you ? 
But the punch in the face ... oh , I 'm sorry I did n't think of it . 
Though blows are forbidden , I should have pounded your ugly face to a jelly . '' 
Smerdyakov looked at him almost with relish . 
`` In the ordinary occasions of life , '' he said in the same complacent and sententious tone in which he had taunted Grigory and argued with him about religion at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's table , `` in the ordinary occasions of life , blows on the face are forbidden nowadays by law , and people have given them up , but in exceptional occasions of life people still fly to blows , not only among us but all over the world , be it even the fullest republic of France , just as in the time of Adam and Eve , and they never will leave off , but you , even in an exceptional case , did not dare . '' 
`` What are you learning French words for ? '' 
Ivan nodded towards the exercise-book lying on the table . 
`` Why should n't I learn them so as to improve my education , supposing that I may myself chance to go some day to those happy parts of Europe ? '' 
`` Listen , monster . '' 
Ivan 's eyes flashed and he trembled all over . 
`` I am not afraid of your accusations ; you can say what you like about me , and if I do n't beat you to death , it 's simply because I suspect you of that crime and I 'll drag you to justice . 
I 'll unmask you . '' 
`` To my thinking , you 'd better keep quiet , for what can you accuse me of , considering my absolute innocence ? 
And who would believe you ? 
Only if you begin , I shall tell everything , too , for I must defend myself . '' 
`` Do you think I am afraid of you now ? '' 
`` If the court does n't believe all I 've said to you just now , the public will , and you will be ashamed . '' 
`` That 's as much as to say , ` It 's always worth while speaking to a sensible man , ' eh ? '' 
snarled Ivan . 
`` You hit the mark , indeed . 
And you 'd better be sensible . '' 
Ivan got up , shaking all over with indignation , put on his coat , and without replying further to Smerdyakov , without even looking at him , walked quickly out of the cottage . 
The cool evening air refreshed him . 
There was a bright moon in the sky . 
A nightmare of ideas and sensations filled his soul . 
`` Shall I go at once and give information against Smerdyakov ? 
But what information can I give ? 
He is not guilty , anyway . 
On the contrary , he 'll accuse me . 
And in fact , why did I set off for Tchermashnya then ? 
What for ? 
What for ? '' 
Ivan asked himself . 
`` Yes , of course , I was expecting something and he is right ... '' And he remembered for the hundredth time how , on the last night in his father 's house , he had listened on the stairs . 
But he remembered it now with such anguish that he stood still on the spot as though he had been stabbed . 
`` Yes , I expected it then , that 's true ! 
I wanted the murder , I did want the murder ! 
Did I want the murder ? 
Did I want it ? 
I must kill Smerdyakov ! 
If I do n't dare kill Smerdyakov now , life is not worth living ! '' 
Ivan did not go home , but went straight to Katerina Ivanovna and alarmed her by his appearance . 
He was like a madman . 
He repeated all his conversation with Smerdyakov , every syllable of it . 
He could n't be calmed , however much she tried to soothe him : he kept walking about the room , speaking strangely , disconnectedly . 
At last he sat down , put his elbows on the table , leaned his head on his hands and pronounced this strange sentence : `` If it 's not Dmitri , but Smerdyakov who 's the murderer , I share his guilt , for I put him up to it . 
Whether I did , I do n't know yet . 
But if he is the murderer , and not Dmitri , then , of course , I am the murderer , too . '' 
When Katerina Ivanovna heard that , she got up from her seat without a word , went to her writing-table , opened a box standing on it , took out a sheet of paper and laid it before Ivan . 
This was the document of which Ivan spoke to Alyosha later on as a `` conclusive proof '' that Dmitri had killed his father . 
It was the letter written by Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna when he was drunk , on the very evening he met Alyosha at the crossroads on the way to the monastery , after the scene at Katerina Ivanovna 's , when Grushenka had insulted her . 
Then , parting from Alyosha , Mitya had rushed to Grushenka . 
I do n't know whether he saw her , but in the evening he was at the Metropolis , where he got thoroughly drunk . 
Then he asked for pen and paper and wrote a document of weighty consequences to himself . 
It was a wordy , disconnected , frantic letter , a drunken letter , in fact . 
It was like the talk of a drunken man , who , on his return home , begins with extraordinary heat telling his wife or one of his household how he has just been insulted , what a rascal had just insulted him , what a fine fellow he is on the other hand , and how he will pay that scoundrel out ; and all that at great length , with great excitement and incoherence , with drunken tears and blows on the table . 
The letter was written on a dirty piece of ordinary paper of the cheapest kind . 
It had been provided by the tavern and there were figures scrawled on the back of it . 
There was evidently not space enough for his drunken verbosity and Mitya not only filled the margins but had written the last line right across the rest . 
The letter ran as follows : FATAL KATYA : To-morrow I will get the money and repay your three thousand and farewell , woman of great wrath , but farewell , too , my love ! 
Let us make an end ! 
To-morrow I shall try and get it from everyone , and if I ca n't borrow it , I give you my word of honour I shall go to my father and break his skull and take the money from under the pillow , if only Ivan has gone . 
It I have to go to Siberia for it , I 'll give you back your three thousand . 
And farewell . 
I bow down to the ground before you , for I 've been a scoundrel to you . 
Forgive me ! 
No , better not forgive me , you 'll be happier and so shall I ! 
Better Siberia than your love , for I love another woman and you got to know her too well to-day , so how can you forgive ? 
I will murder the man who 's robbed me ! 
I 'll leave you all and go to the East so as to see no one again . 
Not her either , for you are not my only tormentress ; she is too . 
Farewel ! 
P.S. - I write my curse , but I adore you ! 
I hear it in my heart . 
One string is left , and it vibrates . 
Better tear my heart in two ! 
I shall kill myself , but first of all that cur . 
I shall tear three thousand from him and fling it to you . 
Though I 've been a scoundrel to you , I am not a thief ! 
You can expect three thousand . 
The cur keeps it under his mattress , in pink ribbon . 
I am not a thief , but I 'll murder my thief . 
Katya , do n't look disdainful . 
Dmitri is not a thief ! 
but a murderer ! 
He has murdered his father and ruined himself to hold his ground , rather than endure your pride . 
And he does n't love you . 
P.P.S. - I kiss your feet , farewel ! 
P.P.P.S. - Katya , pray to God that someone 'll give me the money . 
Then I shall not be steeped in gore , and if no one does - I shall ! 
Kill me ! 
Your slave and enemy , D. KARAMAZOV When Ivan read this `` document '' he was convinced . 
So then it was his brother , not Smerdyakov . 
And if not Smerdyakov , then not he , Ivan . 
This letter at once assumed in his eyes the aspect of a logical proof . 
There could be no longer the slightest doubt of Mitya 's guilt . 
The suspicion never occurred to Ivan , by the way , that Mitya might have committed the murder in conjunction with Smerdyakov , and , indeed , such a theory did not fit in with the facts . 
Ivan was completely reassured . 
The next morning he only thought of Smerdyakov and his gibes with contempt . 
A few days later he positively wondered how he could have been so horribly distressed at his suspicions . 
He resolved to dismiss him with contempt and forget him . 
So passed a month . 
He made no further inquiry about Smerdyakov , but twice he happened to hear that he was very ill and out of his mind . 
`` He 'll end in madness , '' the young doctor Varvinsky observed about him , and Ivan remembered this . 
During the last week of that month Ivan himself began to feel very ill . 
He went to consult the Moscow doctor who had been sent for by Katerina Ivanovna just before the trial . 
And just at that time his relations with Katerina Ivanovna became acutely strained . 
They were like two enemies in love with one another . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's `` returns '' to Mitya , that is , her brief but violent revulsions of feeling in his favour , drove Ivan to perfect frenzy . 
Strange to say , until that last scene described above , when Alyosha came from Mitya to Katerina Ivanovna , Ivan had never once , during that month , heard her express a doubt of Mitya 's guilt , in spite of those `` returns '' that were so hateful to him . 
It is remarkable , too , that while he felt that he hated Mitya more and more every day , he realised that it was not on account of Katya 's `` returns '' that he hated him , but just because he was the murderer of his father . 
He was conscious of this and fully recognised it to himself Nevertheless , he went to see Mitya ten days before the trial and proposed to him a plan of escape - a plan he had obviously thought over a long time . 
He was partly impelled to do this by a sore place still left in his heart from a phrase of Smerdyakov 's , that it was to his , Ivan 's , advantage that his brother should be convicted , as that would increase his inheritance and Alyosha 's from forty to sixty thousand roubles . 
He determined to sacrifice thirty thousand on arranging Mitya 's escape . 
On his return from seeing him , he was very mournful and dispirited ; he suddenly began to feel that he was anxious for Mitya 's escape , not only to heal that sore place by sacrificing thirty thousand , but for another reason . 
`` Is it because I am as much a murderer at heart ? '' 
he asked himself . 
Something very deep down seemed burning and rankling in his soul . 
His pride above all suffered cruelly all that month . 
But of that later ... . 
When , after his conversation with Alyosha , Ivan suddenly decided with his hand on the bell of his lodging to go to Smerdyakov , he obeyed a sudden and peculiar impulse of indignation . 
He suddenly remembered how Katerina Ivanovna had only just cried out to him in Alyosha 's presence : `` It was you , you , persuaded me of his '' -LRB- that is , Mitya 's -RRB- `` guilt ! '' 
Ivan was thunderstruck when he recalled it . 
He had never once tried to persuade her that Mitya was the murderer ; on the contrary , he had suspected himself in her presence , that time when he came back from Smerdyakov . 
It was she , she , who had produced that `` document '' and proved his brother 's guilt . 
And now she suddenly exclaimed : `` I 've been at Smerdyakov 's myself ! '' 
When had she been there ? 
Ivan had known nothing of it . 
So she was not at all so sure of Mitya 's guilt ! 
And what could Smerdyakov have told her ? 
What , what , had he said to her ? 
His heart burned with violent anger . 
He could not understand how he could , half an hour before , have let those words pass and not have cried out at the moment . 
He let go of the bell and rushed off to Smerdyakov . 
`` I shall kill him , perhaps , this time , '' he thought on the way . 
The Third and Last Interview with Smerdyakov WHEN he was half-way there , the keen dry wind that had been blowing early that morning rose again , and a fine dry snow began falling thickly . 
It did not lie on the ground , but was whirled about by the wind , and soon there was a regular snowstorm . 
There were scarcely any lamp-posts in the part of the town where Smerdyakov lived . 
Ivan strode alone in the darkness , unconscious of the storm , instinctively picking out his way . 
His head ached and there was a painful throbbing in his temples . 
He felt that his hands were twitching convulsively . 
Not far from Marya Kondratyevna 's cottage , Ivan suddenly came upon a solitary drunken little peasant . 
He was wearing a coarse and patched coat , and was walking in zigzags , grumbling and swearing to himself . 
Then suddenly he would begin singing in a husky drunken voice : Ach , Vanka 's gone to Petersburg ; I wo n't wait till he comes back . 
But he broke off every time at the second line and began swearing again ; then he would begin the same song again . 
Ivan felt an intense hatred for him before he had thought about him at all . 
Suddenly he realised his presence and felt an irresistible impulse to knock him down . 
At that moment they met , and the peasant with a violent lurch fell full tilt against Ivan , who pushed him back furiously . 
The peasant went flying backwards and fell like a log on the frozen ground . 
He uttered one plaintive `` O - oh ! '' 
and then was silent . 
Ivan stepped up to him . 
He was lying on his back , without movement or consciousness . 
`` He will be frozen , '' thought Ivan , and he went on his way to Smerdyakov 's . 
In the passage , Marya Kondratyevna , who ran out to open the door with a candle in her hand , whispered that Smerdyakov was very ill ; `` It 's not that he 's laid up , but he seems not himself , and he even told us to take the tea away ; he would n't have any . '' 
`` Why , does he make a row ? '' 
asked Ivan coarsely . 
`` Oh dear no , quite the contrary , he 's very quiet . 
Only please do n't talk to him too long , '' Marya Kondratyevna begged him . 
Ivan opened the door and stepped into the room . 
It was over-heated as before , but there were changes in the room . 
One of the benches at the side had been removed , and in its place had been put a large old mahogany leather sofa , on which a bed had been made up , with fairly clean white pillows . 
Smerdyakov was sitting on the sofa , wearing the same dressing-gown . 
The table had been brought out in front of the sofa , so that there was hardly room to move . 
On the table lay a thick book in yellow cover , but Smerdyakov was not reading it . 
He seemed to be sitting doing nothing . 
He met Ivan with a slow silent gaze , and was apparently not at all surprised at his coming . 
There was a great change in his face ; he was much thinner and sallower . 
His eyes were sunken and there were blue marks under them . 
`` Why , you really are ill ? '' 
Ivan stopped short . 
`` I wo n't keep you long , I wont even take off my coat . 
