He drove away any other idea , in fact . 
But for that ending a quite different anxiety arose , a new , incidental , but yet fatal and insoluble difficulty presented itself . 
If she were to say to him : `` I 'm yours ; take me away , '' how could he take her away ? 
Where had he the means , the money to do it ? 
It was just at this time that all sources of revenue from Fyodor Pavlovitch , doles which had gone on without interruption for so many years , ceased . 
Grushenka had money , of course , but with regard to this Mitya suddenly evinced extraordinary pride ; he wanted to carry her away and begin the new life with her himself , at his own expense , not at hers . 
He could not conceive of taking her money , and the very idea caused him a pang of intense repulsion . 
I wo n't enlarge on this fact or analyse it here , but confine myself to remarking that this was his attitude at the moment . 
All this may have arisen indirectly and unconsciously from the secret stings of his conscience for the money of Katerina Ivanovna that he had dishonestly appropriated . 
`` I 've been a scoundrel to one of them , and I shall be a scoundrel again to the other directly , '' was his feeling then , as he explained after : `` and when Grushenka knows , she wo n't care for such a scoundrel . '' 
Where then was he to get the means , where was he to get the fateful money ? 
Without it , all would be lost and nothing could be done , `` and only because I had n't the money . 
Oh , the shame of it ! '' 
To anticipate things : he did , perhaps , know where to get the money , knew , perhaps , where it lay at that moment . 
I will say no more of this here , as it will all be clear later . 
But his chief trouble , I must explain however obscurely , lay in the fact that to have that sum he knew of , to have the right to take it , he must first restore Katerina Ivanovna 's three thousand - if not , `` I 'm a common pick-pocket , I 'm a scoundrel , and I do n't want to begin a new life as a scoundrel , '' Mitya decided . 
And so he made up his mind to move heaven and earth to return Katerina Ivanovna that three thousand , and that first of all . 
The final stage of this decision , so to say , had been reached only during the last hours , that is , after his last interview with Alyosha , two days before , on the high-road , on the evening when Grushenka had insulted Katerina Ivanovna , and Mitya , after hearing Alyosha 's account of it , had admitted that he was a scoundrel , and told him to tell Katerina Ivanovna so , if it could be any comfort to her . 
After parting from his brother on that night , he had felt in his frenzy that it would be better `` to murder and rob someone than fail to pay my debt to Katya . 
I 'd rather everyone thought me a robber and a murderer ; I 'd rather go to Siberia than that Katya should have the right to say that I deceived her and stole her money , and used her money to run away with Grushenka and begin a new life ! 
That I ca n't do ! '' 
So Mitya decided , grinding his teeth , and he might well fancy at times that his brain would give way . 
But meanwhile he went on struggling ... . 
Strange to say , though one would have supposed there was nothing left for him but despair - for what chance had he , with nothing in the world , to raise such a sum ? 
- yet to the very end he persisted in hoping that he would get that three thousand , that the money would somehow come to him of itself , as though it might drop from heaven . 
That is just how it is with people who , like Dmitri , have never had anything to do with money , except to squander what has come to them by inheritance without any effort of their own , and have no notion how money is obtained . 
A whirl of the most fantastic notions took possession of his brain immediately after he had parted with Alyosha two days before , and threw his thoughts into a tangle of confusion . 
This is how it was he pitched first on a perfectly wild enterprise . 
And perhaps to men of that kind in such circumstances the most impossible , fantastic schemes occur first , and seem most practical . 
He suddenly determined to go to Samsonov , the merchant who was Grushenka 's protector , and to propose a `` scheme '' to him , and by means of it to obtain from him at once the whole of the sum required . 
Of the commercial value of his scheme he had no doubt , not the slightest , and was only uncertain how Samsonov would look upon his freak , supposing he were to consider it from any but the commercial point of view . 
Though Mitya knew the merchant by sight , he was not acquainted with him and had never spoken a word to him . 
But for some unknown reason he had long entertained the conviction that the old reprobate , who was lying at death 's door , would perhaps not at all object now to Grushenka 's securing a respectable position , and marrying a man `` to be depended upon . '' 
And he believed not only that he would not object , but that this was what he desired , and , if opportunity arose , that he would be ready to help . 
From some rumour , or perhaps from some stray word of Grushenka 's , he had gathered further that the old man would perhaps prefer him to Fyodor Pavlovitch for Grushenka . 
Possibly many of the readers of my novel will feel that in reckoning on such assistance , and being ready to take his bride , so to speak , from the hands of her protector , Dmitri showed great coarseness and want of delicacy . 
I will only observe that Mitya looked upon Grushenka 's past as something completely over . 
He looked on that past with infinite pity and resolved with all the fervour of his passion that when once Grushenka told him she loved him and would marry him , it would mean the beginning of a new Grushenka and a new Dmitri , free from every vice . 
They would forgive one another and would begin their lives afresh . 
As for Kuzma Samsonov , Dmitri looked upon him as a man who had exercised a fateful influence in that remote past of Grushenka 's , though she had never loved him , and who was now himself a thing of the past , completely done with , and , so to say , non-existent . 
Besides , Mitya hardly looked upon him as a man at all , for it was known to everyone in the town that he was only a shattered wreck , whose relations with Grushenka had changed their character and were now simply paternal , and that this had been so for a long time . 
In any case there was much simplicity on Mitya 's part in all this , for in spite of all his vices , he was a very simple-hearted man . 
It was an instance of this simplicity that Mitya was seriously persuaded that , being on the eve of his departure for the next world , old Kuzma must sincerely repent of his past relations with Grushenka , and that she had no more devoted friend and protector in the world than this , now harmless , old man . 
After his conversation with Alyosha , at the cross-roads , he hardly slept all night , and at ten o'clock next morning , he was at the house of Samsonov and telling the servant to announce him . 
It was a very large and gloomy old house of two stories , with a lodge and outhouses . 
In the lower story lived Samsonov 's two married sons with their families , his old sister , and his unmarried daughter . 
In the lodge lived two of his clerks , one of whom also had a large family . 
Both the lodge and the lower story were overcrowded , but the old man kept the upper floor to himself , and would not even let the daughter live there with him , though she waited upon him , and in spite of her asthma was obliged at certain fixed hours , and at any time he might call her , to run upstairs to him from below . 
This upper floor contained a number of large rooms kept purely for show , furnished in the old-fashioned merchant style , with long monotonous rows of clumsy mahogany chairs along the walls , with glass chandeliers under shades , and gloomy mirrors on the walls . 
All these rooms were entirely empty and unused , for the old man kept to one room , a small , remote bedroom , where he was waited upon by an old servant with a kerchief on her head , and by a lad , who used to sit on the locker in the passage . 
Owing to his swollen legs , the old man could hardly walk at all , and was only rarely lifted from his leather armchair , when the old woman supporting him led him up and down the room once or twice . 
He was morose and taciturn even with this old woman . 
When he was informed of the arrival of the `` captain , '' he at once refused to see him . 
But Mitya persisted and sent his name up again . 
Samsonov questioned the lad minutely : What he looked like ? 
Whether he was drunk ? 
Was he going to make a row ? 
The answer he received was : that he was sober , but would n't go away . 
The old man again refused to see him . 
Then Mitya , who had foreseen this , and purposely brought pencil and paper with him , wrote clearly on the piece of paper the words : `` On most important business closely concerning Agrafena Alexandrovna , '' and sent it up to the old man . 
After thinking a little Samsonov told the lad to take the visitor to the drawing-room , and sent the old woman downstairs with a summons to his younger son to come upstairs to him at once . 
This younger son , a man over six foot and of exceptional physical strength , who was closely-shaven and dressed in the European style , though his father still wore a kaftan and a beard , came at once without a comment . 
All the family trembled before the father . 
The old man had sent for this giant , not because he was afraid of the `` captain '' -LRB- he was by no means of a timorous temper -RRB- , but in order to have a witness in case of any emergency . 
Supported by his son and the servant lad , he waddled at last into the drawing-room . 
It may be assumed that he felt considerable curiosity . 
The drawing-room in which Mitya was awaiting him was a vast , dreary room that laid a weight of depression on the heart . 
It had a double row of windows , a gallery , marbled walls , and three immense chandeliers with glass lustres covered with shades . 
Mitya was sitting on a little chair at the entrance , awaiting his fate with nervous impatience . 
When the old man appeared at the opposite door , seventy feet away , Mitya jumped up at once , and with his long , military stride walked to meet him . 
Mitya was well dressed , in a frock-coat , buttoned up , with a round hat and black gloves in his hands , just as he had been three days before at the elder 's , at the family meeting with his father and brothers . 
The old man waited for him , standing dignified and unbending , and Mitya felt at once that he had looked him through and through as he advanced . 
Mitya was greatly impressed , too , with Samsonov 's immensely swollen face . 
His lower lip , which had always been thick , hung down now , looking like a bun . 
He bowed to his guest in dignified silence , motioned him to a low chair by the sofa , and , leaning on his son 's arm he began lowering himself on to the sofa opposite , groaning painfully , so that Mitya , seeing his painful exertions , immediately felt remorseful and sensitively conscious of his insignificance in the presence of the dignified person he had ventured to disturb . 
`` What is it you want of me , sir ? '' 
said the old man , deliberately , distinctly , severely , but courteously , when he was at last seated . 
Mitya started , leapt up , but sat down again . 
Then he began at once speaking with loud , nervous haste , gesticulating , and in a positive frenzy . 
He was unmistakably a man driven into a corner , on the brink of ruin , catching at the last straw , ready to sink if he failed . 
Old Samsonov probably grasped all this in an instant , though his face remained cold and immovable as a statue 's . 
`` Most honoured sir , Kuzma Kuzmitch , you have no doubt heard more than once of my disputes with my father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , who robbed me of my inheritance from my mother ... seeing the whole town is gossiping about it ... for here everyone 's gossiping of what they should n't ... and besides , it might have reached you through Grushenka ... I beg your pardon , through Agrafena Alexandrovna ... Agrafena Alexandrovna , the lady of whom I have the highest respect and esteem ... '' So Mitya began , and broke down at the first sentence . 
We will not reproduce his speech word for word , but will only summarise the gist of it . 
Three months ago , he said , he had of express intention -LRB- Mitya purposely used these words instead of `` intentionally '' -RRB- consulted a lawyer in the chief town of the province , `` a distinguished lawyer , Kuzma Kuzmitch , Pavel Pavlovitch Korneplodov . 
You have perhaps heard of him ? 
A man of vast intellect , the mind of a statesman ... he knows you , too ... spoke of you in the highest terms ... '' Mitya broke down again . 
But these breaks did not deter him . 
He leapt instantly over the gaps , and struggled on and on . 
This Korneplodov , after questioning him minutely , and inspecting the documents he was able to bring him -LRB- Mitya alluded somewhat vaguely to these documents , and slurred over the subject with special haste -RRB- , reported that they certainly might take proceedings concerning the village of Tchermashnya , which ought , he said , to have come to him , Mitya , from his mother , and so checkmate the old villain , his father ... `` because every door was not closed and justice might still find a loophole . '' 
In fact , he might reckon on an additional sum of six or even seven thousand roubles from Fyodor Pavlovitch , as Tchermashnya was worth , at least , twenty-five thousand , he might say twenty-eight thousand , in fact , `` thirty , thirty , Kuzma Kuzmitch , and would you believe it , I did n't get seventeen from that heartless man ! '' 
So he , Mitya , had thrown the business up for the time , knowing nothing about the law , but on coming here was struck dumb by a cross - claim made upon him -LRB- here Mitya went adrift again and again took a flying leap forward -RRB- , `` so will not you , excellent and honoured Kuzma Kuzmitch , be willing to take up all my claims against that unnatural monster , and pay me a sum down of only three thousand ? 
... You see , you can not , in any case , lose over it . 
On my honour , my honour , I swear that . 
Quite the contrary , you may make six or seven thousand instead of three . '' 
Above all , he wanted this concluded that very day . 
`` I 'll do the business with you at a notary 's , or whatever it is ... in fact , I 'm ready to do anything . . . 
I 'll hand over all the deeds ... whatever you want , sign anything ... and we could draw up the agreement at once ... and if it were possible , if it were only possible , that very morning ... . 
You could pay me that three thousand , for there is n't a capitalist in this town to compare with you , and so would save me from ... save me , in fact ... for a good , I might say an honourable action ... . 
For I cherish the most honourable feelings for a certain person , whom you know well , and care for as a father . 
I would not have come , indeed , if it had not been as a father . 
And , indeed , it 's a struggle of three in this business , for it 's fate - that 's a fearful thing , Kuzma Kuzmitch ! 
A tragedy , Kuzma Kuzmitch , a tragedy ! 
And as you 've dropped out long ago , it 's a tug-of-war between two . 
I 'm expressing it awkwardly , perhaps , but I 'm not a literary man . 
You see , I 'm on the one side , and that monster on the other . 
So you must choose . 
It 's either I or the monster . 
It all lies in your hands - . 
the fate of three lives , and the happiness of two ... . 
Excuse me , I 'm making a mess of it , but you understand ... I see from your venerable eyes that you understand ... and if you do n't understand , I 'm done for ... so you see ! '' 
Mitya broke off his clumsy speech with that , `` so you see ! '' 
and jumping up from his seat , awaited the answer to his foolish proposal . 
At the last phrase he had suddenly become hopelessly aware that it had all fallen flat , above all , that he had been talking utter nonsense . 
`` How strange it is ! 
On the way here it seemed all right , and now it 's nothing but nonsense . '' 
The idea suddenly dawned on his despairing mind . 
All the while he had been talking , the old man sat motionless , watching him with an icy expression in his eyes . 
After keeping him for a moment in suspense , Kuzma Kuzmitch pronounced at last in the most positive and chilling tone : `` Excuse me , we do n't undertake such business . '' 
Mitya suddenly felt his legs growing weak under him . 
`` What am I to do now , Kuzma Kuzmitch ? '' 
he muttered , with a pale smile . 
`` I suppose it 's all up with me - what do you think ? '' 
`` Excuse me ... '' Mitya remained standing , staring motionless . 
He suddenly noticed a movement in the old man 's face . 
He started . 
`` You see , sir , business of that sort 's not in our line , '' said the old man slowly . 
`` There 's the court , and the lawyers - it 's a perfect misery . 
But if you like , there is a man here you might apply to . '' 
`` Good heavens ! 
Who is it ? 
You 're my salvation , Kuzma Kuzmitch , '' faltered Mitya . 
`` He does n't live here , and he 's not here just now . 
He is a peasant , he does business in timber . 
His name is Lyagavy . 
He 's been haggling with Fyodor Pavlovitch for the last year , over your copse at Tchermashnya . 
They ca n't agree on the price , maybe you 've heard ? 
Now he 's come back again and is staying with the priest at Ilyinskoe , about twelve versts from the Volovya station . 
He wrote to me , too , about the business of the copse , asking my advice . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch means to go and see him himself . 
So if you were to be beforehand with Fyodor Pavlovitch and to make Lyagavy the offer you 've made me , he might possibly - '' `` A brilliant idea ! '' 
Mitya interrupted ecstatically . 
`` He 's the very man , it would just suit him . 
He 's haggling with him for it , being asked too much , and here he would have all the documents entitling him to the property itself . 
Ha ha ha ! '' 
And Mitya suddenly went off into his short , wooden laugh , startling Samsonov . 
`` How can I thank you , Kuzma Kuzmitch ? '' 
cried Mitya effusively . 
`` Do n't mention it , '' said Samsonov , inclining his head . 
`` But you do n't know , you 've saved me . 
Oh , it was a true presentiment brought me to you ... . 
So now to this priest ! 
`` No need of thanks . '' 
`` I 'll make haste and fly there . 
I 'm afraid I 've overtaxed your strength . 
I shall never forget it . 
It 's a Russian says that , Kuzma Kuzmitch , a R-r-russian ! '' 
`` To be sure ! '' 
Mitya seized his hand to press it , but there was a malignant gleam in the old man 's eye . 
Mitya drew back his hand , but at once blamed himself for his mistrustfulness . 
`` It 's because he 's tired , '' he thought . 
`` For her sake ! 
For her sake , Kuzma Kuzmitch ! 
You understand that it 's for her , '' he cried , his voice ringing through the room . 
He bowed , turned sharply round , and with the same long stride walked to the door without looking back . 
He was trembling with delight . 
`` Everything was on the verge of ruin and my guardian angel saved me , '' was the thought in his mind . 
And if such a business man as Samsonov -LRB- a most worthy old man , and what dignity ! -RRB- 
had suggested this course , then ... then success was assured . 
He would fly off immediately . 
`` I will be back before night , I shall be back at night and the thing is done . 
Could the old man have been laughing at me ? '' 
exclaimed Mitya , as he strode towards his lodging . 
He could , of course , imagine nothing but that the advice was practical `` from such a business man '' with an understanding of the business , with an understanding of this Lyagavy -LRB- curious surname ! -RRB- . 
Or - the old man was laughing at him . 
Alas ! 
The second alternative was the correct one . 
Long afterwards , when the catastrophe had happened , old Samsonov himself confessed , laughing , that he had made a fool of the `` captain . '' 
He was a cold , spiteful and sarcastic man , liable to violent antipathies . 
Whether it was the `` captain 's '' excited face , or the foolish conviction of the `` rake and spendthrift , '' that he , Samsonov , could be taken in by such a cock-and-bull story as his scheme , or his jealousy of Grushenka , in whose name this `` scapegrace '' had rushed in on him with such a tale to get money which worked on the old man , I ca n't tell . 
But at the instant when Mitya stood before him , feeling his legs grow weak under him , and frantically exclaiming that he was ruined , at that moment the old man looked at him with intense spite , and resolved to make a laughing-stock of him . 
When Mitya had gone , Kuzma Kuzmitch , white with rage , turned to his son and bade him see to it that that beggar be never seen again , and never admitted even into the yard , or else he 'd - He did not utter his threat . 
But even his son , who often saw him enraged , trembled with fear . 
For a whole hour afterwards , the old man was shaking with anger , and by evening he was worse , and sent for the doctor . 
Lyagavy SO he must drive at full speed , and he had not the money for horses . 
He had forty copecks , and that was all , all that was left after so many years of prosperity ! 
But he had at home an old silver watch which had long ceased to go . 
He snatched it up and carried it to a Jewish watch maker who had a shop in the market-place . 
The Jew gave him six roubles for it . 
`` And I did n't expect that cried Mitya , ecstatically . 
-LRB- He was still in a state of ecstasy . -RRB- 
He seized his six roubles and ran home . 
At home he borrowed three roubles from the people of the house , who loved him so much that they were pleased to give it him , though it was all they had . 
Mitya in his excitement told them on the spot that his fate would be decided that day , and he described , in desperate haste , the whole scheme he had put before Samsonov , the latter 's decision , his own hopes for the future , and so on . 
These people had been told many of their lodger 's secrets before , and so looked upon him as a gentleman who was not at all proud , and almost one of themselves . 
Having thus collected nine roubles Mitya sent for posting-horses to take him to the Volovya station . 
This was how the fact came to be remembered and established that `` at midday , on the day before the event , Mitya had not a farthing , and that he had sold his watch to get money and had borrowed three roubles from his landlord , all in the presence of witnesses . '' 
I note this fact , later on it will be apparent why I do so . 
Though he was radiant with the joyful anticipation that he would at last solve all his difficulties , yet , as he drew near Volovya station , he trembled at the thought of what Grushenka might be doing in his absence . 
What if she made up her mind to-day to go to Fyodor Pavlovitch ? 
This was why he had gone off without telling her and why he left orders with his landlady not to let out where he had gone , if anyone came to inquire for him . 
`` I must , I must get back to-night , '' he repeated , as he was jolted along in the cart , `` and I dare say I shall have to bring this Lyagavy back here ... to draw up the deed . '' 
So mused Mitya , with a throbbing heart , but alas ! 
his dreams were not fated to be carried out . 
To begin with , he was late , taking a short cut from Volovya station which turned out to be eighteen versts instead of twelve . 
Secondly , he did not find the priest at home at Ilyinskoe ; he had gone off to a neighbouring village . 
While Mitya , setting off there with the same exhausted horses , was looking for him , it was almost dark . 
The priest , a shy and amiable looking little man , informed him at once that though Lyagavy had been staying with him at first , he was now at Suhoy Possyolok , that he was staying the night in the forester 's cottage , as he was buying timber there too . 
At Mitya 's urgent request that he would take him to Lyagavy at once , and by so doing `` save him , so to speak , '' the priest agreed , after some demur , to conduct him to Suhoy Possyolok ; his curiosity was obviously aroused . 
But , unluckily , he advised their going on foot , as it would not be `` much over '' a verst . 
Mitya , of course , agreed , and marched off with his yard-long strides , so that the poor priest almost ran after him . 
He was a very cautious man , though not old . 
Mitya at once began talking to him , too , of his plans , nervously and excitedly asking advice in regard to Lyagavy , and talking all the way . 
The priest listened attentively , but gave little advice . 
He turned off Mitya 's questions with : `` I do n't know . 
Ah , I ca n't say . 
How can I tell ? '' 
and so on . 
When Mitya began to speak of his quarrel with his father over his inheritance , the priest was positively alarmed , as he was in some way dependent on Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
He inquired , however , with surprise , why he called the peasant-trader Gorstkin , Lyagavy , and obligingly explained to Mitya that , though the man 's name really was Lyagavy , he was never called so , as he would be grievously offended at the name , and that he must be sure to call him Gorstkin , `` or you 'll do nothing with him ; he wo n't even listen to you , '' said the priest in conclusion . 
Mitya was somewhat surprised for a moment , and explained that that was what Samsonov had called him . 
On hearing this fact , the priest dropped the subject , though he would have done well to put into words his doubt whether , if Samsonov had sent him to that peasant , calling him Lyagavy , there was not something wrong about it and he was turning him into ridicule . 
But Mitya had no time to pause over such trifles . 
He hurried , striding along , and only when he reached Suhoy Possyolok did he realise that they had come not one verst , nor one and a half , but at least three . 
This annoyed him , but he controlled himself . 
They went into the hut . 
The forester lived in one half of the hut , and Gorstkin was lodging in the other , the better room the other side of the passage . 
They went into that room and lighted a tallow candle . 
The hut was extremely overheated . 
On the table there was a samovar that had gone out , a tray with cups , an empty rum bottle , a bottle of vodka partly full , and some half-eaten crusts of wheaten bread . 
The visitor himself lay stretched at full length on the bench , with his coat crushed up under his head for a pillow , snoring heavily . 
Mitya stood in perplexity . 
`` Of course , I must wake him . 
My business is too important . 
I 've come in such haste . 
I 'm in a hurry to get back to-day , '' he said in great agitation . 
But the priest and the forester stood in silence , not giving their opinion . 
Mitya went up and began trying to wake him himself ; he tried vigorously , but the sleeper did not wake . 
`` He 's drunk , '' Mitya decided . 
`` Good Lord ! 
What am I to do ? 
What am I to do ? '' 
And , terribly impatient , he began pulling him by the arms , by the legs , shaking his head , lifting him up and making him sit on the bench . 
Yet , after prolonged exertions , he could only succeed in getting the drunken man to utter absurd grunts , and violent , but inarticulate oaths . 
`` No , you 'd better wait a little , '' the priest pronounced at last , `` for he 's obviously not in a fit state . '' 
`` He 's been drinking the whole day , '' the forester chimed in . 
`` Good heavens ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` If only you knew how important it is to me and how desperate I am ! '' 
`` No , you 'd better wait till morning , '' the priest repeated . 
`` Till morning ? 
Mercy ! 
that 's impossible ! '' 
And in his despair he was on the point of attacking the sleeping man again , but stopped short at once , realising the uselessness of his efforts . 
The priest said nothing , the sleepy forester looked gloomy . 
`` What terrible tragedies real life contrives for people , '' said Mitya , in complete despair . 
The perspiration was streaming down his face . 
The priest seized the moment to put before him , very reasonably , that , even if he succeeded in wakening the man , he would still be drunk and incapable of conversation . 
`` And your business is important , '' he said , `` so you 'd certainly better put it off till morning . '' 
With a gesture of despair Mitya agreed . 
`` Father , I will stay here with a light , and seize the favourable moment . 
As soon as he wakes I 'll begin . 
I 'll pay you for the light , '' he said to the forester , `` for the night 's lodging , too ; you 'll remember Dmitri Karamazov . 
Only Father , I do n't know what we 're to do with you . 
Where will you sleep ? '' 
`` No , I 'm going home . 
I 'll take his horse and get home , '' he said , indicating the forester . 
`` And now I 'll say good-bye . 
I wish you all success . '' 
So it was settled . 
The priest rode off on the forester 's horse , delighted to escape , though he shook his head uneasily , wondering whether he ought not next day to inform his benefactor Fyodor Pavlovitch of this curious incident , `` or he may in an unlucky hour hear of it , be angry , and withdraw his favour . '' 
The forester , scratching himself , went back to his room without a word , and Mitya sat on the bench to `` catch the favourable moment , '' as he expressed it . 
Profound dejection clung about his soul like a heavy mist . 
A profound , intense dejection ! 
He sat thinking , but could reach no conclusion . 
The candle burnt dimly , a cricket chirped ; it became insufferably close in the overheated room . 
He suddenly pictured the garden , the path behind the garden , the door of his father 's house mysteriously opening and Grushenka running in . 
He leapt up from the bench . 
`` It 's a tragedy ! '' 
he said , grinding his teeth . 
Mechanically he went up to the sleeping man and looked in his face . 
He was a lean , middle-aged peasant , with a very long face , flaxen curls , and a long , thin , reddish beard , wearing a blue cotton shirt and a black waistcoat , from the pocket of which peeped the chain of a silver watch . 
Mitya looked at his face with intense hatred , and for some unknown reason his curly hair particularly irritated him . 
What was insufferably humiliating was that , after leaving things of such importance and making such sacrifices , he , Mitya , utterly worn out , should with business of such urgency be standing over this dolt on whom his whole fate depended , while he snored as though there were nothing the matter , as though he 'd dropped from another planet . 
`` Oh , the irony of fate ! '' 
cried Mitya , and , quite losing his head , he fell again to rousing the tipsy peasant . 
He roused him with a sort of ferocity , pulled at him , pushed him , even beat him ; but after five minutes of vain exertions , he returned to his bench in helpless despair , and sat down . 
`` Stupid ! 
Stupid ! '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` And how dishonourable it all is ! '' 
something made him add . 
His head began to ache horribly . 
`` Should he fling it up and go away altogether ? '' 
he wondered . 
`` No , wait till to-morrow now . 
I 'll stay on purpose . 
What else did I come for ? 
Besides , I 've no means of going . 
How am I to get away from here now ? 
Oh , the idiocy of it '' But his head ached more and more . 
He sat without moving , and unconsciously dozed off and fell asleep as he sat . 
He seemed to have slept for two hours or more . 
He was waked up by his head aching so unbearably that he could have screamed . 
There was a hammering in his temples , and the top of his head ached . 
It was a long time before he could wake up fully and understand what had happened to him . 
At last he realised that the room was full of charcoal fumes from the stove , and that he might die of suffocation . 
And the drunken peasant still lay snoring . 
The candle guttered and was about to go out . 
Mitya cried out , and ran staggering across the passage into the forester 's room . 
The forester waked up at once , but hearing that the other room was full of fumes , to Mitya 's surprise and annoyance , accepted the fact with strange unconcern , though he did go to see to it . 
`` But he 's dead , he 's dead ! 
and ... what am I to do then ? '' 
cried Mitya frantically . 
They threw open the doors , opened a window and the chimney . 
Mitya brought a pail of water from the passage . 
First he wetted his own head , then , finding a rag of some sort , dipped it into the water , and put it on Lyagavy 's head . 
The forester still treated the matter contemptuously , and when he opened the window said grumpily : `` It 'll be all right , now . '' 
He went back to sleep , leaving Mitya a lighted lantern . 
Mitya fussed about the drunken peasant for half an hour , wetting his head , and gravely resolved not to sleep all night . 
But he was so worn out that when he sat down for a moment to take breath , he closed his eyes , unconsciously stretched himself full length on the bench and slept like the dead . 
It was dreadfully late when he waked . 
It was somewhere about nine o'clock . 
The sun was shining brightly in the two little windows of the hut . 
The curly-headed peasant was sitting on the bench and had his coat on . 
He had another samovar and another bottle in front of him . 
Yesterday 's bottle had already been finished , and the new one was more than half empty . 
Mitya jumped up and saw at once that the cursed peasant was drunk again , hopelessly and incurably . 
He stared at him for a moment with wide opened eyes . 
The peasant was silently and slyly watching him , with insulting composure , and even a sort of contemptuous condescension , so Mitya fancied . 
He rushed up to him . 
`` Excuse me , you see ... I. . . 
you 've most likely heard from the forester here in the hut . 
I 'm Lieutenant Dmitri Karamazov , the son of the old Karamazov whose copse you are buying . '' 
`` That 's a lie ! '' 
said the peasant , calmly and confidently . 
`` A lie ? 
You know Fyodor Pavlovitch ? '' 
`` I do n't know any of your Fyodor Pavlovitches , '' said the peasant , speaking thickly . 
`` You 're bargaining with him for the copse , for the copse . 
Do wake up , and collect yourself . 
Father Pavel of Ilyinskoe brought me here . 
You wrote to Samsonov , and he has sent me to you , '' Mitya gasped breathlessly . 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
Lyagavy blurted out again . 
Mitya 's legs went cold . 
`` For mercy 's sake ! 
It is n't a joke ! 
You 're drunk , perhaps . 
Yet you can speak and understand ... or else ... I understand nothing ! '' 
`` You 're a painter ! '' 
`` For mercy 's sake ! 
I 'm Karamazov , Dmitri Karamazov . 
I have an offer to make you , an advantageous offer ... very advantageous offer , concerning the copse ! '' 
The peasant stroked his beard importantly . 
`` No , you 've contracted for the job and turned out a scamp . 
You 're a scoundrel ! '' 
`` I assure you you 're mistaken , '' cried Mitya , wringing his hands in despair . 
The peasant still stroked his beard , and suddenly screwed up his eyes cunningly . 
`` No , you show me this : you tell me the law that allows roguery . 
D'you hear ? 
You 're a scoundrel ! 
Do you understand that ? '' 
Mitya stepped back gloomily , and suddenly `` something seemed to hit him on the head , '' as he said afterwards . 
In an instant a light seemed to dawn in his mind , `` a light was kindled and I grasped it all . '' 
He stood , stupefied , wondering how he , after all a man of intelligence , could have yielded to such folly , have been led into such an adventure , and have kept it up for almost twenty-four hours , fussing round this Lyagavy , wetting his head . 
`` Why , the man 's drunk , dead drunk , and he 'll go on drinking now for a week ; what 's the use of waiting here ? 
And what if Samsonov sent me here on purpose ? 
What if she - ? 
Oh God , what have I done ? '' 
The peasant sat watching him and grinning . 
Another time Mitya might have killed the fool in a fury , but now he felt as weak as a child . 
He went quietly to the bench , took up his overcoat , put it on without a word , and went out of the hut . 
He did not find the forester in the next room ; there was no one there . 
He took fifty copecks in small change out of his pocket and put them on the table for his night 's lodging , the candle , and the trouble he had given . 
Coming out of the hut he saw nothing but forest all round . 
He walked at hazard , not knowing which way to turn out of the hut , to the right or to the left . 
Hurrying there the evening before with the priest , he had not noticed the road . 
He had no revengeful feeling for anybody , even for Samsonov , in his heart . 
He strode along a narrow forest path , aimless , dazed , without heeding where he was going . 
A child could have knocked him down , so weak was he in body and soul . 
He got out of the forest somehow , however , and a vista of fields , bare after the harvest , stretched as far as the eye could see . 
`` What despair ! 
What death all round ! '' 
he repeated , striding on and on . 
He was saved by meeting an old merchant who was being driven across country in a hired trap . 
When he overtook him , Mitya asked the way and it turned out that the old merchant , too , was going to Volovya . 
After some discussion Mitya got into the trap . 
Three hours later they arrived . 
At Volovya , Mitya at once ordered posting-horses to drive to the town , and suddenly realised that he was appallingly hungry . 
While the horses were being harnessed , an omelette was prepared for him . 
He ate it all in an instant , ate a huge hunk of bread , ate a sausage , and swallowed three glasses of vodka . 
After eating , his spirits and his heart grew lighter . 
He flew towards the town , urged on the driver , and suddenly made a new and `` unalterable '' plan to procure that `` accursed money '' before evening . 
`` And to think , only to think that a man 's life should be ruined for the sake of that paltry three thousand ! '' 
he cried , contemptuously . 
`` I 'll settle it to-day . '' 
And if it had not been for the thought of Grushenka and of what might have happened to her , which never left him , he would perhaps have become quite cheerful again ... . 
But the thought of her was stabbing him to the heart every moment , like a sharp knife . 
At last they arrived , and Mitya at once ran to Grushenka . 
Gold Mines THIS was the visit of Mitya of which Grushenka had spoken to Rakitin with such horror . 
She was just then expecting the `` message , '' and was much relieved that Mitya had not been to see her that day or the day before . 
She hoped that `` please God he wo n't come till I 'm gone away , '' and he suddenly burst in on her . 
The rest we know already . 
To get him off her hands she suggested at once that he should walk with her to Samsonov 's , where she said she absolutely must go `` to settle his accounts , '' and when Mitya accompanied her at once , she said good-bye to him at the gate , making him promise to come at twelve o'clock to take her home again . 
Mitya , too , was delighted at this arrangement . 
If she was sitting at Samsonov 's she could not be going to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's , `` if only she 's not lying , '' he added at once . 
But he thought she was not lying from what he saw . 
He was that sort of jealous man who , in the absence of the beloved woman , at once invents all sorts of awful fancies of what may be happening to her , and how she may be betraying him , but , when shaken , heartbroken , convinced of her faithlessness , he runs back to her , at the first glance at her face , her gay , laughing , affectionate face , he revives at once , lays aside all suspicion and with joyful shame abuses himself for his jealousy . 
After leaving Grushenka at the gate he rushed home . 
Oh , he had so much still to do that day ! 
But a load had been lifted from his heart , anyway . 
`` Now I must only make haste and find out from Smerdyakov whether anything happened there last night , whether , by any chance , she went to Fyodor Pavlovitch ; ough ! '' 
floated through his mind . 
Before he had time to reach his lodging , jealousy had surged up again in his restless heart . 
Jealousy ! 
`` Othello was not jealous , he was trustful , '' observed Pushkin . 
And that remark alone is enough to show the deep insight of our great poet . 
Othello 's soul was shattered and his whole outlook clouded simply because his ideal was destroyed . 
But Othello did not begin hiding , spying , peeping . 
He was trustful , on the contrary . 
He had to be led up , pushed on , excited with great difficulty before he could entertain the idea of deceit . 
The truly jealous man is not like that . 
It is impossible to picture to oneself the shame and moral degradation to which the jealous man can descend without a qualm of conscience . 
And yet it 's not as though the jealous were all vulgar and base souls . 
On the contrary , a man of lofty feelings , whose love is pure and full of self-sacrifice , may yet hide under tables , bribe the vilest people , and be familiar with the lowest ignominy of spying and eavesdropping . 
Othello was incapable of making up his mind to faithlessness - not incapable of forgiving it , but of making up his mind to it - though his soul was as innocent and free from malice as a babe 's . 
It is not so with the really jealous man . 
It is hard to imagine what some jealous men can make up their mind to and overlook , and what they can forgive ! 
The jealous are the readiest of all to forgive , and all women know it . 
The jealous man can forgive extraordinarily quickly -LRB- though , of course , after a violent scene -RRB- , and he is able to forgive infidelity almost conclusively proved , the very kisses and embraces he has seen , if only he can somehow be convinced that it has all been `` for the last time , '' and that his rival will vanish from that day forward , will depart to the ends of the earth , or that he himself will carry her away somewhere , where that dreaded rival will not get near her . 
Of course the reconciliation is only for an hour . 
For , even if the rival did disappear next day , he would invent another one and would be jealous of him . 
And one might wonder what there was in a love that had to be so watched over , what a love could be worth that needed such strenuous guarding . 
But that the jealous will never understand . 
And yet among them are men of noble hearts . 
It is remarkable , too , that those very men of noble hearts , standing hidden in some cupboard , listening and spying , never feel the stings of conscience at that moment , anyway , though they understand clearly enough with their `` noble hearts '' the shameful depths to which they have voluntarily sunk . 
At the sight of Grushenka , Mitya 's jealousy vanished , and , for an instant he became trustful and generous , and positively despised himself for his evil feelings . 
But it only proved that , in his love for the woman , there was an element of something far higher than he himself imagined , that it was not only a sensual passion , not only the `` curve of her body , '' of which he had talked to Alyosha . 
But , as soon as Grushenka had gone , Mitya began to suspect her of all the low cunning of faithlessness , and he felt no sting of conscience at it . 
And so jealousy surged up in him again . 
He had , in any case , to make haste . 
The first thing to be done was to get hold of at least a small , temporary loan of money . 
The nine roubles had almost all gone on his expedition . 
And , as we all know , one ca n't take a step without money . 
But he had thought over in the cart where he could get a loan . 
He had a brace of fine duelling pistols in a case , which he had not pawned till then because he prized them above all his possessions . 
In the Metropolis tavern he had some time since made acquaintance with a young official and had learnt that this very opulent bachelor was passionately fond of weapons . 
He used to buy pistols , revolvers , daggers , hang them on his wall and show them to acquaintances . 
He prided himself on them , and was quite a specialist on the mechanism of the revolver . 
Mitya , without stopping to think , went straight to him , and offered to pawn his pistols to him for ten roubles . 
The official , delighted , began trying to persuade him to sell them outright . 
But Mitya would not consent , so the young man gave him ten roubles , protesting that nothing would induce him to take interest . 
They parted friends . 
Mitya was in haste ; he rushed towards Fyodor Pavlovitch 's by the back way , to his arbour , to get hold of Smerdyakov as soon as possible . 
In this way the fact was established that three or four hours before a certain event , of which I shall speak later on , Mitya had not a farthing , and pawned for ten roubles a possession he valued , though , three hours later , he was in possession of thousands ... . 
But I am anticipating . 
From Marya Kondratyevna -LRB- the woman living near Fyodor Pavlovitch 's -RRB- he learned the very disturbing fact of Smerdyakov 's illness . 
He heard the story of his fall in the cellar , his fit , the doctor 's visit , Fyodor Pavlovitch 's anxiety ; he heard with interest , too , that his brother Ivan had set off that morning for Moscow . 
`` Then he must have driven through Volovya before me , '' thought Dmitri , but he was terribly distressed about Smerdyakov . 
`` What will happen now ? 
Who 'll keep watch for me ? 
Who 'll bring me word ? '' 
he thought . 
He began greedily questioning the women whether they had seen anything the evening before . 
They quite understood what he was trying to find out , and completely reassured him . 
No one had been there . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch had been there that night ; everything had been perfectly as usual . 
Mitya grew thoughtful . 
He would certainly have to keep watch to-day , but where ? 
Here or at Samsonov 's gate ? 
He decided that he must be on the lookout both here and there , and meanwhile ... meanwhile ... The difficulty was that he had to carry out the new plan that he had made on the journey back . 
He was sure of its success , but he must not delay acting upon it . 
Mitya resolved to sacrifice an hour to it : `` In an hour I shall know everything , I shall settle everything , and then , then , then , first of all to Samsonov 's . 
I 'll inquire whether Grushenka 's there and instantly be back here again , stay till eleven , and then to Samsonov 's again to bring her home . '' 
This was what he decided . 
He flew home , washed , combed his hair , brushed his clothes , dressed , and went to Madame Hohlakov 's . 
Alas ! 
he had built his hopes on her . 
He had resolved to borrow three thousand from that lady . 
And what was more , he felt suddenly convinced that she would not refuse to lend it to him . 
It may be wondered why , if he felt so certain , he had not gone to her at first , one of his own sort , so to speak , instead of to Samsonov , a man he did not know , who was not of his own class , and to whom he hardly knew how to speak . 
But the fact was that he had never known Madame Hohlakov well , and had seen nothing of her for the last month , and that he knew she could not endure him . 
She had detested him from the first because he was engaged to Katerina Ivanovna , while she had , for some reason , suddenly conceived the desire that Katerina Ivanovna should throw him over , and marry the `` charming , chivalrously refined Ivan , who had such excellent manners . '' 
Mitya 's manners she detested . 
Mitya positively laughed at her , and had once said about her that she was just as lively and at her ease as she was uncultivated . 
But that morning in the cart a brilliant idea had struck him : `` If she is so anxious I should not marry Katerina Ivanovna '' -LRB- and he knew she was positively hysterical upon the subject -RRB- `` why should she refuse me now that three thousand , just to enable me to leave Katya and get away from her for ever . 
These spoilt fine ladies , if they set their hearts on anything , will spare no expense to satisfy their caprice . 
Besides , she 's so rich , '' Mitya argued . 
As for his `` plan '' it was just the same as before ; it consisted of the offer of his rights to Tchermashnya - but not with a commercial object , as it had been with Samsonov , not trying to allure the lady with the possibility of making a profit of six or seven thousand - but simply as a security for the debt . 
As he worked out this new idea , Mitya was enchanted with it , but so it always was with him in all his undertakings , in all his sudden decisions . 
He gave himself up to every new idea with passionate enthusiasm . 
Yet , when he mounted the steps of Madame Hohlakov 's house he felt a shiver of fear run down his spine . 
At that moment he saw fully , as a mathematical certainty , that this was his last hope , that if this broke down , nothing else was left him in the world but to `` rob and murder someone for the three thousand . '' 
It was half-past seven when he rang at the bell . 
At first fortune seemed to smile upon him . 
As soon as he was announced he was received with extraordinary rapidity . 
`` As though she were waiting for me , '' thought Mitya , and as soon as he had been led to the drawing-room , the lady of the house herself ran in , and declared at once that she was expecting him . 
`` I was expecting you ! 
I was expecting you ! 
Though I 'd no reason to suppose you would come to see me , as you will admit yourself . 
Yet , I did expect you . 
You may marvel at my instinct , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , but I was convinced all the morning that you would come . '' 
`` That is certainly wonderful , madam , '' observed Mitya , sitting down limply , `` but I have come to you on a matter of great importance ... . 
On a matter of supreme importance for me , that is , madam ... for me alone ... and I hasten - '' `` I know you 've come on most important business . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch ; it 's not a case of presentiment , no reactionary harking back to the miraculous -LRB- have you heard about Father Zossima ? -RRB- . 
This is a case of mathematics : you could n't help coming , after all that has passed with Katerina Ivanovna ; you could n't , you could n't , that 's a mathematical certainty . '' 
`` The realism of actual life , madam , that 's what it is . 
But allow me to explain - '' `` Realism indeed , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm all for realism now . 
I 've seen too much of miracles . 
You 've heard that Father Zossima is dead ? '' 
`` No , madam , it 's the first time I 've heard of it . '' 
Mitya was a little surprised . 
The image of Alyosha rose to his mind . 
`` Last night , and only imagine - '' `` Madam , '' said Mitya , `` I can imagine nothing except that I 'm in a desperate position , and that if you do n't help me , everything will come to grief , and I first of all . 
Excuse me for the triviality of the expression , but I 'm in a fever - '' `` I know , I know that you 're in a fever . 
You could hardly fail to be , and whatever you may say to me , I know beforehand . 
I have long been thinking over your destiny , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , I am watching over it and studying it ... . 
Oh , believe me , I 'm an experienced doctor of the soul , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` Madam , if you are an experienced doctor , I 'm certainly an experienced patient , '' said Mitya , with an effort to be polite , `` and I feel that if you are watching over my destiny in this way , you will come to my help in my ruin , and so allow me , at least to explain to you the plan with which I have ventured to come to you ... and what I am hoping of you ... . 
I have come , madam - '' `` Do n't explain it . 
It 's of secondary importance . 
But as for help , you 're not the first I have helped , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
You have most likely heard of my cousin , Madame Belmesov . 
Her husband was ruined , ` had come to grief , ' as you characteristically express it , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I recommended him to take to horse-breeding , and now he 's doing well . 
Have you any idea of horse-breeding , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` Not the faintest , madam ; ah , madam , not the faintest ! '' 
cried Mitya , in nervous impatience , positively starting from his seat . 
`` I simply implore you , madam , to listen to me . 
Only give me two minutes of free speech that I may just explain to you everything , the whole plan with which I have come . 
Besides , I am short of time . 
I 'm in a fearful hurry , '' Mitya cried hysterically , feeling that she was just going to begin talking again , and hoping to cut her short . 
`` I have come in despair ... in the last gasp of despair , to beg you to lend me the sum of three thousand , a loan , but on safe , most safe security , madam , with the most trustworthy guarantees ! 
Only let me explain - '' `` You must tell me all that afterwards , afterwards ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov with a gesture demanded silence in her turn , `` and whatever you may tell me , I know it all beforehand ; I 've told you so already . 
You ask for a certain sum , for three thousand , but I can give you more , immeasurably more ; I will save you , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , but you must listen to me . '' 
Mitya started from his seat again . 
`` Madam , will you really be so good ! '' 
he cried , with strong feeling . 
`` Good God , you 've saved me ! 
You have saved a man from a violent death , from a bullet ... . 
My eternal gratitude `` I will give you more , infinitely more than three thousand ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , looking with a radiant smile at Mitya 's ecstasy . 
`` Infinitely ? 
But I do n't need so much . 
I only need that fatal three thousand , and on my part I can give security for that sum with infinite gratitude , and I propose a plan which - '' `` Enough , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , it 's said and done . '' 
Madame Hohlakov cut him short , with the modest triumph of beneficence . 
`` I have promised to save you , and I will save you . 
I will save you as I did Belmesov . 
What do you think of the gold mines , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` Of the gold mines , madam ? 
I have never thought anything about them . '' 
`` But I have thought of them for you . 
Thought of them over and over again . 
I have been watching you for the last month . 
I 've watched you a hundred times as you 've walked past , saying to myself : That 's a man of energy who ought to be at the gold mines . 
I 've studied your gait and come to the conclusion : that 's a man who would find gold . '' 
`` From my gait , madam ? '' 
said Mitya , smiling . 
`` Yes , from your gait . 
You surely do n't deny that character can be told from the gait , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
Science supports the idea . 
I 'm all for science and realism now . 
After all this business with Father Zossima , which has so upset me , from this very day I 'm a realist and I want to devote myself to practical usefulness . 
I 'm cured . 
` Enough ! ' 
as Turgeney says . '' 
`` But madam , the three thousand you so generously promised to lend me - '' `` It is yours , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov cut in at once . 
`` The money is as good as in your pocket , not three thousand , but three million , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , in less than no time . 
I 'll make you a present of the idea : you shall find gold mines , make millions , return and become a leading man , and wake us up and lead us to better things . 
Are we to leave it all to the Jews ? 
You will found institutions and enterprises of all sorts . 
You will help the poor , and they will bless you . 
This is the age of railways , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
You 'll become famous and indispensable to the Department of Finance , which is so badly off at present . 
The depreciation of the rouble keeps me awake at night , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ; people do n't know that side of me - '' `` Madam , madam ! 
Dmitri interrupted with an uneasy presentiment . 
`` I shall indeed , perhaps , follow your advice , your wise advice , madam ... . 
I shall perhaps set off ... to the gold mines ... . 
I 'll come and see you again about it ... many times , indeed ... but now , that three thousand you so generously ... oh , that would set me free , and if you could to-day ... you see , I have n't a minute , a minute to lose to-day - '' `` Enough , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , enough ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov interrupted emphatically . 
`` The question is , will you go to the gold mines or not ; have you quite made up your mind ? 
Answer yes or no . '' 
`` I will go , madam , afterwards ... . 
I 'll go where you like ... but now - '' `` Wait ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
And jumping up and running to a handsome bureau with numerous little drawers , she began pulling out one drawer after another , looking for something with desperate haste . 
`` The three thousand , '' thought Mitya , his heart almost stopping , `` and at the instant ... without any papers or formalities ... that 's doing things in gentlemanly style ! 
She 's a splendid woman , if only she did n't talk so much ! '' 
`` Here ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , running back joyfully to Mitya , `` here is what I was looking for ! '' 
It was a tiny silver ikon on a cord , such as is sometimes worn next the skin with a cross . 
`` This is from Kiev , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' she went on reverently , `` from the relics of the Holy Martyr , Varvara . 
Let me put it on your neck myself , and with it dedicate you to a new life , to a new career . '' 
And she actually put the cord round his neck , and began arranging it . 
In extreme embarrassment , Mitya bent down and helped her , and at last he got it under his neck-tie and collar through his shirt to his chest . 
`` Now you can set off , '' Madame Hohlakov pronounced , sitting down triumphantly in her place again . 
`` Madam , I am so touched . 
I do n't know how to thank you , indeed ... for such kindness , but ... If only you knew how precious time is to me ... . 
That sum of money , for which I shall be indebted to your generosity ... Oh , madam , since you are so kind , so touchingly generous to me , '' Mitya exclaimed impulsively , `` then let me reveal to you ... though , of course , you 've known it a long time ... that I love somebody here ... . 
I have been false to Katya ... Katerina Ivanovna I should say ... . 
Oh , I 've behaved inhumanly , dishonourably to her , but I fell in love here with another woman ... a woman whom you , madam , perhaps , despise , for you know everything already , but whom I can not leave on any account , and therefore that three thousand now - '' `` Leave everything , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov interrupted in the most decisive tone . 
`` Leave everything , especially women . 
Gold mines are your goal , and there 's no place for women there . 
Afterwards , when you come back rich and famous , you will find the girl of your heart in the highest society . 
That will be a modern girl , a girl of education and advanced ideas . 
By that time the dawning woman question will have gained ground , and the new woman will have appeared . '' 
`` Madam , that 's not the point , not at all ... . 
Mitya clasped his hands in entreaty . 
`` Yes it is , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , just what you need ; the very thing you 're yearning for , though you do n't realise it yourself . 
I am not at all opposed to the present woman movement , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
The development of woman , and even the political emancipation of woman in the near future - that 's my ideal . 
I 've a daughter myself , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , people do n't know that side of me . 
I wrote a letter to the author , Shtchedrin , on that subject . 
He has taught me so much , so much about the vocation of woman . 
So last year I sent him an anonymous letter of two lines : ' I kiss and embrace you , my teacher , for the modern woman . 
Persevere . ' 
And I signed myself , ' A Mother . ' 
I thought of signing myself ' A contemporary Mother , ' and hesitated , but I stuck to the simple ` Mother ' ; there 's more moral beauty in that , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
And the word ` contemporary ' might have reminded him of The Contemporary - a painful recollection owing to the censorship ... . 
Good Heavens , what is the matter ! '' 
`` Madam ! '' 
cried Mitya , jumping up at last , clasping his hands before her in helpless entreaty . 
`` You will make me weep if you delay what you have so generously - '' `` Oh , do weep , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , do weep ! 
That 's a noble feeling ... such a path lies open before you ! 
Tears will ease your heart , and later on you will return rejoicing . 
You will hasten to me from Siberia on purpose to share your joy with me - '' `` But allow me , too ! '' 
Mitya cried suddenly . 
`` For the last time I entreat you , tell me , can I have the sum you promised me to-day , if not , when may I come for it ? '' 
`` What sum , Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
`` The three thousand you promised me ... that you so generously - '' `` Three thousand ? 
Roubles ? 
Oh , no , I have n't got three thousand , '' Madame Hohlakov announced with serene amazement . 
Mitya was stupefied . 
`` Why , you said just now you said ... you said it was as good as in my hands - '' `` Oh , no , you misunderstood me , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
In that case you misunderstood me . 
I was talking of the gold mines . 
It 's true I promised you more , infinitely more than three thousand , I remember it all now , but I was referring to the gold mines . '' 
`` But the money ? 
The three thousand ? '' 
Mitya exclaimed , awkwardly . 
`` Oh , if you meant money , I have n't any . 
I have n't a penny , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm quarrelling with my steward about it , and I 've just borrowed five hundred roubles from Miusov , myself . 
No , no , I 've no money . 
And , do you know , Dmitri Fyodorovitch , if I had , I would n't give it to you . 
In the first place I never lend money . 
Lending money means losing friends . 
And I would n't give it to you particularly . 
I would n't give it you , because I like you and want to save you , for all you need is the gold mines , the gold mines , the gold mines ! '' 
`` Oh , the devil ! '' 
roared Mitya , and with all his might brought his fist down on the table . 
`` Aie ! 
Aie ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov , alarmed , and she flew to the other end of the drawing-room . 
Mitya spat on the ground , and strode rapidly out of the room , out of the house , into the street , into the darkness ! 
He walked like one possessed , and beating himself on the breast , on the spot where he had struck himself two days previously , before Alyosha , the last time he saw him in the dark , on the road . 
What those blows upon his breast signified , on that spot , and what he meant by it - that was , for the time , a secret which was known to no one in the world , and had not been told even to Alyosha . 
But that secret meant for him more than disgrace ; it meant ruin , suicide . 
So he had determined , if he did not get hold of the three thousand that would pay his debt to Katerina Ivanovna , and so remove from his breast , from that spot on his breast , the shame he carried upon it , that weighed on his conscience . 
All this will be fully explained to the reader later on , but now that his last hope had vanished , this man , so strong in appearance , burst out crying like a little child a few steps from the Hohlakovs ' house . 
He walked on , and not knowing what he was doing , wiped away his tears with his fist . 
In this way he reached the square , and suddenly became aware that he had stumbled against something . 
He heard a piercing wail from an old woman whom he had almost knocked down . 
`` Good Lord , you 've nearly killed me ! 
Why do n't you look where you 're going , scapegrace ? '' 
`` Why , it 's you ! '' 
cried Mitya , recognising the old woman in the dark . 
It was the old servant who waited on Samsonov , whom Mitya had particularly noticed the day before . 
`` And who are you , my good sir ? '' 
said the old woman in quite a different voice . 
`` I do n't know you in the dark . '' 
`` You live at Kuzma Kuzmitch 's . 
You 're the servant there ? '' 
`` Just so , sir , I was only running out to Prohoritch 's ... But I do n't know you now . '' 
`` Tell me , my good woman , is Agrafena Alexandrovna there now ? '' 
said Mitya , beside himself with suspense . 
`` I saw her to the house some time ago . '' 
`` She has been there , sir . 
She stayed a little while , and went off again . '' 
`` What ? 
Went away ? '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` When did she go ? '' 
`` Why , as soon as she came . 
She only stayed a minute . 
She only told Kuzma Kuzmitch a tale that made him laugh , and then she ran away . '' 
`` You 're lying , damn you ! '' 
roared Mitya . 
`` Aie ! 
Aie ! '' 
shrieked the old woman , but Mitya had vanished . 
He ran with all his might to the house where Grushenka lived . 
At the moment he reached it , Grushenka was on her way to Mokroe . 
It was not more than a quarter of an hour after her departure . 
Fenya was sitting with her grandmother , the old cook , Matryona , in the kitchen when `` the captain '' ran in . 
Fenya uttered a piercing shriek on seeing him . 
`` You scream ? '' 
roared Mitya , `` where is she ? '' 
But without giving the terror-stricken Fenya time to utter a word , he fell all of a heap at her feet . 
`` Fenya , for Christ 's sake , tell me , where is she ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , my dear , I do n't know . 
You may kill me but I ca n't tell you . '' 
Fenya swore and protested . 
`` You went out with her yourself not long ago - '' `` She came back ! '' 
`` Indeed she did n't . 
By God I swear she did n't come back . '' 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
shouted Mitya . 
`` From your terror I know where she is . '' 
He rushed away . 
Fenya in her fright was glad she had got off so easily . 
But she knew very well that it was only that he was in such haste , or she might not have fared so well . 
But as he ran , he surprised both Fenya and old Matryona by an unexpected action . 
On the table stood a brass mortar , with a pestle in it , a small brass pestle , not much more than six inches long . 
Mitya already had opened the door with one hand when , with the other , he snatched up the pestle , and thrust it in his side-pocket . 
`` Oh Lord ! 
He 's going to murder someone ! '' 
cried Fenya , flinging up her hands . 
In the Dark WHERE was he running ? 
`` Where could she be except at Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
She must have run straight to him from Samsonov 's , that was clear now . 
The whole intrigue , the whole deceit was evident . '' 
... It all rushed whirling through his mind . 
He did not run to Marya Kondratyevna 's . 
`` There was no need to go there ... not the slightest need ... he must raise no alarm ... they would run and tell directly ... . 
Marya Kondratyevna was clearly in the plot , Smerdyakov too , he too , all had been bought over ! '' 
He formed another plan of action : he ran a long way round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house , crossing the lane , running down Dmitrovsky Street , then over the little bridge , and so came straight to the deserted alley at the back , which was empty and uninhabited , with , on one side the hurdle fence of a neighbour 's kitchen-garden , on the other the strong high fence that ran all round Fyodor Pavlovitch 's garden . 
Here he chose a spot , apparently the very place , where according to the tradition , he knew Lizaveta had once climbed over it : `` If she could climb over it , '' the thought , God knows why , occurred to him , `` surely I can . '' 
He did in fact jump up , and instantly contrived to catch hold of the top of the fence . 
Then he vigorously pulled himself up and sat astride on it . 
Close by , in the garden stood the bathhouse , but from the fence he could see the lighted windows of the house too . 
`` Yes , the old man 's bedroom is lighted up . 
She 's there ! 
and he leapt from the fence into the garden . 
Though he knew Grigory was ill and very likely Smerdyakov , too , and that there was no one to hear him , he instinctively hid himself , stood still , and began to listen . 
But there was dead silence on all sides and , as though of design , complete stillness , not the slightest breath of wind . 
`` And naught but the whispering silence , '' the line for some reason rose to his mind . 
`` If only no one heard me jump over the fence ! 
I think not . '' 
Standing still for a minute , he walked softly over the grass in the garden , avoiding the trees and shrubs . 
He walked slowly , creeping stealthily at every step , listening to his own footsteps . 
It took him five minutes to reach the lighted window . 
He remembered that just under the window there were several thick and high bushes of elder and whitebeam . 
The door from the house into the garden on the left-hand side was shut ; he had carefully looked on purpose to see , in passing . 
At last he reached the bushes and hid behind them . 
He held his breath . 
`` I must wait now , '' he thought , `` to reassure them , in case they heard my footsteps and are listening ... if only I do n't cough or sneeze . '' 
He waited two minutes . 
His heart was beating violently , and , at moments , he could scarcely breathe . 
`` No , this throbbing at my heart wo n't stop , '' he thought . 
`` I ca n't wait any longer . '' 
He was standing behind a bush in the shadow . 
The light of the window fell on the front part of the bush . 
`` How red the whitebeam berries are ! '' 
he murmured , not knowing why . 
Softly and noiselessly , step by step , he approached the window , and raised himself on tiptoe . 
All Fyodor Pavlovitch 's bedroom lay open before him . 
It was not a large room , and was divided in two parts by a red screen , `` Chinese , '' as Fyodor Pavlovitch used to call it . 
The word `` Chinese '' flashed into Mitya 's mind , `` and behind the screen , is Grushenka , '' thought Mitya . 
He began watching Fyodor Pavlovitch who was wearing his new striped-silk dressing-gown , which Mitya had never seen , and a silk cord with tassels round the waist . 
A clean , dandified shirt of fine linen with gold studs peeped out under the collar of the dressing-gown . 
On his head Fyodor Pavlovitch had the same red bandage which Alyosha had seen . 
`` He has got himself up , '' thought Mitya . 
His father was standing near the window , apparently lost in thought . 
Suddenly he jerked up his head , listened a moment , and hearing nothing went up to the table , poured out half a glass of brandy from a decanter and drank it off . 
Then he uttered a deep sigh , again stood still a moment , walked carelessly up to the looking-glass on the wall , with his right hand raised the red bandage on his forehead a little , and began examining his bruises and scars , which had not yet disappeared . 
`` He 's alone , '' thought Mitya , `` in all probability he 's alone . '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the looking-glass , turned suddenly to the window and looked out . 
Mitya instantly slipped away into the shadow . 
`` She may be there behind the screen . 
Perhaps she 's asleep by now , '' he thought , with a pang at his heart . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch moved away from the window . 
`` He 's looking for her out of the window , so she 's not there . 
Why should he stare out into the dark ? 
He 's wild with impatience . '' 
... Mitya slipped back at once , and fell to gazing in at the window again . 
The old man was sitting down at the table , apparently disappointed . 
At last he put his elbow on the table , and laid his right cheek against his hand . 
Mitya watched him eagerly . 
`` He 's alone , he 's alone ! '' 
he repeated again . 
`` If she were here , his face would be different . '' 
Strange to say , a queer , irrational vexation rose up in his heart that she was not here . 
`` It 's not that she 's not here , '' he explained to himself , immediately , `` but that I ca n't tell for certain whether she is or not . '' 
Mitya remembered afterwards that his mind was at that moment exceptionally clear , that he took in everything to the slightest detail , and missed no point . 
But a feeling of misery , the misery of uncertainty and indecision , was growing in his heart with every instant . 
`` Is she here or not ? '' 
The angry doubt filled his heart , and suddenly , making up his mind , he put out his hand and softly knocked on the window frame . 
He knocked the signal the old man had agreed upon with Smerdyakov , twice slowly and then three times more quickly , the signal that meant `` Grushenka is here ! '' 
The old man started , jerked up his head , and , jumping up quickly , ran to the window . 
Mitya slipped away into the shadow . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch opened the window and thrust his whole head out . 
`` Grushenka , is it you ? 
Is it you ? '' 
he said , in a sort of trembling half-whisper . 
`` Where are you , my angel , where are you ? '' 
He was fearfully agitated and breathless . 
`` He 's alone , '' Mitya decided . 
`` Where are you ? '' 
cried the old man again ; and he thrust his head out farther , thrust it out to the shoulders , gazing in all directions , right and left . 
`` Come here , I 've a little present for you . 
Come , I 'll show you ... '' `` He means the three thousand , '' thought Mitya . 
`` But where are you ? 
Are you at the door ? 
I 'll open it directly . '' 
And the old man almost climbed out of the window , peering out to the right , where there was a door into the garden , trying to see into the darkness . 
In another second he would certainly have run out to open the door without waiting for Grushenka 's answer . 
Mitya looked at him from the side without stirring . 
The old man 's profile that he loathed so , his pendent Adam 's apple , his hooked nose , his lips that smiled in greedy expectation , were all brightly lighted up by the slanting lamplight falling on the left from the room . 
A horrible fury of hatred suddenly surged up in Mitya 's heart : `` There he was , his rival , the man who had tormented him , had ruined his life ! '' 
It was a rush of that sudden , furious , revengeful anger of which he had spoken , as though foreseeing it , to Alyosha , four days ago in the arbour , when , in answer to Alyosha 's question , `` How can you say you 'll kill our father ? '' 
`` I do n't know , I do n't know , '' he had said then . 
`` Perhaps I shall not kill him , perhaps I shall . 
I 'm afraid he 'll suddenly be so loathsome to me at that moment . 
I hate his double chin , his nose , his eyes , his shameless grin . 
I feel a personal repulsion . 
That 's what I 'm afraid of , that 's what may be too much for me . '' 
... This personal repulsion was growing unendurable . 
Mitya was beside himself , he suddenly pulled the brass pestle out of his pocket . 
`` God was watching over me then , '' Mitya himself said afterwards . 
At that very moment Grigory waked up on his bed of sickness . 
Earlier in the evening he had undergone the treatment which Smerdyakov had described to Ivan . 
He had rubbed himself all over with vodka mixed with a secret , very strong decoction , had drunk what was left of the mixture while his wife repeated a `` certain prayer '' over him , after which he had gone to bed . 
Marfa Ignatyevna had tasted the stuff , too , and , being unused to strong drink , slept like the dead beside her husband . 
But Grigory waked up in the night , quite suddenly , and , after a moment 's reflection , though he immediately felt a sharp pain in his back , he sat up in bed . 
Then he deliberated again , got up and dressed hurriedly . 
Perhaps his conscience was uneasy at the thought of sleeping while the house was unguarded `` in such perilous times . '' 
Smerdyakov , exhausted by his fit , lay motionless in the next room . 
Marfa Ignatyevna did not stir . 
`` The stuff 's been too much for the woman , '' Grigory thought , glancing at her , and groaning , he went out on the steps . 
No doubt he only intended to look out from the steps , for he was hardly able to walk , the pain in his back and his right leg was intolerable . 
But he suddenly remembered that he had not locked the little gate into the garden that evening . 
He was the most punctual and precise of men , a man who adhered to an unchangeable routine , and habits that lasted for years . 
Limping and writhing with pain he went down the steps and towards the garden . 
Yes , the gate stood wide open . 
Mechanically he stepped into the garden . 
Perhaps he fancied something , perhaps caught some sound , and , glancing to the left he saw his master 's window open . 
No one was looking out of it then . 
`` What 's it open for ? 
It 's not summer now , '' thought Grigory , and suddenly , at that very instant he caught a glimpse of something extraordinary before him in the garden . 
Forty paces in front of him a man seemed to be running in the dark , a sort of shadow was moving very fast . 
`` Good Lord ! '' 
cried Grigory beside himself , and forgetting the pain in his back , he hurried to intercept the running figure . 
He took a short cut , evidently he knew the garden better ; the flying figure went towards the bath-house , ran behind it and rushed to the garden fence . 
Grigory followed , not losing sight of him , and ran , forgetting everything . 
He reached the fence at the very moment the man was climbing over it . 
Grigory cried out , beside himself , pounced on him , and clutched his leg in his two hands . 
Yes , his foreboding had not deceived him . 
He recognised him ; it was he , the `` monster , '' the `` parricide . '' 
`` Parricide ! 
the old man shouted so that the whole neighbourhood could hear , but he had not time to shout more , he fell at once , as though struck by lightning . 
Mitya jumped back into the garden and bent over the fallen man . 
In Mitya 's hands was a brass pestle , and he flung it mechanically in the grass . 
The pestle fell two paces from Grigory , not in the grass but on the path , in a most conspicuous place . 
For some seconds he examined the prostrate figure before him . 
The old man 's head was covered with blood . 
Mitya put out his hand and began feeling it . 
He remembered afterwards clearly that he had been awfully anxious to make sure whether he had broken the old man 's skull , or simply stunned him with the pestle . 
But the blood was flowing horribly ; and in a moment Mitya 's fingers were drenched with the hot stream . 
He remembered taking out of his pocket the clean white handkerchief with which he had provided himself for his visit to Madame Hohlakov , and putting it to the old man 's head , senselessly trying to wipe the blood from his face and temples . 
But the handkerchief was instantly soaked with blood . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What am I doing it for ? '' 
thought Mitya , suddenly pulling himself together . 
`` If I have broken his skull , how can I find out now ? 
And what difference does it make now ? '' 
he added , hopelessly . 
`` If I 've killed him , I 've killed him ... . 
You 've come to grief , old man , so there you must lie ! '' 
he said aloud . 
And suddenly turning to the fence , he vaulted over it into the lane and fell to running - the handkerchief soaked with blood he held , crushed up in his right fist , and as he ran he thrust it into the back pocket of his coat . 
He ran headlong , and the few passers-by who met him in the dark , in the streets , remembered afterwards that they had met a man running that night . 
He flew back again to the widow Morozov 's house . 
Immediately after he had left it that evening , Fenya had rushed to the chief porter , Nazar Ivanovitch , and besought him , for Christ 's sake , `` not to let the captain in again to-day or to-morrow . '' 
Nazar Ivanovitch promised , but went upstairs to his mistress who had suddenly sent for him , and meeting his nephew , a boy of twenty , who had recently come from the country , on the way up told him to take his place , but forgot to mention `` the captain . '' 
Mitya , running up to the gate , knocked . 
The lad instantly recognised him , for Mitya had more than once tipped him . 
Opening the gate at once , he let him in , and hastened to inform him with a good-humoured smile that `` Agrafena Alexandrovna is not at home now , you know . '' 
`` Where is she then , Prohor ? '' 
asked Mitya , stopping short . 
`` She set off this evening , some two hours ago , with Timofey , to Mokroe . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
cried Mitya . 
`` That I ca n't say . 
To see some officer . 
Someone invited her and horses were sent to fetch her . '' 
Mitya left him , and ran like a madman to Fenya . 
A Sudden Resolution SHE was sitting in the kitchen with her grandmother ; they were both just going to bed . 
Relying on Nazar Ivanovitch , they had not locked themselves in . 
Mitya ran in , pounced on Fenya and seized her by the throat . 
`` Speak at once ! 
Where is she ? 
With whom is she now , at Mokroe ? '' 
he roared furiously . 
Both the women squealed . 
`` Aie ! 
I 'll tell you . 
Aie ! 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch , darling , I 'll tell you everything directly , I wo n't hide anything , '' gabbled Fenya , frightened to death ; `` she 's gone to Mokroe , to her officer . '' 
`` What officer ? '' 
roared Mitya . 
`` To her officer , the same one she used to know , the one who threw her over five years ago , '' cackled Fenya , as fast as she could speak . 
Mitya withdrew the hands with which he was squeezing her throat . 
He stood facing her , pale as death , unable to utter a word , but his eyes showed that he realised it all , all , from the first word , and guessed the whole position . 
Poor Fenya was not in a condition at that moment to observe whether he understood or not . 
She remained sitting on the trunk as she had been when he ran into the room , trembling all over , holding her hands out before her as though trying to defend herself . 
She seemed to have grown rigid in that position . 
Her wide-opened , scared eyes were fixed immovably upon him . 
And to make matters worse , both his hands were smeared with blood . 
On the way , as he ran , he must have touched his forehead with them , wiping off the perspiration , so that on his forehead and his right cheek were bloodstained patches . 
Fenya was on the verge of hysterics . 
The old cook had jumped up and was staring at him like a mad woman , almost unconscious with terror . 
Mitya stood for a moment , then mechanically sank on to a chair next to Fenya . 
He sat , not reflecting but , as it were , terror-stricken , benumbed . 
Yet everything was clear as day : that officer , he knew about him , he knew everything perfectly , he had known it from Grushenka herself , had known that a letter had come from him a month before . 
So that for a month , for a whole month , this had been going on , a secret from him , till the very arrival of this new man , and he had never thought of him ! 
But how could he , how could he not have thought of him ? 
Why was it he had forgotten this officer , like that , forgotten him as soon as he heard of him ? 
That was the question that faced him like some monstrous thing . 
And he looked at this monstrous thing with horror , growing cold with horror . 
But suddenly , as gently and mildly as a gentle and affectionate child , he began speaking to Fenya as though he had utterly forgotten how he had scared and hurt her just now . 
He fell to questioning Fenya with an extreme preciseness , astonishing in his position , and though the girl looked wildly at his blood-stained hands , she , too , with wonderful readiness and rapidity , answered every question as though eager to put the whole truth and nothing but the truth before him . 
Little by little , even with a sort of enjoyment , she began explaining every detail , not wanting to torment him , but , as it were , eager to be of the utmost service to him . 
She described the whole of that day , in great detail , the visit of Rakitin and Alyosha , how she , Fenya , had stood on the watch , how the mistress had set off , and how she had called out of the window to Alyosha to give him , Mitya , her greetings , and to tell him `` to remember for ever how she had loved him for an hour . '' 
Hearing of the message , Mitya suddenly smiled , and there was a flush of colour on his pale cheeks . 
At the same moment Fenya said to him , not a bit afraid now to be inquisitive : `` Look at your hands , Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 're all over blood ! 
`` Yes , '' answered Mitya mechanically . 
He looked carelessly at his hands and at once forgot them and Fenya 's question . 
He sank into silence again . 
Twenty minutes had passed since he had run in . 
His first horror was over , but evidently some new fixed determination had taken possession of him . 
He suddenly stood up , smiling dreamily . 
`` What has happened to you , sir ? '' 
said Fenya , pointing to his hands again . 
She spoke compassionately , as though she felt very near to him now in his grief . 
Mitya looked at his hands again . 
`` That 's blood , Fenya , '' he said , looking at her with a strange expression . 
`` That 's human blood , and my God ! 
why was it shed ? 
But ... Fenya ... there 's a fence here '' -LRB- he looked at her as though setting her a riddle -RRB- , `` a high fence , and terrible to look at . 
But at dawn to-morrow , when the sun rises , Mitya will leap over that fence ... . 
You do n't understand what fence , Fenya , and , never mind ... . 
You 'll hear to-morrow and understand ... and now , good-bye . 
I wo n't stand in her way . 
I 'll step aside , I know how to step aside . 
Live , my joy ... . 
You loved me for an hour , remember Mityenka Karamazov so for ever ... . 
She always used to call me Mityenka , do you remember ? '' 
And with those words he went suddenly out of the kitchen . 
Fenya was almost more frightened at this sudden departure than she had been when he ran in and attacked her . 
Just ten minutes later Dmitri went in to Pyotr Ilyitch Perhotin , the young official with whom he had pawned his pistols . 
It was by now half-past eight , and Pyotr Ilyitch had finished his evening tea , and had just put his coat on again to go to the Metropolis to play billiards . 
Mitya caught him coming out . 
Seeing him with his face all smeared with blood , the young man uttered a cry of surprise . 
`` Good heavens ! 
What is the matter ? '' 
`` I 've come for my pistols , '' said Mitya , `` and brought you the money . 
And thanks very much . 
I 'm in a hurry , Pyotr Ilyitch , please make haste . '' 
Pyotr Ilyitch grew more and more surprised ; he suddenly caught sight of a bundle of banknotes in Mitya 's hand , and what was more , he had walked in holding the notes as no one walks in and no one carries money : he had them in his right hand , and held them outstretched as if to show them . 
Perhotin 's servant-boy , who met Mitya in the passage , said afterwards that he walked into the passage in the same way , with the money outstretched in his hand , so he must have been carrying them like that even in the streets . 
They were all rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes , and the fingers holding them were covered with blood . 
When Pyotr Ilyitch was questioned later on as to the sum of money , he said that it was difficult to judge at a glance , but that it might have been two thousand , or perhaps three , but it was a big , `` fat '' bundle . 
`` Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' so he testified afterwards , `` seemed unlike himself , too ; not drunk , but , as it were , exalted , lost to everything , but at the same time , as it were , absorbed , as though pondering and searching for something and unable to come to a decision . 
He was in great haste , answered abruptly and very strangely , and at moments seemed not at all dejected but quite cheerful . '' 
`` But what is the matter with you ? 
What 's wrong ? '' 
cried Pyotr Ilyitch , looking wildly at his guest . 
`` How is it that you 're all covered with blood ? 
Have you had a fall ? 
Look at yourself ! '' 
He took him by the elbow and led him to the glass . 
Seeing his blood-stained face , Mitya started and scowled wrathfully . 
`` Damnation ! 
That 's the last straw , '' he muttered angrily , hurriedly changing the notes from his right hand to the left , and impulsively jerked the handkerchief out of his pocket . 
But the handkerchief turned out to be soaked with blood , too -LRB- it was the handkerchief he had used to wipe Grigory 's face -RRB- . 
There was scarcely a white spot on it , and it had not merely begun to dry , but had stiffened into a crumpled ball and could not be pulled apart . 
Mitya threw it angrily on the floor . 
`` Oh , damn it ! '' 
he said . 
`` Have n't you a rag of some sort ... to wipe my face ? '' 
`` So you 're only stained , not wounded ? 
You 'd better wash , '' said Pyotr Ilyitch . 
`` Here 's a wash-stand . 
I 'll pour you out some water . '' 
`` A wash-stand ? 
That 's all right ... but where am I to put this ? '' 
With the strangest perplexity he indicated his bundle of hundred-rouble notes , looking inquiringly at Pyotr Ilyitch as though it were for him to decide what he , Mitya , was to do with his own money . 
`` In your pocket , or on the table here . 
They wo n't be lost . '' 
`` In my pocket ? 
Yes , in my pocket . 
All right ... . 
But , I say , that 's all nonsense , '' he cried , as though suddenly coming out of his absorption . 
`` Look here , let 's first settle that business of the pistols . 
Give them back to me . 
