`` Meanwhile , I spent my time in drink and riot , till the lieutenant-colonel put me under arrest for three days . 
Just at that time father sent me six thousand roubles in return for my sending him a deed giving up all claims upon him - settling our accounts , so to speak , and saying that I would n't expect anything more . 
I did n't understand a word of it at the time . 
Until I came here , Alyosha , till the last few days , indeed , perhaps even now , I have n't been able to make head or tail of my money affairs with father . 
But never mind that , we 'll talk of it later . 
`` Just as I received the money , I got a letter from a friend telling me something that interested me immensely . 
The authorities , I learnt , were dissatisfied with our lieutenant-colonel . 
He was suspected of irregularities ; in fact , his enemies were preparing a surprise for him . 
And then the commander of the division arrived , and kicked up the devil of a shindy . 
Shortly afterwards he was ordered to retire . 
I wo n't tell you how it all happened . 
He had enemies certainly . 
Suddenly there was a marked coolness in the town towards him and all his family . 
His friends all turned their backs on him . 
Then I took my first step . 
I met Agafya Ivanovna , with whom I 'd always kept up a friendship , and said , ` Do you know there 's a deficit of 4500 roubles of government money in your father 's accounts ? ' '' 
` What do you mean ? 
What makes you say so ? 
The general was here not long ago , and everything was all right . ' '' 
` Then it was , but now it is n't . ' 
`` She was terribly scared . '' 
` Do n't frighten me ! ' 
she said . 
` Who told you so ? ' '' 
` Do n't be uneasy , ' I said , ' I wo n't tell anyone . 
You know I 'm as silent as the tomb . 
I only wanted , in view of `` possibilities , '' to add , that when they demand that 4500 roubles from your father , and he ca n't produce it , he 'll be tried , and made to serve as a common soldier in his old age , unless you like to send me your young lady secretly . 
I 've just had money paid me . 
I 'll give her four thousand , if you like , and keep the secret religiously . ' '' 
` Ah , you scoundrel ! ' 
- that 's what she said . 
` You wicked scoundrel ! 
How dare you ! ' 
`` She went away furiously indignant , while I shouted after her once more that the secret should be kept sacred . 
Those two simple creatures , Agafya and her aunt , I may as well say at once , behaved like perfect angels all through this business . 
They genuinely adored their ` Katya , ' thought her far above them , and waited on her , hand and foot . 
But Agafya told her of our conversation . 
I found that out afterwards . 
She did n't keep it back , and of course that was all I wanted . 
`` Suddenly the new major arrived to take command of the battalion . 
The old lieutenant-colonel was taken ill at once , could n't leave his room for two days , and did n't hand over the government money . 
Dr. Kravchenko declared that he really was ill . 
But I knew for a fact , and had known for a long time , that for the last four years the money had never been in his hands except when the Commander made his visits of inspection . 
He used to lend it to a trustworthy person , a merchant of our town called Trifonov , an old widower , with a big beard and gold-rimmed spectacles . 
He used to go to the fair , do a profitable business with the money , and return the whole sum to the colonel , bringing with it a present from the fair , as well as interest on the loan . 
But this time -LRB- I heard all about it quite by chance from Trifonov 's son and heir , a drivelling youth and one of the most vicious in the world -RRB- - this time , I say , Trifonov brought nothing back from the fair . 
The lieutenant-colonel flew to him . 
` I 've never received any money from you , and could n't possibly have received any . ' 
That was all the answer he got . 
So now our lieutenant-colonel is confined to the house , with a towel round his head , while they 're all three busy putting ice on it . 
All at once an orderly arrives on the scene with the book and the order to ` hand over the battalion money immediately , within two hours . ' 
He signed the book -LRB- I saw the signature in the book afterwards -RRB- , stood up , saying he would put on his uniform , ran to his bedroom , loaded his double-barrelled gun with a service bullet , took the boot off his right foot , fixed the gun against his chest , and began feeling for the trigger with his foot . 
But Agafya , remembering what I had told her , had her suspicions . 
She stole up and peeped into the room just in time . 
She rushed in , flung herself upon him from behind , threw her arms round him , and the gun went off , hit the ceiling , but hurt no one . 
The others ran in , took away the gun , and held him by the arms . 
I heard all about this afterwards . 
I was at home , it was getting dusk , and I was just preparing to go out . 
I had dressed , brushed my hair , scented my handkerchief , and taken up my cap , when suddenly the door opened , and facing me in the room stood Katerina Ivanovna . 
`` It 's strange how things happen sometimes . 
No one had seen her in the street , so that no one knew of it in the town . 
I lodged with two decrepit old ladies , who looked after me . 
They were most obliging old things , ready to do anything for me , and at my request were as silent afterwards as two cast-iron posts . 
Of course I grasped the position at once . 
She walked in and looked straight at me , her dark eyes determined , even defiant , but on her lips and round mouth I saw uncertainty . '' 
` My sister told me , ' she began , ` that you would give me 4500 roubles if I came to you for it - myself . 
I have come ... give me the money ! ' 
`` She could n't keep it up . 
She was breathless , frightened , her voice failed her , and the corners of her mouth and the lines round it quivered . 
Alyosha , are you listening , or are you asleep ? '' 
`` Mitya , I know you will tell the whole truth , said Alyosha in agitation . 
`` I am telling it . 
If I tell the whole truth just as it happened I sha n't spare myself . 
My first idea was a - Karamazov one . 
Once I was bitten by a centipede , brother , and laid up a fortnight with fever from it . 
Well , I felt a centipede biting at my heart then - a noxious insect , you understand ? 
I looked her up and down . 
You 've seen her ? 
She 's a beauty . 
But she was beautiful in another way then . 
At that moment she was beautiful because she was noble , and I was a scoundrel ; she in all the grandeur of her generosity and sacrifice for her father , and I - a bug ! 
And , scoundrel as I was , she was altogether at my mercy , body and soul . 
She was hemmed in . 
I tell you frankly , that thought , that venomous thought , so possessed my heart that it almost swooned with suspense . 
It seemed as if there could be no resisting it ; as though I should act like a bug , like a venomous spider , without a spark of pity . 
I could scarcely breathe . 
Understand , I should have gone next day to ask for her hand , so that it might end honourably , so to speak , and that nobody would or could know . 
For though I 'm a man of base desires , I 'm honest . 
And at that very second some voice seemed to whisper in my ear , ` But when you come to-morrow to make your proposal , that girl wo n't even see you ; she 'll order her coachman to kick you out of the yard . 
`` Publish it through all the town , '' she would say , `` I 'm not afraid of you . '' ' 
I looked at the young lady , my voice had not deceived me . 
That is how it would be , not a doubt of it . 
I could see from her face now that I should be turned out of the house . 
My spite was roused . 
I longed to play her the nastiest swinish cad 's trick : to look at her with a sneer , and on the spot where she stood before me to stun her with a tone of voice that only a shopman could use . '' 
` Four thousand ! 
What do you mean ? 
I was joking . 
You 've been counting your chickens too easily , madam . 
Two hundred , if you like , with all my heart . 
But four thousand is not a sum to throw away on such frivolity . 
You 've put yourself out to no purpose . ' 
`` I should have lost the game , of course . 
She 'd have run away . 
But it would have been an infernal revenge . 
It would have been worth it all . 
I 'd have howled with regret all the rest of my life , only to have played that trick . 
Would you believe it , it has never happened to me with any other woman , not one , to look at her at such a moment with hatred . 
But , on my oath , I looked at her for three seconds , or five perhaps , with fearful hatred - that hate which is only a hair 's - breadth from love , from the maddest love ! 
`` I went to the window , put my forehead against the frozen pane , and I remember the ice burnt my forehead like fire . 
I did not keep her long , do n't be afraid . 
I turned round , went up to the table , opened the drawer and took out a banknote for five thousand roubles -LRB- it was lying in a French dictionary -RRB- . 
Then I showed it her in silence , folded it , handed it to her , opened the door into the passage , and , stepping back , made her a deep bow . 
a most respectful , a most impressive bow , believe me ! 
She shuddered all over , gazed at me for a second , turned horribly pale-white as a sheet , in fact - and all at once , not impetuously but softly , gently , bowed down to my feet - not a boarding-school curtsey , but a Russian bow , with her forehead to the floor . 
She jumped up and ran away . 
I was wearing my sword . 
I drew it and nearly stabbed myself with it on the spot ; why , I do n't know . 
It would have been frightfully stupid , of course . 
I suppose it was from delight . 
Can you understand that one might kill oneself from delight ? 
But I did n't stab myself . 
I only kissed my sword and put it back in the scabbard - which there was no need to have told you , by the way . 
And I fancy that in telling you about my inner conflict I have laid it on rather thick to glorify myself . 
But let it pass , and to hell with all who pry into the human heart ! 
Well , so much for that ` adventure ' with Katerina Ivanovna . 
So now Ivan knows of it , and you - no one else . '' 
Dmitri got up , took a step or two in his excitement , pulled out his handkerchief and mopped his forehead , then sat down again , not in the same place as before , but on the opposite side , so that Alyosha had to turn quite round to face him . 
The Confession of a Passionate Heart - `` Heels Up '' `` NOW , '' said Alyosha , `` I understand the first half . '' 
`` You understand the first half . 
That half is a drama , and it was played out there . 
The second half is a tragedy , and it is being acted here . '' 
`` And I understand nothing of that second half so far , '' said Alyosha . 
`` And I ? 
Do you suppose I understand it ? '' 
`` Stop , Dmitri . 
There 's one important question . 
Tell me , you were betrothed , betrothed still ? '' 
`` We were n't betrothed at once , not for three months after that adventure . 
The next day I told myself that the incident was closed , concluded , that there would be no sequel . 
It seemed to me caddish to make her an offer . 
On her side she gave no sign of life for the six weeks that she remained in the town ; except , indeed , for one action . 
The day after her visit the maid-servant slipped round with an envelope addressed to me . 
I tore it open ; it contained the change out of the banknote . 
Only four thousand five hundred roubles was needed , but there was a discount of about two hundred on changing it . 
She only sent me about two hundred and sixty . 
I do n't remember exactly , but not a note , not a word of explanation . 
I searched the packet for a pencil mark n-nothing ! 
Well , I spent the rest of the money on such an orgy that the new major was obliged to reprimand me . 
`` Well , the lieutenant-colonel produced the battalion money , to the astonishment of everyone , for nobody believed that he had the money untouched . 
He 'd no sooner paid it than he fell ill , took to his bed , and , three weeks later , softening of the brain set in , and he died five days afterwards . 
He was buried with military honours , for he had not had time to receive his discharge . 
Ten days after his funeral , Katerina Ivanovna , with her aunt and sister , went to Moscow . 
And , behold , on the very day they went away -LRB- I had n't seen them , did n't see them off or take leave -RRB- I received a tiny note , a sheet of thin blue paper , and on it only one line in pencil : ' I will write to you . 
Wait . 
K. ' And that was all . 
`` I 'll explain the rest now , in two words . 
In Moscow their fortunes changed with the swiftness of lightning and the unexpectedness of an Arabian fairy-tale . 
That general 's widow , their nearest relation , suddenly lost the two nieces who were her heiresses and next-of-kin - both died in the same week of small-pox . 
The old lady , prostrated with grief , welcomed Katya as a daughter , as her one hope , clutched at her , altered her will in Katya 's favour . 
But that concerned the future . 
Meanwhile she gave her , for present use , eighty thousand roubles , as a marriage portion , to do what she liked with . 
She was an hysterical woman . 
I saw something of her in Moscow , later . 
`` Well , suddenly I received by post four thousand five hundred roubles . 
I was speechless with surprise , as you may suppose . 
Three days later came the promised letter . 
I have it with me now . 
You must read it . 
She offers to be my wife , offers herself to me . ' 
I love you madly , she says , ` even if you do n't love me , never mind . 
Be my husband . 
Do n't be afraid . 
I wo n't hamper you in any way . 
I will be your chattel . 
I will be the carpet under your feet . 
I want to love you for ever . 
I want to save you from yourself . ' 
Alyosha , I am not worthy to repeat those lines in my vulgar words and in my vulgar tone , my everlastingly vulgar tone , that I can never cure myself of . 
That letter stabs me even now . 
Do you think I do n't mind - that I do n't mind still ? 
I wrote her an answer at once , as it was impossible for me to go to Moscow . 
I wrote to her with tears . 
One thing I shall be ashamed of for ever . 
I referred to her being rich and having a dowry while I was only a stuck-up beggar ! 
I mentioned money ! 
I ought to have borne it in silence , but it slipped from my pen . 
Then I wrote at once to Ivan , and told him all I could about it in a letter of six pages , and sent him to her . 
Why do you look like that ? 
Why are you staring at me ? 
Yes , Ivan fell in love with her ; he 's in love with her still . 
I know that . 
I did a stupid thing , in the world 's opinion ; but perhaps that one stupid thing may be the saving of us all now . 
Oo ! 
Do n't you see what a lot she thinks of Ivan , how she respects him ? 
When she compares us , do you suppose she can love a man like me , especially after all that has happened here ? '' 
`` But I 'm convinced that she does love a man like you , and not a man like him . '' 
`` She loves her own virtue , not me . '' 
The words broke involuntarily , and almost malignantly , from Dmitri . 
He laughed , but a minute later his eyes gleamed , he flushed crimson and struck the table violently with his fist . 
`` I swear , Alyosha , '' he cried , with intense and genuine anger at himself ; `` You may not believe me , but as God is Holy , and as Christ is God , I swear that though I smiled at her lofty sentiments just now , I know that I am a million times baser in soul than she , and that these lofty sentiments of hers are as sincere as a heavenly angel 's . 
That 's the tragedy of it - that I know that for certain . 
What if anyone does show off a bit ? 
Do n't I do it myself ? 
And yet I 'm sincere , I 'm sincere . 
As for Ivan , I can understand how he must be cursing nature now with his intellect , too ! 
To see the preference given - to whom , to what ? 
To a monster who , though he is betrothed and all eyes are fixed on him , ca n't restrain his debaucheries - and before the very eyes of his betrothed ! 
And a man like me is preferred , while he is rejected . 
And why ? 
Because a girl wants to sacrifice her life and destiny out of gratitude . 
It 's ridiculous ! 
I 've never said a word of this to Ivan , and Ivan of course has never dropped a hint of the sort to me . 
But destiny will be accomplished , and the best man will hold his ground while the undeserving one will vanish into his back-alley for ever - his filthy back-alley , his beloved back-alley , where he is at home and where he will sink in filth and stench at his own free will and with enjoyment . 
I 've been talking foolishly . 
I 've no words left . 
I used them at random , but it will be as I have said . 
I shall drown in the back-alley , and she will marry Ivan . '' 
`` Stop , Dmitri , '' Alyosha interrupted again with great anxiety . 
`` There 's one thing you have n't made clear yet : you are still betrothed all the same , are n't you ? 
How can you break off the engagement if she , your betrothed , does n't want to ? '' 
`` Yes , formally and solemnly betrothed . 
It was all done on my arrival in Moscow , with great ceremony , with ikons , all in fine style . 
The general 's wife blessed us , and - would you believe it ? 
- congratulated Katya . 
You 've made a good choice , ' she said , ' I see right through him . ' 
And - would you believe it ? 
- she did n't like Ivan , and hardly greeted him . 
I had a lot of talk with Katya in Moscow . 
I told her about myself - sincerely , honourably . 
She listened to everything . 
There was sweet confusion , There were tender words . 
Though there were proud words , too . 
She wrung out of me a mighty promise to reform . 
I gave my promise , and here - '' `` What ? '' 
`` Why , I called to you and brought you out here to-day , this very day - remember it - to send you - this very day again - to Katerina Ivanovna , and - '' `` To tell her that I shall never come to see her again . 
Say , ` He sends you his compliments . ' '' 
`` But is that possible ? '' 
`` That 's just the reason I 'm sending you , in my place , because it 's impossible . 
And , how could I tell her myself ? '' 
`` And where are you going ? '' 
`` To the back-alley . '' 
`` To Grushenka , then ! '' 
Alyosha exclaimed mournfully , clasping his hands . 
`` Can Rakitin really have told the truth ? 
I thought that you had just visited her , and that was all . '' 
`` Can a betrothed man pay such visits ? 
Is such a thing possible and with such a betrothed , and before the eyes of all the world ? 
Confound it , I have some honour ! 
As soon as I began visiting Grushenka , I ceased to be betrothed , and to be an honest man . 
I understand that . 
Why do you look at me ? 
You see , I went in the first place to beat her . 
I had heard , and I know for a fact now , that that captain , father 's agent , had given Grushenka an I.O.U. of mine for her to sue me for payment , so as to put an end to me . 
They wanted to scare me . 
I went to beat her . 
I had had a glimpse of her before . 
She does n't strike one at first sight . 
I knew about her old merchant , who 's lying ill now , paralysed ; but he 's leaving her a decent little sum . 
I knew , too , that she was fond of money , that she hoarded it , and lent it at a wicked rate of interest , that she 's a merciless cheat and swindler . 
I went to beat her , and I stayed . 
The storm broke - it struck me down like the plague . 
I 'm plague-stricken still , and I know that everything is over , that there will never be anything more for me . 
The cycle of the ages is accomplished . 
That 's my position . 
And though I 'm a beggar , as fate would have it , I had three thousand just then in my pocket . 
I drove with Grushenka to Mokroe , a place twenty-five versts from here . 
I got Gypsies there and champagne and made all the peasants there drunk on it , and all the women and girls . 
I sent the thousands flying . 
In three days ' time I was stripped bare , but a hero . 
Do you suppose the hero had gained his end ? 
Not a sign of it from her . 
I tell you that rogue , Grushenka , has a supple curve all over her body . 
You can see it in her little foot , even in her little toe . 
I saw it , and kissed it , but that was all , I swear ! 
` I 'll marry you if you like , ' she said , ` you 're a beggar , you know . 
Say that you wo n't beat me , and will let me do anything I choose , and perhaps I will marry you . ' 
She laughed , and she 's laughing still ! '' 
Dmitri leapt up with a sort of fury . 
He seemed all at once as though he were drunk . 
His eyes became suddenly bloodshot . 
`` And do you really mean to marry her ? '' 
`` At once , if she will . 
And if she wo n't , I shall stay all the same . 
I 'll be the porter at her gate . 
Alyosha ! '' 
he cried . 
He stopped short before him , and taking him by the shoulders began shaking him violently . 
`` Do you know , you innocent boy , that this is all delirium , senseless delirium , for there 's a tragedy here . 
Let me tell you , Alexey , that I may be a low man , with low and degraded passions , but a thief and a pickpocket Dmitri Karamazov never can be . 
Well , then ; let me tell you that I am a thief and a pickpocket . 
That very morning , just before I went to beat Grushenka , Katerina Ivanovna sent for me , and in strict secrecy -LRB- why I do n't know , I suppose she had some reason -RRB- asked me to go to the chief town of the province and to post three thousand roubles to Agafya Ivanovna in Moscow , so that nothing should be known of it in the town here . 
So I had that three thousand roubles in my pocket when I went to see Grushenka , and it was that money we spent at Mokroe . 
Afterwards I pretended I had been to the town , but did not show her the post office receipt . 
I said I had sent the money and would bring the receipt , and so far I have n't brought it . 
I 've forgotten it . 
Now what do you think you 're going to her to-day to say ? 
` He sends his compliments , ' and she 'll ask you , ` What about the money ? ' 
You might still have said to her , ` He 's a degraded sensualist , and a low creature , with uncontrolled passions . 
He did n't send your money then , but wasted it , because , like a low brute , he could n't control himself . ' 
But still you might have added , ` He is n't a thief though . 
Here is your three thousand ; he sends it back . 
Send it yourself to Agafya Ivanovna . 
But he told me to say `` he sends his compliments . '' 
But , as it is , she will ask , ` But where is the money ? ' '' 
`` Mitya , you are unhappy , yes ! 
But not as unhappy as you think . 
Do n't worry yourself to death with despair . '' 
`` What , do you suppose I 'd shoot myself because I ca n't get three thousand to pay back ? 
That 's just it . 
I sha n't shoot myself . 
I have n't the strength now . 
Afterwards , perhaps . 
But now I 'm going to Grushenka . 
I do n't care what happens . '' 
`` And what then ? '' 
`` I 'll be her husband if she deigns to have me , and when lovers come , I 'll go into the next room . 
I 'll clean her friends ' goloshes , blow up their samovar , run their errands . '' 
`` Katerina Ivanovna will understand it all , '' Alyosha said solemnly . 
`` She 'll understand how great this trouble is and will forgive . 
She has a lofty mind , and no one could be more unhappy than you . 
She 'll see that for herself . '' 
`` She wo n't forgive everything , '' said Dmitri , with a grin . 
`` There 's something in it , brother , that no woman could forgive . 
Do you know what would be the best thing to do ? '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Pay back the three thousand . '' 
`` Where can we get it from ? 
I say , I have two thousand . 
Ivan will give you another thousand - that makes three . 
Take it and pay it back . '' 
`` And when would you get it , your three thousand ? 
You 're not of age , besides , and you must - you absolutely must - take my farewell to her to-day , with the money or without it , for I ca n't drag on any longer , things have come to such a pass . 
To-morrow is too late . 
I shall send you to father . '' 
`` To father ? '' 
`` Yes , to father first . 
Ask him for three thousand . '' 
`` But , Mitya , he wo n't give it . '' 
`` As though he would ! 
I know he wo n't . 
Do you know the meaning of despair , Alexey ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Listen . 
Legally he owes me nothing . 
I 've had it all from him , I know that . 
But morally he owes me something , does n't he ? 
You know he started with twenty-eight thousand of my mother 's money and made a hundred thousand with it . 
Let him give me back only three out of the twenty-eight thousand , and he 'll draw my soul out of hell , and it will atone for many of his sins . 
For that three thousand - I give you my solemn word - I 'll make an end of everything , and he shall hear nothing more of me . 
For the last time I give him the chance to be a father . 
Tell him God Himself sends him this chance . '' 
`` Mitya , he wo n't give it for anything . '' 
`` I know he wo n't . 
I know it perfectly well . 
Now , especially . 
That 's not all . 
I know something more . 
Now , only a few days ago , perhaps only yesterday he found out for the first time in earnest -LRB- underline in earnest -RRB- that Grushenka is really perhaps not joking , and really means to marry me . 
He knows her nature ; he knows the cat . 
And do you suppose he 's going to give me money to help to bring that about when he 's crazy about her himself ? 
And that 's not all , either . 
I can tell you more than that . 
I know that for the last five days he has had three thousand drawn out of the bank , changed into notes of a hundred roubles . 
packed into a large envelope , sealed with five seals , and tied across with red tape . 
You see how well I know all about it ! 
On the envelope is written : ` To my angel , Grushenka , when she will come to me . ' 
He scrawled it himself in silence and in secret , and no one knows that the money 's there except the valet , Smerdyakov , whom he trusts like himself . 
So now he has been expecting Grushenka for the last three or four days ; he hopes she 'll come for the money . 
He has sent her word of it , and she has sent him word that perhaps she 'll come . 
And if she does go to the old man , can I marry her after that ? 
You understand now why I 'm here in secret and what I 'm on the watch for . '' 
`` For her ? '' 
`` Yes , for her . 
Foma has a room in the house of these sluts here . 
Foma comes from our parts ; he was a soldier in our regiment . 
He does jobs for them . 
He 's watchman at night and goes grouse-shooting in the day-time ; and that 's how he lives . 
I 've established myself in his room . 
Neither he nor the women of the house know the secret - that is , that I am on the watch here . '' 
`` No one but Smerdyakov knows , then ? '' 
`` No one else . 
He will let me know if she goes to the old man . '' 
`` It was he told you about the money , then ? '' 
`` Yes . 
It 's a dead secret . 
Even Ivan does n't know about the money , or anything . 
The old man is sending Ivan to Tchermashnya on a two or three days ' journey . 
A purchaser has turned up for the copse : he 'll give eight thousand for the timber . 
So the old man keeps asking Ivan to help him by going to arrange it . 
It will take him two or three days . 
That 's what the old man wants , so that Grushenka can come while he 's away . '' 
`` Then he 's expecting Grushenka to-day ? '' 
`` No , she wo n't come to-day ; there are signs , She 's certain not to come , '' cried Mitya suddenly . 
`` Smerdyakov thinks so , too . 
Father 's drinking now . 
He 's sitting at table with Ivan . 
Go to him , Alyosha , and ask for the three thousand . '' 
`` Mitya , dear , what 's the matter with you ? '' 
cried Alyosha , jumping up from his place , and looking keenly at his brother 's frenzied face . 
For one moment the thought struck him that Dmitri was mad . 
`` What is it ? 
I 'm not insane , '' said Dmitri , looking intently and earnestly at him . 
`` No fear . 
I am sending you to father , and I know what I 'm saying . 
I believe in miracles . '' 
`` In miracles ? '' 
`` In a miracle of Divine Providence . 
God knows my heart . 
He sees my despair . 
He sees the whole picture . 
Surely He wo n't let something awful happen . 
Alyosha , I believe in miracles . 
Go ! '' 
`` I am going . 
Tell me , will you wait for me here ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I know it will take some time . 
You ca n't go at him point blank . 
He 's drunk now . 
I 'll wait three hours - four , five , six , seven . 
Only remember you must go to Katerina Ivanovna to-day , if it has to be at midnight , with the money or without the money , and say , ` He sends his compliments to you . ' 
I want you to say that verse to her : ` He sends his compliments to you . ' '' 
`` Mitya ! 
And what if Grushenka comes to-day - if not to-day , or the next day ? '' 
`` Grushenka ? 
I shall see her . 
I shall rush out and prevent it . '' 
`` And if - ? '' 
`` If there 's an if , it will be murder . 
I could n't endure it . '' 
`` Who will be murdered ? '' 
`` The old man . 
I sha n't kill her . '' 
`` Brother , what are you saying ? '' 
`` Oh , I do n't know ... . 
I do n't know . 
Perhaps I sha n't kill , and perhaps I shall . 
I 'm afraid that he will suddenly become so loathsome to me with his face at that moment . 
I hate his ugly throat , his nose , his eyes , his shameless snigger . 
I feel a physical repulsion . 
That 's what I 'm afraid of . 
That 's what may be too much for me . '' 
`` I 'll go , Mitya . 
I believe that God will order things for the best , that nothing awful may happen . '' 
`` And I will sit and wait for the miracle . 
And if it does n't come to pass - '' Alyosha went thoughtfully towards his father 's house . 
Smerdyakov HE did in fact find his father still at table . 
Though there was a dining-room in the house , the table was laid as usual in the drawing room , which was the largest room , and furnished with old-fashioned ostentation . 
The furniture was white and very old , upholstered in old , red , silky material . 
In the spaces between the windows there were mirrors in elaborate white and gilt frames , of old-fashioned carving . 
On the walls , covered with white paper , which was torn in many places , there hung two large portraits - one of some prince who had been governor of the district thirty years before , and the other of some bishop , also long since dead . 
In the corner opposite the door there were several ikons , before which a lamp was lighted at nightfall ... not so much for devotional purposes as to light the room . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to go to bed very late , at three or four o'clock in the morning , and would wander about the room at night or sit in an armchair , thinking . 
This had become a habit with him . 
He often slept quite alone in the house , sending his servants to the lodge ; but usually Smerdyakov remained , sleeping on a bench in the hall . 
When Alyosha came in , dinner was over , but coffee and preserves had been served . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch liked sweet things with brandy after dinner . 
Ivan was also at table , sipping coffee . 
The servants , Grigory and Smerdyakov , were standing by . 
Both the gentlemen and the servants seemed in singularly good spirits . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was roaring with laughter . 
Before he entered the room , Alyosha heard the shrill laugh he knew so well , and could tell from the sound of it that his father had only reached the good-humoured stage , and was far from being completely drunk . 
`` Here he is ! 
Here he is ! '' 
yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch , highly delighted at seeing Alyosha . 
`` Join us . 
Sit down . 
Coffee is a lenten dish , but it 's hot and good . 
I do n't offer you brandy , you 're keeping the fast . 
But would you like some ? 
No ; I 'd better give you some of our famous liqueur . 
Smerdyakov , go to the cupboard , the second shelf on the right . 
Here are the keys . 
Look sharp ! '' 
Alyosha began refusing the liqueur . 
`` Never mind . 
If you wo n't have it , we will , '' said Fyodor Pavlovitch , beaming . 
`` But stay - have you dined ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Alyosha , who had in truth only eaten a piece of bread and drunk a glass of kvass in the Father Superior 's kitchen . 
`` Though I should be pleased to have some hot coffee . '' 
`` Bravo , my darling ! 
He 'll have some coffee . 
Does it want warming ? 
No , it 's boiling . 
It 's capital coffee : Smerdyakov 's making . 
My Smerdyakov 's an artist at coffee and at fish patties , and at fish soup , too . 
You must come one day and have some fish soup . 
Let me know beforehand ... . 
But , stay ; did n't I tell you this morning to come home with your mattress and pillow and all ? 
Have you brought your mattress ? 
He he he ! '' 
`` No , I have n't , '' said Alyosha , smiling , too . 
`` Ah , but you were frightened , you were frightened this morning , were n't you ? 
There , my darling , I could n't do anything to vex you . 
Do you know , Ivan , I ca n't resist the way he looks one straight in the face and laughs ? 
It makes me laugh all over . 
I 'm so fond of him . 
Alyosha , let me give you my blessing - a father 's blessing . '' 
Alyosha rose , but Fyodor Pavlovitch had already changed his mind . 
`` No , no , '' he said . 
`` I 'll just make the sign of the cross over you , for now . 
Sit still . 
Now we 've a treat for you , in your own line , too . 
It 'll make you laugh . 
Balaam 's ass has begun talking to us here - and how he talks ! 
How he talks ! 
Balaam 's ass , it appeared , was the valet , Smerdyakov . 
He was a young man of about four and twenty , remarkably unsociable and taciturn . 
Not that he was shy or bashful . 
On the contrary , he was conceited and seemed to despise everybody . 
But we must pause to say a few words about him now . 
He was brought up by Grigory and Marfa , but the boy grew up `` with no sense of gratitude , '' as Grigory expressed it ; he was an unfriendly boy , and seemed to look at the world mistrustfully . 
In his childhood he was very fond of hanging cats , and burying them with great ceremony . 
He used to dress up in a sheet as though it were a surplice , and sang , and waved some object over the dead cat as though it were a censer . 
All this he did on the sly , with the greatest secrecy . 
Grigory caught him once at this diversion and gave him a sound beating . 
He shrank into a corner and sulked there for a week . 
`` He does n't care for you or me , the monster , '' Grigory used to say to Marfa , `` and he does n't care for anyone . 
Are you a human being ? '' 
he said , addressing the boy directly . 
`` You 're not a human being . 
You grew from the mildew in the bath-house . 
That 's what you are , '' Smerdyakov , it appeared afterwards , could never forgive him those words . 
Grigory taught him to read and write , and when he was twelve years old , began teaching him the Scriptures . 
But this teaching came to nothing . 
At the second or third lesson the boy suddenly grinned . 
`` What 's that for ? '' 
asked Grigory , looking at him threateningly from under his spectacles . 
`` Oh , nothing . 
God created light on the first day , and the sun , moon , and stars on the fourth day . 
Where did the light come from on the first day ? '' 
Grigory was thunderstruck . 
The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher . 
There was something positively condescending in his expression . 
Grigory could not restrain himself . 
`` I 'll show you where ! '' 
he cried , and gave the boy a violent slap on the cheek . 
The boy took the slap without a word , but withdrew into his corner again for some days . 
A week later he had his first attack of the disease to which he was subject all the rest of his life - epilepsy . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it , his attitude to the boy seemed changed at once . 
Till then he had taken no notice of him , though he never scolded him , and always gave him a copeck when he met him . 
Sometimes , when he was in good humour , he would send the boy something sweet from his table . 
But as soon as he heard of his illness , he showed an active interest in him , sent for a doctor , and tried remedies , but the disease turned out to be incurable . 
The fits occurred , on an average , once a month , but at various intervals . 
The fits varied too , in violence : some were light and some were very severe . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly forbade Grigory to use corporal punishment to the boy , and began allowing him to come upstairs to him . 
He forbade him to be taught anything whatever for a time , too . 
One day when the boy was about fifteen , Fyodor Pavlovitch noticed him lingering by the bookcase , and reading the titles through the glass . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch had a fair number of books - over a hundred - but no one ever saw him reading . 
He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the bookcase . 
`` Come , read . 
You shall be my librarian . 
You 'll be better sitting reading than hanging about the courtyard . 
Come , read this , '' and Fyodor Pavlovitch gave him Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka . 
He read a little but did n't like it . 
He did not once smile , and ended by frowning . 
`` Why ? 
Is n't it funny ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Smerdyakov did not speak . 
`` Answer stupid ! '' 
`` It 's all untrue , '' mumbled the boy , with a grin . 
`` Then go to the devil ! 
You have the soul of a lackey . 
Stay , here 's Smaragdov 's Universal History . 
That 's all true . 
Read that . '' 
But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov . 
He thought it dull . 
So the bookcase was closed again . 
Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary fastidiousness . 
He would sit before his soup , take up his spoon and look into the soup , bend over it , examine it , take a spoonful and hold it to the light . 
`` What is it ? 
A beetle ? '' 
Grigory would ask . 
`` A fly , perhaps , '' observed Marfa . 
The squeamish youth never answered , but he did the same with his bread , his meat , and everything he ate . 
He would hold a piece on his fork to the light , scrutinise it microscopically , and only after long deliberation decide to put it in his mouth . 
`` Ach ! 
What fine gentlemen 's airs ! '' 
Grigory muttered , looking at him . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of this development in Smerdyakov he determined to make him his cook , and sent him to Moscow to be trained . 
He spent some years there and came back remarkably changed in appearance . 
He looked extraordinarily old for his age . 
His face had grown wrinkled , yellow , and strangely emasculate . 
In character he seemed almost exactly the same as before he went away . 
He was just as unsociable , and showed not the slightest inclination for any companionship . 
In Moscow , too , as we heard afterwards , he had always been silent . 
Moscow itself had little interest for him ; he saw very little there , and took scarcely any notice of anything . 
He went once to the theatre , but returned silent and displeased with it . 
On the other hand , he came back to us from Moscow well dressed , in a clean coat and clean linen . 
He brushed his clothes most scrupulously twice a day invariably , and was very fond of cleaning his smart calf boots with a special English polish , so that they shone like mirrors . 
He turned out a first rate cook . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch paid him a salary , almost the whole of which Smerdyakov spent on clothes , pomade , perfumes , and such things . 
But he seemed to have as much contempt for the female sex as for men ; he was discreet , almost unapproachable , with them . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch began to regard him rather differently . 
His fits were becoming more frequent , and on the days he was ill Marfa cooked , which did not suit Fyodor Pavlovitch at all . 
`` Why are your fits getting worse ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , looking askance at his new cook . 
`` Would you like to get married ? 
Shall I find you a wife ? '' 
But Smerdyakov turned pale with anger , and made no reply . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch left him with an impatient gesture . 
The great thing was that he had absolute confidence in his honesty . 
It happened once , when Fyodor Pavlovitch was drunk , that he dropped in the muddy courtyard three hundred-rouble notes which he had only just received . 
He only missed them next day , and was just hastening to search his pockets when he saw the notes lying on the table . 
Where had they come from ? 
Smerdyakov had picked them up and brought them in the day before . 
`` Well , my lad , I 've never met anyone like you , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch said shortly , and gave him ten roubles . 
We may add that he not only believed in his honesty , but had , for some reason , a liking for him , although the young man looked as morosely at him as at everyone and was always silent . 
He rarely spoke . 
If it had occurred to anyone to wonder at the time what the young man was interested in , and what was in his mind , it would have been impossible to tell by looking at him . 
Yet he used sometimes to stop suddenly in the house , or even in the yard or street , and would stand still for ten minutes , lost in thought . 
A physiognomist studying his face would have said that there was no thought in it , no reflection , but only a sort of contemplation . 
There is a remarkable picture by the painter Kramskoy , called `` Contemplation . '' 
There is a forest in winter , and on a roadway through the forest , in absolute solitude , stands a peasant in a torn kaftan and bark shoes . 
He stands , as it were , lost in thought . 
Yet he is not thinking ; he is `` contemplating . '' 
If anyone touched him he would start and look at one as though awakening and bewildered . 
It 's true he would come to himself immediately ; but if he were asked what he had been thinking about , he would remember nothing . 
Yet probably he has , hidden within himself , the impression which had dominated him during the period of contemplation . 
Those impressions are dear to him and no doubt he hoards them imperceptibly , and even unconsciously . 
How and why , of course , he does not know either . 
He may suddenly , after hoarding impressions for many years , abandon everything and go off to Jerusalem on a pilgrimage for his soul 's salvation , or perhaps he will suddenly set fire to his native village , and perhaps do both . 
There are a good many `` contemplatives '' among the peasantry . 
Well , Smerdyakov was probably one of them , and he probably was greedily hoarding up his impressions , hardly knowing why . 
The Controversy BUT Balaam 's ass had suddenly spoken . 
The subject was a strange one . 
Grigory had gone in the morning to make purchases , and had heard from the shopkeeper Lukyanov the story of a Russian soldier which had appeared in the newspaper of that day . 
This soldier had been taken prisoner in some remote part of Asia , and was threatened with an immediate agonising death if he did not renounce Christianity and follow Islam . 
He refused to deny his faith , and was tortured , flayed alive , and died , praising and glorifying Christ . 
Grigory had related the story at table . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch always liked , over the dessert after dinner , to laugh and talk , if only with Grigory . 
This afternoon he was in a particularly good-humoured and expansive mood . 
Sipping his brandy and listening to the story , he observed that they ought to make a saint of a soldier like that , and to take his skin to some monastery . 
`` That would make the people flock , and bring the money in . '' 
Grigory frowned , seeing that Fyodor Pavlovitch was by no means touched , but , as usual , was beginning to scoff . 
At that moment Smerdyakov , who was standing by the door , smiled . 
Smerdyakov often waited at table towards the end of dinner , and since Ivan 's arrival in our town he had done so every day . 
`` What are you grinning at ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch , catching the smile instantly , and knowing that it referred to Grigory . 
`` Well , my opinion is , '' Smerdyakov began suddenly and unexpectedly in a loud voice , `` that if that laudable soldier 's exploit was so very great there would have been , to my thinking , no sin in it if he had on such an emergency renounced , so to speak , the name of Christ and his own christening , to save by that same his life , for good deeds , by which , in the course of years to expiate his cowardice . '' 
`` How could it not be a sin ? 
You 're talking nonsense . 
For that you 'll go straight to hell and be roasted there like mutton , '' put in Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
It was at this point that Alyosha came in , and Fyodor Pavlovitch , as we have seen , was highly delighted at his appearance . 
`` We 're on your subject , your subject , '' he chuckled gleefully , making Alyosha sit down to listen . 
`` As for mutton , that 's not so , and there 'll be nothing there for this , and there should n't be either , if it 's according to justice , '' Smerdyakov maintained stoutly . 
`` How do you mean ` according to justice ' ? '' 
Fyodor Pavlovitch cried still more gaily , nudging Alyosha with his knee . 
`` He 's a rascal , that 's what he is ! '' 
burst from Grigory . 
He looked Smerdyakov wrathfully in the face . 
`` As for being a rascal , wait a little , Grigory Vassilyevitch , '' answered Smerdyakov with perfect composure . 
`` You 'd better consider yourself that , once I am taken prisoner by the enemies of the Christian race , and they demand from me to curse the name of God and to renounce my holy christening , I am fully entitled to act by my own reason , since there would be no sin in it . '' 
`` But you 've said that before . 
Do n't waste words . 
Prove it , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
`` Soup-maker ! '' 
muttered Grigory contemptuously . 
`` As for being a soup-maker , wait a bit , too , and consider for yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , without abusing me . 
For as soon as I say to those enemies , ` No , I 'm not a Christian , and I curse my true God , ' then at once , by God 's high judgment , I become immediately and specially anathema accursed , and am cut off from the Holy Church , exactly as though I were a heathen , so that at that very instant , not only when I say it aloud , but when I think of saying it , before a quarter of a second has passed , I am cut off . 
Is that so or not , Grigory Vassilyevitch ? '' 
He addressed Grigory with obvious satisfaction , though he was really answering Fyodor Pavlovitch 's questions , and was well aware of it , and intentionally pretending that Grigory had asked the questions . 
`` Ivan , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch suddenly , `` stoop down for me to whisper . 
He 's got this all up for your benefit . 
He wants you to praise him . 
Praise him . '' 
Ivan listened with perfect seriousness to his father 's excited whisper . 
`` Stay , Smerdyakov , be quiet a minute , '' cried Fyodor Pavlovitch once more . 
`` Ivan , your ear again . '' 
Ivan bent down again with a perfectly grave face . 
`` I love you as I do Alyosha . 
Do n't think I do n't love you . 
Some brandy ? '' 
`` Yes . 
- But you 're rather drunk yourself , '' thought Ivan , looking steadily at his father . 
He was watching Smerdyakov with great curiosity . 
`` You 're anathema accursed , as it is , Grigory suddenly burst out , `` and how dare you argue , you rascal , after that , if - '' `` Do n't scold him , Grigory , do n't scold him , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch cut him short . 
`` You should wait , Grigory Vassilyevitch , if only a short time , and listen , for I have n't finished all I had to say . 
For at the very moment I become accursed , at that same highest moment , I become exactly like a heathen , and my christening is taken off me and becomes of no avail . 
Is n't that so ? '' 
`` Make haste and finish , my boy , '' Fyodor Pavlovitch urged him , sipping from his wineglass with relish . 
`` And if I 've ceased to be a Christian , then I told no lie to the enemy when they asked whether I was a Christian or not a Christian , seeing I had already been relieved by God Himself of my Christianity by reason of the thought alone , before I had time to utter a word to the enemy . 
And if I have already been discharged , in what manner and with what sort of justice can I be held responsible as a Christian in the other world for having denied Christ , when , through the very thought alone , before denying Him I had been relieved from my christening ? 
If I 'm no longer a Christian , then I ca n't renounce Christ , for I 've nothing then to renounce . 
Who will hold an unclean Tatar responsible , Grigory Vassilyevitch , even in heaven , for not having been born a Christian ? 
And who would punish him for that , considering that you ca n't take two skins off one ox ? 
For God Almighty Himself , even if He did make the Tatar responsible , when he dies would give him the smallest possible punishment , I imagine -LRB- since he must be punished -RRB- , judging that he is not to blame if he has come into the world an unclean heathen , from heathen parents . 
The Lord God ca n't surely take a Tatar and say he was a Christian ? 
That would mean that the Almighty would tell a real untruth . 
And can the Lord of Heaven and earth tell a lie , even in one word ? '' 
Grigory was thunderstruck and looked at the orator , his eyes nearly starting out of his head . 
Though he did not clearly understand what was said , he had caught something in this rigmarole , and stood , looking like a man who has just hit his head against a wall . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch emptied his glass and went off into his shrill laugh . 
`` Alyosha ! 
Alyosha ! 
What do you say to that ! 
Ah , you casuist ! 
He must have been with the Jesuits , somewhere , Ivan . 
Oh , you stinking Jesuit , who taught you ? 
But you 're talking nonsense , you casuist , nonsense , nonsense , nonsense . 
Do n't cry , Grigory , we 'll reduce him to smoke and ashes in a moment . 
Tell me this , O ass ; you may be right before your enemies , but you have renounced your faith all the same in your own heart , and you say yourself that in that very hour you became anathema accursed . 
And if once you 're anathema they wo n't pat you on the head for it in hell . 
What do you say to that , my fine Jesuit ? '' 
`` There is no doubt that I have renounced it in my own heart , but there no special sin in that . 
Or if there was sin , it was the most ordinary . '' 
`` How 's that the most ordinary ? '' 
`` You lie , accursed one ! '' 
hissed Grigory . 
`` Consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , '' Smerdyakov went on , staid and unruffled , conscious of his triumph , but , as it were , generous to the vanquished foe . 
`` Consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch ; it is said in the Scripture that if you have faith , even as a mustard seed , and bid a mountain move into the sea , it will move without the least delay at your bidding . 
Well , Grigory Vassilyevitch , if I 'm without faith and you have so great a faith that you are continually swearing at me , you try yourself telling this mountain , not to move into the sea for that 's a long way off , but even to our stinking little river which runs at the bottom of the garden . 
You 'll see for yourself that it wo n't budge , but will remain just where it is however much you shout at it , and that shows , Grigory Vassilyevitch , that you have n't faith in the proper manner , and only abuse others about it . 
Again , taking into consideration that no one in our day , not only you , but actually no one , from the highest person to the lowest peasant , can shove mountains into the sea - except perhaps some one man in the world , or , at most , two , and they most likely are saving their souls in secret somewhere in the Egyptian desert , so you would n't find them - if so it be , if all the rest have no faith , will God curse all the rest ? 
that is , the population of the whole earth , except about two hermits in the desert , and in His well-known mercy will He not forgive one of them ? 
And so I 'm persuaded that though I may once have doubted I shall be forgiven if I shed tears of repentance . '' 
`` Stay ! '' 
cried Fyodor Pavlovitch , in a transport of delight . 
`` So you do suppose there are two who can move mountains ? 
Ivan , make a note of it , write it down . 
There you have the Russian all over ! '' 
`` You 're quite right in saying it 's characteristic of the people 's faith , '' Ivan assented , with an approving smile . 
`` You agree . 
Then it must be so , if you agree . 
It 's true , is n't it Alyosha ? 
That 's the Russian faith all over , is n't it ? '' 
`` No , Smerdyakov has not the Russian faith at all , '' said Alyosha firmly and gravely . 
`` I 'm not talking about his faith . 
I mean those two in the desert , only that idea . 
Surely that 's Russian , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes , that 's purely Russian , '' said Alyosha smiling . 
`` Your words are worth a gold piece , O ass , and I 'll give it to you to-day . 
But as to the rest you talk nonsense , nonsense , nonsense . 
Let me tell you , stupid , that we here are all of little faith , only from carelessness , because we have n't time ; things are too much for us , and , in the second place , the Lord God has given us so little time , only twenty-four hours in the day , so that one has n't even time to get sleep enough , much less to repent of one 's sins . 
While you have denied your faith to your enemies when you 'd nothing else to think about but to show your faith ! 
So I consider , brother , that it constitutes a sin . '' 
`` Constitute a sin it may , but consider yourself , Grigory Vassilyevitch , that it only extenuates it , if it does constitute . 
If I had believed then in very truth , as I ought to have believed , then it really would have been sinful if I had not faced tortures for my faith , and had gone over to the pagan Mohammedan faith . 
But , of course , it would n't have come to torture then , because I should only have had to say at that instant to the mountain , ` Move and crush the tormentor , ' and it would have moved and at the very instant have crushed him like a black-beetle , and I should have walked away as though nothing had happened , praising and glorifying God . 
But , suppose at that very moment I had tried all that , and cried to that mountain , ` Crush these tormentors , ' and it had n't crushed them , how could I have helped doubting , pray , at such a time , and at such a dread hour of mortal terror ? 
And apart from that , I should know already that I could not attain to the fullness of the Kingdom of Heaven -LRB- for since the mountain had not moved at my word , they could not think very much of my faith up aloft , and there could be no very great reward awaiting me in the world to come -RRB- . 
So why should I let them flay the skin off me as well , and to no good purpose ? 
For , even though they had flayed my skin half off my back , even then the mountain would not have moved at my word or at my cry . 
And at such a moment not only doubt might come over one but one might lose one 's reason from fear , so that one would not be able to think at all . 
And , therefore , how should I be particularly to blame if not seeing my advantage or reward there or here , I should , at least , save my skin . 
And so trusting fully in the grace of the Lord I should cherish the hope that I might be altogether forgiven . '' 
Over the Brandy THE controversy was over . 
But , strange to say , Fyodor Pavlovitch , who had been so gay , suddenly began frowning . 
He frowned and gulped brandy , and it was already a glass too much . 
`` Get along with you , Jesuits ! '' 
he cried to the servants . 
`` Go away , Smerdyakov . 
I 'll send you the gold piece I promised you to-day , but be off ! 
Do n't cry , Grigory . 
Go to Marfa . 
She 'll comfort you and put you to bed . 
The rascals wo n't let us sit in peace after dinner , '' he snapped peevishly , as the servants promptly withdrew at his word . 
`` Smerdyakov always pokes himself in now , after dinner . 
It 's you he 's so interested in . 
What have you done to fascinate him ? '' 
he added to Ivan . 
`` Nothing whatever , '' answered Ivan . 
`` He 's pleased to have a high opinion of me ; he 's a lackey and a mean soul . 
Raw material for revolution , however , when the time comes . '' 
`` There will be others and better ones . 
But there will be some like him as well . 
His kind will come first , and better ones after . '' 
`` And when will the time come ? '' 
`` The rocket will go off and fizzle out , perhaps . 
The peasants are not very fond of listening to these soup-makers , so far . '' 
`` Ah , brother , but a Balaam 's ass like that thinks and thinks , and the devil knows where he gets to . '' 
`` He 's storing up ideas , '' said Ivan , smiling . 
`` You see , I know he ca n't bear me , nor anyone else , even you , though you fancy that he has a high opinion of you . 
Worse still with Alyosha , he despises Alyosha . 
But he does n't steal , that 's one thing , and he 's not a gossip , he holds his tongue , and does n't wash our dirty linen in public . 
He makes capital fish pasties too . 
But , damn him , is he worth talking about so much ? '' 
`` Of course he is n't . '' 
`` And as for the ideas he may be hatching , the Russian peasant , generally speaking , needs thrashing . 
That I 've always maintained . 
Our peasants are swindlers , and do n't deserve to be pitied , and it 's a good thing they 're still flogged sometimes . 
Russia is rich in birches . 
If they destroyed the forests , it would be the ruin of Russia . 
I stand up for the clever people . 
We 've left off thrashing the peasants , we 've grown so clever , but they go on thrashing themselves . 
And a good thing too . 
` For with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again , ' or how does it go ? 
Anyhow , it will be measured . 
But Russia 's all swinishness . 
My dear , if you only knew how I hate Russia ... . 
That is , not Russia , but all this vice ! 
But maybe I mean Russia . 
Tout cela c'est de la cochonnerie ... * Do you know what I like ? 
I like wit . '' 
* All this is filthiness . 
`` You 've had another glass . 
That 's enough . '' 
`` Wait a bit . 
I 'll have one more , and then another , and then I 'll stop . 
No , stay , you interrupted me . 
At Mokroe I was talking to an old man , and he told me : ` There 's nothing we like so much as sentencing girls to be thrashed , and we always give the lads the job of thrashing them . 
And the girl he has thrashed to-day , the young man will ask in marriage to-morrow . 
So it quite suits the girls , too , ' he said . 
There 's a set of de Sades for you ! 
But it 's clever , anyway . 
Shall we go over and have a look at it , eh ? 
Alyosha , are you blushing ? 
Do n't be bashful , child . 
I 'm sorry I did n't stay to dinner at the Superior 's and tell the monks about the girls at Mokroe . 
Alyosha , do n't be angry that I offended your Superior this morning . 
I lost my temper . 
If there is a God , if He exists , then , of course , I 'm to blame , and I shall have to answer for it . 
But if there is n't a God at all , what do they deserve , your fathers ? 
It 's not enough to cut their heads off , for they keep back progress . 
Would you believe it , Ivan , that that lacerates my sentiments ? 
No , you do n't believe it as I see from your eyes . 
You believe what people say , that I 'm nothing but a buffoon . 
Alyosha , do you believe that I 'm nothing but a buffoon ? '' 
`` No , I do n't believe it . '' 
`` And I believe you do n't , and that you speak the truth . 
You look sincere and you speak sincerely . 
But not Ivan . 
Ivan 's supercilious ... . 
I 'd make an end of your monks , though , all the same . 
I 'd take all that mystic stuff and suppress it , once for all , all over Russia , so as to bring all the fools to reason . 
And the gold and the silver that would flow into the mint ! '' 
`` But why suppress it ? '' 
asked Ivan . 
`` That Truth may prevail . 
That 's why . '' 
`` Well , if Truth were to prevail , you know , you 'd be the first to be robbed and suppressed . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I dare say you 're right . 
Ah , I 'm an ass ! '' 
burst out Fyodor Pavlovitch , striking himself lightly on the forehead . 
`` Well , your monastery may stand then , Alyosha , if that 's how it is . 
And we clever people will sit snug and enjoy our brandy . 
You know , Ivan , it must have been so ordained by the Almighty Himself . 
Ivan , speak , is there a God or not ? 
Stay , speak the truth , speak seriously . 
Why are you laughing again ? '' 
`` I 'm laughing that you should have made a clever remark just now about Smerdyakov 's belief in the existence of two saints who could move mountains . '' 
`` Why , am I like him now , then ? '' 
`` Very much . '' 
`` Well , that shows I 'm a Russian , too , and I have a Russian characteristic . 
And you may be caught in the same way , though you are a philosopher . 
Shall I catch you ? 
What do you bet that I 'll catch you to-morrow ? 
Speak , all the same , is there a God , or not ? 
Only , be serious . 
I want you to be serious now . '' 
`` No , there is no God . '' 
`` Alyosha , is there a God ? '' 
`` There is . '' 
`` Ivan , and is there immortality of some sort , just a little , just a tiny bit ? '' 
`` There is no immortality either . '' 
`` None at all ? '' 
`` None at all . '' 
`` There 's absolute nothingness then . 
Perhaps there is just something ? 
Anything is better than nothing ! '' 
`` Alyosha , is there immortality ? '' 
`` God and immortality ? '' 
`` God and immortality . 
In God is immortality . '' 
`` H 'm ! 
It 's more likely Ivan 's right . 
Good Lord ! 
to think what faith , what force of all kinds , man has lavished for nothing , on that dream , and for how many thousand years . 
Who is it laughing at man ? 
Ivan For the last time , once for all , is there a God or not ? 
I ask for the last time ! '' 
`` And for the last time there is not . '' 
`` Who is laughing at mankind , Ivan ? '' 
`` It must be the devil , '' said Ivan , smiling . 
`` And the devil ? 
Does he exist ? '' 
`` No , there 's no devil either . '' 
`` It 's a pity . 
Damn it all , what would n't I do to the man who first invented God ! 
Hanging on a bitter aspen tree would be too good for , him . '' 
`` There would have been no civilisation if they had n't invented God . '' 
`` Would n't there have been ? 
Without God ? '' 
`` No . 
And there would have been no brandy either . 
But I must take your brandy away from you , anyway . '' 
`` Stop , stop , stop , dear boy , one more little glass . 
I 've hurt Alyosha 's feelings . 
You 're not angry with me , Alyosha ? 
My dear little Alexey ! '' 
`` No , I am not angry . 
I know your thoughts . 
Your heart is better than your head . '' 
`` My heart better than my head , is it ? 
Oh Lord ! 
And that from you . 
Ivan , do you love Alyosha ? '' 
`` You must love him '' -LRB- Fyodor Pavlovitch was by this time very drunk -RRB- . 
`` Listen , Alyosha , I was rude to your elder this morning . 
But I was excited . 
But there 's wit in that elder , do n't you think , Ivan ? '' 
`` Very likely . '' 
`` There is , there is . 
Il y a du Piron la-dedans . 
* He 's a Jesuit , a Russian one , that is . 
As he 's an honourable person there 's a hidden indignation boiling within him at having to pretend and affect holiness . '' 
* There 's something of Piron inside of him . 
`` But , of course , he believes in God . '' 
`` Not a bit of it . 
Did n't you know ? 
Why , he tells everyone so , himself . 
That is , not everyone , but all the clever people who come to him . 
He said straight out to Governor Schultz not long ago : ` Credo , but I do n't know in what . ' '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` He really did . 
But I respect him . 
There 's something of Mephistopheles about him , or rather of ` The hero of our time ' ... Arbenin , or what 's his name ? 
... You see , he 's a sensualist . 
He 's such a sensualist that I should be afraid for my daughter or my wife if she went to confess to him . 
You know , when he begins telling stories ... The year before last he invited us to tea , tea with liqueur -LRB- the ladies send him liqueur -RRB- , and began telling us about old times till we nearly split our sides ... . 
Especially how he once cured a paralysed woman . 
` If my legs were not bad I know a dance I could dance you , ' he said . 
What do you say to that ? 
` I 've plenty of tricks in my time , ' said he . 
He did Demidov , the merchant , out of sixty thousand . '' 
`` What , he stole it ? '' 
`` He brought him the money as a man he could trust , saying , ` Take care of it for me , friend , there 'll be a police search at my place to-morrow . ' 
And he kept it . 
` You have given it to the Church , ' he declared . 
I said to him : ` You 're a scoundrel , ' I said . 
` No , ' said he , ` I 'm not a scoundrel , but I 'm broadminded . ' 
But that was n't he , that was someone else . 
I 've muddled him with someone else ... without noticing it . 
Come , another glass and that 's enough . 
Take away the bottle , Ivan . 
I 've been telling lies . 
Why did n't you stop me , Ivan , and tell me I was lying ? '' 
`` I knew you 'd stop of yourself . '' 
`` That 's a lie . 
You did it from spite , from simple spite against me . 
You despise me . 
You have come to me and despised me in my own house . '' 
`` Well , I 'm going away . 
You 've had too much brandy . '' 
`` I 've begged you for Christ 's sake to go to Tchermashnya for a day or two , and you do n't go . '' 
`` I 'll go to-morrow if you 're so set upon it . '' 
`` You wo n't go . 
You want to keep an eye on me . 
That 's what you want , spiteful fellow . 
That 's why you wo n't go . '' 
The old man persisted . 
He had reached that state of drunkenness when the drunkard who has till then been inoffensive tries to pick a quarrel and to assert himself . 
`` Why are you looking at me ? 
Why do you look like that ? 
Your eyes look at me and say , ` You ugly drunkard ! ' 
Your eyes are mistrustful . 
They 're contemptuous ... . 
You 've come here with some design . 
Alyosha , here , looks at me and his eyes shine . 
Alyosha does n't despise me . 
Alexey , you must n't love Ivan . '' 
`` Do n't be ill-tempered with my brother . 
Leave off attacking him , '' Alyosha said emphatically . 
`` Oh , all right . 
Ugh , my head aches . 
Take away the brandy , Ivan . 
It 's the third time I 've told you . '' 
He mused , and suddenly a slow , cunning grin spread over his face . 
`` Do n't be angry with a feeble old man , Ivan . 
I know you do n't love me , but do n't be angry all the same . 
You 've nothing to love me for . 
You go to Tchermashnya . 
I 'll come to you myself and bring you a present . 
I 'll show you a little wench there . 
I 've had my eye on her a long time . 
She 's still running about bare-foot . 
Do n't be afraid of bare-footed wenches - do n't despise them - they 're pearls ! '' 
And he kissed his hand with a smack . 
`` To my thinking , '' he revived at once , seeming to grow sober the instant he touched on his favourite topic . 
`` To my thinking ... Ah , you boys ! 
You children , little sucking-pigs , to my thinking ... I never thought a woman ugly in my life - that 's been my rule ! 
Can you understand that ? 
How could you understand it ? 
You 've milk in your veins , not blood . 
You 're not out of your shells yet . 
My rule has been that you can always find something devilishly interesting in every woman that you would n't find in any other . 
Only , one must know how to find it , that 's the point ! 
That 's a talent ! 
To my mind there are no ugly women . 
The very fact that she is a woman is half the battle ... but how could you understand that ? 
Even in vieilles filles , even in them you may discover something that makes you simply wonder that men have been such fools as to let them grow old without noticing them . 
Bare-footed girls or unattractive ones , you must take by surprise . 
Did n't you know that ? 
You must astound them till they 're fascinated , upset , ashamed that such a gentleman should fall in love with such a little slut . 
It 's a jolly good thing that there always are and will be masters and slaves in the world , so there always will be a little maid-of-all-work and her master , and you know , that 's all that 's needed for happiness . 
Stay ... listen , Alyosha , I always used to surprise your mother , but in a different way . 
