said Kemp . 
`` I did n't mean to interrupt . '' 
`` It 's very probably been killed , '' said the Invisible Man . 
`` It was alive four days after , I know , and down a grating in Great Tichfield Street ; because I saw a crowd round the place , trying to see whence the miaowing came . '' 
He was silent for the best part of a minute . 
Then he resumed abruptly : `` I remember that morning before the change very vividly . 
I must have gone up Great Portland Street . 
I remember the barracks in Albany Street , and the horse soldiers coming out , and at last I found the summit of Primrose Hill . 
It was a sunny day in January -- one of those sunny , frosty days that came before the snow this year . 
My weary brain tried to formulate the position , to plot out a plan of action . 
`` I was surprised to find , now that my prize was within my grasp , how inconclusive its attainment seemed . 
As a matter of fact I was worked out ; the intense stress of nearly four years ' continuous work left me incapable of any strength of feeling . 
I was apathetic , and I tried in vain to recover the enthusiasm of my first inquiries , the passion of discovery that had enabled me to compass even the downfall of my father 's grey hairs . 
Nothing seemed to matter . 
I saw pretty clearly this was a transient mood , due to overwork and want of sleep , and that either by drugs or rest it would be possible to recover my energies . 
`` All I could think clearly was that the thing had to be carried through ; the fixed idea still ruled me . 
And soon , for the money I had was almost exhausted . 
I looked about me at the hillside , with children playing and girls watching them , and tried to think of all the fantastic advantages an invisible man would have in the world . 
After a time I crawled home , took some food and a strong dose of strychnine , and went to sleep in my clothes on my unmade bed . 
Strychnine is a grand tonic , Kemp , to take the flabbiness out of a man . '' 
`` It 's the devil , '' said Kemp . 
`` It 's the palaeolithic in a bottle . '' 
`` I awoke vastly invigorated and rather irritable . 
You know ? '' 
`` I know the stuff . '' 
`` And there was someone rapping at the door . 
It was my landlord with threats and inquiries , an old Polish Jew in a long grey coat and greasy slippers . 
I had been tormenting a cat in the night , he was sure -- the old woman 's tongue had been busy . 
He insisted on knowing all about it . 
The laws in this country against vivisection were very severe -- he might be liable . 
I denied the cat . 
Then the vibration of the little gas engine could be felt all over the house , he said . 
That was true , certainly . 
He edged round me into the room , peering about over his German-silver spectacles , and a sudden dread came into my mind that he might carry away something of my secret . 
I tried to keep between him and the concentrating apparatus I had arranged , and that only made him more curious . 
What was I doing ? 
Why was I always alone and secretive ? 
Was it legal ? 
Was it dangerous ? 
I paid nothing but the usual rent . 
His had always been a most respectable house -- in a disreputable neighbourhood . 
Suddenly my temper gave way . 
I told him to get out . 
He began to protest , to jabber of his right of entry . 
In a moment I had him by the collar ; something ripped , and he went spinning out into his own passage . 
I slammed and locked the door and sat down quivering . 
`` He made a fuss outside , which I disregarded , and after a time he went away . 
`` But this brought matters to a crisis . 
I did not know what he would do , nor even what he had the power to do . 
To move to fresh apartments would have meant delay ; altogether I had barely twenty pounds left in the world , for the most part in a bank -- and I could not afford that . 
Vanish ! 
It was irresistible . 
Then there would be an inquiry , the sacking of my room . 
`` At the thought of the possibility of my work being exposed or interrupted at its very climax , I became very angry and active . 
I hurried out with my three books of notes , my cheque-book -- the tramp has them now -- and directed them from the nearest Post Office to a house of call for letters and parcels in Great Portland Street . 
I tried to go out noiselessly . 
Coming in , I found my landlord going quietly upstairs ; he had heard the door close , I suppose . 
You would have laughed to see him jump aside on the landing as came tearing after him . 
He glared at me as I went by him , and I made the house quiver with the slamming of my door . 
I heard him come shuffling up to my floor , hesitate , and go down . 
I set to work upon my preparations forthwith . 
`` It was all done that evening and night . 
While I was still sitting under the sickly , drowsy influence of the drugs that decolourise blood , there came a repeated knocking at the door . 
It ceased , footsteps went away and returned , and the knocking was resumed . 
There was an attempt to push something under the door -- a blue paper . 
Then in a fit of irritation I rose and went and flung the door wide open . 
` Now then ? ' 
said I. `` It was my landlord , with a notice of ejectment or something . 
He held it out to me , saw something odd about my hands , I expect , and lifted his eyes to my face . 
`` For a moment he gaped . 
Then he gave a sort of inarticulate cry , dropped candle and writ together , and went blundering down the dark passage to the stairs . 
I shut the door , locked it , and went to the looking-glass . 
Then I understood his terror ... . 
My face was white -- like white stone . 
`` But it was all horrible . 
I had not expected the suffering . 
A night of racking anguish , sickness and fainting . 
I set my teeth , though my skin was presently afire , all my body afire ; but I lay there like grim death . 
I understood now how it was the cat had howled until I chloroformed it . 
Lucky it was I lived alone and untended in my room . 
There were times when I sobbed and groaned and talked . 
But I stuck to it ... . 
I became insensible and woke languid in the darkness . 
`` The pain had passed . 
I thought I was killing myself and I did not care . 
I shall never forget that dawn , and the strange horror of seeing that my hands had become as clouded glass , and watching them grow clearer and thinner as the day went by , until at last I could see the sickly disorder of my room through them , though I closed my transparent eyelids . 
My limbs became glassy , the bones and arteries faded , vanished , and the little white nerves went last . 
I gritted my teeth and stayed there to the end . 
At last only the dead tips of the fingernails remained , pallid and white , and the brown stain of some acid upon my fingers . 
`` I struggled up . 
At first I was as incapable as a swathed infant -- stepping with limbs I could not see . 
I was weak and very hungry . 
I went and stared at nothing in my shaving-glass , at nothing save where an attenuated pigment still remained behind the retina of my eyes , fainter than mist . 
I had to hang on to the table and press my forehead against the glass . 
`` It was only by a frantic effort of will that I dragged myself back to the apparatus and completed the process . 
`` I slept during the forenoon , pulling the sheet over my eyes to shut out the light , and about midday I was awakened again by a knocking . 
My strength had returned . 
I sat up and listened and heard a whispering . 
I sprang to my feet and as noiselessly as possible began to detach the connections of my apparatus , and to distribute it about the room , so as to destroy the suggestions of its arrangement . 
Presently the knocking was renewed and voices called , first my landlord 's , and then two others . 
To gain time I answered them . 
The invisible rag and pillow came to hand and I opened the window and pitched them out on to the cistern cover . 
As the window opened , a heavy crash came at the door . 
Someone had charged it with the idea of smashing the lock . 
But the stout bolts I had screwed up some days before stopped him . 
That startled me , made me angry . 
I began to tremble and do things hurriedly . 
`` I tossed together some loose paper , straw , packing paper and so forth , in the middle of the room , and turned on the gas . 
Heavy blows began to rain upon the door . 
I could not find the matches . 
I beat my hands on the wall with rage . 
I turned down the gas again , stepped out of the window on the cistern cover , very softly lowered the sash , and sat down , secure and invisible , but quivering with anger , to watch events . 
They split a panel , I saw , and in another moment they had broken away the staples of the bolts and stood in the open doorway . 
It was the landlord and his two step-sons , sturdy young men of three or four and twenty . 
Behind them fluttered the old hag of a woman from downstairs . 
`` You may imagine their astonishment to find the room empty . 
One of the younger men rushed to the window at once , flung it up and stared out . 
His staring eyes and thick-lipped bearded face came a foot from my face . 
I was half minded to hit his silly countenance , but I arrested my doubled fist . 
He stared right through me . 
So did the others as they joined him . 
The old man went and peered under the bed , and then they all made a rush for the cupboard . 
They had to argue about it at length in Yiddish and Cockney English . 
They concluded I had not answered them , that their imagination had deceived them . 
A feeling of extraordinary elation took the place of my anger as I sat outside the window and watched these four people -- for the old lady came in , glancing suspiciously about her like a cat , trying to understand the riddle of my behaviour . 
`` The old man , so far as I could understand his patois , agreed with the old lady that I was a vivisectionist . 
The sons protested in garbled English that I was an electrician , and appealed to the dynamos and radiators . 
They were all nervous about my arrival , although I found subsequently that they had bolted the front door . 
The old lady peered into the cupboard and under the bed , and one of the young men pushed up the register and stared up the chimney . 
One of my fellow lodgers , a coster-monger who shared the opposite room with a butcher , appeared on the landing , and he was called in and told incoherent things . 
`` It occurred to me that the radiators , if they fell into the hands of some acute well-educated person , would give me away too much , and watching my opportunity , I came into the room and tilted one of the little dynamos off its fellow on which it was standing , and smashed both apparatus . 
Then , while they were trying to explain the smash , I dodged out of the room and went softly downstairs . 
`` I went into one of the sitting-rooms and waited until they came down , still speculating and argumentative , all a little disappointed at finding no ` horrors , ' and all a little puzzled how they stood legally towards me . 
Then I slipped up again with a box of matches , fired my heap of paper and rubbish , put the chairs and bedding thereby , led the gas to the affair , by means of an india-rubber tube , and waving a farewell to the room left it for the last time . '' 
`` You fired the house ! '' 
exclaimed Kemp . 
`` Fired the house . 
It was the only way to cover my trail -- and no doubt it was insured . 
I slipped the bolts of the front door quietly and went out into the street . 
I was invisible , and I was only just beginning to realise the extraordinary advantage my invisibility gave me . 
My head was already teeming with plans of all the wild and wonderful things I had now impunity to do . 
IN OXFORD STREET `` In going downstairs the first time I found an unexpected difficulty because I could not see my feet ; indeed I stumbled twice , and there was an unaccustomed clumsiness in gripping the bolt . 
By not looking down , however , I managed to walk on the level passably well . 
`` My mood , I say , was one of exaltation . 
I felt as a seeing man might do , with padded feet and noiseless clothes , in a city of the blind . 
I experienced a wild impulse to jest , to startle people , to clap men on the back , fling people 's hats astray , and generally revel in my extraordinary advantage . 
`` But hardly had I emerged upon Great Portland Street , however -LRB- my lodging was close to the big draper 's shop there -RRB- , when I heard a clashing concussion and was hit violently behind , and turning saw a man carrying a basket of soda-water syphons , and looking in amazement at his burden . 
Although the blow had really hurt me , I found something so irresistible in his astonishment that I laughed aloud . 
` The devil 's in the basket , ' I said , and suddenly twisted it out of his hand . 
He let go incontinently , and I swung the whole weight into the air . 
`` But a fool of a cabman , standing outside a public house , made a sudden rush for this , and his extending fingers took me with excruciating violence under the ear . 
I let the whole down with a smash on the cabman , and then , with shouts and the clatter of feet about me , people coming out of shops , vehicles pulling up , I realised what I had done for myself , and cursing my folly , backed against a shop window and prepared to dodge out of the confusion . 
In a moment I should be wedged into a crowd and inevitably discovered . 
I pushed by a butcher boy , who luckily did not turn to see the nothingness that shoved him aside , and dodged behind the cab-man 's four-wheeler . 
I do not know how they settled the business , I hurried straight across the road , which was happily clear , and hardly heeding which way I went , in the fright of detection the incident had given me , plunged into the afternoon throng of Oxford Street . 
`` I tried to get into the stream of people , but they were too thick for me , and in a moment my heels were being trodden upon . 
I took to the gutter , the roughness of which I found painful to my feet , and forthwith the shaft of a crawling hansom dug me forcibly under the shoulder blade , reminding me that I was already bruised severely . 
I staggered out of the way of the cab , avoided a perambulator by a convulsive movement , and found myself behind the hansom . 
A happy thought saved me , and as this drove slowly along I followed in its immediate wake , trembling and astonished at the turn of my adventure . 
And not only trembling , but shivering . 
It was a bright day in January and I was stark naked and the thin slime of mud that covered the road was freezing . 
Foolish as it seems to me now , I had not reckoned that , transparent or not , I was still amenable to the weather and all its consequences . 
`` Then suddenly a bright idea came into my head . 
I ran round and got into the cab . 
And so , shivering , scared , and sniffing with the first intimations of a cold , and with the bruises in the small of my back growing upon my attention , I drove slowly along Oxford Street and past Tottenham Court Road . 
My mood was as different from that in which I had sallied forth ten minutes ago as it is possible to imagine . 
This invisibility indeed ! 
The one thought that possessed me was -- how was I to get out of the scrape I was in . 
`` We crawled past Mudie 's , and there a tall woman with five or six yellow-labelled books hailed my cab , and I sprang out just in time to escape her , shaving a railway van narrowly in my flight . 
I made off up the roadway to Bloomsbury Square , intending to strike north past the Museum and so get into the quiet district . 
I was now cruelly chilled , and the strangeness of my situation so unnerved me that I whimpered as I ran . 
At the northward corner of the Square a little white dog ran out of the Pharmaceutical Society 's offices , and incontinently made for me , nose down . 
`` I had never realised it before , but the nose is to the mind of a dog what the eye is to the mind of a seeing man . 
Dogs perceive the scent of a man moving as men perceive his vision . 
This brute began barking and leaping , showing , as it seemed to me , only too plainly that he was aware of me . 
I crossed Great Russell Street , glancing over my shoulder as I did so , and went some way along Montague Street before I realised what I was running towards . 
`` Then I became aware of a blare of music , and looking along the street saw a number of people advancing out of Russell Square , red shirts , and the banner of the Salvation Army to the fore . 
Such a crowd , chanting in the roadway and scoffing on the pavement , I could not hope to penetrate , and dreading to go back and farther from home again , and deciding on the spur of the moment , I ran up the white steps of a house facing the museum railings , and stood there until the crowd should have passed . 
Happily the dog stopped at the noise of the band too , hesitated , and turned tail , running back to Bloomsbury Square again . 
`` On came the band , bawling with unconscious irony some hymn about ` When shall we see His face ? ' 
and it seemed an interminable time to me before the tide of the crowd washed along the pavement by me . 
Thud , thud , thud , came the drum with a vibrating resonance , and for the moment I did not notice two urchins stopping at the railings by me . 
` See 'em , ' said one . 
` See what ? ' 
said the other . 
` Why -- them footmarks -- bare . 
Like what you makes in mud . ' 
`` I looked down and saw the youngsters had stopped and were gaping at the muddy footmarks I had left behind me up the newly whitened steps . 
The passing people elbowed and jostled them , but their confounded intelligence was arrested . 
` Thud , thud , thud , when , thud , shall we see , thud , his face , thud , thud . ' 
` There 's a barefoot man gone up them steps , or I do n't know nothing , ' said one . 
` And he ai n't never come down again . 
And his foot was a-bleeding . ' 
`` The thick of the crowd had already passed . 
` Looky there , Ted , ' quoth the younger of the detectives , with the sharpness of surprise in his voice , and pointed straight to my feet . 
I looked down and saw at once the dim suggestion of their outline sketched in splashes of mud . 
For a moment I was paralysed . '' 
` Why , that 's rum , ' said the elder . 
` Dashed rum ! 
It 's just like the ghost of a foot , ai n't it ? ' 
He hesitated and advanced with outstretched hand . 
A man pulled up short to see what he was catching , and then a girl . 
In another moment he would have touched me . 
Then I saw what to do . 
I made a step , the boy started back with an exclamation , and with a rapid movement I swung myself over into the portico of the next house . 
But the smaller boy was sharp-eyed enough to follow the movement , and before I was well down the steps and upon the pavement , he had recovered from his momentary astonishment and was shouting out that the feet had gone over the wall . 
`` They rushed round and saw my new footmarks flash into being on the lower step and upon the pavement . 
` What 's up ? ' 
asked someone . 
` Feet ! 
Look ! 
Feet running ! ' 
`` Everybody in the road , except my three pursuers , was pouring along after the Salvation Army , and this blow not only impeded me but them . 
There was an eddy of surprise and interrogation . 
At the cost of bowling over one young fellow I got through , and in another moment I was rushing headlong round the circuit of Russell Square , with six or seven astonished people following my footmarks . 
There was no time for explanation , or else the whole host would have been after me . 
`` Twice I doubled round corners , thrice I crossed the road and came back upon my tracks , and then , as my feet grew hot and dry , the damp impressions began to fade . 
At last I had a breathing space and rubbed my feet clean with my hands , and so got away altogether . 
The last I saw of the chase was a little group of a dozen people perhaps , studying with infinite perplexity a slowly drying footprint that had resulted from a puddle in Tavistock Square , a footprint as isolated and incomprehensible to them as Crusoe 's solitary discovery . 
`` This running warmed me to a certain extent , and I went on with a better courage through the maze of less frequented roads that runs hereabouts . 
My back had now become very stiff and sore , my tonsils were painful from the cabman 's fingers , and the skin of my neck had been scratched by his nails ; my feet hurt exceedingly and I was lame from a little cut on one foot . 
I saw in time a blind man approaching me , and fled limping , for I feared his subtle intuitions . 
Once or twice accidental collisions occurred and I left people amazed , with unaccountable curses ringing in their ears . 
Then came something silent and quiet against my face , and across the Square fell a thin veil of slowly falling flakes of snow . 
I had caught a cold , and do as I would I could not avoid an occasional sneeze . 
And every dog that came in sight , with its pointing nose and curious sniffing , was a terror to me . 
`` Then came men and boys running , first one and then others , and shouting as they ran . 
It was a fire . 
They ran in the direction of my lodging , and looking back down a street I saw a mass of black smoke streaming up above the roofs and telephone wires . 
It was my lodging burning ; my clothes , my apparatus , all my resources indeed , except my cheque-book and the three volumes of memoranda that awaited me in Great Portland Street , were there . 
Burning ! 
I had burnt my boats -- if ever a man did ! 
The place was blazing . '' 
The Invisible Man paused and thought . 
Kemp glanced nervously out of the window . 
`` Yes ? '' 
he said . 
`` Go on . '' 
IN THE EMPORIUM `` So last January , with the beginning of a snowstorm in the air about me -- and if it settled on me it would betray me ! 
-- weary , cold , painful , inexpressibly wretched , and still but half convinced of my invisible quality , I began this new life to which I am committed . 
I had no refuge , no appliances , no human being in the world in whom I could confide . 
To have told my secret would have given me away -- made a mere show and rarity of me . 
Nevertheless , I was half-minded to accost some passer-by and throw myself upon his mercy . 
But I knew too clearly the terror and brutal cruelty my advances would evoke . 
I made no plans in the street . 
My sole object was to get shelter from the snow , to get myself covered and warm ; then I might hope to plan . 
But even to me , an Invisible Man , the rows of London houses stood latched , barred , and bolted impregnably . 
`` Only one thing could I see clearly before me -- the cold exposure and misery of the snowstorm and the night . 
`` And then I had a brilliant idea . 
I turned down one of the roads leading from Gower Street to Tottenham Court Road , and found myself outside Omniums , the big establishment where everything is to be bought -- you know the place : meat , grocery , linen , furniture , clothing , oil paintings even -- a huge meandering collection of shops rather than a shop . 
I had thought I should find the doors open , but they were closed , and as I stood in the wide entrance a carriage stopped outside , and a man in uniform -- you know the kind of personage with ` Omnium ' on his cap -- flung open the door . 
I contrived to enter , and walking down the shop -- it was a department where they were selling ribbons and gloves and stockings and that kind of thing -- came to a more spacious region devoted to picnic baskets and wicker furniture . 
`` I did not feel safe there , however ; people were going to and fro , and I prowled restlessly about until I came upon a huge section in an upper floor containing multitudes of bedsteads , and over these I clambered , and found a resting-place at last among a huge pile of folded flock mattresses . 
The place was already lit up and agreeably warm , and I decided to remain where I was , keeping a cautious eye on the two or three sets of shopmen and customers who were meandering through the place , until closing time came . 
Then I should be able , I thought , to rob the place for food and clothing , and disguised , prowl through it and examine its resources , perhaps sleep on some of the bedding . 
That seemed an acceptable plan . 
My idea was to procure clothing to make myself a muffled but acceptable figure , to get money , and then to recover my books and parcels where they awaited me , take a lodging somewhere and elaborate plans for the complete realisation of the advantages my invisibility gave me -LRB- as I still imagined -RRB- over my fellow-men . 
`` Closing time arrived quickly enough . 
It could not have been more than an hour after I took up my position on the mattresses before I noticed the blinds of the windows being drawn , and customers being marched doorward . 
And then a number of brisk young men began with remarkable alacrity to tidy up the goods that remained disturbed . 
I left my lair as the crowds diminished , and prowled cautiously out into the less desolate parts of the shop . 
I was really surprised to observe how rapidly the young men and women whipped away the goods displayed for sale during the day . 
All the boxes of goods , the hanging fabrics , the festoons of lace , the boxes of sweets in the grocery section , the displays of this and that , were being whipped down , folded up , slapped into tidy receptacles , and everything that could not be taken down and put away had sheets of some coarse stuff like sacking flung over them . 
Finally all the chairs were turned up on to the counters , leaving the floor clear . 
Directly each of these young people had done , he or she made promptly for the door with such an expression of animation as I have rarely observed in a shop assistant before . 
Then came a lot of youngsters scattering sawdust and carrying pails and brooms . 
I had to dodge to get out of the way , and as it was , my ankle got stung with the sawdust . 
For some time , wandering through the swathed and darkened departments , I could hear the brooms at work . 
And at last a good hour or more after the shop had been closed , came a noise of locking doors . 
Silence came upon the place , and I found myself wandering through the vast and intricate shops , galleries , show-rooms of the place , alone . 
It was very still ; in one place I remember passing near one of the Tottenham Court Road entrances and listening to the tapping of boot-heels of the passers-by . 
`` My first visit was to the place where I had seen stockings and gloves for sale . 
It was dark , and I had the devil of a hunt after matches , which I found at last in the drawer of the little cash desk . 
Then I had to get a candle . 
I had to tear down wrappings and ransack a number of boxes and drawers , but at last I managed to turn out what I sought ; the box label called them lambswool pants , and lambswool vests . 
Then socks , a thick comforter , and then I went to the clothing place and got trousers , a lounge jacket , an overcoat and a slouch hat -- a clerical sort of hat with the brim turned down . 
I began to feel a human being again , and my next thought was food . 
`` Upstairs was a refreshment department , and there I got cold meat . 
There was coffee still in the urn , and I lit the gas and warmed it up again , and altogether I did not do badly . 
Afterwards , prowling through the place in search of blankets -- I had to put up at last with a heap of down quilts -- I came upon a grocery section with a lot of chocolate and candied fruits , more than was good for me indeed -- and some white burgundy . 
And near that was a toy department , and I had a brilliant idea . 
I found some artificial noses -- dummy noses , you know , and I thought of dark spectacles . 
But Omniums had no optical department . 
My nose had been a difficulty indeed -- I had thought of paint . 
But the discovery set my mind running on wigs and masks and the like . 
Finally I went to sleep in a heap of down quilts , very warm and comfortable . 
`` My last thoughts before sleeping were the most agreeable I had had since the change . 
I was in a state of physical serenity , and that was reflected in my mind . 
I thought that I should be able to slip out unobserved in the morning with my clothes upon me , muffling my face with a white wrapper I had taken , purchase , with the money I had taken , spectacles and so forth , and so complete my disguise . 
I lapsed into disorderly dreams of all the fantastic things that had happened during the last few days . 
I saw the ugly little Jew of a landlord vociferating in his rooms ; I saw his two sons marvelling , and the wrinkled old woman 's gnarled face as she asked for her cat . 
I experienced again the strange sensation of seeing the cloth disappear , and so I came round to the windy hillside and the sniffing old clergyman mumbling ` Earth to earth , ashes to ashes , dust to dust , ' at my father 's open grave . '' 
` You also , ' said a voice , and suddenly I was being forced towards the grave . 
I struggled , shouted , appealed to the mourners , but they continued stonily following the service ; the old clergyman , too , never faltered droning and sniffing through the ritual . 
I realised I was invisible and inaudible , that overwhelming forces had their grip on me . 
I struggled in vain , I was forced over the brink , the coffin rang hollow as I fell upon it , and the gravel came flying after me in spadefuls . 
Nobody heeded me , nobody was aware of me . 
I made convulsive struggles and awoke . 
`` The pale London dawn had come , the place was full of a chilly grey light that filtered round the edges of the window blinds . 
I sat up , and for a time I could not think where this ample apartment , with its counters , its piles of rolled stuff , its heap of quilts and cushions , its iron pillars , might be . 
Then , as recollection came back to me , I heard voices in conversation . 
`` Then far down the place , in the brighter light of some department which had already raised its blinds , I saw two men approaching . 
I scrambled to my feet , looking about me for some way of escape , and even as I did so the sound of my movement made them aware of me . 
I suppose they saw merely a figure moving quietly and quickly away . 
` Who 's that ? ' 
cried one , and ` Stop , there ! ' 
shouted the other . 
I dashed around a corner and came full tilt -- a faceless figure , mind you ! 
-- on a lanky lad of fifteen . 
He yelled and I bowled him over , rushed past him , turned another corner , and by a happy inspiration threw myself behind a counter . 
In another moment feet went running past and I heard voices shouting , ` All hands to the doors ! ' 
asking what was ` up , ' and giving one another advice how to catch me . 
`` Lying on the ground , I felt scared out of my wits . 
But -- odd as it may seem -- it did not occur to me at the moment to take off my clothes as I should have done . 
I had made up my mind , I suppose , to get away in them , and that ruled me . 
And then down the vista of the counters came a bawling of ` Here he is ! ' 
`` I sprang to my feet , whipped a chair off the counter , and sent it whirling at the fool who had shouted , turned , came into another round a corner , sent him spinning , and rushed up the stairs . 
He kept his footing , gave a view hallo , and came up the staircase hot after me . 
Up the staircase were piled a multitude of those bright-coloured pot things -- what are they ? '' 
`` Art pots , '' suggested Kemp . 
`` That 's it ! 
Art pots . 
Well , I turned at the top step and swung round , plucked one out of a pile and smashed it on his silly head as he came at me . 
The whole pile of pots went headlong , and I heard shouting and footsteps running from all parts . 
I made a mad rush for the refreshment place , and there was a man in white like a man cook , who took up the chase . 
I made one last desperate turn and found myself among lamps and ironmongery . 
I went behind the counter of this , and waited for my cook , and as he bolted in at the head of the chase , I doubled him up with a lamp . 
Down he went , and I crouched down behind the counter and began whipping off my clothes as fast as I could . 
Coat , jacket , trousers , shoes were all right , but a lambswool vest fits a man like a skin . 
I heard more men coming , my cook was lying quiet on the other side of the counter , stunned or scared speechless , and I had to make another dash for it , like a rabbit hunted out of a wood-pile . '' 
` This way , policeman ! ' 
I heard someone shouting . 
I found myself in my bedstead storeroom again , and at the end of a wilderness of wardrobes . 
I rushed among them , went flat , got rid of my vest after infinite wriggling , and stood a free man again , panting and scared , as the policeman and three of the shopmen came round the corner . 
They made a rush for the vest and pants , and collared the trousers . 
` He 's dropping his plunder , ' said one of the young men . 
` He must be somewhere here . ' 
`` But they did not find me all the same . 
`` I stood watching them hunt for me for a time , and cursing my ill-luck in losing the clothes . 
Then I went into the refreshment-room , drank a little milk I found there , and sat down by the fire to consider my position . 
`` In a little while two assistants came in and began to talk over the business very excitedly and like the fools they were . 
I heard a magnified account of my depredations , and other speculations as to my whereabouts . 
Then I fell to scheming again . 
The insurmountable difficulty of the place , especially now it was alarmed , was to get any plunder out of it . 
I went down into the warehouse to see if there was any chance of packing and addressing a parcel , but I could not understand the system of checking . 
About eleven o'clock , the snow having thawed as it fell , and the day being finer and a little warmer than the previous one , I decided that the Emporium was hopeless , and went out again , exasperated at my want of success , with only the vaguest plans of action in my mind . '' 
IN DRURY LANE `` But you begin now to realise , '' said the Invisible Man , `` the full disadvantage of my condition . 
I had no shelter -- no covering -- to get clothing was to forego all my advantage , to make myself a strange and terrible thing . 
I was fasting ; for to eat , to fill myself with unassimilated matter , would be to become grotesquely visible again . '' 
`` I never thought of that , '' said Kemp . 
`` Nor had I. And the snow had warned me of other dangers . 
I could not go abroad in snow -- it would settle on me and expose me . 
Rain , too , would make me a watery outline , a glistening surface of a man -- a bubble . 
And fog -- I should be like a fainter bubble in a fog , a surface , a greasy glimmer of humanity . 
Moreover , as I went abroad -- in the London air -- I gathered dirt about my ankles , floating smuts and dust upon my skin . 
I did not know how long it would be before I should become visible from that cause also . 
But I saw clearly it could not be for long . 
`` Not in London at any rate . 
`` I went into the slums towards Great Portland Street , and found myself at the end of the street in which I had lodged . 
I did not go that way , because of the crowd halfway down it opposite to the still smoking ruins of the house I had fired . 
My most immediate problem was to get clothing . 
What to do with my face puzzled me . 
Then I saw in one of those little miscellaneous shops -- news , sweets , toys , stationery , belated Christmas tomfoolery , and so forth -- an array of masks and noses . 
I realised that problem was solved . 
In a flash I saw my course . 
I turned about , no longer aimless , and went -- circuitously in order to avoid the busy ways , towards the back streets north of the Strand ; for I remembered , though not very distinctly where , that some theatrical costumiers had shops in that district . 
`` The day was cold , with a nipping wind down the northward running streets . 
I walked fast to avoid being overtaken . 
Every crossing was a danger , every passenger a thing to watch alertly . 
One man as I was about to pass him at the top of Bedford Street , turned upon me abruptly and came into me , sending me into the road and almost under the wheel of a passing hansom . 
The verdict of the cab-rank was that he had had some sort of stroke . 
I was so unnerved by this encounter that I went into Covent Garden Market and sat down for some time in a quiet corner by a stall of violets , panting and trembling . 
I found I had caught a fresh cold , and had to turn out after a time lest my sneezes should attract attention . 
`` At last I reached the object of my quest , a dirty , fly-blown little shop in a by-way near Drury Lane , with a window full of tinsel robes , sham jewels , wigs , slippers , dominoes and theatrical photographs . 
The shop was old-fashioned and low and dark , and the house rose above it for four storeys , dark and dismal . 
I peered through the window and , seeing no one within , entered . 
The opening of the door set a clanking bell ringing . 
I left it open , and walked round a bare costume stand , into a corner behind a cheval glass . 
For a minute or so no one came . 
Then I heard heavy feet striding across a room , and a man appeared down the shop . 
`` My plans were now perfectly definite . 
I proposed to make my way into the house , secrete myself upstairs , watch my opportunity , and when everything was quiet , rummage out a wig , mask , spectacles , and costume , and go into the world , perhaps a grotesque but still a credible figure . 
And incidentally of course I could rob the house of any available money . 
`` The man who had just entered the shop was a short , slight , hunched , beetle-browed man , with long arms and very short bandy legs . 
Apparently I had interrupted a meal . 
He stared about the shop with an expression of expectation . 
This gave way to surprise , and then to anger , as he saw the shop empty . 
` Damn the boys ! ' 
he said . 
He went to stare up and down the street . 
He came in again in a minute , kicked the door to with his foot spitefully , and went muttering back to the house door . 
`` I came forward to follow him , and at the noise of my movement he stopped dead . 
I did so too , startled by his quickness of ear . 
He slammed the house door in my face . 
`` I stood hesitating . 
Suddenly I heard his quick footsteps returning , and the door reopened . 
He stood looking about the shop like one who was still not satisfied . 
Then , murmuring to himself , he examined the back of the counter and peered behind some fixtures . 
Then he stood doubtful . 
He had left the house door open and I slipped into the inner room . 
`` It was a queer little room , poorly furnished and with a number of big masks in the corner . 
On the table was his belated breakfast , and it was a confoundedly exasperating thing for me , Kemp , to have to sniff his coffee and stand watching while he came in and resumed his meal . 
And his table manners were irritating . 
Three doors opened into the little room , one going upstairs and one down , but they were all shut . 
I could not get out of the room while he was there ; I could scarcely move because of his alertness , and there was a draught down my back . 
Twice I strangled a sneeze just in time . 
`` The spectacular quality of my sensations was curious and novel , but for all that I was heartily tired and angry long before he had done his eating . 
But at last he made an end and putting his beggarly crockery on the black tin tray upon which he had had his teapot , and gathering all the crumbs up on the mustard stained cloth , he took the whole lot of things after him . 
His burden prevented his shutting the door behind him -- as he would have done ; I never saw such a man for shutting doors -- and I followed him into a very dirty underground kitchen and scullery . 
I had the pleasure of seeing him begin to wash up , and then , finding no good in keeping down there , and the brick floor being cold on my feet , I returned upstairs and sat in his chair by the fire . 
It was burning low , and scarcely thinking , I put on a little coal . 
The noise of this brought him up at once , and he stood aglare . 
He peered about the room and was within an ace of touching me . 
Even after that examination , he scarcely seemed satisfied . 
He stopped in the doorway and took a final inspection before he went down . 
`` I waited in the little parlour for an age , and at last he came up and opened the upstairs door . 
I just managed to get by him . 
`` On the staircase he stopped suddenly , so that I very nearly blundered into him . 
He stood looking back right into my face and listening . ' 
I could have sworn , ' he said . 
His long hairy hand pulled at his lower lip . 
His eye went up and down the staircase . 
Then he grunted and went on up again . 
`` His hand was on the handle of a door , and then he stopped again with the same puzzled anger on his face . 
He was becoming aware of the faint sounds of my movements about him . 
The man must have had diabolically acute hearing . 
He suddenly flashed into rage . 
` If there 's anyone in this house -- ' he cried with an oath , and left the threat unfinished . 
He put his hand in his pocket , failed to find what he wanted , and rushing past me went blundering noisily and pugnaciously downstairs . 
But I did not follow him . 
I sat on the head of the staircase until his return . 
`` Presently he came up again , still muttering . 
He opened the door of the room , and before I could enter , slammed it in my face . 
`` I resolved to explore the house , and spent some time in doing so as noiselessly as possible . 
The house was very old and tumble-down , damp so that the paper in the attics was peeling from the walls , and rat infested . 
Some of the door handles were stiff and I was afraid to turn them . 
Several rooms I did inspect were unfurnished , and others were littered with theatrical lumber , bought second-hand , I judged , from its appearance . 
In one room next to his I found a lot of old clothes . 
I began routing among these , and in my eagerness forgot again the evident sharpness of his ears . 
I heard a stealthy footstep and , looking up just in time , saw him peering in at the tumbled heap and holding an old-fashioned revolver in his hand . 
I stood perfectly still while he stared about open-mouthed and suspicious . 
` It must have been her , ' he said slowly . 
` Damn her ! ' 
`` He shut the door quietly , and immediately I heard the key turn in the lock . 
Then his footsteps retreated . 
I realised abruptly that I was locked in . 
For a minute I did not know what to do . 
I walked from door to window and back , and stood perplexed . 
A gust of anger came upon me . 
But I decided to inspect the clothes before I did anything further , and my first attempt brought down a pile from an upper shelf . 
This brought him back , more sinister than ever . 
That time he actually touched me , jumped back with amazement and stood astonished in the middle of the room . 
`` Presently he calmed a little . 
` Rats , ' he said in an undertone , fingers on lips . 
He was evidently a little scared . 
I edged quietly out of the room , but a plank creaked . 
Then the infernal little brute started going all over the house , revolver in hand and locking door after door and pocketing the keys . 
When I realised what he was up to I had a fit of rage -- I could hardly control myself sufficiently to watch my opportunity . 
By this time I knew he was alone in the house , and so I made no more ado , but knocked him on the head . '' 
`` Knocked him on the head ? '' 
exclaimed Kemp . 
`` Yes -- stunned him -- as he was going downstairs . 
Hit him from behind with a stool that stood on the landing . 
He went downstairs like a bag of old boots . '' 
`` But -- I say ! 
The common conventions of humanity -- '' `` Are all very well for common people . 
But the point was , Kemp , that I had to get out of that house in a disguise without his seeing me . 
I could n't think of any other way of doing it . 
And then I gagged him with a Louis Quatorze vest and tied him up in a sheet . '' 
`` Tied him up in a sheet ! '' 
`` Made a sort of bag of it . 
It was rather a good idea to keep the idiot scared and quiet , and a devilish hard thing to get out of -- head away from the string . 
My dear Kemp , it 's no good your sitting glaring as though I was a murderer . 
It had to be done . 
He had his revolver . 
If once he saw me he would be able to describe me -- '' `` But still , '' said Kemp , `` in England -- to-day . 
And the man was in his own house , and you were -- well , robbing . '' 
`` Robbing ! 
Confound it ! 
You 'll call me a thief next ! 
Surely , Kemp , you 're not fool enough to dance on the old strings . 
Ca n't you see my position ? '' 
`` And his too , '' said Kemp . 
The Invisible Man stood up sharply . 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
Kemp 's face grew a trifle hard . 
He was about to speak and checked himself . 
`` I suppose , after all , '' he said with a sudden change of manner , `` the thing had to be done . 
You were in a fix . 
But still -- '' `` Of course I was in a fix -- an infernal fix . 
And he made me wild too -- hunting me about the house , fooling about with his revolver , locking and unlocking doors . 
He was simply exasperating . 
You do n't blame me , do you ? 
You do n't blame me ? '' 
`` I never blame anyone , '' said Kemp . 
`` It 's quite out of fashion . 
What did you do next ? '' 
`` I was hungry . 
Downstairs I found a loaf and some rank cheese -- more than sufficient to satisfy my hunger . 
I took some brandy and water , and then went up past my impromptu bag -- he was lying quite still -- to the room containing the old clothes . 
