Interrogative cough . 
` How the devil , ' said I , ` can you move an empty sleeve like that ? ' 
'Em pty sleeve ? ' 
` Yes , ' said I , ` an empty sleeve . ' '' 
` It 's an empty sleeve , is it ? 
You saw it was an empty sleeve ? ' 
He stood up right away . 
I stood up too . 
He came towards me in three very slow steps , and stood quite close . 
Sniffed venomously . 
I did n't flinch , though I 'm hanged if that bandaged knob of his , and those blinkers , are n't enough to unnerve any one , coming quietly up to you . '' 
` You said it was an empty sleeve ? ' 
he said . 
` Certainly , ' I said . 
At staring and saying nothing a barefaced man , unspectacled , starts scratch . 
Then very quietly he pulled his sleeve out of his pocket again , and raised his arm towards me as though he would show it to me again . 
He did it very , very slowly . 
I looked at it . 
Seemed an age . 
` Well ? ' 
said I , clearing my throat , ` there 's nothing in it . ' 
`` Had to say something . 
I was beginning to feel frightened . 
I could see right down it . 
He extended it straight towards me , slowly , slowly -- just like that -- until the cuff was six inches from my face . 
Queer thing to see an empty sleeve come at you like that ! 
And then -- '' `` Well ? '' 
`` Something -- exactly like a finger and thumb it felt -- nipped my nose . '' 
Bunting began to laugh . 
`` There was n't anything there ! '' 
said Cuss , his voice running up into a shriek at the `` there . '' 
`` It 's all very well for you to laugh , but I tell you I was so startled , I hit his cuff hard , and turned around , and cut out of the room -- I left him -- '' Cuss stopped . 
There was no mistaking the sincerity of his panic . 
He turned round in a helpless way and took a second glass of the excellent vicar 's very inferior sherry . 
`` When I hit his cuff , '' said Cuss , `` I tell you , it felt exactly like hitting an arm . 
And there was n't an arm ! 
There was n't the ghost of an arm ! '' 
Mr. Bunting thought it over . 
He looked suspiciously at Cuss . 
`` It 's a most remarkable story , '' he said . 
He looked very wise and grave indeed . 
`` It 's really , '' said Mr. Bunting with judicial emphasis , `` a most remarkable story . '' 
THE BURGLARY AT THE VICARAGE The facts of the burglary at the vicarage came to us chiefly through the medium of the vicar and his wife . 
It occurred in the small hours of Whit Monday , the day devoted in Iping to the Club festivities . 
Mrs. Bunting , it seems , woke up suddenly in the stillness that comes before the dawn , with the strong impression that the door of their bedroom had opened and closed . 
She did not arouse her husband at first , but sat up in bed listening . 
She then distinctly heard the pad , pad , pad of bare feet coming out of the adjoining dressing-room and walking along the passage towards the staircase . 
As soon as she felt assured of this , she aroused the Rev. Mr. Bunting as quietly as possible . 
He did not strike a light , but putting on his spectacles , her dressing-gown and his bath slippers , he went out on the landing to listen . 
He heard quite distinctly a fumbling going on at his study desk down-stairs , and then a violent sneeze . 
At that he returned to his bedroom , armed himself with the most obvious weapon , the poker , and descended the staircase as noiselessly as possible . 
Mrs. Bunting came out on the landing . 
The hour was about four , and the ultimate darkness of the night was past . 
There was a faint shimmer of light in the hall , but the study doorway yawned impenetrably black . 
Everything was still except the faint creaking of the stairs under Mr. Bunting 's tread , and the slight movements in the study . 
Then something snapped , the drawer was opened , and there was a rustle of papers . 
Then came an imprecation , and a match was struck and the study was flooded with yellow light . 
Mr. Bunting was now in the hall , and through the crack of the door he could see the desk and the open drawer and a candle burning on the desk . 
But the robber he could not see . 
He stood there in the hall undecided what to do , and Mrs. Bunting , her face white and intent , crept slowly downstairs after him . 
One thing kept Mr. Bunting 's courage ; the persuasion that this burglar was a resident in the village . 
They heard the chink of money , and realised that the robber had found the housekeeping reserve of gold -- two pounds ten in half sovereigns altogether . 
At that sound Mr. Bunting was nerved to abrupt action . 
Gripping the poker firmly , he rushed into the room , closely followed by Mrs. Bunting . 
`` Surrender ! '' 
cried Mr. Bunting , fiercely , and then stooped amazed . 
Apparently the room was perfectly empty . 
Yet their conviction that they had , that very moment , heard somebody moving in the room had amounted to a certainty . 
For half a minute , perhaps , they stood gaping , then Mrs. Bunting went across the room and looked behind the screen , while Mr. Bunting , by a kindred impulse , peered under the desk . 
Then Mrs. Bunting turned back the window-curtains , and Mr. Bunting looked up the chimney and probed it with the poker . 
Then Mrs. Bunting scrutinised the waste-paper basket and Mr. Bunting opened the lid of the coal-scuttle . 
Then they came to a stop and stood with eyes interrogating each other . 
`` I could have sworn -- '' said Mr. Bunting . 
`` The candle ! '' 
said Mr. Bunting . 
`` Who lit the candle ? '' 
`` The drawer ! '' 
said Mrs. Bunting . 
`` And the money 's gone ! '' 
She went hastily to the doorway . 
`` Of all the strange occurrences -- '' There was a violent sneeze in the passage . 
They rushed out , and as they did so the kitchen door slammed . 
`` Bring the candle , '' said Mr. Bunting , and led the way . 
They both heard a sound of bolts being hastily shot back . 
As he opened the kitchen door he saw through the scullery that the back door was just opening , and the faint light of early dawn displayed the dark masses of the garden beyond . 
He is certain that nothing went out of the door . 
It opened , stood open for a moment , and then closed with a slam . 
As it did so , the candle Mrs. Bunting was carrying from the study flickered and flared . 
It was a minute or more before they entered the kitchen . 
The place was empty . 
They refastened the back door , examined the kitchen , pantry , and scullery thoroughly , and at last went down into the cellar . 
There was not a soul to be found in the house , search as they would . 
Daylight found the vicar and his wife , a quaintly-costumed little couple , still marvelling about on their own ground floor by the unnecessary light of a guttering candle . 
THE FURNITURE THAT WENT MAD Now it happened that in the early hours of Whit Monday , before Millie was hunted out for the day , Mr. Hall and Mrs. Hall both rose and went noiselessly down into the cellar . 
Their business there was of a private nature , and had something to do with the specific gravity of their beer . 
They had hardly entered the cellar when Mrs. Hall found she had forgotten to bring down a bottle of sarsaparilla from their joint-room . 
As she was the expert and principal operator in this affair , Hall very properly went upstairs for it . 
On the landing he was surprised to see that the stranger 's door was ajar . 
He went on into his own room and found the bottle as he had been directed . 
But returning with the bottle , he noticed that the bolts of the front door had been shot back , that the door was in fact simply on the latch . 
And with a flash of inspiration he connected this with the stranger 's room upstairs and the suggestions of Mr. Teddy Henfrey . 
He distinctly remembered holding the candle while Mrs. Hall shot these bolts overnight . 
At the sight he stopped , gaping , then with the bottle still in his hand went upstairs again . 
He rapped at the stranger 's door . 
There was no answer . 
He rapped again ; then pushed the door wide open and entered . 
It was as he expected . 
The bed , the room also , was empty . 
And what was stranger , even to his heavy intelligence , on the bedroom chair and along the rail of the bed were scattered the garments , the only garments so far as he knew , and the bandages of their guest . 
His big slouch hat even was cocked jauntily over the bed-post . 
As Hall stood there he heard his wife 's voice coming out of the depth of the cellar , with that rapid telescoping of the syllables and interrogative cocking up of the final words to a high note , by which the West Sussex villager is wont to indicate a brisk impatience . 
`` George ! 
You gart whad a wand ? '' 
At that he turned and hurried down to her . 
`` Janny , '' he said , over the rail of the cellar steps , '' ` tas the truth what Henfrey sez . 
` E 's not in uz room , ' e e n't . 
And the front door 's onbolted . '' 
At first Mrs. Hall did not understand , and as soon as she did she resolved to see the empty room for herself . 
Hall , still holding the bottle , went first . 
`` If ' e e n't there , '' he said , '' ` is close are . 
And what 's ' e doin ' ` ithout ` is close , then ? 
` Tas a most curious business . '' 
As they came up the cellar steps they both , it was afterwards ascertained , fancied they heard the front door open and shut , but seeing it closed and nothing there , neither said a word to the other about it at the time . 
Mrs. Hall passed her husband in the passage and ran on first upstairs . 
Someone sneezed on the staircase . 
Hall , following six steps behind , thought that he heard her sneeze . 
She , going on first , was under the impression that Hall was sneezing . 
She flung open the door and stood regarding the room . 
`` Of all the curious ! '' 
she said . 
She heard a sniff close behind her head as it seemed , and turning , was surprised to see Hall a dozen feet off on the topmost stair . 
But in another moment he was beside her . 
She bent forward and put her hand on the pillow and then under the clothes . 
`` Cold , '' she said . 
`` He 's been up this hour or more . '' 
As she did so , a most extraordinary thing happened . 
The bed-clothes gathered themselves together , leapt up suddenly into a sort of peak , and then jumped headlong over the bottom rail . 
It was exactly as if a hand had clutched them in the centre and flung them aside . 
Immediately after , the stranger 's hat hopped off the bed-post , described a whirling flight in the air through the better part of a circle , and then dashed straight at Mrs. Hall 's face . 
Then as swiftly came the sponge from the washstand ; and then the chair , flinging the stranger 's coat and trousers carelessly aside , and laughing drily in a voice singularly like the stranger 's , turned itself up with its four legs at Mrs. Hall , seemed to take aim at her for a moment , and charged at her . 
She screamed and turned , and then the chair legs came gently but firmly against her back and impelled her and Hall out of the room . 
The door slammed violently and was locked . 
The chair and bed seemed to be executing a dance of triumph for a moment , and then abruptly everything was still . 
Mrs. Hall was left almost in a fainting condition in Mr. Hall 's arms on the landing . 
It was with the greatest difficulty that Mr. Hall and Millie , who had been roused by her scream of alarm , succeeded in getting her downstairs , and applying the restoratives customary in such cases . '' 
` Tas sperits , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` I know ` tas sperits . 
I 've read in papers of en . 
Tables and chairs leaping and dancing ... '' `` Take a drop more , Janny , '' said Hall . '' 
` Twill steady ye . '' 
`` Lock him out , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` Do n't let him come in again . 
I half guessed -- I might ha ' known . 
With them goggling eyes and bandaged head , and never going to church of a Sunday . 
And all they bottles -- more 'n it 's right for any one to have . 
He 's put the sperits into the furniture ... . 
My good old furniture ! 
'T was in that very chair my poor dear mother used to sit when I was a little girl . 
To think it should rise up against me now ! '' 
`` Just a drop more , Janny , '' said Hall . 
`` Your nerves is all upset . '' 
They sent Millie across the street through the golden five o'clock sunshine to rouse up Mr. Sandy Wadgers , the blacksmith . 
Mr. Hall 's compliments and the furniture upstairs was behaving most extraordinary . 
Would Mr. Wadgers come round ? 
He was a knowing man , was Mr. Wadgers , and very resourceful . 
He took quite a grave view of the case . 
`` Arm darmed if thet ent witchcraft , '' was the view of Mr. Sandy Wadgers . 
`` You warnt horseshoes for such gentry as he . '' 
He came round greatly concerned . 
They wanted him to lead the way upstairs to the room , but he did n't seem to be in any hurry . 
He preferred to talk in the passage . 
Over the way Huxter 's apprentice came out and began taking down the shutters of the tobacco window . 
He was called over to join the discussion . 
Mr. Huxter naturally followed over in the course of a few minutes . 
The Anglo-Saxon genius for parliamentary government asserted itself ; there was a great deal of talk and no decisive action . 
`` Let 's have the facts first , '' insisted Mr. Sandy Wadgers . 
`` Let 's be sure we 'd be acting perfectly right in bustin ' that there door open . 
A door onbust is always open to bustin ' , but ye ca n't onbust a door once you 've busted en . '' 
And suddenly and most wonderfully the door of the room upstairs opened of its own accord , and as they looked up in amazement , they saw descending the stairs the muffled figure of the stranger staring more blackly and blankly than ever with those unreasonably large blue glass eyes of his . 
He came down stiffly and slowly , staring all the time ; he walked across the passage staring , then stopped . 
`` Look there ! '' 
he said , and their eyes followed the direction of his gloved finger and saw a bottle of sarsaparilla hard by the cellar door . 
Then he entered the parlour , and suddenly , swiftly , viciously , slammed the door in their faces . 
Not a word was spoken until the last echoes of the slam had died away . 
They stared at one another . 
`` Well , if that do n't lick everything ! '' 
said Mr. Wadgers , and left the alternative unsaid . 
`` I 'd go in and ask 'n ` bout it , '' said Wadgers , to Mr. Hall . 
`` I 'd d'mand an explanation . '' 
It took some time to bring the landlady 's husband up to that pitch . 
At last he rapped , opened the door , and got as far as , `` Excuse me -- '' `` Go to the devil ! '' 
said the stranger in a tremendous voice , and `` Shut that door after you . '' 
So that brief interview terminated . 
THE UNVEILING OF THE STRANGER The stranger went into the little parlour of the `` Coach and Horses '' about half-past five in the morning , and there he remained until near midday , the blinds down , the door shut , and none , after Hall 's repulse , venturing near him . 
All that time he must have fasted . 
Thrice he rang his bell , the third time furiously and continuously , but no one answered him . 
`` Him and his ` go to the devil ' indeed ! '' 
said Mrs. Hall . 
Presently came an imperfect rumour of the burglary at the vicarage , and two and two were put together . 
Hall , assisted by Wadgers , went off to find Mr. Shuckleforth , the magistrate , and take his advice . 
No one ventured upstairs . 
How the stranger occupied himself is unknown . 
Now and then he would stride violently up and down , and twice came an outburst of curses , a tearing of paper , and a violent smashing of bottles . 
The little group of scared but curious people increased . 
Mrs. Huxter came over ; some gay young fellows resplendent in black ready-made jackets and pique paper ties -- for it was Whit Monday -- joined the group with confused interrogations . 
Young Archie Harker distinguished himself by going up the yard and trying to peep under the window-blinds . 
He could see nothing , but gave reason for supposing that he did , and others of the Iping youth presently joined him . 
It was the finest of all possible Whit Mondays , and down the village street stood a row of nearly a dozen booths , a shooting gallery , and on the grass by the forge were three yellow and chocolate waggons and some picturesque strangers of both sexes putting up a cocoanut shy . 
The gentlemen wore blue jerseys , the ladies white aprons and quite fashionable hats with heavy plumes . 
Woodyer , of the `` Purple Fawn , '' and Mr. Jaggers , the cobbler , who also sold old second-hand ordinary bicycles , were stretching a string of union-jacks and royal ensigns -LRB- which had originally celebrated the first Victorian Jubilee -RRB- across the road . 
And inside , in the artificial darkness of the parlour , into which only one thin jet of sunlight penetrated , the stranger , hungry we must suppose , and fearful , hidden in his uncomfortable hot wrappings , pored through his dark glasses upon his paper or chinked his dirty little bottles , and occasionally swore savagely at the boys , audible if invisible , outside the windows . 
In the corner by the fireplace lay the fragments of half a dozen smashed bottles , and a pungent twang of chlorine tainted the air . 
So much we know from what was heard at the time and from what was subsequently seen in the room . 
About noon he suddenly opened his parlour door and stood glaring fixedly at the three or four people in the bar . 
`` Mrs. Hall , '' he said . 
Somebody went sheepishly and called for Mrs. Hall . 
Mrs. Hall appeared after an interval , a little short of breath , but all the fiercer for that . 
Hall was still out . 
She had deliberated over this scene , and she came holding a little tray with an unsettled bill upon it . 
`` Is it your bill you 're wanting , sir ? '' 
she said . 
`` Why was n't my breakfast laid ? 
Why have n't you prepared my meals and answered my bell ? 
Do you think I live without eating ? '' 
`` Why is n't my bill paid ? '' 
said Mrs. Hall . 
`` That 's what I want to know . '' 
`` I told you three days ago I was awaiting a remittance -- '' `` I told you two days ago I was n't going to await no remittances . 
You ca n't grumble if your breakfast waits a bit , if my bill 's been waiting these five days , can you ? '' 
The stranger swore briefly but vividly . 
`` Nar , nar ! '' 
from the bar . 
`` And I 'd thank you kindly , sir , if you 'd keep your swearing to yourself , sir , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
The stranger stood looking more like an angry diving-helmet than ever . 
It was universally felt in the bar that Mrs. Hall had the better of him . 
His next words showed as much . 
`` Look here , my good woman -- '' he began . 
`` Do n't ` good woman ' me , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` I 've told you my remittance has n't come . '' 
`` Remittance indeed ! '' 
said Mrs. Hall . 
`` Still , I daresay in my pocket -- '' `` You told me three days ago that you had n't anything but a sovereign 's worth of silver upon you . '' 
`` Well , I 've found some more -- '' '' ` Ul-lo ! '' 
from the bar . 
`` I wonder where you found it , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
That seemed to annoy the stranger very much . 
He stamped his foot . 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
he said . 
`` That I wonder where you found it , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` And before I take any bills or get any breakfasts , or do any such things whatsoever , you got to tell me one or two things I do n't understand , and what nobody do n't understand , and what everybody is very anxious to understand . 
I want to know what you been doing t ` my chair upstairs , and I want to know how 't is your room was empty , and how you got in again . 
Them as stops in this house comes in by the doors -- that 's the rule of the house , and that you _ did n't _ do , and what I want to know is how you did come in . 
And I want to know -- '' Suddenly the stranger raised his gloved hands clenched , stamped his foot , and said , `` Stop ! '' 
with such extraordinary violence that he silenced her instantly . 
`` You do n't understand , '' he said , `` who I am or what I am . 
I 'll show you . 
By Heaven ! 
I 'll show you . '' 
Then he put his open palm over his face and withdrew it . 
The centre of his face became a black cavity . 
`` Here , '' he said . 
He stepped forward and handed Mrs. Hall something which she , staring at his metamorphosed face , accepted automatically . 
Then , when she saw what it was , she screamed loudly , dropped it , and staggered back . 
The nose -- it was the stranger 's nose ! 
pink and shining -- rolled on the floor . 
Then he removed his spectacles , and everyone in the bar gasped . 
He took off his hat , and with a violent gesture tore at his whiskers and bandages . 
For a moment they resisted him . 
A flash of horrible anticipation passed through the bar . 
`` Oh , my Gard ! '' 
said some one . 
Then off they came . 
It was worse than anything . 
Mrs. Hall , standing open-mouthed and horror-struck , shrieked at what she saw , and made for the door of the house . 
Everyone began to move . 
They were prepared for scars , disfigurements , tangible horrors , but nothing ! 
The bandages and false hair flew across the passage into the bar , making a hobbledehoy jump to avoid them . 
Everyone tumbled on everyone else down the steps . 
For the man who stood there shouting some incoherent explanation , was a solid gesticulating figure up to the coat-collar of him , and then -- nothingness , no visible thing at all ! 
People down the village heard shouts and shrieks , and looking up the street saw the `` Coach and Horses '' violently firing out its humanity . 
They saw Mrs. Hall fall down and Mr. Teddy Henfrey jump to avoid tumbling over her , and then they heard the frightful screams of Millie , who , emerging suddenly from the kitchen at the noise of the tumult , had come upon the headless stranger from behind . 
These increased suddenly . 
Forthwith everyone all down the street , the sweetstuff seller , cocoanut shy proprietor and his assistant , the swing man , little boys and girls , rustic dandies , smart wenches , smocked elders and aproned gipsies -- began running towards the inn , and in a miraculously short space of time a crowd of perhaps forty people , and rapidly increasing , swayed and hooted and inquired and exclaimed and suggested , in front of Mrs. Hall 's establishment . 
Everyone seemed eager to talk at once , and the result was Babel . 
A small group supported Mrs. Hall , who was picked up in a state of collapse . 
There was a conference , and the incredible evidence of a vociferous eye-witness . 
`` O Bogey ! '' 
`` What 's he been doin ' , then ? '' 
`` Ai n't hurt the girl , ` as ` e ? '' 
`` Run at en with a knife , I believe . '' 
`` No ` ed , I tell ye . 
I do n't mean no manner of speaking . 
I mean marn ` ithout a ` ed ! '' 
`` Narnsense ! 
't is some conjuring trick . '' 
`` Fetched off ` is wrapping , ' e did -- '' In its struggles to see in through the open door , the crowd formed itself into a straggling wedge , with the more adventurous apex nearest the inn . 
`` He stood for a moment , I heerd the gal scream , and he turned . 
I saw her skirts whisk , and he went after her . 
Did n't take ten seconds . 
Back he comes with a knife in uz hand and a loaf ; stood just as if he was staring . 
Not a moment ago . 
Went in that there door . 
I tell ` e , ' e ai n't gart no ` ed at all . 
You just missed en -- '' There was a disturbance behind , and the speaker stopped to step aside for a little procession that was marching very resolutely towards the house ; first Mr. Hall , very red and determined , th , I heerd the gal scream , and he turned . 
I saw her skirts whisk , and he went after her . 
Did n't take ten seconds . 
Back he comes with a knife in uz hand and a loaf ; stood just as if he was staring . 
Not a moment ago . 
Went in that there door . 
I tell ` e , ' e ai n't gart no ` ed at all . 
You just missed en -- '' There was a disturbance behind , and the speaker stopped to step aside for a little procession that was marching very resolutely towards the house ; first Mr. Hall , very red and determined , then Mr. Bobby Jaffers , the village constable , and then the wary Mr. Wadgers . 
They had come now armed with a warrant . 
People shouted conflicting information of the recent circumstances . '' 
` Ed or no ` ed , '' said Jaffers , `` I got to ` rest en , and ` rest en I will . '' 
Mr. Hall marched up the steps , marched straight to the door of the parlour and flung it open . 
`` Constable , '' he said , `` do your duty . '' 
Jaffers marched in . 
Hall next , Wadgers last . 
They saw in the dim light the headless figure facing them , with a gnawed crust of bread in one gloved hand and a chunk of cheese in the other . 
`` That 's him ! '' 
said Hall . 
`` What the devil 's this ? '' 
came in a tone of angry expostulation from above the collar of the figure . 
`` You 're a damned rum customer , mister , '' said Mr. Jaffers . 
`` But ` ed or no ` ed , the warrant says ` body , ' and duty 's duty -- '' `` Keep off ! '' 
said the figure , starting back . 
Abruptly he whipped down the bread and cheese , and Mr. Hall just grasped the knife on the table in time to save it . 
Off came the stranger 's left glove and was slapped in Jaffers ' face . 
In another moment Jaffers , cutting short some statement concerning a warrant , had gripped him by the handless wrist and caught his invisible throat . 
He got a sounding kick on the shin that made him shout , but he kept his grip . 
Hall sent the knife sliding along the table to Wadgers , who acted as goal-keeper for the offensive , so to speak , and then stepped forward as Jaffers and the stranger swayed and staggered towards him , clutching and hitting in . 
A chair stood in the way , and went aside with a crash as they came down together . 
`` Get the feet , '' said Jaffers between his teeth . 
Mr. Hall , endeavouring to act on instructions , received a sounding kick in the ribs that disposed of him for a moment , and Mr. Wadgers , seeing the decapitated stranger had rolled over and got the upper side of Jaffers , retreated towards the door , knife in hand , and so collided with Mr. Huxter and the Sidderbridge carter coming to the rescue of law and order . 
At the same moment down came three or four bottles from the chiffonnier and shot a web of pungency into the air of the room . 
`` I 'll surrender , '' cried the stranger , though he had Jaffers down , and in another moment he stood up panting , a strange figure , headless and handless -- for he had pulled off his right glove now as well as his left . 
`` It 's no good , '' he said , as if sobbing for breath . 
It was the strangest thing in the world to hear that voice coming as if out of empty space , but the Sussex peasants are perhaps the most matter-of-fact people under the sun . 
Jaffers got up also and produced a pair of handcuffs . 
Then he stared . 
`` I say ! '' 
said Jaffers , brought up short by a dim realization of the incongruity of the whole business , `` Darn it ! 
Ca n't use 'em as I can see . '' 
The stranger ran his arm down his waistcoat , and as if by a miracle the buttons to which his empty sleeve pointed became undone . 
Then he said something about his shin , and stooped down . 
He seemed to be fumbling with his shoes and socks . 
`` Why ! '' 
said Huxter , suddenly , `` that 's not a man at all . 
It 's just empty clothes . 
Look ! 
You can see down his collar and the linings of his clothes . 
I could put my arm -- '' He extended his hand ; it seemed to meet something in mid-air , and he drew it back with a sharp exclamation . 
`` I wish you 'd keep your fingers out of my eye , '' said the aerial voice , in a tone of savage expostulation . 
`` The fact is , I 'm all here -- head , hands , legs , and all the rest of it , but it happens I 'm invisible . 
It 's a confounded nuisance , but I am . 
That 's no reason why I should be poked to pieces by every stupid bumpkin in Iping , is it ? '' 
The suit of clothes , now all unbuttoned and hanging loosely upon its unseen supports , stood up , arms akimbo . 
Several other of the men folks had now entered the room , so that it was closely crowded . 
`` Invisible , eh ? '' 
said Huxter , ignoring the stranger 's abuse . 
`` Who ever heard the likes of that ? '' 
`` It 's strange , perhaps , but it 's not a crime . 
Why am I assaulted by a policeman in this fashion ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
that 's a different matter , '' said Jaffers . 
`` No doubt you are a bit difficult to see in this light , but I got a warrant and it 's all correct . 
What I 'm after ai n't no invisibility , -- it 's burglary . 
There 's a house been broke into and money took . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` And circumstances certainly point -- '' `` Stuff and nonsense ! '' 
said the Invisible Man . 
`` I hope so , sir ; but I 've got my instructions . '' 
`` Well , '' said the stranger , `` I 'll come . 
I 'll come . 
But no handcuffs . '' 
`` It 's the regular thing , '' said Jaffers . 
`` No handcuffs , '' stipulated the stranger . 
`` Pardon me , '' said Jaffers . 
Abruptly the figure sat down , and before any one could realise was was being done , the slippers , socks , and trousers had been kicked off under the table . 
Then he sprang up again and flung off his coat . 
`` Here , stop that , '' said Jaffers , suddenly realising what was happening . 
He gripped at the waistcoat ; it struggled , and the shirt slipped out of it and left it limply and empty in his hand . 
`` Hold him ! '' 
said Jaffers , loudly . 
`` Once he gets the things off -- '' `` Hold him ! '' 
cried everyone , and there was a rush at the fluttering white shirt which was now all that was visible of the stranger . 
The shirt-sleeve planted a shrewd blow in Hall 's face that stopped his open-armed advance , and sent him backward into old Toothsome the sexton , and in another moment the garment was lifted up and became convulsed and vacantly flapping about the arms , even as a shirt that is being thrust over a man 's head . 
Jaffers clutched at it , and only helped to pull it off ; he was struck in the mouth out of the air , and incontinently threw his truncheon and smote Teddy Henfrey savagely upon the crown of his head . 
`` Look out ! '' 
said everybody , fencing at random and hitting at nothing . 
`` Hold him ! 
Shut the door ! 
Do n't let him loose ! 
I got something ! 
Here he is ! '' 
A perfect Babel of noises they made . 
Everybody , it seemed , was being hit all at once , and Sandy Wadgers , knowing as ever and his wits sharpened by a frightful blow in the nose , reopened the door and led the rout . 
The others , following incontinently , were jammed for a moment in the corner by the doorway . 
The hitting continued . 
Phipps , the Unitarian , had a front tooth broken , and Henfrey was injured in the cartilage of his ear . 
Jaffers was struck under the jaw , and , turning , caught at something that intervened between him and Huxter in the melee , and prevented their coming together . 
He felt a muscular chest , and in another moment the whole mass of struggling , excited men shot out into the crowded hall . 
`` I got him ! '' 
shouted Jaffers , choking and reeling through them all , and wrestling with purple face and swelling veins against his unseen enemy . 
Men staggered right and left as the extraordinary conflict swayed swiftly towards the house door , and went spinning down the half-dozen steps of the inn . 
Jaffers cried in a strangled voice -- holding tight , nevertheless , and making play with his knee -- spun around , and fell heavily undermost with his head on the gravel . 
Only then did his fingers relax . 
There were excited cries of `` Hold him ! '' 
`` Invisible ! '' 
and so forth , and a young fellow , a stranger in the place whose name did not come to light , rushed in at once , caught something , missed his hold , and fell over the constable 's prostrate body . 
Half-way across the road a woman screamed as something pushed by her ; a dog , kicked apparently , yelped and ran howling into Huxter 's yard , and with that the transit of the Invisible Man was accomplished . 
For a space people stood amazed and gesticulating , and then came panic , and scattered them abroad through the village as a gust scatters dead leaves . 
But Jaffers lay quite still , face upward and knees bent , at the foot of the steps of the inn . 
IN TRANSIT The eighth chapter is exceedingly brief , and relates that Gibbons , the amateur naturalist of the district , while lying out on the spacious open downs without a soul within a couple of miles of him , as he thought , and almost dozing , heard close to him the sound as of a man coughing , sneezing , and then swearing savagely to himself ; and looking , beheld nothing . 
Yet the voice was indisputable . 
It continued to swear with that breadth and variety that distinguishes the swearing of a cultivated man . 
It grew to a climax , diminished again , and died away in the distance , going as it seemed to him in the direction of Adderdean . 
It lifted to a spasmodic sneeze and ended . 
Gibbons had heard nothing of the morning 's occurrences , but the phenomenon was so striking and disturbing that his philosophical tranquillity vanished ; he got up hastily , and hurried down the steepness of the hill towards the village , as fast as he could go . 
MR. THOMAS MARVEL You must picture Mr. Thomas Marvel as a person of copious , flexible visage , a nose of cylindrical protrusion , a liquorish , ample , fluctuating mouth , and a beard of bristling eccentricity . 
His figure inclined to embonpoint ; his short limbs accentuated this inclination . 
He wore a furry silk hat , and the frequent substitution of twine and shoe-laces for buttons , apparent at critical points of his costume , marked a man essentially bachelor . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel was sitting with his feet in a ditch by the roadside over the down towards Adderdean , about a mile and a half out of Iping . 
His feet , save for socks of irregular open-work , were bare , his big toes were broad , and pricked like the ears of a watchful dog . 
In a leisurely manner -- he did everything in a leisurely manner -- he was contemplating trying on a pair of boots . 
They were the soundest boots he had come across for a long time , but too large for him ; whereas the ones he had were , in dry weather , a very comfortable fit , but too thin-soled for damp . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel hated roomy shoes , but then he hated damp . 
He had never properly thought out which he hated most , and it was a pleasant day , and there was nothing better to do . 
So he put the four shoes in a graceful group on the turf and looked at them . 
And seeing them there among the grass and springing agrimony , it suddenly occurred to him that both pairs were exceedingly ugly to see . 
He was not at all startled by a voice behind him . 
`` They 're boots , anyhow , '' said the Voice . 
`` They are -- charity boots , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , with his head on one side regarding them distastefully ; `` and which is the ugliest pair in the whole blessed universe , I 'm darned if I know ! '' 
`` H 'm , '' said the Voice . 
`` I 've worn worse -- in fact , I 've worn none . 
But none so owdacious ugly -- if you 'll allow the expression . 
I 've been cadging boots -- in particular -- for days . 
Because I was sick of them . 
They 're sound enough , of course . 
But a gentleman on tramp sees such a thundering lot of his boots . 
And if you 'll believe me , I 've raised nothing in the whole blessed country , try as I would , but them . 
Look at 'em ! 
And a good country for boots , too , in a general way . 
But it 's just my promiscuous luck . 
I 've got my boots in this country ten years or more . 
And then they treat you like this . '' 
`` It 's a beast of a country , '' said the Voice . 
`` And pigs for people . '' 
`` Ai n't it ? '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel . 
`` Lord ! 
But them boots ! 
It beats it . '' 
He turned his head over his shoulder to the right , to look at the boots of his interlocutor with a view to comparisons , and lo ! 
where the boots of his interlocutor should have been were neither legs nor boots . 
He was irradiated by the dawn of a great amazement . 
`` Where are yer ? '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel over his shoulder and coming on all fours . 
He saw a stretch of empty downs with the wind swaying the remote green-pointed furze bushes . 
`` Am I drunk ? '' 
said Mr. Marvel . 
`` Have I had visions ? 
Was I talking to myself ? 
What the -- '' `` Do n't be alarmed , '' said a Voice . 
`` None of your ventriloquising me , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , rising sharply to his feet . 
`` Where are yer ? 
Alarmed , indeed ! '' 
`` Do n't be alarmed , '' repeated the Voice . '' 
_ You 'll _ be alarmed in a minute , you silly fool , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel . 
`` Where are yer ? 
Lem me get my mark on yer ... `` Are yer _ buried _ ? '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel , after an interval . 
There was no answer . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel stood bootless and amazed , his jacket nearly thrown off . 
`` Peewit , '' said a peewit , very remote . 
`` Peewit , indeed ! '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel . 
`` This ai n't no time for foolery . '' 
The down was desolate , east and west , north and south ; the road with its shallow ditches and white bordering stakes , ran smooth and empty north and south , and , save for that peewit , the blue sky was empty too . 
`` So help me , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , shuffling his coat on to his shoulders again . 
`` It 's the drink ! 
I might ha ' known . '' 
`` It 's not the drink , '' said the Voice . 
`` You keep your nerves steady . '' 
`` Ow ! '' 
said Mr. Marvel , and his face grew white amidst its patches . 
`` It 's the drink ! '' 
his lips repeated noiselessly . 
He remained staring about him , rotating slowly backwards . 
`` I could have swore I heard a voice , '' he whispered . 
`` Of course you did . '' 
`` It 's there again , '' said Mr. Marvel , closing his eyes and clasping his hand on his brow with a tragic gesture . 
He was suddenly taken by the collar and shaken violently , and left more dazed than ever . 
`` Do n't be a fool , '' said the Voice . 
`` I 'm -- off -- my -- blooming -- chump , '' said Mr. Marvel . 
`` It 's no good . 
It 's fretting about them blarsted boots . 
I 'm off my blessed blooming chump . 
Or it 's spirits . '' 
