Finally the sleepy guardians of the market appeared ; persons of curious demeanour , themselves liker common rogues than keepers of the peace . 
Such a deafening din of laughs , oaths , and screams now ensued that nobody was audible . 
One shouted , `` He 's an assassin ! '' 
another , `` A thief ! '' 
a third , `` Let 's burn him ! '' 
Suddenly above the hubbub rang out the masterful voice of a tawny half-naked giant , the attendant in a public bath , an individual with a demagogue 's gift for oratory : `` Citizens , listen to me , and mark what I say ! 
I 've long been watching this rascal and his companions ! 
They are writing down our names ! 
They are Cæsar 's spies ! '' 
Scabra , at last putting her threat into execution , seized Agamemnon 's beard in one hand and his tresses in the other . 
He strove to repulse her , but she pulled with might and main , and to the general surprise black hair and beard both remained in the hands of the old woman , who stumbled and fell . 
Instead of Agamemnon , an athletic young man with fair curling hair and short beard stood before the people . 
In its astonishment , the crowd was momentarily silenced ; but the voice of the bath-slave was soon heard clamouring anew : `` See , citizens , they are disguised informers ! '' 
Somebody cried out -- `` Strike him ! 
Knock him down ! '' 
The crowd became tumultuous . 
Stones were thrown ; the sham beggars of Agamemnon 's company encircled him with drawn swords . 
At the first stroke the luckless leather-dresser was killed , and fell in a pool of blood . 
The red-headed boy was trampled under foot , and all faces were becoming ferocious , when at this juncture ten enormous Paphlagonian slaves bearing on their shoulders a purple litter impatiently thrust their way through the crowd . 
`` Saved ! '' 
cried the fair-haired young man , and vaulted into the litter with one of his fellows . 
The Paphlagonians hoisted the pair on their shoulders and set off at sharp run . 
The infuriated crowd were making as if to dash in pursuit , with intent to stone them , when somebody called out -- `` Citizens , do n't you see that it is Cæsar himself -- Gallus Cæsar ! '' 
The mob halted , paralysed by fear , and the purple litter , swaying on the shoulders of the slaves like a skiff in a heavy sea , vanished into the darkness up the street . 
* * * * * Six years had elapsed since the incarceration of Julian and of Gallus in the Cappadocian fortress of Macellum . 
Constantius had restored them to favour . 
Julian , then twenty years old , was sent to Constantinople , and given leave to travel in Asia Minor . 
Gallus , the Emperor had named to be his co-regent , with the title of Cæsar . 
Nevertheless this unlooked-for favour was no valid earnest of good-will . 
Constantius loved to destroy his enemies after having lulled away mistrust by a display of exuberant affection . 
`` Well , Glycon , Constantia may beg me as much as she likes , in future , to go out in false hair ! 
But it 's all over for me ! 
I 've done with it ! '' 
`` We warned your Majesty that it was dangerous . '' 
But Cæsar , stretched on the soft cushions of the litter , had already forgotten his alarm , and cried , laughing -- `` Glycon ! 
Glycon ! 
did you see the old woman rolling on the ground with my beard ? '' 
When they arrived at the palace Cæsar ordered -- `` Quick ! 
Let me have a perfumed bath and supper . 
The walk has famished me . '' 
A courier came near holding a letter . 
`` What is it , Norban ? 
No , no , we will have business to-morrow morning . '' 
`` Let the magnanimity of Cæsar pardon me ! 
It is an important message sent direct from the camp of the Emperor Constantius . '' 
`` From Constantius ? 
Give it me . '' 
Gallus broke the seal of the missive , read , and grew pale . 
His knees gave way -- he would have almost fallen without the support of his courtiers . 
Constantius , in exquisite and flattering terms , invited his tenderly-loved cousin to come to Milan . 
At the same time the Emperor summoned the two legions lodged at Antioch , the only bodyguard left to Gallus . 
Constantius designed thus to leave him defenceless and draw his rival into the snare . 
When Gallus had recovered presence of mind he murmured weakly -- `` Call my wife ! '' 
`` Your Majesty 's Imperial consort has just set out for Antioch . '' 
`` What ! 
She knows nothing of this ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` My God , my God ! 
What is to be done ? 
What can be done without her ? 
Tell the envoy of the Emperor -- No , say nothing to him -- I scarcely know -- How is it possible to arrive at a decision alone ? 
Send a swift post to Constantia ... . 
Say that Cæsar begs her to return ! 
My God , what is to be done ? '' 
He paced up and down distractedly , now hiding his face in his hands , now nervously twisting his fair beard and repeating , `` No , no , nothing in the world will induce me to go . 
I would rather die ! 
Ah ! 
I know Constantius ! '' 
Another messenger came up , a scroll in his hand . 
`` From the spouse of Cæsar ! 
Her Highness in leaving begged you to sign this as soon as possible . '' 
`` What ! 
Another sentence of death ? 
... Clement of Alexandria ... this is really too much . 
Three a day ... '' `` Cæsar , it was your consort 's desire . '' 
`` Well , well , what matters it ? 
Nothing ! 
Where 's the pen ? 
Nothing matters now ! 
But why has she gone away ? 
How can I get out of this pretty pass single-handed ? '' 
And having signed the death-warrant he fixed those charming and listless blue eyes upon the servants . 
`` The bath is ready , sire , and the supper will be served after it . '' 
`` The supper ? 
I 'm hungry no longer . 
But what dish is there ? '' 
`` Truffles from Africa . '' 
`` Fresh gathered ? '' 
`` They arrived this morning . '' 
`` Would n't it be better to raise an army , eh ? 
What do you say , my friends ? 
I feel so overwhelmed ... . 
Truffles , you say ? 
I was thinking about truffles only this afternoon . '' 
The agitation of his countenance gave way to the airiest of smiles . 
Before plunging into the water , which was made milky and iridescent by the infusion of perfumes , Gallus waved his hand lightly : `` Pooh ! 
the great thing is not to think ! 
God have mercy on us all ! 
... Perhaps after all Constantia will smooth over the matter ... '' And his chubby face suddenly lighted while he plunged with glee into the scented water . 
He called out gaily -- `` Tell the head cook to add a dressing of red pepper to the truffles ! '' 
At Nicomedia , at Pergamos , and at Smyrna Julian , now nineteen years old and an enthusiast for Hellenic wisdom , had heard much of the famous mage and sophist , Iamblicus of Chaldea , a pupil of the Neo-Platonist , Porphyrius . 
Men used commonly to call him `` the Divine '' Iamblicus . 
In order to see this master , Julian made a journey to Ephesus . 
Iamblicus was a little thin and wrinkled old man . 
He liked complaining of his ailments -- gout , rheumatism , nervous headache ; he abused physicians , but was zealous in carrying out their advice , and used to speak with deep interest of drugs and infusions of herbs . 
He always wore , even in summer , a double tunic ; never seemed warm enough , and would sit basking in the sun like a lizard . 
From his youth up Iamblicus had broken himself of the habit of meat-eating , and spoke of it with disgust as a practice beyond his comprehension . 
His servant used to prepare for him a special broth , made of barley-water , warm wine , and honey , he being toothless and unable to masticate bread . 
He was always surrounded by numberless admiring students who had travelled from Rome , Antioch , Carthagena ; from Egypt , Mesopotamia , and Persia , to become his pupils . 
All stoutly believed Iamblicus could work miracles . 
Iamblicus treated them like a father irritated at seeing round him so many weaklings . 
When they began to discuss and to wrangle , the master would make a sweeping gesture , followed by a grimace expressive of physical pain . 
He spoke gently , and in a low-toned , agreeable voice ; the louder other folk shouted the more subdued his own tone became . 
He hated all noise , and quarrelsome voices as much as creaking sandals . 
Julian gazed in disappointed perplexity at this chilly , sickly , and whimsical old man . 
What power drew towards him the world of philosophy ? 
He remembered the story of pupils -- that one night the divine master during prayer was upraised by some invisible force to a height of twelve cubits from earth , wrapped in a golden glory . 
Another tale was about a miracle , by which the master had smitten from a rock two warm springs , Eros and Anteros , the two Dæmons of love -- the one dull-souled , the other joyous . 
Iamblicus , it was said , had caressed both , like children , and at a word caused them to disappear . 
But in listening to the master Julian never succeeded in discovering the potency of his words . 
The meta-physic of the school of Porphyrius seemed to him dull , dead , and painfully complicated . 
Iamblicus would , it is true , emerge a playful victor from the most difficult dialectical discussions . 
His teaching about God , about the World , about the Ideas , was full of profound learning ; but in it lay no vital stimulus . 
Julian had hoped otherwise , and nevertheless he hung about , and did not set off again homewards . 
The eyes of Iamblicus were strange , green , and deeply-sunk in his bronzed face . 
Julian was persuaded that these weird and by no means holy eyes betokened some hidden wisdom , the occult wisdom of the serpent , concerning which Iamblicus never spoke to his pupils . 
But when `` the Divine , '' in his cracked voice , used to ask why his barley broth was not ready , or complained of gout , the spell was broken . 
On one occasion Iamblicus was sauntering with Julian on the seashore , outside the town . 
It was a soft and melancholy evening . 
Behind the castle of Panormos in the distance glittered , with their array of statues , the terraces of the celebrated temple of the Ephesian Artemis . 
The dark reeds along the sandy shore made no rustle . 
It was the spot where Latona gave birth to Artemis and Apollo . 
Smoke of numberless altars in the sacred Orthegian wood was rising in columns into the sky . 
To the south the Samian mountains shone blue on the horizon . 
Wavelets fell calmly as the breathings of a child , and pellucid waves swelled over the rocks . 
The setting sun , hidden behind vapour , gilded the edge of enormous cloud-masses . 
Iamblicus seated himself upon a boulder , and Julian threw himself on the ground at his feet . 
The master caressed the thick black locks of the pupil . 
`` Are you sad ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` I know you are sad . 
You seek and you do not find . 
You have not the strength to say ' He is , ' and you are afraid to say ' He is not . ' '' 
`` How have you guessed this , Master ? '' 
`` My poor boy ! 
for fifty years have I not suffered from the same pain ? 
And I shall suffer from it till I die . 
Do you imagine that I know Him better than you -- that I have discovered what you have missed ? 
That is the birth-pain that never ceases . 
Beside it other tortures are as nothing . 
People think that they suffer from hunger , from poverty , from thirst ; in reality they suffer only from the thought that perhaps He has no existence . 
Who shall dare to say ' He exists not ? ' 
and yet what superhuman strength one must have to say , ' He is ' ! '' 
`` Do you mean to say that you , even you , have never come near Him ? '' 
`` Thrice in my life have I borne the ecstacy of feeling myself wholly at one with Him . 
Plotinus felt it four times , Porphyrius five times . 
But as for me , the moments in my existence in which life was worth living were precisely three . '' 
`` I have questioned your pupils on this subject ; they knew nothing . '' 
`` Have they the courage to know ? 
The shell of wisdom is enough for them ; the kernel , for almost everybody , is deadly . '' 
`` Well , let me die , Master ! 
Give the core to me ! '' 
`` Have you courage ? '' 
`` Yes ; but speak -- speak ! '' 
`` And what can I tell you ? 
I do not know , ... and need I tell you ? 
Listen to the calmness of the evening , and the secret will be yours without words of mine ... '' He kept stroking Julian 's head ; the boy was dreaming , `` This , this is what I waited for , '' and clasping the knees of Iamblicus he falteringly entreated -- `` Master , have pity ! 
... Reveal it all ! 
... Do not desert me ! '' 
With green and strangely motionless eyes kept steadily on the clouds , Iamblicus murmured , as if speaking to himself : `` Yes , we have all forgotten the voice of God . 
Like children estranged from the cradle from the face of their father , we hear Him , and we do not recognise Him . 
To hear His voice , every earthly cry in our souls must cease . 
Just so long as reason shines and illumines our souls , we remain imprisoned in ourselves and see not God . 
But when reason is put by , ecstacy falls upon us like the dew of night -- that ecstacy which the evil can not know . 
The wise , the good alone can become , of their own will , lyres vibrating under the hand of God . 
Whence comes that beam which falls into the soul ? 
I do not know . 
It comes unawares , and when one least expects it . 
To search for it is useless . 
God is not remote from us . 
One must make ready , with a soul becalmed ; and simply wait , as the eyes await -LRB- according to the saying of the poet -RRB- the rush of the sun from dark ocean . 
God does not come , God does not go away ; He is revealed . 
He is , what the universe is not , the negation of everything that exists . 
He is nothing , and He is All . '' 
Iamblicus rose and slowly extended his wasted arms : `` Be still , be still , I tell you ! 
Let all things listen for Him ! 
He is here ! 
Let the earth and the sea , let even the sky be dumb ! 
Listen ! 
... It is He who fills the universe , the very atoms sing with His breath ; He who illumines matter and chaos -- at which the gods tremble -- just as the setting sun illumines that dark cloud . '' 
Julian listened . 
It seemed to him that the master 's calm weak voice was filling the world , was reaching the heights of the heaven , and the last confines of the sea . 
But the boy 's sadness was so deep that it escaped from his bosom in an involuntary sigh . 
`` Father , forgive me if the question is a folly ; but if it is thus with the world why go on living ? 
Why this eternal interchange of life and death ? 
Why pain ? 
Why evil ? 
Why the burden of the body ? 
Why doubt ? 
Why this dark thirst for the impossible ? '' 
Iamblicus looked at him with gentleness , and anew passed his hand over Julian 's head . 
He answered : `` Ah , my son , that is the very seat of the mystery ! 
there is no evil , there is no body , there is no universe , if He exists ! 
Think ! 
it is He , or the universe ! 
The body , evil , the universe , all are a mirage , a deception of the living senses . 
All we have once rested together upon the breast of God in the bosom of invisible light . 
But there came a time when we beheld from on high matter in its darkness and deadness , and each of us saw in matter its own image , as in a mirror . 
And the soul mused to itself , ' I can , and I will to , be free ! 
I am like Him ! 
Why not dare to quit Him and contain all in myself ? ' 
So the soul , like Narcissus gazing into the brook , fell under the spell of its own image , reflected in its body ; and then she fell farther , and desired to fall for ever , to rend herself from God for ever . 
She can not do so . 
The feet of mortal man touch earth , but his stature lifts him through the heavens . 
`` Upon the Eternal Ladder of births and of death , all souls , all things existing , are ascending and descending , sometimes towards Him , sometimes away from Him , seeking to leave the Father , and never fulfilling their endeavour . 
Each soul desires to be God . 
It weeps for the breast of God , has no rest upon earth , and aspires only to return to the Absolute . 
We must return to Him , and then all things will become God , and God will be in All . 
Do you imagine that you are alone in regretting Him ! 
Are you not aware that the whole sum of things is yearning for Him ? 
Listen ! '' 
The sun had set . 
The edges of the flaming clouds had sunk into ashes . 
The sea had become pale , light , flocculent as the sky ; the sky deep and diaphanous as the sea . 
Upon the road a cart was passing by ; a young man and woman were in it -- two lovers , perhaps . 
The woman was singing a melancholy love song . 
When they had passed all things were plunged into silence again , and became sadder still . 
With hastened strides , the oriental night swept over the earth . 
Julian murmured : `` How many times have I asked myself why Nature was so sad , and why , when she is proudest then saddest of all ... '' Iamblicus answered by a smile -- `` Yes ... Yes ... Look , she longs to say why ; and can not speak . 
She is dumb . 
She sleeps , and seeks to remember in her dreams , but Matter weighs down her eyelids . 
Only vaguely can she see Him . 
Everything in the universe , stars and sea , and earth , animals , plants , and people are dreams of Nature , thinking of God . 
What she so contemplates , is born and dies . 
She creates by contemplation , as a dream creates , with effortless ease , and no obstacle to her thought . 
That is why her works are so beautiful , so free , so purposeless , and so divine . 
The play of the dreams of Nature is like the play of clouds , without end or beginning . 
Outside that contemplation of hers nothing in the world exists ; and the deeper that contemplation is , the more silent . 
Believe me , Will , Action , Effort , are only enfeebled and deflected contemplations of God . 
Nature , in her grandiose indolence , creates forms like the geometrician , for whom nothing exists except what he sees on the paper before him . 
She brings forms , one after another , out of the womb of her dream . 
But her mute meditation is only the appearance of reality . 
Nature , that sleeping Cybele , never lifts her eyelids , and never finds words . 
Man , he only , has found utterance . 
The human soul is Nature having lifted the lashes of her eyes , awakened and ready to see God , no longer in half-slumber , but really and face to face ... '' The first stars were shining in the firmament ; now they vanished , and now sparkled again into sight , like diamonds set in the dark azure . 
More stars , and yet more , kindled their new lights , till the array became incalculable . 
Iamblicus lifted his finger towards them -- `` Julian , to what should one compare the universe of all those stars ? 
One might liken it to a fisherman 's net thrown into the sea . 
God fills the universe as the water fills the net , which moves , but which can not retain the waters ; and the universe desires , but can not keep God in her meshes . 
The net is drawn , but God remains . 
If the universe made no stir God would create nothing -- would not issue from the calm that surrounds Him . 
For whither should He sweep , and to what end ? 
Yonder , in the realm of the eternal Mothers , in the soul of Calm , dwell the seeds , the Forms , the Ideas , of all that is , has been , and shall be . 
The germ of hearth-cricket and of atom , together with the germ of the Olympian god . '' 
Then Julian cried aloud , and his voice rang in the silence of Nature like a cry of mortal pain -- `` But who then is He ; why does He not answer when we call Him ? 
What is His name ? 
I wish to know , I desire to know Him , to hear Him -- to see Him -- why does He escape my thought ? 
Where is He ? 
Where does He dwell ? '' 
`` My poor boy ! 
What matters thought to Him ? 
What means it ? 
He has no name . 
He is such , that we can say that He must exist , but it is impossible for us to say what He is . 
But do you think that you can suffer love , or curse Him , without singing His praises ? 
The All-Creator is Himself , having no likeness to His creations . 
When you say , ' He is not , ' you are exalting Him as much as if you said ' He is . ' 
One can affirm nothing about Him , because He is above existence , reality , and life . 
That is why I have said to you that He is the negation of the universe and of your thought . 
Deny , renounce all that exists for us here , and yonder , in the soundless profundity of darkness , as in the light , you shall find Him still . 
Give Him friends , family , country , heaven , earth , yourself , your reason , then you will no longer see light , you shall yourself be it . 
You will not say , ` He and I , ' because you will feel that He and you are ' one ' ; and your soul will smile at your body as at a phantasm of the desert . 
You shall become silence , you shall no more find utterance . 
And if at that moment the world should crumble away , you would be happy : for what would the world signify to you , since you shall be with Him ? 
Your soul shall not desire , because He has no desires ; it shall no longer live , because He is above living ; it shall no longer think , because He is above thought . 
Thought is the search for light . 
He seeks not , because He is Himself the light . 
He penetrates the whole soul -- He laps it in Himself . 
And then , impartial and solitary , it rests above reason higher than goodness , higher than beauty , reposes in the infinite , on the breast of God the Father of Light . 
The Soul becomes God , or , to put it better , it remembers that in the night of ages it has been , is , and shall be , God ... . 
Such , my son , is the life of the Olympians ; such is the life of the wise and heroic among men ; renunciation of the universe , contempt of earthly passions , the flight of the Soul towards God , whom at last it sees face to face . '' 
Iamblicus ceased speaking . 
Julian fell at his feet without daring to touch them , and kissed the earth where they rested . 
Then he raised his head and gazed into those strange green eyes , in which dwelt the wisdom of the serpent . 
They appeared calmer and deeper than the sky , and as if exhaling a miraculous power . 
Julian murmured -- `` Master ! 
thou canst do all things . 
I believe ! 
Command the mountains , and they shall approach each other ! 
Be like God . 
Work a miracle , create the impossible . 
Grant my prayer ! 
I believe ! '' 
`` My poor boy , what are you asking for ? 
Is not the miracle which may be accomplished in your soul more beautiful than any wonders which I can work ? 
Son , is it not a terrible and a happy miracle , this power in the name of which you can dare to say : ` He is , ' and if ` He is not ' it matters nothing , ' He will be , ' and you say ` Let God exist ! 
Amen , so be it ! ' '' 
When Iamblicus and Julian , returning from their walk , were crossing Panormos , the crowded harbour-quarter of Ephesus , they noticed an unusual tumult ; folk running hither and thither , waving torches and shouting -- `` The Christians are destroying the temples ! 
Woe be on us ! '' 
and others : `` Death to the Olympian gods ! 
Astarte is vanquished by Christ ! '' 
Iamblicus attempted a detour through less frequented streets , but the howling mob caught and swept them in its course towards the temple of the Ephesian Artemis . 
The superb temple , built by Dynocrates , stood out sharply , dark and austere , against the starry sky . 
The gleam of the torches flickered up gigantic colonnades , pedestalled on beautiful little groups of caryatids . 
Up to this period , not only the Romans , but all tribes in the country had adored this goddess . 
Someone in the crowd cried out in a quavering voice -- `` Hail to the divine Diana of the Ephesians ! '' 
Hundreds of voices responded -- `` Death to the Olympians and to your Diana ! '' 
Above the Arsenal and its towering monument rose a blood-red light . 
Julian glanced at his divine master , and scarcely recognised him . 
Iamblicus was transformed back into a sickly and timid old man . 
He complained of headache , expressed his fear of an attack of rheumatism , and doubted whether his servant had not forgotten to prepare his fomentations . 
Julian lent him his own cloak ; but he remained chilly , and stopped his ears , with a dolorous grimace , against the shouts and laughter of the crowd , which he dreaded . 
Iamblicus used to say there was nothing more stupid and disgusting than the spirit of the people . 
He pointed out to his pupil the faces hurrying past -- `` Look at the monstrous vice in that expression ! 
What hopeless triviality ! 
what self-confident assertion ! 
... Does it not make one ashamed of being human , to share human form with mud like that ! '' 
An old Christian woman hobbled along , telling a story -- `` And my grandson , he says to me , ` Grandmother , make me some meat-broth . ' 
Well , I tell him , ` Yes , darling , I 'll go to the market soon , ' and to myself I 'm thinking meat is nowadays cheaper than bread . 
So I buy some meat for five obols and have it cooked . 
And in comes a neighbour and screams at me , ` What are you cooking there ? 
Do n't you know that the meat of the market is not fit to touch to-day ? ' '' 
` Why so ? ' '' 
` The priests of the goddess have sprinkled the whole market with water from the sacrifices ! 
There 's not a Christian in the town eating the meat so spoiled . 
And they 're going to kill the sacrificers , and pull down the devilish temple ! ' 
`` I threw the broth to the dogs ; just think ! 
five obols , all wasted ! 
-- more than a day 's wage thrown away -- but all the same I would n't make my own grandson unclean ! '' 
Others were telling how , in the previous year , some miserly Christian had eaten of the impure meat , which had so rotted his intestines that his very relatives had had to abandon him , on account of the contagion . 
In the public square rose a beautiful little temple to Diana-Selene-Phoebe-Astarte -- the triple goddess Hecate , mother of the gods . 
Like enormous wasps greedily intent upon a honeycomb , monks had surrounded the temple on all sides , crawling along the lovely white cornice , clambering up ladders , and to the chant of psalms , smashing the statues and bas-reliefs . 
The columns were trembling on their bases , fragments of marble flying in all directions . 
The delicate edifice seemed to wince like a living creature . 
Finally an attempt was made to set the temple on fire ; but as it was wholly built of marble , all efforts in this direction were fruitless . 
Suddenly a strange noise rang out from the interior , a deafening and resonant series of shocks , while triumphant howls of the crowd rose to the sky . 
`` Bring ropes , ropes ! 
Hide her immodest limbs ! '' 
In a hubbub of hymns and wild laughter the mob , by means of ropes , dragged out of the temple the superb silver body of the goddess , which had been moulded by Scopas . 
Step by step , it came thundering down . 
`` Cast her in the fire ! 
in the fire ! '' 
The figure was dragged into the muddy market-place . 
There a monk was declaiming a passage from the celebrated edict of Constantine II , the brother of Constantius -- '' ` Let there be an end of superstition , and let sacrifices be abolished ' -LRB- Cesset superstitio sacrificiorum , aboleatur insania ! -RRB- . 
`` Fear nothing ; break , sack , plunder everything in that temple of demons ! '' 
Another was reading by torchlight from a parchment scroll the following words from the book De errore profanarum religionum , by Firmicus Maternus -- `` Divine Emperors ! 
Come ! 
succour the unfortunate heathen . 
Let us snatch them by force from hell rather than leave them to perish . 
Seize the temple-ornaments and let their riches feed your treasury . 
Let him who sacrifices to idols be torn from the earth , root and branch -LRB- Sacrificans diis eradicabitur -RRB- . 
Thou shalt deliver him to death ; thou shalt stone him with stones , were that offender thy son , thy brother , or the wife that sleeps upon thy heart ! '' 
And over the crowd swept the exultant shout -- `` Death ! 
Death to the gods of Olympus ! '' 
An Arian monk of gigantic stature , his lank black hair plastered to his sweaty face , heaved an axe above the goddess , seeking where to strike . 
A voice advised -- `` In the belly ! 
In her abominable belly ! '' 
The great silver body rolled over mutilated ; the blows rang pitiless , leaving gaps bitten in the metal . 
An old pagan stood by and veiled his face from the sacrilege . 
He was secretly weeping at the thought that now the end of the world , the end of everything , was come , for the earth would no longer bring forth a blade of corn . 
A hermit from the deserts of Mesopotamia , clothed in sheepskin , wearing coarse sandals and an empty gourd slung from his shoulder , stood over the statue , sheep-crook in hand -- `` This forty years I have never washed , that I might not see my nakedness , nor fall into temptation . 
And yet coming into cities , straight one perceives these accursed gods without a rag upon them . 
How long must we endure these devilish temptations ! 
At the hearth , in the street , on the roof , in the baths , these idols everywhere above one 's head ? 
... Faugh ! 
Faugh ! 
Faugh ! 
How can I spit enough disgust on things like these ? '' 
The old man spurned the prostrate woman 's form with his sandal in energetic horror ; stamped on the bare breast as if it were alive , and kept scoring it with the sharp nails of his sandals , stuttering with rage -- `` Take that , and that -- and that , O foul immodesty ! '' 
The lips of the goddess lay with their calm smile under the soles of his feet . 
The crowd began to haul the statue upright in order to tilt it into the bonfire . 
Drunken garlic-smelling apprentices spat in the metal face . 
An enormous blaze , built of the massed wreckage of market-booths , quickly arose . 
The statue was dropped into the flames to be melted into silver bullion . 
`` There are five talents ' worth ! 
think -- thirty thousand pieces of silver ! 
We 'll send half to the Emperor to pay the army , and take the other half for famished folk here . 
Cybele will bring solace to mankind at last , anyhow ! 
Thirty thousand pieces of silver for the soldiers and the poor ! '' 
`` Bring fuel , more wood ! '' 
The flame mounted still more fiercely ; the mob burst into laughter . 
`` We 'll see whether the devil flies out of her ! 
There 's a demon in every idol , you know , and two or three inside goddesses ! '' 
`` When she begins to melt it 'll get too hot for the devil , and he 'll come wriggling out of her mouth like a red serpent ! '' 
`` No ! 
you must make the sign of the cross beforehand . 
If you do n't , he can glide into the earth . 
Last year , when we pulled down the temple of Aphrodite , someone sprinkled her with holy water and -- can you believe it ? 
-- a whole flight of devilets scampered away from underneath the statue -- I saw them myself -- green and black and hairy all over ! 
And when the head was broken open the big devil came out of her neck , with great horns and a tail as bald as a mangy dog ! '' 
At this moment Iamblicus , half dead with terror , seized Julian by the hand and dragged him away -- `` Look ! 
Do you see those two men ? 
They are spies sent by Constantius . 
Your brother Gallus has been taken under escort to Constantinople . 
Be careful ; this very day there will be a report sent in as to how you bear yourself . '' 
`` But what is there to be done , Master ? 
I am well accustomed to it ; for years they have kept spies about me . '' 
`` For years ! 
Why have you said nothing of it to me ? '' 
The hand of Iamblicus shook within that of Julian . 
