We certainly never lacked amusement . '' 
He smiled at some agreeable recollection and passed the tip of his tongue along his rosy upper lip between the sips of Chian wine . 
`` There 's no denying we made the most of time , '' he repeated , not without modest pride . 
When Julian was on his way to this interview with his brother , he had thought of waking in him some feeling of seriousness and remorse , had even prepared a little speech , in the style of Libanius , against the doings of irresponsible tyrants . 
He had expected to see a man bowed under the yoke of Nemesis , and not the tranquil fat and rosy visage of this comely athlete . 
Words died on Julian 's lips . 
He looked without blame or distaste upon this `` docile animal '' -- for so he inwardly named his brother . 
Of what avail were sermons to a young stallion ? 
Julian contented himself therefore with saying to Gallus in a grave tone -- `` Why are you going to Milan ? 
Do you suspect nothing ? '' 
`` Yes -- hush -- but it is too late ! '' 
And , sweeping his hand significantly round his neck , he added -- `` The slipnoose of death is already here ! 
` He ' is tightening it little by little . 
Why , he would unearth me from a rabbit-burrow , Julian ! 
No , no , best speak no more of it ! 
All 's over ! 
We 've made the most of time , that 's all . '' 
`` But you have two legions left you at Antioch ? '' 
`` Not one . 
` He ' has filched all my best soldiers , little by little , under colour of this pretext and that ; and always , by Jove ! 
for my own good ! 
Why , everything he does is for my own good ... . 
He thinks of nothing else ! 
Now he 's in a hurry to see me simply to profit by my advice . 
Julian , that man is terrible ! 
You do n't know yet , and God grant that you may never know , what that man is . 
He sees everything , knows my inmost thoughts , those that I would n't mutter to my pillow ; and he 's watching your mind also . 
Frankly , I am afraid of him ! '' 
`` But ca n't you escape ? '' 
`` Hush , speak lower ! '' 
The features of Gallus took on an expression of boyish terror . 
`` No , no ; I tell you all is over ! 
I am as neatly finished as a fish already hooked . 
` He ' is drawing in the line gently , so that it does n't break . 
A Cæsar , let him be who he will , is always a big fish to land . 
I know that it 's impossible to escape . 
He 'll take me one day or another ... . 
And now I see the snare , and I am walking into it all the same out of fear . 
For six years , from the very first , I quaked before that man . 
Like a small boy , now however I 've walked far enough . 
Brother , he 'll cut my throat as a cook cuts the throat of a fowl . 
But he will torture me first by a thousand stratagems and caresses . 
I should prefer to finish quicker . '' 
The eyes of Gallus became suddenly brilliant , and he exclaimed -- `` Ah , if she had been here , at my side , she would certainly have saved me ! 
She was such an astonishing woman ! '' 
The tribune Scuda , entering the triclinium where supper was laid , announced , with a profound salutation , that on the morrow , in honour of the arrival of Cæsar , there would be races in the hippodrome of Constantinople , and that the celebrated rider Korax would take part in them . 
Gallus was delighted at the news , and ordered a crown of bay-leaf to be prepared , that , in case of the victory of Korax , he might himself crown his favourite before the people . 
He launched into racing stories , boasting the skill of his charioteers . 
Gallus drank deeply , laughed like a man whose rakish conscience is at ease , with not a trace of his recent fears upon those handsome features . 
Only at the last moment of farewell he kissed Julian heartily , suddenly melting into tears . 
`` May God help you ! 
May God help you ! '' 
he blubbered . 
`` You alone have stood my friend -- you and Constantia ! '' 
Then he whispered into Julian 's ear -- `` I hope that you 'll save your skin , brother . 
You can wear a mask and keep your own counsel ; I have always envied you that . 
May God succour you ! '' 
Julian sincerely pitied his brother ; he knew that he would not escape Constantius . 
On the following morning Gallus left Constantinople with his former escort . 
At Adrianople he was only permitted to retain ten small chariots , and had to relinquish all his personal suite and baggage . 
The autumn was far advanced , the roads in fearful condition , rain falling continuously all day for a week . 
Peremptory messages reached Gallus to hurry on . 
He was given no time to rest or sleep , and had taken no bath for a fortnight . 
One of his keenest discomforts was horror at close contact with dirt . 
All his life he had taken peculiar care to keep his body healthy and exquisitely groomed . 
It was with profound melancholy that he gazed at his uncut nails , and the purple of his travelling chlamys , befouled by dust and muddy roads . 
Scuda never quitted his side for an instant , and Gallus , not without reason , dreaded his assiduous companion . 
The tribune , years ago , had come as bearer of a despatch from the Emperor , and was but newly arrived in Antioch , when by an impudent remark he had offended Constantia , the wife of Gallus , who straightway in a fit of fury had ordered the Roman tribune to be flogged and afterwards thrown , like a slave , into a dungeon . 
Foreseeing the probable consequence , Constantia had quickly ordered the tribune to be set at liberty . 
He then presented himself at the palace of Gallus , as if nothing had occurred , and , pocketing the affront , had never even reported it to his master ; perhaps through fear that so degrading a punishment might besmirch the prospects of his career as a courtier . 
During the whole journey from Antioch to Milan Scuda retained his seat in Cæsar 's chariot , never quitting him , inviting his confidences , and treating him like some wayward child , who , being out of sorts , was not to be left to himself for a moment by a servant so devoted and affectionate . 
Where , as in Illyria , there were dangerous river crossings to be made on frail wooden bridges , Scuda would put his arm around Gallus with the tenderest solicitude , and if the latter strove to free himself , swear that he preferred death to the risk of drowning his precious charge . 
The tribune wore an oddly thoughtful expression , especially when contemplating the neck of Gallus , smooth and white as a young girl 's . 
The Cæsar , feeling this attentive look , would fidget uneasily in his seat , and with difficulty restrain himself from striking the amiable tribune in the face . 
But the poor prisoner 's spirits quickly rose again . 
He contented himself with imploring -LRB- for despite everything his appetite remained healthy -RRB- , that they might halt for a meal , were it never so scanty . 
At Petovio , in Norica , they were met by two fresh envoys from the Emperor , accompanied by a cohort of Court legionaries . 
The mask was then dropped . 
Round the palace where Gallus slept armed sentinels were placed as round a prison . 
In the evening the prefect Barbatio , making his way in , without any pretence at ceremony , ordered him to take off the chlamys of a Cæsar and don the simple tunic and paludamentum , or ordinary cloak , of a common soldier . 
On the following morning the prisoner was ordered to get into a karpenta , a little two-wheeled cart without a hood employed by minor officials on official journeys . 
A cold wind was blowing intermittently . 
Scuda according to his custom put one arm round Gallus , and with the disengaged hand gently fingered the new garment . 
`` Sound cloak , this -- soft and warm ! 
Better than the purple , which is a chilly affair ! 
Why , they 've lined this tunic with double wool ! '' 
And pushing his investigations further , Scuda slid a hand under the paludamentum , then under the tunic , and suddenly , with a laugh , drew forth the blade of a poniard , which Gallus had succeeded in concealing . 
`` Now that 's a mistake ! '' 
said Scuda . 
`` Why , you might through carelessness stab yourself ! 
What a boy you are ! '' 
And he threw the dagger out on the road . 
An infinite weariness seized Gallus . 
He closed his eyes and felt the endearing grip of Scuda inside his arm . 
Was it all a nightmare ? 
They halted at the fortress of Pola in Istria , on the shores of the Adriatic . 
Some years formerly this town had been the scene of the murder of Priscus , the heroic young son of Constantine the Great . 
The gloomy town was thronged with soldiers . 
Interminable barracks in the style of Diocletian had replaced the houses of civilians . 
Snow lay thickly on the roofs , the wind was moaning in deserted streets , and the sea lay rumbling below . 
Gallus was led into one of these barracks and given a seat fronting the window , so that the full daylight fell upon his face . 
One of the Emperor 's most skilful police officers -- Eustaphius , -- a little wrinkled and amiable old man with the wheedling and penetrating voice of a confessor , rubbed his blue and chilly hands and began the cross-examination . 
Gallus , who was mortally fatigued , said everything that Eustaphius suggested he should say , but at the words `` treason to the empire , '' paled , and started to his feet . 
`` It was no doing of mine -- nothing to do with me ! '' 
he stammered in dismay . 
`` Constantia planned it all ! 
It was she who exacted the death of Theophilus , of Clement , Domitian , and the rest ! 
Before God , it was not I . 
She said nothing to me about it . 
I was utterly ignorant ! '' 
Eustaphius looked at him smilingly . 
`` Very well , '' he said , `` I will duly inform the Emperor that his own sister Constantia , spouse of the late Cæsar of the East , alone is culpable . '' 
And turning towards the legionaries he ordered -- `` The interrogatory is finished . 
Take him away . '' 
Shortly afterwards arrived the sentence of death decreed by the Emperor Constantius , who had looked on the accusation brought against his lamented sister in the light of a personal insult . 
On hearing the sentence read out , Gallus lost consciousness and fell into the arms of the soldiers . 
Up to the last moment the poor fellow had hoped against hope . 
And , even now , he expected that they would at least grant him the reprieve of a few days , or hours , in which to prepare for death . 
But a rumour had gone round that the soldiers of the `` Steadfast Sixteenth Flavian '' legion were insubordinate , and planning to free Gallus ; so he was dragged off incontinently to execution . 
It was the early dawn . 
The snow , fallen during the night , had covered the foul mud , and lay glittering in chilly sunshine , its dazzling reflection lighting up the ceiling of the small room whither Gallus had been conducted . 
The authorities distrusted the soldiery , who almost all liked and pitied the disgraced Cæsar ; so for executioner they had chosen a butcher , who sometimes officiated in disposing of the thieves and brigands of the neighbourhood . 
This barbarian , unused to a Roman sword , had brought to the block a great double-edged axe which served him in the slaughter-yard . 
The butcher was a stupid , handsome , and sleepy slave . 
The name of the condemned man had been concealed from him and he believed he was only to behead a common thief . 
Before the last scene , Gallus became calm and humble , allowing his gaolers to do what they listed . 
Like a child , he wept and struggled when about to be placed by force in a bath , but once in he found the water pleasant . 
But at sight of the butcher sharpening his axe he shivered in all his limbs . 
A barber then carefully shaved off the fine golden hair , always the beauty and pride of the young Cæsar . 
In returning from the barber 's room Gallus , finding himself alone for a moment with the tribune Scuda , unexpectedly dropped on his knees before the cruellest of his foes . 
`` Save me , Scuda ! 
I know you can do it ! 
Tonight I have received a message from the Flavian legion . 
Let me get a word with them . 
They will deliver me ! 
I have thirty talents hidden in the temple at Mycenæ . 
Nobody knows it . 
I 'll give them to you , -- and more , much more ! 
The soldiers love me . 
I 'll make you my friend , my brother , my co-regent ... fellow-Cæsar ! '' 
Mad with hope , he embraced the tribune 's knees , and Scuda , shuddering , felt the lips of the Cæsar on his hands . 
He made no answer , and , smiling , slowly freed himself from the embrace . 
Gallus was ordered to undress . 
He objected to take off his sandals , his feet being unclean . 
When he was almost naked the butcher began to bind his hands behind his back , thief-fashion , and Scuda hastened to help him . 
When Gallus felt the touch of the tribune 's fingers , in a fit of fury he escaped from the grasp of the headsman , seized Scuda by the throat , and endeavoured to strangle him . 
In his naked activity he seemed suddenly transformed into some sinewy and terrible young tiger . 
The choking tribune was snatched from the grapple , and the prisoner 's feet and hands were securely bound . 
At this moment in the barrack court resounded the shouts of the Flavian soldiers -- `` Long live Cæsar Gallus ! '' 
and the murderers hurried on with their job . 
A great section of a tree-trunk was rolled in for a block , and Gallus thrust down on his knees in front of it . 
Barbatio , Baïnobadois , and Apodemus gripped him by the shoulders , hands , and feet ; and Scuda bowed the head against the block , weighing down that vainly resisting skull with all his might . 
Chilled by emotion , his fingers felt the newly-shorn pate still moist with soap . 
The butcher proved an unskilful headsman . 
His axe slashed the neck , but the blow fell awry . 
He raised the hatchet a second time , crying to Scuda -- `` More to the right ! 
Hold the head more to the right ! '' 
Gallus struggled and roared like a half-stunned bull . 
Nearer and nearer the cries of the soldiery resounded : `` Long live Gallus Cæsar ! '' 
The butcher heaved his handle high and smote . 
A stream of blood gushed over the hands of Scuda ; the head fell with a thud , and rolled away over the stone flags . 
At that moment the legionaries burst into the hall . 
Barbatio , Apodemus , and Scuda hurried to the opposite door , the headsman remaining at a loss ; but Scuda muttered in his ear -- `` Take Cæsar 's head , so that the legionaries may not recognise the body . 
It 's a question of life or death for us all ! '' 
`` He was not a thief then ? '' 
faltered the executioner , in amazement . 
He found it difficult to carry this shaven head ; at first he slid it under an arm , but it became uncomfortable ; then , slipping his hooked thumb into the mouth , he managed to bear off the skull of him before whom so many heads had once bowed down . 
* * * * * Julian , on learning the death of his brother , said quietly to himself -- `` Now comes my turn ! '' 
It was at Athens that Julian was about to take his vows and finally become a monk . 
One fresh spring morning , before the sun was up , Julian , issuing from the church where he had officiated at matins , followed for a few miles the banks of the Ilissus , in the shadow of plane-trees and wild vine . 
Not far from Athens he had lighted upon a solitary place , on the edge of a torrent which poured , like a scarf of silver , upon a sandy bottom . 
Thence he used often to gaze with wonder through the mists at the ruddy cliff of the Acropolis and the haughty lines of the Parthenon , half-illumined by the dawn . 
On this particular morning Julian took off his shoes and walked along the reaches of the Ilissus barefoot . 
The air was full of the smell of flowers and of the rich-scented muscat grape -- that aroma in which there is a foretaste of wine , faint as the promise of first love , stealing into the soul of youth . 
Julian , with feet in the water , sat down upon a platan-root , opened the Phædrus and began to read at the passage in the dialogue in which Socrates says to Phædrus : `` Let us go this way , and follow the course of the Ilissus ; we will choose a solitary place and there sit down . '' 
Phædrus : Luckily , I 'm unshod this morning , and as for you , Socrates , you always go barefoot . 
We 'll walk in the bed of the river . 
Look , how smiling and pellucid the water is ! '' 
Socrates : By Pallas ! 
here 's a wonderful nook ; it must be sacred to the nymphs and to the god Acheloüs -- to judge by these little statues . 
Does n't it seem to you as if here the breeze were softer and of sweeter odour ? 
Here , even in the hum of the crickets there 's something of the sweetness of summer . 
But what I love best of all is this deep grass ! '' 
Julian turned from the book with a smile . 
All was as it had been eight centuries before . 
Even the crickets set up their song . 
`` Socrates actually touched this ground with his feet ! '' 
he thought , and burying his head among the reeds he kissed the spot with adoration . 
`` Good-day , Julian ! 
you 've chosen a lovely corner there to read in . 
May I sit down near you ? '' 
`` Sit , sit ; I shall be delighted . 
Poets never violate a solitude . '' 
Julian looked up at a meagre personage , draped in an enormously long cloak -LRB- it was the poet Publius Porphyrius -RRB- , thinking to himself -- `` He 's so small and frail that I believe he 'll soon turn into a grasshopper , as Plato fancied the poets do . '' 
Publius , like the grasshoppers , could almost live upon air , but the gods had not granted him complete immunity from appetite ; and his shaven cadaverous face and discoloured lips were stamped with insatiable hunger . 
`` Why are you wearing such a long cloak , Publius ? '' 
Julian asked . 
`` It is n't mine , '' answered the other philosophically . 
`` I share a room with a young man , Hephæstion , who has come to Athens to learn eloquence . 
He will be a famous lawyer one day . 
Meanwhile he 's as poor as I am , poor as a lyric poet -- I need say no more ! 
Why , we 've pledged our clothes , our furniture , even the inkstand ; but we still have a cloak between us . 
In the morning I go out , and Hephæstion studies Demosthenes ; in the evening he puts on the chlamys , and I write verses . 
Unfortunately we 're not the same height -- but what does that matter ? 
I take my walks along the streets ` long-robed , ' like the ancient Trojan ladies . '' 
Publius laughed heartily ; the cadaverous face took on the expression of a mourner who has incautiously cheered up . 
`` You see , Julian , '' continued the poet , `` I 'm counting on the death of the widow of a very rich Roman landowner . 
The happy heirs will order an epitaph from me , and are going to pay for it generously . 
Unfortunately the widow , in spite of everything that doctors and heirs can do , persists in not giving up the ghost . 
But for that , my boy , I should have bought myself a cloak long ago . 
Listen , Julian , get up and come with me at once ! '' 
`` Whither ? '' 
`` Trust me -- you 'll thank me for it . '' 
`` What 's the mystery ? '' 
`` Ask no questions ; get up and come ! 
The poet brings no harm to the poet 's friend . 
You 'll see a goddess . '' 
`` What goddess ? '' 
`` Artemis , the huntress . '' 
`` A picture ? 
Statue ? '' 
`` Much better than that . 
If you love beauty , take your cloak and follow me . '' 
Publius assumed so seductive and mysterious an air that Julian was bitten by curiosity . 
`` There 's but one condition . 
Say nothing , and marvel at nothing we do . 
Otherwise the spell will break . 
In the name of Calliope and Erato , just trust me ! 
We 're only two yards from the place , and to shorten the road for you I 'll read you the beginning of my epitaph on the widow . '' 
They issued on the dusty high-road . 
Under the first rays of the sun the steel shield of Pallas Athene darted lightnings from the rose-hued Acropolis . 
Along the stone walls , hiding brooks humming along under the fig-trees , the grasshoppers were singing shrilly , vieing with the hoarse voice of the poet as he recited the epitaph . 
Publius Porphyrius was a man not destitute of talent . 
His career had been a curious one . 
Several years previously he had possessed a pretty little house , a veritable temple of Hermes , at Constantinople , not far from the Chalcedonian suburb . 
His father , an oil merchant , had bequeathed him a little fortune which should have permitted him to live without cares . 
But Publius was a worshipper of antique Hellenism , and rebelled against what he called the triumph of Christian servitude . 
He wrote a liberal poem which displeased the Emperor Constantius , who was therein alluded to unfavourably . 
This allusion cost the author dear . 
Chastisement fell upon him ; his house and goods were confiscated , and he himself banished to an islet in the archipelago , inhabited only by rocks , goats , and fevers . 
This trial was more than Publius could stand . 
He cursed liberal opinions , and determined to blot out his misdeeds at any price . 
Shaking with fever , he composed during his sleepless nights , by means of sentences culled from Virgil , a poem glorifying the Emperor ; the verses of the ancient poet being grouped in such a fashion that they formed a new work . 
This ingenious puzzle tickled the palate of the Court . 
Publius had divined the taste of the century . 
Straightway he ventured on feats more astonishing still . 
He wrote a dithyrambic , or Bacchic ode in free stanzas , and addressed it to Constantius . 
It consisted of verses of different lengths , designed so that they formed complete figures , such as a Pan 's flute , a water-organ , or a sacrificial altar on which the smoke was represented by uneven phrases . 
But by a marvel of skilfulness the poem was so contrived as to make a decorative oblong twenty hexameters wide and forty hexameters long . 
Certain lines were traced in red ink and , read together , became transformed into a monogram of Christ , or into a flower of arabesques , but always , in whatever shape , made new lines composed of new compliments . 
Finally the four last hexameters of the book could be read in eighteen different orders : from the end backwards , from the beginning , from the side , from the middle , from above , from below , etc. , and , read in what manner you please , formed a eulogy to the Emperor . 
In executing this work the poor poet nearly lost his wits . 
But his victory was complete , and Constantius more than charmed . 
He believed that Publius had surpassed all the poets of antiquity ; he wrote the author a letter with his own hand , assuring him of protection and ending thus : `` In our age My bounty , like the calm breath of the zephyrs , is breathed upon all who write verses . '' 
Nevertheless his confiscated property was not restored to the poet ; he was simply given money and authorised to quit his desert island for Athens . 
There he led a melancholy existence . 
The ostler in the stables of the circus , in comparison with Publius , lived in luxury . 
In the company of gravediggers , shady speculators , furnishers of nuptial feasts , he passed whole days in the antechambers of the illiterate great , in order to obtain orders for a marriage ode , an epitaph , or a love-letter . 
At this trade he gained little , but never lost heart , hoping to offer to the Emperor one day a poem which would win him complete pardon . 
Julian felt that in spite of this outward abasement Porphyrius bore at heart a deep love for Hellas . 
He was a fine critic of Greek poetry and Julian enjoyed his conversation . 
They left the high-road and approached the high wall of an enclosure like some palæstra or exercise-ground . 
Round about all was solitary ; two black lambs were cropping the grass ; near the closed door , in the chinks of which poppies and white daisies were growing , there stood a chariot and two white horses . 
Their manes were close-cut like those of the horses in the bas-reliefs . 
By them stood an old slave , a deaf-mute , but evidently of an affable disposition , for he immediately recognised Publius and nodded to him in friendly fashion , pointing to the closed gate of the wrestling ground . 
`` Lend me your purse a moment , '' said Publius to Julian . 
`` I 'll take out one or two pence for this poor old fool . '' 
He threw the coins , and the mute , with servile grimaces and pleased grunts , opened the door . 
They entered under a long and dark covered gallery . 
Between rows of columns ran other galleries laid out for the exercise of athletes . 
The spaces in their midst were now widths of grass instead of sand . 
The two friends penetrated a large inner portico . 
Julian 's curiosity became keener at every step , the mysterious Publius leading him on by the hand without a word . 
Doors of exedræ , or academic halls where orators used to meet , opened into the second portico , and the grasshoppers were humming now where eloquent discourses of Athenian sages had in old time resounded . 
Above the deep grass bees were whirling : silence and melancholy pervaded all . 
Suddenly , a woman 's voice was heard , and the noise of a disk striking the marble , followed by a merry burst of laughter . 
Stealing in like robbers , the pair hid themselves in the outer shadow of the columns of the elaiothesion , or place where the ancient wrestlers used to rub themselves over with oil . 
From behind these columns could be seen the ephebeion , a quadrangular space open to the sky , originally laid out for disk-throwing , and now newly strown with fresh sand . 
Julian looked in , and started back . 
At twenty paces from him stood a young girl entirely naked . 
His eyes swept over her wonderful body . 
She was holding a discus in her hand . 
Julian longed instinctively to beat a retreat ; but turning , he saw in the eyes of Publius and upon the whole of that lean tawny face such a look of admiration , that he understood that the adorer of Hellas , in bringing him to the place , had been moved by no shameful thought ; that enthusiasm was wholly sacred . 
Publius , seizing the hand of Julian , murmured : `` Look ! 
We are now nine centuries back , in ancient Laconia . 
Do you remember the verses of Propertius -- `` Multa tuæ , Sparte , miramur jura palæstræ , Sed mage virginei , tot bona gymnasii , Quod non infames exercet corpore ludos Inter luctantes nuda puella viros ? '' 
`` Who is she ? '' 
asked Julian . 
`` I do n't know . 
I never wanted to know . '' 
`` That is well ! 
Hush ! '' 
Now he gazed eagerly and without shame at the girl hurling the disk . 
Blushes were unworthy of a philosopher . 
She retreated some steps , inclined her body forward , and advancing the left leg made a swift bounding movement , and shot the metal circle so high that it shone in the rising sun , and in falling struck the farthest pillar . 
It was like watching the motions of a statue by Phidias . 
`` That shot was the best , '' said a little twelve-year-old damsel , clad in a rich tunic and standing near the column . 
`` Myrrha , give me the disk , '' replied the player . 
`` I can throw it higher than that , as you shall see . 
Meroë , get farther out of the way . 
I might hurt you , as Apollo hurt Hyacinthus . '' 
Meroë , an old Egyptian , to judge by her multi-coloured vestments and tanned visage , was preparing in alabaster jars perfumes for a bath . 
Julian understood that the mute slave of the gate and the white-horsed chariot outside must belong to these two votaries of the Laconian games . 
After the disk-throwing the young girl took from Myrrha a bow and a quiver , and drew thence a long arrow . 
She aimed at a black circle at the opposite end of the ephebeion ; the string hummed , the arrow flew whistling and stuck in the target : then a second , then a third . 
`` O huntress Artemis ! '' 
sighed Publius . 
Suddenly a sunbeam slipping between two columns shot into the face and youthful breast of the young girl . 
Throwing bow and arrows aside in sudden bedazzlement , she hid her face in her hands . 
Swallows , uttering their faint fine chirpings , undulated about the exercise-ground , and pursuing each other vanished into the blue of the sky . 
She uncovered her face and raised her arms above her head . 
Its fair hair , golden at its ends as honey in the sun , at its roots was auburn ; her lips half opened in a happy smile , she suffered the sun to bathe her body , gliding lower and lower yet , till she stood clothed , as in the loveliest raiment , in pure light and beauty . 
`` Myrrha , '' the girl murmured slowly and dreamily , `` look at the sky ! 
How beautiful it would be to bathe in it , like those birds ! 
Do you remember our saying that men could not be happy because they had no wings ? 
When I look at the birds I am consumed with envy . 
One should be light and bare as I am at this moment , and winging high up in the sky , and knowing that one could fly forever -- that there should be nothing else but sky and sun about one 's light and free and naked body ! '' 
Drawing herself up to her full height with outstretched arms she sighed deeply , as at some remembered joy fled away for ever . 
The burning caress of the sun now reached her waist . 
Suddenly she shivered and grew ashamed , as if some living and passionate being had approached her . 
With one hand she shielded her breast , with the other the abdomen , the immortal gesture of Aphrodite of Cnidos . 
`` Meroë , give me my clothes ! 
quick , Meroë ! '' 
she exclaimed , with eyes wide open and startled . 
Julian never remembered how he came forth from the wrestling-ground ; his heart was on fire . 
The poet 's face was solemn as that of a man quitting a temple . 
`` You are not annoyed ? '' 
he asked Julian . 
`` No ; why should I be ? '' 
`` Perhaps a Christian might find it a temptation ? '' 
`` There was nothing of temptation there for me . 
Do you understand ? '' 
`` Perfectly ; that is what I thought . '' 
And again they found themselves on the dusty high road , where the sun was already hot , and bent their steps towards Athens . 
Publius continued in an undertone , as it were talking to himself -- `` Oh , how shameful , how deformed we are nowadays ! 
Ashamed of our own morose and pitiful nakedness , we hide it because we feel ugly and impure . 
Whereas of old time ... . 
Ah ! 
there was a time when all was very different . 
Julian , the young girls of Sparta used to go out upon the wrestling-ground naked and haughty before all the people . 
Nobody feared temptation in those days . 
Folk were simple as children -- as gods ! 
And to think that nevermore shall that happen again ; that the freedom , the cleanness , of that happy state shall be seen on earth no more ! '' 
The poet 's chin fell on his breast , and he sighed drearily . 
They came at last to the Street of Tripods , and hard by the Acropolis the friends separated and went their ways in silence . 
Julian went into the shadow of the propylæa , through vast porches leading into temple-enclosures ; but avoided the Decorated Porch , on which Parrhasius had chiselled the battles of Marathon and Salamis , and passing the little temple of the Wingless Victory ascended to the Parthenon . 
He had but to shut his eyes to remember the superb body of Artemis the huntress . 
When he opened them the sun-bathed Parthenon marbles seemed golden and living as that divine body ; and , despising Imperial spies and chances of death , he desired openly to worship and kiss the warm stones of that holy place . 
Two black-robed young men of pale and severe countenance were standing near . 
They were Gregory of Nazianzen and Basil of Cæsarea . 
The Hellenists feared these two men as their most formidable foes . 
It was the hope of the Christians that the two friends would one day become fathers of the Church . 
They were now watching Julian . 
`` What 's the matter with him to-day ? '' 
said Gregory . 
`` Is that the attitude of a monk ? 
Are those the gestures of a monk ? 
Do you see those closed eyes -- that smile ? 
Do you believe that his piety is genuine , Basil ? '' 
`` I have often watched him weeping and praying in church . '' 
`` Mere hypocrisy ! '' 
`` If so , why does he come to us , seek our friendship , and argue over the Scriptures ? '' 
`` He 's deceiving himself ; or perhaps he wishes to seduce the faithful . 
Never trust him ! 
He is the tempter ! 
Remember what I say , brother , the Roman Empire in fostering this young man is nursing an adder ! '' 
The two friends went off , their eyes on the ground . 
The severe caryatids of the Erechtheum , the laughing blue of the sky , the white temple of the Wingless One , the Porches and the Parthenon , that wonder of the world , on them cast no spell . 
One thing alone did they desire : to lay all these haunts of demons in the dust . 
The long shadows of the monks fell on the Parthenon steps as they walked away . 
`` I must see her again , '' Julian was thinking ; `` I must find out who she is . '' 
`` The gods created mortals for one purpose only -- polite conversation ! '' 
`` Charmingly said , Mamertinus ! 
Say it again , I beg , before you 've forgotten it ! 
I 'll write that down with the other maxims , '' declared Lampridius , the professor of eloquence , taking tablets from his pocket . 
His admired friend Mamertinus was a fashionable Athenian advocate . 
`` My dear fellow , I say , '' repeated Mamertinus with the most delicate of smiles , `` I merely say that men have been sent by the gods -- '' `` No , no , it did n't run so , Mamertinus ; you put it better . 
The gods created mortals -- '' `` Ah , yes ; the gods created mortals for one purpose only -- polite conversation ! '' 
And the enthusiastic Lampridius scribbled down the words as if they had been the utterance of an oracle . 
The scene was a friendly supper of men of letters given by the venerable Roman senator Hortensius , in the villa of his rich young ward Arsinoë , not far from the Piræus . 
Mamertinus on that day had achieved a remarkable speech in defence of the banker Barnava . 
Nobody had the smallest doubt that Barnava was a complete scoundrel ; but , besides measureless eloquence , the advocate possessed so telling a voice that one of the innumerable ladies who adored him avowed : `` I never listen to what Mamertinus says ; I have no wish to know what he 's talking about . 
I become intoxicated with the tones of his voice , and especially with the dying cadence at the end of his periods . 
It is incredible ! 
It is no longer a human voice , but nectar and ambrosia , the heavenly sighing of an Æolian harp ! '' 
And so , while the populace labelled the money-lender Barnava `` the blood-sucker , '' the devourer of widows and orphans , the Athenian judges enthusiastically acquitted the client of Mamertinus . 
From this client the advocate had received 50,000 sesterces , and therefore felt in no dissatisfied mood at the supper given by Hortensius in his honour . 
But it was his habit to affect the invalid , in order that he might be spoiled and petted the more . 
`` I am utterly done up to-day , my friends , '' he murmured plaintively ; `` aching in every limb . 
Where is Arsinoë ? '' 
`` She will soon be here . 
Arsinoë has just received from the museum of Alexandria some new apparatus for experiments in physics ; and she is entirely absorbed in them . 
But I will give an order to summon her , '' suggested Hortensius . 
`` No , do n't do that , '' responded the lawyer carelessly . 
`` But what a ridiculous thing -- a young girl at physics ! 
What in the world has the one thing to do with the other ? 
Your blue-stockings have been finely belaboured by Aristophanes and Euripides . 
Arsinoë is a whimsical creature , Hortensius ! 
Really , if she was n't so attractive , what with her sculpture and her mathematics she would almost become -- '' He did not finish the sentence , and gazed languidly out of the window . 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
