One thing I shall be ashamed of for ever . 
I referred to her being rich and having a dowry while I was only a stuck‐up beggar ! 
I mentioned money ! 
I ought to have borne it in silence , but it slipped from my pen . 
Then I wrote at once to Ivan , and told him all I could about it in a letter of six pages , and sent him to her . 
Why do you look like that ? 
Why are you staring at me ? 
Yes , Ivan fell in love with her ; he 's in love with her still . 
I know that . 
I did a stupid thing , in the world 's opinion ; but perhaps that one stupid thing may be the saving of us all now . 
Oo ! 
Do n't you see what a lot she thinks of Ivan , how she respects him ? 
When she compares us , do you suppose she can love a man like me , especially after all that has happened here ? '' 
`` But I am convinced that she does love a man like you , and not a man like him . '' 
`` She loves her own virtue , not me . '' 
The words broke involuntarily , and almost malignantly , from Dmitri . 
He laughed , but a minute later his eyes gleamed , he flushed crimson and struck the table violently with his fist . 
`` I swear , Alyosha , '' he cried , with intense and genuine anger at himself ; `` you may not believe me , but as God is holy , and as Christ is God , I swear that though I smiled at her lofty sentiments just now , I know that I am a million times baser in soul than she , and that these lofty sentiments of hers are as sincere as a heavenly angel 's . 
That 's the tragedy of it -- that I know that for certain . 
What if any one does show off a bit ? 
Do n't I do it myself ? 
And yet I 'm sincere , I 'm sincere . 
As for Ivan , I can understand how he must be cursing nature now -- with his intellect , too ! 
To see the preference given -- to whom , to what ? 
To a monster who , though he is betrothed and all eyes are fixed on him , ca n't restrain his debaucheries -- and before the very eyes of his betrothed ! 
And a man like me is preferred , while he is rejected . 
And why ? 
Because a girl wants to sacrifice her life and destiny out of gratitude . 
It 's ridiculous ! 
I 've never said a word of this to Ivan , and Ivan of course has never dropped a hint of the sort to me . 
But destiny will be accomplished , and the best man will hold his ground while the undeserving one will vanish into his back alley for ever -- his filthy back‐alley , his beloved back‐alley , where he is at home and where he will sink in filth and stench at his own free will and with enjoyment . 
I 've been talking foolishly . 
I 've no words left . 
I use them at random , but it will be as I have said . 
I shall drown in the back alley , and she will marry Ivan . '' 
`` Stop , Dmitri , '' Alyosha interrupted again with great anxiety . 
`` There 's one thing you have n't made clear yet : you are still betrothed all the same , are n't you ? 
How can you break off the engagement if she , your betrothed , does n't want to ? '' 
`` Yes , formally and solemnly betrothed . 
It was all done on my arrival in Moscow , with great ceremony , with ikons , all in fine style . 
The general 's wife blessed us , and -- would you believe it ? 
-- congratulated Katya . 
` You 've made a good choice , ' she said , ` I see right through him . ' 
And -- would you believe it ? 
-- she did n't like Ivan , and hardly greeted him . 
I had a lot of talk with Katya in Moscow . 
I told her about myself -- sincerely , honorably . 
She listened to everything . 
There was sweet confusion , There were tender words . 
Though there were proud words , too . 
She wrung out of me a mighty promise to reform . 
I gave my promise , and here -- '' `` What ? '' 
`` Why , I called to you and brought you out here to‐day , this very day -- remember it -- to send you -- this very day again -- to Katerina Ivanovna , and -- '' `` What ? '' 
`` To tell her that I shall never come to see her again . 
Say , ` He sends you his compliments . ' '' 
`` But is that possible ? '' 
`` That 's just the reason I 'm sending you , in my place , because it 's impossible . 
And , how could I tell her myself ? '' 
`` And where are you going ? '' 
`` To the back‐alley . '' 
`` To Grushenka , then ! '' 
Alyosha exclaimed mournfully , clasping his hands . 
`` Can Rakitin really have told the truth ? 
I thought that you had just visited her , and that was all . '' 
`` Can a betrothed man pay such visits ? 
Is such a thing possible and with such a betrothed , and before the eyes of all the world ? 
Confound it , I have some honor ! 
As soon as I began visiting Grushenka , I ceased to be betrothed , and to be an honest man . 
I understand that . 
Why do you look at me ? 
You see , I went in the first place to beat her . 
I had heard , and I know for a fact now , that that captain , father 's agent , had given Grushenka an I.O.U. of mine for her to sue me for payment , so as to put an end to me . 
They wanted to scare me . 
I went to beat her . 
I had had a glimpse of her before . 
She does n't strike one at first sight . 
I knew about her old merchant , who 's lying ill now , paralyzed ; but he 's leaving her a decent little sum . 
I knew , too , that she was fond of money , that she hoarded it , and lent it at a wicked rate of interest , that she 's a merciless cheat and swindler . 
I went to beat her , and I stayed . 
The storm broke -- it struck me down like the plague . 
I 'm plague‐stricken still , and I know that everything is over , that there will never be anything more for me . 
The cycle of the ages is accomplished . 
That 's my position . 
And though I 'm a beggar , as fate would have it , I had three thousand just then in my pocket . 
I drove with Grushenka to Mokroe , a place twenty‐five versts from here . 
I got gypsies there and champagne and made all the peasants there drunk on it , and all the women and girls . 
I sent the thousands flying . 
In three days ' time I was stripped bare , but a hero . 
Do you suppose the hero had gained his end ? 
Not a sign of it from her . 
I tell you that rogue , Grushenka , has a supple curve all over her body . 
You can see it in her little foot , even in her little toe . 
I saw it , and kissed it , but that was all , I swear ! 
` I 'll marry you if you like , ' she said , ` you 're a beggar , you know . 
Say that you wo n't beat me , and will let me do anything I choose , and perhaps I will marry you . ' 
She laughed , and she 's laughing still ! '' 
Dmitri leapt up with a sort of fury . 
He seemed all at once as though he were drunk . 
His eyes became suddenly bloodshot . 
`` And do you really mean to marry her ? '' 
`` At once , if she will . 
And if she wo n't , I shall stay all the same . 
I 'll be the porter at her gate . 
Alyosha ! '' 
he cried . 
He stopped short before him , and taking him by the shoulders began shaking him violently . 
`` Do you know , you innocent boy , that this is all delirium , senseless delirium , for there 's a tragedy here . 
Let me tell you , Alexey , that I may be a low man , with low and degraded passions , but a thief and a pickpocket Dmitri Karamazov never can be . 
Well , then ; let me tell you that I am a thief and a pickpocket . 
That very morning , just before I went to beat Grushenka , Katerina Ivanovna sent for me , and in strict secrecy -LRB- why I do n't know , I suppose she had some reason -RRB- asked me to go to the chief town of the province and to post three thousand roubles to Agafya Ivanovna in Moscow , so that nothing should be known of it in the town here . 
So I had that three thousand roubles in my pocket when I went to see Grushenka , and it was that money we spent at Mokroe . 
Afterwards I pretended I had been to the town , but did not show her the post office receipt . 
I said I had sent the money and would bring the receipt , and so far I have n't brought it . 
I 've forgotten it . 
Now what do you think you 're going to her to‐day to say ? 
` He sends his compliments , ' and she 'll ask you , ` What about the money ? ' 
You might still have said to her , ` He 's a degraded sensualist , and a low creature , with uncontrolled passions . 
He did n't send your money then , but wasted it , because , like a low brute , he could n't control himself . ' 
But still you might have added , ` He is n't a thief though . 
Here is your three thousand ; he sends it back . 
Send it yourself to Agafya Ivanovna . 
But he told me to say `` he sends his compliments . '' ' 
But , as it is , she will ask , ` But where is the money ? ' '' 
`` Mitya , you are unhappy , yes ! 
But not as unhappy as you think . 
Do n't worry yourself to death with despair . '' 
`` What , do you suppose I 'd shoot myself because I ca n't get three thousand to pay back ? 
That 's just it . 
I sha n't shoot myself . 
I have n't the strength now . 
Afterwards , perhaps . 
But now I 'm going to Grushenka . 
I do n't care what happens . '' 
`` And what then ? '' 
`` I 'll be her husband if she deigns to have me , and when lovers come , I 'll go into the next room . 
I 'll clean her friends ' goloshes , blow up their samovar , run their errands . '' 
`` Katerina Ivanovna will understand it all , '' Alyosha said solemnly . 
`` She 'll understand how great this trouble is and will forgive . 
She has a lofty mind , and no one could be more unhappy than you . 
She 'll see that for herself . '' 
`` She wo n't forgive everything , '' said Dmitri , with a grin . 
`` There 's something in it , brother , that no woman could forgive . 
Do you know what would be the best thing to do ? '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Pay back the three thousand . '' 
`` Where can we get it from ? 
I say , I have two thousand . 
Ivan will give you another thousand -- that makes three . 
Take it and pay it back . '' 
`` And when would you get it , your three thousand ? 
You 're not of age , besides , and you must -- you absolutely must -- take my farewell to her to‐day , with the money or without it , for I ca n't drag on any longer , things have come to such a pass . 
To‐morrow is too late . 
I shall send you to father . '' 
`` To father ? '' 
`` Yes , to father first . 
Ask him for three thousand . '' 
`` But , Mitya , he wo n't give it . '' 
`` As though he would ! 
I know he wo n't . 
Do you know the meaning of despair , Alexey ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Listen . 
Legally he owes me nothing . 
I 've had it all from him , I know that . 
But morally he owes me something , does n't he ? 
You know he started with twenty‐eight thousand of my mother 's money and made a hundred thousand with it . 
Let him give me back only three out of the twenty‐eight thousand , and he 'll draw my soul out of hell , and it will atone for many of his sins . 
For that three thousand -- I give you my solemn word -- I 'll make an end of everything , and he shall hear nothing more of me . 
For the last time I give him the chance to be a father . 
Tell him God Himself sends him this chance . '' 
`` Mitya , he wo n't give it for anything . '' 
`` I know he wo n't . 
I know it perfectly well . 
Now , especially . 
That 's not all . 
I know something more . 
Now , only a few days ago , perhaps only yesterday he found out for the first time in earnest -LRB- underline in earnest -RRB- that Grushenka is really perhaps not joking , and really means to marry me . 
He knows her nature ; he knows the cat . 
And do you suppose he 's going to give me money to help to bring that about when he 's crazy about her himself ? 
And that 's not all , either . 
I can tell you more than that . 
I know that for the last five days he has had three thousand drawn out of the bank , changed into notes of a hundred roubles , packed into a large envelope , sealed with five seals , and tied across with red tape . 
You see how well I know all about it ! 
On the envelope is written : ` To my angel , Grushenka , when she will come to me . ' 
He scrawled it himself in silence and in secret , and no one knows that the money 's there except the valet , Smerdyakov , whom he trusts like himself . 
So now he has been expecting Grushenka for the last three or four days ; he hopes she 'll come for the money . 
He has sent her word of it , and she has sent him word that perhaps she 'll come . 
And if she does go to the old man , can I marry her after that ? 
You understand now why I 'm here in secret and what I 'm on the watch for . '' 
`` For her ? '' 
`` Yes , for her . 
Foma has a room in the house of these sluts here . 
Foma comes from our parts ; he was a soldier in our regiment . 
He does jobs for them . 
He 's watchman at night and goes grouse‐shooting in the day‐time ; and that 's how he lives . 
I 've established myself in his room . 
Neither he nor the women of the house know the secret -- that is , that I am on the watch here . '' 
`` No one but Smerdyakov knows , then ? '' 
`` No one else . 
He will let me know if she goes to the old man . '' 
`` It was he told you about the money , then ? '' 
`` Yes . 
It 's a dead secret . 
Even Ivan does n't know about the money , or anything . 
The old man is sending Ivan to Tchermashnya on a two or three days ' journey . 
A purchaser has turned up for the copse : he 'll give eight thousand for the timber . 
So the old man keeps asking Ivan to help him by going to arrange it . 
It will take him two or three days . 
That 's what the old man wants , so that Grushenka can come while he 's away . '' 
`` Then he 's expecting Grushenka to‐day ? '' 
`` No , she wo n't come to‐day ; there are signs . 
She 's certain not to come , '' cried Mitya suddenly . 
`` Smerdyakov thinks so , too . 
Father 's drinking now . 
He 's sitting at table with Ivan . 
Go to him , Alyosha , and ask for the three thousand . '' 
`` Mitya , dear , what 's the matter with you ? '' 
cried Alyosha , jumping up from his place , and looking keenly at his brother 's frenzied face . 
For one moment the thought struck him that Dmitri was mad . 
`` What is it ? 
I 'm not insane , '' said Dmitri , looking intently and earnestly at him . 
`` No fear . 
I am sending you to father , and I know what I 'm saying . 
I believe in miracles . '' 
`` In miracles ? '' 
`` In a miracle of Divine Providence . 
God knows my heart . 
He sees my despair . 
He sees the whole picture . 
Surely He wo n't let something awful happen . 
Alyosha , I believe in miracles . 
Go ! '' 
`` I am going . 
Tell me , will you wait for me here ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I know it will take some time . 
You ca n't go at him point blank . 
He 's drunk now . 
I 'll wait three hours -- four , five , six , seven . 
Only remember you must go to Katerina Ivanovna to‐day , if it has to be at midnight , with the money or without the money , and say , ` He sends his compliments to you . ' 
I want you to say that verse to her : ` He sends his compliments to you . ' '' 
`` Mitya ! 
And what if Grushenka comes to‐day -- if not to‐day , to‐morrow , or the next day ? '' 
`` Grushenka ? 
I shall see her . 
I shall rush out and prevent it . '' 
`` And if -- '' `` If there 's an if , it will be murder . 
I could n't endure it . '' 
`` Who will be murdered ? '' 
`` The old man . 
I sha n't kill her . '' 
`` Brother , what are you saying ? '' 
`` Oh , I do n't know ... . 
I do n't know . 
Perhaps I sha n't kill , and perhaps I shall . 
I 'm afraid that he will suddenly become so loathsome to me with his face at that moment . 
I hate his ugly throat , his nose , his eyes , his shameless snigger . 
I feel a physical repulsion . 
That 's what I 'm afraid of . 
That 's what may be too much for me . '' 
`` I 'll go , Mitya . 
I believe that God will order things for the best , that nothing awful may happen . '' 
`` And I will sit and wait for the miracle . 
And if it does n't come to pass -- '' Alyosha went thoughtfully towards his father 's house . 
He did in fact find his father still at table . 
Though there was a dining room in the house , the table was laid as usual in the drawing‐room , which was the largest room , and furnished with old‐fashioned ostentation . 
The furniture was white and very old , upholstered in old , red , silky material . 
In the spaces between the windows there were mirrors in elaborate white and gilt frames , of old‐fashioned carving . 
On the walls , covered with white paper , which was torn in many places , there hung two large portraits -- one of some prince who had been governor of the district thirty years before , and the other of some bishop , also long since dead . 
In the corner opposite the door there were several ikons , before which a lamp was lighted at nightfall ... not so much for devotional purposes as to light the room . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch used to go to bed very late , at three or four o'clock in the morning , and would wander about the room at night or sit in an arm‐chair , thinking . 
This had become a habit with him . 
He often slept quite alone in the house , sending his servants to the lodge ; but usually Smerdyakov remained , sleeping on a bench in the hall . 
When Alyosha came in , dinner was over , but coffee and preserves had been served . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch liked sweet things with brandy after dinner . 
Ivan was also at table , sipping coffee . 
The servants , Grigory and Smerdyakov , were standing by . 
Both the gentlemen and the servants seemed in singularly good spirits . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch was roaring with laughter . 
Before he entered the room , Alyosha heard the shrill laugh he knew so well , and could tell from the sound of it that his father had only reached the good‐humored stage , and was far from being completely drunk . 
`` Here he is ! 
Here he is ! '' 
yelled Fyodor Pavlovitch , highly delighted at seeing Alyosha . 
`` Join us . 
Sit down . 
Coffee is a lenten dish , but it 's hot and good . 
I do n't offer you brandy , you 're keeping the fast . 
But would you like some ? 
No ; I 'd better give you some of our famous liqueur . 
Smerdyakov , go to the cupboard , the second shelf on the right . 
Here are the keys . 
Look sharp ! '' 
Alyosha began refusing the liqueur . 
`` Never mind . 
If you wo n't have it , we will , '' said Fyodor Pavlovitch , beaming . 
`` But stay -- have you dined ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Alyosha , who had in truth only eaten a piece of bread and drunk a glass of kvas in the Father Superior 's kitchen . 
`` Though I should be pleased to have some hot coffee . '' 
`` Bravo , my darling ! 
He 'll have some coffee . 
Does it want warming ? 
No , it 's boiling . 
It 's capital coffee : Smerdyakov 's making . 
My Smerdyakov 's an artist at coffee and at fish patties , and at fish soup , too . 
You must come one day and have some fish soup . 
Let me know beforehand ... . 
But , stay ; did n't I tell you this morning to come home with your mattress and pillow and all ? 
Have you brought your mattress ? 
He he he ! '' 
`` No , I have n't , '' said Alyosha , smiling , too . 
`` Ah , but you were frightened , you were frightened this morning , were n't you ? 
There , my darling , I could n't do anything to vex you . 
Do you know , Ivan , I ca n't resist the way he looks one straight in the face and laughs ? 
It makes me laugh all over . 
I 'm so fond of him . 
Alyosha , let me give you my blessing -- a father 's blessing . '' 
Alyosha rose , but Fyodor Pavlovitch had already changed his mind . 
`` No , no , '' he said . 
`` I 'll just make the sign of the cross over you , for now . 
Sit still . 
Now we 've a treat for you , in your own line , too . 
It 'll make you laugh . 
Balaam 's ass has begun talking to us here -- and how he talks ! 
How he talks ! '' 
Balaam 's ass , it appeared , was the valet , Smerdyakov . 
He was a young man of about four and twenty , remarkably unsociable and taciturn . 
Not that he was shy or bashful . 
On the contrary , he was conceited and seemed to despise everybody . 
But we must pause to say a few words about him now . 
He was brought up by Grigory and Marfa , but the boy grew up `` with no sense of gratitude , '' as Grigory expressed it ; he was an unfriendly boy , and seemed to look at the world mistrustfully . 
In his childhood he was very fond of hanging cats , and burying them with great ceremony . 
He used to dress up in a sheet as though it were a surplice , and sang , and waved some object over the dead cat as though it were a censer . 
All this he did on the sly , with the greatest secrecy . 
Grigory caught him once at this diversion and gave him a sound beating . 
He shrank into a corner and sulked there for a week . 
`` He does n't care for you or me , the monster , '' Grigory used to say to Marfa , `` and he does n't care for any one . 
Are you a human being ? '' 
he said , addressing the boy directly . 
`` You 're not a human being . 
You grew from the mildew in the bath‐house . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- That 's what you are . '' 
Smerdyakov , it appeared afterwards , could never forgive him those words . 
Grigory taught him to read and write , and when he was twelve years old , began teaching him the Scriptures . 
But this teaching came to nothing . 
At the second or third lesson the boy suddenly grinned . 
`` What 's that for ? '' 
asked Grigory , looking at him threateningly from under his spectacles . 
`` Oh , nothing . 
God created light on the first day , and the sun , moon , and stars on the fourth day . 
Where did the light come from on the first day ? '' 
Grigory was thunderstruck . 
The boy looked sarcastically at his teacher . 
There was something positively condescending in his expression . 
Grigory could not restrain himself . 
`` I 'll show you where ! '' 
he cried , and gave the boy a violent slap on the cheek . 
The boy took the slap without a word , but withdrew into his corner again for some days . 
A week later he had his first attack of the disease to which he was subject all the rest of his life -- epilepsy . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch heard of it , his attitude to the boy seemed changed at once . 
Till then he had taken no notice of him , though he never scolded him , and always gave him a copeck when he met him . 
Sometimes , when he was in good humor , he would send the boy something sweet from his table . 
But as soon as he heard of his illness , he showed an active interest in him , sent for a doctor , and tried remedies , but the disease turned out to be incurable . 
The fits occurred , on an average , once a month , but at various intervals . 
The fits varied too , in violence : some were light and some were very severe . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch strictly forbade Grigory to use corporal punishment to the boy , and began allowing him to come upstairs to him . 
He forbade him to be taught anything whatever for a time , too . 
One day when the boy was about fifteen , Fyodor Pavlovitch noticed him lingering by the bookcase , and reading the titles through the glass . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch had a fair number of books -- over a hundred -- but no one ever saw him reading . 
He at once gave Smerdyakov the key of the bookcase . 
`` Come , read . 
You shall be my librarian . 
You 'll be better sitting reading than hanging about the courtyard . 
Come , read this , '' and Fyodor Pavlovitch gave him Evenings in a Cottage near Dikanka . 
He read a little but did n't like it . 
He did not once smile , and ended by frowning . 
`` Why ? 
Is n't it funny ? '' 
asked Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
Smerdyakov did not speak . 
`` Answer , stupid ! '' 
`` It 's all untrue , '' mumbled the boy , with a grin . 
`` Then go to the devil ! 
You have the soul of a lackey . 
Stay , here 's Smaragdov 's Universal History . 
That 's all true . 
Read that . '' 
But Smerdyakov did not get through ten pages of Smaragdov . 
He thought it dull . 
So the bookcase was closed again . 
Shortly afterwards Marfa and Grigory reported to Fyodor Pavlovitch that Smerdyakov was gradually beginning to show an extraordinary fastidiousness . 
He would sit before his soup , take up his spoon and look into the soup , bend over it , examine it , take a spoonful and hold it to the light . 
`` What is it ? 
A beetle ? '' 
Grigory would ask . 
`` A fly , perhaps , '' observed Marfa . 
The squeamish youth never answered , but he did the same with his bread , his meat , and everything he ate . 
He would hold a piece on his fork to the light , scrutinize it microscopically , and only after long deliberation decide to put it in his mouth . 
`` Ach ! 
What fine gentlemen 's airs ! '' 
Grigory muttered , looking at him . 
