God will not allow one of His creatures to perish . '' 
`` I wish I too could believe it , '' murmured Juventinus , `` but I should be afraid ... '' `` One must fear nothing ; where there is love , fear is cast out . 
I do not fear anything . '' 
`` And He ? '' 
demanded Juventinus . 
`` Who ? '' 
`` He , the Unnameable , the Arch-rebel ! '' 
`` He also , He also ! '' 
cried Myrrha , with strong conviction . 
`` So long as there shall be even a soul that has not gained salvation , no creature can enjoy full felicity . 
If there be no bounds to Love , if Love is infinite , then all shall be in God , and God in all . 
Friend , will not that be happiness ? 
We have not yet taken full account of that . 
Every soul must be blessed , do you understand ? '' 
`` And Evil ? '' 
`` There is no evil , if there is no Death . '' 
Through the open window came the echo of the Bacchic songs of the friends of Anatolius , making merry in their purple galleys on the blue twilight sea . 
Myrrha pointed to them -- `` And that is also beautiful , and that is also to be blest , '' she murmured . 
`` What ? 
These vicious songs ? '' 
asked Juventinus , dreading her reply . 
Myrrha shook her head -- `` No ! 
all is well , all is pure . 
Beauty comes from God . 
Friend , what are you afraid of ? 
To love , one must be unspeakably free ! 
... Fear absolutely nothing . 
You are still ignorant what happiness life can give ! '' 
She drew a deep sigh and added -- `` And what happiness death gives too ! '' 
It was their last talk together . 
Myrrha lay in bed for several days , motionless and silent , without opening her eyes . 
She may have suffered much , for her brows would sometimes contract with pain ; but a gentle smile of resignation would follow ; not a groan , not a complaint escaped the closed lips . 
Once , at midnight , she called Arsinoë , who was sitting beside her . 
The sick girl spoke with difficulty ; she asked , without opening her eyes -- `` Is it yet day ? '' 
`` No , night still , '' answered Arsinoë , `` but the sun will soon rise . '' 
`` I can not hear ... . 
Who are you ? '' 
Myrrha murmured indistinctly . 
`` It is I , Arsinoë . '' 
The invalid suddenly opened her wide luminous eyes and gazed fixedly on her sister . 
`` It seemed to me , '' said Myrrha with an effort , `` it seemed to me that it was not you ... that I was utterly alone . '' 
Then very slowly , with great difficulty , being scarcely able to move , she brought her transparent hands together , with an imploring look of fear . 
The corners of the lips trembled , the eyebrows moved . 
`` Do not abandon me ! 
When I die , do not think that I am no more ! '' 
Arsinoë leaned towards her , but Myrrha was too weak to kiss her , although she tried to do so . 
Arsinoë brought her cheek closer to the great eyes , and the young girl softly caressed her face with the long lashes . 
Arsinoë felt on her cheek a touch light as butterfly 's velvety wings . 
It was a trick invented by Myrrha in childhood . 
That last caress brought back to Arsinoë all their life together , all their mutual affection . 
She fell on her knees and , for the first time for years , sobbed irresistibly , as if the tears were melting her inmost heart . 
`` No , Myrrha , '' she said , `` I will not abandon you ... . 
I will stay with you always ! '' 
Myrrha 's eyes grew animated and joyous ; she faltered -- `` Then you -- '' `` Yes ; I long to believe ; I will believe ! '' 
exclaimed Arsinoë , and immediately wondered . 
Those words appeared a miracle to herself , and no deception . 
She had no wish to recall them . 
`` I will go into the desert , Myrrha ; like you , instead of you , '' she continued in a transport of wild love ; `` and , if God exists , He must grant that there shall be no death between us ; so that we shall be always together . '' 
Myrrha closed her eyes , listening to her sister . 
With a smile of infinite peace , she murmured -- `` Now , I will go to sleep . 
I want nothing more . 
I am well . '' 
She never opened her eyes or spoke again ; her face was calm and severe as the face of the dead ; and in this state she lived on several days longer . 
When a cup of wine was brought near to her lips , she would swallow a few mouthfuls . 
If her breathing became nervous and irregular , Juventinus would chant a prayer or some divine hymn , and then , as if soothed , Myrrha began to breathe more easily . 
One evening , when the sun had set behind Ischia and Capreæ , while the motionless sea was melting into heaven , and the first dim star trembling , Juventinus was singing to the dying girl -- Deus creator omnium Polique rector vestiens , Diem decore lumine Noctem sopora gratia . 
Perhaps Myrrha 's last sigh was breathed to the sound of that solemn hymn . 
None knew when she died . 
There seemed no change . 
Her life mingled painlessly with the impalpable , inviolable , the Eternal , as the warmth of a fair twilight melts into the coolness of night . 
Arsinoë buried her sister in the catacombs , and with her own hand engraved on the slab , '' Myrrha , vivis ! '' 
-LRB- `` Myrrha , thou livest . '' -RRB- 
She scarcely wept . 
But she bore in her heart contempt for the world , and the resolve to believe in God , or at least to do all she could to attain belief in Him . 
She desired to distribute her fortune to the poor , and to set out for the Thebaïd . 
On the very day Arsinoë informed her indignant guardian of these intentions she received from Gaul a curt and enigmatic letter from Cæsar Julian -- `` Julian , to the most noble Arsinoë , happiness ! 
Do you remember the matter about which we spoke together at Athens , in front of the statue of Artemis ? 
Do you remember our alliance ? 
Great is my hate , but greater yet is my love . 
It may be that the lion shall fling away the ass 's skin soon . 
Meantime , let us be gentle as doves and wise as serpents , according to the counsel of the Nazarean Christ . '' 
Composers of Court epigrams , who mockingly nicknamed Julian `` Victorinus '' or `` the little Conqueror , '' were astonished to receive , time after time , news of the Cæsar 's continual victories . 
The laughable gradually became the terrible . 
General discussion arose about witchcrafts and secret dæmonic forces backing the fortunes of the friend of Maximus of Ephesus . 
Julian had conquered and restored to the Roman Empire Argentoratum , Bracomagum , -LSB- 2 -RSB- Tres Tabernæ , -LSB- 3 -RSB- Noviomagus , -LSB- 4 -RSB- Vangiones , -LSB- 5 -RSB- Moguntiacum . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- -LSB- 2 -RSB- Brumat near Strasburg . 
-LSB- 3 -RSB- Saverne -LRB- Vosges -RRB- . 
-LSB- 4 -RSB- Spires . 
-LSB- 5 -RSB- Worms . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- Mayence . 
The soldiers worshipped him as much as ever ; and Julian became more and more convinced that the Olympians were protecting him and advancing his cause . 
But , for prudential reasons , he continued to attend Christian churches , and in the town of Vienna on the banks of the river Rhodanus he had been present at an especially solemn mass . 
In the middle of December the conquering Cæsar was returning after a long campaign to winter quarters in his beloved Parisis-Lutetia on the banks of the Seine . 
Night was closing in . 
The southern soldiers were marvelling at the pale green lights of the northern sky . 
New-fallen snow sounded crisply under the tread of the soldiers . 
Lutetia , built on a little island , was surrounded by wide river-channels . 
Two wooden bridges connected the town with steep banks . 
Its houses were built in the Gallo-Roman style , with broad glazed galleries , instead of the open porticoes of southern countries . 
The smoke of a multitude of chimneys hung over the town , and the trees were hoar with frost . 
Fig-trees carefully swaddled in straw , and brought by the Romans from the south , clung to the southward-facing walls of the gardens , like children dreading the cold . 
This year , in spite of occasional thawing winds from the south , the winter had been severe . 
Huge blocks of ice , crashing and grinding together , were floating down the Seine . 
The Greek and Roman soldiers used to watch these in surprise , and Julian too wondered at the beauty of the blue and green transparent masses , and compared them to Phrygian marble , with its emerald-hued veins . 
There was something in the sad beauty of the North which , like a distant remembrance , haunted and thrilled his heart , as now he and his troop arrived at the palace , of which the brick arcades and turrets rose in sharp black outline against the twilight sky . 
Julian went into the library . 
The cold was intense ; a great fire was kindled on the hearth , and letters which had arrived at Lutetia during his absence were brought to him . 
One of these from Asia Minor came from Iamblicus . 
Julian thought that the fragrance of the East came with it . 
Outside a hurricane was raging , and the wind roaring by struck violent blows on the closed shutters . 
Shutting his eyes , Julian dreamed of marble porticoes and gleaming temples veiled in obscurity , sweeping away to the horizon to disappear like golden clouds . 
He shivered , rose , and noticed that the fire had gone out . 
He could hear a mouse gnawing the parchments in the library . 
Julian suddenly felt a longing to see a human face . 
With a half-humorous smile he remembered that he had a wife . 
She was a relative of the Empress Eusebia , named Helena , whom the Emperor had forced to marry Julian shortly before his departure for Gaul . 
Julian cared nothing for Helena . 
Although more than a year had elapsed since their marriage he had scarcely seen her ; he knew nothing of her , and had never passed a night under the same roof . 
His wife had remained a virgin . 
From youth up , her dream had been to become the spouse of Christ . 
The idea of marriage filled her with disgust . 
At first she had thought all was lost , but , seeing afterwards that Julian asked from her no conjugal caresses , she grew calmer and lived in her apartment , morose , placid , dressed in black , the life of a nun . 
In her prayers Helena had vowed perpetual chastity . 
On this night a mischievous curiosity drove Julian to the tower in which his wife was praying . 
He opened the door without knocking , and went into the feebly lighted cell ; the virgin was kneeling before a lectern above which hung a large crucifix . 
Julian approached , and screening the flame of the lamp with one hand , gazed at his wife for some minutes , frowning . 
She was so absorbed in devotion that she did not notice him . 
He said -- `` Helena ! '' 
She uttered a cry and turned her pale severe face towards Julian . 
`` How you startled me ! '' 
He looked wonderingly at the great crucifix , the gospel , and the lectern , and murmured -- `` Are you always praying ? '' 
`` Yes ! 
I pray for you also , well-beloved Cæsar . '' 
`` For me ? 
Really ! 
... Confess that you believe me to be a great sinner ? '' 
She lowered her eyes without answering . 
His frown became deeper . 
`` Do not be afraid ; speak out . 
Do n't you believe that I am specially guilty , in some manner , before God ? '' 
She answered in a low voice -- `` Specially ? 
... Yes , I think so . 
Do not be angry ... '' `` I was sure of it ... . 
Now tell me what it is ? 
I must repent me of my crimes . '' 
Helena resumed , in a yet lower voice , and more severely -- `` Do not laugh ! 
I have to answer for your soul before the Eternal -- '' `` You ... for mine ? '' 
`` We are joined for ever . '' 
`` By what ? '' 
`` The sacrament of marriage . '' 
`` Religious marriage ? 
But up till now we are strangers to one another , Helena ! '' 
`` I fear for your soul , Julian , '' she repeated , fixing on him her innocent eyes . 
Placing his hand on her shoulder , he gazed mockingly at the pale face , so cold in its chastity . 
The small and lovely mouth , with its rosy lips half parted with an expression of fear and inquiry , was in strange contrast to the rest of the face . 
Julian leaned towards her , and before she had time to regain her presence of mind , kissed her on the lips . 
She started and rushed to a far corner of the room , hiding her face in her hands . 
Then gazing at Julian , her eyes wild with fear , she hastily crossed herself , murmuring -- `` Away , away , O evil one ! 
I know thee ; thou art not Julian , but the Devil . 
In the name of the most Holy Cross , I conjure thee ... disappear ! '' 
Anger seized Julian ; he turned to the door and bolted it ; then approaching Helena with a smile he said -- `` Be yourself , Helena ; I am a man -- I am your husband -- and not the Devil ! 
The Church has blessed our union . '' 
He gazed upon her with strangely warring emotions . 
She slowly drew her hands from her eyes . 
`` Forgive me ... it seemed to me ... you frightened me so , Julian ... . 
I know that you desire nothing evil ... but I have had visions ... . 
Just now I believed ... . 
He haunts this place at night . 
Twice I have seen him ... . 
He said to me ill things about you . 
Since then I have been afraid . 
He told me you bore on your face the mark of Cain ... . 
Why do you look at me so , Julian ? '' 
She was trembling and leaning against the wall ; he approached and put his arm round her waist . 
`` What are you doing ? 
Let me go , let me go ! '' 
She tried to cry out , to call the servant . 
`` Eleutheria ! 
Eleutheria ! '' 
`` Why are you calling ? 
Am I not your husband ? '' 
She began to weep bitterly . 
`` Brother , this must not be ... . 
I am the bride of Christ ! 
... I believed that you ... '' `` The bride of the Roman Cæsar can not be the bride of Christ ! '' 
`` Julian ! 
... If you believe in Him ... '' He smiled . 
`` I abhor the Galilean ! '' 
In a supreme effort she strove to repulse him , exclaiming , `` Away , Devil ! 
... Why hast thou abandoned me , Lord ? '' 
With his impious hands he tore off the black vestment . 
His soul was full of fear , but never before in his life had he known such intoxication in evil-doing . 
Ironically , with a smile of defiance , the Roman Cæsar gazed at the opposite corner of the cell , where in the feeble flicker of the lamp-light hung the great black crucifix ... . 
More than two years had elapsed since the victory of Argentoratum . 
Julian had delivered Gaul from the barbarians . 
At the beginning of spring , when still at Lutetia for his winter quarters , he had received an important letter from the Emperor Constantius brought by the tribune Decensius . 
Each new victory achieved in Gaul harried the soul of Constantius , and stabbed his vanity to the quick . 
This `` street-urchin , '' this `` magpie , '' this `` monkey in the purple , '' this `` pocket conqueror , '' to the indignation of Court scoffers had turned into a veritable victor . 
Constantius writhed with jealousy . 
At the same time he sustained defeat after defeat in his own campaign against the Persians in the Asiatic provinces . 
He grew thin , sleepless , lost his appetite , and twice suffered from terrible attacks of vomiting . 
The Court physicians were in dismay . 
Sometimes , during nights of insomnia , lying in bed under the sacred standard of Constantine , the Emperor mused : `` Eusebia deceived me ! 
But for her I should have followed the wise counsel of Mercurius ... . 
I should have had his throat cut in some dark corner ! 
I should have exterminated this serpent from the Flavian nest ! 
... Imbecile that I was ! 
... It was I , myself , who let him escape ! 
And who knows ? 
... Perhaps Eusebia herself was his mistress ? '' 
A long-delayed jealousy made his envy bitterer still . 
He could not revenge himself on the Empress Eusebia , who was dead . 
His second wife , Faustine , was an empty-headed little woman for whom he felt nothing but contempt . 
Constantius tore the hair on which hairdressers still spent such infinite pains , and shed tears of rage . 
Had he not protected the Church ? 
Had he not swept all heresies to destruction ? 
Had he not built and adorned monastery after monastery ? 
Did he not regularly accomplish all due rites and offices ? 
And now what reward was granted him ? 
For the first time the master of the world felt his soul swelling in indignation against the Master of the universe . 
A dark imprecation rose to his lips . 
To assuage his jealousy he had recourse to unusual means . 
He sent letters to all great cities , -- `` letters of victory , '' adorned with laurels , and announcing the triumphs granted by the grace of God to the Emperor Constantius . 
These letters were to the effect that it was Constantius and not Julian who had four times crossed the Rhine , -- Constantius -LRB- who was really frittering away his army at the other end of the world -RRB- . 
It was Constantius , and not Julian , who had almost perished from arrows at Argentoratum ! 
Constantius who had taken Chlodomir prisoner ; Constantius who had pierced marshes and impracticable forests , hewn roads , stormed fortresses and endured hunger , thirst , heat ; who , more wearied than the soldiers , had allotted to himself less sleep than they . 
Julian 's name was never mentioned in these despatches , as if that Cæsar were no longer in existence . 
The people applauded Constantius as conqueror of the Gauls , and in all the churches , bishops and archbishops chanted prayers and thanksgivings for victory granted to him over the barbaric Alemanni . 
Julian on hearing of these follies contented himself with a smile . 
But the Emperor 's gnawing jealousy was not sated . 
He decided to rob Julian of his best soldiers , and then by imperceptible steps and fleeting pretences to disarm him , as Gallus had been disarmed ; to draw him into the toils and deal him the mortal blow . 
With this intention he sent with a letter to Lutetia a certain skilful official , the tribune Decensius . 
He was forthwith to select the most trusted legions , namely , the Heruli , Batavians , Petulants , and Celts ; and to despatch them into Asia for the Emperor 's own use . 
Moreover , this dignitary was to deflower each remaining legion of its three hundred bravest warriors ; and Cintula , tribune of the Imperial stables , was instructed to take the pick of the porters and baggage-carriers , and , having thus crippled Julian 's transport , to bring these men to the East . 
Julian warned Decensius , and proved to him that rebellion was inevitable among the savage legions raised in Gaul , who would almost certainly prefer to die rather than quit their native soil . 
But that obstinate official , preserving an imperturbable haughtiness on his wily yellow face , took no account of these observations . 
At right angles to one of the wooden bridges which joined the island of Lutetia to the river-banks , stretched long , low barrack buildings . 
All the morning the soldiery had been excited and tumultuous . 
The stern and wise discipline hitherto observed by Julian alone restrained them . 
The first cohorts of Petulants and the Heruli had departed on the previous night . 
Their comrades the Celts and Batavians were preparing to follow them . 
Cintula issued his orders in a peremptory tone . 
Savage murmurs were running through the crowd . 
An insubordinate soldier had just been beaten to death . 
Decensius strode hither and thither , pen behind ear , documents in hand . 
In the great courtyards , under a dark sky , thick-wheeled covered chariots were waiting for the soldiers ' wives and children . 
Women , parting from the country where they were born , were stretching out their arms to the woods and fields . 
Others were kissing the maternal soil , and weeping at the thought that their dust should be buried in a strange land . 
Others , more resigned and sullen in their pain , had wrapped handfuls of earth in little bundles , to carry with them as tokens . 
A lean dog , with ribs to be counted through his skin , was licking the grease of an axle-tree . 
Suddenly he darted away and began to howl , muzzle in the dust . 
Everybody , thrilled by the sound , turned round to watch him . 
A legionary angrily thrashed the poor beast , who fled into a field with his tail between his legs , and , halting there , renewed his howlings in a yet more plaintive key . 
This dog 's cry , wailing through the impressive silence of the twilight , shook the nerves of all who heard it . 
The Sarmatian Aragaris belonged to the number chosen to leave the north . 
He was bidding farewell to the faithful Strombix -- `` Oh , cousin , cousin ! 
why are you leaving me ? '' 
whined Strombix , between mouthfuls of soup , which Aragaris had given up to him . 
Grief had taken away his own appetite . 
`` Be quiet , fool ! '' 
the consolatory Aragaris was remarking ; `` there are too many women groaning already ! 
... It would be more useful if you , who belong to the country , would tell me what forests we shall have to pass through ? '' 
`` What do you mean , cousin ? 
There are no forests there ; only sand and rocks . '' 
`` And how does one get shelter from the sun ? '' 
asked the incredulous Aragaris . 
`` It 's a desert ! 
It 's as hot there as under a cook 's oven , and there 's not a drop of water . '' 
`` What ! 
No water ? 
And how about beer ? '' 
`` They do n't even know what beer means ! '' 
`` You 're lying ! '' 
`` May I be struck blind , cousin , if in all Mesopotamia and Syria you find a keg of beer or of honey . '' 
`` Then it 's all over , brother ! 
If it 's hot there , and there 's neither water , beer , nor honey , they 're simply hunting us to the end of the world like oxen to the slaughter ! '' 
`` Hunting you on to the horns of the Devil , cousin ! '' 
and Strombix wept yet more bitterly . 
At that moment there came a distant rumble , and din of voices . 
The two friends ran out of the barracks ; a crowd of soldiers were rushing over the wooden bridge towards Lutetia . 
The cries came nearer ; wild agitation seized the garrison ; the soldiery poured out upon the road in a dense shouting mass , in spite of the orders , threats , and even blows of the centurions . 
`` What has happened ? '' 
asked a veteran . 
`` Twenty soldiers have been beaten to death ! '' 
`` What ? 
Twenty ! 
Why , it was a hundred ! '' 
`` They 're going to cudgel every man in turn ; it 's the order ! '' 
Suddenly a legionary with torn clothes and terrified demeanour rushed into the crowd shouting -- `` Comrades ! 
quick , to the palace ! 
... quick ! 
Julian 's just been beheaded ! '' 
These words fell like a spark on tinder . 
The long-smouldering flame burst into destructiveness . 
The faces of the soldiers took on an expression of animal ferocity . 
No one understood nor wished to hear , but all shouted -- `` Where are the rascals ? 
Kill the hounds ! '' 
`` Who ? '' 
`` The envoys from the Emperor Constantius ! '' 
`` Down with the Emperor ! '' 
`` Ah , the idiots ! 
-- to think they 've killed such a leader ! '' 
Two innocent centurions who were passing were seized , thrown to earth , trampled upon and almost rent in pieces . 
At the sight of the gushing blood the mutineers became yet more ferocious . 
Another mob coming over the bridge swept up to the barracks , and there rose a deafening cry -- `` Glory to the Emperor Julian ! 
Glory to Augustus Julian ! '' 
`` He is slain ! 
He is slain ! '' 
`` Hold your peace , fools ; Augustus is alive ! 
We 've just seen him ! '' 
`` The Cæsar 's alive ! '' 
`` He 's no longer Cæsar , but Emperor ! '' 
`` Who said he was killed ? '' 
`` Where is the blackguard ? '' 
`` They tried to kill him ! '' 
`` Who ? '' 
`` Constantius ! '' 
`` Down with Constantius ! 
Down with all cursed eunuchs ! '' 
Someone on horseback rode by so quickly as almost to escape recognition -- `` Decensius ! 
Decensius ! 
Catch the ruffian ! '' 
Still with pen behind his ear and ink-flask dangling from his girdle , accompanied by insults and laughter , he disappeared from sight . 
The crowd grew thicker and thicker , and the mutinous army was like a raging flood ; but their anger was turned into glee when the Herulian and Petulant legions , who had marched the evening before , and also mutinied , were seen in the distance on their way back . 
They , their wives , and their children were kissed with emotion , as after a long separation . 
Some shed tears of joy , others struck their shields ; and great bonfires were kindled . 
The fountains of oratory were unloosed . 
Strombix , who in his youth had been a buffoon at Antioch , felt himself inspired , and , hoisted with wild gesticulations on the shoulders of his comrades , began -- '' Nos quidem ad orbis terrarum extrema ut noxii pellimur et damnati ... '' `` They 're sending us to the other end of the world like criminals ; and our families , whom we bought back from slavery with the price of our blood , will fall back into the hands of the Alemanni -- '' He was unable to finish ; the barracks were ringing with piercing cries , and the noise , familiar to soldiers , of scourges scoring the back . 
The legionaries were lashing the detested centurion Cedo Alteram , and the soldier who was administering the lashes to his superior flung away the bloody rod , and to the general amusement , imitating the cheery voice of the centurion , called out -- '' Cedo Alteram ! 
Give me another ! '' 
`` To the palace ! 
To the palace ! '' 
yelled the crowd . 
`` Let us make Julian , Augustus ! 
Let us crown him with a diadem ! '' 
The mob rushed off , leaving in the courtyard the half-dead centurion weltering in blood . 
Through the dark clouds the stars sparkled here and there , and a cold wind lifted the dust . 
The barred windows , doors , and shutters of the palace were all hermetically sealed . 
The building seemed tenantless . 
Foreseeing the revolt , Julian had not left his quarters nor shown himself to the soldiers , being occupied in divinations . 
For two days and two nights he had waited for a miracle . 
Clothed in the long white robe of the Pythagoreans , lamp in hand , he was ascending the steps which led to the highest tower . 
There the assistant of Maximus of Ephesus was awaiting him , and observing the stars . 
This assistant was no other than Nogodarès , who once in the tavern owned by Syrax at the foot of Mount Argæus had foretold the future to the tribune Scuda . 
`` Well ? '' 
Julian asked anxiously . 
`` There 's nothing to be seen ! 
It looks as if heaven and earth were conspiring . '' 
A bat swooped by . 
`` Look , look ! 
Perhaps some prediction can be made from the manner of its flight ? '' 
The night-wandering creature almost brushed Julian 's face with its cold wings , and vanished . 
`` Someone 's soul approaches , '' murmured Nogodarès . 
`` Remember ! 
this night something great will be accomplished ... '' The indistinct cries of the mutineers were borne faintly up the wind . 
`` If a sign appears , come to me , '' said Julian as he went down to his library . 
With irregular restless strides he walked up and down the room , halting every now and then to listen . 
It seemed as if someone was following him ; that a curious cold air was blowing on the nape of his neck . 
He wheeled round , but discovered nothing . 
He felt the blood beating strongly in his temples . 
He resumed his walk , and again it seemed that someone was murmuring into his ear words that he had not time to understand . 
A servant entered , and announced that an old man from Athens desired to see the Cæsar on urgent business . 
Julian uttered a cry of elation and ran to meet the new-comer . 
He thought he should see Maximus ; but he was mistaken . 
It was the high-priest of the mysteries of Eleusis , whom also he had impatiently expected . 
`` Father ! '' 
exclaimed Julian , `` save me ! 
I must know the will of the gods ! 
... Let us come quickly , for all is prepared . '' 
Round the palace resounded deafening cries from the revolted army , shaking the old brickwork of the walls . 
But when a baggage-carrier , livid with fear , ran in exclaiming , `` Mutiny ! 
The soldiers are breaking in the iron gates ! '' 
Julian said with an imperious gesture , `` Fear nothing ! 
We will arrange that matter presently . 
Let no one come into my presence ! '' 
and taking the high-priest by the hand he hastily led him into a dark underground vault , and closed the heavy iron door . 
All was there ready . 
Torch-flames were glittering over the silver image of the Sun-god , and tripods fuming ; the holy vessels , full of water , wine , and honey , stood prepared , with salt and flour to be sprinkled on the bodies of the victims . 
Geese , doves , hens , an eagle , and a white lamb which bleated plaintively , stood round in different cages . 
`` Quicker , quicker ! '' 
exclaimed Julian , giving a long dagger to the priest . 
The old man , who was panting heavily , began hurriedly to mutter prayers ; he killed the lamb , put a portion of the flesh and fat upon the coals of the altar , and with mysterious exorcisms began the inspection of its organs . 
With expert hands he drew forth the liver , heart , and lungs , and scanned them from every side . 
`` The powerful shall be overthrown ! '' 
he said , pointing to the heart , which was still warm ; `` a terrible death ... '' `` Whose ? '' 
Julian asked . 
`` His or mine ? '' 
`` I know not . '' 
`` You know not ? '' 
`` Cæsar , '' said the old man , `` be not hasty . 
Decide nothing to-night ; wait for the day ; the presages are doubtful ... '' He did not finish his sentence , but took another victim , a gander , and then an eagle . 
Overhead the noise of the crowd at the gates swept like the roar of a torrent . 
Blows of a battering-ram shook the iron doors , but Julian heard nothing . 
He examined the bloody organs with eager curiosity . 
The old sacrificial priest repeated : `` Decide nothing to-night ; the gods are silent . '' 
`` But now is the moment ! '' 
cried Julian in vexation . 
Nogodarès came in , and solemnly spoke : `` Julian , rejoice ! 
to-night your destiny is decided ... but make haste ! 
Afterwards it will be too late . '' 
