`` I know , '' she said , `` you always have confidence in me ; let it be so now . 
Julian is a faithful slave . 
Do n't refuse me ... . 
Be kind to him ... '' And she gratified him with one of those smiles which hitherto had wielded irresistible power over the heart of Constantius . 
In the portico , which was separated from the great hall by hangings -LRB- behind which the Emperor used to ensconce himself to hear what was going on at the councils -RRB- , a monk , wearing a cruciform tonsure and in a hooded robe of coarsest drugget , came near . 
It was Julian . 
`` I salute my benefactor , the triumphant and glorious Emperor Augustus Constantius . 
May your Holiness pardon me ! '' 
`` We are happy to receive you , my son . '' 
Julian 's cousin magnanimously extended his hand to Julian 's lips . 
Julian kissed the hand dyed with the blood of his father , of his brother , of all his relatives . 
Then he rose erect , pale and with sparkling eyes fixed upon his enemy . 
He gripped the handle of a poniard hidden under his robe . 
The grey eyes of the Emperor lighted with pride and cautious malice , seldom dropping their scrutiny . 
He was a head shorter than Julian , large-shouldered , solidly-built , and bandy-legged like an old cavalry soldier . 
The tight brown skin over his temples was disagreeably glossy . 
The thin lips were severely closed with the expression of folk that set order and punctuality above all other virtues -- the expression of a pedant and a schoolmaster . 
To Julian he appeared detestable . 
He felt an animal fury getting the better of him , and , unable to utter a word , his eyes fell and he breathed with difficulty . 
Constantius smiled , imagining the young monk unable to bear the superhuman majesty of the Imperial glance . 
With ostentatious benevolence he continued -- `` Fear nothing ! 
Go in peace ! 
Our kindness shall bring no danger upon you . 
On the contrary we shall from this day forth heap bounties on our cousin who is an orphan . '' 
Julian bowed and proceeded into the hall of council ; and the Emperor , hidden behind draperies , lent an ironic and attentive ear to the debate beginning within . 
He immediately recognised the voice of the principal dignitary of the Imperial post , Gaudentius . 
It was he who had suffered from the bad dream . 
`` One council treads on the heels of another , '' Gaudentius was complaining ; `` now it 's at Sirmio , now it 's at Sardis , now at Antioch , and now here at Constantinople . 
They discuss and discuss , but never come to an understanding . 
And I would ask you , for pity 's sake , to consider the horses that have to carry these gentlemen about ! 
Out of a relay of ten horses you will hardly find one who is not foundered by the bishops . 
Another five councils , and my beasts will only be fit for the knacker 's yard -- not a car will have a wheel on it . 
Yet , in spite of all , you 'll see that the bishops will still be at loggerheads and boggling at the Trinity ! '' 
`` Why then , Gaudentius , do n't you send in a formal report on the subject to the Emperor ? '' 
`` Nobody would believe me . 
I should be accused of irreligion and lack of respect for the crying needs of the Church . '' 
In the vast round hall , crowned by a cupola on columns of Phrygian marble , the heat was already stifling . 
Slanting sun rays fell in through uncurtained windows . 
The noise of voices was like the buzzing of a swarm of bees . 
The Imperial golden seat -- sella aurea -- was prepared on a daïs . 
It rested on lions ' paws of carved ivory , crossed like those of the curule chairs of Roman consuls . 
Close to the throne , the high-priest Paphnutis , with a face empurpled by argument , was declaring -- `` For my part , I shall keep to the opinions my fathers taught me ! 
According to the creed of our holy father Athanasius , patriarch of Alexandria , we must worship a single God in a Trinity , and the Trinity in a single God ; the Father is God ; the Son is God ; the Holy Ghost is God , and nevertheless they form together but one God ! '' 
And as if he was smashing an invisible enemy he brought down his enormous right fist into his left-hand palm and glared triumphantly round the assembly . 
`` That tradition have I received from my fathers , and that tradition I will keep ! '' 
`` Who is it ? 
What 's he saying ? '' 
asked Ozius , a man of a hundred years old , who had been alive in the time of the council of Nicæa . 
`` Where 's my trumpet ? '' 
Harrowing perplexity could be read on his face . 
He was deaf , almost blind . 
The deacon who accompanied him set the ear-trumpet to his ear . 
A certain pale thin monk seized Paphnutis by the surplice -- `` Father Paphnutis , '' he shouted to drown the general clamour , `` what is all this about ? 
... It is a question of a single word ; is not that so ? '' 
and forthwith he began to narrate terrible scenes he had witnessed in Alexandria and Constantinople . 
The Arians had opened with wooden pincers the mouths of those unwilling to receive the Sacrament in heretic churches , and forced the host between their lips . 
Mere children were subjected to inquisition ; the breasts of women were crushed under leaden weights and branded with live iron . 
In the Church of the Holy Apostles so horrible a struggle had taken place between Arians and Orthodox that the blood , overflowing the cistern which received the drainage of the place , had poured down the steps in front of the western façade and streamed into the market-square . 
At Alexandria the governor Sebastian had caused virgins to be beaten with thorn branches , so that many of them had succumbed and their bodies lay unburied outside the city gates . 
All this contention was over a single letter , an iota . 
`` Father Paphnutis , '' argued the pale monk , `` for an iota ! 
The word ` substantial ' does not even occur in the holy Scripture . 
What are we then torturing each other about ? 
Think , Father ; it is horrible ! '' 
`` Then , '' interrupted the Arch-priest impatiently , `` must we be reconciled with those impious dogs who will not hunt out of their pestilent hearts the doctrine that there was a moment when the Son of God did not exist ? '' '' 
` One Shepherd and one Flock , ' '' the monk returned : `` Let us make them some concessions ! '' 
But Paphnutis refused to hear anything , vociferating till the veins of his neck almost burst -- `` Let the enemies of God be silent ! 
Never will I give in ! 
Anathema on the Arian heresy ! 
Such have I received the faith from my fathers , and such will I keep it ! '' 
Ozius the centenarian wagged approvingly his white head and long beard . 
On the other side of the hall two archdeacons were talking together . 
`` You keep very calm , Father Dorophas . 
Why are you taking no part in discussion to-day ? '' 
`` My voice is gone , Father Flavius . 
I am too hoarse with anathematising the cursed sectaries . '' 
In another group the deacon from Antioch , Aetius , a bold and fervent disciple of Arius , regarded as an atheist for his audacious and scoffing interpretations of the Trinity , was holding forth . 
The career of Aetius had been remarkable for its extraordinary variety . 
At first a slave , he had afterwards become by turns a coppersmith , a sailor , a rhetorician , a pupil and teacher of Alexandrian philosophy , and finally a deacon . 
`` God the Father is in His substantial essence different from His Son , '' Aetius was saying with a smile and evident gusto , to the dismay of his hearers . 
`` The Trinity has differentiations , degrees of glory , according to the nature of the personalities comprised in it . 
The word ` God ' can not be used of the Son , because He has never applied it to Himself . 
The Son has never even comprehended the essence of the Father , because it is impossible for Him who had a beginning to imagine that which has neither beginning nor end . '' 
`` Blaspheme not ! '' 
shouted an indignant bishop . 
`` Where is this Satanic boldness going to stop , my brethren ? '' 
`` Drag not the simple-minded into perdition by your speeches ! '' 
shrieked another . 
`` Prove me wrong by philosophic reasoning , and I will acquiesce . 
But shouts and insults are proof of nothing but impotence , '' replied Aetius calmly . 
`` It is written in the Scriptures ... '' `` What is that to me ? 
God has given intelligence to man that He himself might be understood . 
I believe in logic of argument and not in texts . 
Reason with me on the basis of the syllogisms and categories of Aristotle ... '' And with a contemptuous smile he threw his surplice around him like the cynic mantle of Diogenes . 
Some bishops were beginning to speak in favour of a universal creed in which mutual concession should be made , when the Arian Narcissus of Neronia , a profound expert in all statutes , creeds , and canons of the councils , intervened in discussion . 
He was a man little liked , suspected of adultery and usury , but admired by everyone for his theological erudition . 
`` That is a flat heresy ! '' 
he declared decisively . 
`` Why is it a heresy ? '' 
demanded several voices . 
`` Because the assizes of Paphlagonia have already so laid it down . '' 
`` The assizes of Paphlagonia ? '' 
repeated the desperate bishops ; `` we had clean forgotten them . 
What is to be done now ? '' 
`` May God have pity on us miserable sinners ! '' 
the good bishop Ozius was muttering ; `` I can no longer understand anything ; I ca n't get out of the labyrinth ; my head is buzzing , my ears singing with Greek words ; I 'm walking in a fog and do n't know myself what I believe in and what I disbelieve ; what is heresy and what is not ... . 
Jesus help us ! 
... We are falling into the snares of the Devil . '' 
At that moment the hubbub and clamour ceased . 
The bishop Ursatius of Singidion , one of the Emperor 's favourites , mounted the tribune . 
He was holding in his hand a long scroll of parchment . 
Two silentiarii , having mended their fine pens of Egyptian reed , got ready to write down the conciliar debate . 
Ursatius read out the message of the Emperor to the bishops -- `` Constantius , the triumphant , glorious , and eternal Augustus , to all bishops assembled in this council ... '' The Emperor demanded the dismissal of Athanasius , the patriarch of Alexandria , whom he called the most useless of men , the traitor , the accomplice of the insolent and abominable Magnentius . 
The courtiers , Valentine , Eusebius , Axentius , hastened to sign the scroll . 
But a murmur arose . 
`` It is all a damnable device ; a trick of the Arians ! 
We will not let our patriarch suffer ... '' `` The Emperor calls himself eternal ... nobody is eternal but God ! 
It is a mockery of holy things . '' 
Constantius , lurking behind the curtain , heard this last speech distinctly . 
Thrusting the hangings roughly by , he pushed unexpectedly into the hall . 
The lances of the guard surrounded him . 
His face expressed anger . 
A heavy silence fell upon the throng . 
`` What is it , what is it ? '' 
the blind Ozius kept whispering in restless perplexity . 
`` Fathers , '' the Emperor began , bridling his anger , `` allow me , the servant of the Most High , to use my zeal under His providence to a successful issue . 
Athanasius is a rebel , the chief violator of universal concord and oecumenical peace . '' 
Fresh murmurs arose . 
Constantius was silent and ran a surprised look over the array of bishops . 
A voice shouted -- `` Anathema upon the abominable Arian heresy ! '' 
`` The faith against which you revolt , '' replied the Emperor , `` is my faith . 
If it is heretical , why has the omnipotent God assigned victory to us over all our enemies ? 
Constans , Vetranio , Gallus , the abominable Magnentius , why has God Himself placed the power over the world in our sacred hands ? '' 
The bishops were dumb ; then the courtier Valentius , bishop of Mursa , bowing with great servility -- `` God will unveil the truth to your wisdom , sire , well-beloved of the Lord ! 
What you believe can not be heresy . 
Did not Cyril of Jerusalem behold a rainbow-surmounted cross in the heavens on the day of your victory over Magnentius ? '' 
`` It is my will , '' interrupted Constantius , rising from the throne . 
`` Athanasius shall be laid low by the power God has entrusted to me . 
Pray that all these conflicts and controversies may cease , that the murderous heresy of the Sabæans , the partisans of Athanasius , may be destroyed , that the truth may shine into all hearts ... '' Suddenly the Emperor grew pale ; the words expired on his lips . 
`` What ! 
How is it that he has been allowed to enter ? '' 
He pointed to a tall old man with a severe and majestic face . 
It was the bishop Hilarion of Pictavia -LRB- Poitiers -RRB- , who had been exiled and ruined for his faith , one of the greatest enemies of the Arian Emperor . 
He had come to the council unsummoned , perhaps seeking martyrdom . 
The old man raised his hand to heaven as if calling down malediction upon the head of the Emperor , and his powerful voice thrilled the silent crowd -- `` Brothers , Christ must be about to descend , for Antichrist has already conquered , and that Antichrist is Constantius ! 
He does not break your backs on the wheel , but he flatters your proud bellies . 
He does not throw us into dungeons , but entices us into his palaces ... . 
Emperor , hearken ! 
I say to you what I have said to Nero , Decius , Maximian , all persecutors of the Church . 
But you are not , like them , the murderer of men , but the murderer of the Divine love itself ! 
Nero , Decius , Maximian , have better served the God of truth than you ! 
In their reign we conquered the Devil , the blood of the martyrs flowed , cleansing the earth , and their dead bones worked miracles . 
Whereas you , O King , cruellest of the cruel , slay and yet grant us not the glory of death ... . 
Lord , send us a true despot like Nero , and let the kindly arm of Thy wrath revive again the Church dishonoured by the kiss of this Judas ! '' 
The Emperor sprang to his feet -- `` Seize him and the rebels ! '' 
he ejaculated , half-choked with rage , pointing to Hilarion . 
The guards flung themselves on the bishops . 
The crowd became a wild and indescribable mob illumined by the flashing of swords . 
Roman soldiers , snatching off the breastplate , stole , and chasuble of Hilarion , dragged the old man away . 
Many present rushed in mad panic to the doors , fell , and were trampled underfoot by the rest . 
One of the recording clerks leapt on the sill of a window , but a soldier pinned him there by his long vestments and would not release him . 
The table and the inkstands were upset , red ink poured over the blue jasper floor , and voices shouted at the sight of the crimson sea -- `` Blood ! 
blood ! 
blood ! '' 
Others howled -- `` Death to the enemies of the thrice-pious Augustus ! '' 
Paphnutis in a thunderous monotone persisted in crying while the guards dragged him away -- `` I recognise the council of Nicæa ! 
... Anathema on the Arian heresy ! '' 
Others screamed -- `` Be silent , enemies of God ! 
Anathema ! 
the council of Nicæa ! 
the assizes of Sardis ! 
the canons of Paphlagonia ! '' 
Blind Ozius remained seated motionless , forgotten by all , in his episcopal chair , murmuring inaudibly -- `` Jesus Christ , Son of God , have pity upon us ! 
What is the matter , my brethren , what is it ? '' 
In vain he stretched feeble hands towards his terrified friends . 
Nobody saw him , nobody heard him ; and tears streamed down his aged cheeks . 
Meanwhile Julian watched all , a contemptuous smile upon his lips , full of inward triumph . 
On the same day , late in the evening , in a quiet and solitary defile two Mesopotamian monks were journeying afoot together . 
They had been sent by Syrian bishops to the council , had escaped the palatine guards with great difficulty , and now , their minds at peace , were proceeding towards Ravenna to embark as quickly as possible upon the ship which was to restore them to the desert . 
Fatigue and sadness were on their faces . 
Ephraim , one of the two , was extremely old ; the other , Pimenus , a lad . 
Ephraim said to Pimenus -- `` It is time to regain the desert , brother . 
Better to hear the howling of jackal and lion than the cry that dinned our ears in the Imperial palace . 
Happy are those who speak not . 
Happy those who hide themselves in desert places , beyond arguments of masters of the Church , who have understood the uselessness of words ; who debate nothing . 
Happy is he who seeks not to understand God 's mysteries , but who , merging his spirit into Thine , sings to Thy face , O Lord , like a harp ; understanding how difficult it is to know , how easy to love Thee ! '' 
Ephraim was silent , and Pimenus murmured -- `` Amen ! '' 
The quiet of night enveloped the pair , and courageously , steering by the stars , the two monks took their way eastwards rejoicing in the majesty of their barren road . 
The city of Milan lay basking in the sun ; and by every street the crowd was turning its steps towards the chief public square . 
Tremendous acclamations ran through the throng , and in the triumphant chariot , drawn by twenty horses white as swans , appeared the Emperor . 
His chariot seat was so lofty that the people were obliged to throw their heads back to behold him . 
His robes , besown with precious stones , sparkled dazzlingly in the sun . 
In his right hand he held the sceptre , in the left the Imperial globe crested by a cross . 
Motionless as a statue , outrageously painted , he looked straight before him without turning his head , which was held stiff as in a vice . 
During the whole journey , and despite the joltings of the car , the Emperor stirred not a finger , nor coughed , nor blinked the steady stare of his eyes . 
Constantius had acquired this immobility by years of effort , and was particularly proud of it , considering it an indispensable part of Imperial etiquette . 
On such occasions he would have preferred to undergo torture rather than betray his mortal nature by sneezing , coughing , or wiping off the sweat which stood in beads on his forehead . 
Although squat and bow-legged he imagined himself gigantic . 
When the chariot disappeared under the arch of triumph , not far from the baths of Maximian Hercules , the Emperor bowed his head as if he were afraid of striking his head against the lofty gates which would have freely taken a Cyclops beneath them . 
Each side of the road was lined with palatine guards helmeted and cuirassed in gold , the two ranks of the bodyguard flashing in the sun like streams of lightning . 
Round the Imperial chariot great dragon-shaped standards were floating . 
The purple stuff , swollen by the wind engulfed in the gullets of the monsters , gave out a shrill sound like the hiss of snakes , and the long purple tails of the dragons wavered to and fro above the people . 
In the Forum were drawn up all the legions quartered in Milan . 
Thunders of applause welcomed the Emperor . 
Constantius was pleased . 
The noise had neither been too feeble nor too tumultuous . 
Arranged beforehand according to the strictest etiquette , the soldiers had been instructed to be enthusiastic with moderation and respect . 
Giving each of his motions a kind of stiff and pedantic emphasis , Constantius solemnly descended from the chariot and went up to the tribune raised above the square . 
It was draped with ragged standards of old victories and studded with metal eagles . 
The trumpets sounded up anew in the call denoting that the leader desired to speak to his army . 
The Forum was instantly hushed . '' 
Optimi reipublicæ defensores ! '' 
began Constantius . 
-LRB- Excellent defenders of the Republic . -RRB- 
The discourse was long-winded , tedious , full of scholastic flowers of rhetoric . 
Julian in Court dress now ascended the steps of the tribune , and the fratricide invested the last descendant of Constantius Chlorus with the sacred purple of the Cæsars . 
The sunlight filtered through the thin silk when the Emperor raised the purple to enrobe the kneeling Julian . 
The rich hue tinged the pale face of the new Cæsar , who murmured inwardly the prophetic verse of the Iliad -- `` Eyes closed by purple death and puissant Destiny ... '' And nevertheless Constantius was welcoming him : '' Recepisti primævus originis tuæ splendidum florem , amatissime mihi omnium frater . '' 
-LRB- Still young , you have attained already the flower of your royal birth , most beloved of all my brothers ! -RRB- 
An enthusiastic roar rose from the legions . 
Constantius became rather gloomy ; that shout had slightly exceeded the proper bounds . 
Julian must have pleased the soldiers . 
`` Glory and prosperity to Cæsar Julian ! '' 
They cheered louder and louder , till it seemed as if they would never cease . 
The new Cæsar thanked the legionaries with a kindly smile , and every soldier clashed his buckler against his knee as a sign of rejoicing . 
It seemed to Julian that it was not by the will of the Emperor , but by the will of the gods , that he had reached this eminence . 
* * * * * Every evening Constantius was in the habit of consecrating a quarter of an hour to the polishing of his nails . 
It was one of the few toilet delicacies that he permitted himself , being sober , unimaginative , and rather gross than effeminate in all his habits . 
Paring his nails with little files , polishing them with minute brushes , he gaily asked his favourite eunuch , the grand chamberlain Eusebius , on the evening of the day of investiture -- `` How soon do you think will Julian conquer the Gauls ? '' 
`` I think , '' answered Eusebius , `` that the next news we shall receive will be of the defeat and death of that young man ! '' 
`` Really ? 
-- that would give me much pain ! 
But I have done , do n't you think , everything that lay in my power ... . 
Henceforth he has only himself to blame ... '' Constantius smiled , and bowing his head admired his nails . 
`` You have conquered Magnentius , '' murmured the eunuch , `` you have conquered Vetranio , Constans , Gallus . 
You will conquer Julian . 
Then there will be but one shepherd , one flock , God and you alone . '' 
`` Yes , yes . 
But , putting Julian on one side , there is still Athanasius . 
I shall never be happy until , living or dead , he shall have fallen into my hands . '' 
`` Julian is more to be feared than Athanasius , and you have invested him to-day in the purple of death . 
Oh , wisdom of Providence , destroying by inscrutable means all the enemies of Your Eternity ! 
Glory be to the Father , and to the Son , and to the Holy Ghost , now and during the night of ages ! '' 
`` Amen , '' concluded the Emperor , having finished the toilet of his nails and thrown away the last minute brush . 
He approached the ancient banner of Constantine , the Labarum , which stood always in the sleeping-chamber , knelt down , and contemplating the monogram of Christ which shone in the flicker of the still-burning lamp , began his prayers . 
He accomplished exactly the prescribed number of salves and signs of the cross , addressing God with an imperturbable faith , as one who never doubts his own worth and acceptability . 
The three-quarters of an hour of devotions having elapsed , Constantius arose with a light heart . 
Eunuchs undressed him . 
He lay down on an Imperial couch propped by cherubim of silver on outspread wings , and fell asleep in placid innocence with a child like smile on his lips . 
At Athens , in one of the most frequented cross-roads , a statue modelled by Arsinoë -- The victorious Octavius holding up the head of Brutus -- was exhibited to the people , and the Athenians welcomed in the daughter of the senator Helvidius Priscus a renewer of the art of their golden age . 
But the special dignitaries whose business was to keep watch on the public temper , officers strangely but rightly nicknamed `` Inquisitors , '' reported to the proper quarters that the statue might arouse liberal sentiments in the people . 
A resemblance to Julian was discovered in the face of Brutus , and in the work as a whole a criminal allusion to the recent punishment of Gallus . 
Attempts were made to discover in Octavius some analogy to the Emperor Constantius . 
The affair took the proportions of an act of treason , and almost fell into the hands of Paul Catena . 
Luckily the Imperial chanceries sent direct a severe order to the local magistrate , that not only should the statue disappear from the cross-roads , but that it should be broken to pieces under the eyes of government officials . 
Arsinoë wished to hide the statue , but Hortensius was in such mortal affright that he threatened to give up his ward herself to the informers . 
In deep disgust at the degradation of the public , Arsinoë allowed them to do with her work everything that Hortensius desired , and masons broke up the figure . 
Arsinoë hastily left Athens , her guardian having persuaded her to follow him to Rome , where friends had long promised him the office of Imperial quæstor . 
They installed themselves in a house not far from the Palatine Hill . 
Days flowed by in inactivity , Arsinoë realising that there was no longer scope for the greatness and freedom of antique art . 
She bore in mind her conversation with Julian at Athens ; and it was the only link which restrained her from suicide . 
The long suspense of inaction seemed to her intolerable . 
In moments of discouragement she longed to have done with it all , to leave all , to set out for the Gallic battlefield and at the side of the young Cæsar attain power , or perish . 
But she fell seriously ill . 
In the long and calm days of convalescence she found a devoted consoler in her most faithful adorer , Anatolius , a centurion of the Imperial cavalry , son of a rich merchant of Rhodes . 
He was a Roman centurion , as he used to say himself , merely as the result of a mistake , having only taken to the military career to satisfy the empty-headed ambition of his father , who desired as the summit of earthly honour to see his son clothed in gilt armour . 
Evading discipline by generous gifts , Anatolius passed his life in luxurious idleness , amidst works of art and books , in feastings and indolent and costly travel . 
The profound lucidity of soul which had characterised ancient Epicureans was not possessed by this modern . 
He complained to his friends -- `` I suffer from a mortal malady ... '' They would ask him dubiously -- `` What malady ? '' 
And he would say -- `` What you call my spirit of irony and what seems to me melancholy madness . '' 
His finely cut delicate features expressed extreme fatigue . 
Sometimes he would awake as from a sleep , undertake a wild excursion with fishermen in a hurricane in the open sea , or set off to hunt wild boar and bear , or contemplate hatching a plot against the life of Cæsar , or seek initiation into the terrible mysteries of Mithra and Adonis . 
On such occasions he was capable of astonishing by his rashness and audacity even those persons who were ignorant of his ordinary way of living . 
But the excitement once evaporated he would return to listlessness and lassitude , still more sleepy , still more cynical and sad . 
`` Nothing can be done with you , Anatolius , '' Arsinoë used to say to him ; `` you are so soft that people might think you had no bones . '' 
But she felt a kind of Hellenic grace in this last of the Epicureans ; liked to read in his weary eyes their melancholy mockery of himself and everything else . 
He would say -- `` The sage can extract enjoyment from the blackest melancholy , as bees of Hymettus make their best honey with the juice of bitterest plants ! '' 
and his gossip soothed Arsinoë , who smilingly used to call Anatolius her physician . 
In reality she became stronger , but never returned to her studio . 
The sight of chips of marble filled her with painful memories . 
Meanwhile , at the time of which we are speaking Hortensius was preparing wonderful public games in the Flavian Theatre , in honour of his arrival in Rome . 
He was continually travelling , and busy receiving horses , lions , bears , Scots wolf-dogs , crocodiles from the tropics , and with these , flocks of intrepid hunters , skilled riders , comedians , and gladiators . 
The date of the performance was approaching , and the lions had not arrived from Tarentum , where they had disembarked . 
The bears had grown thin , famished , timid as lambs . 
Hortensius became sleepless with anxiety . 
Two days before the festival , the gladiators , Saxon prisoners , proud and fearless men for whom he had paid a colossal sum , considering it a disgrace to serve as a sport for the Roman populace , committed suicide by cutting their own throats at night in their prison . 
Hortensius , at that unexpected news , nearly went out of his mind . 
Now all hope concentrated itself on the crocodiles , which excited the special curiosity of the mob . 
`` Have you tried giving them newly-killed hogs ' flesh ? '' 
demanded the senator of the slave entrusted with the supervision of these precious beasts . 
`` Yes ; but they wo n't eat it . '' 
`` Have you tried veal ? '' 
`` They wo n't touch that , either . '' 
`` And wheaten bread soaked in cream ? '' 
`` They turn away from it and go to sleep . '' 
`` They must be ill or too fatigued . '' 
`` We 've even opened their jaws and shoved the food down their throats . 
They cough it up again . '' 
`` Ah ! 
by Jupiter , those foul beasts will be the death of me ! 
We must release them after the first day in the arena or else they will die of hunger , '' groaned Hortensius falling into a chair . 
Arsinoë contemplated him with envy . 
He at least was not tired of life . 
She passed into an isolated chamber whence the windows looked down on the garden . 
There in the calm moonlight her young sister Myrrha , who was now about sixteen years old , was softly touching the strings of a harp , and the notes were falling like tears . 
Arsinoë kissed Myrrha , who answered her by a smile without ceasing to play . 
A loud whistle sounded behind the garden wall : `` It is he , '' said Myrrha , rising . 
`` Come quickly ! '' 
She grasped Arsinoë 's hand tightly . 
The two young girls threw black cloaks over their shoulders and went out . 
The wind was chasing the clouds along , and the moon , sometimes hidden , sometimes shone out brightly . 
Arsinoë opened a door in the outer wall of the house . 
A young man wrapped in a monk 's hooded mantle was awaiting them . 
`` We are not late , Juventinus ? '' 
asked Myrrha . 
`` I was afraid that you were not coming ! '' 
They walked long and rapidly down narrow lanes , then out among the vineyards , issuing at length into the Roman plain . 
In the distance the brick-built aqueduct of Servius Tullius was outlined against the sky . 
Juventinus turned round and said -- `` Somebody is following us ! '' 
The two young girls turned round also . 
A flood of moonlight fell upon them , and the individual following them exclaimed cheerfully -- `` Arsinoë ! 
Myrrha ! 
... And so I have found you again ! 
Where are you going ? '' 
`` We 're going among the Christians , '' answered Arsinoë . 
`` Come with us , Anatolius ; you will see some curious things . '' 
`` What do I hear ? 
Among the Christians ? 
-- You have always been their enemy ! '' 
wondered the centurion . 
`` With age , my friend , one grows better and more tolerant , or indifferent , if you like to call it so . 
This is a superstition neither better nor worse than other superstitions . 
And then one is capable of a good deal when bored . 
I am going among them for Myrrha 's sake ; it pleases her ... '' `` Where is the church ? 
We 're out in the plain , '' murmured Anatolius . 
`` The churches are destroyed or profaned by their fellow-Christians , the Arians , who believe in Christ otherwise than they do . 
You must have heard the debates about it at Court . 
So now the adversaries of the Arians are wont to pray in secret in subterranean vaults , as in the time of the first persecutions . '' 
Myrrha and Juventinus had lingered a little behind the others ; Arsinoë and Anatolius could talk freely . 
`` Who is he ? '' 
asked the centurion with a nod towards Juventinus . 
`` The last scion of the ancient patrician family of the Furii , '' answered Arsinoë . 
`` The mother wishes to make a consul of him . 
His only dream is to flee into some Thebaïd , or monkish community in the desert , to spend his days in prayer . 
He loves his mother and hides himself from her as from an enemy . '' 
`` The descendants of the Furii , monks ? 
... ' T is a queer age , '' sighed the Epicurean . 
They approached the arenarium , old excavations in crumbling tufa , and went down narrow steps to the bottom of the quarry . 
The volcanic blocks of red earth looked strange-hued in the moonlight . 
Juventinus took a little clay lamp from a dark niche , and lighted it ; the long flame flickered feebly in its narrow gullet . 
They entered the darkness of the side galleries of the arenarium . 
Hollowed by the ancient Romans , the quarry was large and spacious and descended in steep slopes . 
It was therefore pierced by numerous galleries , for the use of workmen in transporting the tufa . 
Juventinus led his companions through the labyrinth and halted at last in front of a shaft from which he lifted the coverlid of wood ; the party went cautiously down the damp and slippery steps ; at the bottom was a narrow door ; Juventinus knocked ; the door opened , and a grey-headed monk introduced them into a passage hollowed in harder tufa . 
The walls on both sides from floor to vaulting were covered with slabs of marble , the seals of tombs in which coffins -LRB- loculi -RRB- were ranged . 
At every step folk carrying lamps came to meet them . 
By the flickering light Anatolius read with curiosity on one of these stone flags : `` Dorotheus , son of Felix , in this place of coolness , light , and peace , reposes '' -LRB- '' requiescit in loco refrigii , luminis , pacis '' -RRB- . 
On another : `` Brethren , disturb not my deep slumber . '' 
The style of the inscriptions was radiant and happy : `` Sophronia , beloved , thou art alive for ever in God '' -LRB- '' Sophronia , dulcis , semper vivis Deo '' -RRB- . 
And a little farther on : '' Sophronia vivis ! '' 
-LRB- `` Sophronia , thou livest ! '' -RRB- 
as if he who had written these words had at length realised that there was no more death . 
Nowhere was it written `` He is buried here , '' but only `` Here is laid for a certain time '' -LRB- depositus -RRB- . 
It seemed as if millions of people , generation upon generation , were lying in this place , not dead , but fallen asleep , all full of mysterious expectation . 
In the niches lamps were placed . 
They burned in the close atmosphere with a long steady flame and graceful vases exhaled penetrating odours . 
Nothing but the faint smell of putrefying bones , which escaped by fissures in the coffins , gave any hint of death . 
The passages went down lower and lower , curved as round an amphitheatre ; and here and there in the ceiling a large aperture gave light from luminaria opening on the country without . 
Sometimes a weak moon-ray passing down the luminaria would strike at the bottom on a slab of marble covered with inscriptions . 
At the end of one of these passages they saw a sexton who , chanting gaily , was hollowing the ground with heavy blows of his pick . 
Several Christians were standing near the principal inspector of the tombs , the fossor . 
He was very well dressed and had a fat cunning face . 
The fossor had inherited a right freely to dispose of a gallery of catacombs , and to sell unoccupied sites in his gallery , which was all the more appreciated because in it were buried the relics of St. Laurence . 
Although rich , the fossor was keenly bargaining , as they came up , with a wealthy and miserly leather-merchant . 
Arsinoë stopped a moment to hear the discussion . 
`` And my tomb will be far away from the relics ? '' 
the leather-dresser was asking mistrustfully , thinking of the big sum exacted by the fossor . 
`` No , just six cubits away . '' 
`` Above or beneath ? '' 
`` On the right-hand side , sloping down a little . 
It 's an excellent position ; I do n't ask a penny too much . 
Though you be as sinful as you please , everything will be forgiven . 
You will go straight into the heavenly kingdom . '' 
With an expert hand the gravedigger took the measurements for the tomb as a tailor measures for a coat , the leather-dresser insisting that he should have as much room as possible in order to lie in comfort . 
An old woman approached the sexton . 
`` What do you want , mother ? '' 
`` Here 's the money -- the extra payment ! '' 
`` What extra payment ? '' 
`` For the right-hand tomb . '' 
`` Ah , I see ; you do n't want the crooked one ? '' 
`` No ; my old bones crack at the very idea of the crooked one . '' 
In the catacombs , and especially near the relics , so much value was set upon grave-sites that it was necessary to contrive slanting tombs which were leased to the poor . 
`` God knows how long one will have to wait for the resurrection , '' the old woman was explaining ; `` and if I took a tomb on the slant it would be all very well to begin with , but when I got tired it would n't do at all . '' 
Anatolius listened in astonishment . 
`` It is much more curious than the mysteries of Mithra , '' he observed to Arsinoë with a languid smile . 
`` Pity that I did n't know it sooner . 
I 've never seen such an amusing cemetery . '' 
They went on into a rather large chamber called the cubicula of consolation . 
A multitude of small lamps were burning on the walls . 
The priest was at the evening office , the stone lid of a martyr 's tomb placed under an arched vault -LRB- arcosolium -RRB- serving as altar . 
