muttered Anna Pavlovna in a terrified whisper . 
`` What , Monsieur Pierre ... Do you consider that assassination shows greatness of soul ? '' 
said the little princess , smiling and drawing her work nearer to her . 
`` Oh ! 
Oh ! '' 
exclaimed several voices . 
`` Capital ! '' 
said Prince Hippolyte in English , and began slapping his knee with the palm of his hand . 
The vicomte merely shrugged his shoulders . 
Pierre looked solemnly at his audience over his spectacles and continued . 
`` I say so , '' he continued desperately , `` because the Bourbons fled from the Revolution leaving the people to anarchy , and Napoleon alone understood the Revolution and quelled it , and so for the general good , he could not stop short for the sake of one man 's life . '' 
`` Wo n't you come over to the other table ? '' 
suggested Anna Pavlovna . 
But Pierre continued his speech without heeding her . 
`` No , '' cried he , becoming more and more eager , `` Napoleon is great because he rose superior to the Revolution , suppressed its abuses , preserved all that was good in it -- equality of citizenship and freedom of speech and of the press -- and only for that reason did he obtain power . '' 
`` Yes , if having obtained power , without availing himself of it to commit murder he had restored it to the rightful king , I should have called him a great man , '' remarked the vicomte . 
`` He could not do that . 
The people only gave him power that he might rid them of the Bourbons and because they saw that he was a great man . 
The Revolution was a grand thing ! '' 
continued Monsieur Pierre , betraying by this desperate and provocative proposition his extreme youth and his wish to express all that was in his mind . 
`` What ? 
Revolution and regicide a grand thing ? 
... Well , after that ... But wo n't you come to this other table ? '' 
repeated Anna Pavlovna . 
`` Rousseau 's Contrat Social , '' said the vicomte with a tolerant smile . 
`` I am not speaking of regicide , I am speaking about ideas . '' 
`` Yes : ideas of robbery , murder , and regicide , '' again interjected an ironical voice . 
`` Those were extremes , no doubt , but they are not what is most important . 
What is important are the rights of man , emancipation from prejudices , and equality of citizenship , and all these ideas Napoleon has retained in full force . '' 
`` Liberty and equality , '' said the vicomte contemptuously , as if at last deciding seriously to prove to this youth how foolish his words were , `` high-sounding words which have long been discredited . 
Who does not love liberty and equality ? 
Even our Saviour preached liberty and equality . 
Have people since the Revolution become happier ? 
On the contrary . 
We wanted liberty , but Buonaparte has destroyed it . '' 
Prince Andrew kept looking with an amused smile from Pierre to the vicomte and from the vicomte to their hostess . 
In the first moment of Pierre 's outburst Anna Pavlovna , despite her social experience , was horror-struck . 
But when she saw that Pierre 's sacrilegious words had not exasperated the vicomte , and had convinced herself that it was impossible to stop him , she rallied her forces and joined the vicomte in a vigorous attack on the orator . 
`` But , my dear Monsieur Pierre , '' said she , `` how do you explain the fact of a great man executing a duc -- or even an ordinary man who -- is innocent and untried ? '' 
`` I should like , '' said the vicomte , `` to ask how monsieur explains the 18th Brumaire ; was not that an imposture ? 
It was a swindle , and not at all like the conduct of a great man ! '' 
`` And the prisoners he killed in Africa ? 
That was horrible ! '' 
said the little princess , shrugging her shoulders . 
`` He 's a low fellow , say what you will , '' remarked Prince Hippolyte . 
Pierre , not knowing whom to answer , looked at them all and smiled . 
His smile was unlike the half-smile of other people . 
When he smiled , his grave , even rather gloomy , look was instantaneously replaced by another - - a childlike , kindly , even rather silly look , which seemed to ask forgiveness . 
The vicomte who was meeting him for the first time saw clearly that this young Jacobin was not so terrible as his words suggested . 
All were silent . 
`` How do you expect him to answer you all at once ? '' 
said Prince Andrew . 
`` Besides , in the actions of a statesman one has to distinguish between his acts as a private person , as a general , and as an emperor . 
So it seems to me . '' 
`` Yes , yes , of course ! '' 
Pierre chimed in , pleased at the arrival of this reinforcement . 
`` One must admit , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` that Napoleon as a man was great on the bridge of Arcola , and in the hospital at Jaffa where he gave his hand to the plague-stricken ; but ... but there are other acts which it is difficult to justify . '' 
Prince Andrew , who had evidently wished to tone down the awkwardness of Pierre 's remarks , rose and made a sign to his wife that it was time to go . 
Suddenly Prince Hippolyte started up making signs to everyone to attend , and asking them all to be seated began : `` I was told a charming Moscow story today and must treat you to it . 
Excuse me , Vicomte -- I must tell it in Russian or the point will be lost ... '' And Prince Hippolyte began to tell his story in such Russian as a Frenchman would speak after spending about a year in Russia . 
Everyone waited , so emphatically and eagerly did he demand their attention to his story . 
`` There is in Moscow a lady , une dame , and she is very stingy . 
She must have two footmen behind her carriage , and very big ones . 
That was her taste . 
And she had a lady 's maid , also big . 
She said ... '' Here Prince Hippolyte paused , evidently collecting his ideas with difficulty . 
`` She said ... Oh yes ! 
She said , ` Girl , ' to the maid , ` put on a livery , get up behind the carriage , and come with me while I make some calls . ' '' 
Here Prince Hippolyte spluttered and burst out laughing long before his audience , which produced an effect unfavorable to the narrator . 
Several persons , among them the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna , did however smile . 
`` She went . 
Suddenly there was a great wind . 
The girl lost her hat and her long hair came down ... '' Here he could contain himself no longer and went on , between gasps of laughter : `` And the whole world knew ... '' And so the anecdote ended . 
Though it was unintelligible why he had told it , or why it had to be told in Russian , still Anna Pavlovna and the others appreciated Prince Hippolyte 's social tact in so agreeably ending Pierre 's unpleasant and unamiable outburst . 
After the anecdote the conversation broke up into insignificant small talk about the last and next balls , about theatricals , and who would meet whom , and when and where . 
Having thanked Anna Pavlovna for her charming soiree , the guests began to take their leave . 
Pierre was ungainly . 
Stout , about the average height , broad , with huge red hands ; he did not know , as the saying is , how to enter a drawing room and still less how to leave one ; that is , how to say something particularly agreeable before going away . 
Besides this he was absent - minded . 
When he rose to go , he took up instead of his own , the general 's three-cornered hat , and held it , pulling at the plume , till the general asked him to restore it . 
All his absent-mindedness and inability to enter a room and converse in it was , however , redeemed by his kindly , simple , and modest expression . 
Anna Pavlovna turned toward him and , with a Christian mildness that expressed forgiveness of his indiscretion , nodded and said : `` I hope to see you again , but I also hope you will change your opinions , my dear Monsieur Pierre . '' 
When she said this , he did not reply and only bowed , but again everybody saw his smile , which said nothing , unless perhaps , `` Opinions are opinions , but you see what a capital , good-natured fellow I am . '' 
And everyone , including Anna Pavlovna , felt this . 
Prince Andrew had gone out into the hall , and , turning his shoulders to the footman who was helping him on with his cloak , listened indifferently to his wife 's chatter with Prince Hippolyte who had also come into the hall . 
Prince Hippolyte stood close to the pretty , pregnant princess , and stared fixedly at her through his eyeglass . 
`` Go in , Annette , or you will catch cold , '' said the little princess , taking leave of Anna Pavlovna . 
`` It is settled , '' she added in a low voice . 
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak to Lise about the match she contemplated between Anatole and the little princess ' sister-in-law . 
`` I rely on you , my dear , '' said Anna Pavlovna , also in a low tone . 
`` Write to her and let me know how her father looks at the matter . 
Au revoir ! '' 
-- and she left the hall . 
Prince Hippolyte approached the little princess and , bending his face close to her , began to whisper something . 
Two footmen , the princess ' and his own , stood holding a shawl and a cloak , waiting for the conversation to finish . 
They listened to the French sentences which to them were meaningless , with an air of understanding but not wishing to appear to do so . 
The princess as usual spoke smilingly and listened with a laugh . 
`` I am very glad I did not go to the ambassador 's , '' said Prince Hippolyte '' - so dull - . 
It has been a delightful evening , has it not ? 
Delightful ! '' 
`` They say the ball will be very good , '' replied the princess , drawing up her downy little lip . 
`` All the pretty women in society will be there . '' 
`` Not all , for you will not be there ; not all , '' said Prince Hippolyte smiling joyfully ; and snatching the shawl from the footman , whom he even pushed aside , he began wrapping it round the princess . 
Either from awkwardness or intentionally -LRB- no one could have said which -RRB- after the shawl had been adjusted he kept his arm around her for a long time , as though embracing her . 
Still smiling , she gracefully moved away , turning and glancing at her husband . 
Prince Andrew 's eyes were closed , so weary and sleepy did he seem . 
`` Are you ready ? '' 
he asked his wife , looking past her . 
Prince Hippolyte hurriedly put on his cloak , which in the latest fashion reached to his very heels , and , stumbling in it , ran out into the porch following the princess , whom a footman was helping into the carriage . 
`` Princesse , au revoir , '' cried he , stumbling with his tongue as well as with his feet . 
The princess , picking up her dress , was taking her seat in the dark carriage , her husband was adjusting his saber ; Prince Hippolyte , under pretense of helping , was in everyone 's way . 
`` Allow me , sir , '' said Prince Andrew in Russian in a cold , disagreeable tone to Prince Hippolyte who was blocking his path . 
`` I am expecting you , Pierre , '' said the same voice , but gently and affectionately . 
The postilion started , the carriage wheels rattled . 
Prince Hippolyte laughed spasmodically as he stood in the porch waiting for the vicomte whom he had promised to take home . 
`` Well , mon cher , '' said the vicomte , having seated himself beside Hippolyte in the carriage , `` your little princess is very nice , very nice indeed , quite French , '' and he kissed the tips of his fingers . 
Hippolyte burst out laughing . 
`` Do you know , you are a terrible chap for all your innocent airs , '' continued the vicomte . 
`` I pity the poor husband , that little officer who gives himself the airs of a monarch . '' 
Hippolyte spluttered again , and amid his laughter said , `` And you were saying that the Russian ladies are not equal to the French ? 
One has to know how to deal with them . '' 
Pierre reaching the house first went into Prince Andrew 's study like one quite at home , and from habit immediately lay down on the sofa , took from the shelf the first book that came to his hand -LRB- it was Caesar 's Commentaries -RRB- , and resting on his elbow , began reading it in the middle . 
`` What have you done to Mlle Scherer ? 
She will be quite ill now , '' said Prince Andrew , as he entered the study , rubbing his small white hands . 
Pierre turned his whole body , making the sofa creak . 
He lifted his eager face to Prince Andrew , smiled , and waved his hand . 
`` That abbe is very interesting but he does not see the thing in the right light ... . 
In my opinion perpetual peace is possible but -- I do not know how to express it ... not by a balance of political power ... '' It was evident that Prince Andrew was not interested in such abstract conversation . 
`` One ca n't everywhere say all one thinks , mon cher . 
Well , have you at last decided on anything ? 
Are you going to be a guardsman or a diplomatist ? '' 
asked Prince Andrew after a momentary silence . 
Pierre sat up on the sofa , with his legs tucked under him . 
`` Really , I do n't yet know . 
I do n't like either the one or the other . '' 
`` But you must decide on something ! 
Your father expects it . '' 
Pierre at the age of ten had been sent abroad with an abbe as tutor , and had remained away till he was twenty . 
When he returned to Moscow his father dismissed the abbe and said to the young man , `` Now go to Petersburg , look round , and choose your profession . 
I will agree to anything . 
Here is a letter to Prince Vasili , and here is money . 
Write to me all about it , and I will help you in everything . '' 
Pierre had already been choosing a career for three months , and had not decided on anything . 
It was about this choice that Prince Andrew was speaking . 
Pierre rubbed his forehead . 
`` But he must be a Freemason , '' said he , referring to the abbe whom he had met that evening . 
`` That is all nonsense . '' 
Prince Andrew again interrupted him , `` let us talk business . 
Have you been to the Horse Guards ? '' 
`` No , I have not ; but this is what I have been thinking and wanted to tell you . 
There is a war now against Napoleon . 
If it were a war for freedom I could understand it and should be the first to enter the army ; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world is not right . '' 
Prince Andrew only shrugged his shoulders at Pierre 's childish words . 
He put on the air of one who finds it impossible to reply to such nonsense , but it would in fact have been difficult to give any other answer than the one Prince Andrew gave to this naive question . 
`` If no one fought except on his own conviction , there would be no wars , '' he said . 
`` And that would be splendid , '' said Pierre . 
Prince Andrew smiled ironically . 
`` Very likely it would be splendid , but it will never come about ... '' `` Well , why are you going to the war ? '' 
asked Pierre . 
`` What for ? 
I do n't know . 
I must . 
Besides that I am going ... '' He paused . 
`` I am going because the life I am leading here does not suit me ! '' 
The rustle of a woman 's dress was heard in the next room . 
Prince Andrew shook himself as if waking up , and his face assumed the look it had had in Anna Pavlovna 's drawing room . 
Pierre removed his feet from the sofa . 
The princess came in . 
She had changed her gown for a house dress as fresh and elegant as the other . 
Prince Andrew rose and politely placed a chair for her . 
`` How is it , '' she began , as usual in French , settling down briskly and fussily in the easy chair , `` how is it Annette never got married ? 
How stupid you men all are not to have married her ! 
Excuse me for saying so , but you have no sense about women . 
What an argumentative fellow you are , Monsieur Pierre ! '' 
`` And I am still arguing with your husband . 
I ca n't understand why he wants to go to the war , '' replied Pierre , addressing the princess with none of the embarrassment so commonly shown by young men in their intercourse with young women . 
The princess started . 
Evidently Pierre 's words touched her to the quick . 
`` Ah , that is just what I tell him ! '' 
said she . 
`` I do n't understand it ; I do n't in the least understand why men ca n't live without wars . 
How is it that we women do n't want anything of the kind , do n't need it ? 
Now you shall judge between us . 
I always tell him : Here he is Uncle 's aide-de - camp , a most brilliant position . 
He is so well known , so much appreciated by everyone . 
The other day at the Apraksins ' I heard a lady asking , ` Is that the famous Prince Andrew ? ' 
I did indeed . '' 
She laughed . 
`` He is so well received everywhere . 
He might easily become aide-de-camp to the Emperor . 
You know the Emperor spoke to him most graciously . 
Annette and I were speaking of how to arrange it . 
What do you think ? '' 
Pierre looked at his friend and , noticing that he did not like the conversation , gave no reply . 
`` When are you starting ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Oh , do n't speak of his going , do n't ! 
I wo n't hear it spoken of , '' said the princess in the same petulantly playful tone in which she had spoken to Hippolyte in the drawing room and which was so plainly ill-suited to the family circle of which Pierre was almost a member . 
`` Today when I remembered that all these delightful associations must be broken off ... and then you know , Andre ... '' -LRB- she looked significantly at her husband -RRB- `` I 'm afraid , I 'm afraid ! '' 
she whispered , and a shudder ran down her back . 
Her husband looked at her as if surprised to notice that someone besides Pierre and himself was in the room , and addressed her in a tone of frigid politeness . 
`` What is it you are afraid of , Lise ? 
I do n't understand , '' said he . 
`` There , what egotists men all are : all , all egotists ! 
Just for a whim of his own , goodness only knows why , he leaves me and locks me up alone in the country . '' 
`` With my father and sister , remember , '' said Prince Andrew gently . 
`` Alone all the same , without my friends ... . 
And he expects me not to be afraid . '' 
Her tone was now querulous and her lip drawn up , giving her not a joyful , but an animal , squirrel-like expression . 
She paused as if she felt it indecorous to speak of her pregnancy before Pierre , though the gist of the matter lay in that . 
`` I still ca n't understand what you are afraid of , '' said Prince Andrew slowly , not taking his eyes off his wife . 
The princess blushed , and raised her arms with a gesture of despair . 
`` No , Andrew , I must say you have changed . 
Oh , how you have ... '' `` Your doctor tells you to go to bed earlier , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` You had better go . '' 
The princess said nothing , but suddenly her short downy lip quivered . 
Prince Andrew rose , shrugged his shoulders , and walked about the room . 
Pierre looked over his spectacles with naive surprise , now at him and now at her , moved as if about to rise too , but changed his mind . 
`` Why should I mind Monsieur Pierre being here ? '' 
exclaimed the little princess suddenly , her pretty face all at once distorted by a tearful grimace . 
`` I have long wanted to ask you , Andrew , why you have changed so to me ? 
What have I done to you ? 
You are going to the war and have no pity for me . 
Why is it ? '' 
`` Lise ! '' 
was all Prince Andrew said . 
But that one word expressed an entreaty , a threat , and above all conviction that she would herself regret her words . 
But she went on hurriedly : `` You treat me like an invalid or a child . 
I see it all ! 
Did you behave like that six months ago ? '' 
`` Lise , I beg you to desist , '' said Prince Andrew still more emphatically . 
Pierre , who had been growing more and more agitated as he listened to all this , rose and approached the princess . 
He seemed unable to bear the sight of tears and was ready to cry himself . 
`` Calm yourself , Princess ! 
It seems so to you because ... I assure you I myself have experienced ... and so ... because ... No , excuse me ! 
An outsider is out of place here ... No , do n't distress yourself ... Good - bye ! '' 
Prince Andrew caught him by the hand . 
`` No , wait , Pierre ! 
The princess is too kind to wish to deprive me of the pleasure of spending the evening with you . '' 
`` No , he thinks only of himself , '' muttered the princess without restraining her angry tears . 
`` Lise ! '' 
said Prince Andrew dryly , raising his voice to the pitch which indicates that patience is exhausted . 
Suddenly the angry , squirrel-like expression of the princess ' pretty face changed into a winning and piteous look of fear . 
Her beautiful eyes glanced askance at her husband 's face , and her own assumed the timid , deprecating expression of a dog when it rapidly but feebly wags its drooping tail . 
`` Mon Dieu , mon Dieu ! '' 
she muttered , and lifting her dress with one hand she went up to her husband and kissed him on the forehead . 
`` Good night , Lise , '' said he , rising and courteously kissing her hand as he would have done to a stranger . 
The friends were silent . 
Neither cared to begin talking . 
Pierre continually glanced at Prince Andrew ; Prince Andrew rubbed his forehead with his small hand . 
`` Let us go and have supper , '' he said with a sigh , going to the door . 
They entered the elegant , newly decorated , and luxurious dining room . 
Everything from the table napkins to the silver , china , and glass bore that imprint of newness found in the households of the newly married . 
Halfway through supper Prince Andrew leaned his elbows on the table and , with a look of nervous agitation such as Pierre had never before seen on his face , began to talk -- as one who has long had something on his mind and suddenly determines to speak out . 
`` Never , never marry , my dear fellow ! 
That 's my advice : never marry till you can say to yourself that you have done all you are capable of , and until you have ceased to love the woman of your choice and have seen her plainly as she is , or else you will make a cruel and irrevocable mistake . 
Marry when you are old and good for nothing -- or all that is good and noble in you will be lost . 
It will all be wasted on trifles . 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
Yes ! 
Do n't look at me with such surprise . 
If you marry expecting anything from yourself in the future , you will feel at every step that for you all is ended , all is closed except the drawing room , where you will be ranged side by side with a court lackey and an idiot ! 
... But what 's the good ? 
... '' and he waved his arm . 
Pierre took off his spectacles , which made his face seem different and the good-natured expression still more apparent , and gazed at his friend in amazement . 
`` My wife , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` is an excellent woman , one of those rare women with whom a man 's honor is safe ; but , O God , what would I not give now to be unmarried ! 
You are the first and only one to whom I mention this , because I like you . '' 
As he said this Prince Andrew was less than ever like that Bolkonski who had lolled in Anna Pavlovna 's easy chairs and with half-closed eyes had uttered French phrases between his teeth . 
Every muscle of his thin face was now quivering with nervous excitement ; his eyes , in which the fire of life had seemed extinguished , now flashed with brilliant light . 
It was evident that the more lifeless he seemed at ordinary times , the more impassioned he became in these moments of almost morbid irritation . 
`` You do n't understand why I say this , '' he continued , `` but it is the whole story of life . 
You talk of Bonaparte and his career , '' said he -LRB- though Pierre had not mentioned Bonaparte -RRB- , `` but Bonaparte when he worked went step by step toward his goal . 
He was free , he had nothing but his aim to consider , and he reached it . 
But tie yourself up with a woman and , like a chained convict , you lose all freedom ! 
And all you have of hope and strength merely weighs you down and torments you with regret . 
Drawing rooms , gossip , balls , vanity , and triviality -- these are the enchanted circle I can not escape from . 
I am now going to the war , the greatest war there ever was , and I know nothing and am fit for nothing . 
I am very amiable and have a caustic wit , '' continued Prince Andrew , `` and at Anna Pavlovna 's they listen to me . 
And that stupid set without whom my wife can not exist , and those women ... If you only knew what those society women are , and women in general ! 
My father is right . 
Selfish , vain , stupid , trivial in everything -- that 's what women are when you see them in their true colors ! 
When you meet them in society it seems as if there were something in them , but there 's nothing , nothing , nothing ! 
No , do n't marry , my dear fellow ; do n't marry ! '' 
concluded Prince Andrew . 
`` It seems funny to me , '' said Pierre , `` that you , you should consider yourself incapable and your life a spoiled life . 
You have everything before you , everything . 
And you ... '' He did not finish his sentence , but his tone showed how highly he thought of his friend and how much he expected of him in the future . 
`` How can he talk like that ? '' 
thought Pierre . 
He considered his friend a model of perfection because Prince Andrew possessed in the highest degree just the very qualities Pierre lacked , and which might be best described as strength of will . 
Pierre was always astonished at Prince Andrew 's calm manner of treating everybody , his extraordinary memory , his extensive reading -LRB- he had read everything , knew everything , and had an opinion about everything -RRB- , but above all at his capacity for work and study . 
And if Pierre was often struck by Andrew 's lack of capacity for philosophical meditation -LRB- to which he himself was particularly addicted -RRB- , he regarded even this not as a defect but as a sign of strength . 
Even in the best , most friendly and simplest relations of life , praise and commendation are essential , just as grease is necessary to wheels that they may run smoothly . 
`` My part is played out , '' said Prince Andrew . 
`` What 's the use of talking about me ? 
Let us talk about you , '' he added after a silence , smiling at his reassuring thoughts . 
That smile was immediately reflected on Pierre 's face . 
`` But what is there to say about me ? '' 
said Pierre , his face relaxing into a careless , merry smile . 
`` What am I ? 
An illegitimate son ! '' 
He suddenly blushed crimson , and it was plain that he had made a great effort to say this . 
`` Without a name and without means ... And it really ... '' But he did not say what `` it really '' was . 
`` For the present I am free and am all right . 
Only I have n't the least idea what I am to do ; I wanted to consult you seriously . '' 
Prince Andrew looked kindly at him , yet his glance -- friendly and affectionate as it was -- expressed a sense of his own superiority . 
`` I am fond of you , especially as you are the one live man among our whole set . 
Yes , you 're all right ! 
Choose what you will ; it 's all the same . 
You 'll be all right anywhere . 
But look here : give up visiting those Kuragins and leading that sort of life . 
It suits you so badly -- all this debauchery , dissipation , and the rest of it ! '' 
`` What would you have , my dear fellow ? '' 
answered Pierre , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Women , my dear fellow ; women ! '' 
`` I do n't understand it , '' replied Prince Andrew . 
`` Women who are comme il faut , that 's a different matter ; but the Kuragins ' set of women , ` women and wine ' I do n't understand ! '' 
Pierre was staying at Prince Vasili Kuragin 's and sharing the dissipated life of his son Anatole , the son whom they were planning to reform by marrying him to Prince Andrew 's sister . 
`` Do you know ? '' 
said Pierre , as if suddenly struck by a happy thought , `` seriously , I have long been thinking of it ... . 
Leading such a life I ca n't decide or think properly about anything . 
One 's head aches , and one spends all one 's money . 
He asked me for tonight , but I wo n't go . '' 
`` You give me your word of honor not to go ? '' 
`` On my honor ! '' 
It was past one o'clock when Pierre left his friend . 
It was a cloudless , northern , summer night . 
Pierre took an open cab intending to drive straight home . 
But the nearer he drew to the house the more he felt the impossibility of going to sleep on such a night . 
It was light enough to see a long way in the deserted street and it seemed more like morning or evening than night . 
On the way Pierre remembered that Anatole Kuragin was expecting the usual set for cards that evening , after which there was generally a drinking bout , finishing with visits of a kind Pierre was very fond of . 
`` I should like to go to Kuragin 's , '' thought he . 
But he immediately recalled his promise to Prince Andrew not to go there . 
Then , as happens to people of weak character , he desired so passionately once more to enjoy that dissipation he was so accustomed to that he decided to go . 
The thought immediately occurred to him that his promise to Prince Andrew was of no account , because before he gave it he had already promised Prince Anatole to come to his gathering ; `` besides , '' thought he , `` all such ` words of honor ' are conventional things with no definite meaning , especially if one considers that by tomorrow one may be dead , or something so extraordinary may happen to one that honor and dishonor will be all the same ! '' 
Pierre often indulged in reflections of this sort , nullifying all his decisions and intentions . 
He went to Kuragin 's . 
Reaching the large house near the Horse Guards ' barracks , in which Anatole lived , Pierre entered the lighted porch , ascended the stairs , and went in at the open door . 
There was no one in the anteroom ; empty bottles , cloaks , and overshoes were lying about ; there was a smell of alcohol , and sounds of voices and shouting in the distance . 
Cards and supper were over , but the visitors had not yet dispersed . 
Pierre threw off his cloak and entered the first room , in which were the remains of supper . 
A footman , thinking no one saw him , was drinking on the sly what was left in the glasses . 
From the third room came sounds of laughter , the shouting of familiar voices , the growling of a bear , and general commotion . 
Some eight or nine young men were crowding anxiously round an open window . 
Three others were romping with a young bear , one pulling him by the chain and trying to set him at the others . 
`` I bet a hundred on Stevens ! '' 
shouted one . 
`` Mind , no holding on ! '' 
cried another . 
`` I bet on Dolokhov ! '' 
cried a third . 
`` Kuragin , you part our hands . '' 
`` There , leave Bruin alone ; here 's a bet on . '' 
`` At one draught , or he loses ! '' 
shouted a fourth . 
`` Jacob , bring a bottle ! '' 
shouted the host , a tall , handsome fellow who stood in the midst of the group , without a coat , and with his fine linen shirt unfastened in front . 
`` Wait a bit , you fellows ... . 
Here is Petya ! 
Good man ! '' 
cried he , addressing Pierre . 
Another voice , from a man of medium height with clear blue eyes , particularly striking among all these drunken voices by its sober ring , cried from the window : `` Come here ; part the bets ! '' 
This was Dolokhov , an officer of the Semenov regiment , a notorious gambler and duelist , who was living with Anatole . 
Pierre smiled , looking about him merrily . 
`` I do n't understand . 
What 's it all about ? '' 
`` Wait a bit , he is not drunk yet ! 
A bottle here , '' said Anatole , taking a glass from the table he went up to Pierre . 
`` First of all you must drink ! '' 
Pierre drank one glass after another , looking from under his brows at the tipsy guests who were again crowding round the window , and listening to their chatter . 
Anatole kept on refilling Pierre 's glass while explaining that Dolokhov was betting with Stevens , an English naval officer , that he would drink a bottle of rum sitting on the outer ledge of the third floor window with his legs hanging out . 
`` Go on , you must drink it all , '' said Anatole , giving Pierre the last glass , `` or I wo n't let you go ! '' 
`` No , I wo n't , '' said Pierre , pushing Anatole aside , and he went up to the window . 
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman 's hand and clearly and distinctly repeating the terms of the bet , addressing himself particularly to Anatole and Pierre . 
Dolokhov was of medium height , with curly hair and light-blue eyes . 
He was about twenty-five . 
Like all infantry officers he wore no mustache , so that his mouth , the most striking feature of his face , was clearly seen . 
The lines of that mouth were remarkably finely curved . 
The middle of the upper lip formed a sharp wedge and closed firmly on the firm lower one , and something like two distinct smiles played continually round the two corners of the mouth ; this , together with the resolute , insolent intelligence of his eyes , produced an effect which made it impossible not to notice his face . 
Dolokhov was a man of small means and no connections . 
Yet , though Anatole spent tens of thousands of rubles , Dolokhov lived with him and had placed himself on such a footing that all who knew them , including Anatole himself , respected him more than they did Anatole . 
Dolokhov could play all games and nearly always won . 
However much he drank , he never lost his clearheadedness . 
Both Kuragin and Dolokhov were at that time notorious among the rakes and scapegraces of Petersburg . 
The bottle of rum was brought . 
The window frame which prevented anyone from sitting on the outer sill was being forced out by two footmen , who were evidently flurried and intimidated by the directions and shouts of the gentlemen around . 
Anatole with his swaggering air strode up to the window . 
He wanted to smash something . 
Pushing away the footmen he tugged at the frame , but could not move it . 
He smashed a pane . 
`` You have a try , Hercules , '' said he , turning to Pierre . 
Pierre seized the crossbeam , tugged , and wrenched the oak frame out with a crash . 
`` Take it right out , or they 'll think I 'm holding on , '' said Dolokhov . 
`` Is the Englishman bragging ? 
... Eh ? 
Is it all right ? '' 
said Anatole . 
`` First-rate , '' said Pierre , looking at Dolokhov , who with a bottle of rum in his hand was approaching the window , from which the light of the sky , the dawn merging with the afterglow of sunset , was visible . 
Dolokhov , the bottle of rum still in his hand , jumped onto the window sill . 
