Oh , cruel ! 
what hast thou done with her ? 
There lies my puzzle ; but thine is greater . 
Thou knowest not how came ye , hence callest thyself unbegotten ; certainly knowest not thy beginning , hence callest thyself unbegun . 
I know that of me , which thou knowest not of thyself , oh , thou omnipotent . 
There is some unsuffusing thing beyond thee , thou clear spirit , to whom all thy eternity is but time , all thy creativeness mechanical . 
Through thee , thy flaming self , my scorched eyes do dimly see it . 
Oh , thou foundling fire , thou hermit immemorial , thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle , thy unparticipated grief . 
Here again with haughty agony , I read my sire . 
Leap ! 
leap up , and lick the sky ! 
I leap with thee ; I burn with thee ; would fain be welded with thee ; defyingly I worship thee ! '' 
`` The boat ! 
the boat ! '' 
cried Starbuck , `` look at thy boat , old man ! '' 
Ahab 's harpoon , the one forged at Perth 's fire , remained firmly lashed in its conspicuous crotch , so that it projected beyond his whale-boat 's bow ; but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off ; and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale , forked fire . 
As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent 's tongue , Starbuck grasped Ahab by the arm -- `` God , God is against thee , old man ; forbear ! ' 
t is an ill voyage ! 
ill begun , ill continued ; let me square the yards , while we may , old man , and make a fair wind of it homewards , to go on a better voyage than this . '' 
Overhearing Starbuck , the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the braces -- though not a sail was left aloft . 
For the moment all the aghast mate 's thoughts seemed theirs ; they raised a half mutinous cry . 
But dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck , and snatching the burning harpoon , Ahab waved it like a torch among them ; swearing to transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope 's end . 
Petrified by his aspect , and still more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held , the men fell back in dismay , and Ahab again spoke : -- `` All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine ; and heart , soul , and body , lungs and life , old Ahab is bound . 
And that ye may know to what tune this heart beats : look ye here ; thus I blow out the last fear ! '' 
And with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame . 
As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain , men fly the neighborhood of some lone , gigantic elm , whose very height and strength but render it so much the more unsafe , because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts ; so at those last words of Ahab 's many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of dismay . 
The Deck Toward the End of the First Night Watch Ahab standing by the helm . 
Starbuck approaching him . 
We must send down the main-top-sail yard , sir . 
The band is working loose and the lee lift is half-stranded . 
Shall I strike it , sir ? '' 
`` Strike nothing ; lash it . 
If I had sky-sail poles , I 'd sway them up now . '' 
`` Sir ! 
-- in God 's name ! 
-- sir ? '' 
`` Well . '' 
`` The anchors are working , sir . 
Shall I get them inboard ? '' 
`` Strike nothing , and stir nothing but lash everything . 
The wind rises , but it has not got up to my table-lands yet . 
Quick , and see to it . 
-- By masts and keels ! 
he takes me for the hunchbacked skipper of some coasting smack . 
Send down my main-top-sail yard ! 
Ho , gluepots ! 
Loftiest trucks were made for wildest winds , and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud . 
Shall I strike that ? 
Oh , none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in tempest time . 
What a hooroosh aloft there ! 
I would e ` en take it for sublime , did I not know that the colic is a noisy malady . 
Oh , take medicine , take medicine ! '' 
Midnight - The Forecastle Bulwarks Stubb and Flask mounted on them , and passing additional lashings over the anchors there hanging . 
No , Stubb ; you may pound that knot there as much as you please , but you will never pound into me what you were just now saying . 
And how long ago is it since you said the very contrary ? 
Did n't you once say that whatever ship Ahab sails in , that ship should pay something extra on its insurance policy , just as though it were loaded with powder barrels aft and boxes of lucifers forward ? 
Stop , now ; did n't you say so ? '' 
`` Well , suppose I did ? 
What then ! 
I 've part changed my flesh since that time , why not my mind ? 
Besides , supposing we are loaded with powder barrels aft and lucifers forward ; how the devil could the lucifers get afire in this drenching spray here ? 
Why , my little man , you have pretty red hair , but you could n't get afire now . 
Shake yourself ; you 're Aquarius , or the water-bearer , Flask ; might fill pitchers at your coat collar . 
Do n't you see , then , that for these extra risks the Marine Insurance companies have extra guarantees ? 
Here are hydrants , Flask . 
But hark , again , and I 'll answer ye the other thing . 
First take your leg off from the crown of the anchor here , though , so I can pass the rope ; now listen . 
What 's the mighty difference between holding a mast 's lightning-rod in the storm , and standing close by a mast that has n't got any lightning-rod at all in a storm ? 
Do n't you see , you timber-head , that no harm can come to the holder of the rod , unless the mast is first struck ? 
What are you talking about , then ? 
Not one ship in a hundred carries rods , and Ahab , -- aye , man , and all of us , -- were in no more danger then , in my poor opinion , than all the crews in ten thousand ships now sailing the seas . 
Why , you King-Post , you , I suppose you would have every man in the world go about with a small lightning-rod running up the corner of his hat , like a militia officer 's skewered feather , and trailing behind like his sash . 
Why do n't ye be sensible , Flask ? 
it 's easy to be sensible ; why do n't ye , then ? 
any man with half an eye can be sensible . '' 
`` I do n't know that , Stubb . 
You sometimes find it rather hard . '' 
`` Yes , when a fellow 's soaked through , it 's hard to be sensible , that 's a fact . 
And I am about drenched with this spray . 
Never mind ; catch the turn there , and pass it . 
Seems to me we are lashing down these anchors now as if they were never going to be used again . 
Tying these two anchors here , Flask , seems like tying a man 's hands behind him . 
And what big generous hands they are , to be sure . 
These are your iron fists , hey ? 
What a hold they have , too ! 
I wonder , Flask , whether the world is anchored anywhere ; if she is , she swings with an uncommon long cable , though . 
There , hammer that knot down , and we 've done . 
So ; next to touching land , lighting on deck is the most satisfactory . 
I say , just wring out my jacket skirts , will ye ? 
Thank ye . 
They laugh at long-togs so , Flask ; but seems to me , a long-tailed coat ought always to be worn in all storms afloat . 
The tails tapering down that way , serve to carry off the water , d'ye see . 
Same with cocked hats ; the cocks form gable-end eave-troughs , Flask . 
No more monkey-jackets and tarpaulins for me ; I must mount a swallow-tail , and drive down a beaver ; so . 
Halloa ! 
whew ! 
there goes my tarpaulin overboard ; Lord , Lord , that the winds that come from heaven should be so unmannerly ! 
This is a nasty night , lad . '' 
Midnight Aloft . 
-- Thunder and Lightning The Main-top-sail yard - Tashtego passing new lashings around it . 
`` Um , um , um . 
Stop that thunder ! 
Plenty too much thunder up here . 
What 's the use of thunder ? 
Um , um , um . 
We do n't want thunder ; we want rum ; give us a glass of rum . 
Um , um , um ! '' 
The Musket During the most violent shocks of the Typhoon , the man at the Pequod 's jaw-bone tiller had several times been reelingly hurled to the deck by its spasmodic motions even though preventer tackles had been attached to it -- for they were slack -- because some play to the tiller was indispensable . 
In a severe gale like this , while the ship is but a tossed shuttlecock to the blast , it is by no means uncommon to see the needles in the compasses , at intervals , go round and round . 
It was thus with the Pequod 's ; at almost every shock the helmsman had not failed to notice the whirling velocity with which they revolved upon the cards ; it is a sight that hardly anyone can behold without some sort of unwonted emotion . 
Some hours after midnight , the Typhoon abated so much , that through the strenuous exertions of Starbuck and Stubb -- one engaged forward and the other aft -- the shivered remnants of the jib and fore and main-top-sails were cut adrift from the spars , and went eddying away to leeward , like the feathers of an albatross , which sometimes are cast to the winds when that storm-tossed bird is on the wing . 
The three corresponding new sails were now bent and reefed , and a storm-trysail was set further aft ; so that the ship soon went through the water with some precision again ; and the course -- for the present , East-south-east -- which he was to steer , if practicable , was once more given to the helmsman . 
For during the violence of the gale , he had only steered according to its vicissitudes . 
But as he was now bringing the ship as near her course as possible , watching the compass meanwhile , lo ! 
a good sign ! 
the wind seemed coming round astern ; aye , the foul breeze became fair ! 
Instantly the yards were squared , to the lively song of `` Ho ! 
the fair wind ! 
oh-ye-ho cheerly , men ! '' 
the crew singing for joy , that so promising an event should so soon have falsified the evil portents preceding it . 
In compliance with the standing order of his commander -- to report immediately , and at any one of the twenty-four hours , any decided change in the affairs of the deck , -- Starbuck had no sooner trimmed the yards to the breeze -- however reluctantly and gloomily , -- than he mechanically went below to apprise Captain Ahab of the circumstance . 
Ere knocking at his state-room , he involuntarily paused before it a moment . 
The cabin lamp -- taking long swings this way and that -- was burning fitfully , and casting fitful shadows upon the old man 's bolted door , -- a thin one , with fixed blinds inserted , in place of upper panels . 
The isolated subterraneousness of the cabin made a certain humming silence to reign there , though it was hooped round by all the roar of the elements . 
The loaded muskets in the rack were shiningly revealed , as they stood upright against the forward bulkhead . 
Starbuck was an honest , upright man ; but out of Starbuck 's heart , at that instant when he saw the muskets , there strangely evolved an evil thought ; but so blent with its neutral or good accompaniments that for the instant he hardly knew it for itself . 
`` He would have shot me once , '' he murmured , `` yes , there 's the very musket that he pointed at me ; -- that one with the studded stock ; let me touch it -- lift it . 
Strange , that I , who have handled so many deadly lances , strange , that I should shake so now . 
Loaded ? 
I must see . 
Aye , aye ; and powder in the pan ; -- that 's not good . 
Best spill it ? 
-- wait . 
I 'll cure myself of this . 
I 'll hold the musket boldly while I think . 
-- I come to report a fair wind to him . 
But how fair ? 
Fair for death and doom , -- that 's fair for Moby Dick . 
It 's a fair wind that 's only fair for that accursed fish . 
-- The very tube he pointed at me ! 
-- the very one ; this one -- I hold it here ; he would have killed me with the very thing I handle now . 
-- Aye and he would fain kill all his crew . 
Does he not say he will not strike his spars to any gale ? 
Has he not dashed his heavenly quadrant ? 
and in these same perilous seas , gropes he not his way by mere dead reckoning of the error-abounding log ? 
and in this very Typhoon , did he not swear that he would have no lightning-rods ? 
But shall this crazed old man be tamely suffered to drag a whole ship 's company down to doom with him ? 
-- Yes , it would make him the wilful murderer of thirty men and more , if this ship come to any deadly harm ; and come to deadly harm , my soul swears this ship will , if Ahab have his way . 
If , then , he were this instant -- put aside , that crime would not be his . 
Ha ! 
is he muttering in his sleep ? 
Yes , just there , -- in there , he 's sleeping . 
Sleeping ? 
aye , but still alive , and soon awake again . 
I ca n't withstand thee , then , old man . 
Not reasoning ; not remonstrance ; not entreaty wilt thou hearken to ; all this thou scornest . 
Flat obedience to thy own flat commands , this is all thou breathest . 
Aye , and say ` st the men have vow 'd thy vow ; say ` st all of us are Ahabs . 
Great God forbid ! 
-- But is there no other way ? 
no lawful way ? 
-- Make him a prisoner to be taken home ? 
What ! 
hope to wrest this old man 's living power from his own living hands ? 
Only a fool would try it . 
Say he were pinioned even ; knotted all over with ropes and hawsers ; chained down to ring-bolts on this cabin floor ; he would be more hideous than a caged tiger , then . 
I could not endure the sight ; could not possibly fly his howlings ; all comfort , sleep itself , inestimable reason would leave me on the long intolerable voyage . 
What , then , remains ? 
The land is hundreds of leagues away , and locked Japan the nearest . 
I stand alone here upon an open sea , with two oceans and a whole continent between me and law . 
-- Aye , aye , 't is so . 
-- Is heaven a murderer when its lightning strikes a would-be murderer in his bed , tindering sheets and skin together ? 
-- And would I be a murderer , then , if '' -- and slowly , stealthily , and half sideways looking , he placed the loaded musket 's end against the door . 
`` On this level , Ahab 's hammock swings within ; his head this way . 
A touch , and Starbuck may survive to hug his wife and child again . 
-- Oh Mary ! 
Mary ! 
-- boy ! 
boy ! 
boy ! 
-- But if I wake thee not to death , old man , who can tell to what unsounded deeps Starbuck 's body this day week may sink , with all the crew ! 
Great God , where art Thou ? 
Shall I ? 
shall I ? 
-- The wind has gone down and shifted , sir ; the fore and main topsails are reefed and set ! 
she heads her course . '' 
`` Stern all ! 
Oh Moby Dick , I clutch thy heart at last ! '' 
Such were the sounds that now came hurtling from out the old man 's tormented sleep , as if Starbuck 's voice had caused the long dumb dream to speak . 
The yet levelled musket shook like a drunkard 's arm against the panel ; Starbuck seemed wrestling with an angel , but turning from the door , he placed the death-tube in its rack , and left the place . 
`` He 's too sound asleep , Mr. Stubb ; go thou down , and wake him , and tell him . 
I must see to the deck here . 
Thou know ` st what to say . '' 
The Needle Next morning the not-yet-subsided sea rolled in long slow billows of mighty bulk , and striving in the Pequod 's gurgling track , pushed her on like giants ' palms outspread . 
The strong unstaggering breeze abounded so , that sky and air seemed vast outbellying sails ; the whole world boomed before the wind . 
Muffled in the full morning light , the invisible sun was only known by the spread intensity of his place ; where his bayonet rays moved on in stacks . 
Emblazonings , as of crowned Babylonian kings and queens , reigned over everything . 
The sea was as a crucible of molten gold , that bubblingly leaps with light and heat . 
Long maintaining an enchanted silence , Ahab stood apart ; and every time the teetering ship loweringly pitched down her bowsprit , he turned to eye the bright sun 's rays produced ahead ; and when she profoundly settled by the stern , he turned behind , and saw the sun 's rearward place , and how the same yellow rays were blending with his undeviating wake . 
`` Ha , ha , my ship ! 
thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the sun . 
Ho , ho ! 
all ye nations before my prow , I bring the sun to ye ! 
Yoke on the further billows ; hallo ! 
a tandem , I drive the sea ! '' 
But suddenly reined back by some counter thought , he hurried towards the helm , huskily demanding how the ship was heading . 
`` East-sou-east , sir , '' said the frightened steersman . 
`` Thou liest ! '' 
smiting him with his clenched fist . 
`` Heading East at this hour in the morning , and the sun astern ? '' 
Upon this every soul was confounded ; for the phenomenon just then observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else ; but its very blinding palpableness must have been the cause . 
Thrusting his head half-way into the binnacle , Ahab caught one glimpse of the compasses ; his uplifted arm slowly fell ; for a moment he almost seemed to stagger . 
Standing behind him Starbuck looked , and lo ! 
the two compasses pointed East , and the Pequod was as infallibly going West . 
But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew , the old man with a rigid laugh exclaimed , `` I have it ! 
It has happened before . 
Mr. Starbuck , last night 's thunder turned our compasses -- that 's all . 
Thou hast before now heard of such a thing , I take it . '' 
`` Aye ; but never before has it happened to me , sir , '' said the pale mate , gloomily . 
Here , it must needs be said , that accidents like this have in more than one case occurred to ships in violent storms . 
The magnetic energy , as developed in the mariner 's needle , is , as all know , essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven ; hence it is not to be much marvelled at , that such things should be . 
In instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel , so as to smite down some of the spars and rigging , the effect upon the needle has at times been still more fatal ; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated , so that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife 's knitting needle . 
But in either case , the needle never again , of itself , recovers the original virtue thus marred or lost ; and if the binnacle compasses be affected , the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship ; even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson . 
Deliberately standing before the binnacle , and eyeing the transpointed compasses , the old man , with the sharp of his extended hand , now took the precise bearing of the sun , and satisfied that the needles were exactly inverted , shouted out his orders for the ship 's course to be changed accordingly . 
The yards were hard up ; and once more the Pequod thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind , for the supposed fair one had only been juggling her . 
Meanwhile , whatever were his own secret thoughts , Starbuck said nothing , but quietly he issued all requisite orders ; while Stubb and Flask -- who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings -- likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced . 
As for the men , though some of them lowly rumbled , their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate . 
But as ever before , the pagan harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed ; or if impressed , it was only with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahab 's . 
For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries . 
But chancing to slip with his ivory heel , he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck . 
`` Thou poor , proud heaven-gazer and sun 's pilot ! 
yesterday I wrecked thee , and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me . 
So , so . 
But Ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet . 
Mr. Starbuck -- a lance without the pole ; a top-maul , and the smallest of the sail-maker 's needles . 
Quick ! '' 
Accessory , perhaps , to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do , were certain prudential motives , whose object might have been to revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill , in a matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses . 
Besides , the old man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles , though clumsily practicable , was not a thing to be passed over by superstitious sailors , without some shudderings and evil portents . 
`` Men , '' said he , steadily turning upon the crew , as the mate handed him the things he had demanded , `` my men , the thunder turned old Ahab 's needles ; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own , that will point as true as any . '' 
Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors , as this was said ; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow . 
But Starbuck looked away . 
With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance , and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining , bade him hold it upright , without its touching the deck . 
Then , with the maul , after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod , he placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it , and less strongly hammered that , several times , the mate still holding the rod as before . 
Then going through some small strange motions with it -- whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel , or merely intended to augment the awe of the crew , is uncertain -- he called for linen thread ; and moving to the binnacle , slipped out the two reversed needles there , and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle , over one of the compass cards . 
At first , the steel went round and round , quivering and vibrating at either end ; but at last it settled to its place , when Ahab , who had been intently watching for this result , stepped frankly back from the binnacle , and pointing his stretched arm towards it , exclaimed , -- `` Look ye , for yourselves , if Ahab be not the lord of the level loadstone ! 
The sun is East , and that compass swears it ! '' 
One after another they peered in , for nothing but their own eyes could persuade such ignorance as theirs , and one after another they slunk away . 
In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph , you then saw Ahab in all his fatal pride . 
The Log and Line While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage , the log and line had but very seldom been in use . 
Owing to a confident reliance upon other means of determining the vessel 's place , some merchantmen , and many whalemen , especially when cruising , wholly neglect to heave the log ; though at the same time , and frequently more for form 's sake than anything else , regularly putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship , as well as the presumed average rate of progression every hour . 
It had been thus with the Pequod . 
The wooden reel and angular log attached hung , long untouched , just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks . 
Rains and spray had damped it ; the sun and wind had warped it ; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that hung so idly . 
But heedless of all this , his mood seized Ahab , as he happened to glance upon the reel , not many hours after the magnet scene , and he remembered how his quadrant was no more , and recalled his frantic oath about the level log and line . 
The ship was sailing plungingly ; astern the billows rolled in riots . 
`` Forward , there ! 
Heave the log ! '' 
Two seamen came . 
The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman . 
`` Take the reel , one of ye , I 'll heave . '' 
They went towards the extreme stern , on the ship 's lee side , where the deck , with the oblique energy of the wind , was now almost dipping into the creamy , sidelong-rushing sea . 
The Manxman took the reel , and holding it high up , by the projecting handle-ends of the spindle , round which the spool of line revolved , so stood with the angular log hanging downwards , till Ahab advanced to him . 
Ahab stood before him , and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard , when the old Manxman , who was intently eyeing both him and the line , made bold to speak . 
`` Sir , I mistrust it ; this line looks far gone , long heat and wet have spoiled it . '' '' 
` Twill hold , old gentleman . 
Long heat and wet , have they spoiled thee ? 
Thou seem ` st to hold . 
Or , truer perhaps , life holds thee ; not thou it . '' 
`` I hold the spool , sir . 
But just as my captain says . 
With these grey hairs of mine 't is not worth while disputing , ` specially with a superior , who 'll ne'er confess . '' 
`` What 's that ? 
There now 's a patched professor in Queen Nature 's granite-founded College ; but methinks he 's too subservient . 
Where wert thou born ? '' 
`` In the little rocky Isle of Man , sir . '' 
`` Excellent ! 
Thou ` st hit the world by that . '' 
`` I know not , sir , but I was born there . '' 
`` In the Isle of Man , hey ? 
Well , the other way , it 's good . 
Here 's a man from Man ; a man born in once independent Man , and now unmanned of Man ; which is sucked in -- by what ? 
Up with the reel ! 
The dead , blind wall butts all inquiring heads at last . 
Up with it ! 
So . '' 
The log was heaved . 
The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long dragging line astern , and then , instantly , the reel began to whirl . 
In turn , jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows , the towing resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely . 
`` Hold hard ! '' 
Snap ! 
the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon ; the tugging log was gone . 
`` I crush the quadrant , the thunder turns the needles , and now the mad sea parts the log-line . 
But Ahab can mend all . 
Haul in here , Tahitian ; reel up , Manxman . 
And look ye , let the carpenter make another log , and mend thou the line . 
See to it . '' 
`` There he goes now ; to him nothing 's happened ; but to me , the skewer seems loosening out of the middle of the world . 
Haul in , haul in , Tahitian ! 
These lines run whole , and whirling out : come in broken , and dragging slow . 
Ha , Pip ? 
come to help ; eh , Pip ? '' 
`` Pip ? 
whom call ye Pip ? 
Pip jumped from the whaleboat . 
Pip 's missing . 
Let 's see now if ye have n't fished him up here , fisherman . 
It drags hard ; I guess he 's holding on . 
Jerk him , Tahiti ! 
Jerk him off we haul in no cowards here . 
Ho ! 
there 's his arm just breaking water . 
A hatchet ! 
a hatchet ! 
cut it off -- we haul in no cowards here . 
Captain Ahab ! 
sir , sir ! 
here 's Pip , trying to get on board again . '' 
`` Peace , thou crazy loon , '' cried the Manxman , seizing him by the arm . 
`` Away from the quarter-deck ! '' 
`` The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser , '' muttered Ahab , advancing . 
`` Hands off from that holiness ! 
Where sayest thou Pip was , boy ? 
`` Astern there , sir , astern ! 
Lo ! 
lo ! '' 
`` And who art thou , boy ? 
I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy eyes . 
Oh God ! 
that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through ! 
Who art thou , boy ? '' 
`` Bell-boy , sir ; ship 's - crier ; ding , dong , ding ! 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
One hundred pounds of clay reward for Pip ; five feet high -- looks cowardly -- quickest known by that ! 
Ding , dong , ding ! 
Who 's seen Pip the coward ? '' 
`` There can be no hearts above the snow-line . 
Oh , ye frozen heavens ! 
look down here . 
Ye did beget this luckless child , and have abandoned him , ye creative libertines . 
Here , boy ; Ahab 's cabin shall be Pip 's home henceforth , while Ahab lives . 
Thou touchest my inmost centre , boy ; thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings . 
Come , let 's down . '' 
`` What 's this ? 
here 's velvet shark-skin , '' intently gazing at Ahab 's hand , and feeling it . 
`` Ah , now , had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this , perhaps he had ne'er been lost ! 
This seems to me , sir , as a man-rope ; something that weak souls may hold by . 
Oh , sir , let old Perth now come and rivet these two hands together ; the black one with the white , for I will not let this go . '' 
`` Oh , boy , nor will I thee , unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors than are here . 
Come , then , to my cabin . 
Lo ! 
ye believers in gods all goodness , and in man all ill , lo you ! 
see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering man ; and man , though idiotic , and knowing not what he does , yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude . 
Come ! 
I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand , than though I grasped an Emperor 's ! '' 
`` There go two daft ones now , '' muttered the old Manxman . 
`` One daft with strength , the other daft with weakness . 
But here 's the end of the rotten line -- all dripping , too . 
Mend it , eh ? 
I think we had best have a new line altogether . 
I 'll see Mr. Stubb about it . '' 
The Life-Buoy Steering now south-eastward by Ahab 's levelled steel , and her progress solely determined by Ahab 's level log and line ; the Pequod held on her path towards the Equator . 
Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters , descrying no ships , and ere long , sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds , over waves monotonously mild ; all these seemed the strange calm things preluding some riotous and desperate scene . 
At last , when the ship drew near to the outskirts , as it were , of the Equatorial fishing-ground , and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn , was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets ; the watch -- then headed by Flask -- was startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly -- like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of all Herod 's murdered Innocents -- that one and all , they started from their reveries , and for the space of some moments stood , or sat , or leaned all transfixed by listening , like the carved Roman slave , while that wild cry remained within hearing . 
The Christian or civilized part of the crew said it was mermaids , and shuddered ; but the pagan harpooneers remained unappalled . 
Yet the grey Manxman -- the oldest mariner of all -- declared that the wild thrilling sounds that were heard , were the voices of newly drowned men in the sea . 
Below in his hammock , Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn , when he came to the deck ; it was then recounted to him by Flask , not unaccompanied with hinted dark meanings . 
He hollowly laughed , and thus explained the wonder . 
Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of seals , and some young seals that had lost their dams , or some dams that had lost their cubs , must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her , crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail . 
But this only the more affected some of them , because most mariners cherish a very superstitious feeling about seals , arising not only from their peculiar tones when in distress , but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-intelligent faces , seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside . 
In the sea , under certain circumstances , seals have more than once been mistaken for men . 
But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning . 
At sun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore ; and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep -LRB- for sailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state -RRB- , whether it was thus with the man , there is now no telling ; but , be that as it may , he had not been long at his perch , when a cry was heard -- a cry and a rushing -- and looking up , they saw a falling phantom in the air ; and looking down , a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue of the sea . 
The life-buoy -- a long slender cask -- was dropped from the stern , where it always hung obedient to a cunning spring ; but no hand rose to seize it , and the sun having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken , so that it slowly filled , and the parched wood also filled at its every pore ; and the studded iron-bound cask followed the sailor to the bottom , as if to yield him his pillow , though in sooth but a hard one . 
And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the White Whale , on the White Whale 's own peculiar ground ; that man was swallowed up in the deep . 
But few , perhaps , thought of that at the time . 
Indeed , in some sort , they were not grieved at this event , at least as a portent ; for they regarded it , not as a fore-shadowing of evil in the future , but as the fulfilment of an evil already presaged . 
They declared that now they knew the reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before . 
But again the old Manxman said nay . 
The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced ; Starbuck was directed to see to it ; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found , and as in the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage , all hands were impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end , whatever that might prove to be ; therefore , they were going to leave the ship 's stern unprovided with a buoy , when by certain strange signs and inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin . 
`` A life-buoy of a coffin ! '' 
cried Starbuck , starting . 
`` Rather queer , that , I should say , '' said Stubb . 
`` It will make a good enough one , '' said Flask , `` the carpenter here can arrange it easily . '' 
`` Bring it up ; there 's nothing else for it , '' said Starbuck , after a melancholy pause . 
`` Rig it , carpenter ; do not look at me so -- the coffin , I mean . 
Dost thou hear me ? 
Rig it . '' 
`` And shall I nail down the lid , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a hammer . 
`` Aye . '' 
`` And shall I caulk the seams , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a caulking-iron . 
`` Aye . '' 
`` And shall I then pay over the same with pitch , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a pitch-pot . 
Away ! 
What possesses thee to this ? 
Make a life-buoy of the coffin , and no more . 
-- Mr. Stubb , Mr. Flask , come forward with me . '' 
`` He goes off in a huff . 
The whole he can endure ; at the parts he baulks . 
Now I do n't like this . 
I make a leg for Captain Ahab , and he wears it like a gentleman ; but I make a bandbox for Queequeg , and he wo n't put his head into it . 
Are all my pains to go for nothing with that coffin ? 
And now I 'm ordered to make a life-buoy of it . 
It 's like turning an old coat ; going to bring the flesh on the other side now . 
I do n't like this cobbling sort of business -- I do n't like it at all ; it 's undignified ; it 's not my place . 
Let tinkers ' brats do tinkerings ; we are their betters . 
I like to take in hand none but clean , virgin , fair-and-square mathematical jobs , something that regularly begins at the beginning , and is at the middle when midway , and comes to an end at the conclusion ; not a cobbler 's job , that 's at an end in the middle , and at the beginning at the end . 
It 's the old woman 's tricks to be giving cobbling jobs . 
Lord ! 
what an affection all old women have for tinkers . 
I know an old woman of sixty-five who ran away with a bald-headed young tinker once . 
And that 's the reason I never would work for lonely widow old women ashore when I kept my job-shop in the Vineyard ; they might have taken it into their lonely old heads to run off with me . 
But heigh-ho ! 
there are no caps at sea but snow-caps . 
Let me see . 
Nail down the lid ; caulk the seams ; pay over the same with pitch ; batten them down tight , and hang it with the snap-spring over the ship 's stern . 
Were ever such things done before with a coffin ? 
Some superstitious old carpenters , now , would be tied up in the rigging , ere they would do the job . 
But I 'm made of knotty Aroostook hemlock ; I do n't budge . 
Cruppered with a coffin ! 
Sailing about with a grave-yard tray ! 
But never mind . 
We workers in woods make bridal bedsteads and card-tables , as well as coffins and hearses . 
We work by the month , or by the job , or by the profit ; not for us to ask the why and wherefore of our work , unless it be too confounded cobbling , and then we stash it if we can . 
Hem ! 
I 'll do the job , now , tenderly . 
I 'll have me -- let 's see -- how many in the ship 's company , all told ? 
But I 've forgotten . 
Any way , I 'll have me thirty separate , Turk 's - headed life-lines , each three feet long hanging all round to the coffin . 
Then , if the hull go down , there 'll be thirty lively fellows all fighting for one coffin , a sight not seen very often beneath the sun ! 
Come hammer , caulking-iron , pitch-pot , and marling-spike ! 
Let 's to it . '' 
The Deck The coffin laid upon two line-tubs , between the vice-bench and the open hatchway ; the Carpenter caulking its seams ; the string of twisted oakum slowly unwinding from a large roll of it placed in the bosom of his frock . 
-- Ahab comes slowly from the cabin-gangway , and hears Pip following him . 
Back lad ; I will be with ye again presently . 
He goes ! 
Not this hand complies with my humor more genially than that boy . 
-- Middle aisle of a church ! 
What 's here ? '' 
`` Life-buoy , sir . 
Mr. Starbuck 's orders . 
Oh , look , sir ! 
Beware the hatchway ! '' 
`` Thank ye , man . 
Thy coffin lies handy to the vault . '' 
`` Sir ? 
The hatchway ? 
oh ! 
So it does , sir , so it does . '' 
`` Art not thou the leg-maker ? 
Look , did not this stump come from thy shop ? '' 
`` I believe it did , sir ; does the ferrule stand , sir ? '' 
`` Well enough . 
But art thou not also the undertaker ? '' 
`` Aye , sir ; I patched up this thing here as a coffin for Queequeg ; but they 've set me now to turning it into something else . '' 
`` Then tell me ; art thou not an arrant , all-grasping , intermeddling , monopolizing , heathenish old scamp , to be one day making legs , and the next day coffins to clap them in , and yet again life-buoys out of those same coffins ? 
Thou art as unprincipled as the gods , and as much of a jack-of-all-trades . '' 
`` But I do not mean anything , sir . 
I do as I do . '' 
`` The gods again . 
Hark ye , dost thou not ever sing working about a coffin ? 
The Titans , they say , hummed snatches when chipping out the craters for volcanoes ; and the grave-digger in the play sings , spade in hand . 
Dost thou never ? '' 
`` Sing , sir ? 
Do I sing ? 
Oh , I 'm indifferent enough , sir , for that ; but the reason why the grave-digger made music must have been because there was none in his spade , sir . 
But the caulking mallet is full of it . 
Hark to it . '' 
`` Aye , and that 's because the lid there 's a sounding-board ; and what in all things makes the sounding-board is this -- there 's naught beneath . 
And yet , a coffin with a body in it rings pretty much the same , Carpenter . 
Hast thou ever helped carry a bier , and heard the coffin knock against the churchyard gate , going in ? 
`` Faith , sir , I 've - '' `` Faith ? 
What 's that ? '' 
`` Why , faith , sir , it 's only a sort of exclamation-like -- that 's all , sir . '' 
`` Um , um ; go on . '' 
`` I was about to say , sir , that - '' `` Art thou a silk-worm ? 
Dost thou spin thy own shroud out of thyself ? 
Look at thy bosom ! 
Despatch ! 
and get these traps out of sight . '' 
`` He goes aft . 
That was sudden , now ; but squalls come sudden in hot latitudes . 
I 've heard that the Isle of Albermarle , one of the Gallipagos , is cut by the Equator right in the middle . 
Seems to me some sort of Equator cuts yon old man , too , right in his middle . 
He 's always under the Line -- fiery hot , I tell ye ! 
He 's looking this way -- come , oakum ; quick . 
Here we go again . 
This wooden mallet is the cork , and I 'm the professor of musical glasses -- tap , tap ! '' 
-LRB- Ahab to himself -RRB- `` There 's a sight ! 
There 's a sound ! 
The greyheaded wood-pecker tapping the hollow tree ! 
Blind and dumb might well be envied now . 
See ! 
that thing rests on two line-tubs , full of tow-lines . 
A most malicious wag , that fellow . 
Rat-tat ! 
So man 's seconds tick ! 
Oh ! 
how immaterial are all materials ! 
What things real are there , but imponderable thoughts ? 
Here now 's the very dreaded symbol of grim death , by a mere hap , made the expressive sign of the help and hope of most endangered life . 
A life-buoy of a coffin ! 
Does it go further ? 
Can it be that in some spiritual sense the coffin is , after all , but an immortality-preserver ! 
I 'll think of that . 
But no . 
So far gone am I in the dark side of earth , that its other side , the theoretic bright one , seems but uncertain twilight to me . 
Will ye never have done , Carpenter , with that accursed sound ? 
I go below ; let me not see that thing here when I return again . 
Now , then , Pip , we 'll talk this over ; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee ! 
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee ! '' 
The Pequod Meets The Rachel Next day , a large ship , the Rachel , was descried , bearing directly down upon the Pequod , all her spars thickly clustering with men . 
At the time the Pequod was making good speed through the water ; but as the broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her , the boastful sails all fell together as blank bladders that are burst , and all life fled from the smitten hull . 
`` Bad news ; she brings bad news , '' muttered the old Manxman . 
But ere her commander , who , with trumpet to mouth , stood up in his boat ; ere he could hopefully hail , Ahab 's voice was heard . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
`` Aye , yesterday . 
Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift ? '' 
Throttling his joy , Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question ; and would then have fain boarded the stranger , when the stranger captain himself , having stopped his vessel 's way , was seen descending her side . 
A few keen pulls , and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod 's main-chains , and he sprang to the deck . 
Immediately he was recognized by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew . 
But no formal salutation was exchanged . 
`` Where was he ? 
-- not killed ! 
-- not killed ! '' 
cried Ahab , closely advancing . 
`` How was it ? '' 
It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous , while three of the stranger 's boats were engaged with a shoal of whales , which had led them some four or five miles from the ship ; and while they were yet in swift chase to windward , the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the blue water , not very far to leeward ; whereupon , the fourth rigged boat -- a reserved one -- had been instantly lowered in chase . 
After a keen sail before the wind , this fourth boat -- the swiftest keeled of all -- seemed to have succeeded in fastening -- at least , as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything about it . 
In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat ; and then a swift gleam of bubbling white water ; and after that nothing more ; whence it was concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his pursuers , as often happens . 
There was some apprehension , but no positive alarm , as yet . 
The recall signals were placed in the rigging ; darkness came on ; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats -- ere going in quest of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction -- the ship had not only been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight , but , for the time , to increase her distance from it . 
But the rest of her crew being at last safe aboard , she crowded all sail -- stunsail on stunsail -- after the missing boat ; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon ; and every other man aloft on the look-out . 
But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen ; though she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her ; and not finding anything , had again dashed on ; again paused , and lowered her boats ; and though she had thus continued doing till daylight ; yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been seen . 
The story told , the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object in boarding the Pequod . 
He desired that ship to unite with his own in the search ; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart , on parallel lines , and so sweeping a double horizon , as it were . 
`` I will wager something now , '' whispered Stubb to Flask , `` that some one in that missing boat wore off that Captain 's best coat ; mayhap , his watch -- he 's so cursed anxious to get it back . 
Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season ? 
See , Flask , only see how pale he looks -- pale in the very buttons of his eyes -- look -- it was n't the coat -- it must have been the - '' `` My boy , my own boy is among them . 
For God 's sake -- I beg , I conjure '' -- here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab , who thus far had but icily received his petition . 
`` For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship -- I will gladly pay for it , and roundly pay for it -- if there be no other way -- for eight-and-forty hours only -- only that -- you must , oh , you must , and you shall do this thing . '' 
`` His son ! '' 
cried Stubb , `` oh , it 's his son he 's lost ! 
I take back the coat and watch -- what says Ahab ? 
We must save that boy . '' 
`` He 's drowned with the rest on 'em , last night , '' said the old Manx sailor standing behind them ; `` I heard ; all of ye heard their spirits . '' 
Now , as it shortly turned out , what made this incident of the Rachel 's the more melancholy , was the circumstance , that not only was one of the Captain 's sons among the number of the missing boat 's crew ; but among the number of the other boats ' crews , at the same time , but on the other hand , separated from the ship during the dark vicissitudes of the chase , there had been still another son ; as that for a time , the wretched father was plunged to the bottom of the cruellest perplexity ; which was only solved for him by his chief mate 's instinctively adopting the ordinary procedure of a whaleship in such emergencies , that is , when placed between jeopardized but divided boats , always to pick up the majority first . 
But the captain , for some unknown constitutional reason , had refrained from mentioning all this , and not till forced to it by Ahab 's iciness did he allude to his one yet missing boy ; a little lad , but twelve years old , whose father with the earnest but unmisgiving hardihood of a Nantucketer 's paternal love , had thus early sought to initiate him in the perils and wonders of a vocation almost immemorially the destiny of all his race . 
Nor does it unfrequently occur , that Nantucket captains will send a son of such tender age away from them , for a protracted three or four years ' voyage in some other ship than their own ; so that their first knowledge of a whaleman 's career shall be unenervated by any chance display of a father 's natural but untimely partiality , or undue apprehensiveness and concern . 
Meantime , now the stranger was still beseeching his poor boon of Ahab ; and Ahab still stood like an anvil , receiving every shock , but without the least quivering of his own . 
`` I will not go , '' said the stranger , `` till you say aye to me . 
Do to me as you would have me do to you in the like case . 
For you too have a boy , Captain Ahab -- though but a child , and nestling safely at home now -- a child of your old age too -- Yes , yes , you relent ; I see it -- run , run , men , now , and stand by to square in the yards . '' 
`` Avast , '' cried Ahab -- `` touch not a rope-yarn '' ; then in a voice that prolongingly moulded every word -- `` Captain Gardiner , I will not do it . 
Even now I lose time , Good-bye , good-bye . 
God bless ye , man , and may I forgive myself , but I must go . 
Mr. Starbuck , look at the binnacle watch , and in three minutes from this present instant warn off all strangers ; then brace forward again , and let the ship sail as before . '' 
Hurriedly turning , with averted face , he descended into his cabin , leaving the strange captain transfixed at this unconditional and utter rejection of his so earnest suit . 
But starting from his enchantment , Gardiner silently hurried to the side ; more fell than stepped into his boat , and returned to his ship . 
Soon the two ships diverged their wakes ; and long as the strange vessel was in view , she was seen to yaw hither and thither at every dark spot , however small , on the sea . 
This way and that her yards were swung around ; starboard and larboard , she continued to tack ; now she beat against a head sea ; and again it pushed her before it ; while all the while , her masts and yards were thickly clustered with men , as three tall cherry trees , when the boys are cherrying among the boughs . 
But by her still halting course and winding , woeful way , you plainly saw that this ship that so wept with spray , still remained without comfort . 
She was Rachel , weeping for her children , because they were not . 
The Cabin -LRB- Ahab moving to go on deck ; Pip catches him by the hand to follow . -RRB- 
Lad , lad , I tell thee thou must not follow Ahab now . 
The hour is coming when Ahab would not scare thee from him , yet would not have thee by him . 
There is that in thee , poor lad , which I feel too curing to my malady . 
Like cures like ; and for this hunt , my malady becomes my most desired health . 
Do thou abide below here , where they shall serve thee , as if thou wert the captain . 
Aye , lad , thou shalt sit here in my own screwed chair ; another screw to it , thou must be . '' 
`` No , no , no ! 
ye have not a whole body , sir ; do ye but use poor me for your one lost leg ; only tread upon me , sir ; I ask no more , so I remain a part of ye . '' 
`` Oh ! 
spite of million villains , this makes me a bigot in the fadeless fidelity of man ! 
-- and a black ! 
and crazy ! 
-- but methinks like-cures-like applies to him too ; he grows so sane again . '' 
`` They tell me , sir , that Stubb did once desert poor little Pip , whose drowned bones now show white , for all the blackness of his living skin . 
But I will never desert ye , sir , as Stubb did him . 
Sir , I must go with ye . '' 
`` If thou speakest thus to me much more , Ahab 's purpose keels up in him . 
I tell thee no ; it can not be . '' 
`` Oh good master , master , master ! 
`` Weep so , and I will murder thee ! 
have a care , for Ahab too is mad . 
Listen , and thou wilt often hear my ivory foot upon the deck , and still know that I am there . 
And now I quit thee . 
Thy hand ! 
-- Met ! 
True art thou , lad , as the circumference to its centre . 
So : God for ever bless thee ; and if it come to that , -- God for ever save thee , let what will befall . '' 
-LRB- Ahab goes ; Pip steps one step forward . -RRB- 
`` Here he this instant stood , I stand in his air , -- but I 'm alone . 
Now were even poor Pip here I could endure it , but he 's missing . 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
Ding , dong , ding ! 
Who 's seen Pip ? 
He must be up here ; let 's try the door . 
What ? 
neither lock , nor bolt , nor bar ; and yet there 's no opening it . 
It must be the spell ; he told me to stay here : Aye , and told me this screwed chair was mine . 
Here , then , I 'll seat me , against the transom , in the ship 's full middle , all her keel and her three masts before me . 
Here , our old sailors say , in their black seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table , and lord it over rows of captains and lieutenants . 
Ha ! 
what 's this ? 
epaulets ! 
epaulets ! 
the epaulets all come crowding . 
Pass round the decanters ; glad to see ye ; fill up , monsieurs ! 
What an odd feeling , now , when a black boy 's host to white men with gold lace upon their coats ! 
-- Monsieurs , have ye seen one Pip ? 
-- a little negro lad , five feet high , hang-dog look , and cowardly ! 
Jumped from a whale-boat once ; -- seen him ? 
No ! 
Well then , fill up again , captains , and let 's drink shame upon all cowards ! 
I name no names . 
Shame upon them ! 
Put one foot upon the table . 
Shame upon all cowards . 
-- Hist ! 
above there , I hear ivory -- Oh , master ! 
master ! 
I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me . 
But here I 'll stay , though this stern strikes rocks ; and they bulge through ; and oysters come to join me . '' 
The Hat And now that at the proper time and place , after so long and wide a preliminary cruise , Ahab , -- all other whaling waters swept -- seemed to have chased his foe into an oceanfold , to slay him the more securely there ; now , that he found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting wound had been inflicted ; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick ; -- and now that all his successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters , whether sinning or sinned against ; now it was that there lurked a something in the old man 's eyes , which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see . 
As the unsetting polar star , which through the livelong , arctic , six months ' night sustains its piercing , steady , central gaze ; so Ahab 's purpose now fixedly gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew . 
It domineered above them so , that all their bodings , doubts , misgivings , fears , were fain to hide beneath their souls , and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf . 
In this foreshadowing interval , too , all humor , forced or natural , vanished . 
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile ; Starbuck no more strove to check one . 
Alike , joy and sorrow , hope and fear , seemed ground to finest dust , and powdered , for the time , in the clamped mortar of Ahab 's iron soul . 
Like machines , they dumbly moved about the deck , ever conscious that the old man 's despot eye was on them . 
But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours when he thought no glance but one was on him ; then you would have seen that even as Ahab 's eyes so awed the crew 's , the inscrutable Parsee 's glance awed his ; or somehow , at least , in some wild way , at times affected it . 
Such an added , gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now ; such ceaseless shudderings shook him ; that the men looked dubious at him ; half uncertain , as it seemed , whether indeed he were a mortal substance , or else a tremulous shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being 's body . 
And that shadow was always hovering there . 
For not by night , even , had Fedallah ever certainly been known to slumber , or go below . 
He would stand still for hours : but never sat or leaned ; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say -- We two watchmen never rest . 
Nor , at any time , by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck , unless Ahab was before them ; either standing in his pivot-hole , or exactly pacing the planks between two undeviating limits , -- the main-mast and the mizen ; or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle , -- his living foot advanced upon the deck , as if to step ; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes ; so that however motionless he stood , however the days and nights were added on , that he had not swung in his hammock ; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat , they could never tell unerringly whether , for all this , his eyes were really closed at times ; or whether he was still intently scanning them ; no matter , though he stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch , and the unheeded night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat . 
The clothes that the night had wet , the next day 's sunshine dried upon him ; and so , day after day , and night after night ; he went no more beneath the planks ; whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for . 
He ate in the same open air ; that is , his two only meals , -- breakfast and dinner : supper he never touched ; nor reaped his beard ; which darkly grew all gnarled , as unearthed roots of trees blown over , which still grow idly on at naked base , though perished in the upper verdure . 
But though his whole life was now become one watch on deck ; and though the Parsee 's mystic watch was without intermission as his own ; yet these two never seemed to speak -- one man to the other -- unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it necessary . 
Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain ; openly , and to the awe-struck crew , they seemed pole-like asunder . 
If by day they chanced to speak one word ; by night , dumb men were both , so far as concerned the slightest verbal interchange . 
At times , for longest hours , without a single hail , they stood far parted in the starlight ; Ahab in his scuttle , the Parsee by the main-mast ; but still fixedly gazing upon each other ; as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow , in Ahab the Parsee his abandoned substance . 
And yet , somehow , did Ahab -- in his own proper self , as daily , hourly , and every instant , commandingly revealed to his subordinates , -- Ahab seemed an independent lord ; the Parsee but his slave . 
Still again both seemed yoked together , and an unseen tyrant driving them ; the lean shade siding the solid rib . 
For be this Parsee what he may , all rib and keel was solid Ahab . 
At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn , his iron voice was heard from aft , -- `` Man the mast-heads ! '' 
-- and all through the day , till after sunset and after twilight , the same voice every hour , at the striking of the helmsman 's bell , was heard -- `` What d'ye see ? 
-- sharp ! 
sharp ! 
sharp ! '' 
But when three or four days had slided by , after meeting the children-seeking Rachel ; and no spout had yet been seen ; the monomaniac old man seemed distrustful of his crew 's fidelity ; at least , of nearly all except the Pagan harpooneers ; he seemed to doubt , even , whether Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook the sight he sought . 
But if these suspicions were really his , he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them , however his actions might seem to hint them . 
`` I will have the first sight of the whale myself , '' -- he said . 
`` Aye ! 
Ahab must have the doubloon ! 
and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed bowlines ; and sending a hand aloft , with a single sheaved block , to secure to the mainmast head , he received the two ends of the downwardreeved rope ; and attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end , in order to fasten it at the rail . 
This done , with that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin , he looked round upon his crew , sweeping from one to the other ; pausing his glance long upon Daggoo , Queequeg , Tashtego ; but shunning Fedallah ; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate , said , -- `` Take the rope , sir -- I give it into thy hands , Starbuck . '' 
Then arranging his person in the basket , he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch , Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last ; and afterwards stood near it . 
And thus , with one hand clinging round the royal mast , Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles , -- ahead astern , this side , and that , -- within the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height . 
When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the rigging , which chances to afford no foothold , the sailor at sea is hoisted up to that spot , and sustained there by the rope ; under these circumstances , its fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has the special watch of it . 
Because in such a wilderness of running rigging , whose various different relations aloft can not always be infallibly discerned by what is seen of them at the deck ; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings , it would be but a natural fatality , if , unprovided with a constant watchman , the hoisted sailor should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping to the sea . 
So Ahab 's proceedings in this matter were not unusual ; the only strange thing about them seemed to be , that Starbuck , almost the one only man who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree approaching to decision -- one of those too , whose faithfulness on the look-out he had seemed to doubt somewhat ; it was strange , that this was the very man he should select for his watchman ; freely giving his whole life into such an otherwise distrusted person 's hands . 
Now , the first time Ahab was perched aloft ; ere he had been there ten minutes ; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes ; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably swift circlings . 
Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air ; then spiralized downwards , and went eddying again round his head . 
But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon , Ahab seemed not to mark this wild bird ; nor , indeed , would any one else have marked it much , it being no uncommon circumstance ; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight . 
`` Your hat , your hat , sir ! '' 
suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman , who being posted at the mizen-mast-head , stood directly behind Ahab , though somewhat lower than his level , and with a deep gulf of air dividing them . 
But already the sable wing was before the old man 's eyes ; the long hooked bill at his head : with a scream , the black hawk darted away with his prize . 
An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin 's head , removing his cap to replace it , and thereupon Tanaquil , his wife , declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome . 
But only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good . 
Ahab 's hat was never restored ; the wild hawk flew on and on with it ; far in advance of the prow : and at last disappeared ; while from the point of that disappearance , a minute black spot was dimly discerned , falling from that vast height into the sea . 
The Pequod Meets The Delight The intense Pequod sailed on ; the rolling waves and days went by ; the life-buoy-coffin still lightly swung ; and another ship , most miserably misnamed the Delight , was descried . 
As she drew nigh , all eyes were fixed upon her broad beams , called shears , which , in some whaling-ships , cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or nine feet ; serving to carry the spare , unrigged , or disabled boats . 
Upon the stranger 's shears were beheld the shattered , white ribs , and some few splintered planks , of what had once been a whale-boat ; but you now saw through this wreck , as plainly as you see through the peeled , half-unhinged , and bleaching skeleton of a horse . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
`` Look ! '' 
replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail ; and with his trumpet he pointed to the wreck . 
`` Hast killed him ? '' 
`` The harpoon is not yet forged that will ever will do that , '' answered the other , sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on the deck , whose gathered sides some noiseless sailors were busy in sewing together . 
`` Not forged ! '' 
and snatching Perth 's levelled iron from the crotch , Ahab held it out , exclaiming -- `` Look ye , Nantucketer ; here in this hand I hold his death ! 
Tempered in blood , and tempered by lightning are these barbs ; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot place behind the fin , where the White Whale most feels his accursed life ! '' 
`` Then God keep thee , old man -- see ` st thou that '' -- pointing to the hammock -- `` I bury but one of five stout men , who were alive only yesterday ; but were dead ere night . 
Only that one I bury ; the rest were buried before they died ; you sail upon their tomb . '' 
Then turning to his crew -- `` Are ye ready there ? 
place the plank then on the rail , and lift the body ; so , then -- Oh ! 
God '' -- advancing towards the hammock with uplifted hands -- `` may the resurrection and the life - '' `` Brace forward ! 
Up helm ! '' 
cried Ahab like lightning to his men . 
But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape the sound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea ; not so quick , indeed , but that some of the flying bubbles might have sprinkled her hull with their ghostly baptism . 
As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight , the strange life-buoy hanging at the Pequod 's stern came into conspicuous relief . 
`` Ha ! 
yonder ! 
look yonder , men ! '' 
cried a foreboding voice in her wake . 
`` In vain , oh , ye strangers , ye fly our sad burial ; ye but turn us your taffrail to show us your coffin ! '' 
The Symphony It was a clear steel-blue day . 
The firmaments of air and sea were hardly separable in that all-pervading azure ; only , the pensive air was transparently pure and soft , with a woman 's look , and the robust and man-like sea heaved with long , strong , lingering swells , as Samson 's chest in his sleep . 
Hither , and thither , on high , glided the snow-white wings of small , unspeckled birds ; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air ; but to and fro in the deeps , far down in the bottomless blue , rushed mighty leviathans , sword-fish , and sharks ; and these were the strong , troubled , murderous thinkings of the masculine sea . 
But though thus contrasting within , the contrast was only in shades and shadows without ; those two seemed one ; it was only the sex , as it were , that distinguished them . 
Aloft , like a royal czar and king , the sun seemed giving this gentle air to this bold and rolling sea ; even as bride to groom . 
And at the girdling line of the horizon , a soft and tremulous motion -- most seen here at the Equator -- denoted the fond , throbbing trust , the loving alarms , with which the poor bride gave her bosom away . 
Tied up and twisted ; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles ; haggardly firm and unyielding ; his eyes glowing like coals , that still glow in the ashes of ruin ; untottering Ahab stood forth in the clearness of the morn ; lifting his splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl 's forehead of heaven . 
Oh , immortal infancy , and innocency of the azure ! 
Invisible winged creatures that frolic all round us ! 
Sweet childhood of air and sky ! 
how oblivious were ye of old Ahab 's close-coiled woe ! 
But so have I seen little Miriam and Martha , laughing-eyed elves , heedlessly gambol around their old sire ; sporting with the circle of singed locks which grew on the marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain . 
Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle , Ahab leaned over the side and watched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze , the more and the more that he strove to pierce the profundity . 
But the lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel , for a moment , the cankerous thing in his soul . 
That glad , happy air , that winsome sky , did at last stroke and caress him ; the step-mother world , so long cruel -- forbidding -- now threw affectionate arms round his stubborn neck , and did seem to joyously sob over him , as if over one , that however wilful and erring , she could yet find it in her heart to save and to bless . 
From beneath his slouched hat Ahab dropped a tear into the sea ; nor did all the Pacific contain such wealth as that one wee drop . 
Starbuck saw the old man ; saw him , how he heavily leaned over the side ; and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless sobbing that stole out of the centre of the serenity around . 
Careful not to touch him , or be noticed by him , he yet drew near to him , and stood there . 
Ahab turned . 
`` Starbuck ! '' 
`` Sir . '' 
`` Oh , Starbuck ! 
it is a mild , mild wind , and a mild looking sky . 
On such a day -- very much such a sweetness as this -- I struck my first whale -- a boy-harpooneer of eighteen ! 
Forty -- forty -- forty years ago ! 
-- ago ! 
Forty years of continual whaling ! 
forty years of privation , and peril , and storm-time ! 
forty years on the pitiless sea ! 
for forty years has Ahab forsaken the peaceful land , for forty years to make war on the horrors of the deep ! 
Aye and yes , Starbuck , out of those forty years I have not spent three ashore . 
When I think of this life I have led ; the desolation of solitude it has been ; the masoned , walled-town of a Captain 's exclusiveness , which admits but small entrance to any sympathy from the green country without -- oh , weariness ! 
heaviness ! 
Guinea-coast slavery of solitary command ! 
-- when I think of all this ; only half-suspected , not so keenly known to me before -- and how for forty years I have fed upon dry salted fare -- fit emblem of the dry nourishment of my soul ! 
-- when the poorest landsman has had fresh fruit to his daily hand , and broken the world 's fresh bread to my mouldy crusts -- away , whole oceans away , from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty , and sailed for Cape Horn the next day , leaving but one dent in my marriage pillow -- wife ? 
wife ? 
-- rather a widow with her husband alive ? 
Aye , I widowed that poor girl when I married her , Starbuck ; and then , the madness , the frenzy , the boiling blood and the smoking brow , with which , for a thousand lowerings old Ahab has furiously , foamingly chased his prey -- more a demon than a man ! 
-- aye , aye ! 
what a forty years ' fool -- fool -- old fool , has old Ahab been ! 
Why this strife of the chase ? 
why weary , and palsy the arm at the oar , and the iron , and the lance ? 
how the richer or better is Ahab now ? 
Behold . 
Oh , Starbuck ! 
is it not hard , that with this weary load I bear , one poor leg should have been snatched from under me ? 
Here , brush this old hair aside ; it blinds me , that I seem to weep . 
Locks so grey did never grow but from out some ashes ! 
But do I look very old , so very , very old , Starbuck ? 
I feel deadly faint , bowed , and humped , as though I were Adam , staggering beneath the piled centuries since Paradise . 
God ! 
God ! 
God ! 
-- crack my heart ! 
-- stave my brain ! 
-- mockery ! 
mockery ! 
bitter , biting mockery of grey hairs , have I lived enough joy to wear ye ; and seem and feel thus intolerably old ? 
Close ! 
stand close to me , Starbuck ; let me look into a human eye ; it is better than to gaze into sea or sky ; better than to gaze upon God . 
By the green land ; by the bright hearthstone ! 
this is the magic glass , man ; I see my wife and my child in thine eye . 
No , no ; stay on board , on board ! 
-- lower not when I do ; when branded Ahab gives chase to Moby Dick . 
That hazard shall not be thine . 
No , no ! 
not with the far away home I see in that eye ! '' 
`` Oh , my Captain ! 
my Captain ! 
noble soul ! 
grand old heart , after all ! 
why should any one give chase to that hated fish ! 
Away with me ! 
let us fly these deadly waters ! 
let us home ! 
Wife and child , too , are Starbuck 's -- wife and child of his brotherly , sisterly , play-fellow youth ; even as thine , sir , are the wife and child of thy loving , longing , paternal old age ! 
Away ! 
let us away ! 
-- this instant let me alter the course ! 
How cheerily , how hilariously , O my Captain , would we bowl on our way to see old Nantucket again ! 
I think , sir , they have some such mild blue days , even as this , in Nantucket . '' 
`` They have , they have . 
I have seen them -- some summer days in the morning . 
About this time -- yes , it is his noon nap now -- the boy vivaciously wakes ; sits up in bed ; and his mother tells him of me , of cannibal old me ; how I am abroad upon the deep , but will yet come back to dance him again . '' '' 
'T is my Mary , my Mary herself ! 
She promised that my boy , every morning , should be carried to the hill to catch the first glimpse of his father 's sail ! 
Yes , yes ! 
no more ! 
it is done ! 
we head for Nantucket ! 
Come , my Captain , study out the course , and let us away ! 
See , see ! 
the boy 's face from the window ! 
the boy 's hand on the hill ! '' 
But Ahab 's glance was averted ; like a blighted fruit tree he shook , and cast his last , cindered apple to the soil . 
`` What is it , what nameless , inscrutable , unearthly thing is it ; what cozening , hidden lord and master , and cruel , remorseless emperor commands me ; that against all natural lovings and longings , I so keep pushing , and crowding , and jamming myself on all the time ; recklessly making me ready to do what in my own proper , natural heart , I durst not so much as dare ? 
Is Ahab , Ahab ? 
Is it I , God , or who , that lifts this arm ? 
But if the great sun move not of himself ; but is as an errand-boy in heaven ; nor one single star can revolve , but by some invisible power ; how then can this one small heart beat ; this one small brain think thoughts ; unless God does that beating , does that thinking , does that living , and not I. By heaven , man , we are turned round and round in this world , like yonder windlass , and Fate is the handspike . 
And all the time , lo ! 
that smiling sky , and this unsounded sea ! 
Look ! 
see yon Albicore ! 
who put it into him to chase and fang that flying-fish ? 
Where do murderers go , man ! 
Who 's to doom , when the judge himself is dragged to the bar ? 
But it is a mild , mild wind , and a mild looking sky ; and the airs smells now , as if it blew from a far-away meadow ; they have been making hay somewhere under the slopes of the Andes , Starbuck , and the mowers are sleeping among the new-mown hay . 
Sleeping ? 
Aye , toil we how we may , we all sleep at last on the field . 
Sleep ? 
Aye , and rust amid greenness ; as last year 's scythes flung down , and left in the half-cut swarths -- Starbuck ! '' 
But blanched to a corpse 's hue with despair , the Mate had stolen away . 
Ahab crossed the deck to gaze over on the other side ; but started at two reflected , fixed eyes in the water there , Fedallah was motionlessly leaning over the same rail . 
The Chase - First Day That night , in the mid-watch when the old man -- as his wont at intervals -- stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned , and went to his pivot-hole , he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely , snuffing up the sea air as a sagacious ship 's dog will , in drawing nigh to some barbarous isle . 
He declared that a whale must be near . 
Soon that peculiar odor , sometimes to a great distance given forth by the living sperm whale , was palpable to all the watch ; nor was any mariner surprised when , after inspecting the compass , and then the dog-vane , and then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as nearly as possible , Ahab rapidly ordered the ship 's course to be slightly altered , and the sail to be shortened . 
The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently vindicated at daybreak , by the sight of a long sleek on the sea directly and lengthwise ahead , smooth as oil , and resembling in the pleated watery wrinkles bordering it , the polished metallic-like marks of some swift tide-rip , at the mouth of a deep , rapid stream . 
`` Man the mast-heads ! 
Call all hands ! '' 
Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the forecastle deck , Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps that they seemed to exhale from the scuttle , so instantaneously did they appear with their clothes in their hands . 
`` What d'ye see ? '' 
cried Ahab , flattening his face to the sky . 
`` Nothing , nothing sir ! '' 
was the sound hailing down in reply . 
`` T'gallant sails ! 
-- stunsails ! 
alow and aloft , and on both sides ! '' 
All sail being set , he now cast loose the life-line , reserved for swaying him to the main royal-mast head ; and in a few moments they were hoisting him thither , when , while but two thirds of the way aloft , and while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy between the main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail , he raised a gull-like cry in the air . 
`` There she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
A hump like a snow-hill ! 
It is Moby Dick ! '' 
Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the three look-outs , the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famous whale they had so long been pursuing . 
Ahab had now gained his final perch , some feet above the other look-outs , Tashtego standing just beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast , so that the Indian 's head was almost on a level with Ahab 's heel . 
From this height the whale was now seen some mile or so ahead , at every roll of the sea revealing his high sparkling hump , and regularly jetting his silent spout into the air . 
To the credulous mariners it seemed the same silent spout they had so long ago beheld in the moonlit Atlantic and Indian Oceans . 
`` And did none of ye see it before ? '' 
cried Ahab , hailing the perched men all around him . 
`` I saw him almost that same instant , sir , that Captain Ahab did , and I cried out , '' said Tashtego . 
`` Not the same instant ; not the same -- no , the doubloon is mine , Fate reserved the doubloon for me . 
I only ; none of ye could have raised the White Whale first . 
There she blows ! 
there she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
-- there she blows ! 
There again ! 
-- there again ! '' 
he cried , in long-drawn , lingering , methodic tones , attuned to the gradual prolongings of the whale 's visible jets . 
`` He 's going to sound ! 
In stunsails ! 
Down top-gallant-sails ! 
Stand by three boats . 
Mr. Starbuck , remember , stay on board , and keep the ship . 
Helm there ! 
Luff , luff a point ! 
So ; steady , man , steady ! 
There go flukes ! 
No , no ; only black water ! 
All ready the boats there ? 
Stand by , stand by ! 
Lower me , Mr. Starbuck ; lower , lower , -- quick , quicker ! '' 
and he slid through the air to the deck . 
`` He is heading straight to leeward , sir , '' cried Stubb , `` right away from us ; can not have seen the ship yet . '' 
`` Be dumb , man ! 
Stand by the braces ! 
Hard down the helm ! 
-- brace up ! 
Shiver her ! 
-- shiver her ! 
-- So ; well that ! 
Boats , boats ! '' 
Soon all the boats but Starbuck 's were dropped ; all the boat-sails set -- all the paddles plying ; with rippling swiftness , shooting to leeward ; and Ahab heading the onset . 
A pale , death-glimmer lit up Fedallah 's sunken eyes ; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth . 
Like noiseless nautilus shells , their light prows sped through the sea ; but only slowly they neared the foe . 
As they neared him , the ocean grew still more smooth ; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves ; seemed a noon-meadow , so serenely it spread . 
At length the breathless hunter came so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey , that his entire dazzling hump was distinctly visible , sliding along the sea as if an isolated thing , and continually set in a revolving ring of finest , fleecy , greenish foam . 
He saw the vast , involved wrinkles of the slightly projecting head beyond . 
Before it , far out on the soft Turkish-rugged waters , went the glistening white shadow from his broad , milky forehead , a musical rippling playfully accompanying the shade ; and behind , the blue waters interchangeably flowed over into the moving valley of his steady wake ; and on either hand bright bubbles arose and danced by his side . 
But these were broken again by the light toes of hundreds of gay fowls softly feathering the sea , alternate with their fitful flight ; and like to some flag-staff rising from the painted hull of an argosy , the tall but shattered pole of a recent lance projected from the white whale 's back ; and at intervals one of the cloud of soft-toed fowls hovering , and to and fro skimming like a canopy over the fish , silently perched and rocked on this pole , the long tail feathers streaming like pennons . 
A gentle joyousness -- a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness , invested the gliding whale . 
Not the white bull Jupiter swimming away with ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns ; his lovely , leering eyes sideways intent upon the maid ; with smooth bewitching fleetness , rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete ; not Jove , not that great majesty Supreme ! 
did surpass the glorified White Whale as he so divinely swam . 
On each soft side -- coincident with the parted swell , that but once leaving him then flowed so wide away -- on each bright side , the whale shed off enticings . 
No wonder there had been some among the hunters who namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity , had ventured to assail it ; but had fatally found that quietude but the vesture of tornadoes . 
Yet calm , enticing calm , oh , whale ! 
thou glidest on , to all who for the first time eye thee , no matter how many in that same way thou mayst have bejuggled and destroyed before . 
And thus , through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea , among waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture , Moby Dick moved on , still withholding from sight the full terrors of his submerged trunk , entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw . 
But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water ; for an instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch , like Virginia 's Natural Bridge , and warningly waving his bannered flukes in the air , the grand god revealed himself , sounded and went out of sight . 
Hoveringly halting , and dipping on the wing , the white sea-fowls longingly lingered over the agitated pool that he left . 
With oars apeak , and paddles down , the sheets of their sails adrift , the three boats now stilly floated , awaiting Moby Dick 's reappearance . 
`` An hour , '' said Ahab , standing rooted in his boat 's stern ; and he gazed beyond the whale 's place , towards the dim blue spaces and wide wooing vacancies to leeward . 
It was only an instant ; for again his eyes seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle . 
The breeze now freshened ; the sea began to swell . 
`` The birds ! 
-- the birds ! '' 
cried Tashtego . 
In long Indian file , as when herons take wing , the white birds were now all flying towards Ahab 's boat ; and when within a few yards began fluttering over the water there , wheeling round and round , with joyous , expectant cries . 
Their vision was keener than man 's ; Ahab could discover no sign in the sea . 
But suddenly as he peered down and down into its depths , he profoundly saw a white living spot no bigger than a white weasel , with wonderful celerity uprising , and magnifying as it rose , till it turned , and then there were plainly revealed two long crooked rows of white , glistening teeth , floating up from the undiscoverable bottom . 
It was Moby Dick 's open mouth and scrolled jaw ; his vast , shadowed bulk still half blending with the blue of the sea . 
The glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat like an open-doored marble tomb ; and giving one sidelong sweep with his steering oar , Ahab whirled the craft aside from this tremendous apparition . 
Then , calling upon Fedallah to change places with him , went forward to the bows , and seizing Perth 's harpoon , commanded his crew to grasp their oars and stand by to stern . 
Now , by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis , its bow , by anticipation , was made to face the whale 's head while yet under water . 
But as if perceiving this stratagem , Moby Dick , with that malicious intelligence ascribed to him , sidelingly transplanted himself , as it were , in an instant , shooting his pleated head lengthwise beneath the boat . 
Through and through ; through every plank and each rib , it thrilled for an instant , the whale obliquely lying on his back , in the manner of a biting shark slowly and feelingly taking its bows full within his mouth , so that the long , narrow , scrolled lower jaw curled high up into the open air , and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock . 
The bluish pearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of Ahab 's head , and reached higher than that . 
In this attitude the White Whale now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse . 
With unastonished eyes Fedallah gazed , and crossed his arms ; but the tiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other 's heads to gain the uttermost stern . 
And now , while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out , as the whale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way ; and from his body being submerged beneath the boat , he could not be darted at from the bows , for the bows were almost inside of him , as it were ; and while the other boats involuntarily paused , as before a quick crisis impossible to withstand , then it was that monomaniac Ahab , furious with this tantalizing vicinity of his foe , which placed him all alive and helpless in the very jaws he hated ; frenzied with all this , he seized the long bone with his naked hands , and wildly strove to wrench it from its gripe . 
As now he thus vainly strove , the jaw slipped from him ; the frail gunwales bent in , collapsed , and snapped , as both jaws , like an enormous shears , sliding further aft , bit the craft completely in twain , and locked themselves fast again in the sea , midway between the two floating wrecks . 
These floated aside , the broken ends drooping , the crew at the stern-wreck clinging to the gunwales , and striving to hold fast to the oars to lash them across . 
At that preluding moment , ere the boat was yet snapped , Ahab , the first to perceive the whale 's intent , by the crafty upraising of his head , a movement that loosed his hold for the time ; at that moment his hand had made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite . 
But only slipping further into the whale 's mouth , and tilting over sideways as it slipped , the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw ; spilled him out of it , as he leaned to the push ; and so he fell flat-faced upon the sea . 
Ripplingly withdrawing from his prey , Moby Dick now lay at a little distance , vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and down in the billows ; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindled body ; so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose -- some twenty or more feet out of the water -- the now rising swells , with all their confluent waves , dazzlingly broke against it ; vindictively tossing their shivered spray still higher into the air . 
* So , in a gale , the but half baffled Channel billows only recoil from the base of the Eddystone , triumphantly to overleap its summit with their scud . 
* This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale . 
It receives its designation -LRB- pitchpoling -RRB- from its being likened to that preliminary up-and-down poise of the whale-lance , in the exercise called pitchpoling , previously described . 
By this motion the whale must best and most comprehensively view whatever objects may be encircling him . 
But soon resuming his horizontal attitude , Moby Dick swam swiftly round and round the wrecked crew ; sideways churning the water in his vengeful wake , as if lashing himself up to still another and more deadly assault . 
The sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden him , as the blood of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus 's elephants in the book of Maccabees . 
Meanwhile Ahab half smothered in the foam of the whale 's insolent tail , and too much of a cripple to swim , -- though he could still keep afloat , even in the heart of such a whirlpool as that ; helpless Ahab 's head was seen , like a tossed bubble which the least chance shock might burst . 
From the boat 's fragmentary stern , Fedallah incuriously and mildly eyed him ; the clinging crew , at the other drifting end , could not succor him ; more than enough was it for them to look to themselves . 
For so revolvingly appalling was the White Whale 's aspect , and so planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made , that he seemed horizontally swooping upon them . 
And though the other boats , unharmed , still hovered hard by ; still they dared not pull into the eddy to strike , lest that should be the signal for the instant destruction of the jeopardized castaways , Ahab and all ; nor in that case could they themselves hope to escape . 
With straining eyes , then , they remained on the outer edge of the direful zone , whose centre had now become the old man 's head . 
Meantime , from the beginning all this had been descried from the ship 's mast heads ; and squaring her yards , she had borne down upon the scene ; and was now so nigh , that Ahab in the water hailed her ! 
-- `` Sail on the '' -- but that moment a breaking sea dashed on him from Moby Dick , and whelmed him for the time . 
But struggling out of it again , and chancing to rise on a towering crest , he shouted , -- `` Sail on the whale ! 
-- Drive him off ! '' 
The Pequod 's prows were pointed - , and breaking up the charmed circle , she effectually parted the white whale from his victim . 
As he sullenly swam off , the boats flew to the rescue . 
Dragged into Stubb 's boat with blood-shot , blinded eyes , the white brine caking in his wrinkles ; the long tension of Ahab 's bodily strength did crack , and helplessly he yielded to his body 's doom for a time , lying all crushed in the bottom of Stubb 's boat , like one trodden under foot of herds of elephants . 
Far inland , nameless wails came from him , as desolate sounds from out ravines . 
But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much the more abbreviate it . 
In an instant 's compass , great hearts sometimes condense to one deep pang , the sum total of those shallow pains kindly diffused through feebler men 's whole lives . 
And so , such hearts , though summary in each one suffering ; still , if the gods decree it , in their life-time aggregate a whole age of woe , wholly made up of instantaneous intensities ; for even in their pointless centres , those noble natures contain the entire circumferences of inferior souls . 
`` The harpoon , '' said Ahab , half way rising , and draggingly leaning on one bended arm -- `` is it safe ? '' 
`` Aye , sir , for it was not darted ; this is it , '' said Stubb , showing it . 
`` Lay it before me ; -- any missing men ? '' 
`` One , two , three , four , five ; -- there were five oars , sir , and here are five men . '' 
`` That 's good . 
-- Help me , man ; I wish to stand . 
So , so , I see him ! 
there ! 
there ! 
going to leeward still ; what a leaping spout ! 
-- Hands off from me ! 
The eternal sap runs up in Ahab 's bones again ! 
Set the sail ; out oars ; the helm ! '' 
It is often the case that when a boat is stove , its crew , being picked up by another boat , help to work that second boat ; and the chase is thus continued with what is called double-banked oars . 
It was thus now . 
But the added power of the boat did not equal the added power of the whale , for he seemed to have treble-banked his every fin ; swimming with a velocity which plainly showed , that if now , under these circumstances , pushed on , the chase would prove an indefinitely prolonged , if not a hopeless one ; nor could any crew endure for so long a period , such an unintermitted , intense straining at the oar ; a thing barely tolerable only in some one brief vicissitude . 
The ship itself , then , as it sometimes happens , offered the most promising intermediate means of overtaking the chase . 
Accordingly , the boats now made for her , and were soon swayed up to their cranes -- the two parts of the wrecked boat having been previously secured by her -- and then hoisting everything to her side , and stacking her canvas high up , and sideways outstretching it with stunsails , like the double-jointed wings of an albatross ; the Pequod bore down in the leeward wake of Moby Dick . 
At the well known , methodic intervals , the whale 's glittering spout was regularly announced from the manned mast-heads ; and when he would be reported as just gone down , Ahab would take the time , and then pacing the deck , binnacle-watch in hand , so soon as the last second of the allotted hour expired , his voice was heard . 
-- `` Whose is the doubloon now ? 
D'ye see him ? '' 
and if the reply was No , sir ! 
straightway he commanded them to lift him to his perch . 
In this way the day wore on ; Ahab , now aloft and motionless ; anon , unrestingly pacing the planks . 
As he was thus walking , uttering no sound , except to hail the men aloft , or to bid them hoist a sail still higher , or to spread one to a still greater breadth -- thus to and fro pacing , beneath his slouched hat , at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat , which had been dropped upon the quarter-deck , and lay there reversed ; broken bow to shattered stern . 
At last he paused before it ; and as in an already over-clouded sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail across , so over the old man 's face there now stole some such added gloom as this . 
Stubb saw him pause ; and perhaps intending , not vainly , though , to evince his own unabated fortitude , and thus keep up a valiant place in his Captain 's mind , he advanced , and eyeing the wreck exclaimed -- `` The thistle the ass refused ; it pricked his mouth too keenly , sir ; ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! '' 
`` What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck ? 
Man , man ! 
did I not know thee brave as fearless fire -LRB- and as mechanical -RRB- I could swear thou wert a poltroon . 
Groan nor laugh should be heard before a wreck . '' 
`` Aye , sir , '' said Starbuck drawing near , '' 't is a solemn sight ; an omen , and an ill one . '' 
`` Omen ? 
omen ? 
-- the dictionary ! 
If the gods think to speak outright to man , they will honorably speak outright ; not shake their heads , and give an old wives ' darkling hint . 
-- Begone ! 
Ye two are the opposite poles of one thing ; Starbuck is Stubb reversed , and Stubb is Starbuck ; and ye two are all mankind ; and Ahab stands alone among the millions of the peopled earth , nor gods nor men his neighbors ! 
Cold , cold -- I shiver ! 
-- How now ? 
Aloft there ! 
D'ye see him ? 
Sing out for every spout , though he spout ten times a second ! '' 
The day was nearly done ; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling . 
Soon it was almost dark , but the look-out men still remained unset . 
`` Ca n't see the spout now , sir ; -- too dark '' -- cried a voice from the air . 
`` How heading when last seen ? '' 
`` As before , sir , -- straight to leeward . '' 
`` Good ! 
he will travel slower now 't is night . 
Down royals and top-gallant stunsails , Mr. Starbuck . 
We must not run over him before morning ; he 's making a passage now , and may heave-to a while . 
Helm there ! 
keep her full before the wind ! 
-- Aloft ! 
come down ! 
-- Mr. Stubb , send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head , and see it manned till morning . '' 
-- Then advancing towards the doubloon in the main-mast -- `` Men , this gold is mine , for I earned it ; but I shall let it abide here till the White Whale is dead ; and then , whosoever of ye first raises him , upon the day he shall be killed , this gold is that man 's ; and if on that day I shall again raise him , then , ten times its sum shall be divided among all of ye ! 
Away now ! 
