Nor is the history of fanatics half so striking in respect to the measureless self-deception of the fanatic himself , as his measureless power of deceiving and bedevilling so many others . 
But it is time to return to the Pequod . 
`` I fear not thy epidemic , man , '' said Ahab from the bulwarks , to Captain Mayhew , who stood in the boat 's stern ; `` come on board . '' 
But now Gabriel started to his feet . 
`` Think , think of the fevers , yellow and bilious ! 
Beware of the horrible plague ! '' 
`` Gabriel ! 
Gabriel ! '' 
cried Captain Mayhew ; `` thou must either - '' But that instant a headlong wave shot the boat far ahead , and its seethings drowned all speech . 
`` Hast thou seen the White Whale ? '' 
demanded Ahab , when the boat drifted back . 
`` Think , think of thy whale-boat , stoven and sunk ! 
Beware of the horrible tail ! '' 
`` I tell thee again , Gabriel , that - '' But again the boat tore ahead as if dragged by fiends . 
Nothing was said for some moments , while a succession of riotous waves rolled by which by one of those occasional caprices of the seas were tumbling , not heaving it . 
Meantime , the hoisted sperm whale 's head jogged about very violently , and Gabriel was seen eyeing it with rather more apprehensiveness than his archangel nature seemed to warrant . 
When this interlude was over , Captain Mayhew began a dark story concerning Moby Dick ; not , however , without frequent interruptions from Gabriel , whenever his name was mentioned , and the crazy sea that seemed leagued with him . 
It seemed that the Jeroboam had not long left home , when upon speaking a whale-ship , her people were reliably apprised of the existence of Moby Dick , and the havoc he had made . 
Greedily sucking in this intelligence , Gabriel solemnly warned the captain against attacking the White Whale , in case the monster should be seen ; in his gibbering insanity , pronouncing the White Whale to be no less a being than the Shaker God incarnated ; the Shakers receiving the Bible . 
But when , some year or two afterwards , Moby Dick was fairly sighted from the mast-heads , Macey , the chief mate , burned with ardor to encounter him ; and the captain himself being not unwilling to let him have the opportunity , despite all the archangel 's denunciations and forewarnings , Macey succeeded in persuading five men to man his boat . 
With them he pushed off ; and , after much weary pulling , and many perilous , unsuccessful onsets , he at last succeeded in getting one iron fast . 
Meantime , Gabriel , ascending to the main-royal mast-head , was tossing one arm in frantic gestures , and hurling forth prophecies of speedy doom to the sacrilegious assailants of his divinity . 
Now , while Macey , the mate , was standing up in his boat 's bow , and with all the reckless energy of his tribe was venting his wild exclamations upon the whale , and essaying to get a fair chance for his poised lance , lo ! 
a broad white shadow rose from the sea ; by its quick , fanning motion , temporarily taking the breath out of the bodies of the oarsmen . 
Next instant , the luckless mate , so full of furious life , was smitten bodily into the air , and making a long arc in his descent , fell into the sea at the distance of about fifty yards . 
Not a chip of the boat was harmed , nor a hair of any oarsman 's head ; but the mate for ever sank . 
It is well to parenthesize here , that of the fatal accidents in the Sperm-Whale Fishery , this kind is perhaps almost as frequent as any . 
Sometimes , nothing is injured but the man who is thus annihilated ; oftener the boat 's bow is knocked off , or the thigh-board , on which the headsman stands , is torn from its place and accompanies the body . 
But strangest of all is the circumstance , that in more instances than one , when the body has been recovered , not a single mark of violence is discernible the man being stark dead . 
The whole calamity , with the falling form of Macey , was plainly descried from the ship . 
Raising a piercing shriek -- `` The vial ! 
the vial ! '' 
Gabriel called off the terror-stricken crew from the further hunting of the whale . 
This terrible event clothed the archangel with added influence ; because his credulous disciples believed that he had specifically fore-announced it , instead of only making a general prophecy , which any one might have done , and so have chanced to hit one of many marks in the wide margin allowed . 
He became a nameless terror to the ship . 
Mayhew having concluded his narration , Ahab put such questions to him , that the stranger captain could not forbear inquiring whether he intended to hunt the White Whale , if opportunity should offer . 
To which Ahab answered -- `` Aye . '' 
Straightway , then , Gabriel once more started to his feet , glaring upon the old man , and vehemently exclaimed , with downward pointed finger -- `` Think , think of the blasphemer -- dead , and down there ! 
-- beware of the blasphemer 's end ! '' 
Ahab stolidly turned aside ; then said to Mayhew , `` Captain , I have just bethought me of my letter-bag ; there is a letter for one of thy officers , if I mistake not . 
Starbuck , look over the bag . '' 
Every whale-ship takes out a goodly number of letters for various ships , whose delivery to the persons to whom they may be addressed , depends upon the mere chance of encountering them in the four oceans . 
Thus , most letters never reach their mark ; and many are only received after attaining an age of two or three years or more . 
Soon Starbuck returned with a letter in his hand . 
It was sorely tumbled , damp , and covered with a dull , spotted , green mould , in consequence of being kept in a dark locker of the cabin . 
Of such a letter , Death himself might well have been the post-boy . 
`` Can ` st not read it ? '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Give it me , man . 
Aye , aye , aye it 's but a dim scrawl ; -- what 's this ? '' 
As he was studying it out , Starbuck took a long cutting-spade pole , and with his knife slightly split the end , to insert the letter there , and in that way , hand it to the boat , without its coming any closer to the ship . 
Meantime , Ahab holding the letter , muttered , `` Mr. Har -- yes , Mr. Harry -- -LRB- a woman 's pinny hand , -- the man 's wife , I 'll wager -RRB- -- Aye -- Mr. Harry Macey , Ship Jeroboam ; why it 's Macey , and he 's dead ! '' 
`` Poor fellow ! 
poor fellow ! 
and from his wife , '' sighed Mayhew ; `` but let me have it . '' 
`` Nay , keep it thyself , '' cried Gabriel to Ahab ; `` thou art soon going that way . '' 
`` Curses throttle thee ! '' 
yelled Ahab . 
`` Captain Mayhew , stand by now to receive it '' ; and taking the fatal missive from Starbuck 's hands , he caught it in the slit of the pole , and reached it over towards the boat . 
But as he did so , the oarsmen expectantly desisted from rowing ; the boat drifted a little towards the ship 's stern ; so that , as if by magic , the letter suddenly ranged along with Gabriel 's eager hand . 
He clutched it in an instant , seized the boat-knife , and impaling the letter on it , sent it thus loaded back into the ship . 
It fell at Ahab 's feet . 
Then Gabriel shrieked out to his comrades to give way with their oars , and in that manner the mutinous boat rapidly shot away from the Pequod . 
As , after this interlude , the seamen resumed their work upon the jacket of the whale , many strange things were hinted in reference to this wild affair . 
The Monkey-Rope In the tumultuous business of cutting-in and attending to a whale , there is much running backwards and forwards among the crew . 
Now hands are wanted here , and then again hands are wanted there . 
There is no staying in any one place ; for at one and the same time everything has to be done everywhere . 
It is much the same with him who endeavors the description of the scene . 
We must now retrace our way a little . 
It was mentioned that upon first breaking ground in the whale 's back , the blubber-hook was inserted into the original hole there cut by the spades of the mates . 
But how did so clumsy and weighty a mass as that same hook get fixed in that hole ? 
It was inserted there by my particular friend Queequeg , whose duty it was , as harpooneer , to descend upon the monster 's back for the special purpose referred to . 
But in very many cases , circumstances require that the harpooneer shall remain on the whale till the whole tensing or stripping operation is concluded . 
The whale , be it observed , lies almost entirely submerged , excepting the immediate parts operated upon . 
So down there , some ten feet below the level of the deck , the poor harpooneer flounders about , half on the whale and half in the water , as the vast mass revolves like a tread-mill beneath him . 
On the occasion in question , Queequeg figured in the Highland costume -- a shirt and socks -- in which to my eyes , at least , he appeared to uncommon advantage ; and no one had a better chance to observe him , as will presently be seen . 
Being the savage 's bowsman , that is , the person who pulled the bow-oar in his boat -LRB- the second one from forward -RRB- , it was my cheerful duty to attend upon him while taking that hard-scrabble scramble upon the dead whale 's back . 
You have seen Italian organ-boys holding a dancing-ape by a long cord . 
Just so , from the ship 's steep side , did I hold Queequeg down there in the sea , by what is technically called in the fishery a monkey-rope , attached to a strong strip of canvas belted round his waist . 
It was a humorously perilous business for both of us . 
For , before we proceed further , it must be said that the monkey-rope was fast at both ends ; fast to Queequeg 's broad canvas belt , and fast to my narrow leather one . 
So that for better or for worse , we two , for the time , were wedded ; and should poor Queequeg sink to rise no more , then both usage and honor demanded , that instead of cutting the cord , it should drag me down in his wake . 
So , then , an elongated Siamese ligature united us . 
Queequeg was my own inseparable twin brother ; nor could I any way get rid of the dangerous liabilities which the hempen bond entailed . 
So strongly and metaphysically did I conceive of my situation then , that while earnestly watching his motions , I seemed distinctly to perceive that my own individuality was now merged in a joint stock company of two ; that my free will had received a mortal wound ; and that another 's mistake or misfortune might plunge innocent me into unmerited disaster and death . 
Therefore , I saw that here was a sort of interregnum in Providence ; for its even-handed equity never could have so gross an injustice . 
And yet still further pondering -- while I jerked him now and then from between the whale and ship , which would threaten to jam him -- still further pondering , I say , I saw that this situation of mine was the precise situation of every mortal that breathes ; only , in most cases , he , one way or other , has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of other mortals . 
If your banker breaks , you snap ; if your apothecary by mistake sends you poison in your pills , you die . 
True , you may say that , by exceeding caution , you may possibly escape these and the multitudinous other evil chances of life . 
But handle Queequeg 's monkey-rope heedfully as I would , sometimes he jerked it so , that I came very near sliding overboard . 
Nor could I possibly forget that , do what I would , I only had the management of one end of it . 
* * The monkey-rope is found in all whalers ; but it was only in the Pequod that the monkey and his holder were ever tied together . 
This improvement upon the original usage was introduced by no less a man than Stubb , in order to afford to the imperilled harpooneer the strongest possible guarantee for the faithfulness and vigilance of his monkey-rope holder . 
I have hinted that I would often jerk poor Queequeg from between the whale and the ship -- where he would occasionally fall , from the incessant rolling and swaying of both . 
But this was not the only jamming jeopardy he was exposed to . 
Unappalled by the massacre made upon them during the night , the sharks now freshly and more keenly allured by the before pent blood which began to flow from the carcass -- the rabid creatures swarmed round it like bees in a beehive . 
And right in among those sharks was Queequeg ; who often pushed them aside with his floundering feet . 
A thing altogether incredible were it not that attracted by such prey as a dead whale , the otherwise miscellaneously carnivorous shark will seldom touch a man . 
Nevertheless , it may well be believed that since they have such a ravenous finger in the pie , it is deemed but wise to look sharp to them . 
Accordingly , besides the monkey-rope , with which I now and then jerked the poor fellow from too close a vicinity to the maw of what seemed a peculiarly ferocious shark -- he was provided with still another protection . 
Suspended over the side in one of the stages , Tashtego and Daggoo continually flourished over his head a couple of keen whale-spades , wherewith they slaughtered as many sharks as they could reach . 
This procedure of theirs , to be sure , was very disinterested and benevolent of them . 
They meant Queequeg 's best happiness , I admit ; but in their hasty zeal to befriend him , and from the circumstance that both he and the sharks were at times half hidden by the blood-muddled water , those indiscreet spades of theirs would come nearer amputating a leg than a tall . 
But poor Queequeg , I suppose , straining and gasping there with that great iron hook -- poor Queequeg , I suppose , only prayed to his Yojo , and gave up his life into the hands of his gods . 
Well , well , my dear comrade and twin-brother , thought I , as I drew in and then slacked off the rope to every swell of the sea -- what matters it , after all ? 
Are you not the precious image of each and all of us men in this whaling world ? 
That unsounded ocean you gasp in , is Life ; those sharks , your foes ; those spades , your friends ; and what between sharks and spades you are in a sad pickle and peril , poor lad . 
But courage ! 
there is good cheer in store for you , Queequeg . 
For now , as with blue lips and blood-shot eyes the exhausted savage at last climbs up the chains and stands all dripping and involuntarily trembling over the side ; the steward advances , and with a benevolent , consolatory glance hands him -- what ? 
Some hot Cognac ? 
No ! 
hands him , ye gods ! 
hands him a cup of tepid ginger and water ! 
`` Ginger ? 
Do I smell ginger ? '' 
suspiciously asked Stubb , coming near . 
`` Yes , this must be ginger , '' peering into the as yet untasted cup . 
Then standing as if incredulous for a while , he calmly walked towards the astonished steward slowly saying , `` Ginger ? 
ginger ? 
and will you have the goodness to tell me , Mr. Dough-Boy , where lies the virtue of ginger ? 
Ginger ! 
is ginger the sort of fuel you use , Dough-boy , to kindle a fire in this shivering cannibal ? 
Ginger ! 
-- what the devil is ginger ? 
-- sea-coal ? 
firewood ? 
-- lucifer matches ? 
-- tinder ? 
-- gunpowder ? 
-- what the devil is ginger , I say , that you offer this cup to our poor Queequeg here . '' 
`` There is some sneaking Temperance Society movement about this business , '' he suddenly added , now approaching Starbuck , who had just come from forward . 
`` Will you look at that kannakin , sir ; smell of it , if you please . '' 
Then watching the mate 's countenance , he added , `` The steward , Mr. Starbuck , had the face to offer that calomel and jalap to Queequeg , there , this instant off the whale . 
Is the steward an apothecary , sir ? 
and may I ask whether this is the sort of bitters by which he blows back the life into a half-drowned man ? '' 
`` I trust not , '' said Starbuck , `` it is poor stuff enough . '' 
`` Aye , aye , steward , '' cried Stubb , `` we 'll teach you to drug it harpooneer ; none of your apothecary 's medicine here ; you want to poison us , do ye ? 
You have got out insurances on our lives and want to give way with their oars , and pocket the proceeds , do ye ? '' 
`` It was not me , '' cried Dough-Boy , `` it was Aunt Charity that brought the ginger on board ; and bade me never give the harpooneers any spirits , but only this ginger-jub -- so she called it . '' 
`` Ginger-jub ! 
you gingerly rascal ! 
take that ! 
and run along with ye to the lockers , and get something better . 
I hope I do no wrong , Mr. Starbuck . 
It is the captain 's orders -- grog for the harpooneer on a whale . '' 
`` Enough , '' replied Starbuck , `` only do n't hit him again , but - '' `` Oh , I never hurt when I hit , except when I hit a whale or something of that sort ; and this fellow 's a weazel . 
What were you about saying , sir ? '' 
`` Only this : go down with him , and get what thou wantest thyself . '' 
When Stubb reappeared , he came with a dark flask in one hand , and a sort of tea-caddy in the other . 
The first contained strong spirits , and was handed to Queequeg ; the second was Aunt Charity 's gift , and that was freely given to the waves . 
Stubb and Flask Kill a Right Whale ; and Then Have a Talk Over Him It must be borne in mind that all this time we have a Sperm Whale 's prodigious head hanging to the Pequod 's side . 
But we must let it continue hanging there a while till we can get a chance to attend to it . 
For the present other matters press , and the best we can do now for the head , is to pray heaven the tackles may hold . 
Now , during the past night and forenoon , the Pequod had gradually drifted into a sea , which , by its occasional patches of yellow brit , gave unusual tokens of the vicinity of Right Whales , a species of the Leviathan that but few supposed to be at this particular time lurking anywhere near . 
And though all hands commonly disdained the capture of those inferior creatures ; and though the Pequod was not commissioned to cruise for them at all , and though she had passed numbers of them near the Crozetts without lowering a boat ; yet now that a Sperm Whale had been brought alongside and beheaded , to the surprise of all , the announcement was made that a Right Whale should be captured that day , if opportunity offered . 
Nor was this long wanting . 
Tall spouts were seen to leeward ; and two boats , Stubb 's and Flask 's , were detached in pursuit . 
Pulling further and further away , they at last became almost invisible to the men at the masthead . 
But suddenly in the distance , they saw a great heap of tumultuous white water , and soon after news came from aloft that one or both the boats must be fast . 
An interval passed and the boats were in plain sight , in the act of being dragged right towards the ship by the towing whale . 
So close did the monster come to the hull , that at first it seemed as if he meant it malice ; but suddenly going down in a maelstrom , within three rods of the planks , he wholly disappeared from view , as if diving under the keel . 
`` Cut , cut ! '' 
was the cry from the ship to the boats , which , for one instant , seemed on the point of being brought with a deadly dash against the vessel 's side . 
But having plenty of line yet in the tubs , and the whale not sounding very rapidly , they paid out abundance of rope , and at the same time pulled with all their might so as to get ahead of the ship . 
For a few minutes the struggle was intensely critical ; for while they still slacked out the tightened line in one direction , and still plied their oars in another , the contending strain threatened to take them under . 
But it was only a few feet advance they sought to gain . 
And they stuck to it till they did gain it ; when instantly , a swift tremor was felt running like lightning along the keel , as the strained line , scraping beneath the ship , suddenly rose to view under her bows , snapping and quivering ; and so flinging off its drippings , that the drops fell like bits of broken glass on the water , while the whale beyond also rose to sight , and once more the boats were free to fly . 
But the fagged whale abated his speed , and blindly altering his course , went round the stern of the ship towing the two boats after him , so that they performed a complete circuit . 
Meantime , they hauled more and more upon their lines , till close flanking him on both sides , Stubb answered Flask with lance for lance ; and thus round and round the Pequod the battle went , while the multitudes of sharks that had before swum round the Sperm Whale 's body , rushed to the fresh blood that was spilled , thirstily drinking at every new gash , as the eager Israelites did at the new bursting fountains that poured from the smitten rock . 
At last his spout grew thick , and with a frightful roll and vomit , he turned upon his back a corpse . 
While the two headsmen were engaged in making fast cords to his flukes , and in other ways getting the mass in readiness for towing , some conversation ensued between them . 
`` I wonder what the old man wants with this lump of foul lard , '' said Stubb , not without some disgust at the thought of having to do with so ignoble a leviathan . 
`` Wants with it ? '' 
said Flask , coiling some spare line in the boat 's bow , `` did you never hear that the ship which but once has a Sperm Whale 's head hoisted on her starboard side , and at the same time a Right Whale 's on the larboard ; did you never hear , Stubb , that that ship can never afterwards capsize ? '' 
`` Why not ? 
`` I do n't know , but I heard that gamboge ghost of a Fedallah saying so , and he seems to know all about ships ' charms . 
But I sometimes think he 'll charm the ship to no good at last . 
I do n't half like that chap , Stubb . 
Did you ever notice how that tusk of his is a sort of carved into a snake 's head , Stubb ? '' 
`` Sink him ! 
I never look at him at all ; but if ever I get a chance of a dark night , and he standing hard by the bulwarks , and no one by ; look down there , Flask '' -- pointing into the sea with a peculiar motion of both hands -- `` Aye , will I ! 
Flask , I take that Fedallah to be the devil in disguise . 
Do you believe that cock and bull story about his having been stowed away on board ship ? 
He 's the devil , I say . 
The reason why you do n't see his tail , is because he tucks it up out of sight ; he carries it coiled away in his pocket , I guess . 
Blast him ! 
now that I think of it , he 's always wanting oakum to stuff into the toes of his boots . '' 
`` He sleeps in his boots , do n't he ? 
He has n't got any hammock ; but I 've seen him lay of nights in a coil of rigging . '' 
`` No doubt , and it 's because of his cursed tail ; he coils it down , do ye see , in the eye of the rigging . '' 
`` What 's the old man have so much to do with him for ? '' 
`` Striking up a swap or a bargain , I suppose . '' 
`` Bargain ? 
-- about what ? '' 
`` Why , do ye see , the old man is hard bent after that White Whale , and the devil there is trying to come round him , and get him to swap away his silver watch , or his soul , or something of that sort , and then he 'll surrender Moby Dick . '' 
`` Pooh ! 
Stubb , you are skylarking ; how can Fedallah do that ? '' 
`` I do n't know , Flask , but the devil is a curious chap , and a wicked one , I tell ye . 
Why , they say as how he went a sauntering into the old flag-ship once , switching his tail about devilish easy and gentlemanlike , and inquiring if the old governor was at home . 
Well , he was at home , and asked the devil what he wanted . 
The devil , switching his hoofs , up and says , ' I want John . ' 
` What for ? ' 
says the old governor . 
` What business is that of yours , ' says the devil , getting mad , -- ' I want to use him . ' 
` Take him , ' says the governor -- and by the Lord , Flask , if the devil did n't give John the Asiatic cholera before he got through with him , I 'll eat this whale in one mouthful . 
But look sharp -- ai n't you all ready there ? 
Well , then , pull ahead , and let 's get the whale alongside . '' 
`` I think I remember some such story as you were telling , '' said Flask , when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship , `` but I ca n't remember where . '' 
`` Three Spaniards ? 
Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes ? 
Did ye read it there , Flask ? 
I guess ye did ? '' 
`` No : never saw such a book ; heard of it , though . 
But now , tell me , Stubb , do you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now , was the same you say is now on board the Pequod ? '' 
`` Am I the same man that helped kill this whale ? 
Does n't the devil live for ever ; who ever heard that the devil was dead ? 
Did you ever see any parson a wearing mourning for the devil ? 
And if the devil has a latch-key to get into the admiral 's cabin , do n't you suppose he can crawl into a porthole ? 
Tell me that , Mr. Flask ? '' 
`` How old do you suppose Fedallah is , Stubb ? '' 
`` Do you see that mainmast there ? '' 
pointing to the ship ; `` well , that 's the figure one ; now take all the hoops in the Pequod 's hold , and string 'em along in a row with that mast , for oughts , do you see ; well , that would n't begin to be Fedallah 's age . 
Nor all the coopers in creation could n't show hoops enough to make oughts enough . '' 
`` But see here , Stubb , I thought you a little boasted just now , that you meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss , if you got a good chance . 
Now , if he 's so old as all those hoops of yours come to , and if he is going to live for ever , what good will it do to pitch him overboard -- tell me that ? 
`` Give him a good ducking , anyhow . '' 
`` But he 'd crawl back . '' 
`` Duck him again ; and keep ducking him . '' 
`` Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you , though -- yes , and drown you -- what then ? '' 
`` I should like to see him try it ; I 'd give him such a pair of black eyes that he would n't dare to show his face in the admiral 's cabin again for a long while , let alone down in the orlop there , where he lives , and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much . 
Damn the devil , Flask ; do you suppose I 'm afraid of the devil ? 
Who 's afraid of him , except the old governor who dares n't catch him and put him in double-darbies , as he deserves , but lets him go about kidnapping people ; aye , and signed a bond with him , that all the people the devil kidnapped , he 'd roast for him ? 
There 's a governor ! '' 
`` Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab ? '' 
`` Do I suppose it ? 
You 'll know it before long , Flask . 
But I am going now to keep a sharp look-out on him ; and if I see anything very suspicious going on , I 'll just take him by the nape of his neck , and say -- Look here , Beelzebub , you do n't do it ; and if he makes any fuss , by the Lord I 'll make a grab into his pocket for his tail , take it to the capstan , and give him such a wrenching and heaving , that his tail will come short off at the stump -- do you see ; and then , I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion , he 'll sneak off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs . '' 
`` And what will you do with the tail , Stubb ? '' 
`` Do with it ? 
Sell it for an ox whip when we get home ; -- what else ? '' 
`` Now , do you mean what you say , and have been saying all along , Stubb ? '' 
`` Mean or not mean , here we are at the ship . '' 
The boats were here hailed , to tow the whale on the larboard side , where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him . 
`` Did n't I tell you so ? '' 
said Flask ; `` yes , you 'll soon see this right whale 's head hoisted up opposite that parmacety 's . '' 
In good time , Flask 's saying proved true . 
As before , the Pequod steeply leaned over towards the sperm whale 's head , now , by the counterpoise of both heads , she regained her even keel ; though sorely strained , you may well believe . 
So , when on one side you hoist in Locke 's head , you go over that way ; but now , on the other side , hoist in Kant 's and you come back again ; but in very poor plight . 
Thus , some minds for ever keep trimming boat . 
Oh , ye foolish ! 
throw all these thunder-heads overboard , and then you will float light and right . 
In disposing of the body of a right whale , when brought alongside the ship , the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm whale ; only , in the latter instance , the head is cut off whole , but in the former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck , with all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece . 
But nothing like this , in the present case , had been done . 
The carcases of both whales had dropped astern ; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers . 
Meantime , Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale 's head , and ever and anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand . 
And Ahab chanced so to stand , that the Parsee occupied his shadow ; while , if the Parsee 's shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with , and lengthen Ahab 's . 
As the crew toiled on , Laplandish speculations were bandied among them , concerning all these passing things . 
The Sperm Whale 's Head - Contrasted View Here , now , are two great whales , laying their heads together ; let us join them , and lay together our own . 
Of the grand order of folio leviathans , the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale are by far the most noteworthy . 
They are the only whales regularly hunted by man . 
To the Nantucketer , they present the two extremes of all the known varieties of the whale . 
As the external difference between them is mainly observable in their heads ; and as a head of each is this moment hanging from the Pequod 's side ; and as we may freely go from one to the other , by merely stepping across the deck : -- where , I should like to know , will you obtain a better chance to study practical cetology than here ? 
In the first place , you are struck by the general contrast between these heads . 
Both are massive enough in all conscience ; but , there is a certain mathematical symmetry in the Sperm Whale 's which the Right Whale 's sadly lacks . 
There is more character in the Sperm Whale 's head . 
As you behold it , you involuntarily yield the immense superiority to him , in point of pervading dignity . 
In the present instance , too , this dignity is heightened by the pepper and salt color of his head at the summit , giving token of advanced age and large experience . 
In short , he is what the fishermen technically call a `` grey-headed whale . '' 
Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads -- namely , the two most important organs , the eye and the ear . 
Far back on the side of the head , and low down , near the angle of either whale 's jaw , if you narrowly search , you will at last see a lashless eye , which you would fancy to be a young colt 's eye ; so out of all proportion is it to the magnitude of the head . 
Now , from this peculiar sideway position of the whale 's eyes , it is plain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead , no more than he can one exactly astern . 
In a word , the position of the whale 's eyes corresponds to that of a man 's ears ; and you may fancy , for yourself , how it would fare with you , did you sideways survey objects through your ears . 
You would find that you could only command some thirty degrees of vision in advance of the straight side-line of sight ; and about thirty more behind it . 
If your bitterest foe were walking straight towards you , with dagger uplifted in broad day , you would not be able to see him , any more than if he were stealing upon you from behind . 
In a word , you would have two backs , so to speak ; but , at the same time , also , two fronts -LRB- side fronts -RRB- : for what is it that makes the front of a man -- what , indeed , but his eyes ? 
Moreover , while in most other animals that I can now think of , the eyes are so planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power , so as to produce one picture and not two to the brain ; the peculiar position of the whale 's eyes , effectually divided as they are by many cubic feet of solid head , which towers between them like a great mountain separating two lakes in valleys ; this , of course , must wholly separate the impressions which each independent organ imparts . 
The whale , therefore , must see one distinct picture on this side , and another distinct picture on that side ; while all between must be profound darkness and nothingness to him . 
Man may , in effect , be said to look out on the world from a sentry-box with two joined sashes for his window . 
But with the whale , these two sashes are separately inserted , making two distinct windows , but sadly impairing the view . 
This peculiarity of the whale 's eyes is a thing always to be borne in mind in the fishery ; and to be remembered by the reader in some subsequent scenes . 
A curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning this visual matter as touching the Leviathan . 
But I must be content with a hint . 
So long as a man 's eyes are open in the light , the act of seeing is involuntary ; that is , he can not then help mechanically seeing whatever objects are before him . 
Nevertheless , any one 's experience will teach him , that though he can take in an undiscriminating sweep of things at one glance , it is quite impossible for him , attentively , and completely , to examine any two things -- however large or however small -- at one and the same instant of time ; never mind if they lie side by side and touch each other . 
But if you now come to separate these two objects , and surround each by a circle of profound darkness ; then , in order to see one of them , in such a manner as to bring your mind to bear on it , the other will be utterly excluded from your contemporary consciousness . 
How is it , then , with the whale ? 
True , both his eyes , in themselves , must simultaneously act ; but is his brain so much more comprehensive , combining , and subtle than man 's , that he can at the same moment of time attentively examine two distinct prospects , one on one side of him , and the other in an exactly opposite direction ? 
If he can , then is it as marvellous a thing in him , as if a man were able simultaneously to go through the demonstrations of two distinct problems in Euclid . 
Nor , strictly investigated , is there any incongruity in this comparison . 
It may be but an idle whim , but it has always seemed to me , that the extraordinary vacillations of movement displayed by some whales when beset by three or four boats ; the timidity and liability to queer frights , so common to such whales ; I think that all this indirectly proceeds from the helpless perplexity of volition , in which their divided and diametrically opposite powers of vision must involve them . 
But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye . 
If you are an entire stranger to their race , you might hunt over these two heads for hours , and never discover that organ . 
The ear has no external leaf whatever ; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert a quill , so wondrously minute is it . 
It is lodged a little behind the eye . 
With respect to their ears , this important difference is to be observed between the sperm whale and the right . 
While the ears of the former has an external opening , that of the latter is entirely and evenly covered over with a membrane , so as to be quite imperceptible from without . 
Is it not curious , that so vast a being as the whale should see the world through so small an eye , and hear the thunder through an ear which is smaller than a hare 's ? 
But if his eyes were broad as the lens of Herschel 's great telescope ; and his ears capacious as the porches of cathedrals ; would that make him any longer of sight , or sharper of hearing ? 
Not at all . 
-- Why then do you try to `` enlarge '' your mind ? 
Subtilize it . 
Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand , cant over the sperm whale 's head , so , that it may lie bottom up ; then , ascending by a ladder to the summit , have a peep down the mouth ; and were it not that the body is now completely separated from it , with a lantern we might descend into the great Kentucky Mammoth Cave of his stomach . 
But let us hold on here by this tooth , and look about us where we are . 
What a really beautiful and chaste-looking mouth ! 
from floor to ceiling , lined , or rather papered with a glistening white membrane , glossy as bridal satins . 
But come out now , and look at this portentous lower jaw , which seems like the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box , with the hinge at one end , instead of one side . 
If you pry it up , so as to get it overhead , and expose its rows of teeth , it seems a terrific portcullis ; and such , alas ! 
it proves to many a poor wight in the fishery , upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force . 
But far more terrible is it to behold , when fathoms down in the sea , you see some sulky whale , floating there suspended , with his prodigious jaw , some fifteen feet long , hanging straight down at right-angles with his body ; for all the world like a ship 's jibboom . 
This whale is not dead ; he is only dispirited ; out of sorts , perhaps ; hypochondriac ; and so supine , that the hinges of his jaw have relaxed , leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight , a reproach to all his tribe , who must , no doubt , imprecate lock-jaws upon him . 
In most cases this lower jaw -- being easily unhinged by a practised artist -- is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extracting the ivory teeth , and furnishing a supply of that hard white whalebone with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious articles including canes , umbrella-stocks , and handles to riding-whips . 
With a long , weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board , as if it were an anchor ; and when the proper time comes -- some few days after the other work -- Queequeg , Daggoo , and Tashtego , being all accomplished dentists , are set to drawing teeth . 
With a keen cutting-spade , Queequeg lances the gums ; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts , and a tackle being rigged from aloft , they drag out these teeth , as Michigan oxen drag stumps of old oaks out of wild woodlands . 
There are generally forty-two teeth in all ; in old whales , much worn down , but undecayed ; nor filled after our artificial fashion . 
The jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs , and piled away like joists for building houses . 
The Right Whale 's Head - Contrasted View Crossing the deck , let us now have a good long look at the the Right Whale 's head . 
As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale 's head may be compared to a Roman war-chariot -LRB- especially in front , where it is so broadly rounded -RRB- ; so , at a broad view , the Right Whale 's head bears a rather inelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe . 
Two hundred years ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape to that of a shoemaker 's last . 
And in this same last or shoe , that old woman of the nursery tale with the swarming brood , might very comfortably be lodged , she and all her progeny . 
But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume different aspects , according to your point of view . 
If you stand on its summit and look at these two f-shaped spout-holes , you would take the whole head for an enormous bass viol , and these spiracles , the apertures in its soundingboard . 
Then , again , if you fix your eye upon this strange , crested , comblike incrustation on the top of the mass -- this green , barnacled thing , which the Greenlanders call the `` crown , '' and the Southern fishers the `` bonnet '' of the Right Whale ; fixing your eyes solely on this , you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak , with a bird 's nest in its crotch . 
At any rate , when you watch those live crabs that nestle here on this bonnet , such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you ; unless , indeed , your fancy has been fixed by the technical term `` crown '' also bestowed upon it ; in which case you will take great interest in thinking how this mighty monster is actually a diademed king of the sea , whose green crown has been put together for him in this marvellous manner . 
But if this whale be a king , he is a very sulky looking fellow to grace a diadem . 
Look at that hanging lower lip ! 
what a huge sulk and pout is there ! 
a sulk and pout , by carpenter 's measurement , about twenty feet long and five feet deep ; a sulk and pout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more . 
A great pity , now , that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped . 
The fissure is about a foot across . 
Probably the mother during an important interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast , when earthquakes caused the beach to gape . 
Over this lip , as over a slippery threshold , we now slide into the mouth . 
Upon my word were I at Mackinaw , I should take this to be the inside of an Indian wigwam . 
Good Lord ! 
is this the road that Jonah went ? 
The roof is about twelve feet high , and runs to a pretty sharp angle , as if there were a regular ridge-pole there ; while these ribbed , arched , hairy sides , present us with those wondrous , half vertical , scimitar-shaped slats of whalebone , say three hundred on a side , which depending from the upper part of the head or crown bone , form those Venetian blinds which have elsewhere been cursorily mentioned . 
The edges of these bones are fringed with hairy fibres , through which the Right Whale strains the water , and in whose intricacies he retains the small fish , when openmouthed he goes through the seas of brit in feeding time . 
In the central blinds of bone , as they stand in their natural order , there are certain curious marks , curves , hollows , and ridges , whereby some whalemen calculate the creature 's age , as the age of an oak by its circular rings . 
Though the certainty of this criterion is far from demonstrable , yet it has the savor of analogical probability . 
At any rate , if we yield to it , we must grant a far greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance will seem reasonable . 
In old times , there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies concerning these blinds . 
One voyager in Purchas calls them the wondrous `` whiskers '' inside of the whale 's mouth ; * another , `` hogs ' bristles '' ; a third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the following elegant language : `` There are about two hundred and fifty fins growing on each side of his upper chop , which arch over his tongue on each side of his mouth . '' 
* This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker , or rather a moustache , consisting of a few scattered white hairs on the upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw . 
Sometimes these tufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn countenance . 
As every one knows , these same `` hogs ' bristles , '' `` fins , '' `` whiskers , '' `` blinds , '' or whatever you please , furnish to the ladies their busks and other stiffening contrivances . 
But in this particular , the demand has long been on the decline . 
It was in Queen Anne 's time that the bone was in its glory , the farthingale being then all the fashion . 
And as those ancient dames moved about gaily , though in the jaws of the whale , as you may say ; even so , in a shower , with the like thoughtlessness , do we nowadays fly under the same jaws for protection ; the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone . 
But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment , and , standing in the Right Whale 's mouth , look around you afresh . 
Seeing all these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about , would you not think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ , and gazing upon its thousand pipes ? 
For a carpet to the organ we have a rug of the softest Turkey -- the tongue , which is glued , as it were , to the floor of the mouth . 
It is very fat and tender , and apt to tear in pieces in hoisting it on deck . 
This particular tongue now before us ; at a passing glance I should say it was a six-barreler ; that is , it will yield you about that amount of oil . 
Ere this , you must have plainly seen the truth of what I started with -- that the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale have almost entirely different heads . 
To sum up , then : in the Right Whale 's there is no great well of sperm ; no ivory teeth at all ; no long , slender mandible of a lower jaw , like the Sperm Whale 's . 
Nor in the Sperm Whale are there any of those blinds of bone ; no huge lower lip ; and scarcely anything of a tongue . 
Again , the Right Whale has two external spout-holes , the Sperm Whale only one . 
Look your last now , on these venerable hooded heads , while they yet lie together ; for one will soon sink , unrecorded , in the sea ; the other will not be very long in following . 
Can you catch the expression of the Sperm Whale 's there ? 
It is the same he died with , only some of the longer wrinkles in the forehead seem now faded away . 
I think his broad brow to be full of a prairie-like placidity , born of a speculative indifference as to death . 
But mark the other head 's expression . 
See that amazing lower lip , pressed by accident against the vessel 's side , so as firmly to embrace the jaw . 
Does not this whole head seem to speak of an enormous practical resolution in facing death ? 
This Right Whale I take to have been a Stoic ; the Sperm Whale , a Platonian , who might have taken up Spinoza in his latter years . 
The Battering-Ram Ere quitting , for the nonce , the Sperm Whale 's head , I would have you , as a sensible physiologist , simply -- particularly remark its front aspect , in all its compacted collectedness . 
I would have you investigate it now with the sole view of forming to yourself some unexaggerated , intelligent estimate of whatever battering-ram power may be lodged there . 
Here is a vital point ; for you must either satisfactorily settle this matter with yourself , or for ever remain an infidel as to one of the most appalling , but not the less true events , perhaps anywhere to be found in all recorded history . 
You observe that in the ordinary swimming position of the Sperm Whale , the front of his head presents an almost wholly vertical plane to the water ; you observe that the lower part of that front slopes considerably backwards , so as to furnish more of a retreat for the long socket which receives the boom-like lower jaw ; you observe that the mouth is entirely under the head , much in the same way , indeed , as though your own mouth were entirely under your chin . 
Moreover you observe that the whale has no external nose ; and that what nose he has -- his spout hole -- is on the top of his head ; you observe that his eyes and ears are at the sides of his head ; nearly one third of his entire length from the front . 
Wherefore , you must now have perceived that the front of the Sperm Whale 's head is a dead , blind wall , without a single organ or tender prominence of any sort whatsoever . 
Furthermore , you are now to consider that only in the extreme , lower , backward sloping part of the front of the head , is there the slightest vestige of bone ; and not till you get near twenty feet from the forehead do you come to the full cranial development . 
So that this whole enormous boneless mass is as one wad . 
Finally , though , as will soon be revealed , its contents partly comprise the most delicate oil ; yet , you are now to be apprised of the nature of the substance which so impregnably invests all that apparent effeminacy . 
In some previous place I have described to you how the blubber wraps the body of the whale , as the rind wraps an orange . 
Just so with the head ; but with this difference : about the head this envelope , though not so thick is of a boneless toughness , inestimable by any man who has not handled it . 
The severest pointed harpoon , the sharpest lance darted by the strongest human arm , impotently rebounds from it . 
It is as though the forehead of the Sperm Whale were paved with horses ' hoofs . 
I do not think that any sensation lurks in it . 
Bethink yourself also of another thing . 
When two large , loaded Indian-men chance to crowd and crush towards each other in the docks , what do the sailors do ? 
They do not suspend between them , at the point of coming contact , any merely hard substance , like iron or wood . 
No , they hold there a large , round wad of tow and cork , enveloped in the thickest and toughest of ox-hide . 
That bravely and uninjured takes the jam which would have snapped all their oaken handspikes and iron crow-bars . 
By itself this sufficiently illustrates the obvious fact I drive at . 
But supplementary to this , it has hypothetically occurred to me , that as ordinary fish possess what is called a swimming bladder in them , capable , at will , of distension or contraction ; and as the Sperm Whale , as far as I know , has no such provision in him ; considering , too , the otherwise inexplicable manner in which he now depresses his head altogether beneath the surface , and anon swims with it high elevated out of the water ; considering the unobstructed elasticity of its envelope ; considering the unique interior of his head ; it has hypothetically occurred to me , I say , that those mystical lung-celled honeycombs there may possibly have some hitherto unknown and unsuspected connexion with the outer air , so as to be susceptible to atmospheric distension and contraction . 
If this be so , fancy the irresistibleness of that might , to which the most impalpable and destructive of all elements contributes . 
Now , mark . 
Unerringly impelling this dead , impregnable , uninjurable wall , and this most buoyant thing within ; there swims behind it all a mass of tremendous life , only to be adequately estimated as piled wood is -- by the cord ; and all obedient to one volition , as the smallest insect . 
So that when I shall hereafter detail to you all the specialities and concentrations of potency everywhere lurking in this expansive monster ; when I shall show you some of his more inconsiderable braining feats ; I trust you will have renounced all ignorant incredulity , and be ready to abide by this ; that though the Sperm Whale stove a passage through the Isthmus of Darien , and mixed the Atlantic with the Pacific , you would not elevate one hair of your eye-brow . 
For unless you own the whale , you are but a provincial and sentimentalist in Truth . 
But clear Truth is a thing for salamander giants only to encounter ; how small the chances for the provincials then ? 
What befell the weakling youth lifting the dread goddess 's veil at Lais ? 
The Great Heidelburgh Tun Now comes the Baling of the Case . 
But to comprehend it aright , you must know something of the curious internal structure of the thing operated upon . 
Regarding the Sperm Whale 's head as a solid oblong , you may , on an inclined plane , sideways divide it into two quoins , * whereof the lower is the bony structure , forming the cranium and jaws , and the upper an unctuous mass wholly free from bones ; its broad forward end forming the expanded vertical apparent forehead of the whale . 
At the middle of the forehead horizontally subdivide this upper quoin , and then you have two almost equal parts , which before were naturally divided by an internal wall of a thick tendinous substance . 
* Quoin is not a Euclidean term . 
It belongs to the pure nautical mathematics . 
I know not that it has been defined before . 
A quoin is a solid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by the steep inclination of one side , instead of the mutual tapering of both sides . 
The lower subdivided part , called the junk , is one immense honeycomb of oil , formed by the crossing and recrossing , into ten thousand infiltrated cells , of tough elastic white fibres throughout its whole extent . 
The upper part , known as the Case , may be regarded as the great Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale . 
And as that famous great tierce is mystically carved in front , so the whale 's vast plaited forehead forms innumerable strange devices for the emblematical adornment of his wondrous tun . 
Moreover , as that of Heidelburgh was always replenished with the most excellent of the wines of the Rhenish valleys , so the tun of the whale contains by far the most precious of all his oily vintages ; namely , the highly-prized spermaceti , in its absolutely pure , limpid , and odoriferous state . 
Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part of the creature . 
Though in life it remains perfectly fluid , yet , upon exposure to the air , after death , it soon begins to concrete ; sending forth beautiful crystalline shoots , as when the first thin delicate ice is just forming in water . 
A large whale 's case generally yields about five hundred gallons of sperm , though from unavoidable circumstances , considerable of it is spilled , leaks , and dribbles away , or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish business of securing what you can . 
I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun was coated within , but in superlative richness that coating could not possibly have compared with the silken pearl-colored membrane , like the lining of a fine pelisse , forming the inner surface of the Sperm Whale 's case . 
It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale embraces the entire length of the entire top of the head ; and since -- as has been elsewhere set forth -- the head embraces one third of the whole length of the creature , then setting that length down at eighty feet for a good sized whale , you have more than twenty-six feet for the depth of the tun , when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a ship 's side . 
As in decapitating the whale , the operator 's instrument is brought close to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into the spermaceti magazine ; he has , therefore , to be uncommonly heedful , lest a careless , untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and wastingly let out its invaluable contents . 
It is this decapitated end of the head , also , which is at last elevated out of the water , and retained in that position by the enormous cutting tackles , whose hempen combinations , on one side , make quite a wilderness of ropes in that quarter . 
Thus much being said , attend now , I pray you , to that marvellous and -- in this particular instance -- almost fatal operation whereby the Sperm Whale 's great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped . 
Cistern and Buckets Nimble as a cat , Tashtego mounts aloft ; and without altering his erect posture , runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm , to the part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun . 
He has carried with him a light tackle called a whip , consisting of only two parts , travelling through a single-sheaved block . 
Securing this block , so that it hangs down from the yard-arm , he swings one end of the rope , till it is caught and firmly held by a hand on the deck . 
Then , hand-over-hand , down the other part , the Indian drops through the air , till dexterously he lands on the summit of the head . 
There -- still high elevated above the rest of the company , to whom he vivaciously cries -- he seems some Turkish Muezzin calling the good people to prayers from the top of a tower . 
A short-handled sharp spade being sent up to him , he diligently searches for the proper place to begin breaking into the Tun . 
In this business he proceeds very heedfully , like a treasure-hunter in some old house , sounding the walls to find where the gold is masoned in . 
By the time this cautious search is over , a stout ironbound bucket , precisely like a well-bucket , has been attached to one end of the whip ; while the other end , being stretched across the deck , is there held by two or three alert hands . 
These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of the Indian , to whom another person has reached up a very long pole . 
Inserting this pole into the bucket , Tashtego downward guides the bucket into the Tun , till it entirely disappears ; then giving the word to the seamen at the whip , up comes the bucket again , all bubbling like a dairy-maid 's pail of new milk . 
Carefully lowered from its height , the full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed hand , and quickly emptied into a large tub . 
Then remounting aloft , it again goes through the same round until the deep cistern will yield no more . 
Towards the end , Tashtego has to ram his long pole harder and harder , and deeper and deeper into the Tun , until some twenty feet of the pole have gone down . 
Now , the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way ; several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm ; when all at once a queer accident happened . 
Whether it was that Tashtego , that wild Indian , was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment his one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head ; or whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy ; or whether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so , without stating his particular reasons ; how it was exactly , there is no telling now ; but , on a sudden , as the eightieth or ninetieth bucket came suckingly up -- my God ! 
poor Tashtego -- like the twin reciprocating bucket in a veritable well , dropped head-foremost down into this great Tun of Heidelburgh , and with a horrible oily gurgling , went clean out of sight ! 
`` Man overboard ! '' 
cried Daggoo , who amid the general consternation first came to his senses . 
`` Swing the bucket this way ! '' 
and putting one foot into it , so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold on the whip itself the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head , almost before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom . 
Meantime , there was a terrible tumult . 
Looking over the side , they saw the before lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the surface of the sea , as if that moment seized with some momentous idea ; whereas it was only the poor Indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilous depth to which he had sunk . 
At this instant , while Daggoo , on the summit of the head , was clearing the whip -- which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles -- a sharp cracking noise was heard ; and to the unspeakable horror of all , one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out , and with a vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung , till the drunk ship reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg . 
The one remaining hook , upon which the entire strain now depended , seemed every instant to be on the point of giving way ; an event still more likely from the violent motions of the head . 
`` Come down , come down ! '' 
yelled the seamen to Daggoo , but with one hand holding on to the heavy tackles , so that if the head should drop , he would still remain suspended ; the negro having cleared the foul line , rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well , meaning that the buried harpooneer should grasp it , and so be hoisted out . 
`` In heaven 's name , man , '' cried Stubb , `` are you ramming home a cartridge there ? 
-- Avast ! 
How will that help him ; jamming that iron-bound bucket on top of his head ? 
Avast , will ye ! '' 
`` Stand clear of the tackle ! '' 
cried a voice like the bursting of a rocket . 
Almost in the same instant , with a thunder-boom , the enormous mass dropped into the sea , like Niagara 's Table-Rock into the whirlpool ; the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it , to far down her glittering copper ; and all caught their breath , as half swinging -- now over the sailors ' heads , and now over the water -- Daggoo , through a thick mist of spray , was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles , while poor , buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottom of the sea ! 
But hardly had the blinding vapor cleared away , when a naked figure with a boardingsword in his hand , was for one swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks . 
The next , a loud splash announced that my brave Queequeg had dived to the rescue . 
One packed rush was made to the side , and every eye counted every ripple , as moment followed moment , and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen . 
Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside , and pushed a little off from the ship . 
`` Ha ! 
ha ! '' 
cried Daggoo , all at once , from his now quiet , swinging perch overhead ; and looking further off from the side , we saw an arm thrust upright from the blue waves ; a sight strange to see , as an arm thrust forth from the grass over a grave . 
`` Both ! 
both ! 
-- it is both ! '' 
- cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout ; and soon after , Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand , and with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian . 
Drawn into the waiting boat , they were quickly brought to the deck ; but Tashtego was long in coming to , and Queequeg did not look very brisk . 
Now , how had this noble rescue been accomplished ? 
Why , diving after the slowly descending head , Queequeg with his keen sword had made side lunges near its bottom , so as to scuttle a large hole there ; then dropping his sword , had thrust his long arm far inwards and upwards , and so hauled out our poor Tash by the head . 
He averred , that upon first thrusting in for him , a leg was presented ; but well knowing that that was not as it ought to be , and might occasion great trouble ; -- he had thrust back the leg , and by a dexterous heave and toss , had wrought a somerset upon the Indian ; so that with the next trial , he came forth in the good old way -- head foremost . 
As for the great head itself , that was doing as well as could be expected . 
And thus , through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of Queequeg , the deliverance , or rather , delivery of Tashtego , was successfully accomplished , in the teeth , too , of the most untoward and apparently hopeless impediments ; which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten . 
Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing , riding and rowing . 
I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header 's will be sure to seem incredible to some landsmen , though they themselves may have either seen or heard of some one 's falling into a cistern ashore ; an accident which not seldom happens , and with much less reason too than the Indian 's , considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of the Sperm Whale 's well . 
But , peradventure , it may be sagaciously urged , how is this ? 
We thought the tissued , infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale , was the lightest and most corky part about him ; and yet thou makest it sink in an element of a far greater specific gravity than itself . 
We have thee there . 
Not at all , but I have ye ; for at the time poor Tash fell in , the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents , leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well -- a double welded , hammered substance , as I have before said , much heavier than the sea water , and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost . 
But the tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the present instance materially counteracted by the other parts of the head remaining undetached from it , so that it sank very slowly and deliberately indeed , affording Queequeg a fair chance for performing his agile obstetrics on the run , as you may say . 
Yes , it was a running delivery , so it was . 
Now , had Tashtego perished in that head , it had been a very precious perishing ; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrant spermaceti ; coffined , hearsed , and tombed in the secret inner chamber and sanctum sanctorum of the whale . 
Only one sweeter end can readily be recalled -- the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter , who seeking honey in the crotch of a hollow tree , found such exceeding store of it , that leaning too far over , it sucked him in , so that he died embalmed . 
How many , think ye , have likewise fallen into Plato 's honey head , and sweetly perished there ? 
The Prairie To scan the lines of his face , or feel the bumps on the head of this Leviathan ; this is a thing which no Physiognomist or Phrenologist has as yet undertaken . 
Such an enterprise would seem almost as hopeful as for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the Rock of Gibraltar , or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated the Dome of the Pantheon . 
Still , in that famous work of his , Lavater not only treats of the various faces of men , but also attentively studies the faces of horses , birds , serpents , and fish ; and dwells in detail upon the modifications of expression discernible therein . 
Nor have Gall and his disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints touching the phrenological characteristics of other beings than man . 
Therefore , though I am but ill qualified for a pioneer , in the application of these two semi-sciences to the whale , I will do my endeavor . 
I try all things ; I achieve what I can . 
Physiognomically regarded , the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature . 
He has no proper nose . 
And since the nose is the central and most conspicuous of the features ; and since it perhaps most modifies and finally controls their combined expression ; hence it would seem that its entire absence , as an external appendage , must very largely affect the countenance of the whale . 
For as in landscape gardening , a spire , cupola , monument , or tower of some sort , is deemed almost indispensable to the completion of the scene ; so no face can be physiognomically in keeping without the elevated open-work belfry of the nose . 
Dash the nose from Phidias 's marble Jove , and what a sorry remainder ! 
Nevertheless , Leviathan is of so mighty a magnitude , all his proportions are so stately , that the same deficiency which in the sculptured Jove were hideous , in him is no blemish at all . 
Nay , it is an added grandeur . 
A nose to the whale would have been impertinent . 
As on your physiognomical voyage you sail round his vast head in your jollyboat , your noble conceptions of him are never insulted by the reflection that he has a nose to be pulled . 
A pestilent conceit , which so often will insist upon obtruding even when beholding the mightiest royal beadle on his throne . 
In some particulars , perhaps the most imposing physiognomical view to be had of the Sperm Whale , is that of the full front of his head . 
This aspect is sublime . 
In thought , a fine human brow is like the East when troubled with the morning . 
In the repose of the pasture , the curled brow of the bull has a touch of the grand in it . 
Pushing heavy cannon up mountain defiles , the elephant 's brow is majestic . 
Human or animal , the mystical brow is as that great golden seal affixed by the German Emperors to their decrees . 
It signifies -- `` God : done this day by my hand . '' 
But in most creatures , nay in man himself , very often the brow is but a mere strip of alpine land lying along the snow line . 
Few are the foreheads which like Shakespeare 's or Melancthon 's rise so high , and descend so low , that the eyes themselves seem clear , eternal , tideless mountain lakes ; and all above them in the forehead 's wrinkles , you seem to track the antlered thoughts descending there to drink , as the Highland hunters track the snow prints of the deer . 
But in the great Sperm Whale , this high and mighty god-like dignity inherent in the brow is so immensely amplified , that gazing on it , in that full front view , you feel the Deity and the dread powers more forcibly than in beholding any other object in living nature . 
For you see no one point precisely ; not one distinct feature is revealed ; no nose , eyes , ears , or mouth ; no face ; he has none , proper ; nothing but that one broad firmament of a forehead , pleated with riddles ; dumbly lowering with the doom of boats , and ships , and men . 
Nor , in profile , does this wondrous brow diminish ; though that way viewed its grandeur does not domineer upon you so . 
In profile , you plainly perceive that horizontal , semi-crescentic depression in the forehead 's middle , which , in a man , is Lavater 's mark of genius . 
But how ? 
Genius in the Sperm Whale ? 
Has the Sperm Whale ever written a book , spoken a speech ? 
No , his great genius is declared in his doing nothing particular to prove it . 
It is moreover declared in his pyramidical silence . 
And this reminds me that had the great Sperm Whale been known to the young Orient World , he would have been deified by their child-magian thoughts . 
They deified the crocodile of the Nile , because the crocodile is tongueless ; and the Sperm Whale has no tongue , or at least it is so exceedingly small , as to be incapable of protrusion . 
If hereafter any highly cultured , poetical nation shall lure back to their birth-right , the merry May-day gods of old ; and livingly enthrone them again in the now egotistical sky ; in the now unhaunted hill ; then be sure , exalted to Jove 's high seat , the great Sperm Whale shall lord it . 
Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics . 
But there is no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every man 's and every being 's face . 
Physiognomy , like every other human science , is but a passing fable . 
If then , Sir William Jones , who read in thirty languages , could not read the simplest peasant 's face in its profounder and more subtle meanings , how may unlettered Ishmael hope to read the awful Chaldee of the Sperm Whale 's brow ? 
I but put that brow before you . 
Read if it if you can . 
The Nut If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a Sphinx , to the phrenologist his brain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible to square . 
In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty feet in length . 
Unhinge the lower jaw , and the side view of this skull is as the side view of a moderately inclined plane resting throughout on a level base . 
But in life -- as we have elsewhere seen -- this inclined plane is angularly filled up , and almost squared by the enormous superincumbent mass of the junk and sperm . 
At the high end the skull forms a crater to bed that part of the mass ; while under the long floor of this crater -- in another cavity seldom exceeding ten inches in length and as many in depth reposes the mere handful of this monster 's brain . 
The brain is at least twenty feet from his apparent forehead in life ; it is hidden away behind its vast outworks , like the innermost citadel within the amplified fortifications of Quebec . 
So like a choice casket is it secreted in him , that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily deny that the Sperm Whale has any other brain than that palpable semblance of one formed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine . 
Lying in strange folds , courses , and convolutions , to their apprehensions , it seems more in keeping with the idea of his general might to regard that mystic part of him as the seat of his intelligence . 
It is plain , then , that phrenologically the head of this Leviathan , in the creature 's living intact state , is an entire delusion . 
As for his true brain , you can then see no indications of it , nor feel any . 
The whale , like all things that are mighty , wears a false brow to the common world . 
If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear view of its rear end , which is the high end , you will be struck by its resemblance to the human skull , beheld in the same situation , and from the same point of view . 
Indeed , place this reversed skull -LRB- scaled down to the human magnitude -RRB- among a plate of men 's skulls , and you would involuntarily confound it with them ; and remarking the depressions on one part of its summit , in phrenological phrase you would say -- This man had no self-esteem , and no veneration . 
And by those negations , considered along with the affirmative fact of his prodigious bulk and power , you can best form to yourself the truest , though not the most exhilarating conception of what the most exalted potency is . 
But if from the comparative dimensions of the whale 's proper brain , you deem it incapable of being adequately charted , then I have another idea for you . 
If you attentively regard almost any quadruped 's spine , you will be struck with the resemblance of its vertebrae to a strung necklace of dwarfed skulls , all bearing rudimental resemblance to the skull proper . 
It is a German conceit , that the vertebrae are absolutely undeveloped skulls . 
But the curious external resemblance , I take it the Germans were not the first men to perceive . 
A foreign friend once pointed it out to me , in the skeleton of a foe he had slain , and with the vertebrae of which he was inlaying , in a sort of basso-relieve , the beaked prow of his canoe . 
Now , I consider that the phrenologists have omitted an important thing in not pushing their investigations from the cerebellum through the spinal canal . 
For I believe that much of a man 's character will be found betokened in his backbone . 
I would rather feel your spine than your skull , whoever you are . 
A thin joist of a spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul . 
I rejoice in my spine , as in the firm audacious staff of that flag which I fling half out to the world . 
Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the Sperm Whale . 
His cranial cavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra ; and in that vertebra the bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inches across , being eight in height , and of a triangular figure with the base downwards . 
As it passes through the remaining vertebrae the canal tapers in size , but for a considerable distance remains of large capacity . 
Now , of course , this canal is filled with much the same strangely fibrous substance -- the spinal cord -- as the brain ; and directly communicates with the brain . 
And what is still more , for many feet after emerging from the brain 's cavity , the spinal cord remains of an undecreasing girth , almost equal to that of the brain . 
Under all these circumstances , would it be unreasonable to survey and map out the whale 's spine phrenologically ? 
For , viewed in this light , the wonderful comparative smallness of his brain proper is more than compensated by the wonderful comparative magnitude of his spinal cord . 
But leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists , I would merely assume the spinal theory for a moment , in reference to the Sperm Whale 's hump . 
This august hump , if I mistake not , rises over one of the larger vertebrae , and is , therefore , in some sort , the outer convex mould of it . 
From its relative situation then , I should call this high hump the organ of firmness or indomitableness in the Sperm Whale . 
And that the great monster is indomitable , you will yet have reason to know . 
The Pequod Meets The Virgin The predestinated day arrived , and we duly met the ship Jungfrau , Derick De Deer , master , of Bremen . 
At one time the greatest whaling people in the world , the Dutch and Germans are now among the least ; but here and there at very wide intervals of latitude and longitude , you still occasionally meet with their flag in the Pacific . 
For some reason , the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects . 
While yet some distance from the Pequod , she rounded to , and dropping a boat , her captain was impelled towards us , impatiently standing in the bows instead of the stern . 
`` What has he in his hand there ? '' 
cried Starbuck , pointing to something wavingly held by the German . 
`` Impossible ! 
-- a lamp-feeder ! '' 
`` Not that , '' said Stubb , `` no , no , it 's a coffee-pot , Mr. Starbuck ; he 's coming off to make us our coffee , is the Yarman ; do n't you see that big tin can there alongside of him ? 
-- that 's his boiling water . 
Oh ! 
he 's all right , is the Yarman . '' 
`` Go along with you , '' cried Flask , `` it 's a lamp-feeder and an oil-can . 
He 's out of oil , and has come a-begging . '' 
However curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing oil on the whale-ground , and however much it may invertedly contradict the old proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle , yet sometimes such a thing really happens ; and in the present case Captain Derick De Deer did indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as Flask did declare . 
As he mounted the deck , Ahab abruptly accosted him , without at all heeding what he had in his hand ; but in his broken lingo , the German soon evinced his complete ignorance of the White Whale ; immediately turning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can , with some remarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at night in profound darkness -- his last drop of Bremen oil being gone , and not a single flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency ; concluding by hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery is technically called a clean one -LRB- that is , an empty one -RRB- , well deserving the name of Jungfrau or the Virgin . 
His necessities supplied , Derick departed ; but he had not gained his ship 's side , when whales were almost simultaneously raised from the mast-heads of both vessels ; and so eager for the chase was Derick , that without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard , he slewed round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders . 
Now , the game having risen to leeward , he and the other three German boats that soon followed him , had considerably the start of the Pequod 's keels . 
There were eight whales , an average pod . 
Aware of their danger , they were going all abreast with great speed straight before the wind , rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans of horses in harness . 
They left a great , wide wake , as though continually unrolling a great wide parchment upon the sea . 
Full in this rapid wake , and many fathoms in the rear , swam a huge , humped old bull , which by his comparatively slow progress , as well as by the unusual yellowish incrustations over-growing him , seemed afflicted with the jaundice , or some other infirmity . 
Whether this whale belonged to the pod in advance , seemed questionable ; for it is not customary for such venerable leviathans to be at all social . 
Nevertheless , he stuck to their wake , though indeed their back water must have retarded him , because the white-bone or swell at his broad muzzle was a dashed one , like the swell formed when two hostile currents meet . 
His spout was short , slow , and laborious ; coming forth with a choking sort of gush , and spending itself in torn shreds , followed by strange subterranean commotions in him , which seemed to have egress at his other buried extremity , causing the waters behind him to upbubble . 
`` Who 's got some paregoric ? '' 
said Stubb , `` he has the stomach-ache , I 'm afraid . 
Lord , think of having half an acre of stomach-ache ! 
Adverse winds are holding mad Christmas in him , boys . 
It 's the first foul wind I ever knew to blow from astern ; but look , did ever whale yaw so before ? 
it must be , he 's lost his tiller . '' 
As an overladen Indiaman bearing down the Hindostan coast with a deck load of frightened horses , careens , buries , rolls , and wallows on her way ; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk , and now and then partly turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends , expose the cause of his devious wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin . 
Whether he had lost that fin in battle , or had been born without it , it were hard to say . 
`` Only wait a bit , old chap , and I 'll give ye a sling for that wounded arm , '' cried cruel Flask , pointing to the whale-line near him . 
`` Mind he do n't sling thee with it , '' cried Starbuck . 
`` Give way , or the German will have him . '' 
With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for this one fish , because not only was he the largest , and therefore the most valuable whale , but he was nearest to them , and the other whales were going with such great velocity , moreover , as almost to defy pursuit for the time . 
At this juncture , the Pequod 's keels had shot by the three German boats last lowered ; but from the great start he had had , Derick 's boat still led the chase , though every moment neared by his foreign rivals . 
The only thing they feared , was , that from being already so nigh to his mark , he would be enabled to dart his iron before they could completely overtake and pass him . 
As for Derick , he seemed quite confident that this would be the case , and occasionally with a deriding gesture shook his lamp-feeder at the other boats . 
`` The ungracious and ungrateful dog ! '' 
cried Starbuck ; `` he mocks and dares me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutes ago ! '' 
-- Then in his old intense whisper -- `` give way , greyhounds ! 
Dog to it ! '' 
`` I tell ye what it is , men '' -- cried Stubb to his crew -- It 's against my religion to get mad ; but I 'd like to eat that villainous Yarman -- Pull -- wo n't ye ? 
Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye ? 
Do ye love brandy ? 
A hogshead of brandy , then , to the best man . 
Come , why do n't some of ye burst a blood-vessel ? 
Who 's that been dropping an anchor overboard -- we do n't budge an inch -- we 're becalmed . 
Halloo , here 's grass growing in the boat 's bottom -- and by the Lord , the mast there 's budding . 
This wo n't do , boys . 
Look at that Yarman ! 
The short and long of it is , men , will ye spit fire or not ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
see the suds he makes ! '' 
cried Flask , dancing up and down -- `` What a hump -- Oh , do pile on the beef -- lays like a log ! 
Oh ! 
my lads , do spring -- slap-jacks and quahogs for supper , you know , my lads -- baked clams and muffins -- oh , do , do , spring , -- he 's a hundred barreler -- do n't lose him now -- do n't oh , do n't ! 
-- see that Yarman -- Oh , wo n't ye pull for your duff , my lads -- such a sog ! 
such a sogger ! 
Do n't ye love sperm ? 
There goes three thousand dollars , men ! 
-- a bank ! 
-- a whole bank ! 
The bank of England ! 
-- Oh , do , do , do ! 
-- What 's that Yarman about now ? '' 
At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder at the advancing boats , and also his oil-can ; perhaps with the double view of retarding his rivals ' way , and at the same time economically accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss . 
`` The unmannerly Dutch dogger ! '' 
cried Stubb . 
`` Pull now , men , like fifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils . 
What d'ye say , Tashtego ; are you the man to snap your spine in two-and-twenty pieces for the honor of old Gayhead ? 
What d'ye say ? '' 
`` I say , pull like god-dam , '' -- cried the Indian . 
Fiercely , but evenly incited by the taunts of the German , the Pequod 's three boats now began ranging almost abreast ; and , so disposed , momentarily neared him . 
In that fine , loose , chivalrous attitude of the headsman when drawing near to his prey , the three mates stood up proudly , occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating cry of , `` There she slides , now ! 
Hurrah for the white-ash breeze ! 
Down with the Yarman ! 
Sail over him ! '' 
But so decided an original start had Derick had , that spite of all their gallantry , he would have proved the victor in this race , had not a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught the blade of his midship oarsman . 
While this clumsy lubber was striving to free his white-ash , and while , in consequence , Derick 's boat was nigh to capsizing , and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage ; -- that was a good time for Starbuck , Stubb , and Flask . 
With a shout , they took a mortal start forwards , and slantingly ranged up on the German 's quarter . 
An instant more , and all four boats were diagonically in the whale 's immediate wake , while stretching from them , on both sides , was the foaming swell that he made . 
It was a terrific , most pitiable , and maddening sight . 
The whale was now going head out , and sending his spout before him in a continual tormented jet ; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of fright . 
Now to this hand , now to that , he yawed in his faltering flight , and still at every billow that he broke , he spasmodically sank in the sea , or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating fin . 
So have I seen a bird with clipped wing , making affrighted broken circles in the air , vainly striving to escape the piratical hawks . 
But the bird has a voice , and with plaintive cries will make known her fear ; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea , was chained up and enchanted in him ; he had no voice , save that choking respiration through his spiracle , and this made the sight of him unspeakably pitiable ; while still , in his amazing bulk , portcullis jaw , and omnipotent tail , there was enough to appal the stoutest man who so pitied . 
Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod 's boats the advantage , and rather than be thus foiled of his game , Derick chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually long dart , ere the last chance would for ever escape . 
But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke , than all three tigers -- Queequeg , Tashtego , Daggoo -- instinctively sprang to their feet , and standing in a diagonal row , simultaneously pointed their barbs ; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer , their three Nantucket irons entered the whale . 
Blinding vapors of foam and white-fire ! 
The three boats , in the first fury of the whale 's headlong rush , bumped the German 's aside with such force , that both Derick and his baffled harpooneer were spilled out , and sailed over by the three flying keels . 
`` Do n't be afraid , my butter-boxes , '' cried Stubb , casting a passing glance upon them as he shot by ; `` ye 'll be picked up presently -- all right -- I saw some sharks astern -- St. Bernard 's dogs , you know -- relieve distressed travellers . 
Hurrah ! 
this is the way to sail now . 
Every keel a sunbeam ! 
Hurrah ! 
-- Here we go like three tin kettles at the tail of a mad cougar ! 
This puts me in mind of fastening to an elephant in a tilbury on a plain -- makes the wheelspokes fly , boys , when you fasten to him that way ; and there 's danger of being pitched out too , when you strike a hill . 
Hurrah ! 
this is the way a fellow feels when he 's going to Davy Jones -- all a rush down an endless inclined plane ! 
Hurrah ! 
this whale carries the everlasting mail ! '' 
But the monster 's run was a brief one . 
Giving a sudden gasp , he tumultuously sounded . 
With a grating rush , the three lines flew round the loggerheads with such a force as to gouge deep grooves in them ; while so fearful were the harpooneers that this rapid sounding would soon exhaust the lines , that using all their dexterous might , they caught repeated smoking turns with the rope to hold on ; till at last -- owing to the perpendicular strain from the lead-lined chocks of the boats , whence the three ropes went straight down into the blue -- the gunwales of the bows were almost even with the water , while the three sterns tilted high in the air . 
And the whale soon ceasing to sound , for some time they remained in that attitude , fearful of expending more line , though the position was a little ticklish . 
But though boats have been taken down and lost in this way , yet it is this `` holding on , '' as it is called ; this hooking up by the sharp barbs of his live flesh from the back ; this it is that often torments the Leviathan into soon rising again to meet the sharp lance of his foes . 
Yet not to speak of the peril of the thing , it is to be doubted whether this course is always the best ; for it is but reasonable to presume , that the longer the stricken whale stays under water , the more he is exhausted . 
Because , owing to the enormous surface of him -- in a full grown sperm whale something less than 2000 square feet -- the pressure of the water is immense . 
We all know what an astonishing atmospheric weight we ourselves stand up under ; even here , above-ground , in the air ; how vast , then , the burden of a whale , bearing on his back a column of two hundred fathoms of ocean ! 
It must at least equal the weight of fifty atmospheres . 
One whaleman has estimated it at the weight of twenty line-of-battle ships , with all their guns , and stores , and men on board . 
As the three boats lay there on that gently rolling sea , gazing down into its eternal blue noon ; and as not a single groan or cry of any sort , nay , not so much as a ripple or a bubble came up from its depths ; what landsman would have thought , that beneath all that silence and placidity , the utmost monster of the seas was writhing and wrenching in agony ! 
Not eight inches of perpendicular rope were visible at the bows . 
Seems it credible that by three such thin threads the great Leviathan was suspended like the big weight to an eight day clock . 
Suspended ? 
and to what ? 
To three bits of board . 
Is this the creature of whom it was once so triumphantly said -- `` Canst thou fill his skin with barbed irons ? 
or his head with fish-spears ? 
The sword of him that layeth at him can not hold , the spear , the dart , nor the habergeon : he esteemeth iron as straw ; the arrow can not make him flee ; darts are counted as stubble ; he laugheth at the shaking of a spear ! '' 
This the creature ? 
this he ? 
Oh ! 
that unfulfilments should follow the prophets . 
For with the strength of a thousand thighs in his tail , Leviathan had run his head under the mountains of the sea , to hide him from the Pequod 's fishspears ! 
In that sloping afternoon sunlight , the shadows that the three boats sent down beneath the surface , must have been long enough and broad enough to shade half Xerxes ' army . 
Who can tell how appalling to the wounded whale must have been such huge phantoms flitting over his head ! 
`` Stand by , men ; he stirs , '' cried Starbuck , as the three lines suddenly vibrated in the water , distinctly conducting upwards to them , as by magnetic wires , the life and death throbs of the whale , so that every oarsman felt them in his seat . 
The next moment , relieved in a great part from the downward strain at the bows , the boats gave a sudden bounce upwards , as a small icefield will , when a dense herd of white bears are scared from it into the sea . 
`` Haul in ! 
Haul in ! '' 
cried Starbuck again ; `` he 's rising . '' 
The lines , of which , hardly an instant before , not one hand 's breadth could have been gained , were now in long quick coils flung back all dripping into the boats , and soon the whale broke water within two ship 's length of the hunters . 
His motions plainly denoted his extreme exhaustion . 
In most land animals there are certain valves or flood-gates in many of their veins , whereby when wounded , the blood is in some degree at least instantly shut off in certain directions . 
Not so with the whale ; one of whose peculiarities it is , to have an entire non-valvular structure of the blood-vessels , so that when pierced even by so small a point as a harpoon , a deadly drain is at once begun upon his whole arterial system ; and when this is heightened by the extraordinary pressure of water at a great distance below the surface , his life may be said to pour from him in incessant streams . 
Yet so vast is the quantity of blood in him , and so distant and numerous its interior fountains , that he will keep thus bleeding and bleeding for a considerable period ; even as in a drought a river will flow , whose source is in the well-springs of far-off and indiscernible hills . 
Even now , when the boats pulled upon this whale , and perilously drew over his swaying flukes , and the lances were darted into him , they were followed by steady jets from the new made wound , which kept continually playing , while the natural spout-hole in his head was only at intervals , however rapid , sending its affrighted moisture into the air . 
From this last vent no blood yet came , because no vital part of him had thus far been struck . 
His life , as they significantly call it , was untouched . 
As the boats now more closely surrounded him , the whole upper part of his form , with much of it that is ordinarily submerged , was plainly revealed . 
His eyes , or rather the places where his eyes had been , were beheld . 
As strange misgrown masses gather in the knot-holes of the noblest oaks when prostrate , so from the points which the whale 's eyes had once occupied , now protruded blind bulbs , horribly pitiable to see . 
But pity there was none . 
For all his old age , and his one arm , and his blind eyes , he must die the death and be murdered , in order to light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men , and also to illuminate the solemn churches that preach unconditional inoffensiveness by all to all . 
Still rolling in his blood , at last he partially disclosed a strangely discolored bunch or protuberance , the size of a bushel , low down on the flank . 
`` A nice spot , '' cried Flask ; `` just let me prick him there once . '' 
`` Avast ! '' 
cried Starbuck , `` there 's no need of that ! '' 
But humane Starbuck was too late . 
At the instant of the dart an ulcerous jet shot from this cruel wound , and goaded by it into more than sufferable anguish , the whale now spouting thick blood , with swift fury blindly darted at the craft , bespattering them and their glorying crews all over with showers of gore , capsizing Flask 's boat and marring the bows . 
It was his death stroke . 
For , by this time , so spent was he by loss of blood , that he helplessly rolled away from the wreck he had made ; lay panting on his side , impotently flapped with his stumped fin , then over and over slowly revolved like a waning world ; turned up the white secrets of his belly ; lay like a log , and died . 
It was most piteous , that last expiring spout . 
As when by unseen hands the water is gradually drawn off from some mighty fountain , and with half-stifled melancholy gurglings the spray-column lowers and lowers to the ground -- so the last long dying spout of the whale . 
Soon , while the crews were awaiting the arrival of the ship , the body showed symptoms of sinking with all its treasures unrifled . 
Immediately , by Starbuck 's orders , lines were secured to it at different points , so that ere long every boat was a buoy ; the sunken whale being suspended a few inches beneath them by the cords . 
By very heedful management , when the ship drew nigh , the whale was transferred to her side , and was strongly secured there by the stiffest fluke-chains , for it was plain that unless artificially upheld , the body would at once sink to the bottom . 
It so chanced that almost upon first cutting into him with the spade , the entire length of a corroded harpoon was found imbedded in his flesh , on the lower part of the bunch before described . 
But as the stumps of harpoons are frequently found in the dead bodies of captured whales , with the flesh perfectly healed around them , and no prominence of any kind to denote their place ; therefore , there must needs have been some other unknown reason in the present case fully to account for the ulceration alluded to . 
But still more curious was the fact of a lance-head of stone being found in him , not far from the buried iron , the flesh perfectly firm about it . 
Who had darted that stone lance ? 
And when ? 
It might have been darted by some Nor ' West Indian long before America was discovered . 
What other marvels might have been rummaged out of this monstrous cabinet there is no telling . 
But a sudden stop was put to further discoveries , by the ship 's being unprecedentedly dragged over sideways to the sea , owing to the body 's immensely increasing tendency to sink . 
However , Starbuck , who had the ordering of affairs , hung on to it to the last ; hung on to it so resolutely , indeed , that when at length the ship would have been capsized , if still persisting in locking arms with the body ; then , when the command was given to break clear from it , such was the immovable strain upon the timber-heads to which the fluke-chains and cables were fastened , that it was impossible to cast them off . 
Meantime everything in the Pequod was aslant . 
To cross to the other side of the deck was like walking up the steep gabled roof of a house . 
The ship groaned and gasped . 
Many of the ivory inlayings of her bulwarks and cabins were started from their places , by the unnatural dislocation . 
In vain handspikes and crows were brought to bear upon the immovable fluke-chains , to pry them adrift from the timberheads ; and so low had the whale now settled that the submerged ends could not be at all approached , while every moment whole tons of ponderosity seemed added to the sinking bulk , and the ship seemed on the point of going over . 
`` Hold on , hold on , wo n't ye ? '' 
cried Stubb to the body , `` do n't be in such a devil of a hurry to sink ! 
By thunder , men , we must do something or go for it . 
No use prying there ; avast , I say with your handspikes , and run one of ye for a prayer book and a pen-knife , and cut the big chains . '' 
`` Knife ? 
Aye , aye , '' cried Queequeg , and seizing the carpenter 's heavy hatchet , he leaned out of a porthole , and steel to iron , began slashing at the largest fluke-chains . 
But a few strokes , full of sparks , were given , when the exceeding strain effected the rest . 
With a terrific snap , every fastening went adrift ; the ship righted , the carcase sank . 
Now , this occasional inevitable sinking of the recently killed Sperm Whale is a very curious thing ; nor has any fisherman yet adequately accounted for it . 
Usually the dead Sperm Whale floats with great buoyancy , with its side or belly considerably elevated above the surface . 
If the only whales that thus sank were old , meagre , and broken-hearted creatures , their pads of lard diminished and all their bones heavy and rheumatic ; then you might with some reason assert that this sinking is caused by an uncommon specific gravity in the fish so sinking , consequent upon this absence of buoyant matter in him . 
But it is not so . 
For young whales , in the highest health , and swelling with noble aspirations , prematurely cut off in the warm flush and May of life , with all their panting lard about them ! 
even these brawny , buoyant heroes do sometimes sink . 
Be it said , however , that the Sperm Whale is far less liable to this accident than any other species . 
Where one of that sort go down , twenty Right Whales do . 
This difference in the species is no doubt imputable in no small degree to the greater quantity of bone in the Right Whale ; his Venetian blinds alone sometimes weighing more than a ton ; from this incumbrance the Sperm Whale is wholly free . 
But there are instances where , after the lapse of many hours or several days , the sunken whale again rises , more buoyant than in life . 
But the reason of this is obvious . 
Gases are generated in him ; he swells to a prodigious magnitude ; becomes a sort of animal balloon . 
A line-of-battle ship could hardly keep him under then . 
In the Shore Whaling , on soundings , among the Bays of New Zealand , when a Right Whale gives token of sinking , they fasten buoys to him , with plenty of rope ; so that when the body has gone down , they know where to look for it when it shall have ascended again . 
It was not long after the sinking of the body that a cry was heard from the Pequod 's mast-heads , announcing that the Jungfrau was again lowering her boats ; though the only spout in sight was that of a Fin-Back , belonging to the species of uncapturable whales , because of its incredible power of swimming . 
Nevertheless , the Fin-Back 's spout is so similar to the Sperm Whale 's , that by unskilful fishermen it is often mistaken for it . 
And consequently Derick and all his host were now in valiant chase of this unnearable brute . 
The Virgin crowding all sail , made after her four young keels , and thus they all disappeared far to leeward , still in bold , hopeful chase . 
Oh ! 
many are the Fin-Backs , and many are the Dericks , my friend . 
The Honor and Glory of Whaling There are some enterprises in which a careful disorderliness is the true method . 
The more I dive into this matter of whaling , and push my researches up to the very spring-head of it so much the more am I impressed with its great honorableness and antiquity ; and especially when I find so many great demi-gods and heroes , prophets of all sorts , who one way or other have shed distinction upon it , I am transported with the reflection that I myself belong , though but subordinately , to so emblazoned a fraternity . 
The gallant Perseus , a son of Jupiter , was the first whaleman ; and to the eternal honor of our calling be it said , that the first whale attacked by our brotherhood was not killed with any sordid intent . 
Those were the knightly days of our profession , when we only bore arms to succor the distressed , and not to fill men 's lamp-feeders . 
Every one knows the fine story of Perseus and Andromeda ; how the lovely Andromeda , the daughter of a king , was tied to a rock on the sea-coast , and as Leviathan was in the very act of carrying her off , Perseus , the prince of whalemen , intrepidly advancing , harpooned the monster , and delivered and married the maid . 
It was an admirable artistic exploit , rarely achieved by the best harpooneers of the present day ; inasmuch as this Leviathan was slain at the very first dart . 
And let no man doubt this Arkite story ; for in the ancient Joppa , now Jaffa , on the Syrian coast , in one of the Pagan temples , there stood for many ages the vast skeleton of a whale , which the city 's legends and all the inhabitants asserted to be the identical bones of the monster that Perseus slew . 
When the Romans took Joppa , the same skeleton was carried to Italy in triumph . 
What seems most singular and suggestively important in this story , is this : it was from Joppa that Jonah set sail . 
Akin to the adventure of Perseus and Andromeda -- indeed , by some supposed to be indirectly derived from it -- is that famous story of St. George and the Dragon ; which dragon I maintain to have been a whale ; for in many old chronicles whales and dragons are strangely jumbled together , and often stand for each other . 
`` Thou art as a lion of the waters , and as a dragon of the sea , '' said Ezekiel ; hereby , plainly meaning a whale ; in truth , some versions of the Bible use that word itself . 
Besides , it would much subtract from the glory of the exploit had St. George but encountered a crawling reptile of the land , instead of doing battle with the great monster of the deep . 
Any man may kill a snake , but only a Perseus , a St. George , a Coffin , have the heart in them to march boldly up to a whale . 
Let not the modern paintings of this scene mislead us ; for though the creature encountered by that valiant whaleman of old is vaguely represented of a griffin-like shape , and though the battle is depicted on land and the saint on horseback , yet considering the great ignorance of those times , when the true form of the whale was unknown to artists ; and considering that as in Perseus ' case , St. George 's whale might have crawled up out of the sea on the beach ; and considering that the animal ridden by St. George might have been only a large seal , or sea-horse ; bearing all this in mind , it will not appear altogether incompatible with the sacred legend and the ancientest draughts of the scene , to hold this so-called dragon no other than the great Leviathan himself . 
In fact , placed before the strict and piercing truth , this whole story will fare like that fish , flesh , and fowl idol of the Philistines , Dagon by name ; who being planted before the ark of Israel , his horse 's head and both the palms of his hands fell off from him , and only the stump or fishy part of him remained . 
Thus , then , one of our own noble stamp , even a whaleman , is the tutelary guardian of England ; and by good rights , we harpooneers of Nantucket should be enrolled in the most noble order of St. George . 
And therefore , let not the knights of that honorable company -LRB- none of whom , I venture to say , have ever had to do with a whale like their great patron -RRB- , let them never eye a Nantucketer with disdain , since even in our woollen frocks and tarred trowsers we are much better entitled to St. George 's decoration than they . 
Whether to admit Hercules among us or not , concerning this I long remained dubious : for though according to the Greek mythologies , that antique Crockett and Kit Carson -- that brawny doer of rejoicing good deeds , was swallowed down and thrown up by a whale ; still , whether that strictly makes a whaleman of him , that might be mooted . 
It nowhere appears that he ever actually harpooned his fish , unless , indeed , from the inside . 
Nevertheless , he may be deemed a sort of involuntary whaleman ; at any rate the whale caught him , if he did not the whale . 
I claim him for one of our clan . 
But , by the best contradictory authorities , this Grecian story of Hercules and the whale is considered to be derived from the still more ancient Hebrew story of Jonah and the whale ; and vice versa ; certainly they are very similar . 
If I claim the demigod then , why not the prophet ? 
Nor do heroes , saints , demigods , and prophets alone comprise the whole roll of our order . 
Our grand master is still to be named ; for like royal kings of old times , we find the head-waters of our fraternity in nothing short of the great gods themselves . 
That wondrous oriental story is now to be rehearsed from the Shaster , which gives us the dread Vishnoo , one of the three persons in the godhead of the Hindoos ; gives us this divine Vishnoo himself for our Lord ; -- Vishnoo , who , by the first of his ten earthly incarnations , has for ever set apart and sanctified the whale . 
When Brahma , or the God of Gods , saith the Shaster , resolved to recreate the world after one of its periodical dissolutions , he gave birth to Vishnoo , to preside over the work ; but the Vedas , or mystical books , whose perusal would seem to have been indispensable to Vishnoo before beginning the creation , and which therefore must have contained something in the shape of practical hints to young architects , these Vedas were lying at the bottom of the waters ; so Vishnoo became incarnate in a whale , and sounding down in him to the uttermost depths , rescued the sacred volumes . 
Was not this Vishnoo a whaleman , then ? 
even as a man who rides a horse is called a horseman ? 
Perseus , St. George , Hercules , Jonah , and Vishnoo ! 
there 's a member-roll for you ! 
What club but the whaleman 's can head off like that ? 
Jonah Historically Regarded Reference was made to the historical story of Jonah and the whale in the preceding chapter . 
Now some Nantucketers rather distrust this historical story of Jonah and the whale . 
But then there were some sceptical Greeks and Romans , who , standing out from the orthodox pagans of their times , equally doubted the story of Hercules and the whale , and Arion and the dolphin ; and yet their doubting those traditions did not make those traditions one whit the less facts , for all that . 
One old Sag-Harbor whaleman 's chief reason for questioning the Hebrew story was this : -- He had one of those quaint old-fashioned Bibles , embellished with curious , unscientific plates ; one of which represented Jonah 's whale with two spouts in his head -- a peculiarity only true with respect to a species of the Leviathan -LRB- the Right Whale , and the varieties of that order -RRB- , concerning which the fishermen have this saying , `` A penny roll would choke him '' ; his swallow is so very small . 
But , to this , Bishop Jebb 's anticipative answer is ready . 
It is not necessary , hints the Bishop , that we consider Jonah as tombed in the whale 's belly , but as temporarily lodged in some part of his mouth . 
And this seems reasonable enough in the good Bishop . 
For truly , the Right Whale 's mouth would accommodate a couple of whist-tables , and comfortably seat all the players . 
Possibly , too , Jonah might have ensconced himself in a hollow tooth ; but , on second thoughts , the Right Whale is toothless . 
Another reason which Sag-Harbor -LRB- he went by that name -RRB- urged for his want of faith in this matter of the prophet , was something obscurely in reference to his incarcerated body and the whale 's gastric juices . 
But this objection likewise falls to the ground , because a German exegetist supposes that Jonah must have taken refuge in the floating body of a dead whale -- even as the French soldiers in the Russian campaign turned their dead horses into tents , and crawled into them . 
Besides , it has been divined by other continental commentators , that when Jonah was thrown overboard from the Joppa ship , he straightway effected his escape to another vessel near by , some vessel with a whale for a figure-head ; and , I would add , possibly called `` The Whale , '' as some craft are nowadays christened the `` Shark , '' the `` Gull , '' the `` Eagle . '' 
Nor have there been wanting learned exegetists who have opined that the whale mentioned in the book of Jonah merely meant a life-preserver -- an inflated bag of wind -- which the endangered prophet swam to , and so was saved from a watery doom . 
Poor Sag-Harbor , therefore , seems worsted all round . 
But he had still another reason for his want of faith . 
It was this , if I remember right : Jonah was swallowed by the whale in the Mediterranean Sea , and after three days ' he was vomited up somewhere within three days ' journey of Nineveh , a city on the Tigris , very much more than three days ' journey across from the nearest point of the Mediterranean coast . 
How is that ? 
But was there no other way for the whale to land the prophet within that short distance of Nineveh ? 
Yes . 
He might have carried him round by the way of the Cape of Good Hope . 
But not to speak of the passage through the whole length of the Mediterranean , and another passage up the Persian Gulf and Red Sea , such a supposition would involve the complete circumnavigation of all Africa in three days , not to speak of the Tigris waters , near the site of Nineveh , being too shallow for any whale to swim in . 
Besides , this idea of Jonah 's weathering the Cape of Good Hope at so early a day would wrest the honor of the discovery of that great headland from Bartholomew Diaz , its reputed discoverer , and so make modern history a liar . 
But all these foolish arguments of old Sag-Harbor only evinced his foolish pride of reason -- a thing still more reprehensible in him , seeing that he had but little learning except what he had picked up from the sun and the sea . 
I say it only shows his foolish , impious pride , and abominable , devilish rebellion against the reverend clergy . 
For by a Portuguese Catholic priest , this very idea of Jonah 's going to Nineveh via the Cape of Good Hope was advanced as a signal magnification of the general miracle . 
And so it was . 
Besides , to this day , the highly enlightened Turks devoutly believe in the historical story of Jonah . 
And some three centuries ago , an English traveller in old Harris 's Voyages , speaks of a Turkish Mosque built in honor of Jonah , in which Mosque was a miraculous lamp that burnt without any oil . 
Pitchpoling To make them run easily and swiftly , the axles of carriages are anointed ; and for much the same purpose , some whalers perform an analogous operation upon their boat ; they grease the bottom . 
Nor is it to be doubted that as such a procedure can do no harm , it may possibly be of no contemptible advantage ; considering that oil and water are hostile ; that oil is a sliding thing , and that the object in view is to make the boat slide bravely . 
Queequeg believed strongly in anointing his boat , and one morning not long after the German ship Jungfrau disappeared , took more than customary pains in that occupation ; crawling under its bottom , where it hung over the side , and rubbing in the unctuousness as though diligently seeking to insure a crop of hair from the craft 's bald keel . 
He seemed to be working in obedience to some particular presentiment . 
Nor did it remain unwarranted by the event . 
Towards noon whales were raised ; but so soon as the ship sailed down to them , they turned and fled with swift precipitancy ; a disordered flight , as of Cleopatra 's barges from Actium . 
Nevertheless , the boats pursued , and Stubb 's was foremost . 
By great exertion , Tashtego at last succeeded in planting one iron ; but the stricken whale , without at all sounding , still continued his horizontal flight , with added fleetness . 
Such unintermitted strainings upon the planted iron must sooner or later inevitably extract it . 
It became imperative to lance the flying whale , or be content to lose him . 
But to haul the boat up to his flank was impossible , he swam so fast and furious . 
What then remained ? 
Of all the wondrous devices and dexterities , the sleights of hand and countless subtleties , to which the veteran whaleman is so often forced , none exceed that fine manoeuvre with the lance called pitchpoling . 
Small sword , or broad sword , in all its exercises boasts nothing like it . 
It is only indispensable with an inveterate running whale ; its grand fact and feature is the wonderful distance to which the long lance is accurately darted from a violently rocking , jerking boat , under extreme headway . 
Steel and wood included , the entire spear is some ten or twelve feet in length ; the staff is much slighter than that of the harpoon , and also of a lighter material -- pine . 
It is furnished with a small rope called a warp , of considerable length , by which it can be hauled back to the hand after darting . 
But before going further , it is important to mention here , that though the harpoon may be pitchpoled in the same way with the lance , yet it is seldom done ; and when done , is still less frequently successful , on account of the greater weight and inferior length of the harpoon as compared with the lance , which in effect become serious drawbacks . 
As a general thing , therefore , you must first get fast to a whale , before any pitchpoling comes into play . 
Look now at Stubb ; a man who from his humorous , deliberate coolness and equanimity in the direst emergencies , was specially qualified to excel in pitchpoling . 
Look at him ; he stands upright in the tossed bow of the flying boat ; wrapt in fleecy foam , the towing whale is forty feet ahead . 
Handling the long lance lightly , glancing twice or thrice along its length to see if it be exactly straight , Stubb whistlingly gathers up the coil of the warp in one hand , so as to secure its free end in his grasp , leaving the rest unobstructed . 
Then holding the lance full before his waistband 's middle , he levels it at the whale ; when , covering him with it , he steadily depresses the butt-end in his hand , thereby elevating the point till the weapon stands fairly balanced upon his palm , fifteen feet in the air . 
He minds you somewhat of a juggler , balancing a long staff on his chin . 
Next moment with a rapid , nameless impulse , in a superb lofty arch the bright steel spans the foaming distance , and quivers in the life spot of the whale . 
Instead of sparkling water , he now spouts red blood . 
`` That drove the spigot out of him ! '' 
cried Stubb . '' 
'T is July 's immortal Fourth ; all fountains must run wine today ! 
Would now , it were old Orleans whiskey , or old Ohio , or unspeakable old Monongahela ! 
Then , Tashtego , lad , I 'd have ye hold a canakin to the jet , and we 'd drink round it ! 
Yea , verily , hearts alive , we 'd brew choice punch in the spread of his spout-hole there , and from that live punch-bowl quaff the living stuff . '' 
Again and again to such gamesome talk , the dexterous dart is repeated , the spear returning to its master like a greyhound held in skilful leash . 
The agonized whale goes into his flurry ; the tow-line is slackened , and the pitchpoler dropping astern , folds his hands , and mutely watches the monster die . 
The Fountain That for six thousand years -- and no one knows how many millions of ages before -- the great whales should have been spouting all over the sea , and sprinkling and mistifying the gardens of the deep , as with so many sprinkling or mistifying pots ; and that for some centuries back , thousands of hunters should have been close by the fountain of the whale , watching these sprinklings and spoutings -- that all this should be , and yet , that down to this blessed minute -LRB- fifteen and a quarter minutes past one o'clock P.M. of this sixteenth day of December , A.D. 1851 -RRB- , it should still remain a problem , whether these spoutings are , after all , really water , or nothing but vapor -- this is surely a noteworthy thing . 
Let us , then , look at this matter , along with some interesting items contingent . 
Every one knows that by the peculiar cunning of their gills , the finny tribes in general breathe the air which at all times is combined with the element in which they swim ; hence , a herring or a cod might live a century , and never once raise its head above the surface . 
But owing to his marked internal structure which gives him regular lungs , like a human being 's , the whale can only live by inhaling the disengaged air in the open atmosphere . 
Wherefore the necessity for his periodical visits to the upper world . 
But he can not in any degree breathe through his mouth , for , in his ordinary attitude , the Sperm Whale 's mouth is buried at least eight feet beneath the surface ; and what is still more , his windpipe has no connexion with his mouth . 
No , he breathes through his spiracle alone ; and this is on the top of his head . 
If I say , that in any creature breathing is only a function indispensable to vitality , inasmuch as it withdraws from the air a certain element , which being subsequently brought into contact with the blood imparts to the blood its vivifying principle , I do not think I shall err ; though I may possibly use some superfluous scientific words . 
Assume it , and it follows that if all the blood in a man could be aerated with one breath , he might then seal up his nostrils and not fetch another for a considerable time . 
That is to say , he would then live without breathing . 
Anomalous as it may seem , this is precisely the case with the whale , who systematically lives , by intervals , his full hour and more -LRB- when at the bottom -RRB- without drawing a single breath , or so much as in any way inhaling a particle of air ; for , remember , he has no gills . 
How is this ? 
Between his ribs and on each side of his spine he is supplied with a remarkable involved Cretan labyrinth of vermicelli-like vessels , which vessels , when he quits the surface , are completely distended with oxygenated blood . 
So that for an hour or more , a thousand fathoms in the sea , he carries a surplus stock of vitality in him , just as the camel crossing the waterless desert carries a surplus supply of drink for future use in its four supplementary stomachs . 
The anatomical fact of this labyrinth is indisputable ; and that the supposition founded upon it is reasonable and true , seems the more cogent to me , when I consider the otherwise inexplicable obstinacy of that leviathan in having his spoutings out , as the fishermen phrase it . 
This is what I mean . 
If unmolested , upon rising to the surface , the Sperm Whale will continue there for a period of time exactly uniform with all his other unmolested risings . 
Say he stays eleven minutes , and jets seventy times , that is , respires seventy breaths ; then whenever he rises again , he will be sure to have his seventy breaths over again , to a minute . 
Now , if after he fetches a few breaths you alarm him , so that he sounds , he will be always dodging up again to make good his regular allowance of air . 
And not till those seventy breaths are told , will he finally go down to stay out his full term below . 
Remark , however , that in different individuals these rates are different ; but in any one they are alike . 
Now , why should the whale thus insist upon having his spoutings out , unless it be to replenish his reservoir of air , ere descending for good ? 
How obvious it is it , too , that this necessity for the whale 's rising exposes him to all the fatal hazards of the chase . 
For not by hook or by net could this vast leviathan be caught , when sailing a thousand fathoms beneath the sunlight . 
Not so much thy skill , then , O hunter , as the great necessities that strike the victory to thee ! 
In man , breathing is incessantly going on -- one breath only serving for two or three pulsations ; so that whatever other business he has to attend to , waking or sleeping , breathe he must , or die he will . 
But the Sperm Whale only breathes about one seventh or Sunday of his time . 
It has been said that the whale only breathes through his spout-hole ; if it could truthfully be added that his spouts are mixed with water , then I opine we should be furnished with the reason why his sense of smell seems obliterated in him ; for the only thing about him that at all answers to his nose is that identical spout-hole ; and being so clogged with two elements , it could not be expected to have the power of smelling . 
But owing to the mystery of the spout -- whether it be water or whether it be vapor -- no absolute certainty can as yet be arrived at on this head . 
Sure it is , nevertheless , that the Sperm Whale has no proper olfactories . 
But what does he want of them ? 
No roses , no violets , no Cologne-water in the sea . 
Furthermore , as his windpipe solely opens into the tube of his spouting canal , and as that long canal -- like the grand Erie Canal -- is furnished with a sort of locks -LRB- that open and shut -RRB- for the downward retention of air or the upward exclusion of water , therefore the whale has no voice ; unless you insult him by saying , that when he so strangely rumbles , he talks through his nose . 
But then again , what has the whale to say ? 
Seldom have I known any profound being that had anything to say to this world , unless forced to stammer out something by way of getting a living . 
Oh ! 
happy that the world is such an excellent listener ! 
Now , the spouting canal of the Sperm Whale , chiefly intended as it is for the conveyance of air , and for several feet laid along , horizontally , just beneath the upper surface of his head , and a little to one side ; this curious canal is very much like a gas-pipe laid down in a city on one side of a street . 
But the question returns whether this gas-pipe is also a water-pipe ; in other words , whether the spout of the Sperm Whale is the mere vapor of the exhaled breath , or whether that exhaled breath is mixed with water taken in at the mouth , and discharged through the spiracle . 
It is certain that the mouth indirectly communicates with the spouting canal ; but it can not be proved that this is for the purpose of discharging water through the spiracle . 
Because the greatest necessity for so doing would seem to be , when in feeding he accidentally takes in water . 
But the Sperm Whale 's food is far beneath the surface , and there he can not spout even if he would . 
Besides , if you regard him very closely , and time him with your watch , you will find that when unmolested , there is an undeviating rhyme between the periods of his jets and the ordinary periods of respiration . 
But why pester one with all this reasoning on the subject ? 
Speak out ! 
You have seen him spout ; then declare what the spout is ; can you not tell water from air ? 
My dear sir , in this world it is not so easy to settle these plain things . 
I have ever found your plain things the knottiest of all . 
And as for this whale spout , you might almost stand in it , and yet be undecided as to what it is precisely . 
The central body of it is hidden in the snowy sparkling mist enveloping it ; and how can you certainly tell whether any water falls from it , when , always , when you are close enough to a whale to get a close view of his spout , he is in a prodigious commotion , the water cascading all around him . 
And if at such times you should think that you really perceived drops of moisture in the spout , how do you know that they are not merely condensed from its vapor ; or how do you know that they are not those identical drops superficially lodged in the spout-hole fissure , which is countersunk into the summit of the whale 's head ? 
For even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day sea in a calm , with his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary 's in the desert ; even then , the whale always carries a small basin of water on his head , as under a blazing sun you will sometimes see a cavity in a rock filled up with rain . 
Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touching the precise nature of the whale spout . 
It will not do for him to be peering into it , and putting his face in it . 
You can not go with your pitcher to this fountain and fill it , and bring it away . 
For even when coming into slight contact with the outer , vapory shreds of the jet , which will often happen , your skin will feverishly smart , from the acridness of the thing so touching it . 
And I know one , who coming into still closer contact with the spout , whether with some scientific object in view , or otherwise , I can not say , the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm . 
Wherefore , among whalemen , the spout is deemed poisonous ; they try to evade it . 
Another thing ; I have heard it said , and I do not much doubt it , that if the jet is fairly spouted into your eyes , it will blind you . 
The wisest thing the investigator can do then , it seems to me , is to let this deadly spout alone . 
Still , we can hypothesize , even if we can not prove and establish . 
My hypothesis is this : that the spout is nothing but mist . 
And besides other reasons , to this conclusion I am impelled , by considerations touching the great inherent dignity and sublimity of the Sperm Whale ; I account him no common , shallow being , inasmuch as it is an undisputed fact that he is never found on soundings , or near shores ; all other whales sometimes are . 
He is both ponderous and profound . 
And I am convinced that from the heads of all ponderous profound beings , such as Plato , Pyrrho , the Devil , Jupiter , Dante , and so on , there always goes up a certain semi-visible steam , while in the act of thinking deep thoughts . 
While composing a little treatise on Eternity , I had the curiosity to place a mirror before me ; and ere long saw reflected there , a curious involved worming and undulation in the atmosphere over my head . 
The invariable moisture of my hair , while plunged in deep thought , after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled attic , of an August noon ; this seems an additional argument for the above supposition . 
And how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty , misty monster , to behold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea ; his vast , mild head overhung by a canopy of vapor , engendered by his incommunicable contemplations , and that vapor -- as you will sometimes see it -- glorified by a rainbow , as if Heaven itself had put its seal upon his thoughts . 
For d'ye see , rainbows do not visit the clear air ; they only irradiate vapor . 
And so , through all the thick mists of the dim doubts in my mind , divine intuitions now and then shoot , enkindling my fog with a heavenly ray . 
And for this I thank God ; for all have doubts ; many deny ; but doubts or denials , few along with them , have intuitions . 
Doubts of all things earthly , and intuitions of some things heavenly ; this combination makes neither believer nor infidel , but makes a man who regards them both with equal eye . 
The Tail Other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope , and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights ; less celestial , I celebrate a tail . 
Reckoning the largest sized Sperm Whale 's tail to begin at that point of the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man , it comprises upon its upper surface alone , an area of at least fifty square feet . 
The compact round body of its root expands into two broad , firm , flat palms or flukes , gradually shoaling away to less than an inch in thickness . 
At the crotch or junction , these flukes slightly overlap , then sideways recede from each other like wings , leaving a wide vacancy between . 
In no living thing are the lines of beauty more exquisitely defined than in the crescentic borders of these flukes . 
At its utmost expansion in the full grown whale , the tail will considerably exceed twenty feet across . 
The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews ; but cut into it , and you find that three distinct strata compose it : -- upper , middle , and lower . 
The fibres in the upper and lower layers , are long and horizontal ; those of the middle one , very short , and running crosswise between the outside layers . 
This triune structure , as much as anything else , imparts power to the tail . 
To the student of old Roman walls , the middle layer will furnish a curious parallel to the thin course of tiles always alternating with the stone in those wonderful relics of the antique , and which undoubtedly contribute so much to the great strength of the masonry . 
But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not enough , the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and woof of muscular fibres and filaments , which passing on either side the loins and running down into the flukes , insensibly blend with them , and largely contribute to their might ; so that in the tail the confluent measureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated to a point . 
Could annihilation occur to matter , this were the thing to do it . 
Nor does this -- its amazing strength , at all tend to cripple the graceful flexion of its motions ; where infantileness of ease undulates through a Titanism of power . 
On the contrary , those motions derive their most appalling beauty from it . 
Real strength never impairs beauty or harmony , but it often bestows it ; and in everything imposingly beautiful , strength has much to do with the magic . 
Take away the tied tendons that all over seem bursting from the marble in the carved Hercules , and its charm would be gone . 
As devout Eckerman lifted the linen sheet from the naked corpse of Goethe , he was overwhelmed with the massive chest of the man , that seemed as a Roman triumphal arch . 
When Angelo paints even God the Father in human form , mark what robustness is there . 
And whatever they may reveal of the divine love in the Son , the soft , curled , hermaphroditical Italian pictures , in which his idea has been most successfully embodied ; these pictures , so destitute as they are of all brawniness , hint nothing of any power , but the mere negative , feminine one of submission and endurance , which on all hands it is conceded , form the peculiar practical virtues of his teachings . 
Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of , that whether wielded in sport , or in earnest , or in anger , whatever be the mood it be in , its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace . 
Therein no fairy 's arm can transcend it . 
Five great motions are peculiar to it . 
First , when used as a fin for progression ; Second , when used as a mace in battle ; Third , in sweeping ; Fourth , in lobtailing ; Fifth , in peaking flukes . 
First : Being horizontal in its position , the Leviathan 's tail acts in a different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures . 
It never wriggles . 
In man or fish , wriggling is a sign of inferiority . 
To the whale his tail is the sole means of propulsion . 
Scroll-wise coiled forwards beneath the body , and then rapidly sprung backwards , it is this which gives that singular darting , leaping motion to the monster when furiously swimming . 
His side-fins only serve to steer by . 
Second : It is a little significant , that while one sperm whale only fights another sperm whale with his head and jaw , nevertheless , in his conflicts with man , he chiefly and contemptuously uses his tail . 
In striking at a boat , he swiftly curves away his flukes from it , and the blow is only inflicted by the recoil . 
If it be made in the unobstructed air , especially if it descend to its mark , the stroke is then simply irresistible . 
No ribs of man or boat can withstand it . 
Your only salvation lies in eluding it ; but if it comes sideways through the opposing water , then partly owing to the light buoyancy of the whale-boat , and the elasticity of its materials , a cracked rib or a dashed plank or two , a sort of stitch in the side , is generally the most serious result . 
These submerged side blows are so often received in the fishery , that they are accounted mere child 's play . 
Some one strips off a frock , and the hole is stopped . 
Third : I can not demonstrate it , but it seems to me , that in the whale the sense of touch is concentrated in the tail ; for in this respect there is a delicacy in it only equalled by the daintiness of the elephant 's trunk . 
This delicacy is chiefly evinced in the action of sweeping , when in maidenly gentleness the whale with a certain soft slowness moves his immense flukes from side to side upon the surface of the sea ; and if he feel but a sailor 's whisker , woe to that sailor , whiskers and all . 
What tenderness there is in that preliminary touch ! 
Had this tail any prehensile power , I should straightway bethink me of Darmonodes ' elephant that so frequented the flower-market , and with low salutations presented nosegays to damsels , and then caressed their zones . 
On more accounts than one , a pity it is that the whale does not possess this prehensile virtue in his tail ; for I have heard of yet another elephant , that when wounded in the fight , curved round his trunk and extracted the dart . 
Fourth : Stealing unawares upon the whale in the fancied security of the middle of solitary seas , you find him unbent from the vast corpulence of his dignity , and kitten-like , he plays on the ocean as if it were a hearth . 
But still you see his power in his play . 
The broad palms of his tail are flirted high into the air ! 
then smiting the surface , the thunderous concussion resounds for miles . 
You would almost think a great gun had been discharged ; and if you noticed the light wreath of vapor from the spiracle at his other extremity , you would think that that was the smoke from the touch-hole . 
Fifth : As in the ordinary floating posture of the leviathan the flukes lies considerably below the level of his back , they are then completely out of sight beneath the surface ; but when he is about to plunge into the deeps , his entire flukes with at least thirty feet of his body are tossed erect in the air , and so remain vibrating a moment , till they downwards shoot out of view . 
Excepting the sublime breach -- somewhere else to be described -- this peaking of the whale 's flukes is perhaps the grandest sight to be seen in all animated nature . 
Out of the bottomless profundities the gigantic tail seems spasmodically snatching at the highest heaven . 
So in dreams , have I seen majestic Satan thrusting forth his tormented colossal claw from the flame Baltic of Hell . 
But in gazing at such scenes , it is all in all what mood you are in ; if in the Dantean , the devils will occur to you ; if in that of Isaiah , the archangels . 
Standing at the mast-head of my ship during a sunrise that crimsoned sky and sea , I once saw a large herd of whales in the east , all heading towards the sun , and for a moment vibrating in concert with peaked flukes . 
As it seemed to me at the time , such a grand embodiment of adoration of the gods was never beheld , even in Persia , the home of the fire worshippers . 
As Ptolemy Philopater testified of the African elephant , I then testified of the whale , pronouncing him the most devout of all beings . 
For according to King Juba , the military elephants of antiquity often hailed the morning with their trunks uplifted in the profoundest silence . 
The chance comparison in this chapter , between the whale and the elephant , so far as some aspects of the tail of the one and the trunk of the other are concerned , should not tend to place those two opposite organs on an equality , much less the creatures to which they respectively belong . 
For as the mightiest elephant is but a terrier to Leviathan , so , compared with Leviathan 's tail , his trunk is but the stalk of a lily . 
The most direful blow from the elephant 's trunk were as the playful tap of a fan , compared with the measureless crush and crash of the sperm whale 's ponderous flukes , which in repeated instances have one after the other hurled entire boats with all their oars and crews into the air , very much as an Indian juggler tosses his balls . 
* * Though all comparison in the way of general bulk between the whale and the elephant is preposterous , inasmuch as in that particular the elephant stands in much the same respect to the whale that a dog does to the elephant ; nevertheless , there are not wanting some points of curious similitude ; among these is the spout . 
It is well known that the elephant will often draw up water or dust in his trunk , and then elevating it , jet it forth in a stream . 
The more I consider this mighty tail , the more do I deplore my inability to express it . 
At times there are gestures in it , which , though they would well grace the hand of man , remain wholly inexplicable . 
In an extensive herd , so remarkable , occasionally , are these mystic gestures , that I have heard hunters who have declared them akin to Free-Mason signs and symbols ; that the whale , indeed , by these methods intelligently conversed with the world . 
Nor are there wanting other motions of the whale in his general body , full of strangeness , and unaccountable to his most experienced assailant . 
Dissect him how I may , then , I but go skin deep . 
I know him not , and never will . 
But if I know not even the tail of this whale , how understand his head ? 
much more , how comprehend his face , when face he has none ? 
Thou shalt see my back parts , my tail , he seems to say , but my face shall not be seen . 
But I can not completely make out his back parts ; and hint what he will about his face , I say again he has no face . 
The Grand Armada The long and narrow peninsula of Malacca , extending south-eastward from the territories of Birmah , forms the most southerly point of all Asia . 
In a continuous line from that peninsula stretch the long islands of Sumatra , Java , Bally , and Timor ; which , with many others , form a vast mole , or rampart , lengthwise connecting Asia with Australia , and dividing the long unbroken Indian ocean from the thickly studded oriental archipelagoes . 
This rampart is pierced by several sally-ports for the convenience of ships and whales ; conspicuous among which are the straits of Sunda and Malacca . 
By the straits of Sunda , chiefly , vessels bound to China from the west , emerge into the China seas . 
Those narrow straits of Sunda divide Sumatra from Java ; and standing midway in that vast rampart of islands , buttressed by that bold green promontory , known to seamen as Java Head ; they not a little correspond to the central gateway opening into some vast walled empire : and considering the inexhaustible wealth of spices , and silks , and jewels , and gold , and ivory , with which the thousand islands of that oriental sea are enriched , it seems a significant provision of nature , that such treasures , by the very formation of the land , should at least bear the appearance , however ineffectual , of being guarded from the all-grasping western world . 
The shores of the Straits of Sunda are unsupplied with those domineering fortresses which guard the entrances to the Mediterranean , the Baltic , and the Propontis . 
Unlike the Danes , these Orientals do not demand the obsequious homage of lowered top-sails from the endless procession of ships before the wind , which for centuries past , by night and by day , have passed between the islands of Sumatra and Java , freighted with the costliest cargoes of the east . 
But while they freely waive a ceremonial like this , they do by no means renounce their claim to more solid tribute . 
Time out of mind the piratical proas of the Malays , lurking among the low shaded coves and islets of Sumatra , have sallied out upon the vessels sailing through the straits , fiercely demanding tribute at the point of their spears . 
