All he can do is to inform his captain of what is going on so that he may try to remedy it by a counter-mine , and then stand his ground in fear and expectation of the moment when he will fly up to the clouds without wings and descend into the deep against his will . 
And if this seems a trifling risk , let us see whether it is equalled or surpassed by the encounter of two galleys stem to stem , in the midst of the open sea , locked and entangled one with the other , when the soldier has no more standing room than two feet of the plank of the spur ; and yet , though he sees before him threatening him as many ministers of death as there are cannon of the foe pointed at him , not a lance length from his body , and sees too that with the first heedless step he will go down to visit the profundities of Neptune 's bosom , still with dauntless heart , urged on by honour that nerves him , he makes himself a target for all that musketry , and struggles to cross that narrow path to the enemy 's ship . 
And what is still more marvellous , no sooner has one gone down into the depths he will never rise from till the end of the world , than another takes his place ; and if he too falls into the sea that waits for him like an enemy , another and another will succeed him without a moment 's pause between their deaths : courage and daring the greatest that all the chances of war can show . 
Happy the blest ages that knew not the dread fury of those devilish engines of artillery , whose inventor I am persuaded is in hell receiving the reward of his diabolical invention , by which he made it easy for a base and cowardly arm to take the life of a gallant gentleman ; and that , when he knows not how or whence , in the height of the ardour and enthusiasm that fire and animate brave hearts , there should come some random bullet , discharged perhaps by one who fled in terror at the flash when he fired off his accursed machine , which in an instant puts an end to the projects and cuts off the life of one who deserved to live for ages to come . 
And thus when I reflect on this , I am almost tempted to say that in my heart I repent of having adopted this profession of knight-errant in so detestable an age as we live in now ; for though no peril can make me fear , still it gives me some uneasiness to think that powder and lead may rob me of the opportunity of making myself famous and renowned throughout the known earth by the might of my arm and the edge of my sword . 
But Heaven 's will be done ; if I succeed in my attempt I shall be all the more honoured , as I have faced greater dangers than the knights-errant of yore exposed themselves to . '' 
All this lengthy discourse Don Quixote delivered while the others supped , forgetting to raise a morsel to his lips , though Sancho more than once told him to eat his supper , as he would have time enough afterwards to say all he wanted . 
It excited fresh pity in those who had heard him to see a man of apparently sound sense , and with rational views on every subject he discussed , so hopelessly wanting in all , when his wretched unlucky chivalry was in question . 
The curate told him he was quite right in all he had said in favour of arms , and that he himself , though a man of letters and a graduate , was of the same opinion . 
They finished their supper , the cloth was removed , and while the hostess , her daughter , and Maritornes were getting Don Quixote of La Mancha 's garret ready , in which it was arranged that the women were to be quartered by themselves for the night , Don Fernando begged the captive to tell them the story of his life , for it could not fail to be strange and interesting , to judge by the hints he had let fall on his arrival in company with Zoraida . 
To this the captive replied that he would very willingly yield to his request , only he feared his tale would not give them as much pleasure as he wished ; nevertheless , not to be wanting in compliance , he would tell it . 
The curate and the others thanked him and added their entreaties , and he finding himself so pressed said there was no occasion ask , where a command had such weight , and added , `` If your worships will give me your attention you will hear a true story which , perhaps , fictitious ones constructed with ingenious and studied art can not come up to . '' 
These words made them settle themselves in their places and preserve a deep silence , and he seeing them waiting on his words in mute expectation , began thus in a pleasant quiet voice . 
My family had its origin in a village in the mountains of Leon , and nature had been kinder and more generous to it than fortune ; though in the general poverty of those communities my father passed for being even a rich man ; and he would have been so in reality had he been as clever in preserving his property as he was in spending it . 
This tendency of his to be liberal and profuse he had acquired from having been a soldier in his youth , for the soldier 's life is a school in which the niggard becomes free-handed and the free-handed prodigal ; and if any soldiers are to be found who are misers , they are monsters of rare occurrence . 
My father went beyond liberality and bordered on prodigality , a disposition by no means advantageous to a married man who has children to succeed to his name and position . 
My father had three , all sons , and all of sufficient age to make choice of a profession . 
Finding , then , that he was unable to resist his propensity , he resolved to divest himself of the instrument and cause of his prodigality and lavishness , to divest himself of wealth , without which Alexander himself would have seemed parsimonious ; and so calling us all three aside one day into a room , he addressed us in words somewhat to the following effect : `` My sons , to assure you that I love you , no more need be known or said than that you are my sons ; and to encourage a suspicion that I do not love you , no more is needed than the knowledge that I have no self-control as far as preservation of your patrimony is concerned ; therefore , that you may for the future feel sure that I love you like a father , and have no wish to ruin you like a stepfather , I propose to do with you what I have for some time back meditated , and after mature deliberation decided upon . 
You are now of an age to choose your line of life or at least make choice of a calling that will bring you honour and profit when you are older ; and what I have resolved to do is to divide my property into four parts ; three I will give to you , to each his portion without making any difference , and the other I will retain to live upon and support myself for whatever remainder of life Heaven may be pleased to grant me . 
But I wish each of you on taking possession of the share that falls to him to follow one of the paths I shall indicate . 
In this Spain of ours there is a proverb , to my mind very true -- as they all are , being short aphorisms drawn from long practical experience -- and the one I refer to says , ` The church , or the sea , or the king 's house ; ' as much as to say , in plainer language , whoever wants to flourish and become rich , let him follow the church , or go to sea , adopting commerce as his calling , or go into the king 's service in his household , for they say , ` Better a king 's crumb than a lord 's favour . ' 
I say so because it is my will and pleasure that one of you should follow letters , another trade , and the third serve the king in the wars , for it is a difficult matter to gain admission to his service in his household , and if war does not bring much wealth it confers great distinction and fame . 
Eight days hence I will give you your full shares in money , without defrauding you of a farthing , as you will see in the end . 
Now tell me if you are willing to follow out my idea and advice as I have laid it before you . '' 
Having called upon me as the eldest to answer , I , after urging him not to strip himself of his property but to spend it all as he pleased , for we were young men able to gain our living , consented to comply with his wishes , and said that mine were to follow the profession of arms and thereby serve God and my king . 
My second brother having made the same proposal , decided upon going to the Indies , embarking the portion that fell to him in trade . 
The youngest , and in my opinion the wisest , said he would rather follow the church , or go to complete his studies at Salamanca . 
As soon as we had come to an understanding , and made choice of our professions , my father embraced us all , and in the short time he mentioned carried into effect all he had promised ; and when he had given to each his share , which as well as I remember was three thousand ducats apiece in cash -LRB- for an uncle of ours bought the estate and paid for it down , not to let it go out of the family -RRB- , we all three on the same day took leave of our good father ; and at the same time , as it seemed to me inhuman to leave my father with such scanty means in his old age , I induced him to take two of my three thousand ducats , as the remainder would be enough to provide me with all a soldier needed . 
My two brothers , moved by my example , gave him each a thousand ducats , so that there was left for my father four thousand ducats in money , besides three thousand , the value of the portion that fell to him which he preferred to retain in land instead of selling it . 
Finally , as I said , we took leave of him , and of our uncle whom I have mentioned , not without sorrow and tears on both sides , they charging us to let them know whenever an opportunity offered how we fared , whether well or ill . 
We promised to do so , and when he had embraced us and given us his blessing , one set out for Salamanca , the other for Seville , and I for Alicante , where I had heard there was a Genoese vessel taking in a cargo of wool for Genoa . 
It is now some twenty-two years since I left my father 's house , and all that time , though I have written several letters , I have had no news whatever of him or of my brothers ; my own adventures during that period I will now relate briefly . 
I embarked at Alicante , reached Genoa after a prosperous voyage , and proceeded thence to Milan , where I provided myself with arms and a few soldier 's accoutrements ; thence it was my intention to go and take service in Piedmont , but as I was already on the road to Alessandria della Paglia , I learned that the great Duke of Alva was on his way to Flanders . 
I changed my plans , joined him , served under him in the campaigns he made , was present at the deaths of the Counts Egmont and Horn , and was promoted to be ensign under a famous captain of Guadalajara , Diego de Urbina by name . 
Some time after my arrival in Flanders news came of the league that his Holiness Pope Pius V of happy memory , had made with Venice and Spain against the common enemy , the Turk , who had just then with his fleet taken the famous island of Cyprus , which belonged to the Venetians , a loss deplorable and disastrous . 
It was known as a fact that the Most Serene Don John of Austria , natural brother of our good king Don Philip , was coming as commander-in-chief of the allied forces , and rumours were abroad of the vast warlike preparations which were being made , all which stirred my heart and filled me with a longing to take part in the campaign which was expected ; and though I had reason to believe , and almost certain promises , that on the first opportunity that presented itself I should be promoted to be captain , I preferred to leave all and betake myself , as I did , to Italy ; and it was my good fortune that Don John had just arrived at Genoa , and was going on to Naples to join the Venetian fleet , as he afterwards did at Messina . 
I may say , in short , that I took part in that glorious expedition , promoted by this time to be a captain of infantry , to which honourable charge my good luck rather than my merits raised me ; and that day -- so fortunate for Christendom , because then all the nations of the earth were disabused of the error under which they lay in imagining the Turks to be invincible on sea-on that day , I say , on which the Ottoman pride and arrogance were broken , among all that were there made happy -LRB- for the Christians who died that day were happier than those who remained alive and victorious -RRB- I alone was miserable ; for , instead of some naval crown that I might have expected had it been in Roman times , on the night that followed that famous day I found myself with fetters on my feet and manacles on my hands . 
It happened in this way : El Uchali , the king of Algiers , a daring and successful corsair , having attacked and taken the leading Maltese galley -LRB- only three knights being left alive in it , and they badly wounded -RRB- , the chief galley of John Andrea , on board of which I and my company were placed , came to its relief , and doing as was bound to do in such a case , I leaped on board the enemy 's galley , which , sheering off from that which had attacked it , prevented my men from following me , and so I found myself alone in the midst of my enemies , who were in such numbers that I was unable to resist ; in short I was taken , covered with wounds ; El Uchali , as you know , sirs , made his escape with his entire squadron , and I was left a prisoner in his power , the only sad being among so many filled with joy , and the only captive among so many free ; for there were fifteen thousand Christians , all at the oar in the Turkish fleet , that regained their longed-for liberty that day . 
They carried me to Constantinople , where the Grand Turk , Selim , made my master general at sea for having done his duty in the battle and carried off as evidence of his bravery the standard of the Order of Malta . 
The following year , which was the year seventy-two , I found myself at Navarino rowing in the leading galley with the three lanterns . 
There I saw and observed how the opportunity of capturing the whole Turkish fleet in harbour was lost ; for all the marines and janizzaries that belonged to it made sure that they were about to be attacked inside the very harbour , and had their kits and pasamaques , or shoes , ready to flee at once on shore without waiting to be assailed , in so great fear did they stand of our fleet . 
But Heaven ordered it otherwise , not for any fault or neglect of the general who commanded on our side , but for the sins of Christendom , and because it was God 's will and pleasure that we should always have instruments of punishment to chastise us . 
As it was , El Uchali took refuge at Modon , which is an island near Navarino , and landing forces fortified the mouth of the harbour and waited quietly until Don John retired . 
On this expedition was taken the galley called the Prize , whose captain was a son of the famous corsair Barbarossa . 
It was taken by the chief Neapolitan galley called the She-wolf , commanded by that thunderbolt of war , that father of his men , that successful and unconquered captain Don Alvaro de Bazan , Marquis of Santa Cruz ; and I can not help telling you what took place at the capture of the Prize . 
The son of Barbarossa was so cruel , and treated his slaves so badly , that , when those who were at the oars saw that the She-wolf galley was bearing down upon them and gaining upon them , they all at once dropped their oars and seized their captain who stood on the stage at the end of the gangway shouting to them to row lustily ; and passing him on from bench to bench , from the poop to the prow , they so bit him that before he had got much past the mast his soul had already got to hell ; so great , as I said , was the cruelty with which he treated them , and the hatred with which they hated him . 
We returned to Constantinople , and the following year , seventy-three , it became known that Don John had seized Tunis and taken the kingdom from the Turks , and placed Muley Hamet in possession , putting an end to the hopes which Muley Hamida , the cruelest and bravest Moor in the world , entertained of returning to reign there . 
The Grand Turk took the loss greatly to heart , and with the cunning which all his race possess , he made peace with the Venetians -LRB- who were much more eager for it than he was -RRB- , and the following year , seventy-four , he attacked the Goletta and the fort which Don John had left half built near Tunis . 
While all these events were occurring , I was labouring at the oar without any hope of freedom ; at least I had no hope of obtaining it by ransom , for I was firmly resolved not to write to my father telling him of my misfortunes . 
At length the Goletta fell , and the fort fell , before which places there were seventy-five thousand regular Turkish soldiers , and more than four hundred thousand Moors and Arabs from all parts of Africa , and in the train of all this great host such munitions and engines of war , and so many pioneers that with their hands they might have covered the Goletta and the fort with handfuls of earth . 
The first to fall was the Goletta , until then reckoned impregnable , and it fell , not by any fault of its defenders , who did all that they could and should have done , but because experiment proved how easily entrenchments could be made in the desert sand there ; for water used to be found at two palms depth , while the Turks found none at two yards ; and so by means of a quantity of sandbags they raised their works so high that they commanded the walls of the fort , sweeping them as if from a cavalier , so that no one was able to make a stand or maintain the defence . 
It was a common opinion that our men should not have shut themselves up in the Goletta , but should have waited in the open at the landing-place ; but those who say so talk at random and with little knowledge of such matters ; for if in the Goletta and in the fort there were barely seven thousand soldiers , how could such a small number , however resolute , sally out and hold their own against numbers like those of the enemy ? 
And how is it possible to help losing a stronghold that is not relieved , above all when surrounded by a host of determined enemies in their own country ? 
But many thought , and I thought so too , that it was special favour and mercy which Heaven showed to Spain in permitting the destruction of that source and hiding place of mischief , that devourer , sponge , and moth of countless money , fruitlessly wasted there to no other purpose save preserving the memory of its capture by the invincible Charles V ; as if to make that eternal , as it is and will be , these stones were needed to support it . 
The fort also fell ; but the Turks had to win it inch by inch , for the soldiers who defended it fought so gallantly and stoutly that the number of the enemy killed in twenty-two general assaults exceeded twenty-five thousand . 
Of three hundred that remained alive not one was taken unwounded , a clear and manifest proof of their gallantry and resolution , and how sturdily they had defended themselves and held their post . 
A small fort or tower which was in the middle of the lagoon under the command of Don Juan Zanoguera , a Valencian gentleman and a famous soldier , capitulated upon terms . 
They took prisoner Don Pedro Puertocarrero , commandant of the Goletta , who had done all in his power to defend his fortress , and took the loss of it so much to heart that he died of grief on the way to Constantinople , where they were carrying him a prisoner . 
They also took the commandant of the fort , Gabrio Cerbellon by name , a Milanese gentleman , a great engineer and a very brave soldier . 
In these two fortresses perished many persons of note , among whom was Pagano Doria , knight of the Order of St. John , a man of generous disposition , as was shown by his extreme liberality to his brother , the famous John Andrea Doria ; and what made his death the more sad was that he was slain by some Arabs to whom , seeing that the fort was now lost , he entrusted himself , and who offered to conduct him in the disguise of a Moor to Tabarca , a small fort or station on the coast held by the Genoese employed in the coral fishery . 
These Arabs cut off his head and carried it to the commander of the Turkish fleet , who proved on them the truth of our Castilian proverb , that `` though the treason may please , the traitor is hated ; '' for they say he ordered those who brought him the present to be hanged for not having brought him alive . 
Among the Christians who were taken in the fort was one named Don Pedro de Aguilar , a native of some place , I know not what , in Andalusia , who had been ensign in the fort , a soldier of great repute and rare intelligence , who had in particular a special gift for what they call poetry . 
I say so because his fate brought him to my galley and to my bench , and made him a slave to the same master ; and before we left the port this gentleman composed two sonnets by way of epitaphs , one on the Goletta and the other on the fort ; indeed , I may as well repeat them , for I have them by heart , and I think they will be liked rather than disliked . 
The instant the captive mentioned the name of Don Pedro de Aguilar , Don Fernando looked at his companions and they all three smiled ; and when he came to speak of the sonnets one of them said , `` Before your worship proceeds any further I entreat you to tell me what became of that Don Pedro de Aguilar you have spoken of . '' 
`` All I know is , '' replied the captive , `` that after having been in Constantinople two years , he escaped in the disguise of an Arnaut , in company with a Greek spy ; but whether he regained his liberty or not I can not tell , though I fancy he did , because a year afterwards I saw the Greek at Constantinople , though I was unable to ask him what the result of the journey was . '' 
`` Well then , you are right , '' returned the gentleman , `` for that Don Pedro is my brother , and he is now in our village in good health , rich , married , and with three children . '' 
`` Thanks be to God for all the mercies he has shown him , '' said the captive ; `` for to my mind there is no happiness on earth to compare with recovering lost liberty . '' 
`` And what is more , '' said the gentleman , `` I know the sonnets my brother made . '' 
`` Then let your worship repeat them , '' said the captive , `` for you will recite them better than I can . '' 
`` With all my heart , '' said the gentleman ; `` that on the Goletta runs thus . '' 
SONNET `` Blest souls , that , from this mortal husk set free , In guerdon of brave deeds beatified , Above this lowly orb of ours abide Made heirs of heaven and immortality , With noble rage and ardour glowing ye Your strength , while strength was yours , in battle plied , And with your own blood and the foeman 's dyed The sandy soil and the encircling sea . 
It was the ebbing life-blood first that failed The weary arms ; the stout hearts never quailed . 
Though vanquished , yet ye earned the victor 's crown : Though mourned , yet still triumphant was your fall For there ye won , between the sword and wall , In Heaven glory and on earth renown . '' 
`` That is it exactly , according to my recollection , '' said the captive . 
`` Well then , that on the fort , '' said the gentleman , `` if my memory serves me , goes thus : SONNET `` Up from this wasted soil , this shattered shell , Whose walls and towers here in ruin lie , Three thousand soldier souls took wing on high , In the bright mansions of the blest to dwell . 
The onslaught of the foeman to repel By might of arm all vainly did they try , And when at length 't was left them but to die , Wearied and few the last defenders fell . 
And this same arid soil hath ever been A haunt of countless mournful memories , As well in our day as in days of yore . 
But never yet to Heaven it sent , I ween , From its hard bosom purer souls than these , Or braver bodies on its surface bore . '' 
The sonnets were not disliked , and the captive was rejoiced at the tidings they gave him of his comrade , and continuing his tale , he went on to say : The Goletta and the fort being thus in their hands , the Turks gave orders to dismantle the Goletta -- for the fort was reduced to such a state that there was nothing left to level -- and to do the work more quickly and easily they mined it in three places ; but nowhere were they able to blow up the part which seemed to be the least strong , that is to say , the old walls , while all that remained standing of the new fortifications that the Fratin had made came to the ground with the greatest ease . 
Finally the fleet returned victorious and triumphant to Constantinople , and a few months later died my master , El Uchali , otherwise Uchali Fartax , which means in Turkish `` the scabby renegade ; '' for that he was ; it is the practice with the Turks to name people from some defect or virtue they may possess ; the reason being that there are among them only four surnames belonging to families tracing their descent from the Ottoman house , and the others , as I have said , take their names and surnames either from bodily blemishes or moral qualities . 
This `` scabby one '' rowed at the oar as a slave of the Grand Signor 's for fourteen years , and when over thirty-four years of age , in resentment at having been struck by a Turk while at the oar , turned renegade and renounced his faith in order to be able to revenge himself ; and such was his valour that , without owing his advancement to the base ways and means by which most favourites of the Grand Signor rise to power , he came to be king of Algiers , and afterwards general-on-sea , which is the third place of trust in the realm . 
He was a Calabrian by birth , and a worthy man morally , and he treated his slaves with great humanity . 
He had three thousand of them , and after his death they were divided , as he directed by his will , between the Grand Signor -LRB- who is heir of all who die and shares with the children of the deceased -RRB- and his renegades . 
I fell to the lot of a Venetian renegade who , when a cabin boy on board a ship , had been taken by Uchali and was so much beloved by him that he became one of his most favoured youths . 
He came to be the most cruel renegade I ever saw : his name was Hassan Aga , and he grew very rich and became king of Algiers . 
With him I went there from Constantinople , rather glad to be so near Spain , not that I intended to write to anyone about my unhappy lot , but to try if fortune would be kinder to me in Algiers than in Constantinople , where I had attempted in a thousand ways to escape without ever finding a favourable time or chance ; but in Algiers I resolved to seek for other means of effecting the purpose I cherished so dearly ; for the hope of obtaining my liberty never deserted me ; and when in my plots and schemes and attempts the result did not answer my expectations , without giving way to despair I immediately began to look out for or conjure up some new hope to support me , however faint or feeble it might be . 
In this way I lived on immured in a building or prison called by the Turks a bano in which they confine the Christian captives , as well those that are the king 's as those belonging to private individuals , and also what they call those of the Almacen , which is as much as to say the slaves of the municipality , who serve the city in the public works and other employments ; but captives of this kind recover their liberty with great difficulty , for , as they are public property and have no particular master , there is no one with whom to treat for their ransom , even though they may have the means . 
To these banos , as I have said , some private individuals of the town are in the habit of bringing their captives , especially when they are to be ransomed ; because there they can keep them in safety and comfort until their ransom arrives . 
The king 's captives also , that are on ransom , do not go out to work with the rest of the crew , unless when their ransom is delayed ; for then , to make them write for it more pressingly , they compel them to work and go for wood , which is no light labour . 
I , however , was one of those on ransom , for when it was discovered that I was a captain , although I declared my scanty means and want of fortune , nothing could dissuade them from including me among the gentlemen and those waiting to be ransomed . 
They put a chain on me , more as a mark of this than to keep me safe , and so I passed my life in that bano with several other gentlemen and persons of quality marked out as held to ransom ; but though at times , or rather almost always , we suffered from hunger and scanty clothing , nothing distressed us so much as hearing and seeing at every turn the unexampled and unheard-of cruelties my master inflicted upon the Christians . 
Every day he hanged a man , impaled one , cut off the ears of another ; and all with so little provocation , or so entirely without any , that the Turks acknowledged he did it merely for the sake of doing it , and because he was by nature murderously disposed towards the whole human race . 
The only one that fared at all well with him was a Spanish soldier , something de Saavedra by name , to whom he never gave a blow himself , or ordered a blow to be given , or addressed a hard word , although he had done things that will dwell in the memory of the people there for many a year , and all to recover his liberty ; and for the least of the many things he did we all dreaded that he would be impaled , and he himself was in fear of it more than once ; and only that time does not allow , I could tell you now something of what that soldier did , that would interest and astonish you much more than the narration of my own tale . 
To go on with my story ; the courtyard of our prison was overlooked by the windows of the house belonging to a wealthy Moor of high position ; and these , as is usual in Moorish houses , were rather loopholes than windows , and besides were covered with thick and close lattice-work . 
It so happened , then , that as I was one day on the terrace of our prison with three other comrades , trying , to pass away the time , how far we could leap with our chains , we being alone , for all the other Christians had gone out to work , I chanced to raise my eyes , and from one of these little closed windows I saw a reed appear with a cloth attached to the end of it , and it kept waving to and fro , and moving as if making signs to us to come and take it . 
We watched it , and one of those who were with me went and stood under the reed to see whether they would let it drop , or what they would do , but as he did so the reed was raised and moved from side to side , as if they meant to say `` no '' by a shake of the head . 
The Christian came back , and it was again lowered , making the same movements as before . 
Another of my comrades went , and with him the same happened as with the first , and then the third went forward , but with the same result as the first and second . 
Seeing this I did not like not to try my luck , and as soon as I came under the reed it was dropped and fell inside the bano at my feet . 
I hastened to untie the cloth , in which I perceived a knot , and in this were ten cianis , which are coins of base gold , current among the Moors , and each worth ten reals of our money . 
It is needless to say I rejoiced over this godsend , and my joy was not less than my wonder as I strove to imagine how this good fortune could have come to us , but to me specially ; for the evident unwillingness to drop the reed for any but me showed that it was for me the favour was intended . 
I took my welcome money , broke the reed , and returned to the terrace , and looking up at the window , I saw a very white hand put out that opened and shut very quickly . 
From this we gathered or fancied that it must be some woman living in that house that had done us this kindness , and to show that we were grateful for it , we made salaams after the fashion of the Moors , bowing the head , bending the body , and crossing the arms on the breast . 
Shortly afterwards at the same window a small cross made of reeds was put out and immediately withdrawn . 
This sign led us to believe that some Christian woman was a captive in the house , and that it was she who had been so good to us ; but the whiteness of the hand and the bracelets we had perceived made us dismiss that idea , though we thought it might be one of the Christian renegades whom their masters very often take as lawful wives , and gladly , for they prefer them to the women of their own nation . 
In all our conjectures we were wide of the truth ; so from that time forward our sole occupation was watching and gazing at the window where the cross had appeared to us , as if it were our pole-star ; but at least fifteen days passed without our seeing either it or the hand , or any other sign and though meanwhile we endeavoured with the utmost pains to ascertain who it was that lived in the house , and whether there were any Christian renegade in it , nobody could ever tell us anything more than that he who lived there was a rich Moor of high position , Hadji Morato by name , formerly alcaide of La Pata , an office of high dignity among them . 
But when we least thought it was going to rain any more cianis from that quarter , we saw the reed suddenly appear with another cloth tied in a larger knot attached to it , and this at a time when , as on the former occasion , the bano was deserted and unoccupied . 
We made trial as before , each of the same three going forward before I did ; but the reed was delivered to none but me , and on my approach it was let drop . 
I untied the knot and I found forty Spanish gold crowns with a paper written in Arabic , and at the end of the writing there was a large cross drawn . 
I kissed the cross , took the crowns and returned to the terrace , and we all made our salaams ; again the hand appeared , I made signs that I would read the paper , and then the window was closed . 
We were all puzzled , though filled with joy at what had taken place ; and as none of us understood Arabic , great was our curiosity to know what the paper contained , and still greater the difficulty of finding some one to read it . 
At last I resolved to confide in a renegade , a native of Murcia , who professed a very great friendship for me , and had given pledges that bound him to keep any secret I might entrust to him ; for it is the custom with some renegades , when they intend to return to Christian territory , to carry about them certificates from captives of mark testifying , in whatever form they can , that such and such a renegade is a worthy man who has always shown kindness to Christians , and is anxious to escape on the first opportunity that may present itself . 
Some obtain these testimonials with good intentions , others put them to a cunning use ; for when they go to pillage on Christian territory , if they chance to be cast away , or taken prisoners , they produce their certificates and say that from these papers may be seen the object they came for , which was to remain on Christian ground , and that it was to this end they joined the Turks in their foray . 
In this way they escape the consequences of the first outburst and make their peace with the Church before it does them any harm , and then when they have the chance they return to Barbary to become what they were before . 
Others , however , there are who procure these papers and make use of them honestly , and remain on Christian soil . 
This friend of mine , then , was one of these renegades that I have described ; he had certificates from all our comrades , in which we testified in his favour as strongly as we could ; and if the Moors had found the papers they would have burned him alive . 
I knew that he understood Arabic very well , and could not only speak but also write it ; but before I disclosed the whole matter to him , I asked him to read for me this paper which I had found by accident in a hole in my cell . 
He opened it and remained some time examining it and muttering to himself as he translated it . 
I asked him if he understood it , and he told me he did perfectly well , and that if I wished him to tell me its meaning word for word , I must give him pen and ink that he might do it more satisfactorily . 
We at once gave him what he required , and he set about translating it bit by bit , and when he had done he said : `` All that is here in Spanish is what the Moorish paper contains , and you must bear in mind that when it says ` Lela Marien ' it means ` Our Lady the Virgin Mary . ' '' 
We read the paper and it ran thus : `` When I was a child my father had a slave who taught me to pray the Christian prayer in my own language , and told me many things about Lela Marien . 
The Christian died , and I know that she did not go to the fire , but to Allah , because since then I have seen her twice , and she told me to go to the land of the Christians to see Lela Marien , who had great love for me . 
I know not how to go . 
I have seen many Christians , but except thyself none has seemed to me to be a gentleman . 
I am young and beautiful , and have plenty of money to take with me . 
See if thou canst contrive how we may go , and if thou wilt thou shalt be my husband there , and if thou wilt not it will not distress me , for Lela Marien will find me some one to marry me . 
I myself have written this : have a care to whom thou givest it to read : trust no Moor , for they are all perfidious . 
I am greatly troubled on this account , for I would not have thee confide in anyone , because if my father knew it he would at once fling me down a well and cover me with stones . 
I will put a thread to the reed ; tie the answer to it , and if thou hast no one to write for thee in Arabic , tell it to me by signs , for Lela Marien will make me understand thee . 
She and Allah and this cross , which I often kiss as the captive bade me , protect thee . '' 
Judge , sirs , whether we had reason for surprise and joy at the words of this paper ; and both one and the other were so great , that the renegade perceived that the paper had not been found by chance , but had been in reality addressed to some one of us , and he begged us , if what he suspected were the truth , to trust him and tell him all , for he would risk his life for our freedom ; and so saying he took out from his breast a metal crucifix , and with many tears swore by the God the image represented , in whom , sinful and wicked as he was , he truly and faithfully believed , to be loyal to us and keep secret whatever we chose to reveal to him ; for he thought and almost foresaw that by means of her who had written that paper , he and all of us would obtain our liberty , and he himself obtain the object he so much desired , his restoration to the bosom of the Holy Mother Church , from which by his own sin and ignorance he was now severed like a corrupt limb . 
The renegade said this with so many tears and such signs of repentance , that with one consent we all agreed to tell him the whole truth of the matter , and so we gave him a full account of all , without hiding anything from him . 
We pointed out to him the window at which the reed appeared , and he by that means took note of the house , and resolved to ascertain with particular care who lived in it . 
We agreed also that it would be advisable to answer the Moorish lady 's letter , and the renegade without a moment 's delay took down the words I dictated to him , which were exactly what I shall tell you , for nothing of importance that took place in this affair has escaped my memory , or ever will while life lasts . 
This , then , was the answer returned to the Moorish lady : `` The true Allah protect thee , Lady , and that blessed Marien who is the true mother of God , and who has put it into thy heart to go to the land of the Christians , because she loves thee . 
Entreat her that she be pleased to show thee how thou canst execute the command she gives thee , for she will , such is her goodness . 
On my own part , and on that of all these Christians who are with me , I promise to do all that we can for thee , even to death . 
Fail not to write to me and inform me what thou dost mean to do , and I will always answer thee ; for the great Allah has given us a Christian captive who can speak and write thy language well , as thou mayest see by this paper ; without fear , therefore , thou canst inform us of all thou wouldst . 
As to what thou sayest , that if thou dost reach the land of the Christians thou wilt be my wife , I give thee my promise upon it as a good Christian ; and know that the Christians keep their promises better than the Moors . 
Allah and Marien his mother watch over thee , my Lady . '' 
The paper being written and folded I waited two days until the bano was empty as before , and immediately repaired to the usual walk on the terrace to see if there were any sign of the reed , which was not long in making its appearance . 
As soon as I saw it , although I could not distinguish who put it out , I showed the paper as a sign to attach the thread , but it was already fixed to the reed , and to it I tied the paper ; and shortly afterwards our star once more made its appearance with the white flag of peace , the little bundle . 
It was dropped , and I picked it up , and found in the cloth , in gold and silver coins of all sorts , more than fifty crowns , which fifty times more strengthened our joy and doubled our hope of gaining our liberty . 
That very night our renegade returned and said he had learned that the Moor we had been told of lived in that house , that his name was Hadji Morato , that he was enormously rich , that he had one only daughter the heiress of all his wealth , and that it was the general opinion throughout the city that she was the most beautiful woman in Barbary , and that several of the viceroys who came there had sought her for a wife , but that she had been always unwilling to marry ; and he had learned , moreover , that she had a Christian slave who was now dead ; all which agreed with the contents of the paper . 
We immediately took counsel with the renegade as to what means would have to be adopted in order to carry off the Moorish lady and bring us all to Christian territory ; and in the end it was agreed that for the present we should wait for a second communication from Zoraida -LRB- for that was the name of her who now desires to be called Maria -RRB- , because we saw clearly that she and no one else could find a way out of all these difficulties . 
When we had decided upon this the renegade told us not to be uneasy , for he would lose his life or restore us to liberty . 
For four days the bano was filled with people , for which reason the reed delayed its appearance for four days , but at the end of that time , when the bano was , as it generally was , empty , it appeared with the cloth so bulky that it promised a happy birth . 
Reed and cloth came down to me , and I found another paper and a hundred crowns in gold , without any other coin . 
The renegade was present , and in our cell we gave him the paper to read , which was to this effect : `` I can not think of a plan , senor , for our going to Spain , nor has Lela Marien shown me one , though I have asked her . 
All that can be done is for me to give you plenty of money in gold from this window . 
With it ransom yourself and your friends , and let one of you go to the land of the Christians , and there buy a vessel and come back for the others ; and he will find me in my father 's garden , which is at the Babazon gate near the seashore , where I shall be all this summer with my father and my servants . 
You can carry me away from there by night without any danger , and bring me to the vessel . 
And remember thou art to be my husband , else I will pray to Marien to punish thee . 
If thou canst not trust anyone to go for the vessel , ransom thyself and do thou go , for I know thou wilt return more surely than any other , as thou art a gentleman and a Christian . 
Endeavour to make thyself acquainted with the garden ; and when I see thee walking yonder I shall know that the bano is empty and I will give thee abundance of money . 
Allah protect thee , senor . '' 
These were the words and contents of the second paper , and on hearing them , each declared himself willing to be the ransomed one , and promised to go and return with scrupulous good faith ; and I too made the same offer ; but to all this the renegade objected , saying that he would not on any account consent to one being set free before all went together , as experience had taught him how ill those who have been set free keep promises which they made in captivity ; for captives of distinction frequently had recourse to this plan , paying the ransom of one who was to go to Valencia or Majorca with money to enable him to arm a bark and return for the others who had ransomed him , but who never came back ; for recovered liberty and the dread of losing it again efface from the memory all the obligations in the world . 
And to prove the truth of what he said , he told us briefly what had happened to a certain Christian gentleman almost at that very time , the strangest case that had ever occurred even there , where astonishing and marvellous things are happening every instant . 
In short , he ended by saying that what could and ought to be done was to give the money intended for the ransom of one of us Christians to him , so that he might with it buy a vessel there in Algiers under the pretence of becoming a merchant and trader at Tetuan and along the coast ; and when master of the vessel , it would be easy for him to hit on some way of getting us all out of the bano and putting us on board ; especially if the Moorish lady gave , as she said , money enough to ransom all , because once free it would be the easiest thing in the world for us to embark even in open day ; but the greatest difficulty was that the Moors do not allow any renegade to buy or own any craft , unless it be a large vessel for going on roving expeditions , because they are afraid that anyone who buys a small vessel , especially if he be a Spaniard , only wants it for the purpose of escaping to Christian territory . 
This however he could get over by arranging with a Tagarin Moor to go shares with him in the purchase of the vessel , and in the profit on the cargo ; and under cover of this he could become master of the vessel , in which case he looked upon all the rest as accomplished . 
But though to me and my comrades it had seemed a better plan to send to Majorca for the vessel , as the Moorish lady suggested , we did not dare to oppose him , fearing that if we did not do as he said he would denounce us , and place us in danger of losing all our lives if he were to disclose our dealings with Zoraida , for whose life we would have all given our own . 
We therefore resolved to put ourselves in the hands of God and in the renegade 's ; and at the same time an answer was given to Zoraida , telling her that we would do all she recommended , for she had given as good advice as if Lela Marien had delivered it , and that it depended on her alone whether we were to defer the business or put it in execution at once . 
I renewed my promise to be her husband ; and thus the next day that the bano chanced to be empty she at different times gave us by means of the reed and cloth two thousand gold crowns and a paper in which she said that the next Juma , that is to say Friday , she was going to her father 's garden , but that before she went she would give us more money ; and if it were not enough we were to let her know , as she would give us as much as we asked , for her father had so much he would not miss it , and besides she kept all the keys . 
We at once gave the renegade five hundred crowns to buy the vessel , and with eight hundred I ransomed myself , giving the money to a Valencian merchant who happened to be in Algiers at the time , and who had me released on his word , pledging it that on the arrival of the first ship from Valencia he would pay my ransom ; for if he had given the money at once it would have made the king suspect that my ransom money had been for a long time in Algiers , and that the merchant had for his own advantage kept it secret . 
In fact my master was so difficult to deal with that I dared not on any account pay down the money at once . 
The Thursday before the Friday on which the fair Zoraida was to go to the garden she gave us a thousand crowns more , and warned us of her departure , begging me , if I were ransomed , to find out her father 's garden at once , and by all means to seek an opportunity of going there to see her . 
I answered in a few words that I would do so , and that she must remember to commend us to Lela Marien with all the prayers the captive had taught her . 
This having been done , steps were taken to ransom our three comrades , so as to enable them to quit the bano , and lest , seeing me ransomed and themselves not , though the money was forthcoming , they should make a disturbance about it and the devil should prompt them to do something that might injure Zoraida ; for though their position might be sufficient to relieve me from this apprehension , nevertheless I was unwilling to run any risk in the matter ; and so I had them ransomed in the same way as I was , handing over all the money to the merchant so that he might with safety and confidence give security ; without , however , confiding our arrangement and secret to him , which might have been dangerous . 
Before fifteen days were over our renegade had already purchased an excellent vessel with room for more than thirty persons ; and to make the transaction safe and lend a colour to it , he thought it well to make , as he did , a voyage to a place called Shershel , twenty leagues from Algiers on the Oran side , where there is an extensive trade in dried figs . 
Two or three times he made this voyage in company with the Tagarin already mentioned . 
The Moors of Aragon are called Tagarins in Barbary , and those of Granada Mudejars ; but in the Kingdom of Fez they call the Mudejars Elches , and they are the people the king chiefly employs in war . 
To proceed : every time he passed with his vessel he anchored in a cove that was not two crossbow shots from the garden where Zoraida was waiting ; and there the renegade , together with the two Moorish lads that rowed , used purposely to station himself , either going through his prayers , or else practising as a part what he meant to perform in earnest . 
And thus he would go to Zoraida 's garden and ask for fruit , which her father gave him , not knowing him ; but though , as he afterwards told me , he sought to speak to Zoraida , and tell her who he was , and that by my orders he was to take her to the land of the Christians , so that she might feel satisfied and easy , he had never been able to do so ; for the Moorish women do not allow themselves to be seen by any Moor or Turk , unless their husband or father bid them : with Christian captives they permit freedom of intercourse and communication , even more than might be considered proper . 
But for my part I should have been sorry if he had spoken to her , for perhaps it might have alarmed her to find her affairs talked of by renegades . 
But God , who ordered it otherwise , afforded no opportunity for our renegade 's well-meant purpose ; and he , seeing how safely he could go to Shershel and return , and anchor when and how and where he liked , and that the Tagarin his partner had no will but his , and that , now I was ransomed , all we wanted was to find some Christians to row , told me to look out for any I should be willing to take with me , over and above those who had been ransomed , and to engage them for the next Friday , which he fixed upon for our departure . 
On this I spoke to twelve Spaniards , all stout rowers , and such as could most easily leave the city ; but it was no easy matter to find so many just then , because there were twenty ships out on a cruise and they had taken all the rowers with them ; and these would not have been found were it not that their master remained at home that summer without going to sea in order to finish a galliot that he had upon the stocks . 
To these men I said nothing more than that the next Friday in the evening they were to come out stealthily one by one and hang about Hadji Morato 's garden , waiting for me there until I came . 
These directions I gave each one separately , with orders that if they saw any other Christians there they were not to say anything to them except that I had directed them to wait at that spot . 
This preliminary having been settled , another still more necessary step had to be taken , which was to let Zoraida know how matters stood that she might be prepared and forewarned , so as not to be taken by surprise if we were suddenly to seize upon her before she thought the Christians ' vessel could have returned . 
I determined , therefore , to go to the garden and try if I could speak to her ; and the day before my departure I went there under the pretence of gathering herbs . 
The first person I met was her father , who addressed me in the language that all over Barbary and even in Constantinople is the medium between captives and Moors , and is neither Morisco nor Castilian , nor of any other nation , but a mixture of all languages , by means of which we can all understand one another . 
In this sort of language , I say , he asked me what I wanted in his garden , and to whom I belonged . 
I replied that I was a slave of the Arnaut Mami -LRB- for I knew as a certainty that he was a very great friend of his -RRB- , and that I wanted some herbs to make a salad . 
He asked me then whether I were on ransom or not , and what my master demanded for me . 
While these questions and answers were proceeding , the fair Zoraida , who had already perceived me some time before , came out of the house in the garden , and as Moorish women are by no means particular about letting themselves be seen by Christians , or , as I have said before , at all coy , she had no hesitation in coming to where her father stood with me ; moreover her father , seeing her approaching slowly , called to her to come . 
It would be beyond my power now to describe to you the great beauty , the high-bred air , the brilliant attire of my beloved Zoraida as she presented herself before my eyes . 
I will content myself with saying that more pearls hung from her fair neck , her ears , and her hair than she had hairs on her head . 
On her ankles , which as is customary were bare , she had carcajes -LRB- for so bracelets or anklets are called in Morisco -RRB- of the purest gold , set with so many diamonds that she told me afterwards her father valued them at ten thousand doubloons , and those she had on her wrists were worth as much more . 
The pearls were in profusion and very fine , for the highest display and adornment of the Moorish women is decking themselves with rich pearls and seed-pearls ; and of these there are therefore more among the Moors than among any other people . 
Zoraida 's father had to the reputation of possessing a great number , and the purest in all Algiers , and of possessing also more than two hundred thousand Spanish crowns ; and she , who is now mistress of me only , was mistress of all this . 
Whether thus adorned she would have been beautiful or not , and what she must have been in her prosperity , may be imagined from the beauty remaining to her after so many hardships ; for , as everyone knows , the beauty of some women has its times and its seasons , and is increased or diminished by chance causes ; and naturally the emotions of the mind will heighten or impair it , though indeed more frequently they totally destroy it . 
In a word she presented herself before me that day attired with the utmost splendour , and supremely beautiful ; at any rate , she seemed to me the most beautiful object I had ever seen ; and when , besides , I thought of all I owed to her I felt as though I had before me some heavenly being come to earth to bring me relief and happiness . 
As she approached her father told her in his own language that I was a captive belonging to his friend the Arnaut Mami , and that I had come for salad . 
She took up the conversation , and in that mixture of tongues I have spoken of she asked me if I was a gentleman , and why I was not ransomed . 
I answered that I was already ransomed , and that by the price it might be seen what value my master set on me , as I had given one thousand five hundred zoltanis for me ; to which she replied , `` Hadst thou been my father 's , I can tell thee , I would not have let him part with thee for twice as much , for you Christians always tell lies about yourselves and make yourselves out poor to cheat the Moors . '' 
`` That may be , lady , '' said I ; `` but indeed I dealt truthfully with my master , as I do and mean to do with everybody in the world . '' 
`` And when dost thou go ? '' 
said Zoraida . 
`` To-morrow , I think , '' said I , `` for there is a vessel here from France which sails to-morrow , and I think I shall go in her . '' 
`` Would it not be better , '' said Zoraida , `` to wait for the arrival of ships from Spain and go with them and not with the French who are not your friends ? '' 
`` No , '' said I ; `` though if there were intelligence that a vessel were now coming from Spain it is true I might , perhaps , wait for it ; however , it is more likely I shall depart to-morrow , for the longing I feel to return to my country and to those I love is so great that it will not allow me to wait for another opportunity , however more convenient , if it be delayed . '' 
`` No doubt thou art married in thine own country , '' said Zoraida , `` and for that reason thou art anxious to go and see thy wife . '' 
`` I am not married , '' I replied , `` but I have given my promise to marry on my arrival there . '' 
`` And is the lady beautiful to whom thou hast given it ? '' 
said Zoraida . 
`` So beautiful , '' said I , `` that , to describe her worthily and tell thee the truth , she is very like thee . '' 
At this her father laughed very heartily and said , `` By Allah , Christian , she must be very beautiful if she is like my daughter , who is the most beautiful woman in all this kingdom : only look at her well and thou wilt see I am telling the truth . '' 
Zoraida 's father as the better linguist helped to interpret most of these words and phrases , for though she spoke the bastard language , that , as I have said , is employed there , she expressed her meaning more by signs than by words . 
While we were still engaged in this conversation , a Moor came running up , exclaiming that four Turks had leaped over the fence or wall of the garden , and were gathering the fruit though it was not yet ripe . 
The old man was alarmed and Zoraida too , for the Moors commonly , and , so to speak , instinctively have a dread of the Turks , but particularly of the soldiers , who are so insolent and domineering to the Moors who are under their power that they treat them worse than if they were their slaves . 
Her father said to Zoraida , `` Daughter , retire into the house and shut thyself in while I go and speak to these dogs ; and thou , Christian , pick thy herbs , and go in peace , and Allah bring thee safe to thy own country . '' 
I bowed , and he went away to look for the Turks , leaving me alone with Zoraida , who made as if she were about to retire as her father bade her ; but the moment he was concealed by the trees of the garden , turning to me with her eyes full of tears she said , `` Tameji , cristiano , tameji ? '' 
that is to say , `` Art thou going , Christian , art thou going ? '' 
I made answer , `` Yes , lady , but not without thee , come what may : be on the watch for me on the next Juma , and be not alarmed when thou seest us ; for most surely we shall go to the land of the Christians . '' 
This I said in such a way that she understood perfectly all that passed between us , and throwing her arm round my neck she began with feeble steps to move towards the house ; but as fate would have it -LRB- and it might have been very unfortunate if Heaven had not otherwise ordered it -RRB- , just as we were moving on in the manner and position I have described , with her arm round my neck , her father , as he returned after having sent away the Turks , saw how we were walking and we perceived that he saw us ; but Zoraida , ready and quickwitted , took care not to remove her arm from my neck , but on the contrary drew closer to me and laid her head on my breast , bending her knees a little and showing all the signs and tokens of fainting , while I at the same time made it seem as though I were supporting her against my will . 
Her father came running up to where we were , and seeing his daughter in this state asked what was the matter with her ; she , however , giving no answer , he said , `` No doubt she has fainted in alarm at the entrance of those dogs , '' and taking her from mine he drew her to his own breast , while she sighing , her eyes still wet with tears , said again , `` Ameji , cristiano , ameji '' -- `` Go , Christian , go . '' 
To this her father replied , `` There is no need , daughter , for the Christian to go , for he has done thee no harm , and the Turks have now gone ; feel no alarm , there is nothing to hurt thee , for as I say , the Turks at my request have gone back the way they came . '' 
`` It was they who terrified her , as thou hast said , senor , '' said I to her father ; `` but since she tells me to go , I have no wish to displease her : peace be with thee , and with thy leave I will come back to this garden for herbs if need be , for my master says there are nowhere better herbs for salad then here . '' 
`` Come back for any thou hast need of , '' replied Hadji Morato ; `` for my daughter does not speak thus because she is displeased with thee or any Christian : she only meant that the Turks should go , not thou ; or that it was time for thee to look for thy herbs . '' 
With this I at once took my leave of both ; and she , looking as though her heart were breaking , retired with her father . 
While pretending to look for herbs I made the round of the garden at my ease , and studied carefully all the approaches and outlets , and the fastenings of the house and everything that could be taken advantage of to make our task easy . 
Having done so I went and gave an account of all that had taken place to the renegade and my comrades , and looked forward with impatience to the hour when , all fear at an end , I should find myself in possession of the prize which fortune held out to me in the fair and lovely Zoraida . 
The time passed at length , and the appointed day we so longed for arrived ; and , all following out the arrangement and plan which , after careful consideration and many a long discussion , we had decided upon , we succeeded as fully as we could have wished ; for on the Friday following the day upon which I spoke to Zoraida in the garden , the renegade anchored his vessel at nightfall almost opposite the spot where she was . 
The Christians who were to row were ready and in hiding in different places round about , all waiting for me , anxious and elated , and eager to attack the vessel they had before their eyes ; for they did not know the renegade 's plan , but expected that they were to gain their liberty by force of arms and by killing the Moors who were on board the vessel . 
As soon , then , as I and my comrades made our appearance , all those that were in hiding seeing us came and joined us . 
It was now the time when the city gates are shut , and there was no one to be seen in all the space outside . 
When we were collected together we debated whether it would be better first to go for Zoraida , or to make prisoners of the Moorish rowers who rowed in the vessel ; but while we were still uncertain our renegade came up asking us what kept us , as it was now the time , and all the Moors were off their guard and most of them asleep . 
We told him why we hesitated , but he said it was of more importance first to secure the vessel , which could be done with the greatest ease and without any danger , and then we could go for Zoraida . 
We all approved of what he said , and so without further delay , guided by him we made for the vessel , and he leaping on board first , drew his cutlass and said in Morisco , `` Let no one stir from this if he does not want it to cost him his life . '' 
By this almost all the Christians were on board , and the Moors , who were fainthearted , hearing their captain speak in this way , were cowed , and without any one of them taking to his arms -LRB- and indeed they had few or hardly any -RRB- they submitted without saying a word to be bound by the Christians , who quickly secured them , threatening them that if they raised any kind of outcry they would be all put to the sword . 
This having been accomplished , and half of our party being left to keep guard over them , the rest of us , again taking the renegade as our guide , hastened towards Hadji Morato 's garden , and as good luck would have it , on trying the gate it opened as easily as if it had not been locked ; and so , quite quietly and in silence , we reached the house without being perceived by anybody . 
The lovely Zoraida was watching for us at a window , and as soon as she perceived that there were people there , she asked in a low voice if we were `` Nizarani , '' as much as to say or ask if we were Christians . 
I answered that we were , and begged her to come down . 
As soon as she recognised me she did not delay an instant , but without answering a word came down immediately , opened the door and presented herself before us all , so beautiful and so richly attired that I can not attempt to describe her . 
The moment I saw her I took her hand and kissed it , and the renegade and my two comrades did the same ; and the rest , who knew nothing of the circumstances , did as they saw us do , for it only seemed as if we were returning thanks to her , and recognising her as the giver of our liberty . 
The renegade asked her in the Morisco language if her father was in the house . 
She replied that he was and that he was asleep . 
`` Then it will be necessary to waken him and take him with us , '' said the renegade , `` and everything of value in this fair mansion . '' 
`` Nay , '' said she , `` my father must not on any account be touched , and there is nothing in the house except what I shall take , and that will be quite enough to enrich and satisfy all of you ; wait a little and you shall see , '' and so saying she went in , telling us she would return immediately and bidding us keep quiet making any noise . 
I asked the renegade what had passed between them , and when he told me , I declared that nothing should be done except in accordance with the wishes of Zoraida , who now came back with a little trunk so full of gold crowns that she could scarcely carry it . 
Unfortunately her father awoke while this was going on , and hearing a noise in the garden , came to the window , and at once perceiving that all those who were there were Christians , raising a prodigiously loud outcry , he began to call out in Arabic , `` Christians , Christians ! 
thieves , thieves ! '' 
by which cries we were all thrown into the greatest fear and embarrassment ; but the renegade seeing the danger we were in and how important it was for him to effect his purpose before we were heard , mounted with the utmost quickness to where Hadji Morato was , and with him went some of our party ; I , however , did not dare to leave Zoraida , who had fallen almost fainting in my arms . 
To be brief , those who had gone upstairs acted so promptly that in an instant they came down , carrying Hadji Morato with his hands bound and a napkin tied over his mouth , which prevented him from uttering a word , warning him at the same time that to attempt to speak would cost him his life . 
When his daughter caught sight of him she covered her eyes so as not to see him , and her father was horror-stricken , not knowing how willingly she had placed herself in our hands . 
But it was now most essential for us to be on the move , and carefully and quickly we regained the vessel , where those who had remained on board were waiting for us in apprehension of some mishap having befallen us . 
It was barely two hours after night set in when we were all on board the vessel , where the cords were removed from the hands of Zoraida 's father , and the napkin from his mouth ; but the renegade once more told him not to utter a word , or they would take his life . 
He , when he saw his daughter there , began to sigh piteously , and still more when he perceived that I held her closely embraced and that she lay quiet without resisting or complaining , or showing any reluctance ; nevertheless he remained silent lest they should carry into effect the repeated threats the renegade had addressed to him . 
Finding herself now on board , and that we were about to give way with the oars , Zoraida , seeing her father there , and the other Moors bound , bade the renegade ask me to do her the favour of releasing the Moors and setting her father at liberty , for she would rather drown herself in the sea than suffer a father that had loved her so dearly to be carried away captive before her eyes and on her account . 
The renegade repeated this to me , and I replied that I was very willing to do so ; but he replied that it was not advisable , because if they were left there they would at once raise the country and stir up the city , and lead to the despatch of swift cruisers in pursuit , and our being taken , by sea or land , without any possibility of escape ; and that all that could be done was to set them free on the first Christian ground we reached . 
On this point we all agreed ; and Zoraida , to whom it was explained , together with the reasons that prevented us from doing at once what she desired , was satisfied likewise ; and then in glad silence and with cheerful alacrity each of our stout rowers took his oar , and commending ourselves to God with all our hearts , we began to shape our course for the island of Majorca , the nearest Christian land . 
Owing , however , to the Tramontana rising a little , and the sea growing somewhat rough , it was impossible for us to keep a straight course for Majorca , and we were compelled to coast in the direction of Oran , not without great uneasiness on our part lest we should be observed from the town of Shershel , which lies on that coast , not more than sixty miles from Algiers . 
Moreover we were afraid of meeting on that course one of the galliots that usually come with goods from Tetuan ; although each of us for himself and all of us together felt confident that , if we were to meet a merchant galliot , so that it were not a cruiser , not only should we not be lost , but that we should take a vessel in which we could more safely accomplish our voyage . 
As we pursued our course Zoraida kept her head between my hands so as not to see her father , and I felt that she was praying to Lela Marien to help us . 
We might have made about thirty miles when daybreak found us some three musket-shots off the land , which seemed to us deserted , and without anyone to see us . 
For all that , however , by hard rowing we put out a little to sea , for it was now somewhat calmer , and having gained about two leagues the word was given to row by batches , while we ate something , for the vessel was well provided ; but the rowers said it was not a time to take any rest ; let food be served out to those who were not rowing , but they would not leave their oars on any account . 
This was done , but now a stiff breeze began to blow , which obliged us to leave off rowing and make sail at once and steer for Oran , as it was impossible to make any other course . 
All this was done very promptly , and under sail we ran more than eight miles an hour without any fear , except that of coming across some vessel out on a roving expedition . 
We gave the Moorish rowers some food , and the renegade comforted them by telling them that they were not held as captives , as we should set them free on the first opportunity . 
The same was said to Zoraida 's father , who replied , `` Anything else , Christian , I might hope for or think likely from your generosity and good behaviour , but do not think me so simple as to imagine you will give me my liberty ; for you would have never exposed yourselves to the danger of depriving me of it only to restore it to me so generously , especially as you know who I am and the sum you may expect to receive on restoring it ; and if you will only name that , I here offer you all you require for myself and for my unhappy daughter there ; or else for her alone , for she is the greatest and most precious part of my soul . '' 
As he said this he began to weep so bitterly that he filled us all with compassion and forced Zoraida to look at him , and when she saw him weeping she was so moved that she rose from my feet and ran to throw her arms round him , and pressing her face to his , they both gave way to such an outburst of tears that several of us were constrained to keep them company . 
But when her father saw her in full dress and with all her jewels about her , he said to her in his own language , `` What means this , my daughter ? 
Last night , before this terrible misfortune in which we are plunged befell us , I saw thee in thy everyday and indoor garments ; and now , without having had time to attire thyself , and without my bringing thee any joyful tidings to furnish an occasion for adorning and bedecking thyself , I see thee arrayed in the finest attire it would be in my power to give thee when fortune was most kind to us . 
Answer me this ; for it causes me greater anxiety and surprise than even this misfortune itself . '' 
The renegade interpreted to us what the Moor said to his daughter ; she , however , returned him no answer . 
But when he observed in one corner of the vessel the little trunk in which she used to keep her jewels , which he well knew he had left in Algiers and had not brought to the garden , he was still more amazed , and asked her how that trunk had come into our hands , and what there was in it . 
To which the renegade , without waiting for Zoraida to reply , made answer , `` Do not trouble thyself by asking thy daughter Zoraida so many questions , senor , for the one answer I will give thee will serve for all ; I would have thee know that she is a Christian , and that it is she who has been the file for our chains and our deliverer from captivity . 
She is here of her own free will , as glad , I imagine , to find herself in this position as he who escapes from darkness into the light , from death to life , and from suffering to glory . '' 
`` Daughter , is this true , what he says ? '' 
cried the Moor . 
`` It is , '' replied Zoraida . 
`` That thou art in truth a Christian , '' said the old man , `` and that thou hast given thy father into the power of his enemies ? '' 
To which Zoraida made answer , `` A Christian I am , but it is not I who have placed thee in this position , for it never was my wish to leave thee or do thee harm , but only to do good to myself . '' 
`` And what good hast thou done thyself , daughter ? '' 
said he . 
`` Ask thou that , '' said she , `` of Lela Marien , for she can tell thee better than I. '' The Moor had hardly heard these words when with marvellous quickness he flung himself headforemost into the sea , where no doubt he would have been drowned had not the long and full dress he wore held him up for a little on the surface of the water . 
Zoraida cried aloud to us to save him , and we all hastened to help , and seizing him by his robe we drew him in half drowned and insensible , at which Zoraida was in such distress that she wept over him as piteously and bitterly as though he were already dead . 
We turned him upon his face and he voided a great quantity of water , and at the end of two hours came to himself . 
Meanwhile , the wind having changed we were compelled to head for the land , and ply our oars to avoid being driven on shore ; but it was our good fortune to reach a creek that lies on one side of a small promontory or cape , called by the Moors that of the `` Cava rumia , '' which in our language means `` the wicked Christian woman ; '' for it is a tradition among them that La Cava , through whom Spain was lost , lies buried at that spot ; `` cava '' in their language meaning `` wicked woman , '' and `` rumia '' `` Christian ; '' moreover , they count it unlucky to anchor there when necessity compels them , and they never do so otherwise . 
For us , however , it was not the resting-place of the wicked woman but a haven of safety for our relief , so much had the sea now got up . 
We posted a look-out on shore , and never let the oars out of our hands , and ate of the stores the renegade had laid in , imploring God and Our Lady with all our hearts to help and protect us , that we might give a happy ending to a beginning so prosperous . 
At the entreaty of Zoraida orders were given to set on shore her father and the other Moors who were still bound , for she could not endure , nor could her tender heart bear to see her father in bonds and her fellow-countrymen prisoners before her eyes . 
We promised her to do this at the moment of departure , for as it was uninhabited we ran no risk in releasing them at that place . 
Our prayers were not so far in vain as to be unheard by Heaven , for after a while the wind changed in our favour , and made the sea calm , inviting us once more to resume our voyage with a good heart . 
Seeing this we unbound the Moors , and one by one put them on shore , at which they were filled with amazement ; but when we came to land Zoraida 's father , who had now completely recovered his senses , he said : `` Why is it , think ye , Christians , that this wicked woman is rejoiced at your giving me my liberty ? 
Think ye it is because of the affection she bears me ? 
Nay verily , it is only because of the hindrance my presence offers to the execution of her base designs . 
And think not that it is her belief that yours is better than ours that has led her to change her religion ; it is only because she knows that immodesty is more freely practised in your country than in ours . '' 
Then turning to Zoraida , while I and another of the Christians held him fast by both arms , lest he should do some mad act , he said to her , `` Infamous girl , misguided maiden , whither in thy blindness and madness art thou going in the hands of these dogs , our natural enemies ? 
Cursed be the hour when I begot thee ! 
Cursed the luxury and indulgence in which I reared thee ! '' 
But seeing that he was not likely soon to cease I made haste to put him on shore , and thence he continued his maledictions and lamentations aloud ; calling on Mohammed to pray to Allah to destroy us , to confound us , to make an end of us ; and when , in consequence of having made sail , we could no longer hear what he said we could see what he did ; how he plucked out his beard and tore his hair and lay writhing on the ground . 
But once he raised his voice to such a pitch that we were able to hear what he said . 
`` Come back , dear daughter , come back to shore ; I forgive thee all ; let those men have the money , for it is theirs now , and come back to comfort thy sorrowing father , who will yield up his life on this barren strand if thou dost leave him . '' 
All this Zoraida heard , and heard with sorrow and tears , and all she could say in answer was , `` Allah grant that Lela Marien , who has made me become a Christian , give thee comfort in thy sorrow , my father . 
Allah knows that I could not do otherwise than I have done , and that these Christians owe nothing to my will ; for even had I wished not to accompany them , but remain at home , it would have been impossible for me , so eagerly did my soul urge me on to the accomplishment of this purpose , which I feel to be as righteous as to thee , dear father , it seems wicked . '' 
But neither could her father hear her nor we see him when she said this ; and so , while I consoled Zoraida , we turned our attention to our voyage , in which a breeze from the right point so favoured us that we made sure of finding ourselves off the coast of Spain on the morrow by daybreak . 
But , as good seldom or never comes pure and unmixed , without being attended or followed by some disturbing evil that gives a shock to it , our fortune , or perhaps the curses which the Moor had hurled at his daughter -LRB- for whatever kind of father they may come from these are always to be dreaded -RRB- , brought it about that when we were now in mid-sea , and the night about three hours spent , as we were running with all sail set and oars lashed , for the favouring breeze saved us the trouble of using them , we saw by the light of the moon , which shone brilliantly , a square-rigged vessel in full sail close to us , luffing up and standing across our course , and so close that we had to strike sail to avoid running foul of her , while they too put the helm hard up to let us pass . 
They came to the side of the ship to ask who we were , whither we were bound , and whence we came , but as they asked this in French our renegade said , `` Let no one answer , for no doubt these are French corsairs who plunder all comers . '' 
Acting on this warning no one answered a word , but after we had gone a little ahead , and the vessel was now lying to leeward , suddenly they fired two guns , and apparently both loaded with chain-shot , for with one they cut our mast in half and brought down both it and the sail into the sea , and the other , discharged at the same moment , sent a ball into our vessel amidships , staving her in completely , but without doing any further damage . 
We , however , finding ourselves sinking began to shout for help and call upon those in the ship to pick us up as we were beginning to fill . 
They then lay to , and lowering a skiff or boat , as many as a dozen Frenchmen , well armed with match-locks , and their matches burning , got into it and came alongside ; and seeing how few we were , and that our vessel was going down , they took us in , telling us that this had come to us through our incivility in not giving them an answer . 
Our renegade took the trunk containing Zoraida 's wealth and dropped it into the sea without anyone perceiving what he did . 
In short we went on board with the Frenchmen , who , after having ascertained all they wanted to know about us , rifled us of everything we had , as if they had been our bitterest enemies , and from Zoraida they took even the anklets she wore on her feet ; but the distress they caused her did not distress me so much as the fear I was in that from robbing her of her rich and precious jewels they would proceed to rob her of the most precious jewel that she valued more than all . 
The desires , however , of those people do not go beyond money , but of that their covetousness is insatiable , and on this occasion it was carried to such a pitch that they would have taken even the clothes we wore as captives if they had been worth anything to them . 
It was the advice of some of them to throw us all into the sea wrapped up in a sail ; for their purpose was to trade at some of the ports of Spain , giving themselves out as Bretons , and if they brought us alive they would be punished as soon as the robbery was discovered ; but the captain -LRB- who was the one who had plundered my beloved Zoraida -RRB- said he was satisfied with the prize he had got , and that he would not touch at any Spanish port , but pass the Straits of Gibraltar by night , or as best he could , and make for La Rochelle , from which he had sailed . 
So they agreed by common consent to give us the skiff belonging to their ship and all we required for the short voyage that remained to us , and this they did the next day on coming in sight of the Spanish coast , with which , and the joy we felt , all our sufferings and miseries were as completely forgotten as if they had never been endured by us , such is the delight of recovering lost liberty . 
It may have been about mid-day when they placed us in the boat , giving us two kegs of water and some biscuit ; and the captain , moved by I know not what compassion , as the lovely Zoraida was about to embark , gave her some forty gold crowns , and would not permit his men to take from her those same garments which she has on now . 
We got into the boat , returning them thanks for their kindness to us , and showing ourselves grateful rather than indignant . 
They stood out to sea , steering for the straits ; we , without looking to any compass save the land we had before us , set ourselves to row with such energy that by sunset we were so near that we might easily , we thought , land before the night was far advanced . 
But as the moon did not show that night , and the sky was clouded , and as we knew not whereabouts we were , it did not seem to us a prudent thing to make for the shore , as several of us advised , saying we ought to run ourselves ashore even if it were on rocks and far from any habitation , for in this way we should be relieved from the apprehensions we naturally felt of the prowling vessels of the Tetuan corsairs , who leave Barbary at nightfall and are on the Spanish coast by daybreak , where they commonly take some prize , and then go home to sleep in their own houses . 
But of the conflicting counsels the one which was adopted was that we should approach gradually , and land where we could if the sea were calm enough to permit us . 
This was done , and a little before midnight we drew near to the foot of a huge and lofty mountain , not so close to the sea but that it left a narrow space on which to land conveniently . 
We ran our boat up on the sand , and all sprang out and kissed the ground , and with tears of joyful satisfaction returned thanks to God our Lord for all his incomparable goodness to us on our voyage . 
We took out of the boat the provisions it contained , and drew it up on the shore , and then climbed a long way up the mountain , for even there we could not feel easy in our hearts , or persuade ourselves that it was Christian soil that was now under our feet . 
The dawn came , more slowly , I think , than we could have wished ; we completed the ascent in order to see if from the summit any habitation or any shepherds ' huts could be discovered , but strain our eyes as we might , neither dwelling , nor human being , nor path nor road could we perceive . 
However , we determined to push on farther , as it could not but be that ere long we must see some one who could tell us where we were . 
But what distressed me most was to see Zoraida going on foot over that rough ground ; for though I once carried her on my shoulders , she was more wearied by my weariness than rested by the rest ; and so she would never again allow me to undergo the exertion , and went on very patiently and cheerfully , while I led her by the hand . 
We had gone rather less than a quarter of a league when the sound of a little bell fell on our ears , a clear proof that there were flocks hard by , and looking about carefully to see if any were within view , we observed a young shepherd tranquilly and unsuspiciously trimming a stick with his knife at the foot of a cork tree . 
We called to him , and he , raising his head , sprang nimbly to his feet , for , as we afterwards learned , the first who presented themselves to his sight were the renegade and Zoraida , and seeing them in Moorish dress he imagined that all the Moors of Barbary were upon him ; and plunging with marvellous swiftness into the thicket in front of him , he began to raise a prodigious outcry , exclaiming , `` The Moors -- the Moors have landed ! 
To arms , to arms ! '' 
We were all thrown into perplexity by these cries , not knowing what to do ; but reflecting that the shouts of the shepherd would raise the country and that the mounted coast-guard would come at once to see what was the matter , we agreed that the renegade must strip off his Turkish garments and put on a captive 's jacket or coat which one of our party gave him at once , though he himself was reduced to his shirt ; and so commending ourselves to God , we followed the same road which we saw the shepherd take , expecting every moment that the coast-guard would be down upon us . 
Nor did our expectation deceive us , for two hours had not passed when , coming out of the brushwood into the open ground , we perceived some fifty mounted men swiftly approaching us at a hand-gallop . 
As soon as we saw them we stood still , waiting for them ; but as they came close and , instead of the Moors they were in quest of , saw a set of poor Christians , they were taken aback , and one of them asked if it could be we who were the cause of the shepherd having raised the call to arms . 
I said `` Yes , '' and as I was about to explain to him what had occurred , and whence we came and who we were , one of the Christians of our party recognised the horseman who had put the question to us , and before I could say anything more he exclaimed : `` Thanks be to God , sirs , for bringing us to such good quarters ; for , if I do not deceive myself , the ground we stand on is that of Velez Malaga unless , indeed , all my years of captivity have made me unable to recollect that you , senor , who ask who we are , are Pedro de Bustamante , my uncle . '' 
The Christian captive had hardly uttered these words , when the horseman threw himself off his horse , and ran to embrace the young man , crying : `` Nephew of my soul and life ! 
I recognise thee now ; and long have I mourned thee as dead , I , and my sister , thy mother , and all thy kin that are still alive , and whom God has been pleased to preserve that they may enjoy the happiness of seeing thee . 
We knew long since that thou wert in Algiers , and from the appearance of thy garments and those of all this company , I conclude that ye have had a miraculous restoration to liberty . '' 
`` It is true , '' replied the young man , `` and by-and-by we will tell you all . '' 
As soon as the horsemen understood that we were Christian captives , they dismounted from their horses , and each offered his to carry us to the city of Velez Malaga , which was a league and a half distant . 
Some of them went to bring the boat to the city , we having told them where we had left it ; others took us up behind them , and Zoraida was placed on the horse of the young man 's uncle . 
The whole town came out to meet us , for they had by this time heard of our arrival from one who had gone on in advance . 
They were not astonished to see liberated captives or captive Moors , for people on that coast are well used to see both one and the other ; but they were astonished at the beauty of Zoraida , which was just then heightened , as well by the exertion of travelling as by joy at finding herself on Christian soil , and relieved of all fear of being lost ; for this had brought such a glow upon her face , that unless my affection for her were deceiving me , I would venture to say that there was not a more beautiful creature in the world -- at least , that I had ever seen . 
We went straight to the church to return thanks to God for the mercies we had received , and when Zoraida entered it she said there were faces there like Lela Marien 's . 
We told her they were her images ; and as well as he could the renegade explained to her what they meant , that she might adore them as if each of them were the very same Lela Marien that had spoken to her ; and she , having great intelligence and a quick and clear instinct , understood at once all he said to her about them . 
Thence they took us away and distributed us all in different houses in the town ; but as for the renegade , Zoraida , and myself , the Christian who came with us brought us to the house of his parents , who had a fair share of the gifts of fortune , and treated us with as much kindness as they did their own son . 
We remained six days in Velez , at the end of which the renegade , having informed himself of all that was requisite for him to do , set out for the city of Granada to restore himself to the sacred bosom of the Church through the medium of the Holy Inquisition . 
The other released captives took their departures , each the way that seemed best to him , and Zoraida and I were left alone , with nothing more than the crowns which the courtesy of the Frenchman had bestowed upon Zoraida , out of which I bought the beast on which she rides ; and , I for the present attending her as her father and squire and not as her husband , we are now going to ascertain if my father is living , or if any of my brothers has had better fortune than mine has been ; though , as Heaven has made me the companion of Zoraida , I think no other lot could be assigned to me , however happy , that I would rather have . 
The patience with which she endures the hardships that poverty brings with it , and the eagerness she shows to become a Christian , are such that they fill me with admiration , and bind me to serve her all my life ; though the happiness I feel in seeing myself hers , and her mine , is disturbed and marred by not knowing whether I shall find any corner to shelter her in my own country , or whether time and death may not have made such changes in the fortunes and lives of my father and brothers , that I shall hardly find anyone who knows me , if they are not alive . 
I have no more of my story to tell you , gentlemen ; whether it be an interesting or a curious one let your better judgments decide ; all I can say is I would gladly have told it to you more briefly ; although my fear of wearying you has made me leave out more than one circumstance . 
With these words the captive held his peace , and Don Fernando said to him , `` In truth , captain , the manner in which you have related this remarkable adventure has been such as befitted the novelty and strangeness of the matter . 
The whole story is curious and uncommon , and abounds with incidents that fill the hearers with wonder and astonishment ; and so great is the pleasure we have found in listening to it that we should be glad if it were to begin again , even though to-morrow were to find us still occupied with the same tale . '' 
And while he said this Cardenio and the rest of them offered to be of service to him in any way that lay in their power , and in words and language so kindly and sincere that the captain was much gratified by their good-will . 
In particular Don Fernando offered , if he would go back with him , to get his brother the marquis to become godfather at the baptism of Zoraida , and on his own part to provide him with the means of making his appearance in his own country with the credit and comfort he was entitled to . 
For all this the captive returned thanks very courteously , although he would not accept any of their generous offers . 
By this time night closed in , and as it did , there came up to the inn a coach attended by some men on horseback , who demanded accommodation ; to which the landlady replied that there was not a hand 's breadth of the whole inn unoccupied . 
`` Still , for all that , '' said one of those who had entered on horseback , `` room must be found for his lordship the Judge here . '' 
At this name the landlady was taken aback , and said , `` Senor , the fact is I have no beds ; but if his lordship the Judge carries one with him , as no doubt he does , let him come in and welcome ; for my husband and I will give up our room to accommodate his worship . '' 
`` Very good , so be it , '' said the squire ; but in the meantime a man had got out of the coach whose dress indicated at a glance the office and post he held , for the long robe with ruffled sleeves that he wore showed that he was , as his servant said , a Judge of appeal . 
He led by the hand a young girl in a travelling dress , apparently about sixteen years of age , and of such a high-bred air , so beautiful and so graceful , that all were filled with admiration when she made her appearance , and but for having seen Dorothea , Luscinda , and Zoraida , who were there in the inn , they would have fancied that a beauty like that of this maiden 's would have been hard to find . 
Don Quixote was present at the entrance of the Judge with the young lady , and as soon as he saw him he said , `` Your worship may with confidence enter and take your ease in this castle ; for though the accommodation be scanty and poor , there are no quarters so cramped or inconvenient that they can not make room for arms and letters ; above all if arms and letters have beauty for a guide and leader , as letters represented by your worship have in this fair maiden , to whom not only ought castles to throw themselves open and yield themselves up , but rocks should rend themselves asunder and mountains divide and bow themselves down to give her a reception . 
Enter , your worship , I say , into this paradise , for here you will find stars and suns to accompany the heaven your worship brings with you , here you will find arms in their supreme excellence , and beauty in its highest perfection . '' 
The Judge was struck with amazement at the language of Don Quixote , whom he scrutinized very carefully , no less astonished by his figure than by his talk ; and before he could find words to answer him he had a fresh surprise , when he saw opposite to him Luscinda , Dorothea , and Zoraida , who , having heard of the new guests and of the beauty of the young lady , had come to see her and welcome her ; Don Fernando , Cardenio , and the curate , however , greeted him in a more intelligible and polished style . 
In short , the Judge made his entrance in a state of bewilderment , as well with what he saw as what he heard , and the fair ladies of the inn gave the fair damsel a cordial welcome . 
On the whole he could perceive that all who were there were people of quality ; but with the figure , countenance , and bearing of Don Quixote he was at his wits ' end ; and all civilities having been exchanged , and the accommodation of the inn inquired into , it was settled , as it had been before settled , that all the women should retire to the garret that has been already mentioned , and that the men should remain outside as if to guard them ; the Judge , therefore , was very well pleased to allow his daughter , for such the damsel was , to go with the ladies , which she did very willingly ; and with part of the host 's narrow bed and half of what the Judge had brought with him , they made a more comfortable arrangement for the night than they had expected . 
The captive , whose heart had leaped within him the instant he saw the Judge , telling him somehow that this was his brother , asked one of the servants who accompanied him what his name was , and whether he knew from what part of the country he came . 
The servant replied that he was called the Licentiate Juan Perez de Viedma , and that he had heard it said he came from a village in the mountains of Leon . 
From this statement , and what he himself had seen , he felt convinced that this was his brother who had adopted letters by his father 's advice ; and excited and rejoiced , he called Don Fernando and Cardenio and the curate aside , and told them how the matter stood , assuring them that the judge was his brother . 
The servant had further informed him that he was now going to the Indies with the appointment of Judge of the Supreme Court of Mexico ; and he had learned , likewise , that the young lady was his daughter , whose mother had died in giving birth to her , and that he was very rich in consequence of the dowry left to him with the daughter . 
He asked their advice as to what means he should adopt to make himself known , or to ascertain beforehand whether , when he had made himself known , his brother , seeing him so poor , would be ashamed of him , or would receive him with a warm heart . 
`` Leave it to me to find out that , '' said the curate ; `` though there is no reason for supposing , senor captain , that you will not be kindly received , because the worth and wisdom that your brother 's bearing shows him to possess do not make it likely that he will prove haughty or insensible , or that he will not know how to estimate the accidents of fortune at their proper value . '' 
`` Still , '' said the captain , `` I would not make myself known abruptly , but in some indirect way . '' 
`` I have told you already , '' said the curate , `` that I will manage it in a way to satisfy us all . '' 
By this time supper was ready , and they all took their seats at the table , except the captive , and the ladies , who supped by themselves in their own room . 
In the middle of supper the curate said : `` I had a comrade of your worship 's name , Senor Judge , in Constantinople , where I was a captive for several years , and that same comrade was one of the stoutest soldiers and captains in the whole Spanish infantry ; but he had as large a share of misfortune as he had of gallantry and courage . '' 
`` And how was the captain called , senor ? '' 
asked the Judge . 
`` He was called Ruy Perez de Viedma , '' replied the curate , `` and he was born in a village in the mountains of Leon ; and he mentioned a circumstance connected with his father and his brothers which , had it not been told me by so truthful a man as he was , I should have set down as one of those fables the old women tell over the fire in winter ; for he said his father had divided his property among his three sons and had addressed words of advice to them sounder than any of Cato 's . 
But I can say this much , that the choice he made of going to the wars was attended with such success , that by his gallant conduct and courage , and without any help save his own merit , he rose in a few years to be captain of infantry , and to see himself on the high-road and in position to be given the command of a corps before long ; but Fortune was against him , for where he might have expected her favour he lost it , and with it his liberty , on that glorious day when so many recovered theirs , at the battle of Lepanto . 
I lost mine at the Goletta , and after a variety of adventures we found ourselves comrades at Constantinople . 
Thence he went to Algiers , where he met with one of the most extraordinary adventures that ever befell anyone in the world . '' 
Here the curate went on to relate briefly his brother 's adventure with Zoraida ; to all which the Judge gave such an attentive hearing that he never before had been so much of a hearer . 
The curate , however , only went so far as to describe how the Frenchmen plundered those who were in the boat , and the poverty and distress in which his comrade and the fair Moor were left , of whom he said he had not been able to learn what became of them , or whether they had reached Spain , or been carried to France by the Frenchmen . 
The captain , standing a little to one side , was listening to all the curate said , and watching every movement of his brother , who , as soon as he perceived the curate had made an end of his story , gave a deep sigh and said with his eyes full of tears , `` Oh , senor , if you only knew what news you have given me and how it comes home to me , making me show how I feel it with these tears that spring from my eyes in spite of all my worldly wisdom and self-restraint ! 
That brave captain that you speak of is my eldest brother , who , being of a bolder and loftier mind than my other brother or myself , chose the honourable and worthy calling of arms , which was one of the three careers our father proposed to us , as your comrade mentioned in that fable you thought he was telling you . 
I followed that of letters , in which God and my own exertions have raised me to the position in which you see me . 
My second brother is in Peru , so wealthy that with what he has sent to my father and to me he has fully repaid the portion he took with him , and has even furnished my father 's hands with the means of gratifying his natural generosity , while I too have been enabled to pursue my studies in a more becoming and creditable fashion , and so to attain my present standing . 
My father is still alive , though dying with anxiety to hear of his eldest son , and he prays God unceasingly that death may not close his eyes until he has looked upon those of his son ; but with regard to him what surprises me is , that having so much common sense as he had , he should have neglected to give any intelligence about himself , either in his troubles and sufferings , or in his prosperity , for if his father or any of us had known of his condition he need not have waited for that miracle of the reed to obtain his ransom ; but what now disquiets me is the uncertainty whether those Frenchmen may have restored him to liberty , or murdered him to hide the robbery . 
All this will make me continue my journey , not with the satisfaction in which I began it , but in the deepest melancholy and sadness . 
Oh dear brother ! 
that I only knew where thou art now , and I would hasten to seek thee out and deliver thee from thy sufferings , though it were to cost me suffering myself ! 
Oh that I could bring news to our old father that thou art alive , even wert thou the deepest dungeon of Barbary ; for his wealth and my brother 's and mine would rescue thee thence ! 
Oh beautiful and generous Zoraida , that I could repay thy good goodness to a brother ! 
That I could be present at the new birth of thy soul , and at thy bridal that would give us all such happiness ! '' 
All this and more the Judge uttered with such deep emotion at the news he had received of his brother that all who heard him shared in it , showing their sympathy with his sorrow . 
The curate , seeing , then , how well he had succeeded in carrying out his purpose and the captain 's wishes , had no desire to keep them unhappy any longer , so he rose from the table and going into the room where Zoraida was he took her by the hand , Luscinda , Dorothea , and the Judge 's daughter following her . 
The captain was waiting to see what the curate would do , when the latter , taking him with the other hand , advanced with both of them to where the Judge and the other gentlemen were and said , `` Let your tears cease to flow , Senor Judge , and the wish of your heart be gratified as fully as you could desire , for you have before you your worthy brother and your good sister-in-law . 
He whom you see here is the Captain Viedma , and this is the fair Moor who has been so good to him . 
The Frenchmen I told you of have reduced them to the state of poverty you see that you may show the generosity of your kind heart . '' 
The captain ran to embrace his brother , who placed both hands on his breast so as to have a good look at him , holding him a little way off but as soon as he had fully recognised him he clasped him in his arms so closely , shedding such tears of heartfelt joy , that most of those present could not but join in them . 
The words the brothers exchanged , the emotion they showed can scarcely be imagined , I fancy , much less put down in writing . 
They told each other in a few words the events of their lives ; they showed the true affection of brothers in all its strength ; then the judge embraced Zoraida , putting all he possessed at her disposal ; then he made his daughter embrace her , and the fair Christian and the lovely Moor drew fresh tears from every eye . 
And there was Don Quixote observing all these strange proceedings attentively without uttering a word , and attributing the whole to chimeras of knight-errantry . 
Then they agreed that the captain and Zoraida should return with his brother to Seville , and send news to his father of his having been delivered and found , so as to enable him to come and be present at the marriage and baptism of Zoraida , for it was impossible for the Judge to put off his journey , as he was informed that in a month from that time the fleet was to sail from Seville for New Spain , and to miss the passage would have been a great inconvenience to him . 
In short , everybody was well pleased and glad at the captive 's good fortune ; and as now almost two-thirds of the night were past , they resolved to retire to rest for the remainder of it . 
Don Quixote offered to mount guard over the castle lest they should be attacked by some giant or other malevolent scoundrel , covetous of the great treasure of beauty the castle contained . 
Those who understood him returned him thanks for this service , and they gave the Judge an account of his extraordinary humour , with which he was not a little amused . 
Sancho Panza alone was fuming at the lateness of the hour for retiring to rest ; and he of all was the one that made himself most comfortable , as he stretched himself on the trappings of his ass , which , as will be told farther on , cost him so dear . 
The ladies , then , having retired to their chamber , and the others having disposed themselves with as little discomfort as they could , Don Quixote sallied out of the inn to act as sentinel of the castle as he had promised . 
It happened , however , that a little before the approach of dawn a voice so musical and sweet reached the ears of the ladies that it forced them all to listen attentively , but especially Dorothea , who had been awake , and by whose side Dona Clara de Viedma , for so the Judge 's daughter was called , lay sleeping . 
