Gonzalo looked at her attentively . 
She was really a perfect creature ; the more he looked at her , the more he admired her particular charms . 
Her skin was soft , and shining as silk ; her complexion pink and white ; her mouth like a budding rose ; her lips red and full enough to show two rows of even teeth ; her hair golden , silky , and abundant ; a drawing-room magazine would say that it fell over her shoulders like a cascade of sunbeams , or something to that effect . 
Her only imperfection was her height . 
If she had taken after her mother in this respect , nobody could have found any fault with her excepting , perhaps , her friends . 
Seeing she was an object of admiration , she went on walking about , turning herself round to be seen from all sides , posing in affected attitudes , asking impertinent questions of her sister , then laughing aimlessly and covering her with kisses , or pinching her unmercifully . 
`` Let me alone , Venturita ; how wild you are to-day ! '' 
exclaimed Cecilia , with her kind , frank smile as she tried to get away from her . 
`` Go to bed ! '' 
said Doña Paula . 
`` I am going . '' 
But instead of going , she embraced Cecilia again , and , tickling her , she managed to whisper into her ear : `` How are you enjoying yourself , you rogue ? 
Do n't make those large eyes at him , or you will frighten him . 
Good-by , good-by , Señores , '' she said in a louder voice , `` and leave something for to-morrow , eh ? '' 
`` What a little silly ! '' 
cried Cecilia , blushing . 
Doña Paula and Gonzalo smiled , and he said in a low voice : `` What lovely hair ! '' 
Ventura overheard him , and shaking her locks , she said : `` It is false . '' 
They all burst out laughing . 
`` Do n't you believe it ? '' 
she asked in a serious tone , and approaching nearer . 
`` Pull it , and you will see it will come off in your hand . '' 
The young man did not dare to comply , and continued to smile . 
`` Pull , pull , '' she insisted , turning her back to him , and holding her hair before his face . 
Gonzalo raised his hand to the hair , but he only ventured to touch it caressingly . 
`` What ! 
it has not come off ! 
That is because it is well tied on . '' 
And she ran out of the room . 
The private conclave was prolonged for some time , and many more points of their future life were touched upon ; and as Cecilia listened to her mother descanting upon what they should do when once they were married , she could hardly conceal the tremor of emotion that possessed her . 
She had taken her mother 's hand , and she pressed it and caressed it in a nervous way ; sometimes she raised it to her lips and kissed it passionately . 
Doña Paula looked at her with sympathy , and smiled kindly at the joy that filled her daughter 's heart . 
The clock in the dining-room struck half-past twelve . 
`` Oh , how late ! 
What will Don Rosendo say ? '' 
`` He never goes to bed before this time , '' replied Cecilia . 
`` Yes ; but you know he takes some time to lock up , '' returned Doña Paula . 
Cecilia was silent . 
Gonzalo shook hands with them warmly , promising to come the following day . 
Then he went to Señor Belinchon 's study to take leave of him . 
The mother and daughter went on talking in the same corner on the same theme , the former being the object of countless embraces and fervent kisses . 
`` These are not for me , '' said the lady , in a tone of mingled joy and sadness . 
`` Yes , mama ; yes ! '' 
replied the girl , embracing her with still greater effusion . 
In the meanwhile Don Rosendo was bringing the arduous and complicated task of locking and bolting the doors and windows to a successful termination . 
He was not contented with locks and iron bars , but , to insure the non-violation of the sanctuary of his dwelling during the night , the rich merchant was in the habit of gumming pieces of paper over all the locks . 
These he examined carefully in the morning , to be quite certain that nobody had tampered with them . 
Then he put various bottles and pots upon the doorstep , so that if thieves came they would fall over them . 
Don Melchor de Las Cuevas rose from the table , lighted a cigar and , offering one to his nephew , said : `` Let us go and have coffee . '' 
Gonzalo was about to put the cigar in his pocket , not having hitherto been permitted to smoke in his uncle 's presence ; but the old man touched his arm , saying : `` Light it , my boy , light it ; you are not a yunker now . '' 
So the young fellow took out a match and began puffing at the Havana with enjoyment , and the men then left the house together , and proceeded slowly down the street with the air of utter comfort worn by powerful-looking men after a heavy meal . 
They were as silent and majestic as two magnificent cedars unrustled by a breeze . 
The women at work in their doorways looked after them with interest and admiration . 
`` Who 's the young man with Don Melchor ? '' 
`` What ! 
do n't you know ? 
'T is his nephew , Señor Gonzalo , who arrived last night in the ` Bella Paula . ' '' 
`` He is a fine , strapping fellow . '' 
`` Like his father , Don Martos , God rest his soul . '' 
`` And like his grandfather , Don Benito , '' added an old woman . 
`` What a noble , fine-looking family they are ! '' 
At the top of a street which commanded a view to the sea , Señor de las Cuevas stopped a minute to cast his eye over the waters . 
`` Fine weather at sea ! 
a slight breeze coming up ! 
Do you see them ? '' 
he added , with an expression of triumph after a minute . 
`` What ? '' 
`` The launches , man , the launches . 
Do n't you see them ? '' 
`` I see nothing , '' returned Gonzalo , fixing his eyes on the horizon . 
`` You are just as you were ; you see nothing but the soup in your plate , '' said the uncle , with a sarcastic smile . 
The Café de la Marina was already full of people . 
The clatter of conversation and disputes , the clink of the glasses , the ring of the domino pieces on the marble table , made a deafening noise . 
The place was situated in the small square formed by the junction of the Rua Nueva with the harbor , and one side of the house looked on to the sea . 
Most of the captains and pilots who stopped at Sarrio on their cruises resorted thither , as did the majority of the residents , who , without being sailors , had a partiality for what was maritime . 
The entrance of our friends was hailed with delight from different tables . 
Don Melchor was the most popular and the most highly respected frequenter of the café . 
He had to greet all the assembled company , and take Gonzalo up to each of them . 
The jolly fellows were all delighted with the young man , and wrung his hand almost to dislocation , while they were eager and hearty in their offers of a glass of wine or maraschino ; and when this was refused on the plea of taking coffee upstairs , a profound gloom overspread their countenances . 
As a matter of fact , Don Melchor was accustomed to have his coffee in the small saloon , which was a room on the first floor of the house , communicating with the café by an iron staircase , which the uncle and nephew finally ascended . 
There the chief residents of the town were congregated , seated on a circular sofa , with little Japanese tables in front of them , on all of which coffee was served . 
Through one of the doors , which was generally left open , could be seen the billiard room , where the same people always played , with the same on-lookers . 
When Don Melchor and his nephew entered a project was in course of discussion for keeping the poor women who sell vegetables and milk from intemperance . 
And Gonzalo recollected that on a certain occasion , when he came thither to see his uncle before going to England , the same matter was then under discussion . 
The themes varied little in that assembly . 
The town continued its tranquil even course in the midst of its daily work . 
The only events that occasionally shook it from its lethargy were the arrival or departure of some important ship , the death of a well-known person , a dishonored bill , the paving of some street , the tax on some merchandise , the lightering of contraband goods , or the bad state of the harbor . 
The women and young people were too much taken up with their own affairs to trouble about outside matters . 
But the arrival of any handsome young stranger caused a great sensation among the marriageable girls ; and if any young man walked for the first time with Margarita at the Promenade , it was looked upon as a settled affair ; if Severino of the ironmongery administered a beating to his wife , what could she expect after marrying such a drunken fellow ? 
and the dress that a certain young girl wore on the Day of Our Lady made quite an excitement . 
`` You say it came from Madrid ! 
What Madrid ? 
Why , I saw it cut out at Martina 's myself ! '' 
The subscription dance announced at the Lyceum formed a great topic of discussion . 
`` I do n't believe there will be a ball ; the young men fight too shy of expense . '' 
But the grave elders who frequented the Club despised these themes , albeit they sometimes condescended to touch upon them . 
Gonzalo had seen Don Rosendo , Don Mateo , Don Pedro Miranda , and the mayor the previous evening . 
But Gabino Maza , Don Feliciano Gomez , M. Delaunay , the French engineer , Alvaro Peña , Marin , Don Lorenzo , Don Agapito , and five or six other men whom he had not yet seen , were there , and they all rose to embrace the young man . 
Don Pedro Miranda , whom we have already mentioned , was a man considerably past seventy , small and insignificant looking , with a smooth bald head , large solemn eyes , and of a retiring disposition . 
He was the richest landowner in the place , and no titled person in the town could have been a better representative of the aristocracy , in virtue of his own descent from an old family of landowners . 
To this distinction , however , he attached but small importance . 
He was an unpretentious , courteous man , who consorted with all his neighbors regardless of his superior rank ; and he was always extremely particular not to allude to money , or to be in any wise dictatorial or antagonistic to anybody . 
But if he entirely waived the respect due to his birth , he was very jealous of his rights as a landowner . 
Never was there a proprietor more proprietary than Don Pedro Miranda . 
The institutions of ancient as well as modern law , the universities , the army and navy , the political constitution , and religion itself had no other excuse for existence in his eyes but that of contributing , directly or indirectly , to the preservation of his seignorial rights . 
The marvelous microcosm of the universe was designed for the support of his indisputable claim to the full possession of Praducos , a hamlet two miles from the town , and to his right of an annual fee of a hundred and fifty ducats in consideration of his title to the land at the mouth of the river . 
This very clear sense of his rights engendered , from very excess of clearness , several disputes . 
A laborer would come to him and say : `` Señor , Joaquim the martin-breeder cut to-day some of the branches of your walnut tree which hung over into his garden . '' 
`` But the walnut tree was mine , '' exclaimed Don Pedro , crimson with rage and surprise . 
`` Yes , señor , but it hung over into his garden . '' 
`` What ! 
The fellow dared to touch anything which is mine -- mine ! '' 
Thereupon a little lawsuit ensued , which , of course , he lost . 
He lost dozens of these lawsuits in the course of his life , without growing any wiser on the subject . 
Don Roque de la Riva , the mayor of Sarrio , whom we had the honor of comparing , when we first saw him at the theatre , to a courtier of the time of Louis XV , or a coachman of some great house , was not distinguished for clearness of speech , for it was so indistinct and confused that his interlocutors had great difficulty in understanding him . 
We do not know whether the mutilation of his words took place in his mouth , throat , or nose , but it is a fact that they usually came forth transformed into such mysterious , vague , chaotic utterances that they were completely unintelligible . 
More especially was it impossible to talk with him after dinner , and this for no other reason , according to report , than because Don Roque would insist on patronizing a wine called Rivero , so strong that nobody could touch it without fear of getting intoxicated . 
This head of the corporation used to leave home every afternoon , apparently alone , but in reality with an escort . 
His enormous shaven face was very red , and the color was accentuated in his huge Roman nose ; his eyes , bloodshot and half closed , as if unable to bear the weight of his eyelids , looked slowly into every corner of the street with an expression of physical comfort ; his ponderous , slow , vacillating step showed the sympathetic state between his psychical and physical faculties . 
Don Roque only had to come across some official , sweeper , watchman , or stone-breaker of the municipality to make his enjoyment complete . 
When from afar he espied one , his eyelids were quickly raised and his nostrils quivered like those of a tiger at approach of prey . 
Suppose the fellow , scenting the approach of the tiger , passed into another street or tried to hide himself ! 
Don Roque shouted to him , with a voice of thunder : `` Juan , Juaan , Juaaan ! '' 
The victim heard and bowed his head . 
`` Have you taken the message to Don Lorenzo ? '' 
`` Yes , señor . '' 
`` Have you told the secretary that he must let the matter of the cemetery stand over ? '' 
`` Yes , señor . '' 
`` Have you taken the documents to the petty court of San Martin ? '' 
`` Yes , señor . '' 
`` Have you told Don Manuel that he must take away that rubbish in front of his house ? '' 
In fact , he went on asking questions until the poor official came to a negative answer . 
Then the loud voice of the mayor was heard all down the street , and even to the end of the town ; his eyes became more inflamed , and his apoplectic face grew quite alarming . 
It was impossible to understand what he said . 
His ejaculations alone would have made his discourse incomprehensible , but these were enunciated in such a chaotic fashion that the `` h '' alone was distinguishable . 
The scolding never lasted less than fifteen or twenty minutes ; he required no less time to let off the superfluous spleen which had accumulated since the previous afternoon . 
Just as there are people who put their fingers down their throats in the morning to make themselves ill , so Don Roque was not happy until he had had this ebullition of wrath . 
He had only one interjection in his vocabulary , but this he used in such abundance that quantity atoned for quality . 
The neighbors came out of their doors to hear him , but with a smile on their faces , as if accustomed to such scenes . 
`` Don Roque is giving it hot to-day , '' said one to another in a loud voice . 
`` See how Juan is behaving . '' 
In fact , every time the mayor turned his back the clerk put up his thumb and made a long nose at him . 
Don Roque liked to come upon a road-sweeper or a stone-breaker at his work . 
For he would cautiously approach him from behind and , catching him by the collar , exclaim : `` Ah ! 
so that 's the way you sweep , is it ! 
-- ah ! 
Do you think I pay you to leave half the dirt between the stones ? 
-- ah ! 
Is this gratitude ? 
-- ah ! 
It is shameful ! 
-- ah ! '' 
Once the zeal for his office led him to seize the broom and give the man an object-lesson in the art of sweeping . 
The townsfolk , the few passers-by in the street , and also some young ladies whom the noise had brought to a window went into fits of laughter . 
The sweeper himself , in spite of his awkward position , could not help smiling at the energy with which the figure , with its coat-tails flying , made erratic and angry dashes at the ground . 
`` Is that the way you sweep ? 
-- ah ! '' 
-LRB- Terrible bang with the broom . -RRB- 
`` That is the way -- ah ! '' 
-LRB- another bang -RRB- . 
`` That is the way to sweep ! 
-- ah ! '' 
Not until worn out , heated , and nearly falling from fatigue , did the mayor hand back the broom , and take up his tasseled stick again . 
Having thus relieved his noble heart of the superfluous ah 's which weighted it , he resumed his way , and arrived at the Club in a very happy state of body and mind . 
Gabino Maza was a man of about five-and-forty years of age , a naval officer who had retired some years before from the service , his ungovernable temper being unable to brook professional discipline . 
He had an olive complexion , and small bright eyes , with dark lines underneath which showed his bilious temperament . 
He was tall , wiry , and masculine , and his hair and beard were of a blue-black hue ; his gestures were always nervous and violent ; his voice was indefinable , sometimes quiet , but when he was at all agitated , which was almost always the case when he began to speak , it was loud and shrill , and of such a discordant falsetto that it was deafening . 
With his little income , and a tiny pension , he was able to support his family in Sarrio with the comfort of a gentleman at ease , which in the capital of the province would have been impossible . 
A born disputant , he brought into every question , trivial as it might be , an amount of passion and violence that was truly alarming , so anxious was he to contradict whatever was said , although it might be as clear as noonday . 
He judged people in such a severe and pessimistic spirit that he never believed in the pure motive of a kind action , however noble and honorable it might seem ; and his spite and malignity bordered on madness . 
Nevertheless , this man was not so much disliked by his neighbors as might have been expected . 
The intimacy of a village or little town gives greater scope for learning the true character of each individual than is possible in large places , where a merely superficial intercourse may permit many cold , selfish , bad-tempered men to disguise their true selves with a sympathetic veneer , and polite words , courteous manners , and an insinuating smile win the encomium , `` nice , agreeable sort of a person . '' 
But in the country that all goes for naught , and , on the contrary , excessive amiability and very sweet smiles excite distrust . 
The character of everybody is as ruthless and as minutely examined as if it were a bundle of nerves under the dissector 's knife ; so that many people are hated who seemed at first attractive ; and others liked who were at first sight considered aggressive , hard , and violent . 
Dissimulation , so much practised in great towns , is never tolerated in the provinces , albeit it is the prevailing vice of all social relationships . 
Quick tempers and excitable natures do not arouse mistrust , as they are at least `` clear and aboveboard . '' 
There is always a sense of justice in such people which , distorted and overbalanced by passion as it may be , does not make them disliked . 
Besides , as quick temper and excitability are a constant cause of self-suffering and discomfort , both physical and moral , it is justly considered that men of this temperament reap their own retribution . 
Gabino Maza was neither disliked nor very much liked ; those who were offended by him grumbled at him and kept him at a distance , terming him a malignant , sharp-tongued fellow ; and the others laughed at his exaggerated style , and enjoyed a conversation with him without professing any great regard for him . 
Another of the characters frequenting this café was Don Feliciano Gomez , a retail merchant in ultramarine goods , and also the owner of three or four vessels and several smacks which traded along the Biscayan coast , the largest sometimes going even as far as Seville . 
He was of middle height ; his head , destitute of hair , was pyramidal in form ; his waxed mustaches were turned up to his nose , and his voice was almost always hoarse . 
He was a cheerful , kind , optimistic sort of fellow ; he was a confirmed bachelor , and lived with his three elder sisters , whom he had made real `` señoras '' by dint of his own hard work and economy . 
The reward they gave him , according to public report , was to keep him in hand like a child , admonish his slightest faults , and worry and torment him in every imaginable way . 
Nevertheless , he was never heard to utter a single word of complaint against them . 
M. Delaunay , the Belgian engineer , arrived at Sarrio a few years before our story opens , with the object of managing a mining district for an imposing English company . 
The working was a failure , and the company deprived him of his post and his pay . 
But Delaunay , who was a born speculator , undertook seven or eight other commercial enterprises . 
First he started a manufactory of paper , then one of French nails , then he conceived the idea of cultivating oysters , then he tried a cheese factory , and ice factory ; and finally he thought of turning to account some large , uncultivated tracts of land near Sarrio . 
All the enterprises had failed without anybody knowing why . 
Delaunay was certainly intelligent , clear-headed , and industrious . 
He was complete master of every trade that he entered into ; he ordered all the apparatus from England , set it up , and it worked well and produced very satisfactory results . 
He attributed his failures to the lack of means of transport . 
The last of his famous enterprises , which died before it came into practise , brought more discredit on him than any other . 
In one of his excursions in the environs of the town he noticed close to a little river some uncultivated land , which he thought could easily , with a little trouble , be cultivated ; he computed its value , drew out a plan , and when , a few months later , he found himself compelled to close the ice factory and to dismiss the workmen , he recollected this low land and mentioned it to Don Rosendo Belinchon , Don Feliciano Gomez , and two West Indians , so that they might aid him in his grand scheme . 
They replied that it would be necessary to see the district , and an expedition was arranged . 
One morning they set off on horseback , and took the direction of the river Orleo , six miles from Sarrio . 
Arriving there , they left the horses and ascended the hill on foot , from whence they could see the marsh land . 
What was Delaunay 's shame and confusion , when he saw the tract that he intended to cultivate covered with maize , beautifully green and flourishing . 
In fact , it had been under cultivation for more than six years ; and his mistake arose from having seen it in December , when it dies down . 
The party returned to the town , and one can imagine what a joke was made of the incident . 
He was ruined at last , and he found himself obliged to live in a wretched fashion . 
But his rage for speculation increased instead of being dampened by failure , and this to such a degree that there was not a single capitalist in Sarrio whom he had not tried to inveigle into some of his enterprises . 
At one time it was a road to the capital , another a port of refuge , or stone moles , and another time a grand hotel . 
Some West Indians , certainly only a few , fell victims to his persuasions , and paid for their innocence with the loss of some thousands of pesetas . 
However , Delaunay was a man of talent , and studious , and he was well informed in all the improvements of science , so to depreciate him would be injustice . 
The harbor-master , Alvaro Peña , a young fellow thirty years of age , dark , with large black eyes , and a mustache like King Victor Emmanuel 's , was noted for his profound , implacable hatred against the ecclesiastical profession , and all who represented it , even to his own brother . 
Without any taste for science or literature , he owned a rather extensive library , consisting exclusively of books against religion and its ministers . 
He was a contributor to two or three periodicals , known by their anti-clerical opinions ; and it was said that he had been occupying himself for some years past collecting data for a book that he thought of publishing under the title `` Religion , the Most Retrograde of Sciences , '' of which several of his acquaintances had been introduced to different portions . 
He was cheerful and straightforward , and loved stories and jokes in which some priest or monk played the chief part . 
Don Jaime Marin , the owner of four hundred acres of land which , with the tax , realized six thousand pesetas , would have been a great scoundrel , a fast , bad man , if he had not had Doña Brigida for a wife . 
This important lady managed , with laudable energy , to prevent her husband ruining the whole family , and being turned out of doors . 
Before he finished making ducks and drakes of the property she succeeded in depriving him judicially of its control , and having it made over to her . 
It is not easy to describe the firmness with which Doña Brigida took the reins of management . 
No Roman patrician was ever imbued with a greater sense of the sui juris of the sacred rights with which `` the city '' had invested her . 
From the time of this occurrence Don Jaime , who was then over fifty years of age , dropped into being a mere thing in her hands , according to the law 's decree . 
In his character of alieni juris he had to submit to the direct and constant sway of his lord and master , and to bow in all ways to her universal will . 
Farewell to sumptuous suppers of shellfish and Rueda wine in the Café de la Marina ! 
Farewell to hunting the hare with Fermo the butcher and Mercelino the engraver ! 
Farewell to delightful nights of tresillo ! 
Farewell to afternoons of peace and happiness on the lake of Sebastian de la Puente ! 
Farewell ! 
The obdurate lady put three pesetas in his hand every Sunday , neither more nor less . 
It was all the pocket money he had to spend on his pleasures for the week , with the exception of smoking , which she took in hand herself , buying the cigars and all . 
When he required a hat , she bought it for him ; when he needed a suit of clothes , or a pair of boots , she told the tailor or shoemaker to call and measure him . 
She even prevented his going to the barber 's for fear he should spend the two reales , and so the barber came on Saturdays to shave him . 
It sometimes happened that the barber came when Don Jaime was still asleep . 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
he asked of Doña Brigida . 
`` Shave him , '' returned the inexorable señora . 
Obedient to the command , the barber approached the bedside , covered the face with soap and quietly shaved Don Jaime while still half asleep , and on his finally rousing himself , he said to the servant who brought him his chocolate : `` To-day is Saturday ; let the barber be brought . '' 
`` You ass , you silly , that no priest can shrive , '' replied his sweet consort from her room , `` do n't you see you are shaved already ? '' 
`` Ah so I am , '' returned the good señor , feeling his face . 
At first he asked his friends or acquaintances at the café for money with which to play tresillo , and he drank coffee on trust at the café . 
But the friends soon left off obliging him , and the proprietor of the establishment declined to even trust him for a peseta , for Doña Brigida almost knocked him downstairs when he one day brought her a bill for a hundred and twenty reales . 
So Don Jaime was reduced to spending hours in watching the game of tresillo and in giving advice to the players , which was not wanted . 
The winners sometimes rewarded him with a glass of rum . 
He occasionally played drafts with Don Lorenzo , but as the latter declined to play `` for love , '' Marin had to find something to play for which was not money . 
He finally decided to have for a stake one of the cigars that his wife gave him in the morning ; when he lost it , he had to spend the evening without smoking ; sometimes , trying to get his revenge , he lost two or three more , and so he had to hand them over to his opponent on the ensuing days . 
In the meanwhile he went from friend to friend begging a little tobacco to appease his insufferable longing for a smoke . 
Poor Marin ! 
Doña Brigida could never succeed in making him retire to rest early . 
He had spent so many years in being up till four or five in the morning that it was now impossible to break the habit . 
As , when he was kept at home , he never went to bed until dawn , and as he spent the night in wandering about the rooms , and the bad habit of being up at night by one 's self is very inexpensive , the ingenious señora let him retire to rest at what hour he liked . 
He remained at the Café de la Marina with the latest customers , and when these had gone he waited while the servants put away the china and glass , and the proprietor was ready to shut up . 
When he was literally sent off from the establishment , he withdrew to the Rua Nueva , where he sat with his friend the watchman , and , chatting with him , passed the hours before dawn . 
Don Lorenzo , Don Agapito , Don Pancho , Don Aquilino , Don German , and Don Justo were Indians . 
That is to say , they were people who had been sent as children to the West Indians by their parents to earn their living , and they had returned between fifty and sixty years of age with fortunes varying from one hundred and fifty to half a million pesetas . 
There were more than fifty of these Indians in Sarrio . 
The hard work and the long state of self-suppression in which they had lived made their ideas of happiness quite different to ours . 
We find pleasure in a constant change of amusement , in going about and traveling , and enjoying with both body and mind the beautiful variety of things of nature . 
But these West Indians looked for nothing more than exemption from the hard law imposed by God on Adam after his fall ; and , in truth , they gave themselves up to this peculiar delight . 
The majority of them had their money invested in government funds , so they had their incomes without any trouble . 
They were early risers from force of habit , and they paraded the streets or the mole every morning in parties of six or eight . 
They watched the arrival and departure of boats , and the loading and unloading of cargoes . 
After dinner , they retired to the Café de la Marina , or to that of La Amistad , and spent three or four hours watching or joining in the game of billiards . 
`` Go , little ivory ball , go into that pocket ! 
See , see , Don Pancho , it has cannoned . '' 
`` Come out , my little dear , come out of that pocket . '' 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! 
well played , Don Lorenzo ! '' 
`` Did it not go well , Pancho ? '' 
The game was always seasoned with these remarks , which went on without pause . 
When the days were long , these West Indians were seen in parties about the environs of the town , either walking , or seated on the grass on the banks of a stream . 
That was the hour of reminiscences of the tropics . 
`` Do you recollect , Don Agapito , do you recollect that little dark creature who came to you for a place in the shop ? '' 
`` And how well she sang , the little rogue ! '' 
`` They said you were smitten with her , quite smitten , Don Agapito . '' 
`` How now , Don Pancho -- why , she only went to the blacks ' ball with the negro of my partner , Don Justo ? '' 
`` Get along , man , do n't annoy me ; the one who went to the ball was yourself ; I saw you sportive enough with her in the country dance . '' 
There was no counting on this West Indian clique for subscriptions for the orchestra , theatre , or any public amusement . 
The young people of the town had to apply to the purses of their fathers , for they knew it was useless to expect American money to be forthcoming , which roused such indignation among the young people that they called them stingy fellows , boors , and money-laden asses to their faces as well as behind their backs . 
But the Indians were thick-skinned , and treated such terms with contempt . 
The one who professed an open aversion to them -LRB- and for whom did he not entertain it ? -RRB- 
was Gabino Maza . 
Why should these fifty idlers spend their days dawdling about the streets ? 
If they would only devote their money to some industry profitable to the place ! 
When Don Melchor de las Cuevas and his nephew entered the saloon , the only person standing and gesticulating in the middle of the place was this same Gabino Maza . 
He could not remain seated two minutes ; the excitement of his nervous system , the vehemence with which he tried to convince his audience , obliged him to jump from his seat and dash into the centre of the room , where he shouted and gesticulated until he had exhausted his breath and his strength . 
He was talking of the theatrical company , which had announced its departure on account of having lost in the receipts of thirty performances . 
Maza was trying to prove that there had not been such losses and it was all make-up . 
`` It is not true ; it is not true . 
He who says he has lost a copper , lies ! '' 
-LRB- Then lowering his voice and giving his hand to Gonzalo . -RRB- 
`` How are you , Gonzalo ? 
Yes , I know you arrived yesterday . 
You are all right . 
I am glad of it . 
I repeat , that he lies ! 
Why , they do n't dare to tell me so ! '' 
`` They have lost six thousand reals in the thirty performances , according to the account that the baritone has given me , '' said Don Mateo . 
Maza ground his teeth . 
His indignation impeded his speech . 
At last he burst out : `` And you listen to that drunkard , Don Mateo ? 
Get along ! 
get along ! '' 
-LRB- With assumed disdain . -RRB- 
`` By dint of consorting with comic players you have lost your head for business . 
You have got rusty . '' 
`` Listen to me , you blusterer . 
I did not say I believed him . 
I said that was what the baritone 's calculations came to . '' 
Maza leaped up , and returned to the centre of the room , tore his hat violently from his head with both hands , and , waving it frantically , he vociferated : `` But , señor ; but , señor ! 
We seem to be made fools of here ! 
Well , you tell me what has become of twenty thousand and more reals which the receipts came to , and almost as much again for admissions paid at the door ? '' 
`` The salaries have very much increased , '' said the harbor-master . 
`` You are not drunk , by Gad , Alvaro ! 
You are not drunk -- I will tell you in a minute what the salaries are '' -LRB- counting on his fingers . -RRB- 
`` The tenor , six crowns ; the treble , another six ; that 's twelve ; the bass , four ; that 's sixteen ; the contralto , three ; that 's nineteen ; the baritone , four -- '' `` The baritone , five , '' interrupted Peña . 
`` The baritone , four , '' persisted Maza in a rage . 
`` I am certain it is five . '' 
`` The baritone , four ! '' 
roared Maza again . 
Alvaro Peña now rose in his turn , fired with the noble desire of getting the better of his opponent , and then ensued a hot and furious dispute , which lasted about an hour , and all , or nearly all , the members of that gathering of celebrities joined in . 
Such a battle resembled the famous engagements that took place between the Greeks before the walls of Troy ; there was the same fury and heat , the same primitive simplicity in the arguments , and the same candid , rough violence in the invectives . 
`` You are an addle-headed blunderer ! '' 
`` Hold your tongue ; you are a ruffian ! '' 
`` You are a bellowing ox ! '' 
`` I tell you it is not true , and if you want it plainer , you lie ! '' 
`` Goodness , what a goose ! 
You are like a silly woman . '' 
These altercations were very frequent , almost daily incidents at the Club . 
As all those who took part in them had a straightforward , perfectly primitive way of dealing with questions , similar , not to say equal , to that adopted by the heroes of Homer , the argument started at the beginning of the dispute continued until the end . 
There was a man who would spend an hour incessantly saying : `` One has no right to meddle with anybody 's private life ! '' 
or `` That may do in Germany , but not here in Spain ! '' 
Then cries briefer , and more to the point , such as `` windbags ! '' 
`` windbags ! '' 
filled the air until the crier collapsed on the sofa with exhaustion . 
But what the arguments lost in variety they gained in intensity , for they were expressed with great and forcible energy , and in tones raised to such a pitch that some of the voices became quite hoarse , which was generally the case with Alvaro Peña and Don Feliciano , who had the loudest voices , but the weakest throats . 
When the Corporation had the trees of the Promenade de Riego trimmed , it caused a commotion in the Club ; when the clerk of the House of Gonzalez and Sons decamped with fourteen thousand reals , it caused another heated discussion ; when the parish priest declined to give a certificate of good conduct to the pilot Velasco , Alvaro Peña burst a blood vessel in his excitement . 
But no bad feeling remained after these violent scenes were over , neither were the personal remarks recollected that the discussions gave rise to . 
How could it be otherwise , since there seemed to be a tacit understanding that none of the ungracious epithets were to be resented ? 
The local character of the subjects was unique . 
Politics were little studied in Sarrio ; it was only when the papers noticed some event of great importance that the inhabitants of the place took a passing interest in them . 
Twenty years ago the rich banker , Rojas Salcedo , was elected representative of the place in Parliament , and he paid one visit to Sarrio to make himself acquainted with the town . 
Nobody thought of disputing his election . 
The presidents and secretaries of the colleges generally met together , and computed from the Acts the number of votes that he was entitled to . 
The reason of this was that Sarrio had always been a commercial town , where everybody could gain a living without having recourse to Madrid for government appointments . 
The majority of the young men , after having passed two or three years in some college in England or Belgium , took their places in their fathers ' offices as their future successors ; the others , the minority , followed some military or civil career with a fixed income , and only came occasionally to pass a few days with their families . 
It must , in one word , be confessed that Sarrio was a sleepy place , dormant amid all the great manifestations of mind , amid all the regenerating lights of contemporary society ; nobody studied the profound problems of politics , and the terrible controversies engaged in by the different parties in other places , to gain victory and power , left them utterly unmoved . 
In short , in the year of grace , 1860 , there was no public life in Sarrio . 
They ate , they slept , they worked , they danced , they played , they paid their taxes , but they were absolutely wanting in public spirit . 
When that evening at the club the dispute had utterly worn them out and spoiled their digestions , Don Mateo , beaming with delight , announced to the company that he did not mind about the departure of the dramatic company , for he had for some days past been arranging a surprise for the Sarrienses ; and after a great deal of trouble the matter was concluded . 
He was in treaty with the celebrated Marabini , the phrenologist , the prestidigitator ; probably Tuesday , yes , Tuesday or Wednesday , they would moreover be able to admire his wonderful skill at the theatre ; he would , moreover , bring with him some dissolving views and a tame wolf . 
Gonzalo meanwhile had left the billiard-room and was looking at half a dozen West Indians playing at chapo . 
When they struck the ball all the gold seals that hung from their enormous gold chains rang like bells . 
These chains and these seals were the greatest inducement and the chief bait that the artisans of Sarrio used to persuade their sons to go to Cuba . 
`` Fool ! 
and you could come back in a few years with a fine cloth coat , a well-got-up shirt-front , patent boots , and a watch-chain like Don Pancho 's ! '' 
This last inducement was too much for any lad . 
`` Will it go seven times round my neck , dear father ? '' 
`` Yes , boy , yes ; and you will have pencil cases and seals hanging on to it . '' 
And so with their heads full of the prize the poor fellows went off on the `` Bella Paula , '' the `` Carmen , '' the `` Villa de Sarrio , '' or any other sailing vessel , to perish with yellow fever or hunger , lured to destruction by the glitter of the trumpery jewelry like the voices of the terrible Lorelei . 
The gestures of the Indians while at billiards being those of people unaccustomed to restrain and compose their feelings , were strange and funny , and a source of delight to the young men of the place , whose antipathy to the West Indians was always shown in making fun of them . 
Who tapped upon the floor while the balls were running like Don Benito ? 
Who bent from one side to another , and twisted and contorted himself as if the destination of the ball depended upon his movements , like Don Lorenzo ? 
And who could equal Don Pancho , who was little and fat , almost square , in his way of sinking in a heap on the sofa after having struck a ball , to better see the havoc he had made on the table ? 
Occasionally one of them addressed a word of impatience to the fellow : `` Get up , my boy ; do n't excite yourself ! '' 
Don Feliciano Gomez took a seat by Gonzalo , who soon wearied of his good-tempered , superficial conversation , which he always accompanied by an affectionate poke in the ribs at every instant . 
`` When is the great day to be , Gonzalino ? 
Soon , eh ? 
You know I am longing to see you with your young lady on your arm , going to high mass ! 
All right , my dear ; all right ; go and be happy . 
At home , the girls -LSB- it was thus he always termed his old sisters -RSB- do n't leave me a moment 's peace ; since yesterday it is : ` When is Gonzalino going to be married ? 
Do n't forget to ask him ! ' 
Well , the poor things have known you ever since you were born . 
There is nothing like matrimony for a peaceful , contented life . 
You will say , ` That being so , why have you not married yourself , Don Feliciano ? ' 
Listen my boy , why should I marry , when I can live happy as a bachelor ? 
What do I want ? 
I have a home , with two dear girls who take the utmost care of me , whom I adore -- -LRB- Poor fellow ! 
report in the place gave quite another version . -RRB- 
`` And so I have nothing to complain of -- is it not so , my boy ? 
Certainly , when I was young I had other ideas , but , as years go by , one ceases to think of them . 
Look here , if any one said to me now : ` Feliciano , would you like to go back twenty years ? ' 
Bah ! 
let another dog have that bone . 
The best age for a man is fifty . 
Do n't you doubt it , Gonzalino . 
It is then that one can eat and sleep in peace . 
Is there a young woman that is worth a dish of sardines freshly fried ? 
`` But they have to be fried just before they are eaten ; if fried during the soup , they are not worth a brass farthing . 
Or a lobster with fresh draft cider ? 
Does n't it make your mouth water , my boy ? 
And now you are going to be married , and there will be a kissing and ` my darling ' here and ` my love ' there -- is it not so ? 
Well , well , as things go it is a good thing . 
The girl is of good family . 
Don Rosendo is rich -- you are doing well , doing well , my boy . 
But , I say , why do n't you marry the little one , Venturita , who is pretty ? 
I do n't say that the elder one is ugly , but there is no doubt that the younger one is more attractive ; she is just like a rosebud . 
What roguish eyes ! 
what teeth ! 
what gracefulness ! 
But if you are engaged to the other sister , I have nothing to say . 
But what comes up to prettiness ! 
And it would be the same family -- '' These remarks made a strange impression upon Gonzalo . 
It was the formulation of what he had vaguely felt in an uncomfortable way ever since the previous evening . 
Yes , it was quite true , what beautiful eyes , how mischievous , and yet how candid ! 
What an alabaster skin ! 
What lips , what teeth , what golden hair ! 
