`` No , a thousand times no ! '' 
he exclaimed after a brief silence . 
`` The struggle for existence with its procession of cruelties may be true among the lower species , but it should not be true among human creatures . 
We are rational beings and ought to free ourselves from the fatality of environment , moulding it to our convenience . 
The animal does not know law , justice or compassion ; he lives enslaved in the obscurity of his instincts . 
We think , and thought signifies liberty . 
Force does not necessarily have to be cruel ; it is strongest when it does not take advantage of its power , and is kindly . 
All have a right to the life into which they are born , and since among individuals there exist the haughty and the humble , the mighty and the weak , so should exist nations , large and small , old and young . 
The end of our existence is not combat nor killing in order that others may afterwards kill us , and , perhaps , be killed themselves . 
Civilized peoples ought unanimously to adopt the idea of southern Europe , striving for the most peaceful and sweetest form of life possible . '' 
A cruel smile played over the Russian 's beard . 
`` But there exists that Kultur , diametrically opposed to civilization , which the Germans wish to palm off upon us . 
Civilization is refinement of spirit , respect of one 's neighbor , tolerance of foreign opinion , courtesy of manner . 
Kultur is the action of a State that organizes and assimilates individuals and communities in order to utilize them for its own ends ; and these ends consist mainly in placing ` The State ' above other states , overwhelming them with their grandeur -- or what is the same thing -- with their haughty and violent pride . '' 
By this time , the three had reached the place de l'Etoile . 
The dark outline of the Arc de Triomphe stood forth clearly in the starry expanse . 
The avenues extended in all directions , a double file of lights . 
Those around the monument illuminated its gigantic bases and the feet of the sculptured groups . 
Further up , the vaulted spaces were so locked in shadow that they had the black density of ebony . 
Upon passing under the Arch , which greatly intensified the echo of their footsteps , they came to a standstill . 
The night breeze had a wintry chill as it whistled past , and the curved masses seemed melting into the diffused blue of space . 
Instinctively the three turned to glance back at the Champs Elysees . 
They saw only a river of shadow on which were floating rosaries of red stars among the two long , black scarfs formed by the buildings . 
But they were so well acquainted with this panorama that in imagination they mentally saw the majestic sweep of the avenue , the double row of palaces , the place de la Concorde in the background with the Egyptian obelisk , and the trees of the Tuileries . 
`` How beautiful it is ! '' 
exclaimed Tchernoff who was seeing something beyond the shadows . 
`` An entire civilization , loving peace and pleasure , has passed through here . '' 
A memory greatly affected the Russian . 
Many an afternoon , after lunch , he had met in this very spot a robust man , stocky , with reddish beard and kindly eyes -- a man who looked like a giant who had just stopped growing . 
He was always accompanied by a dog . 
It was Jaures , his friend Jaures , who before going to the senate was accustomed to taking a walk toward the Arch from his home in Passy . 
`` He liked to come just where we are now ! 
He loved to look at the avenues , the distant gardens , all of Paris which can be seen from this height ; and filled with admiration , he would often say to me , ` This is magnificent -- one of the most beautiful perspectives that can be found in the entire world . ' 
... Poor Jaures ! '' 
Through association of ideas , the Russian evoked the image of his compatriot , Michael Bakounine , another revolutionist , the father of anarchy , weeping with emotion at a concert after hearing the symphony with Beethoven chorals directed by a young friend of his , named Richard Wagner . 
`` When our revolution comes , '' he cried , clasping the hand of the master , `` whatever else may perish , this must be saved at any cost ! '' 
Tchernoff roused himself from his reveries to look around him and say with sadness : `` THEY have passed through here ! '' 
Every time that he walked through the Arch , the same vision would spring up in his mind . 
THEY were thousands of helmets glistening in the sun , thousands of heavy boots lifted with mechanical rigidity at the same time ; horns , fifes , drums large and small , clashing against the majestic silence of these stones -- the warlike march from Lohengrin sounding in the deserted avenues before the closed houses . 
He , who was a foreigner , always felt attracted by the spell exerted by venerable buildings guarding the glory of a bygone day . 
He did not wish to know who had erected it . 
As soon as its pride is flattered , mankind tries immediately to solidify it . 
Then Humanity intervenes with a broader vision that changes the original significance of the work , enlarges it and strips it of its first egotistical import . 
The Greek statues , models of the highest beauty , had been originally mere images of the temple , donated by the piety of the devotees of those times . 
Upon evoking Roman grandeur , everybody sees in imagination the enormous Coliseum , circle of butcheries , or the arches erected to the glory of the inept Caesars . 
The representative works of nations have two significations -- the interior or immediate one which their creators gave them , and the exterior or universal interest , the symbolic value which the centuries have given them . 
`` This Arch , '' continued Tchernoff , `` is French within , with its names of battles and generals open to criticism . 
On the outside , it is the monument of the people who carried through the greatest revolution for liberty ever known . 
The glorification of man is there below in the column of the place Vendome . 
Here there is nothing individual . 
Its builders erected it to the memory of la Grande Armee and that Grand Army was the people in arms who spread revolution throughout Europe . 
The artists , great inventors , foresaw the true significance of this work . 
The warriors of Rude who are chanting the Marseillaise in the group at the left are not professional soldiers , they are armed citizens , marching to work out their sublime and violent mission . 
Their nudity makes them appear to me like sans-culottes in Grecian helmets ... . 
Here there is more than the glory and egoism of a great nation . 
All Europe is awake to new life , thanks to these Crusaders of Liberty ... . 
The nations call to mind certain images . 
If I think of Greece , I see the columns of the Parthenon ; Rome , Mistress of the World , is the Coliseum and the Arch of Trajan ; and revolutionary France is the Arc de Triomphe . '' 
The Arch was even more , according to the Russian . 
It represented a great historical retaliation ; the nations of the South , called the Latin races , replying , after many centuries , to the invasion which had destroyed the Roman jurisdiction -- the Mediterranean peoples spreading themselves as conquerors through the lands of the ancient barbarians . 
Retreating immediately , they had swept away the past like a tidal wave -- the great surf depositing all that it contained . 
Like the waters of certain rivers which fructify by overflowing , this recession of the human tide had left the soil enriched with new and generous ideas . 
`` If THEY should return ! '' 
added Tchernoff with a look of uneasiness . 
`` If they again should tread these stones ! 
... Before , they were simple-minded folk , stunned by their rapid good-fortune , who passed through here like a farmer through a salon . 
They were content with money for the pocket and two provinces which should perpetuate the memory of their victory ... . 
But now they will not be the soldiers only who march against Paris . 
At the tail of the armies come the maddened canteen-keepers , the Herr Professors , carrying at the side the little keg of wine with the powder which crazes the barbarian , the wine of Kultur . 
And in the vans come also an enormous load of scientific savagery , a new philosophy which glorifies Force as a principle and sanctifier of everything , denies liberty , suppresses the weak and places the entire world under the charge of a minority chosen by God , just because it possesses the surest and most rapid methods of slaughter . 
Humanity may well tremble for the future if again resounds under this archway the tramp of boots following a march of Wagner or any other Kapellmeister . '' 
They left the Arch , following the avenue Victor Hugo . 
Tchernoff walking along in dogged silence as though the vision of this imaginary procession had overwhelmed him . 
Suddenly he continued aloud the course of his reflections . 
`` And if they should enter , what does it matter ? 
... On that account , the cause of Right will not die . 
It suffers eclipses , but is born again ; it may be ignored and trampled under foot , but it does not , therefore , cease to exist , and all good souls recognize it as the only rule of life . 
A nation of madmen wishes to place might upon the pedestal that others have raised to Right . 
Useless endeavor ! 
The eternal hope of mankind will ever be the increasing power of more liberty , more brotherliness , more justice . '' 
The Russian appeared to calm himself with this statement . 
He and his friends spoke of the spectacle which Paris was presenting in its preparation for war . 
Tchernoff bemoaned the great suffering produced by the catastrophe , the thousands and thousands of domestic tragedies that were unrolling at that moment . 
Apparently nothing had changed . 
In the centre of the city and around the stations , there was unusual agitation , but the rest of the immense city did not appear affected by the great overthrow of its existence . 
The solitary street was presenting its usual aspect , the breeze was gently moving the leaves . 
A solemn peace seemed to be spreading itself through space . 
The houses appeared wrapped in slumber , but behind the closed windows might be surmised the insomnia of the reddened eyes , the sighs from hearts anguished by the threatened danger , the tremulous agility of the hands preparing the war outfit , perhaps the last loving greetings exchanged without pleasure , with kisses ending in sobs . 
Tchernoff thought of his neighbors , the husband and wife who occupied the other interior apartment behind the studio . 
She was no longer playing the piano . 
The Russian had overheard disputes , the banging of doors locked with violence , and the footsteps of a man in the middle of the night , fleeing from a woman 's cries . 
There had begun to develop on the other side of the wall a regulation drama -- a repetition of hundreds of others , all taking place at the same time . 
`` She is a German , '' volunteered the Russian . 
`` Our concierge has ferreted out her nationality . 
He must have gone by this time to join his regiment . 
Last night I could hardly sleep . 
I heard the lamentations through the thin wall partition , the steady , desperate weeping of an abandoned child , and the voice of a man who was vainly trying to quiet her ! 
... Ah , what a rain of sorrows is now falling upon the world ! '' 
That same evening , on leaving the house , he had met her by her door . 
She appeared like another woman , with an old look as though in these agonizing hours she had been suffering for fifteen years . 
In vain the kindly Tchernoff had tried to cheer her up , urging her to accept quietly her husband 's absence so as not to harm the little one who was coming . 
`` For the unhappy creature is going to be a mother , '' he said sadly . 
`` She hides her condition with a certain modesty , but from my window , I have often seen her making the dainty layette . '' 
The woman had listened to him as though she did not understand . 
Words were useless before her desperation . 
She could only sob as though talking to herself , `` I am a German ... . 
He has gone ; he has to go away ... . 
Alone ! 
... Alone forever ! '' 
... `` She is thinking all the time of her nationality which is separating her from her husband ; she is thinking of the concentration camp to which they will take her with her compatriots . 
She is fearful of being abandoned in the enemy 's country obliged to defend itself against the attack of her own country ... . 
And all this when she is about to become a mother . 
What miseries ! 
What agonies ! '' 
The three reached the rue de la Pompe and on entering the house , Tchernoff began to take leave of his companions in order to climb the service stairs ; but Desnoyers wished to prolong the conversation . 
He dreaded being alone with his friend , still chagrined over the evening 's events . 
The conversation with the Russian interested him , so they all went up in the elevator together . 
Argensola suggested that this would be a good opportunity to uncork one of the many bottles which he was keeping in the kitchen . 
Tchernoff could go home through the studio door that opened on the stairway . 
The great window had its glass doors wide open ; the transoms on the patio side were also open ; a breeze kept the curtains swaying , moving , too , the old lanterns , moth-eaten flags and other adornments of the romantic studio . 
They seated themselves around the table , near a window some distance from the light which was illuminating the other end of the big room . 
They were in the shadow , with their backs to the interior court . 
Opposite them were tiled roofs and an enormous rectangle of blue shadow , perforated by the sharp-pointed stars . 
The city lights were coloring the shadowy space with a bloody reflection . 
Tchernoff drank two glasses , testifying to the excellence of the liquid by smacking his lips . 
The three were silent with the wondering and thoughtful silence which the grandeur of the night imposes . 
Their eyes were glancing from star to star , grouping them in fanciful lines , forming them into triangles or squares of varying irregularity . 
At times , the twinkling radiance of a heavenly body appeared to broaden the rays of light , almost hypnotizing them . 
The Russian , without coming out of his revery , availed himself of another glass . 
Then he smiled with cruel irony , his bearded face taking on the semblance of a tragic mask peeping between the curtains of the night . 
`` I wonder what those men up there are thinking ! '' 
he muttered . 
`` I wonder if any star knows that Bismarck ever existed ! 
... I wonder if the planets are aware of the divine mission of the German nation ! '' 
And he continued laughing . 
Some far-away and uncertain noise disturbed the stillness of the night , slipping through some of the chinks that cut the immense plain of roofs . 
The three turned their heads so as to hear better ... . 
The sound of voices cut through the thick silence of night -- a masculine chorus chanting a hymn , simple , monotonous and solemn . 
They guessed at what it must be , although they could not hear very well . 
Various single notes floating with greater intensity on the night wind , enabled Argensola to piece together the short song , ending in a melodious , triumphant yell -- a true war song : C'est l'Alsace et la Lorraine , C'est l'Alsace qu'il nous faut , Oh , oh , oh , oh . 
A new band of men was going away through the streets below , toward the railway station , the gateway of the war . 
They must be from the outlying districts , perhaps from the country , and passing through silence-wrapped Paris , they felt like singing of the great national hope , that those who were watching behind the dark facades might feel comforted , knowing that they were not alone . 
`` Just as it is in the opera , '' said Julio listening to the last notes of the invisible chorus dying away into the night . 
Tchernoff continued drinking , but with a distracted air , his eyes fixed on the red cloud that floated over the roofs . 
The two friends conjectured his mental labor from his concentrated look , and the low exclamations which were escaping him like the echoes of an interior monologue . 
Suddenly he leaped from thought to word without any forewarning , continuing aloud the course of his reasoning . 
`` And when the sun arises in a few hours , the world will see coursing through its fields the four horsemen , enemies of mankind ... . 
Already their wild steeds are pawing the ground with impatience ; already the ill-omened riders have come together and are exchanging the last words before leaping into the saddle . '' 
`` What horsemen are these ? '' 
asked Argensola . 
`` Those which go before the Beast . '' 
The two friends thought this reply as unintelligible as the preceding words . 
Desnoyers again said mentally , `` He is drunk , '' but his curiosity forced him to ask , `` What beast is that ? '' 
`` That of the Apocalypse . '' 
There was a brief silence , but the Russian 's terseness of speech did not last long . 
He felt the necessity of expressing his enthusiasm for the dreamer on the island rock of Patmos . 
The poet of great and mystic vision was exerting , across two thousand years , his influence over this mysterious revolutionary , tucked away on the top floor of a house in Paris . 
John had foreseen it all . 
His visions , unintelligible to the masses , nevertheless held within them the mystery of great human events . 
Tchernoff described the Apocalyptic beast rising from the depths of the sea . 
He was like a leopard , his feet like those of a bear , his mouth like the snout of a lion . 
He had seven heads and ten horns . 
And upon the horns were ten crowns , and upon each of his heads the name of a blasphemy . 
The evangelist did not say just what these blasphemies were , perhaps they differed according to the epochs , modified every thousand years when the beast made a new apparition . 
The Russian seemed to be reading those that were flaming on the heads of the monster -- blasphemies against humanity , against justice , against all that makes life sweet and bearable . 
`` Might is superior to Right ! '' 
... `` The weak should not exist . '' 
... `` Be harsh in order to be great . '' 
... And the Beast in all its hideousness was attempting to govern the world and make mankind render him homage ! 
`` But the four horsemen ? '' 
persisted Desnoyers . 
The four horsemen were preceding the appearance of the monster in John 's vision . 
The seven seals of the book of mystery were broken by the Lamb in the presence of the great throne where was seated one who shone like jasper . 
The rainbow round about the throne was in sight like unto an emerald . 
Twenty-four thrones were in a semicircle around the great throne , and upon them twenty-four elders with white robes and crowns of gold . 
Four enormous animals , covered with eyes and each having six wings , seemed to be guarding the throne . 
The sounding of trumpets was greeting the breaking of the first seal . 
`` Come and see , '' cried one of the beasts in a stentorian tone to the vision-seeing poet ... . 
And the first horseman appeared on a white horse . 
In his hand he carried a bow , and a crown was given unto him . 
He was Conquest , according to some , the Plague according to others . 
He might be both things at the same time . 
He wore a crown , and that was enough for Tchernoff . 
`` Come forth , '' shouted the second animal , removing his thousand eyes . 
And from the broken seal leaped a flame-colored steed . 
His rider brandished over his head an enormous sword . 
He was War . 
Peace fled from the world before his furious gallop ; humanity was going to be exterminated . 
And when the third seal was broken , another of the winged animals bellowed like a thunder clap , `` Come and see ! '' 
And John saw a black horse . 
He who mounted it held in his hand a scale in order to weigh the maintenance of mankind . 
He was Famine . 
The fourth animal saluted the breaking of the fourth seal with a great roaring -- `` Come and see ! '' 
And there appeared a pale-colored horse . 
His rider was called Death , and power was given him to destroy with the sword and with hunger and with death , and with the beasts of the earth . 
The four horsemen were beginning their mad , desolating course over the heads of terrified humanity . 
Tchernoff was describing the four scourges of the earth exactly as though he were seeing them . 
The horseman on the white horse was clad in a showy and barbarous attire . 
His Oriental countenance was contracted with hatred as if smelling out his victims . 
While his horse continued galloping , he was bending his bow in order to spread pestilence abroad . 
At his back swung the brass quiver filled with poisoned arrows , containing the germs of all diseases -- those of private life as well as those which envenom the wounded soldier on the battlefield . 
The second horseman on the red steed was waving the enormous , two-edged sword over his hair bristling with the swiftness of his course . 
He was young , but the fierce scowl and the scornful mouth gave him a look of implacable ferocity . 
His garments , blown open by the motion of his wild race , disclosed the form of a muscular athlete . 
Bald , old and horribly skinny was the third horseman bouncing up and down on the rawboned back of his black steed . 
His shrunken legs clanked against the thin flanks of the lean beast . 
In one withered hand he was holding the scales , symbol of the scarcity of food that was going to become as valuable as gold . 
The knees of the fourth horseman , sharp as spurs , were pricking the ribs of the pale horse . 
His parchment-like skin betrayed the lines and hollows of his skeleton . 
The front of his skull-like face was twisted with the sardonic laugh of destruction . 
His cane-like arms were whirling aloft a gigantic sickle . 
From his angular shoulders was hanging a ragged , filthy shroud . 
And the furious cavalcade was passing like a hurricane over the immense assemblage of human beings . 
The heavens showed above their heads , a livid , dark-edged cloud from the west . 
Horrible monsters and deformities were swarming in spirals above the furious horde , like a repulsive escort . 
Poor Humanity , crazed with fear , was fleeing in all directions on hearing the thundering pace of the Plague , War , Hunger and Death . 
Men and women , young and old , were knocking each other down and falling to the ground overwhelmed by terror , astonishment and desperation . 
And the white horse , the red , the black and the pale , were crushing all with their relentless , iron tread -- the athletic man was hearing the crashing of his broken ribs , the nursing babe was writhing at its mother 's breast , and the aged and feeble were closing their eyes forever with a childlike sob . 
`` God is asleep , forgetting the world , '' continued the Russian . 
`` It will be a long time before he awakes , and while he sleeps the four feudal horsemen of the Beast will course through the land as its only lords . '' 
Tchernoff was overpowered by the intensity of his dramatic vision . 
Springing from his seat , he paced up and down with great strides ; but his picture of the fourfold catastrophe revealed by the gloomy poet 's trance , seemed to him very weak indeed . 
A great painter had given corporeal form to these terrible dreams . 
`` I have a book , '' he murmured , `` a rare book . '' 
... And suddenly he left the studio and went to his own quarters . 
He wanted to bring the book to show to his friends . 
Argensola accompanied him , and they returned in a few minutes with the volume , leaving the doors open behind them , so as to make a stronger current of air among the hollows of the facades and the interior patio . 
Tchernoff placed his precious book under the light . 
It was a volume printed in 1511 , with Latin text and engravings . 
Desnoyers read the title , `` The Apocalypse Illustrated . '' 
The engravings were by Albert Durer , a youthful effort , when the master was only twenty-seven years old . 
The three were fascinated by the picture portraying the wild career of the Apocalyptic horsemen . 
The quadruple scourge , on fantastic mounts , seemed to be precipitating itself with a realistic sweep , crushing panic-stricken humanity . 
Suddenly something happened which startled the three men from their contemplative admiration -- something unusual , indefinable , a dreadful sound which seemed to enter directly into their brains without passing through their ears -- a clutch at the heart . 
Instinctively they knew that something very grave had just happened . 
They stared at each other silently for a few interminable seconds . 
Through the open door , a cry of alarm came up from the patio . 
With a common impulse , the three ran to the interior window , but before reaching them , the Russian had a presentiment . 
`` My neighbor ! 
... It must be my neighbor . 
Perhaps she has killed herself ! '' 
Looking down , they could see lights below , people moving around a form stretched out on the tiled floor . 
The alarm had instantly filled all the court windows , for it was a sleepless night -- a night of nervous apprehension when everyone was keeping a sad vigil . 
`` She has killed herself , '' said a voice which seemed to come up from a well . 
`` The German woman has committed suicide . '' 
The explanation of the concierge leaped from window to window up to the top floor . 
The Russian was shaking his head with a fatalistic expression . 
The unhappy woman had not taken the death-leap of her own accord . 
Someone had intensified her desperation , someone had pushed her ... . 
The horsemen ! 
The four horsemen of the Apocalypse ! 
... Already they were in the saddle ! 
Already they were beginning their merciless gallop of destruction ! 
The blind forces of evil were about to be let loose throughout the world . 
The agony of humanity , under the brutal sweep of the four horsemen , was already begun ! 
Upon being convinced that war really was inevitable , the elder Desnoyers was filled with amazement . 
Humanity had gone crazy . 
Was it possible that war could happen in these days of so many railroads , so many merchant marines , so many inventions , so much activity developed above and below the earth ? 
... The nations would ruin themselves forever . 
They were now accustomed to luxuries and necessities unknown a century ago . 
Capital was master of the world , and war was going to wipe it out . 
In its turn , war would be wiped out in a few months ' time through lack of funds to sustain it . 
His soul of a business man revolted before the hundreds of thousands of millions that this foolhardy event was going to convert into smoke and slaughter . 
As his indignation had to fix upon something close at hand , he made his own countrymen responsible for this insanity . 
Too much talk about la revanche ! 
The very idea of worrying for forty-four years over the two lost provinces when the nation was mistress of enormous and undeveloped lands in other countries ! 
... Now they were going to pay the penalty for such exasperating and clamorous foolishness . 
For him war meant disaster writ large . 
He had no faith in his country . 
France 's day had passed . 
Now the victors were of the Northern peoples , and especially that Germany which he had seen so close , admiring with a certain terror its discipline and its rigorous organization . 
The former working-man felt the conservative and selfish instinct of all those who have amassed millions . 
He scorned political ideals , but through class interest he had of late years accepted the declarations against the scandals of the government . 
What could a corrupt and disorganized Republic do against the solidest and strongest empire in the world ? 
... `` We are going to our deaths , '' he said to himself . 
`` Worse than ' 70 ! 
... We are going to see horrible things ! '' 
The good order and enthusiasm with which the French responded to their country 's call and transformed themselves into soldiers were most astonishing to him . 
This moral shock made his national faith begin to revive . 
The great majority of Frenchmen were good after all ; the nation was as valiant as in former times . 
Forty-four years of suffering and alarm had developed their old bravery . 
But the leaders ? 
Where were they going to get leaders to march to victory ? 
... Many others were asking themselves the same question . 
The silence of the democratic government was keeping the country in complete ignorance of their future commanders . 
Everybody saw the army increasing from hour to hour : very few knew the generals . 
One name was beginning to be repeated from mouth to mouth , `` Joffre ... Joffre . '' 
His first pictures made the curious crowds struggle to get a glimpse of them . 
Desnoyers studied them very carefully . 
`` He looks like a very capable person . '' 
His methodical instincts were gratified by the grave and confident look of the general of the Republic . 
Suddenly he felt the great confidence that efficient-looking bank directors always inspired in him . 
He could entrust his interests to this gentleman , sure that he would not act impulsively . 
Finally , against his will , Desnoyers was drawn into the whirlpool of enthusiasm and emotion . 
Like everyone around him , he lived minutes that were hours , and hours that were years . 
Events kept on overlapping each other ; within a week the world seemed to have made up for its long period of peace . 
The old man fairly lived in the street , attracted by the spectacle of the multitude of civilians saluting the multitude of uniformed men departing for the seat of war . 
At night he saw the processions passing through the boulevards . 
The tricolored flag was fluttering its colors under the electric lights . 
The cafes were overflowing with people , sending forth from doors and windows the excited , musical notes of patriotic songs . 
Suddenly , amidst applause and cheers , the crowd would make an opening in the street . 
All Europe was passing here ; all Europe -- less the arrogant enemy -- and was saluting France in her hour of danger with hearty spontaneity . 
Flags of different nations were filing by , of all tints of the rainbow , and behind them were the Russians with bright and mystical eyes ; the English , with heads uncovered , intoning songs of religious gravity ; the Greeks and Roumanians of aquiline profile ; the Scandinavians , white and red ; the North Americans , with the noisiness of a somewhat puerile enthusiasm ; the Hebrews without a country , friends of the nation of socialistic revolutions ; the Italians , as spirited as a choir of heroic tenors ; the Spanish and South Americans , tireless in their huzzas . 
They were students and apprentices who were completing their courses in the schools and workshops , and refugees who , like shipwrecked mariners , had sought shelter on the hospitable strand of Paris . 
Their cheers had no special significance , but they were all moved by their desire to show their love for the Republic . 
And Desnoyers , touched by the sight , felt that France was still of some account in the world , that she yet exercised a moral force among the nations , and that her joys and sorrows were still of interest to humanity . 
`` In Berlin and Vienna , too , '' he said to himself , `` they must also be cheering enthusiastically at this moment ... but Germans only , no others . 
Assuredly no foreigner is joining in their demonstrations . '' 
The nation of the Revolution , legislator of the rights of mankind , was harvesting the gratitude of the throngs , but was beginning to feel a certain remorse before the enthusiasm of the foreigners who were offering their blood for France . 
Many were lamenting that the government should delay twenty days , until after they had finished the operations of mobilization , in admitting the volunteers . 
And he , a Frenchman born , a few hours before , had been mistrusting his country ! 
... In the daytime the popular current was running toward the Gare de l'Est . 
Crowded against the gratings was a surging mass of humanity stretching its tentacles through the nearby streets . 
The station that was acquiring the importance of a historic spot appeared like a narrow tunnel through which a great human river was trying to flow with many rippling encounters and much heavy pressure against its banks . 
A large part of France in arms was coursing through this exit from Paris toward the battlefields at the frontier . 
Desnoyers had been in the station only twice , when going and coming from Germany . 
Others were now taking the same road . 
The crowds were swarming in from the environs of the city in order to see the masses of human beings in geometric bodies , uniformly clad , disappearing within the entrance with flash of steel and the rhythm of clanking metal . 
The crystal archways that were glistening in the sun like fiery mouths were swallowing and swallowing people . 
When night fell the processions were still coming on , by light of the electric lamps . 
Through the iron grills were passing thousands and thousands of draught horses ; men with their breasts crossed with metal and bunches of horsehair hanging from their helmets , like paladins of bygone centuries ; enormous cases that were serving as cages for the aeronautic condors ; strings of cannon , long and narrow , painted grey and protected , by metal screens , more like astronomical instruments than mouths of death ; masses and masses of red kepis -LRB- military caps -RRB- moving in marching rhythm , rows and rows of muskets , some black and stark like reed plantations , others ending in bayonets like shining spikes . 
And over all these restless fields of seething throngs , the flags of the regiments were fluttering in the air like colored birds ; a white body , a blue wing , or a red one , a cravat of gold on the neck , and above , the metal tip pointing toward the clouds . 
Don Marcelo would return home from these send-offs vibrating with nervous fatigue , as one who had just participated in a scene of racking emotion . 
In spite of his tenacious character which always stood out against admitting a mistake , the old man began to feel ashamed of his former doubts . 
The nation was quivering with life ; France was a grand nation ; appearances had deceived him as well as many others . 
Perhaps the most of his countrymen were of a light and flippant character , given to excessive interest in the sensuous side of life ; but when danger came they were fulfilling their duty simply , without the necessity of the harsh force to which the iron-clad organizations were submitting their people . 
On leaving home on the morning of the fourth day of the mobilization Desnoyers , instead of betaking himself to the centre of the city , went in the opposite direction toward the rue de la Pompe . 
Some imprudent words dropped by Chichi , and the uneasy looks of his wife and sister-in-law made him suspect that Julio had returned from his trip . 
He felt the necessity of seeing at least the outside of the studio windows , as if they might give him news . 
And in order to justify a trip so at variance with his policy of ignoring his son , he remembered that the carpenter lived in the same street . 
`` I must hunt up Robert . 
He promised a week ago that he would come here . '' 
This Robert was a husky young fellow who , to use his own words , was `` emancipated from boss tyranny , '' and was working independently in his own home . 
A tiny , almost subterranean room was serving him for dwelling and workshop . 
A woman he called `` my affinity '' was looking carefully after his hearth and home , with a baby boy clinging to her skirts . 
Desnoyers was accustomed to humor Robert 's tirades against his fellow citizens because the man had always humored his whimseys about the incessant rearrangement of his furniture . 
In the luxurious apartment in the avenue Victor Hugo the carpenter would sing La Internacional while using hammer and saw , and his employer would overlook his audacity of speech because of the cheapness of his work . 
Upon arriving at the shop he found the man with cap over one ear , broad trousers like a mameluke 's , hobnailed boots and various pennants and rosettes fastened to the lapels of his jacket . 
`` You 've come too late , Boss , '' he said cheerily . 
`` I am just going to close the factory . 
The Proprietor has been mobilized , and in a few hours will join his regiment . '' 
And he pointed to a written paper posted on the door of his dwelling like the printed cards on all establishments , signifying that employer and employees had obeyed the order of mobilization . 
It had never occurred to Desnoyers that his carpenter might become a soldier , since he was so opposed to all kinds of authority . 
He hated the flics , the Paris police , with whom he had , more than once , exchanged fisticuffs and clubbings . 
Militarism was his special aversion . 
In the meetings against the despotism of the barracks he had always been one of the noisiest participants . 
And was this revolutionary fellow going to war naturally and voluntarily ? 
... Robert spoke enthusiastically of his regiment , of life among comrades with Death but four steps away . 
`` I believe in my ideas , Boss , the same as before , '' he explained as though guessing the other 's thought . 
`` But war is war and teaches many things -- among others that Liberty must be accompanied with order and authority . 
It is necessary that someone direct that the rest may follow -- willingly , by common consent ... but they must follow . 
When war actually comes one sees things very differently from when living at home doing as one pleases . '' 
The night that they assassinated Jaures he howled with rage , announcing that the following morning the murder would be avenged . 
He had hunted up his associates in the district in order to inform them what retaliation was being planned against the malefactors . 
But war was about to break out . 
There was something in the air that was opposing civil strife , that was placing private grievances in momentary abeyance , concentrating all minds on the common weal . 
`` A week ago , '' he exclaimed , `` I was an anti-militarist ! 
How far away that seems now -- as if a year had gone by ! 
I keep thinking as before ! 
I love peace and hate war like all my comrades . 
But the French have not offended anybody , and yet they threaten us , wishing to enslave us ... . 
But we French can be fierce , since they oblige us to be , and in order to defend ourselves it is just that nobody should shirk , that all should obey . 
Discipline does not quarrel with Revolution . 
Remember the armies of the first Republic -- all citizens , Generals as well as soldiers , but Hoche , Kleber and the others were rough-hewn , unpolished benefactors who knew how to command and exact obedience . '' 
The carpenter was well read . 
Besides the papers and pamphlets of `` the Idea , '' he had also read on stray sheets the views of Michelet and other liberal actors on the stage of history . 
`` We are going to make war on War , '' he added . 
`` We are going to fight so that this war will be the last . '' 
This statement did not seem to be expressed with sufficient clearness , so he recast his thought . 
`` We are going to fight for the future ; we are going to die in order that our grandchildren may not have to endure a similar calamity . 
If the enemy triumphs , the war-habit will triumph , and conquest will be the only means of growth . 
First they will overcome Europe , then the rest of the world . 
Later on , those who have been pillaged will rise up in their wrath . 
More wars ! 
... We do not want conquests . 
We desire to regain Alsace and Lorraine , for their inhabitants wish to return to us ... and nothing more . 
We shall not imitate the enemy , appropriating territory and jeopardizing the peace of the world . 
We had enough of that with Napoleon ; we must not repeat that experience . 
We are going to fight for our immediate security , and at the same time for the security of the world -- for the life of the weaker nations . 
If this were a war of aggression , of mere vanity , of conquest , then we Socialists would bethink ourselves of our anti-militarism . 
But this is self-defense , and the government has not been at fault . 
Since we are attacked , we must be united in our defensive . '' 
The carpenter , who was also anti-clerical , was now showing a more generous tolerance , an amplitude of ideas that embraced all mankind . 
The day before he had met at the administration office a Reservist who was just leaving to join his regiment . 
At a glance he saw that this man was a priest . 
`` I am a carpenter , '' he had said to him , by way of introduction , `` and you , comrade , are working in the churches ? '' 
He employed this figure of speech in order that the priest might not suspect him of anything offensive . 
The two had clasped hands . 
`` I do not take much stock in the clerical cowl , '' Robert explained to Desnoyers . 
`` For some time I have not been on friendly terms with religion . 
But in every walk of life there must be good people , and the good people ought to understand each other in a crisis like this . 
Do n't you think so , Boss ? '' 
The war coincided with his socialistic tendencies . 
Before this , when speaking of future revolution , he had felt a malign pleasure in imagining all the rich deprived of their fortunes and having to work in order to exist . 
Now he was equally enthusiastic at the thought that all Frenchmen would share the same fate without class distinction . 
`` All with knapsacks on their backs and eating at mess . '' 
And he was even extending this military sobriety to those who remained behind the army . 
War was going to cause great scarcity of provisions , and all would have to come down to very plain fare . 
`` You , too , Boss , who are too old to go to war -- you , with all your millions , will have to eat the same as I. ... Admit that it is a beautiful thing . '' 
Desnoyers was not offended by the malicious satisfaction that his future privations seemed to inspire in the carpenter . 
