The face of Don Rosendo beams with dignity and delight . -RSB- 
After the son of Perinolo came Don Jeronimo de la Fuente . 
The illustrious professor of the instruction of youth was very anxious to rise in the eyes of the public after his slip about the pandectas . 
He began by saying that he shared the opinions of the worthy orator -LSB- notice that he did not say eloquent , or illustrious , but worthy , nothing more -RSB- who had preceded him on the subject ; that he , destined by his profession to light the torch of science in infantile brains , could not do less than be a devoted partizan of all modern enlightenment , more especially of that of the press . 
In corroboration of this statement he begged to say that as soon as a periodical in Sarrio was an established fact he would have the pleasure of laying before his fellow-citizens the solution of a problem which until now was considered insoluble , that of the trisection of the angle , to which he had devoted much time and trouble , and which , fortunately , now was crowned with success . 
He spoke , moreover , with great emphasis on other matters -- of physical geography and astronomy , clearly and briefly explaining the earth 's rotation and progression , the composition of air , the formation of the clouds and dew , the origin of the salt of the sea , of springs and rivers , the scientific cause of tides , and also something about the cause of volcanoes . 
Afterward , just by the way , he passed on to an explanation of the celestial mechanism , and particularly the law of universal attraction , discovered by Newton , by which planets move round the sun in elliptic orbits . 
Then he explained with great brilliancy the nature of an ellipsis . 
Finally , speaking of our satellite the moon , he remarked that the time of its revolution round the earth was sensibly diminishing , which indicated the decrease of its orbit . 
This , according to the orator , would sooner or later result in the moon falling into the earth , when both would be shattered . 
Don Jeronimo then resumed his seat , leaving the audience quite crushed under the weight of this alarming prophecy . 
The proceedings went on until the lamps were lighted . 
Don Rufo , the town doctor , a tall , lean man , with a pointed beard and gold eyeglasses , then got up and declared explicitly in a few words that thought was only a physiological function of the brain , and the soul an attribute of matter , and that the greater or less degree of intelligence in animals depends on the cerebral lobules and the weight of the brain . 
The orator computed that its weight in a man was three pounds and a half . 
Then he gave the calculation of the phosphoric matter that it contains . 
Man 's brain contains more phosphorus than animals ' , while theirs have more than birds ' . 
In children the quantity of phosphorus increases considerably at the natal hour , and it continues to increase rapidly with the course of time . 
But in what part of the brain is the spark of intellectual activity situated ? 
asked the orator . 
In his opinion this activity has its mainspring in the grayish or bluish substance , and in some way in the whitish substance , which is the conductor of such activity . 
He then spoke of the dura mater , the hemispheres of the brain , the frontal , parietal , and occipital parts of the skull , the function of the cerebrum , the seat of the cerebellum . 
Here the speaker conceived the happy idea of making a beautiful comparison between the circumlocutions of this gray substance and a heap of intestines thrown promiscuously together . 
All the faculties which we call the soul are nothing but functions of this gray substance , of this mass of intestines . 
The brain secretes thoughts , as the liver does bile . 
The orator concluded by saying that while humanity is ignorant of these truths it can not rise from its present state of barbarism . 
Navarro , the veterinary professor , who never wished to be behind the doctor , then asked leave to speak , and after a few words of congratulation on the inauguration of the `` meeting '' -LRB- all the speakers used the English term -RRB- , he gave expression of a few very rational ideas on the gangrenous quinsy of the pig , and the treatment for its prevention . 
The orator hesitated , stuttered , and grew hot in the expression of his ideas , but this deficiency of language was compensated for by the novelty and interest of the subject , for numbers of these nice animals fell victims to quinsy at certain seasons in Sarrio . 
In spite of the interest and respect with which the public listened to the discourse on the danger which threatened pig-farming , there were certainly signs of impatience to hear the president 's speech . 
After the allusion of Perinolo 's son to the fact of a journal , every one was anxious to have the news confirmed . 
While Navarro was talking a voice from the gallery cried : `` Let Don Rosendo speak ! '' 
And although this rude interruption was rebuked with a prompt `` Sh ! '' 
it was evident that they had had enough of Navarro . 
At last the celebrated man of Sarrio , the standard-bearer of all progress , the illustrious patrician , Don Rosendo Belinchon , reared his majestic figure behind the table . 
-LSB- Silence ! 
Sh ! 
Sh ! 
Silence , gentlemen ! 
Attention ! 
A little attention , please . -RSB- 
These were the cries that proceeded from the crowd , although nobody dared move a finger , such was the anxiety of all to hear the president 's remarks . 
Like all men of a really superior mind and clear intelligence , Don Rosendo wrote better than he spoke . 
Nevertheless , his quiet mode of speech gave an impression of dignity that was wanting in the orators who had preceded him . 
`` Gentlemen -LSB- pause -RSB- , I thank -LSB- pause -RSB- all the people -LSB- pause -RSB- who have assisted -LSB- pause -RSB- this afternoon -LSB- pause -RSB- at the meeting which I have had the honor to convene . 
-LSB- Much longer pause , rife with expectation . -RSB- 
I have a real pleasure -LSB- pause -RSB- in seeing gathered together in this place -LSB- pause -RSB- the most illustrious persons of the town -LSB- pause -RSB- , and all those who , for one reason or another , are of consequence and importance . '' 
-LSB- Bravo ! 
Very good ! 
Very good ! -RSB- 
After this exordium , received in such a flattering style , the orator maintained that he was moved by the desire to raise the intellectual tone of Sarrio . 
Then he added that the object of this meeting had only been that of raising this tone . 
-LSB- Long applause . -RSB- 
He considered himself too weak and incompetent to accomplish the task . 
-LSB- No , no . 
Applause . -RSB- 
But he counted on -- at least he thought he could count on -- the support of the many men of feeling , patriotism , intelligence , and progress dwelling in Sarrio . 
-LSB- Thunders of applause . -RSB- 
The means that he considered most efficacious to raise Sarrio to its rightful height , and to make it compete worthily with other towns , and even maritime towns of more importance , was the creation of an organ that would support its political , moral , and material interests . 
`` And , gentlemen -LSB- pause -RSB- , although all the difficulties are not yet overcome -LSB- pause -RSB- , I have the pleasure of informing this illustrious assembly -LSB- Attention ! 
Sh ! 
Sh ! 
Silence ! -RSB- 
that perhaps in the ensuing month of August -LSB- Bravo ! 
Bravo ! 
Loud and frantic applause that interrupted the orator for some minutes -RSB- -- that perhaps in the ensuing month of August -LSB- Bravo ! 
Bravo ! 
Silence ! -RSB- 
the town of Sarrio will have a biweekly paper . '' 
-LSB- Loud applause . 
Navarro threw his hat upon the stage . 
Several other spectators followed his example . -RSB- 
Alvaro Peña and Don Feliciano Gomez employed themselves in picking them up and returning them to their owners . 
Don Rosendo 's face shone with an august expression , and his lips , wreathed with a happy smile , revealed the two symmetrical rows of teeth , eloquent proof of dental skill . 
`` In spite of these expressions of regard -LSB- pause -RSB- , for which I thank you from the bottom of my soul -LSB- pause -RSB- , pride does not blind me . 
My want of power -LSB- No , no . 
Applause . -RSB- 
makes me fear that the organ about to be started may not come up to the expectations of the public . '' 
-LSB- Voices from various sides : `` Yes , it will . 
We are sure it will . '' 
Applause . -RSB- 
`` But if , perhaps -LSB- pause -RSB- , the lack of cleverness can be atoned for by faith and enthusiasm , it will certainly be so . 
My humble pen and my modest fortune are at the disposal of the town of Sarrio . '' 
-LSB- Vehement signs of approbation . -RSB- 
`` The new paper , '' continued the orator , `` has a great mission to fulfil . 
This mission consists in starting the reforms and the advancement which the town requires . '' 
The necessity of these reforms and advancement was known to all the world . 
The covered market was absolutely indispensable ; the road to Rodillero was the constant desire of both places ; and as to the slaughter-house , Don Rosendo asked with surprise how the town could consent to the existence of a focus of filth like the present one , which was a perfect disgrace to the place . 
Gabino from his seat had listened to the speakers with marked disdain and disgust . 
He turned about in his chair as if it were hurting him , and he was filled with an overwhelming desire to cry out to the orators : `` Asses ! 
Fools ! '' 
as he was accustomed to in the Club , or to slash out at them with one of his fiercest sarcasms . 
These fooleries thoroughly upset him . 
It was not surprising , when we recollect the state of the ex-sailor 's liver . 
He breathed with difficulty , he ground his teeth , he smiled sarcastically , and was paralyzed with rage , thus showing his disapprobation of all that had been said , all that was being said , and all that would be said . 
Occasionally he gave vent to a `` Bah ! '' 
or a `` Pooh ! '' 
or a `` Pshaw ! '' 
and other peculiar sounds not less significant . 
Finally , in the middle of Don Rosendo 's discourse , either because his grave eloquence was incontrovertible , or because the applause exasperated him to an intolerable degree , Gabino left the place and walked up and down in front of the door of the theatre in a pitiable state of agitation . 
In a few minutes he returned , and then went up into the gallery . 
Then , hearing Don Rosendo touch upon the matter of the slaughter-house , he left his seat , and , arriving in the first row , cried out excitedly , `` This is not fair play . '' 
On hearing the remark Don Rosendo stopped suddenly , dumb and pale . 
A loud murmur of surprise ran through the whole theatre . 
Some cried , `` Out with him ! '' 
Others said , `` Sh ! 
Sh ! '' 
and the eyes of all , after being directed to the gallery , were turned to the chairman . 
Don Rosendo , quite agitated , said with a hoarse voice : `` Gentlemen , if these remarks have shown that I have had any unworthy thoughts in the convocation of this meeting , my delicacy forbids me to remain in the chair , and I retire . '' 
-LSB- No , no ! 
Go on ! 
Go on ! 
Long live the president ! -RSB- 
`` I am sure , gentlemen , '' said the orator , visibly moved , `` that the individual who has just called out is not a resident of Sarrio ; he was not born in Sarrio ! 
He ca n't belong to Sarrio ! '' 
Somebody having murmured that the interlocutor was of Nieva , great indignation and confusion reigned in the theatre . 
A formidable cry of `` Down with the bullfinches ! 
Viva Sarrio ! '' 
It must be mentioned that the people of Nieva were called bullfinches on account of the great number of these birds there , while the people of Sarrio are called in Nieva chaffinches for a similar reason . 
The excitement having at last abated , Don Rosendo acknowledged the applause with thanks and acceded to the persuasions of the audience , and returned to his place . 
`` Before again occupying this seat -LSB- the president had retired to the back of the stage -RSB- , I must say that if this popinjay or bullfinch -LSB- laughter -RSB- wants to force from me an opinion on the subject of the slaughter-house , I have no objection to giving it , because I am always straightforward . 
-LSB- Great interest . 
You could have heard a pin drop . -RSB- 
I solemnly declare , gentlemen , that in my opinion the new slaughter-house ought not to be put anywhere but on the rubbish chute . '' 
The orator terminated his eloquent speech with a few more words , and the meeting broke up . 
The audience left the theatre , half asphyxiated , as much by the many emotions experienced in a short time as by the hundred and four degrees of heat in the place . 
All this happened in exalted spheres , while in the obscure regions of private life events were transpiring which , albeit not so memorable , were of some importance to those concerned . 
On the day following the interview already narrated between Venturita and Gonzalo , the young man did not appear at his betrothed 's ; he remained at home , feigning a seizure of violent toothache . 
Such at least was the news that reached Cecilia through Elvira , the maid , who met Don Melchor 's servant on the market-place . 
As the young man did not appear the next day either , the family thought he was still suffering , but Venturita and Valentina were not deceived . 
The embroideress avoided meeting the girl 's eyes , perhaps from fear of embarrassing her , or because she herself felt embarrassed without knowing why . 
Venturita was as merry as ever ; and Cecilia , the only one anxious enough to be silent , took a toothache mixture from her wardrobe , copied out a prayer to Saint Polonia which had been given her , and calling Elvira mysteriously aside , she said with a deep blush : `` Elvira , will you be so kind as to take this bottle and paper to Señor Gonzalo ? '' 
`` Now , at once ? '' 
`` As soon as you can . 
If you have nothing to do just now -- But I do n't want it to be talked about . '' 
`` All right , señorita , '' returned the pale little brunette , smiling kindly , `` nobody shall know a word about it . 
Your mother was just asking for some starch , so I will go and get some . '' 
When Gonzalo received the little packet , he was overwhelmed with remorse , and paced up and down the room in agitation . 
Three or four times he was on the point of taking his hat , going to the Belinchons ' house , and letting things go on as before . 
All the feelings of honor , kindness , and goodness inherent in him , the voice of reason which spoke for Cecilia -- in one word , the good angel which every man has within him , impelled him to this course . 
But he could not drive the pretty , graceful image of Venturita from his mind : the fire of her eyes seemed still to pierce his soul , the sweet , voluptuous touch of her golden hair -- in fact , his bad angel held him back . 
Gonzalo was a man of physical health , powerful muscles , rich blood , but with a weak will . 
Evil spirits fear delicate constitutions more than a fine one like his . 
The battle fought by his good and bad angels did not last long ; it was soon decided in favor of the latter by means of a note from Venturita brought by the other maid of the house . 
It ran thus : `` Do n't be impatient . 
To-day I will speak to mama . 
Trust in me . 
VENTURITA . '' 
The look of the maid as she gave this note seemed , in spite of her smile , to convey a tacit reproach , which somewhat upset him . 
He dismissed her with a handsome tip ; and on opening the letter with a trembling hand , he noticed the sandal perfume , always used by Venturita , and as it recalled to his mind the bewitching , beautiful girl , it set chords vibrating in his being which had hitherto remained untouched . 
He put the letter to his lips , and intoxicated with passion , he kissed it effusively many times . 
Poor Cecilia ! 
She had taken the first piece of paper that came to hand , and without waiting for perfumes , she generally wrote to her lover in pencil . 
If women only knew the importance of these wretched details ! 
Venturita had been hovering about her mother all day , waiting for an opportunity of speaking privately to her . 
In the evening , when the needlewomen had gone , the mother and daughter were at last alone . 
Cecilia had retired to her room , a prey to a depression that she had tried to combat by work during the day . 
Doña Paula was seated in an armchair with her eyes fixed on the window , looking at the last rays of the setting sun , in a melancholy , pensive attitude unusual in her . 
She seemed to forebode the trouble that was coming . 
Venturita put the embroidery frames away in a corner , covered them over with a cloth , arranged the chairs in order and dragged the work-basket to one side so that it should not be in the way . 
`` Have the lights brought , '' said Doña Paula . 
`` Why ? '' 
returned the girl , taking a low chair by her side . 
`` It is all tidy now . '' 
Her mother turned her eyes again to the window , and resumed her melancholy attitude . 
At the end of some minutes ' silence Venturita took her parent 's hand and raised it affectionately to her lips . 
Doña Paula turned her head with surprise . 
Seldom , nay never , had her youngest daughter given this respectful kiss . 
She smiled sweetly , and taking her by the chin , she said : `` Are you pleased with the dress ? '' 
`` Yes , mama . '' 
`` It makes you a very pretty figure . 
If it is taken in a little at the waist it will be charming . '' 
The girl was silent , and after a minute she raised her eyes , and , controlling her voice , said in a calm tone : `` I say , mama , what do you think of Gonzalo 's retreat ? '' 
`` Gonzalo 's retreat ! '' 
exclaimed the señora , turning her head anxiously . 
`` What do you mean , child ? '' 
`` Yes , his retreat , because I do n't believe that he is ill ; yesterday he was playing billiards at the Marina Café all the evening . '' 
`` Bah ! 
bah ! 
you are joking . '' 
`` I am not joking ; I am serious . '' 
`` And who told you that ? '' 
`` I know it from Nieves , who was told by her brother . '' 
`` The pain probably left him in the evening , and he went out for a little change . '' 
`` Well , then , why did he not come to-day ? '' 
`` Because the pain no doubt returned . '' 
`` Do n't you believe it , mama . 
You can be quite certain Gonzalo does not love Cecilia . '' 
`` Do you know what you are saying , child ? 
Be so good as to hold your tongue , before you make me angry . '' 
`` I will be silent , but the proofs that he is giving of his affection are not very great . '' 
`` That I should have to hear this ! '' 
said the señora , turning round proudly . 
`` If Gonzalo is somebody , Cecilia is as good . 
My daughter is not to be treated with disrespect by Gonzalo , or the Prince of Asturias , do you hear ? 
I will inquire into the truth of what you have said , and if it be true , I will take measures . '' 
Doña Paula was naturally kind and gentle , a friend of the poor , and generous ; but she had the unreflective pride and the extreme touchiness of the working class of Sarrio . 
`` No , mama , I do n't mean that . 
Who said that Gonzalo treats Cecilia with disrespect ? '' 
`` You yourself . 
Why does he not love her then ? '' 
Venturita hesitated a moment , and then replied with firmness : `` Because he loves me . '' 
`` Come , '' said the señora laughing , `` I ought to have seen from the first that it was all a joke . '' 
`` It is not a joke , it is pure truth , and if you want convincing you can see for yourself . '' 
Then she drew from her bosom a letter which she had ready , and handed it to her mother ; whereupon Doña Paula sprang to her feet and cried : `` Quick ! 
a light , quick ! '' 
Venturita took a box of tapers that was on the table , and lighted one . 
Mother and daughter were pale . 
The mother held the letter to the light , and after reading a few lines she dropped into an armchair , and fixing her eyes on her daughter with a sad expression , she said : `` Ventura , what have you done ? '' 
`` I ? 
Nothing , '' returned the girl , letting the taper , which was nearly burnt out , fall to the floor . 
`` Is it then nothing to you , you heartless , mad creature , to prevent the marriage of your sister , to deceive her so abominably and to give rise to such a scandal in the town as never was seen ? '' 
`` I have not done all this . 
He was the one to declare himself to me . 
Is it then a sin to be loved ? '' 
`` On this occasion , yes , '' replied the señora severely ; `` at the first sign you ought to have told me . 
To allow him to speak to you in any other way than as to a sister was treachery to your sister , and does little credit to yourself . '' 
`` Well , there it is , '' returned the girl in a scornful tone . 
`` Then it shall not be , '' said Doña Paula angrily , as she rose from her seat . 
`` What do you suggest ? 
Come , say ; or rather , what have you suggested ? '' 
`` You can imagine . '' 
`` To marry each other , eh ? '' 
she asked in a sarcastic tone . 
`` Then you are greatly mistaken ! 
The marriage of your sister is broken off -- Well , it is as good as broken off -- Of course , you are free to marry Gonzalo , but do n't you think you will set foot in this house . 
In the first place , you are a bad girl who ought to pay for your grimacings ; and in any case your father and I will not consent to your marrying a man who has treated your sister so disgracefully and deceived us all round . 
People would indeed say that we were dying to have him for a son-in-law , so give up the idea , child . '' 
`` Well , if you like it or not , '' said Venturita , flouncing to the door , `` I shall marry him . '' 
Doña Paula felt inclined to punish this insolence with corporal punishment , but the girl quickly left the room and shut the door ; then half reopening it , she said in furious tone : `` I will marry him ; I will marry him ; I will marry him . '' 
The following day Gonzalo received a letter from Ventura in which she said : `` Yesterday I spoke to mama , and I think she will give in . 
Keep your spirits up . '' 
And in effect , that same morning mother and daughter renewed the conversation in the daughter 's room . 
It was a long interview , and we do not know what transpired , but at the end of an hour Doña Paula appeared with her eyes red with weeping and her hand on her heart , from which she frequently suffered , and retiring to her room she went to bed . 
Ventura came out behind her , quiet but pale , and calling Generosa , her confidential maid , she gave her a letter for Gonzalo , who that evening appeared at nine o'clock in front of Belinchon 's house . 
A few minutes later , Venturita opened the window of the library , which was on the ground floor and protected with iron gratings . 
`` Everything is settled , '' she said in a falsetto voice , directly the young man approached . 
`` No ! 
How ? 
Really ? '' 
he asked in a tone of delight . 
`` It has been a pretty hard task for me ! 
She was furious . '' 
`` And your papa ? '' 
`` Papa knows nothing about it yet , but he will give in , too . 
See if he wo n't give in . 
The measure taken could not have been more effectual . '' 
`` What measure ? '' 
`` The one I took . 
The whole business looked so hopeless that it would have ended by your being forbidden the house , and I should have been packed off to Tejada in disgrace . 
All entreaties , all arguments were in vain ; she was mad with rage , she called you an infamous traitor , you can imagine how she spoke of me ! 
Then I saw that there was nothing for it but to take a strong measure ; and it was somewhat strong , '' she added in a low , changed voice . 
`` What strong measure ? '' 
asked Gonzalo with curiosity . 
Venturita was silent for some moments , and then somewhat shamefacedly returned : `` I told her -- I told her that there was nothing else for us but to marry each other . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Why -- why -- guess why ! '' 
said the girl with impatience . 
Then Gonzalo divined what she meant , and the knowledge filled him with repugnance and terror . 
A gloomy silence fell upon him , and Venturita at last said : `` Do you think it was wrong ? '' 
`` Yes , '' he returned dryly . 
`` All right , my boy ; to-morrow I will tell her it was all a lie , and then all is over between us . '' 
`` That wo n't do any good . 
I do not quarrel with the result , as you must know , but with the way you have managed it . '' 
`` I lose more than you . '' 
`` Well , I feel it all the same . '' 
`` All right , then show it , '' she returned in a pet , jumping up from the window-sill , where she had been seated . 
But Gonzalo put his hand through the bars , and caught her by the dress . 
`` Stop . '' 
The dress tore . 
`` Now you have torn my frock , do you see ? '' 
`` Well , do n't go so quickly . '' 
And succeeding in catching her by the arm , he obliged her to sit down again . 
`` What rough manners ! '' 
exclaimed the girl , laughing ; `` that must be the way bears make love . '' 
`` Do you love me ? '' 
asked Gonzalo , also laughing . 
`` No . '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Give me your hand as a friend . '' 
The girl then gave him her pink and white hand , and the herculean youth kissed it passionately several times . 
`` Good-by till to-morrow , and I will tell you all the news , '' she said , once more rising from her seat . 
Gonzalo withdrew , and after taking a few steps he recollected that the news signified the way in which Cecilia would take his disloyal conduct , and his forehead corrugated with an expression of pain . 
In this state of preoccupation he crossed the Rua Nueva , entered the Plaza de la Marina , went along by the harbor , and reached the end of the mole . 
The night was mild and clear . 
The stars shining in the firmament were reflected in the tranquil waters of the bay . 
The rigging of the anchored shipping stood out distinctly from the dark blue background . 
The hour for the extinction of lights had not yet struck , and one could see several lights and figures on the ships ; the sailors reclining on the upper decks were chatting before retiring to rest . 
Occasionally a glance would be cast at a great English steamer anchored in the middle of the harbor , and a sailor would call out , with an exaggeration of the pronunciation : '' All right , '' and a schooner would echo the words , '' All right '' and the cry would be taken up by all the tenders , schooners , and fishing smacks . 
It was a joke upon the English anchored there . 
But it was received with silence ; the great steamer treated it with the phlegmatic , profound contempt that nobody can assume better than a son of Albion . 
The end of the mole was the resort of anybody who wished to enjoy the fresh air . 
It was one of the hottest nights of August . 
Gonzalo , overwhelmed by the heat and the difficulty of his position , walked along with his hat in his hand . 
Before he reached the end of the mole he caught sight of a gigantic figure on the second stage . 
`` I say , uncle , '' he cried . 
The old sailor spent the greater part of his life on that mole in intimate communion with the sea , his old friend and companion . 
The terrible ocean was an open book to him , either sleeping in its immense bed of sand or awakening and lashing the sky furiously with its foam . 
He could accurately forecast its rages , its storms , its smiles , and its profoundest working . 
To him the monster seemed to reveal its liquid heart as to a faithful friend , and told him how it fretted in its granite prison , and how the sight of human wickedness sometimes made it long to rush over the land and submerge this fulsome human ant-hill . 
And the good man , thinking of all the crimes about which he had read , would reply : `` You are right , friend ; in your place it is probable I should feel the same . '' 
Nothing in the world would have induced Don Melchor to forego his morning , afternoon , and evening walks at the end of the mole . 
During his wife 's lifetime , when he was under surveillance , he had to his great vexation been obliged to give up the later walks . 
But now unfortunately , as he had no one to look after him and keep him in hand , he did as he liked . 
Nothing came up to the sea air cure for catarrh . 
When occasionally he had a pain in his inside , he drank a couple of glasses of salt water and he was all right . 
There is no better or simpler medicine than sea water . 
Once he had a bad leg : two ulcers corroded the flesh down to the bone ; and the doctors not only gave the leg up for lost , but despaired of his life . 
In desperation he had himself carried down to the beach and bathed . 
After nine baths the ulcers were cured . 
One can imagine what he thought of the curative efficacy of the sea after that ! 
On the other hand , he had a great objection to rivers . 
The air of a river made him hoarse , the fogs suffocated him , and gave him asthma . 
The `` shut-in '' feeling of the air filled him with aversion and unspeakable dislike . 
Don Melchor slept little ; he rose before sunrise ; and directly he got up he ascended to his observatory , and examined the sky and the sea ; and after drawing out in his head a meteorological map of the coming day , he went down to the end of the mole to corroborate his observations ; ascertained whether the wind was passing , or settled , if it were positively north , or inclined to the east or west , if the weather were going to be good or bad , if the sea would be stormy or calm , how long the weather would remain as it was ; to what quarter the wind would veer at mid-day ; if the sea would then be calm or rough , etc. , etc. . 
He could not take his chocolate until he had made all these observations . 
And really , however this may look like a mania , I think it is less silly than rising from one 's bed to notice if one 's neighbor 's face is clean or dirty , cheerful or sad , if he eats or if he fasts , if he sleeps or if he wakes , if he be idle or industrious , how long he remains at home , and what road he takes when he goes out . 
Gonzalo mounted the upper wall with an irresistible desire to unburden his heart and tell his uncle what had happened , for although his character was little adapted for love confidences , the occasion was important and critical . 
Don Melchor , who walked a little bent under the weight of years , straightened himself at the sight of a man approaching , for he was anxious to hide all signs of weakness from the world , and he liked to be thought a stalwart fellow . 
`` Is that you , Gonzalo ? '' 
`` It is I , uncle . '' 
`` That is a wonder ! 
For you like seeing billiard balls roll better than waves . '' 
`` No ; I have not played billiards to-day . 
But I am worried and upset , and I want to speak to you about an important matter ; in fact I want your advice . '' 
Don Melchor looked at him in surprise . 
`` An important matter ? '' 
`` Yes -- look here , uncle ; would you marry a woman you did not love ? '' 
`` What a question ! 
Matrimony at my age is a thing of the past , my boy . '' 
`` But if you were young , would you marry like that ? '' 
`` Never . '' 
`` Very well , uncle -- I do not love Cecilia . '' 
`` You do not love Cecilia ? '' 
exclaimed the old gentleman in horror . 
It must be said that Don Melchor had a blind affection , almost adoration , for his nephew 's betrothed -- the girl was sacred to him . 
From the time that he knew Gonzalo 's affections were set in that quarter he inspected her as carefully as if he were examining the hulk of a ship before masting her . 
He had considered her kind , quiet , intelligent , and capable , and his delight at the marriage was only embittered by hearing that the engaged couple were not going to live with him . 
He seldom visited Belinchon 's house , but when he met the girl in the street he made a point of stopping her and treating her with exceptional courtesy and attention . 
`` You do not love her ? '' 
he repeated . 
`` And why do n't you love her , you dunderhead ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
I have made superhuman efforts to love her , and I have not succeeded . '' 
`` And you have just found that out -- a month before your marriage ? 
Come , Gonzalo , you have got a screw loose . '' 
`` It is shameful -- I grant it -- but I ca n't resign myself to being unhappy for life . '' 
`` Unhappy ! 
And you call it unhappiness , you great fool , to marry the nicest and prettiest girl in Sarrio , for no other can hold a candle to her . '' 
Gonzalo could not forbear smiling . 
`` Cecilia is a good girl , and worthy of marrying a better man than I am , but pretty , uncle -- '' `` Pretty , yes , pretty , you fool ! '' 
exclaimed the Señor de las Cuevas in a rage ; `` you would find fault with an angel . '' 
Surprising as the statement may be , the old man was at that time of life when one is more impressed by the poetry of womanhood , seen in exquisite sensibility , resignation , sweetness , and self-sacrifice , than by the ephemeral physical charms before which impetuous youth is so prone to fall captive . 
`` Do not let us quarrel about it . '' 
`` But we will quarrel about it -- I wo n't have Cecilia spoken of like that -- so there ! '' 
`` All right ; then I 'll say that Cecilia is a very pretty girl -- but -- '' `` But what ? '' 
`` But I can not love her , because I love another . '' 
`` What thousand deviltries are you saying now , boy ? '' 
returned Don Melchor , taking his nephew by the arm and shaking him . 
`` I can not help it , uncle . 
I am madly in love with her sister , Venturita . '' 
`` Are you in your senses or out of them , you madman ? '' 
`` I am speaking seriously -- I love her , and she loves me . '' 
`` And you think that this is all there is to be said ? '' 
said the old man , getting more and more angry . 
`` Do you think a solemn promise can be broken in that way ? 
Do you think a girl can be made the laughing-stock of a place like this ? 
Do you think any parents will tolerate such infamous conduct ? '' 
`` Uncle , '' returned Gonzalo quietly , `` before daring to tell you this , things have occurred which have made me take this step . 
My position with Venturita is an established fact ; her mother knows it , and has authorized it , and by this time her father has also been made acquainted with the circumstances . '' 
`` And will give his consent ? '' 
`` I am sure he will . '' 
Don Melchor dropped his nephew 's arm , and raised his hand to his forehead . 
It was some time before he could speak . 
At last he said in slow and melancholy tones : `` All right . 
I am powerless to prevent this disgrace -- for it is a disgrace , '' he added forcibly . 
`` You are of age , and even if you were not I would have nothing to do with such a business . '' 
`` Are you angry ? '' 
`` There is no use being angry . 
I am only very sorry . 
I am sorry for her , for I am very fond of her -- and I am still more sorry for you , Gonzalo . 
God can not help the man who breaks his word . 
You were on a safe ship , well built of white , seasoned wood , with the flats well lined , straight strong masts , and bright and smart rigging ; and you leave that to embark in a craft that is prettier and showier . 
You are making a fine experiment , but take heed , lad , the journey is long , the sea wide and wild ; when all the calm and beauty of the present becomes a scene of storm , when the soft winds rise to a hurricane , matters become serious , and pretty decorations and designs are of no avail where timber -- good strong timber -- is required . 
Give me good timber and I will take you for miles . 
It is not much good for a ship to leave a port well dressed if her hulk is not equal to her get up . 
You know that I liked Cecilia -- I am very sorry that I can not say the same of her sister . 
And this is not speaking against her ; I do not know her well enough to do that , neither do I feel inclined to , but I can and I ought to tell you my sentiments although you disregard them . '' 
`` Oh , uncle ! '' 
`` It does not matter , my boy ; when a lad 's mind is set upon anything , full sail must be set and he must go before the wind . 
Everything looks ship-shape -- but foul weather comes , and I tell you , you are not navigating your ship well , you are not behaving like a gentleman . '' 
`` Uncle ! '' 
`` The facts speak for themselves . 
Even if you have got over her parents , and overcome all difficulties , you ca n't make black white , and make a bad action good . 
Heave the anchor and unfurl the sails . 
I am old , and I hope I shall not live to see the storms overtake you . 
But if it be God 's will to punish me thus , if for my sins I have to see you shipping water with bare masts , I shall feel , my boy , that it is beyond my power to help you . '' 
At these last words the voice of the old man shook ; Gonzalo 's heart strings tightened . 
For some time they were both silent ; and then Don Melchor said : `` Come along to supper , Gonzalo . '' 
`` I am not hungry now , '' returned the young man , `` but I will come presently . '' 
`` Very well . 
