And at these words , uttered in an angry tone , her eyes flamed with rage , and she gave a violent pull at her hand to release it . 
But this Gonzalo did not allow , and kissing it passionately several times , he said , laughing : `` But , my girl , do n't be angry with me , who have done nothing . 
If I admire you , it is just because you are so hot-tempered . 
I do n't like women who are milk-and-watery . '' 
`` Because you are so yourself , '' she replied , now calm and smiling . 
`` Do n't believe it . 
I am not so milk-and-watery as you think . 
When I am angry , I am so indeed . '' 
`` Bah ! 
Once a year ! '' 
`` Well , as I am so , I ought to like quiet , sweet-tempered women . '' 
`` You make a mistake ; one always likes one 's contrast . 
Fair people like dark people , thin people fat , tall people short . 
Do n't I suit you because you are so tall and I so small ? '' 
`` Not only for that , '' he said , laughing and drawing her toward him . 
`` Why , then ? '' 
she asked , giving him a mocking glance . 
`` Do n't you know ? 
Shall I whisper it to you ? '' 
`` Why ? '' 
she insisted , keeping her eyes upon him . 
`` Because you are so very ugly . '' 
`` Thank you , '' she returned , with her face bright with gratified vanity . 
`` There is no one uglier than you in Sarrio ; not in the whole world . '' 
`` You have seen uglier in the countries where you have been . '' 
`` I assure you , no . '' 
`` Holy Mother of Amparo ! 
Then I must be a monster , '' she cried , accepting the flattering hyperbole of the words . 
`` Somebody is coming ! '' 
said Gonzalo , suddenly turning grave . 
Venturita went to the door . 
`` It is only the cook passing , '' she said , turning back into the room . 
`` I think we are in danger here . 
Suppose your mother or one of the girls came in -- or Cecilia '' -LRB- he added in a low voice -RRB- -- `` what excuse could we give ? '' 
`` Something or other ; that 's a slight matter . 
But if you are nervous , we can go elsewhere . '' 
`` Let us go to the drawing-room . '' 
`` No , no ; wait a moment . 
I will go first . '' 
Then stopping at the door , and turning back , she said : `` If you give me your word to be good , I will take you to my room . '' 
`` On my word of honor , '' replied the young man with delight . 
`` No caresses ? '' 
`` None . '' 
`` Swear it . '' 
`` I swear . '' 
`` Very well ; stop here a minute , and then come on tiptoe . 
Till we meet again ! '' 
`` Till we meet again ! '' 
said Gonzalo , taking one of her hands and kissing it . 
`` I see what it is , '' she said , pretending to be angry ; `` before you come you begin to break your word . '' 
`` I did not think that your hands were included in the promise . '' 
`` Above all things , '' she said , with severity in her tone and a smile in her eyes . 
At the end of two minutes the youth followed her , found the door ajar , and entered . 
Venturita 's room was like its mistress , small , pretty , and seductive . 
There was a sandalwood bedstead hung with brocaded silk hangings and covered with a blue silk coverlet ; an ebony cabinet inlaid with ivory , which formed a desk when opened ; a comfortable blue velvet armchair ; a toilet table and looking-glass , also hung with silk ; a mirrored wardrobe of sandalwood , like the bedstead ; and a few gilt chairs completed the furniture ; and the room was as redolent of sweet perfume as the sanctum of an odalisque . 
`` Oh , this is better than Cecilia 's room ! '' 
said Gonzalo . 
`` When did you see that ? '' 
asked Venturita . 
`` A few days ago she showed it to me ; bare walls , with a few second-rate pictures , a curtainless bed , a common wardrobe . '' 
`` Well , if she does n't have it as I do , it is because she does n't care to . 
I certainly had to get around papa at first . 
But my sister is so -- well , she is as God made her . 
It is all alike to her . 
Everything pleases a commonplace person , does n't it ? '' 
`` In this room there is so much taste and so much coquetry , and that there always is about you . '' 
`` Why do you accuse me of coquetry , you silly ? '' 
she asked , in her old mocking tone . 
`` Because it is true , and quite right so . 
Coquetry , when not excessive , adds attraction to beauty as spice adds flavor to food . '' 
`` And so I suit your taste ! 
Well , look here ; although coquetry may give attraction , or flavor , or what you like , I am not coquettish . 
You at least have no right to say so . 
I say -- it seems to me -- '' `` It is true ; you are right ; you are quite right . 
I can not call you coquettish , because the coquetry I was speaking of is quite different . '' 
`` Do me the favor to sit down , for I think you have grown enough -- and let us leave abstract questions . '' 
Gonzalo dropped into the chair the girl offered him , still under the spell of her brilliant , mischievous eyes . 
From the minute he entered the room he experienced a delight , half physical , half spiritual , which dominated his senses and his spirit . 
The perfume that he inhaled mounted to his brain , and the magnetic glance of Venturita hypnotized him . 
`` You did wrong in bringing me to your room , '' he said , as he passed his handkerchief over his forehead . 
`` Why ? '' 
she asked , opening and shutting her eyes several times , which were like stars at the close of a hot day in summer . 
`` Because I do n't feel well , '' he returned , with the same smile . 
`` You really feel ill ? '' 
replied the girl , opening her eyes wide with an innocent expression . 
`` A little . '' 
`` Shall I call some one ? '' 
`` No ; it is your eyes that hurt me . '' 
`` Oh , come ! '' 
she exclaimed , with a laugh , as if that were of no consequence ; `` then I will shut them . '' 
`` Oh , no ; do n't shut them , or I shall be much worse . '' 
`` Then I will go , '' she said , rising from her chair . 
`` That would kill me , my girl ! 
Do you know why I am ill ? 
It is because it kills me not to be able to kiss your eyes . '' 
`` Goodness ! '' 
exclaimed Venturita , with a burst of laughter . 
`` How bad it must be ! 
I am sorry not to be able to cure you . '' 
`` Will you let me die ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Thank you . 
Let me kiss your hair , then . '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Your hands . '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Let me kiss something of yours . 
See , you are doing me a lot of harm . '' 
`` Kiss this glove , '' said the girl , laughing , and taking one from the toilet table . 
Gonzalo seized it , and kissed it passionately several times . 
The reader , who may have denounced Gonzalo in his heart as a disloyal , perfidious fellow , or at least weak , and maybe deserving the appellation of `` a disagreeable character , '' as the critics say when the people in novels are not all as heroic and as clever as might be wished , must imagine himself in that little nest , as full of perfume as the chalice of a magnolia , with the youngest daughter of the Belinchons , dressed in a blue-ribboned peignoir , revealing a good part of her neck , like roses and milk , with her shining blue eyes on him , and a soft , melodious voice that moved his very soul , and if the girl gave him a glove , saying `` kiss it , '' he must think whether he could refrain from doing so . 
`` You must calm yourself , Gonzalo , '' she said , with a smile that would have bewitched St. Anthony . 
`` Yes , yes . '' 
`` Very well . 
Now we must talk seriously and review the situation . '' 
Gonzalo became grave . 
`` After what you said to me three days ago I did think that before now you would have said something to mama , or papa , or that you would have written . 
But no ; you not only let the time slip by , so that things get worse every day , but I see that you are more affectionate and attentive to Cecilia than ever . '' 
Gonzalo made a negative gesture . 
`` Yes ; I saw you a moment ago through the keyhole of the room . 
Nothing escapes me . 
Now this is very bad if you do n't love her ; and if you do love her , it is treating me badly . '' 
`` Are you not yet sure that you alone possess my heart ? '' 
said the young man , raising his eyes toward her . 
`` No . '' 
`` Then yes , yes ; a thousand times yes . 
But I can not treat Cecilia in a cold , indifferent manner . 
That would be very ugly . 
I prefer to tell her plainly and end the matter once for all . '' 
`` Then tell her . '' 
`` I do not dare . '' 
`` Then do n't tell her , and you and I will have done with each other . 
Better so , '' returned the girl with impatience . 
`` For God 's sake , do n't speak like that , Ventura ! 
I shall think you do n't love me . 
You must understand that my position is awkward , strange , and terrible . 
To be on the eve of marrying an excellent girl ; then without any quarrel whatever , without any warning of any kind , to suddenly say to her : ` It is all over . 
I can not marry you because I do not love you , and I never have loved you , ' is the most brutal and hateful thing that has ever been known . 
Besides , I do n't know how your parents will take my behavior . 
It is most probable that , justly indignant on her behalf , they will load me with reproaches and forbid me the house . '' 
`` Very well ; marry her -- and go in peace ! '' 
said Venturita , turning somewhat pale . 
`` That I 'll never do . 
I marry you , or nobody . '' 
`` Then what are we to do ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' returned the youth , hanging his head in distress . 
Both remained silent for some seconds . 
Then Venturita , placing her hand on his head , said : `` Think it over , man ; think it over . '' 
`` I do , but with no result . '' 
`` You ca n't manage it . 
Come , then ; go along , and leave it to me . 
I will speak to mama ; but you must write a letter to Cecilia . '' 
`` Oh , my God ! 
Ventura ! '' 
he exclaimed , full of anguish . 
`` Then what do you want -- say ? '' 
asked the girl , now in a rage . 
`` Do you think I am going to be made a plaything of ? '' 
`` If we could only manage without this letter , '' returned Gonzalo humbly . 
`` You ca n't imagine the effort it will be for me . 
Would it not do if I left off coming to the house for some days ? '' 
`` Yes , yes ; be off and do n't come back ! '' 
she replied , taking a step to the door . 
But the youth caught her by the tresses of her hair . 
`` Come , do n't be cross , beautiful one ; you well know that you have completely conquered and fascinated me , and that I will obey your every command , even to casting myself into the sea . 
I only told you my opinion -- if you do n't like it , I have nothing more to say . 
I only want to avoid hurting Cecilia . '' 
`` It is like your conceit ! '' 
exclaimed the girl , without turning round . 
`` Do you think Cecilia is going to die of grief ? '' 
`` If she is not hurt , so much the better , and I shall be saved remorse . '' 
`` Cecilia is cold ; she can not love or hate much . 
She is very good , and does not know what selfishness is ; but you will always find her the same , neither happy nor sad . 
She is incapable of either giving or taking offense ; at least , if she does take it , nobody knows it . 
What are you doing ? '' 
she added , turning round quickly . 
`` I am untying the ribbons of your tresses . 
I want to see your hair loose again . 
No sight gives me more pleasure . '' 
`` If that is your fancy , I will undo them . 
Stop , '' said the girl , who had reason to be proud of her hair . 
`` Oh , how beautiful ! 
It is a marvel of nature ! '' 
exclaimed Gonzalo , putting his fingers in it . 
`` Let me bury my face in it ; let me bathe in this river of gold . '' 
And so saying , he hid his face in the fair locks of the girl . 
But it happened that a few minutes earlier , as the clock struck seven , the seamstress and the embroideresses had left off their work and prepared to leave . 
Before doing so Valentina was commissioned by Doña Paula to go to Venturita 's room to fetch thence some patterns on the wardrobe . 
So she pushed open the door at the critical moment in which Gonzalo was bathing his face in that original manner . 
On hearing the sound he rose suddenly and stood , paler than wax . 
Valentina blushed up to her eyes , and said stammeringly : `` Your mother wants the patterns , those of the other day ; they ought to be on the wardrobe . '' 
`` They are not on the wardrobe , but inside it , '' returned Venturita , without any confusion whatsoever . 
And turning to the wardrobe , the girl opened a drawer and drew out a paper parcel , which she gave her . 
`` Stop a moment , Valentina , '' said Venturita before she left the room ; `` be so kind as to tie my hair , for I can not do it with this bad finger . '' 
Then she showed that her finger was bleeding , for she had managed to scratch it when getting the patterns out . 
Valentina , still quite taken aback , proceeded to tie the ribbon . 
`` Yes , my hair hurt me , and on untying the ribbon I scratched it with the pin which fastened the bow . 
Poor Gonzalo could not manage to do it very well , eh ? '' 
she added , with a laugh . 
`` Oh , no ! '' 
said the youth with a forced smile , amazed at her calmness . 
The excuse , well conceived as it was , did not deceive Valentina , who was quite certain of what she had seen . 
`` Do you think she was taken in by that story of the scratch ? '' 
anxiously asked Gonzalo when the girl had left the room . 
`` Perhaps not , but I do n't mind her ; she is the most stupid of the lot . '' 
Valentina took the patterns to her mistress , and then started to go home until the following day . 
On crossing the hall she distinctly heard the sound of a kiss , and on looking in its direction , toward the dark room , she caught sight of the black and white checks of Nieves 's dress . 
`` So this is the way the wind blows , is it ? '' 
she murmured , with that particular little frown that characterized her . 
Then she descended the staircase and passed into the street , where Cosme was waiting to escort her home . 
The 9th of June , 1860 , ought to be recorded in letters of gold in the annals of the town of Sarrio , for Don Rosendo , supported by Alvaro Peña and his son Pablo , appointed the afternoon of that day to meet at the theatre for the discussion of a subject of vital -LRB- Don Rosendo would not for the world have omitted the word `` vital '' -RRB- interest to the town of Sarrio and its suburbs . 
Only four or five of the most intimate friends of the merchant were acquainted with the noble and patriotic project which had prompted the invitation ; so , drawn by curiosity as much as by courtesy , those who had been asked arrived at three o'clock precisely , and many came to the meeting who had not received an invitation . 
The theatre was packed quite full . 
The patrician townsfolk took possession of the boxes and stalls , while the plebeians repaired to the gallery . 
On the stage there was a writing-table , old and dirty , and round it were placed half a dozen chairs , neither new nor clean , for they served as furniture for any `` poorly furnished rooms '' in a play . 
The stage was still empty , although the theatre was full , and the whole house was almost in darkness , for what little light there was came through the dusty panes of a window at the back of the stage . 
In time one 's eyes became accustomed to the gloom , and one could distinguish the people as they entered and proceeded cautiously along the line of boxes , so as to avoid knocking against anybody , touching the craniums of the occupants , in their search for vacant seats . 
`` There is no room here , Don Rufo . '' 
`` Is there no place ? '' 
asked the medical man with the vacant smile of the blind . 
`` No ; go up to the stage boxes . '' 
`` Come here , Don Rufo ; come here , '' cried some one in the front . 
`` Is that you , Cipriano ? '' 
And after more pushing and struggling the newcomer managed to get settled . 
One arrival , more wide-awake than the others , lighted a wax taper , but instantly there arose voices from the gallery : `` Eh , eh ! 
Cat 's eyes , Don Juan ! 
When you go at night to Peonza 's house you do n't have a taper then . '' 
Don Juan hastened to extinguish it , to avoid the insults and shouts of laughter leveled at him by the idle crowd . 
As time went on the hum of conversation grew deafening . 
The patronizers of the gallery expressed their impatience by stamps , cries , and shouts , while exchanging with each other , over the heads of the occupants of the stalls , jokes and remarks which were coarse in the extreme . 
It was a good thing that there were no ladies present . 
At last four gentlemen appeared on the stage -- Don Rosendo Belinchon , Alvaro Peña , Don Feliciano Gomez , and Don Rudesindo Cepeda , proprietor of the finest cider distillery . 
The four men took off their hats as they assembled on the stage . 
Silence suddenly reigned . 
Some of the audience -- the minority -- also took off their hats ; the majority , more veiled in darkness , and more inclined to discourtesy , so prevalent in the gallery , remained covered . 
Don Rosendo and his friends smiled shamefacedly at the audience , and , to overcome the oppressive feeling of nervousness and embarrassment , they began talking to the occupants of the front row of stalls who were within sight . 
Alvaro Peña , more courageous by dint of his military experience , advanced to the front of the stage , and , giving an exaggeratedly familiar tone to his remarks , and aimlessly smiling like a ballet girl , said : `` Señores , my coadjutors are as anxious as myself for all persons of note in the audience to come up here , so that they may assist us with their support , eh ? 
and with their knowledge , eh ? 
-- in short , that they may second us in the enterprise about to be inaugurated . '' 
The harbor-master pronounced his r 's very much like j 's . 
The modesty conveyed by this suggestion was received with a murmur of applause from the assembly . 
`` Is not Don Pedro Miranda here ? '' 
asked Peña , now at his ease , and resuming the despotic military air peculiar to him . 
`` Here he is -- here ! '' 
cried several voices . 
Don Pedro , however , remonstrated with those who pushed him toward the stage . 
`` But , señores , why ? 
What is the object ? 
There are other people . '' 
But there was no help for it . 
He was gradually pushed to the stage , and as there were no steps by which to climb , Peña and Don Feliciano Gomez pulled him up by the hands on to the boards . 
`` Now , Don Rufo , come up . '' 
Don Rufo , the chief doctor of the town , after protesting a little , was also pulled up in the same way . 
And by the same simple means five or six more gentlemen arrived upon the stage . 
Each ascent was greeted with loud applause and a murmur of delight from the friendly gathering . 
The officer then seeing Gabino Maza seated in a chair by the wall , cried out cheerfully : `` Gabino , I did not see you ! 
Come , man ; come along . '' 
`` I am very well here , '' cried the huffy ex-officer of the navy , dryly . 
`` Shall I come down for you ? '' 
Maza returned in a loud voice : `` There is no need . '' 
`` Come , Don Gabino , go up . 
Do n't be idle . 
Men like you ought to be there . 
There is only you now to go up ! '' 
And at the same time they tried to push him on . 
But all entreaties were in vain . 
Maza was as determined to remain in the box as the others were that he should leave it . 
Then Alvaro Peña came down after him , but after a long altercation he was obliged to retire defeated . 
The stage was now almost full . 
More chairs were brought from the actors ' dressing-rooms , the most aristocratic residents of Sarrio took their seats , and then ensued a consultation to decide who was to be the chairman of the meeting . 
In this there seemed to be some difficulty in coming to an agreement , and the public gave signs of impatience . 
The majority was of opinion that the honor of sitting behind the pine-wood table was due to Don Rosendo , but he declined it with a modesty much redounding to his credit . 
At last , however , he took the chair , as he saw the public was getting tired ; the applause was tremendous . 
Fresh and wearisome discussion ensued as to who was to open the meeting . 
Alvaro Peña , a man of impulse and action , finally took a few steps toward the curtain ; and said in a loud voice : `` Gentlemen . '' 
`` Sh ! 
Sh ! 
Silence ! '' 
cried several voices , and silence reigned . 
`` Gentlemen , the object of this meeting is no other , eh ? 
than for us to unite in the support of the material and moral interests of Sarrio . 
Some days ago our most worthy president informed me that they were deteriorating , eh ? 
and that it was necessary to support them at all costs . 
Gentlemen , there are many questions at issue in Sarrio at this critical time -- the question of the covered market , the question of the cemetery , the question of the road to Rodillero , the question of the slaughter-house , and many others ; and I said to my worthy friend , the only means of solving these problems was to call a meeting at which all the Sarrienses could freely give their opinions . '' 
`` What ? '' 
cried a sharp voice from the gallery . 
Peña darted an angry look in the direction of the sound , and as he was known to be a violent man , and had great , fierce mustachios , the fellow trembled in his skin , and did not venture to make a second ejaculation . 
`` My good friend , whose large heart and love of progress is known to all , said to me some time ago that he was of the same opinion , and that , moreover , he had a plan that he was anxious to lay before this illustrious assembly . 
Therefore we have called our friends of Sarrio to a public meeting , and here we are -- because we have come . '' 
This collapse produced an excellent effect on the audience , who laughed and clapped their hands good-naturedly . 
`` Gentlemen , '' continued the captain , encouraged by the sound of merriment , `` I believe that what this place requires is to be roused from its state of lethargy to the life of reason and progress , eh ? 
-- to rise to the height of the progress of the century , to take stock of itself and its powers . 
Hitherto Sarrio has been a town under the sway of theocracy ; plenty of nones , sermons , and rosaries , and no thought of the advance of its interests and the knowledge of anything useful . 
We must get out of this state , eh ? 
-- we must shake off the theocratic yoke . 
A place governed by priests is always a backward and a squalid place . '' 
-LRB- Laughter and applause , mingled with hisses . -RRB- 
The officer spoke better at the conclusion of his speech , and even acquired a certain aplomb during his denunciation of priestcraft . 
`` May I be allowed to say a word ? '' 
cried a clear voice from a box . 
`` Who is it ? 
Who is it ? '' 
asked the audience and the dignitaries of the stage of one another . 
`` It is Perinolo 's son . '' 
`` Who ? '' 
`` Perinolo 's son . 
Perinolo 's son . '' 
These words were repeated in a low tone all over the theatre . 
Perinolo 's son was a pale youth with large , prominent eyes . 
Nothing else was visible in the semi-darkness of the place , which was fortunate for him , for a good light would have revealed the crumpled front of his shirt and the disheveled locks of his hair , and the holes in his boots and his threadbare trousers would have been seen through the balustrade of the box . 
But all the people of Sarrio knew him from meeting him constantly in the street or at the cafés . 
I must say that , in spite of his appearance , he was a lad of gentle mien and disposition . 
His father , Señor Maria el Perinolo , the boot-maker in the town , was quite an institution . 
He was one of the few old artisans who in the middle of the century still retained the jacket and large hat of former times . 
He was a Carlist fanatic , a member of all the religious confraternities ; he told his beads in the afternoon as the bell from the Church of St. Andrew rang for prayer ; accompanied by several womenfolk , he joined in the processions of Holy Week with its disciplinary garb and a crown of thorns , and he had under his care the Chapel of the Nazarene , in the Calle de Atras . 
This poor saint , who had never given anybody cause to speak against him -LRB- supreme testimony of honesty among the lower classes -RRB- , brought up his own son , Sinforoso , and two others in the holy fear of God , and the strap , scourgings , penances on his knees , days on bread and water , ear-pullings , and blows , constituted the tender memories of Sinforoso 's childhood . 
As he grew from boyhood and youth he showed signs of having profited by his father 's teaching . 
Perinolo made up his mind that the lad 's vocation was not in the direction of boot-making , but of becoming a pillar of the Romish Church . 
Means , were , however , wanting to send him to the seminary at Lancia , so Don Melchor de las Cuevas , Don Rudesindo , and the parish priest spontaneously came to his assistance , and allowed the lad three pesetas a day until he could intone the mass . 
But at the end of the second year of theology these gentlemen received from the seminarist an elegantly expressed letter in which he stated that he did not feel called by God to an ecclesiastical career , and that rather than be a bad priest he would learn his father 's business , or go to America ; and it ended by entreating in fervent terms that he might be allowed to exchange theology for the law , for which he had a predilection , so as to modify the disappointment of his father . 
His benefactors acceded to the request , and Sinforoso finally became a pillar of the state instead of the church , as Perinolo had wished . 
While pursuing his studies with marks of commendation from the beginning to the close , he contributed several articles to the daily papers , by which achievement he considered himself entitled to let his hair grow and wear eye-glasses . 
So that the licentiate returned to Sarrio with an aureole of glory befitting one who had won his spurs and still waged war in the press of the day . 
He attached himself to the most advanced Liberal party , which alienated him from his people . 
His father was greatly enraged with him , and it was only through his mother 's intercession that he let him remain in the house . 
He never spoke to him or gave him a centime for his expenses , but merely let him sleep under his roof and partake of their scanty fare . 
At the end of a few months the youth 's boots became shabby , and his clothes looked wretched ; but the man of letters carried it off by the reserve and gravity of his physiognomy and the self-importance of his deportment . 
He spent the morning reading in bed , and the afternoon and evening in loud discussions at the café of what he read in the morning . 
The townfolk did not like him , but they respected his talents and dignity . 
`` Who asked permission to speak ? '' 
queried Don Rosendo . 
`` Suarez -- Sinforoso Suarez , '' said the youth , bending over the rail . 
`` Then you have it , Señor Suarez . '' 
The young man coughed , ran the fingers of both hands through his hair , leaving it rougher and more tumbled than ever , put on his glasses that he wore hanging by a string , and said : `` Gentlemen . '' 
The quiet , impressive tone with which he said this word , the long pause that followed it , during which he fixed his glasses on his nose and looked at the audience in a superior way , inspired silence and attention . 
`` After the brilliant speech which has just been given us by Señor Peña , my respected friend , the illustrious harbor-master of this port -LSB- the captain , who had never spoken to Suarez more than three times in his life , bowed graciously -RSB- , the assembly is quite convinced of the generous and patriotic feelings which prompted the promoters of this meeting . 
There is nothing so beautiful , nothing so grand , nothing so sublime as to see a town met together to discuss the dearest , highest interests of life . 
`` Ah , gentlemen , when listening just now to Señor Peña I imagined myself in the Agora of Athens , a free citizen , with other citizens , free as myself , discussing the destiny of my country ; I imagined I heard the ardent , eloquent words of one of those great orators who adorned the Hellenic State . 
Why , the eloquence of my dear friend , Señor Peña , was like the overwhelming passion that characterized Demosthenes , the prince of orators , and like the fluency and elegance that distinguished the discourses of Pericles . 
-LSB- Pause , with his hand to his glasses . -RSB- 
He was bright and animated , like Cleon ; deliberate and temperate , like Aristides ; his intonation was quiet and precise , like that of Esquines , and his voice was pleasant to the ear , like that of Isocrates . 
`` Ah , gentlemen , I , like the eloquent orator who has preceded me on the subject , desire that the place which gave me birth may awake to the life of progress , to the life of liberty and justice . 
Sarrio ! 
What sweet recollections , what ineffable happiness does this single word awaken in my soul ! 
Here were passed the days of my childhood . 
Here my mind began to form . 
Here love made my heart palpitate for the first time . 
Elsewhere my mind has been enriched by the knowledge of science , and the grand ideas engendered by the study of law ; here my soul has been nourished by the sweet and holy feelings of the hearth . 
Elsewhere my intelligence has been sharpened by polemics and the light of ideas ; here my affections have been fostered by tender family love . 
`` Gentlemen , I will say it again , come what may , Sarrio is called to a great destiny . 
It has a right to be one of the first towns on the Biscayan coast , an emporium of activity and riches , by reason of the excellent position which nature has given it , a harbor second to none , as well as the integrity , industry , and the great gift of intelligence of its inhabitants . '' 
-LSB- Bravo ! 
Bravo ! 
Unanimous and loud applause . -RSB- 
The silence , caused more by surprise than any bad feeling , was now broken , and the `` bravos '' and applause continued without intermission . 
Never had the industrious , honest , intelligent people of Sarrio heard any one speak so fluently and eloquently before . 
`` That discourse was a revelation of the modern parliamentary style ! '' 
So Alvaro Peña said when the meeting was over . 
The speech continued half an hour longer , amid the increasing enthusiasm of the audience , when one of the notabilities on the platform thought that his throat must be dry , and that it was time to give him a glass of sugared water . 
The idea was communicated in an undertone to the president , who interrupted the orator with the remark : `` If Señor Suarez is fatigued , he can rest . 
I am going to have a glass of water sent him . '' 
These words were received with a murmur of approval . 
`` I am not tired , Señor President , '' the orator replied gently . 
-LSB- Yes , yes ; rest . 
Make him rest . 
Let him have a glass of water . 
He will hurt himself . 
Let him have a few drops of anise . -RSB- 
The audience , suddenly inspired with tender sympathy , manifested quite a maternal solicitude for Perinolo 's son , who , inflated with delight , smiled on the audience and continued : `` Fatigue is fitting for valiant soldiers . 
Those who , like myself , are accustomed to the tribune -LSB- he had spoken a few times in the Academy of Jurisprudence in Lancia -RSB- , do not easily become fatigued . '' 
We must now say that Mechacar , a shoemaker , a neighbor , and a rival of many years ' standing of Señor José Maria Perinolo , who had known Sinforoso from his birth , and had often given him two or three beatings with the strap , when on his return from school he annoyed him by calling him by some contemptuous nickname , was in the gallery with his hands resting on the rail , and his face , alert and attentive , on his hands . 
No enthusiasm shone in those eyes under the lowering brows , as in those of the others ; but envy , hatred , and malice were visible on the countenance . 
When the honeyed words of his rival fell upon his ears he felt powerless to stand the farce , and he called out in a rage : `` Stop that rubbish , you fool ! '' 
-LSB- Indescribable indignation of the audience . 
All eyes were turned to the gallery . 
Voices were heard saying : -RSB- `` Who is this brawler ? 
To the prison with him ! 
Out with the fool ! '' 
The president asked with terrible severity : `` Are we in a civilized town , or among Hottentots ? '' 
The question thus formulated produced a profound impression upon the audience . 
Suarez , slightly pale , and in an agitated voice , finally said : `` If the meeting desire it , I am ready to sit down . '' 
-LSB- No , no . 
Go on ! 
Loud and prolonged applause for the orator . -RSB- 
The indignation against the rude disturber increased to such a degree that sounds of threats were audible , and several shook their fists in the direction whence the voice had proceeded . 
Alvaro Peña , the Greek orator , more indignant than anybody , finally went up to the gallery and put Mechacar out of the theatre by force , amid the applause of the public . 
The storm abated , the orator continued . 
He made a wide digression through the fields of history to prove that from the Roman conquest , when Spain was divided into citerior and ulterior Hispania , and afterward into Tarraco , Betica , and Lusitania , and so on down to the present day , the Sarrienses had on all occasions given proof of a powerful intellect , very superior to that of the people of Nieva . 
Such assertions were received with great signs of approval . 
Then suddenly passing into the region of law , he gently touched upon branches of knowledge that are not common , particularly in Sarrio -- the science of Tribonianus and Papinianus . 
On arriving at a certain point he said , with a modesty that did him credit : `` What I have just observed , señor , has no scientific value whatsoever . 
Every boy and girl knows it who has made the acquaintance of the pandectas . '' 
Don Jeronimo de la Fuente , a schoolmaster of the town who had studied the modern methods of pedagogics , and knew something of Froebel and Pestalozzi , a celebrated man who had written a primer on irregular verbs and kept a telescope at his window always turned toward the heavens , now rose from his seat and said : `` Corporal punishment has been stopped in the schools for some years . '' 
`` I did not say ` palmetas ' -LSB- blows -RSB- ; I said ` pan-dec-tas ' '' -LSB- digest of law -RSB- , returned Suarez , smiling with some vexation . 
Don Jeronimo was angry at having made such a mistake . 
The orator continued , and finally resumed his seat , saying , like the eloquent officer who had preceded him , that Sarrio must awake to the life of progress ; that she must arise from the lethargy in which she lay , and that she must take part in the struggle of ideas , which are always fruitful ; and that she must let the radiant sun of civilization rise on her horizon . 
`` If it be true , as I have heard , that , thanks to the patriotic and generous initiative of a most worthy citizen of this town , the Fourth Estate of modern powers is about to celebrate its advent here ; if , in fact , Sarrio will be presented with a periodical which will reflect her legitimate aspirations , let it be the palladium for the exercise of her intelligence , the promoter of her dearest interests , the advanced protector of her tranquillity and peace , the organ , in short , by which she may have communion with the intellectual world . 
Let us congratulate ourselves with all our hearts , and let us also congratulate the illustrious patrician whose efforts will bring to us a ray of this luminous star of the nineteenth century which is called the press . '' 
-LSB- Bravo , bravo ! 
All eyes are turned to the chairman . 
