Cecilia , poor thing , was plainer than when he went away and less attractive . 
How was it possible that she had taken his fancy ? 
Gonzalo had , in fact , to confess to himself that she had never taken his fancy as Venturita certainly now had . 
Why then -- ? 
Well , it was no use asking questions . 
He was only a lad at the time ; he had not been accustomed to seeing ladies ; Cecilia 's kindness had impressed him . 
Then there was a certain satisfaction in being engaged . 
Then the distance which enhances the beauty and increases the value of things . 
In fact , everything had combined to bind him to that girl . 
But , if only he had seen Venturita sooner ! 
It was better not to think of that . 
The affair was too far gone to be retracted . 
Unlike himself , he remained a good quarter of an hour pensively looking at the marble balls without seeing them . 
Don Feliciano had gone . 
At last his healthy , sanguine temperament asserted itself over the ridiculous fancies that threatened to disturb him . 
He rose from his seat , the frown which had momentarily darkened his brow was soon banished by the genial smile which was his particular attraction . 
He shrugged his shoulders with contempt , and that gesture seemed to say : `` I am going to marry the plainer of the De Belinchon girls . 
Well , and what then ? 
In any case it would have been with one or the other , unless I married no one . 
I want to be happy . 
It is not necessary for happiness to come from without ; I have it within , in the even temper God has given me , in the money left me by my parents , in this marvelous health , and in this ox-like strength . '' 
When he returned to the sitting-room , he found that all the habitués had been thrown into great perturbation by the news just brought in by Severino , of the ironmongery shop . 
`` Do n't you know what has happened , sirs ? '' 
They all left their seats and surrounded the store-keeper , who spoke with visible agitation . 
`` Don Laureano was robbed and assassinated last night . '' 
`` What ! 
Don Laureano , who lives in the country house ? '' 
`` Yes ; he of Las Acenas . 
They say that , at half past two , or thereabout , nine masked men entered the house ; they knocked the servant down with sticks , they tied up the señora and the maid-servant , and they killed Don Laureano . 
What they must have made them suffer before they gave up the money ! 
The good man only had twelve thousand reales , and those he had hidden away , but they tortured the women until they made them disclose the hiding-place . '' 
A shudder of horror went through the notabilities of Sarrio . 
They turned as pale as if they had assisted at that fearful scene . 
The house of Las Acenas was a mile from the town , in the solitude of a pine forest , but nobody took that into account ; they imagined themselves assaulted in their houses in la Rua Nueva or de Caborana and cruelly assassinated . 
Oh ! 
what acts of violence ! 
Santo Cristo , what atrocities ! 
The first moments of surprise that elapsed were followed by remarks in low voices . 
The robbers could not be very far off . 
Such a thing had never happened before in Sarrio , or its suburbs , in anybody 's recollection . 
Marin asserted that he had seen some suspicious-looking men about for some days past . 
This news gave rise to an inward panic among the bystanders . 
They all determined not to go out any more at night , but this determination they kept to themselves . 
The mayor said that , in his opinion , the robbers must have come from Castile . 
`` From Castile ? '' 
`` Yes , señor ; from Castile . '' 
`` I have heard my father -LRB- who is now in glory -RRB- say that in the year 1805 , seventeen men , armed , and on horseback , appeared in Sariego . 
They prowled round the place , and finally robbed Don Jose Maria Herrero of seventy thousand crowns that he had hidden under one of the bricks of the hearth . '' 
At any other time , the customers of the café would have said that because such an event had happened in the year five , it did not necessarily imply that the same thing should occur in Las Acenas in the year sixty , but just then no one felt equal to controverting the statement . 
Then they continued to talk of the event of Las Acenas in subdued tones , and they seemed all to concur in the wildest , most extravagant ideas . 
But as Gabino Maza was never known to agree for more than ten minutes together to what was said in his presence , he suddenly seized the opportunity of some very silly remark , made by Don Feliciano Gomez with the perfect naturalness and modesty that characterized the conversation of this distinguished merchant , to pounce upon him in a manner as violent as it was unjustifiable . 
`` What ridiculous thing will you think of next ? 
What is the good of a house-to-house visitation ? 
Do you think you are going to find Don Laureano 's money in a heap there ? '' 
`` If the money is not found , some trace might be discovered . '' 
`` Of what , you dunderhead , of what ? '' 
Then the dispute had full swing . 
The cries and noise were indescribable . 
At last , as usual , nobody could hear anything , nobody could understand anything . 
The voices were perfectly audible over the whole Plaza de la Marina , but the people were so used to it that they did not stop to listen . 
The notables of Sarrio resolved to abstain from setting foot in the street at night , therefore the Club , Graell 's shop-parlor , and even Morana 's , were all deserted at an early hour . 
The five or six locksmiths in the town were given more orders for locks , bolts , iron bars , and patent keys than they could execute . 
The robbers of Las Acenas had not been caught , and every one declared , with more or less authority , that they were still prowling about the place , ready to slip in anywhere at some unexpected minute . 
Nevertheless , as one gets accustomed to everything , even illness , and even to the discussions at the atheneum , they became accustomed to the danger , and again sallied forth of an evening , after taking great precautions to well lock up their houses . 
The first to venture was Marin . 
As all Doña Brigida 's efforts to induce him to retire to rest at a reasonable hour were of no avail , she let him go out without any pity . 
Don Jaime asked permission to carry under the blue military cloak that he wore at night an old , short gun kept in the garret , and the magnanimous señora granted the permission under the condition that he take it unloaded . 
Then Alvaro Peña sallied forth , for having a certain military reputation and being a man of reputed courage , it behooved him to show bravery at such a critical time . 
He carried two saddle pistols in his pockets , and a sword-stick in his hand . 
The mayor , Don Roque , who from time immemorial had repaired to Morana 's with Don Segis , the chaplain of the Augustine convent , and Don Benigno , the curate of the parish , there to imbibe in the course of the evening from four to eight quarterns of Rueda wine , could not put up with the domestic hearth for more than three days ; so he also sallied forth into the town . 
The octogenarian official , Marcones , armed with carbine and sword , accompanied his chief , himself carrying a revolver and a sword-stick . 
Don Melchor , Gabino Maza , Don Pedro Miranda , Delaunay , Don Mateo , and all the others soon followed suit , and repaired to the nocturnal resorts . 
The West Indians held out longer . 
Thus Graell 's parlor , Morana 's , and the Club were transformed into veritable arsenals at nightfall . 
Each one , on his arrival , put his war accoutrements against the wall , and on leaving the places they seized them with an intrepid courage worthy of the Biscayan blood that coursed in the veins of nearly all of them . 
The old-fashioned harquebus stood side by side with the modern repeating rifle , the cylindrical iron sword by the steel bladed modern sword-stick , the heavy bronze pistol by the plated revolver . 
And this diversity of war accoutrements served to sustain the warlike spirit so necessary for the occasion . 
Certain other measures of great utility had been adopted . 
The watchmen had orders not to extinguish any street lamp until twelve o'clock at night . 
They were provided with more powerful whistles than the old ones ; and they had orders to keep their eyes on any stranger passing along the streets at night . 
The townsfolk wisely agreed among themselves not to make way on the sidewalk for anybody , as it might not be a friend , and everybody knows how propitious to criminals the custom of making way on the sidewalk is . 
Full of this idea , Don Pedro Miranda and Don Feliciano Gomez met one night in the Calle de San Florencio . 
They were both muffled up in their cloaks , with their swords unsheathed , prepared for any emergency , when Don Feliciano cried to Don Pedro from afar : `` Well , friend , make way ! '' 
`` Bah ! 
bah ! 
make way yourself , '' returned Don Pedro . 
`` You are the one to make way , '' replied the merchant ; `` make way , make way . '' 
`` Bah , bah , be kind enough to let me pass , '' returned Señor Miranda . 
Neither man budged an inch . 
They unmuffled themselves and unsheathed their swords . 
`` Will you have the kindness ? '' 
`` Will you have the goodness ? '' 
Who knows what awful tragedy might not have taken place in Sarrio at that instant , if they had not recognized each other ? 
`` Does it happen to be Don Feliciano ? '' 
`` Is it Don Pedro ? '' 
`` Don Feliciano ! '' 
`` Don Pedro ! '' 
And rushing to each other , they shook hands with effusion . 
`` What a fate would have been yours had I not recognized you , Don Feliciano ! '' 
exclaimed Señor Miranda , showing his broad iron sword with its bone handle . 
`` And yours would not have been agreeable , Don Pedro ! '' 
returned the merchant , as he made passes in the air with his finely polished Toledo blade . 
One had to go down two steps to enter Morana 's shop . 
The shop was a confectioner 's , although it did not look like it ; it was the only confectioner 's in Sarrio . 
Nowadays there are three , if I am not mistaken . 
I say , it did not look like a confectioner 's , because church tapers , wax hands and feet and bodies for votive offerings were sold there and had gradually become the chief stock in trade instead of a mere supplementary one ; and this was due to the lack of greediness in the town , which speaks very well for it . 
It is usual in Spain for the folk of little villages and towns to be passionately fond of sweets , for want of the pleasures peculiar to great towns , for , say what one may , the pleasures of the table even are not equal in small towns to those of large ones . 
In the first place , clever cooks are not forthcoming , the food has not the variety induced by the laws of biology , and the palate has not risen to the state of culture from a right and just estimate of the culinary science . 
Perhaps it will be remarked : `` But the nuns of St. Augustine used to make sweets . '' 
Yes , but we must remember that this manufacture was limited exclusively to preserves of cherry , quince , pear , and apricot , almond tart and burrage tart , and a particular sweetmeat shaped like fishes ' fins , called orange flower . 
I can only repeat the fact that there are few high livers in Sarrio . 
After all , rare as this abstemiousness may be in towns in the interior , it is common in maritime places , which are known to be less under ecclesiastical sway . 
For observation teaches the visitor of the towns that more sweets are consumed where church services and religious rites absorb the greater part of life , and where enthusiasm for the religious sentiment is evinced in nones , masses , confraternities , and canonries , which shows that there must be some mysterious affinity between mysticism and sweetmeats . 
This branch of Morana 's business was exhibited in the shop by two pine wood cupboards , painted blue , with glass doors at each end of the counter . 
In these cupboards there was a fair show of caramels , spiral cakes , sugar cakes , almond cakes , madeleines , and above all the celebrated tablets , the renown of which must certainly have reached the ears of our readers , as it dates from remotest time . 
The secret of the magic composition of these tablets we have never been able to discover , but their fascination was irresistible , and , strange to say , it was based upon their extraordinary hardness . 
At the age when Morana 's tablets are eaten , the chief thing is not that the sweets should be delicate , savory , and exquisite , but that they should last a long time . 
It was not easy to get the teeth into them at all , but once in this stick-jaw paste , the extrication from it presented a really difficult problem . 
Allow me to offer a delicate tribute of affection and gratitude to these tablets which , from four to eight years of age , constituted the greatest joy of my existence . 
It is perhaps to their sweet influence that the author of this book owes the optimistic spirit which , according to the critics , shines in his works . 
Morana , daughter and successor of another Morana , who was dead , was a woman of forty years of age , of a pallid complexion , with gutta-percha plaisters on her temples for the severe pains in her head . 
She married a Juan Chrysostom , who , according to Don Segis , the chaplain , did not take after his patron saint . 
Nevertheless , when he administered corporal punishment to his wife , he seasoned it with rather a rare amount of learned talk . 
`` I who love this woman , '' he exclaimed , as he commenced operations -- `` I who love this woman like a wife , and not like a servant , according to the Apostle Paul 's command -- you have read the Apostle Saint Paul ? 
-- what right have you to read , you great ass ! '' 
The wine was very good , one can almost say it was the only good thing in the place , and that was because it did not remain long in the bottle , for Don Roque , Don Segis , Don Benigno , Don Juan , `` the old Salt , '' and Señor Anselmo , the cabinet-maker , took care to empty it . 
It was a white wine , strong and superior , and it went to one 's head with alarming facility . 
The customers of the shop left every night between eleven and twelve , rather stumbling in their gaits , but silent and quiet , which prevented any scandal . 
They sallied forth arm in arm , leaning one against the other , and they went along without saying a word , albeit with much puffing and blowing . 
Their instinct , which never completely left them , instigated this prudent behavior , for they knew if they spoke much or little , some dispute would arise and then a scandal would ensue . 
Not a word -- not a word ; it was better even not to whisper -- and when they arrived at their houses , they murmured a gruff `` good-night '' and the one left last was Don Roque , as he lived further away than anybody . 
So these venerable men got intoxicated every night in this solemn , quiet , patriarchal fashion . 
Two of them , Don Juan , `` the old Salt , '' the clerk of the harbor-master , and Don Segis , were reaping the consequences of that course . 
`` The old Salt '' had a nose enough to frighten one . 
When least expected , the hour of retribution came for Don Segis , who , seized with an apoplectic fit , was left with one leg dragging as if a weight of six pounds were tied to it . 
It is true that the insatiable chaplain was not contented with his four quarterns of wine at the confectioner 's ; he made Morana give him a glass of gin in each , which greatly added to the expense ; if he had six quarterns of wine , he had six glasses of gin ; if eight , eight ; and so on . 
The effect of all this gin was evident . 
`` But , Don Segis , how can you drink so much gin at a time ? '' 
`` There is nothing for it , '' he replied in a tone of humility ; `` if I did not take a glass with every quartern , child of my soul , what would become of me ? 
I should be ill . '' 
The conversations at Morana 's were less exciting and thrilling than those of the Club . 
Very few things interested these old parties ; the most important local matters , which excited storms in the Club , were here treated , or rather touched upon , with indifference . 
When the Gonzalezes sent off the captain of the `` Carmen '' and put an Andalusian in his place , they only said in a quiet tone : `` If the Gonzalezes have done so , they had reasons for doing it , '' for they were quite indifferent on the subject . 
`` It is true , '' said another , after some time , raising his glass to his lips . 
`` Ripalda seems a good fellow , '' said a third , after five minutes , as he put his glass down on the counter . 
`` Yes , he seems so , '' replied another gravely . 
Ten minutes passed in meditation . 
The customers gave affectionate kisses to their glasses , which shone like topaz . 
Don Roque at last broke the silence . 
`` There is no manner of doubt that Don Antonio embraced her . '' 
`` Embraced her , '' said Don Juan , `` the Salt . '' 
`` Embraced her , '' echoed Don Benigno . 
`` Embraced her , '' corroborated Señor Anselmo . 
`` Really embraced her , '' added Don Segis in a lugubrious tone . 
Their minds were occasionally exercised on the subject of dovecots . 
Señor Anselmo and Don Benigno were devotedly attached to this pursuit ; each had his dovecot , his doves , and mode of management , and long and lively discussions were held occasionally on the subject . 
The others listened without daring to give an opinion , as they raised their glasses to their lips in solemn silence . 
The crime of Las Acenas horrified them , but it did not cause as great a commotion as in the rest of the neighborhood . 
At the end of five or six days they returned to their patriarchal customs , and such was their bravery that the majority left their arms behind in the shop . 
It was nearer one o'clock than twelve when Don Roque , who had exceeded by three quarterns his usual six , sallied forth with the other five frequenters of the confectioner 's in a serried line to their different homes . 
Marcones closed the file with his gun on his shoulder . 
The first of the line was Don Segis , who lived in a little two-windowed house , close to the Augustine convent ; then came Don Juan `` the Salt , '' then the coadjutor , and finally Señor Anselmo , pulling out the enormous shining key with which he beat time when he conducted the orchestra , and opened the apartment where he slept . 
The mayor remained with his aide-de-camp . 
He said something , but his aide-de-camp did not hear him . 
They directed their steps toward home , which was not far off . 
But before arriving there , Don Roque , who puffed and blew like a whale , and whose walk was unmistakably like the gait of that creature , suddenly stopped and gave a long discourse in a loud voice , of which Marcones caught nothing but the word `` robbers '' repeated several times . 
The official , alarmed , looked all round to see if he could see anybody while loading his gun , but he saw nothing to give him reason to suppose that the villains were at hand . 
Don Roque made another remark , if such a term can be applied to a series of strange , intermittent sounds , both horrible and depressing , but Marcones managed to gather that his chief wished a hunt made in search of the criminals of Las Acenas . 
Marcones thought that the force was hardly equal to the undertaking ; but discipline forbade objections . 
Moreover , he nourished the hope that few murderers cared about taking the fresh air at such an hour . 
So , after a careful examination of their weapons , they took their dangerous course through all the streets and alleys of the town . 
One is in honor bound to state that Don Roque walked in front as the leader of the valorous enterprise , with his revolver in his left hand , and his sword-stick in his right , leaving his noble breast a mark for the enemy 's bullet . 
Marcones , weighed down by the weight of his gun and his eighty-two years of age , walked six steps behind . 
It was a moonlight night , but great black clouds occasionally darkened the sky , and the light of the petroleum lamps burning at the corners of the streets was not sufficient to banish the gloom in them . 
Sarrio had five chief streets , known respectively as Rua Nueva , which runs to the harbor ; the Calles of Carborana , of San Florencio , of La Herreria , and of Atras . 
These streets , long and narrow , run parallel to each other . 
The buildings are generally low and poor . 
Other smaller streets cross and communicate with the principal ones , and lead to branch roads where the spacious residences of the West Indians are built , and which constitute what may be termed the suburb of Sarrio . 
As the party was passing through the Calle de Atras , near to that of Santa Brigida , they heard cries and lamentations , which obliged them to halt . 
`` What 's that , Marcones ? '' 
asked the mayor . 
The old official shrugged his shoulders philosophically : `` Nothing , señor ; it is at Patina Santa 's . '' 
`` How dare they commit these enormities ? 
Let us go there . 
Let us proceed . '' 
`` Let us proceed , '' was a phrase both used and abused by Don Roque , as it conveyed his sense of the decision , rapidity , and energy of his authority to remedy all grievances . 
Patina Santa was the great high priest of one of the two temples of pleasure existing in Sarrio , but the sordid , wretched appearance of these temples was quite unlike the ancient famous ones of Greece . 
`` What scandal is this ? '' 
cried Don Roque in his stentorian voice as he approached the miserable dwelling . 
Three or four lads in the street flew away like birds at the sight of the dignitary , but the doves remained . 
Two of them stood at the door and two more were at the windows . 
Those at the door wished to withdraw at the sight of the mayor , but he caught hold of them . 
`` What is this scandal -- eh ? '' 
he repeated . 
The girls began to explain the cause of the commotion , but hardly had they uttered a word than Don Roque interrupted them , vociferating : `` To prison with you ! '' 
`` Señor , I -- '' `` To the prison -- ah ! 
To the prison , away with you all ! 
Be off , everybody ! 
Where is the ruffian Patina ? '' 
Merciful heavens , what a commotion then ensued ! 
The girls at the windows had nothing for it but to come downstairs , and Patina came with them , for Don Roque brooked no delay . 
Cries and lamentations filled the air , while the strident voice of the mayor cried out incessantly : `` To the prison -- ah ! 
To the prison -- ah ! '' 
The unhappy creatures called on God and the Virgin ; but the mayor , with his infuriated face and flaming eyes , raised his voice still higher as he deafened himself with his cry : `` To the prison -- ah ! 
To the prison -- ah ! '' 
There was no help for it . 
The watchman , who had approached at the sound of the first ah 's , led them off to the town prison , in attendance on his worthy chief , while the neighbors watched the scene from behind their window-panes in mingled compassion and derision . 
Don Roque exercised his authority by locking the door of the dovecot himself , and handed the key over to Marcones , and with the usual `` Proceed , '' they continued their perilous course . 
The mayor and his aide-de-camp had not gone very far when , in one of the narrowest and dirtiest streets , they espied a man 's figure cautiously approaching a door , which he tried to open . 
`` Stop ! '' 
whispered Don Roque in the ear of his subordinate . 
`` There is one of the thieves . '' 
The official only caught the last word , but it was enough to make him drop his gun . 
`` Do n't tremble , Marcones , for there is only one , '' said the mayor , seizing him by the arm . 
If the venerable Marcones had been at that moment in full possession of his faculties of observation , he might have detected a decided tendency to a convulsive movement in the hand of his chief . 
The thief , hearing the steps of the patrol , suddenly turned his head and stood motionless , with his hand still on the door-handle . 
Don Roque and his companion also stood motionless , and the moon appearing from under a cloud shed its light upon the direful scene . 
`` Hsh ! 
hsh ! 
friend , '' said the magistrate at the end of some time , without advancing a step . 
The robber heard this exclamation of authority , and took flight at one and the same moment . 
`` At him , Marcones ! 
Fire ! '' 
cried Don Roque , courageously running in pursuit of the criminal . 
Marcones wished to follow his chief 's injunction , but fear made him helpless . 
The trigger fell without emitting a spark . 
Then , with martial promptitude , he cast aside the weapon , which was useless , drew his sword and made valiant efforts to keep pace with the mayor , who , with intrepid courage , was at least twenty paces in advance , in pursuit of the robber . 
The fellow now disappeared round the corner of a street . 
But on their arrival there the pursuers saw him attempting to gain the next . 
`` Boom ! '' 
Don Roque fired his revolver , crying at the same time : `` Take that , thief ! '' 
He again disappeared , and again they caught sight of him in the Calle de la Misericordia . 
Boom ! 
Another shot from Don Roque . 
`` Take that , thief ! '' 
But the villain , doubtless as a last resource , and to prevent any watchman stopping him , began also to cry : `` Thieves ! 
Thieves ! '' 
Then the sharp , long whistles of the watchmen were heard , followed by another and another . 
The street of San Florencio was well lighted , and the criminal was clearly visible , trying to get quickly under the shadow of the houses . 
Boom ! 
Boom ! 
`` Take that , thief ! '' 
`` Thieves ! '' 
returned the fugitive , without ceasing flight . 
Two watchmen joined the column of attack , and ran , brandishing their pikes , by the side of the mayor . 
The thief seemed , at all cost , anxious to reach the Rua Nueva , so as to gain the harbor , where he could secure himself in a boat , or cast himself into the water . 
But before arriving there he stumbled and fell prostrate on the ground . 
Thanks to this accident , the patrol gained upon him considerably , and had almost reached him when the villain jumped up with great celerity and flew off swifter than the wind . 
Don Roque fired off the last two shots of his revolver , still crying : `` Take that , thief ! '' 
He disappeared round the corner of the Rua Nueva . 
Arrived there , the magistrate and his force , now near the Plaza de la Marina , saw no sign of the criminal anywhere . 
They took a few hesitating steps on to the said plaza , and there they stopped , not knowing what course to take . 
`` To the mole ! 
To the mole ! 
He must be there , '' said a watchman . 
They were just about to proceed farther when a window of one of the houses was suddenly opened and a man in night attire said in sonorous tones that resounded in the silence of the night : `` The thief has just entered the Café de la Marina . '' 
These words were uttered by Don Feliciano Gomez . 
When the patrol heard them it rushed to the door of the café and abruptly made its entrance . 
The sitting-room was empty . 
There at the end , by the side of the counter , were three or four lads in white aprons standing round a man who was lying , more than sitting , upon a chair . 
The mayor , the officer , and the watchmen rushed at him with their pikes , swords , and sword-sticks at his chest , and all with one accord cried : `` Take that , thief ! '' 
The criminal raised his terror-stricken face , now whiter than wax . 
`` Ah -- if it is not Don Jaime , God bless my soul ! '' 
exclaimed a watchman , lowering his pike . 
All the others did the same , dumb with astonishment . 
For indeed it was a fact that the villain they had so hotly pursued was no other than Don Jaime Marin , taken unawares as he was about to enter the door of his house . 
They had to carry him home and bleed him . 
On the following day Don Roque appeared to ask his pardon , which was granted . 
But Doña Brigida , his severe spouse , would not grant it until she had given expression to a storm of recriminatory adjectives , among which that of `` drunken '' figured frequently . 
Don Roque submitted meekly to the attack , and the matter dropped . 
Preparations for the wedding had begun in the Belinchon household . 
They were started very cautiously . 
Doña Paula sent for Nieves , the embroideress , and a long conference ensued with closed doors . 
Then patterns were ordered from Madrid , and a few days later the señora , accompanied by Cecilia and Pablito , took a journey to the capital of the province in the family coach . 
The prying Don Petra , who was passing along the Rua Nueva as Doña Paula and her children returned , saw the servant take from the carriage large , heavy parcels that looked like bales of material . 
All Sarrio then soon knew that preparations for the trousseau of Don Rosendo 's eldest daughter had commenced , and Doña Paula had one of her heart attacks when she heard that it was known . 
The blame was cast on Nieves , but she declared that she had never breathed a word on the subject . 
Doña Paula declared she must have done so ; the embroideress wept , and there was a regular scene . 
Well , as the cat was out of the bag , there was no use making any more mystery about it . 
The room at the back of the house , the one that looked on to the Calle de Carborana , was the scene of operations for the staff working at the linen under Doña Paula 's orders and Nieves 's instruction . 
It consisted of four persons besides the two maids of the house , when domestic duties permitted , and Venturita , and Cecilia herself . 
It was a merry party , as work did not prevent chatting , laughing , and singing all day long . 
Merriment welled from the young creatures ' hearts , and bubbled forth in aimless laughter that sometimes lasted a long time . 
If one of them dropped the scissors -- laughter ; if a skein of thread caught on a neck -- laughter ; if the cook came with a red face to ask the señora for the money for the milkwoman -- hearty laughter . 
Not only were those working at Cecilia 's trousseau young and merry , but , from the directress herself , they were all pretty . 
Nieves was a tall , graceful , red-haired girl , with a white , transparent skin , clear blue eyes , a perfect nose and mouth , twenty years of age , and endowed with a disposition that was Heaven 's own blessing . 
It was impossible to be long melancholy in her company . 
Not that she was talkative or witty , nothing of the sort ; the poor girl had little more intellect than a fish , but her boundless good-humor shone from her eyes in such a charming manner , and rang forth from her throat in such clear tones , that it was quite infectious . 
By the work of her hands she supported a paralytic mother , and a bad , idle brother , who treated her shamefully when she was unable to give him sufficient money with which to get intoxicated . 
Her troubles , which would have been insupportable to anybody else , only momentarily disturbed her equanimity , and , rising above them , she soon recovered her habitual cheerful spirits . 
She enjoyed the blessing of perfect health , the only pain she ever knew being an occasional stitch in the side from overmuch laughter . 
Valentina , also an embroideress , and also with red hair , was not so pretty ; her eyes were smaller , her skin less delicate , her nose less regular , and she was smaller of stature . 
On the other hand , her bright locks were curly , and clustered very prettily on her forehead , her hands and feet were smaller and more delicate than those of Nieves , and the striking point of her face was a constant little trick of knitting her brows , which gave a pleasant piquancy to her features , as it was not due to bad temper . 
Encarnacian was a needlewoman too ; she was a great , strong , bouncing girl with a vulgar face . 
The artisans of Sarrio thought she was the flower of the flock , but she would not have pleased the taste of a refined , intelligent person . 
Teresa , also of the same trade , was perfectly Moorish in coloring ; her hair was as black as jet , and her large eyes were as dark as her hair , and her nose and mouth were regular ; she was considered ugly in the town on account of her swarthiness , but she was really a type of Oriental beauty . 
There was nothing remarkable in Generosa , one of the two maids of the house . 
Elvira , the other , was a pale little thing , with large , languid eyes , and very graceful figure . 
The working classes of Sarrio have never gone in for the ridiculous imitation of ladies , which is so frequent nowadays in other places in Spain . 
They think , and I am of the same opinion , that the fashions adopted by ladies would not enhance their natural grace ; in fact , they would lessen it . 
And this is logical , for , in the first place , they are not accustomed to drawing their waists in , as fashion demands of its slaves , and as little towns have no good dressmakers , the imitation would be both inferior and ugly ; whereas , who upon the terrestrial globe , or upon any other globe , can compete with the charm of the girls of Sarrio when they don the richly embroidered fichu , crossed in front , and tied behind ? 
Who can equal their fascinating mode of arranging the curls on their foreheads with a studied carelessness ? 
Who can take part in a giraldilla with more consummate grace , or give in a more coquettish way a push to a young fellow who gets out of his place , while saying with a mingled smile and frown : `` Good fellow , you are mad , or on the road to it . 
Look out , or I shall pinch you ! '' 
Who can sing with more sentiment and with less ear the couplet : `` When Aben Hamet Granada left , He felt his heart of joy bereft . '' 
There is no doubt that the artisan girls of Sarrio , whose strict ideas of taste are the admiration of both Spaniards and foreigners , especially nowadays when characteristic features are on the wane , are quite right to maintain their independence and to hold their own costume in spite of the dressed-up young ladies of the cities . 
Because -LRB- be it said softly , so as not to be overheard -RRB- , the truth is they are much prettier . 
And this I say without meaning offense to anybody in particular ; Heaven forbid . 
There is no traveler in the Peninsula who , on thinking of Sarrio , will not echo this assertion with more of the enthusiasm natural to him . 
There is no Englishman who stops for a few days at this port but who , when talking to his friends at Cardiff or Bristol of this Spanish town , will begin by raising his eyebrows and smacking his lips with delight , with `` Oh ! 
oh ! 
oh ! 
Sarrio ! 
the young girls there are very , very , very beautiful . '' 
And if Englishmen say it , what will be said by the Spaniards , and particularly those who have lived so long under their beneficent influence ? 
The four workers , including Nieves , although she was rather superior , belonged to this much-admired class of women for whose prosperity and continuance in their ways I offer daily prayers to Heaven , and advise every good Catholic to do the same . 
On working days they were dressed in cotton gowns , with a little woolen fichu tied behind and a silk handkerchief falling back on the neck from the uncovered head . 
Nieves , as an exception , wore a black fringed fichu . 
They had just sat down to work after dinner . 
The sun poured through the panes of the two windows despite the blinds . 
The workers were gathered together in one of the corners of the room to escape its rays . 
Teresa , the most musical of the party , started a sentimental song in sad , drawn-out cadences in a sweet , timid voice , so that the others should join in parts ; and in effect Nieves soon `` took second , '' and the rest followed suit , some taking first and others second , which resulted in a somewhat melancholy harmony , tinged with romance . 
Romance may vanish from customs , and be banished from the novel and the stage , but it still finds a delicious haven of rest in the hearts of the artisans of Sarrio . 
The music continued until Pablito saw fit to disturb it by breaking in suddenly with his bleating voice . 
The needlewomen stopped singing , raised their heads in alarm , and then burst out laughing . '' 
Madre ! 
what a fright you gave me ! '' 
`` I thought it was a cow ! '' 
`` And I thought it was a cock crowing -- and I still think so , '' said Venturita . 
The handsome Pablito , reclining in his armchair in the other corner , laughed loudly at his own expense . 
He certainly was of a jocose turn of mind , as we shall have occasion to see later on . 
From the time of the commencement of his sister 's trousseau Pablito evinced a sudden taste for a sedentary life that had not hitherto been noticeable in him . 
Who had ever seen him before stop a minute in the house after dinner ? 
Who would have thought that he could spend the morning in that armchair chatting with the workers ? 
Nevertheless , it was a fact . 
For the last month he had not been out riding or driving , and he did not spend more than an hour in the stable during the course of the day . 
Piscis was quite upset . 
He came every day to fetch him out , but it was in vain . 
`` Look here , Piscis , I have to clean my silver spurs , so I can not go out . '' 
`` I say , Piscis , I have to go and get a bill of exchange cashed for father . '' 
`` Look here , Piscis , Linda is ill and ca n't be ridden . '' 
`` She is all right now , '' growled Piscis . 
`` Have you come from the stable ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , anyhow , I ca n't go out to-day -- am out of sorts . '' 
Sometimes Piscis entered the room and sat waiting silently ; it was certainly not for long , because he was always thinking the women were making fun of him , and this prevented him being at his ease . 
When he thought the right moment had arrived , or when he noticed symptoms of boredom in Pablo , or when some other circumstance beyond our province occurred , he rose from his seat and made a sign with his hand to his friend as he gave a long , low whistle , for they understood each other better by whistles than by words . 
They both objected to articulate sounds and eschewed their use in each other 's company , but Pablito did not relish the sign at that moment . 
`` I say , Piscis , '' he said , `` I am dreadfully idle . 
Be so kind as to go to the stable and ask Pepe to put another oil compress on Romeo . '' 
`` I will do it , '' returned Piscis with a frowning face . 
`` All right , Piscis ; thank you very much . 
Ta-ta ! 
You will come to-morrow , eh ? 
Perhaps I shall be able to ride then . '' 
This was said with great suavity and amiability , to throw his friend off the scent . 
Piscis growled a `` good-day '' without turning to the company , and left with his eyes aflame , uglier and more demoniacal-looking than ever . 
The same thing occurred the next day . 
In spite of his respect for Pablito , Piscis then came to the conclusion that he admired one of the needlewomen . 
Which ? 
His perspicacity could not solve that question . 
The young people began singing , but coming to the words : `` Only thou , Divine woman , Said a prayer At my solitary tomb , '' Pablito gave vent to such a discordant bellow that they all burst out laughing ; but Venturita became serious . 
`` Look here , Pablo , if you go on like that , you had better go off with Piscis . '' 
It was then Pablito 's turn to be cross . 
`` I shall go when I feel inclined . 
You are always the one to spoil everything . '' 
Young Belinchon meant to infer that his sister Venturita was the only one who failed to recognize the gifts which Heaven had bestowed on him , and this was true ; and all the company laughed as if they had heard a passage from `` Rabelais '' instead of a cross remark . 
Doña Paula , who had an idolatrous admiration for her first-born , and nourished a grudge against the girl for her sharp remarks , which she considered were not warranted by her beauty , came to her son 's assistance : `` You are quite right , Pablo ! 
She always does throw cold water on any enjoyment . 
Goodness , what a girl ! 
The man who takes her will have something to do to keep her in order . '' 
At that moment Gonzalo appeared at the door of the room ; he bent like a bow to shake hands with his future sister-in-law , Ventura , and Cecilia . 
The latter became serious , for , without turning her head , she knew that all the workers were looking out of the corners of their eyes , and she knew the kind of smile that wreathed their lips . 
Every day was alike . 
Before Gonzalo arrived the needlewomen lost no opportunity in teasing the bride . 
`` Cecilia , which of these garments will you wear the day of your wedding ? '' 
`` Señorita , you will sleep in these sheets , they are so fine . '' 
`` You wo n't be the only one to find them so . '' 
`` I say , you rogue , what a fine young man you 've got . 
You wo n't have such a handsome fellow , Venturita . '' 
`` Who knows ! '' 
returned the girl . 
Cecilia listened to these words with a smile on her lips , and blushed . 
Since the beginning of the preparations for the wedding her cheeks , formerly so pale , were almost rosy . 
This animation , and the light which happiness lent to her eyes , made her look interesting and sweet , if not pretty . 
There is not a girl who does not become more or less good-looking on the approach of marriage . 
Cecilia was naturally silent and reserved without being bad-tempered . 
She hardly ever spoke , except when she was addressed , and then her replies were sweet , clear , and to the point . 
Timidity , which lends a certain charm to youth , was not the characteristic trait of her character , but our heroine had a sweet serenity and a certain sympathetic force in all her actions and words that revealed the perfect purity of her mind . 
This serenity was taken by unobservant people , if not for pride , which certainly could not be laid to the charge of Cecilia , for cold-heartedness . 
Even those who were most often at the house thought she was incapable of conceiving a great and tender passion . 
Accustomed to see her fulfil her domestic duties with the regularity of a clock , they would have required a power of penetration not possessed by many to divine the true moral worth of the eldest daughter of the Belinchons . 
The majority of such beings live and die unappreciated because they do not possess any of the brilliant qualities that attract all that see them . 
Innocence may be ranked among the virtues of this class of girl , and rare as it is , it is one least calculated to add to the value of a woman 's character . 
Very few are those who know how to appreciate the beauty of these crystal souls ; see them without noticing anything to arouse attention . 
But the same can be said of certain philters that are poisonous and certain drafts that are life-giving , and because our unpractised , dull eyes can not discern the elements of life or death that lie dormant in them , are we to say that such do not exist ? 
It was difficult to divine whether sad or pleasant feelings filled Cecilia 's heart , but it was not impossible . 
I do not know if she tried to hide them , or whether her particular nature impelled her to do so , but it was a fact that in her home she was misunderstood , even by her parents . 
If perchance it was a question of paying calls , or buying a dress , Doña Paula would ask her daughter with solicitude : `` And what do you think , Cecilia ? '' 
`` I think it is very nice , '' was the reply . 
