he finally asked abruptly . 
But the Señor de Belinchon only gave monosyllabic answers to all these questions . 
`` Do you know , Gonzalo , '' he said , stopping suddenly , `` that I might have killed myself just now ? '' 
`` How ? '' 
He then gave a full account of the incident of the mole , and when the story was ended , he again relapsed into a state of profound melancholy . 
`` I suppose the family is in bed , '' said Gonzalo , after he had sufficiently sympathized -LRB- at least in his own opinion -RRB- with the late peril of the merchant . 
`` No , they are at the theatre -- one never knows what may happen , eh ? '' 
`` So you 've got a theatrical company here , eh ? '' 
`` Yes , for some days past . 
Do you know I thought I should have been killed , Gonzalo ? '' 
`` Tush ! 
You might , perhaps , have broken a leg , or at the worst , a rib or two . '' 
`` Well , that would have been bad enough ! '' 
exclaimed the Señor de Belinchon , with a sigh . 
By this time they had proceeded some distance into the town , and arriving at a certain street , Don Rosendo took leave of the uncle and nephew . 
He held out his hand in a sad way , saying : `` I must go and fetch my family from the theatre . 
Until to-morrow , and a good night 's rest to you , Gonzalo . '' 
`` Until to-morrow -- kind regards to all . '' 
Then the Señor de las Cuevas and his nephew went on together to their house ; and the traveler had to undergo a torrent of questions not relative to his visit to England , but concerning particulars of the voyage home . 
`` What wind did you have ? 
Pretty blusterous , eh ? 
I suppose it hardly sank once ? 
The ship did n't pitch much , eh ? 
She was well loaded . 
You never sailed with all that canvas , eh ? 
You had to reef on leaving Liverpool , eh ? 
I know the course well . '' 
Gonzalo replied to the questions in an absent-minded manner , for he really hardly took them in , as he was walking along in a state of abstraction , with his head down . 
`` What is the matter , Gonzalito ? 
You seem low-spirited . '' 
`` I ? 
Bah ! 
no , señor . '' 
`` I know you are . '' 
They proceeded some distance in silence , and Don Melchor , striking his forehead , exclaimed : `` I know what it is ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` You are longing for the sea again . 
I have gone through just the same . 
I used to leap ashore after any voyage , and then I was seized with a fit of depression and a strong desire to return to the ship ! 
This lasted two or three days , until I got accustomed to it . 
The fact is , I longed to get into port , but once there , I wished to be on board again . 
I do n't know what there is so attractive in the sea , eh ? 
That air so pure ! 
The motion ! 
The freedom ! 
I know you are longing to return to the ship , eh ? '' 
he concluded , with a mischievous smile , to show his perspicacity . 
`` Bother it all ! 
what I am longing for , uncle , is to go and see my sweetheart . '' 
Don Melchor was dumfounded . 
`` Is that true ? '' 
`` Of course it is . '' 
The Señor de las Cuevas reflected a minute , and then said : `` All right ; perhaps you would like to go and meet her at the theatre ? 
In the meanwhile I will go and see if Domingo has improved . '' 
`` How can he improve ? 
He is a first-rate fellow , '' returned the youth , smiling . 
The uncle , oblivious of the irony , looked at him with scorn . 
`` Get along ! 
I see you return as silly as you went . 
I will wait supper for you . '' 
`` Do n't wait for me , uncle , '' replied Gonzalo , already some distance off . 
`` Perhaps I shall not want supper . '' 
Then , without running , but with extraordinary swiftness , thanks to his unusually long legs , he strode through the streets , lighted here and there by oil lamps , in the direction of the theatre . 
Any one meeting him just then would have taken him for one of the many Englishmen who occasionally come to Sarrio on shipping business , to reconnoitre mining districts , or to start some industry . 
His colossal height and his stout , robust appearance are not characteristic features of the Spanish race , although one comes across them in the north ; then that long coat , those double-soled boots , and strange-shaped hat denoted the foreigner . 
A glance at the face completed the illusion , for it was fair ; and the long red beard , and blue , or , more properly called , azure eyes are almost always seen in the northern races . 
The family of Las Cuevas , to which Gonzalo belonged , had from time immemorial been huge in stature , and seafaring by profession . 
His father had been a sailor , his grandfather a sailor , his uncles sailors , and the sons of these uncles also sailors . 
Gonzalo when not eight years of age was left orphaned of both father and mother , and possessed of a considerable fortune , managed by his uncle and guardian , Don Melchor , in whose care he had been left by his father at his death . 
The old sailor greatly wished his ward to continue the uninterrupted course of the Cuevas with regard to a profession . 
To awaken in him a love of the sea , or to make him take a fancy to it , he bought him a beautiful sailing boat , in which they both took trips , or went on fishing expeditions . 
But the good man 's plans could not prevail against his nephew 's predisposition for the land . 
He cared for nothing to do with the sea , but the fish out of it , and that only when dressed and steaming on the table . 
However , he managed sometimes to enjoy himself with a kettle , cooking an impromptu meal in some out-of-the-way spot on the coast , seated on a rock whence bubbled beautiful fresh drinking water . 
At fourteen Gonzalo had grown into a fine young fellow in the second class of the private college of Sarrio , which sent him up to the Capital every year for the examination , where he generally won the qualification `` good , '' and once and again , but very rarely , that of `` highly commended . '' 
He was much liked by his schoolfellows for his open , frank disposition , while he was respected for his ability to deal powerful blows . 
The gentlefolk of the town made much of him on account of his position and the family to which he belonged , and the sailors and other people of the place loved him for his frank , equable nature . 
After graduating as bachelor of arts , he remained three years in Sarrio without doing anything . 
He got up late , and spent the greater part of the day at the casino playing billiards , in which game he became an expert . 
In spite of being the spoiled child of the place , he visited at few houses , preferring the stupid , demoralizing life of the café , to which he had become accustomed . 
Nevertheless , as he was not wanting in intelligence , and being of a naturally active turn of mind , he sometimes turned his attention to the study of some branch of science . 
He liked mineralogy , and many afternoons he left the casino and the billiards to repair to the suburbs of the town , in search of minerals and fossils , until he had quite a valuable collection . 
Then he took up the microscope for a time , and after sending for a costly one from Germany he devoted himself to the examination of diatomaceæ , and he arranged them admirably well upon the little crystals , which he cut himself . 
Finally , a book upon brewing having fallen into his hands , he devoted himself enthusiastically to its study . 
He ordered several works on the subject from England , and began to think that this unpractised industry might be started with advantage in Sarrio . 
He seriously thought of opening a brewery , but , confiding the project to his uncle , the old man was furious , and gave vent to a series of inarticulate grunts , all beyond the normal diapason , which ended with the exclamation : `` What ! 
a Cuevas start a brewery ! 
The son of a captain , the nephew of a rear-admiral ! 
Impossible ! 
You are off your head , Gonzalo . 
It is well said that idleness is the mother of every vice . 
If you had passed through the naval college , as I advised you , you would have been first lieutenant by now , and would not be running about with such mad ideas . '' 
Gonzalo was silent , but he did not cease reading his treatises on the industry . 
He soon saw that , without visiting the chief breweries , and without studying the subject seriously , he could never attain any real knowledge of it , and so he determined to go to England and learn the business of a civil engineer . 
When he ventured to broach the subject to his uncle , the sailor did not object to the word engineer , but the attributive adjunct of civil aroused the same storm of invectives as the brewery had called forth . 
`` Civil , civil ! 
nowadays everything shady is called civil . 
Be a straightforward engineer of roads , and bridges or mines . '' 
At this time he knew , or , to speak more correctly , for everybody knows each other in Sarrio , he became acquainted with , the Señorita de Belinchon . 
One day his uncle sent him to the rich merchant 's house to ask him if he could give him a bill of exchange on Manila . 
Don Rosendo was not in his office , which was on the ground floor of the house , but as the business was urgent , Gonzalo decided to go upstairs . 
The maid who opened the door was very alert . 
`` Come this way , Don Gonzalo ; the Señorita Cecilia will tell you where the master is . '' 
He was taken into an untidy room , with heaps of clothes upon the floor and on the table , at which the eldest daughter of the Belinchons was ironing a shirt , in a costume not befitting her station , for it was a scanty , narrow skirt , an apron tied round her waist like a workwoman , and her feet in shabby slippers . 
She did not blush at the young man finding her in such an attire and engaged in such a menial occupation , nor did she exclaim , as many girls would have done in her place : `` Goodness , what a state you find me in ! '' 
putting her hands to her hair and her throat . 
Nothing of the sort ; she suspended her task for a minute , smiled sweetly , and waited to hear what the youth had to say . 
`` Good-evening , '' he said with a blush . 
`` Good-evening , Gonzalo , '' she returned . 
`` Can I see your father ? '' 
`` I do not know if he is at home ; I will go and see , '' replied the girl , leaving the ironing upon the table , and passing in front of him . 
When she had proceeded a few steps she turned back and said : `` Is your uncle well ? '' 
`` Yes , señora , yes -- I mean no ; for some days he has not left his bed -- he has a dreadful cold . '' 
`` It is nothing serious ? '' 
`` I think not , señora . '' 
The girl went on her way smiling ; she was pleased at Gonzalo calling her señora , for she was not sixteen , and he spoke as if she were over twenty . 
They knew each other like brother and sister , but they had never hitherto behaved like grown-up people . 
They met every day in the street , at the promenade , at the theatre , or at church . 
When they were quite little , Cecilia recollected that one afternoon at the Elorrio Fair , when dancing the giraldilla with some other little girls of her own age , some rough boys began teasing them , pulling their hair , pushing them about , and running in the way so as to spoil their dance , and upset them . 
Gonzalo , then a boy of thirteen , seeing this rude conduct , ran to the little girls ' assistance ; and with a kick here , a push there , and a few blows all round , he soon dispersed the rude boys . 
The eyes of the little dancers gazed at him in admiration , and an undying feeling of gratitude toward the heroic lad filled those tender hearts of five to ten years . 
Another time , years afterward , on St. John 's Day , Gonzalo lent his boat to her and her family , for a little sea trip , as all the boats and launches were full on that occasion . 
But neither of these circumstances had constituted much intercourse between the young people . 
If they met face to face , Gonzalo would raise his hand to his hat ; if not , they would pass as if they did not see each other , in spite of the acquaintance , if not intimate friendship , existing between his uncle and Señor Belinchon . 
For the Bohemian life of the café , his rare association with girls , had made Gonzalo a shy , retiring youth . 
`` Come this way , Gonzalo ; papa is waiting for you in the dining-room , '' said the girl , when she reappeared . 
`` I hope your uncle will get better . '' 
`` Many thanks , '' he returned abruptly , and being so tall , he knocked against the lamp hanging in the hall so that it nearly fell to the ground . 
He cast an agonized look at it , and quickly steadied it , while his face grew red with confusion . 
`` Has it hurt you ? '' 
asked Cecilia , anxiously . 
`` No , indeed , señora -- on the contrary , dear me ! 
I nearly broke it . '' 
And he became more and more confused . 
Our young friend was at that time of life when he would fall in love with a broom . 
He was rather late in reaching this susceptible stage , as is often the case when the physical organism overbalances the nervous . 
Therefore , Señorita de Belinchon , with no claim to prettiness , suddenly aroused a sort of feeling in him easily mistaken for love , and the result of that short interview was that Gonzalo henceforth went out of his way to pass the house of the De Belinchons , with his longing eyes fixed on the windows for a chance glimpse of the young lady ; he went on Sunday to eight o'clock mass at St. Andrew 's Church , because Doña Paula and her family went there ; at the theatre he ventured to cast many a glance in her direction , and he occasionally dared to raise his hat to her , but when he did so , he blushed violently and cast furtive looks around , trembling lest he should have betrayed the nascent feeling of his heart . 
Innocent Gonzalo ! 
Long before he was aware himself of his state of mind the whole town knew of it . 
Nothing could be hidden , especially anything to do with a young man and woman , from the sharp eyes of the gossips of a place so small as Sarrio . 
And not only did they know what was going on , but they made up their minds that the marriage was certain to come off sooner or later . 
Nevertheless , months went by and the matter did not advance one step . 
However , Gonzalo continued to give the same signs of his fancy for the girl , and he spent a long time every day after dinner in walking up and down in front of the rich merchant 's house on his way to the casino . 
Cecilia would be at the window sewing ; he would raise his hat and then go to the billiard table , and so it was the next day . 
Don Melchor sent him twice on messages to Don Rosendo , but he always had the good luck to find him in his office . 
We say good luck because Gonzalo trembled at the idea of going upstairs and meeting Cecilia . 
He was now twenty years of age . 
The idea of qualifying himself as a civil engineer and taking up some occupation occasionally crossed his mind in this idle life . 
A friend at this time returning from a military academy , a conversation with an English engineer , the tone of contempt in which those who have no occupation were spoken of in the casino , suddenly awoke in him a desire for work . 
At last he told his uncle that , with his permission , he would go to England to study something and see the world . 
As Don Melchor could make no objection to this just and laudable suggestion , Gonzalo a few days later appeared at several houses of relations and friends , where he had not set foot for years , to take his leave of them , and on a beautiful , balmy spring afternoon he embarked with great pomp on the big `` Vigia '' for England . 
Did he recollect Cecilia ? 
We do not know . 
Temperaments like those of our friend are a long time falling a prey to passion -- great havoc as it may make in the end . 
Three years went by . 
He finished his course as an engineer , which is brief and practical in England , and then made up his mind to visit the factories of England , Spain , and Germany . 
During the time of his studies the recollection of Cecilia occasionally occurred to him without arousing any very deep feeling . 
But in the spring , when the blood circulates more freely in the veins , and Mother Nature gives her lesson in the verdure of the fields , the vivid colors of the flowers , the effects of sunshine , the soft , balmy air , and above all in her more faithful interpreters , the birds , Gonzalo 's thoughts turned to matrimony . 
And whenever the idea crossed his mind , it was accompanied by the image of the eldest daughter of the De Belinchons . 
`` This way , Gonzalo ; papa is waiting for you . 
Have you hurt yourself ? '' 
The words still rang in his ears , and the recollection of the kind tone in which they were said filled his young heart with a feeling of love . 
The girl was not beautiful , but her eyes were , and her modest , pleasant manner and the tone of her voice were all full of the charm so attractive in her sex . 
`` I should not mind marrying her , '' he said with a sigh to himself , as he thought how impossible it would be for him to breathe a word of love in her ears , or in those of any girl . 
One day , when writing to a great friend in Sarrio , he suddenly thought of asking if Cecilia Belinchon were married . 
In reply , he learned that she was still single , and that , although young men frequented the house , probably more attracted by De Belinchon 's money than his daughter 's charms , it was not known that she had so far listened to any one of them . 
On reading this letter the blood mounted to the cheek of the civil engineer , and he was foolish enough to think -LRB- will the reader think him very conceited ? -RRB- 
that if Cecilia turned the cold shoulder on her admirers it was , perhaps , because she was prepossessed in his favor . 
Then he formed the plan of declaring his feelings in a letter , for he thought it would be less awkward to do it thus while far away . 
Nevertheless , he hesitated , and when he took the pen in his hand to write the first line he dropped it at the thought of the surprise of the girl on the receipt of the letter . 
Some days elapsed . 
He could not get rid of the idea . 
At last , by dint of much subtle reasoning , he determined to write the letter . 
If she laughed at him , what of it ? 
He would not be there to see , for in that case he would stay away from Sarrio ; and if perchance he ever returned , he would manage to keep clear of her . 
So at last the letter was written , but terrified at the idea of posting it , he kept it in his writing-case for some days . 
A few glasses of spirits were required to give him courage to post it , and when slightly elevated by the potation he took the letter from his writing-case , rushed into the street and dropped it into the first letter-box he came across . 
`` My God ! 
What have I done ? '' 
The effects of the libation had suddenly vanished , and he colored up to the roots of his hair , as if the mocking eyes of all the people of Sarrio were gazing at him through the gaping mouth of the letter-box . 
He put his fingers into the aperture , in the vain attempt to withdraw the ill-fated epistle , but a shark could not hive swallowed it more effectually , and the mouth of the box looked gaping and ready for more . 
For one moment he thought of going to the post-office to reclaim it , but the thought of the particulars which would have to be given so alarmed him that he preferred leaving the matter to fate rather than undergo such an ordeal . 
Eight days of trembling suspense went by . 
By the time he could expect an answer his anxiety was overwhelming , and he even began to think he might see his own bold , ugly handwriting returned to him in an envelope . 
A week , and then a fortnight , elapsed , but still no answer came . 
He calmed himself with the vague hope of the non-arrival of his letter at its destination ; then he fancied that Cecilia might have torn it up , without mentioning it to anybody . 
But , lo and behold , when he had given up all hope , he found on his plate , at breakfast-time , a letter from Spain , in an unknown lady 's writing . 
His excitement at the sight was indescribable . 
He turned as white as the mantelpiece -- his heart seemed to jump into his mouth . 
He opened the envelope with a trembling hand . 
`` Ah-a-a ! '' 
he sighed , with relief , after devouring the contents in two seconds . 
He then put his hand to his side , wiped the sweat from his brow with his pocket-handkerchief , took up the letter again , and reread it quietly . 
It was really from Cecilia ; it was slightly ironical in tone -- however , it was not a rebuff . 
What fancy could have seized him for her after four years ' absence ? 
Her parents -- who had opened the letter before she did -- were equally surprised , and thought it was a rash act , peculiar to youth -- a passing idea , of which he had probably already repented . 
She quite coincided with their opinion , although she had consented to follow their advice of writing to him , as they had always maintained friendly relations with his family . 
This letter filled him with delight ; it was not the scornful refusal he had expected . 
Then he grew sad , and then cheerful , as he read and reread the letter in search of a clear meaning . 
Was it kind -- or was it unkind ? 
He hastened to reply , imploring forgiveness for his boldness , and confirming his previous declaration with renewed and more vehement protestations . 
The girl wrote again in a few days , in a kinder and more affectionate manner , and then Gonzalo sent another letter . 
An interchange of photographs followed , and sometimes Doña Paula enclosed a few lines in the letters sent by her daughter . 
In time the young people were formally engaged , and the marriage was arranged . 
Don Melchor corresponded with his nephew on the subject , and he called upon Don Rosendo . 
It was at last settled that Gonzalo should return in the spring , when the wedding was to take place . 
The rest of the audience was leaving the theatre , and as Gonzalo met the people pouring from the door , many of them recognized him , and he was soon surrounded by old friends who were all warm in their welcome . 
The first to throw his arms around his neck was Don Mateo ; then came Don Pedro Miranda ; then the mayor , Don Roque ; then Don Victoriano and his wife , Doña Rosario , and their three daughters . 
Thus a circle soon gathered round the young man , who responded effusively to the greetings , embraces , and hand-pressures which reached him from all sides . 
The sailors and women of the place also joined the señores in this demonstration of affection , and nothing was heard but exclamations of delight and admiration . 
`` How stout you have grown , Gonzalito ! '' 
`` You are a fine young man ! '' 
`` Why do n't you grow like that , Periquito ? '' 
`` Don Gonzalo , you are a head taller than all the other fellows of Sarrio ! '' 
`` Grow ! 
He has not grown ; he has doubled his height . 
Come here , Grenadier , and embrace me directly . '' 
A shipmaster declared that the youth was as like the Prince of Wales as two drops of water , although Gonzalo might be taller . 
The tall figure of the youth certainly towered above the group , and he reached his hand over the heads of those about him to the friends who could not get close to him , and his fine , open countenance beamed on all . 
Don Mateo , on tiptoe , pulled him by the arm so that he bent down , and then he whispered in his ear : `` What a performance you have lost , Gonzalo ! 
It is a pity you did not arrive in the afternoon . 
The soprano sings like an angel ! 
And the dancing ! 
The dancing ! 
I tell you , boy , they do n't have better in Bilbao or Corunna . 
But never mind , I will have the performance again before the company leaves -- or it wo n't say much for my influence . '' 
But Gonzalo paid little heed to these words . 
With his eyes fixed on the door , he was waiting in breathless expectation for the appearance of the De Belinchon family , which , as one of the first and most patrician of the place , always waited behind to avoid mixing with the plebeians . 
At last , by the light of the lamp burning under the archway of the entrance , he caught sight of the face of Doña Paula , followed by that of Cecilia , and he tremulously advanced to greet them . 
The girl turned as red as a poppy . 
This was natural , but for the mother to do so also was less natural . 
What was he to her ? 
Why was she to blush as much as the daughter ? 
But it was what she did to perfection . 
The voices of all three trembled , and after inquiring after each other 's health , their tongues seemed tied . 
The looks of curiosity from the people added to their embarrassment . 
Fortunately , Pablito now approached with Venturita , and our young friend greeted the former affectionately and gave a ceremonious bow to the latter . 
Pablo smiled . 
`` Do n't you know her ? 
She is my sister , Venturita . '' 
`` Oh ! 
How could I know her ? 
She is a woman . 
How do you do , Ventura ? '' 
The girl gave him her hand with a mocking , roguish expression that quite confused him . 
They then all turned toward home . 
Venturita ran in front , dragging her brother with her . 
Doña Paula , Cecilia , and Gonzalo walked behind . 
Don Rosendo closed the procession with his old friend , Don Pedro Miranda . 
The streets were dark , for it was only at the corners that there were lamps . 
The distance between the three groups of people gradually increased . 
Gonzalo made desperate efforts to sustain conversation with his bride-elect and future mother-in-law ; but the girl never opened her lips , and Doña Paula was very far from being a Madame de Staël , and as the young man had never consulted the manual of conversation , he could not be called brilliant . 
In their letters they had arrived at the confidential stage . 
Doña Paula had put post-scripts into Cecilia 's epistles , to which Gonzalo had replied with little jokes ; he had sent stamps and caricatures for Ventura , and in every way had comported himself as a member of the family . 
But now the three were quite embarrassed , for our young friend had never before spoken to the Señora de Belinchon , and to Cecilia he had only addressed the words that we have recorded . 
But there in front was Venturita , laughing with her brother ; and the engaged couple were quite certain that the merriment was at their expense . 
Nevertheless , by the time they reached the house they were more at home with each other , and there were signs of increasing friendliness between them . 
The party collected together on reaching the door of the De Belinchons ' abode , which was situated in the Rua Nueva , the best street in Sarrio , and , like all the houses in that quarter , it was large and handsome . 
As Gonzalo had not yet supped , Don Rosendo asked him to join them at their evening meal ; and the invitation was given so cordially , that the young man , who wished for nothing better , willingly accepted it . 
Señor Miranda and his son then took leave , and the Belinchon family , with the newcomer who was soon to be one of them , entered the house . 
In the anteroom the ladies took off their cloaks and hats . 
The light seemed to make the affianced pair shy . 
Gonzalo was now well able to see his betrothed , who had not improved with years . 
She was taller , but also thinner -- love affairs do n't make girls grow plump ; her nose seemed a trifle sharper ; but her beautiful eyes , so soft and intelligent , still shone like two stars . 
He was greatly struck with the change in Venturita , the child he had seen skipping to school on the arm of a schoolfellow . 
She was now a woman , a full-grown woman , not so much from her height as from the roundness and fulness of her figure , and a certain directness of look touched with a dash of coquetry . 
They cast a rapid look at each other , as if they met for the first time ; and Gonzalo said in a low voice to Doña Paula : `` How Venturita has improved ! 
She is a beautiful girl . '' 
Low as it was , the girl overheard the remark ; she pouted disdainfully and went straight to the dining-room , without betraying the gratification his spontaneous admiration had given her . 
The table was laid , a patriarchal provincial board , abundant and clean , without flowers or any of the elegant accessories which are now the fashion . 
All Gonzalo 's shyness vanishing at the sight of the meal , he soon felt quite at home . 
A feeling of cheerfulness pervaded them all . 
They exchanged remarks and smiles ; Gonzalo took Pablito by the arm and asked him after his horses ; Doña Paula arranged the order of the places ; Venturita , who was already seated , began eating olives and throwing the stones at her sister , with knowing winks , while Cecilia , her cheeks aflame , put her finger on her lip to call her to order . 
Don Rosendo had returned from putting on his jacket and smoking cap , as he could not eat supper without them . 
His wife now invited the visitor to take the chair next to Cecilia , but she had taken her seat at the other end of the table . 
`` What are you about ? 
Why do n't you come to your proper place ? '' 
asked Doña Paula in surprise , whereupon the girl , without replying , quietly rose and blushingly took the chair next to her betrothed . 
The classic dish of buttered eggs was already steaming on the table . 
`` Come , help Gonzalo -- serve him first , '' said Doña Paula to her daughter , with the benign smile befitting a wife whose ideas were in accord with those given by Saint Paul in his celebrated epistle . 
Cecilia hastened to obey , and filled the plate of her future husband . 
He always had an excellent appetite , fitting for his great size , but now , sharpened by the sea air and some hours ' fasting , he was voracious . 
He ate everything that was put before him , without stopping a moment , and without leaving a morsel , and Cecilia , as we can suppose , was indefatigable in serving him . 
Directly he began to eat Gonzalo lost his shyness , for the pressing necessity of satisfying his enormous appetite was all-absorbing . 
Cecilia , on the contrary , hardly touched her food . 
Seeing two little pieces of ham about the size of two filberts on her plate , the young man said : `` Whom is that plate for -- the parrot ? '' 
`` No ; it is for me . '' 
`` And are you not afraid it will give you indigestion ? '' 
It was the first joke that he had ventured to make with his bride-elect . 
She smilingly returned : `` I never eat more than that . '' 
Doña Paula whispered into Venturita 's ear : `` Do n't you think they are very stiff with each other ? '' 
Venturita repeated the remark in an undertone to Pablo , and he passed it on to his father . 
All four began laughing and casting glances at the engaged couple , who looked confused , asking with their eyes the reason of the sudden merriment . 
`` Mama , do you want me to tell them what we are laughing at ? '' 
`` Tell them . '' 
`` Then , señores , we were thinking that you might be less stiff with each other . '' 
The bride and bridegroom-elect hung their heads and smiled . 
The good spirits of the supper party now broke forth in laughter and jokes . 
Pablito asked his future brother-in-law questions about horse racing , skating rinks , and other more or less enthralling topics of the kind . 
Only Cecilia was silent in the intensity of her happiness , shown in the brilliant scarlet of her cheeks , the heat of which she tried in vain to cool with the back of her hand . 
When she thought she was unobserved she cast long , loving looks at her fiancé , whose fine , insatiable appetite , the sign of life and energy , surprised and captivated her ; and she gazed at him in adoring admiration as a splendid type of masculine strength . 
But these long , ecstatic looks did not escape Venturita , who managed by signs to draw the attention of Pablo and her mother to them . 
Gonzalo acknowledged the attentions of his fiancée with a rapid `` Many thanks '' without looking at her , for fear of blushing . 
When he did look up to speak to Pablo , his eyes always encountered Venturita 's , and her smiling , mocking glance somewhat disconcerted him . 
At last they left the table and dispersed . 
Don Rosendo and Ventura , disappeared , and Pablo , after a few minutes , following their example . 
Doña Paula and the engaged couple remained alone in the dining-room , and all three sat on low chairs in a corner together . 
Soon nothing but soft whispers were audible , as if they were at the confessional . 
The three chairs were close together , and with their heads almost touching , they began an animated conversation . 
Doña Paula soon broached the all-important question . 
`` This is the twenty-eighth of April . 
There are only four months from now to the first of September , '' and here she cast a long , knowing glance at the couple . 
If it had been possible for Cecilia to get redder , she would have done so . 
Gonzalo 's lips wreathed in a meaningless smile , and he lowered his eyes . 
After looking at them for a minute , as if enjoying their confusion , Doña Paula continued : `` It is necessary to think of the trousseau . '' 
`` Heavens ! 
It is early for that , '' exclaimed the girl in dismay , while her heart leaped into her mouth . 
`` It is not so , Cecilia ; you do not know the time the embroideresses take in such matters . 
Nieves took a month to embroider two petticoats for Doña Rosario 's daughter -- and Martina is slower than she . '' 
`` Nieves embroiders very well . '' 
`` There is no embroideress in the town to hold a candle to Martina . 
She has hands of gold . '' 
`` I prefer the embroideries of Nieves . '' 
`` Then , if you wish it , let her embroider your clothes , but I -- '' said Doña Paula , looking at her daughter in an offended , haughty sort of way . 
`` I do n't say so , '' returned the girl in alarm ; `` I only say I like the work of Nieves better than Martina 's . '' 
The trousseau soon became the subject of conversation . 
It was discussed from every point of view , and with the gravity and the care it deserved . 
To whom should they entrust the hemming of the linen sheets ? 
To whom the common ones ? 
Who should make the underlinen ? 
Where should the mantles be bought , etc. ? 
All these questions were discussed , weighed , and considered . 
Doña Paula gave her opinion ; Cecilia affected to contradict , but in reality what did she care ? 
Her whole soul was so filled with the thought of her approaching marriage that her voice trembled with emotion , and she could hardly speak , while her eyes glowed with rapture , and shone like two fine stars on a soft summer night . 
`` How hot it is ! '' 
she exclaimed every now and then , putting her hands upon her flaming cheeks . 
Gonzalo assented with an inane smile to what was said , and frequently changed the position of his long legs , which were cramped from the lowness of his chair . 
When they had discussed the linen of the trousseau , they passed on to the dresses , and the conversation became more animated , and Cecilia saw her betrothed without looking at him , and the eyes of Doña Paula , as she gazed at them both , grew softer and softer , their breath mingled , and the shoulders of the future bride and bridegroom touched each other . 
The soft whispers , the lowered light of the lamp , which scarcely reached them , the frequent contact with the arm of her beloved , all combined to fill Cecilia with overwhelming emotion . 
Quite overcome , she got up two or three times and kissed her mother warmly ; when she did this the third time , Doña Paula saw what it betokened and , with a compassionate , smiling glance , said : `` Poor little thing ! 
My poor little thing ! '' 
Cecilia covered her eyes with her hands , and remained so for some time . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
said Doña Paula at last . 
`` Nothing , nothing . '' 
But she kept her eyes covered . 
`` But what is the matter , my daughter ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' she replied at last , taking her hands from her face , and she smiled , but her eyes were wet . 
`` I know , I know , '' returned the mother . 
`` You want the salts ; you feel faint . '' 
`` No , I am not faint ; I am quite well . '' 
The conversation was then renewed , and Doña Paula expressed her wish that Gonzalo should come and live with them . 
This he rather objected to at first , as he knew his uncle would not like it , nevertheless he ended by conceding to the entreaties of both ladies . 
It was so natural that they should not want to be separated ! 
`` You can both be quite independent , I will take care of that . 
There is the large room , the blue one , you know , Cecilia ; it has a large alcove ; then you only want the study for Gonzalo . 
But I have thought of that . 
Just by the large room there is the wardrobe-room , that opens on the courtyard ; it is nice and light . 
It is all in disorder now , but , with a little trouble , it could be turned into a very nice room . 
Would you like to see it , Gonzalo ? '' 
The young man replied that it was not necessary , that he believed all she said , and that he had as good as seen it ; but the lady insisted on it , and , taking a flat candlestick , she escorted him to the other end of the house . 
`` This is the room -- large , is it not ? 
Two windows . 
The alcove is large enough for two beds , let alone for one , '' she added , with a glance at her daughter , who turned aside to shut a window . 
`` Let us go and see the wardrobe-room -- '' And leaving the apartment , crossing a passage , and turning round a corner , they entered another room full of cupboards and lumber . 
`` Do n't mind about the distance , for it is really next to the large room ; it only wants a door of communication to be made between . '' 
Gonzalo turned to his intended and said softly : `` Why does not mama thee and thou me as your papa does ? 
Ask her from me -- I do not like to . '' 
Then Cecilia approached her mother 's ear and said in a soft voice , which trembled with shyness : `` Gonzalo would like you to thee and thou him . '' 
`` What do you say , child ? '' 
asked Doña Paula , putting her hand to her ear . 
Cecilia , with a great effort , raised her voice a little : `` Gonzalo asks why you do not thee and thou him as papa does ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
I am glad the suggestion comes from him , otherwise I should not have ventured . 
Very well , then , when a door is made here in the wall , you will be able to go from the large room into this one without crossing the passage -- do you like the room ? 
Is it large enough ? '' 
`` Too large ; my business at the present moment does not require much space . '' 
Cecilia looked anxious , as if something were on her mind . 
She opened her mouth several times as if about to speak , and then lacked courage . 
At last , after a long pause , she ventured to say : `` One thing is wanting , mama . '' 
`` What ? '' 
The girl hesitated , as if to gain courage , and then , in a trembling voice , she said : `` There is no dressing-room for Gonzalo . '' 
`` That 's true . 
I never thought of that . 
Where was my head ? 
There is no room about here -- wait a moment -- wait . 
We might put the pantry downstairs , and then there would be that little room , which , nicely furnished , would perhaps do . 
The only thing is , it does not communicate with the other rooms ; he will have to cross the passage . '' 
`` What does that matter ? '' 
They then returned to the dining-room , and to the same seats in the corner . 
Presently Venturita came in , in a white peignoir , cut so as to show her alabaster throat and part of her beautiful neck ; her hair hung loose over her shoulders , and her feet were shod with gorgeously embroidered Eastern slippers . 
She came to say `` Good-night '' before retiring to rest , and , approaching her mother , she gave her a kiss , making teasing faces at her sister the while , which Gonzalo could not see . 
`` Well , good-night , '' she said , giving Gonzalo her hand . 
`` Good-night , '' he returned , with an admiring glance , and in a tone of admiration not unnoticed by the girl . 
She was just going away when a coquettish feeling made her turn back at the door and say to Cecilia : `` Where did you put the shoe-horn ? 
I had to come in with slippers , as I could not find it . '' 
Then she took the opportunity of showing her pretty foot . 
`` But it is there in the table drawer . '' 
`` If you only knew how sleepy I am , '' she said , advancing a step , and putting her hand on the head of her sister -- `` Do you know what I ought to do for it ? '' 
she added , with a smile . 
