To say that everything is God , and that when we die we return to God , or , more accurately , continue in Him , avails our longing nothing ; for if this indeed be so , then we were in God before we were born , and if when we die we return to where we were before being born , then the human soul , the individual consciousness , is perishable . 
And since we know very well that God , the personal and conscious God of Christian monotheism , is simply the provider , and above all the guarantor , of our immortality , pantheism is said , and rightly said , to be merely atheism disguised ; and , in my opinion , undisguised . 
And they were right in calling Spinoza an atheist , for his is the most logical , the most rational , system of pantheism . 
Neither is the longing for immortality saved , but rather dissolved and submerged , by agnosticism , or the doctrine of the unknowable , which , when it has professed to wish to leave religious feelings scathless , has always been inspired by the most refined hypocrisy . 
The whole of the first part of Spencer 's First Principles , and especially the fifth chapter entitled `` Reconciliation '' -- that between reason and faith or science and religion being understood -- is a model at the same time of philosophical superficiality and religious insincerity , of the most refined British cant . 
The unknowable , if it is something more than the merely hitherto unknown , is but a purely negative concept , a concept of limitation . 
And upon this foundation no human feeling can be built up . 
The science of religion , on the other hand , of religion considered as an individual and social psychic phenomenon irrespective of the transcendental objective validity of religious affirmations , is a science which , in explaining the origin of the belief that the soul is something that can live disjoined from the body , has destroyed the rationality of this belief . 
However much the religious man may repeat with Schleiermacher , `` Science can teach thee nothing ; it is for science to learn from thee , '' inwardly he thinks otherwise . 
From whatever side the matter is regarded , it is always found that reason confronts our longing for personal immortality and contradicts it . 
And the truth is , in all strictness , that reason is the enemy of life . 
A terrible thing is intelligence . 
It tends to death as memory tends to stability . 
The living , the absolutely unstable , the absolutely individual , is , strictly , unintelligible . 
Logic tends to reduce everything to identities and genera , to each representation having no more than one single and self-same content in whatever place , time , or relation it may occur to us . 
And there is nothing that remains the same for two successive moments of its existence . 
My idea of God is different each time that I conceive it . 
Identity , which is death , is the goal of the intellect . 
The mind seeks what is dead , for what is living escapes it ; it seeks to congeal the flowing stream in blocks of ice ; it seeks to arrest it . 
In order to analyze a body it is necessary to extenuate or destroy it . 
In order to understand anything it is necessary to kill it , to lay it out rigid in the mind . 
Science is a cemetery of dead ideas , even though life may issue from them . 
Worms also feed upon corpses . 
My own thoughts , tumultuous and agitated in the innermost recesses of my soul , once they are torn from their roots in the heart , poured out on to this paper and there fixed in unalterable shape , are already only the corpses of thoughts . 
How , then , shall reason open its portals to the revelation of life ? 
It is a tragic combat -- it is the very essence of tragedy -- this combat of life with reason . 
And truth ? 
Is truth something that is lived or that is comprehended ? 
It is only necessary to read the terrible Parmenides of Plato to arrive at his tragic conclusion that `` the one is and is not , and both itself and others , in relation to themselves and one another , are and are not , and appear to be and appear not to be . '' 
All that is vital is irrational , and all that is rational is anti-vital , for reason is essentially sceptical . 
The rational , in effect , is simply the relational ; reason is limited to relating irrational elements . 
Mathematics is the only perfect science , inasmuch as it adds , subtracts , multiplies , and divides numbers , but not real and substantial things , inasmuch as it is the most formal of the sciences . 
Who can extract the cube root of an ash-tree ? 
Nevertheless we need logic , this terrible power , in order to communicate thoughts and perceptions and even in order to think and perceive , for we think with words , we perceive with forms . 
To think is to converse with oneself ; and speech is social , and social are thought and logic . 
But may they not perhaps possess a content , an individual matter , incommunicable and untranslatable ? 
And may not this be the source of their power ? 
The truth is that man , the prisoner of logic , without which he can not think , has always sought to make logic subservient to his desires , and principally to his fundamental desire . 
He has always sought to hold fast to logic , and especially in the Middle Ages , in the interests of theology and jurisprudence , both of which based themselves on what was established by authority . 
It was not until very much later that logic propounded the problem of knowledge , the problem of its own validity , the scrutiny of the metalogical foundations . 
`` The Western theology , '' Dean Stanley wrote , `` is essentially logical in form and based on law . 
The Eastern theology is rhetorical in form and based on philosophy . 
The Latin divine succeeded to the Roman advocate . 
The Oriental divine succeeded to the Grecian sophist . '' 
-LSB- 28 -RSB- And all the laboured arguments in support of our hunger of immortality , which pretend to be grounded on reason or logic , are merely advocacy and sophistry . 
The property and characteristic of advocacy is , in effect , to make use of logic in the interests of a thesis that is to be defended , while , on the other hand , the strictly scientific method proceeds from the facts , the data , presented to us by reality , in order that it may arrive , or not arrive , as the case may be , at a certain conclusion . 
What is important is to define the problem clearly , whence it follows that progress consists not seldom in undoing what has been done . 
Advocacy always supposes a petitio principii , and its arguments are ad probandum . 
And theology that pretends to be rational is nothing but advocacy . 
Theology proceeds from dogma , and dogma , dogma , in its primitive and most direct sense , signifies a decree , something akin to the Latin placitum , that which has seemed to the legislative authority fitting to be law . 
This juridical concept is the starting-point of theology . 
For the theologian , as for the advocate , dogma , law , is something given -- a starting-point which admits of discussion only in respect of its application and its most exact interpretation . 
Hence it follows that the theological or advocatory spirit is in its principle dogmatical , while the strictly scientific and purely rational spirit is sceptical , skeptikos -- that is , investigative . 
It is so at least in its principle , for there is the other sense of the term scepticism , that which is most usual to-day , that of a system of doubt , suspicion , and uncertainty , and this has arisen from the theological or advocatory use of reason , from the abuse of dogmatism . 
The endeavour to apply the law of authority , the placitum , the dogma , to different and sometimes contraposed practical necessities , is what has engendered the scepticism of doubt . 
It is advocacy , or what amounts to the same thing , theology , that teaches the distrust of reason -- not true science , not the science of investigation , sceptical in the primitive and direct meaning of the word , which hastens towards no predetermined solution nor proceeds save by the testing of hypotheses . 
Take the Summa Theologica of St. Thomas , the classical monument of the theology -- that is , of the advocacy -- of Catholicism , and open it where you please . 
First comes the thesis -- utrum ... whether such a thing be thus or otherwise ; then the objections -- ad primum sic proceditur ; next the answers to these objections -- sed contra est ... or respondeo dicendum ... . 
Pure advocacy ! 
And underlying many , perhaps most , of its arguments you will find a logical fallacy which may be expressed more scholastico by this syllogism : I do not understand this fact save by giving it this explanation ; it is thus that I must understand it , therefore this must be its explanation . 
The alternative being that I am left without any understanding of it at all . 
True science teaches , above all , to doubt and to be ignorant ; advocacy neither doubts nor believes that it does not know . 
It requires a solution . 
To the mentality that assumes , more or less consciously , that we must of necessity find a solution to every problem , belongs the argument based on the disastrous consequences of a thing . 
Take any book of apologetics -- that is to say , of theological advocacy -- and you will see how many times you will meet with this phrase -- `` the disastrous consequences of this doctrine . '' 
Now the disastrous consequences of a doctrine prove at most that the doctrine is disastrous , but not that it is false , for there is no proof that the true is necessarily that which suits us best . 
The identification of the true and the good is but a pious wish . 
In his Études sur Blaise Pascal , A. Vinet says : `` Of the two needs that unceasingly belabour human nature , that of happiness is not only the more universally felt and the more constantly experienced , but it is also the more imperious . 
And this need is not only of the senses ; it is intellectual . 
It is not only for the soul ; it is for the mind that happiness is a necessity . 
Happiness forms a part of truth . '' 
This last proposition -- le bonheur fait partie de la verité -- is a proposition of pure advocacy , but not of science or of pure reason . 
It would be better to say that truth forms a part of happiness in a Tertullianesque sense , in the sense of credo quia absurdum , which means actually credo quia consolans -- I believe because it is a thing consoling to me . 
No , for reason , truth is that of which it can be proved that it is , that it exists , whether it console us or not . 
And reason is certainly not a consoling faculty . 
That terrible Latin poet Lucretius , whose apparent serenity and Epicurean ataraxia conceal so much despair , said that piety consists in the power to contemplate all things with a serene soul -- pacata posse mente omnia tueri . 
And it was the same Lucretius who wrote that religion can persuade us into so great evils -- tantum religio potuit suadere malorum . 
And it is true that religion -- above all the Christian religion -- has been , as the Apostle says , to the Jews a stumbling-block , and to the intellectuals foolishness . 
-LSB- 29 -RSB- The Christian religion , the religion of the immortality of the soul , was called by Tacitus a pernicious superstition -LRB- exitialis superstitio -RRB- , and he asserted that it involved a hatred of mankind -LRB- odium generis humani -RRB- . 
Speaking of the age in which these men lived , the most genuinely rationalistic age in the world 's history , Flaubert , writing to Madame Roger des Genettes , uttered these pregnant words : `` You are right ; we must speak with respect of Lucretius ; I see no one who can compare with him except Byron , and Byron has not his gravity nor the sincerity of his sadness . 
The melancholy of the ancients seems to me more profound than that of the moderns , who all more or less presuppose an immortality on the yonder side of the black hole . 
But for the ancients this black hole was the infinite itself ; the procession of their dreams is imaged against a background of immutable ebony . 
The gods being no more and Christ being not yet , there was between Cicero and Marcus Aurelius a unique moment in which man stood alone . 
Nowhere else do I find this grandeur ; but what renders Lucretius intolerable is his physics , which he gives as if positive . 
If he is weak , it is because he did not doubt enough ; he wished to explain , to arrive at a conclusion ! '' 
-LSB- 30 -RSB- Yes , Lucretius wished to arrive at a conclusion , a solution , and , what is worse , he wished to find consolation in reason . 
For there is also an anti-theological advocacy , and an odium anti-theologicum . 
Many , very many , men of science , the majority of those who call themselves rationalists , are afflicted by it . 
The rationalist acts rationally -- that is to say , he does not speak out of his part -- so long as he confines himself to denying that reason satisfies our vital hunger for immortality ; but , furious at not being able to believe , he soon becomes a prey to the vindictiveness of the odium anti-theologicum , and exclaims with the Pharisees : `` This people who knoweth not the law are cursed . '' 
There is much truth in these words of Soloviev : `` I have a foreboding of the near approach of a time when Christians will gather together again in the Catacombs , because of the persecution of the faith -- a persecution less brutal , perhaps , than that of Nero 's day , but not less refined in its severity , consummated by mendacity , derision , and all the hypocrisies . '' 
The anti-theological hate , the scientificist -- I do not say scientific -- fury , is manifest . 
Consider , not the more detached scientific investigators , those who know how to doubt , but the fanatics of rationalism , and observe with what gross brutality they speak of faith . 
Vogt considered it probable that the cranial structure of the Apostles was of a pronounced simian character ; of the indecencies of Haeckel , that supreme incomprehender , there is no need to speak , nor yet of those of Büchner ; even Virchow is not free from them . 
And others work with more subtilty . 
There are people who seem not to be content with not believing that there is another life , or rather , with believing that there is none , but who are vexed and hurt that others should believe in it or even should wish that it might exist . 
And this attitude is as contemptible as that is worthy of respect which characterizes those who , though urged by the need they have of it to believe in another life , are unable to believe . 
But of this most noble attitude of the spirit , the most profound , the most human , and the most fruitful , the attitude of despair , we will speak later on . 
And the rationalists who do not succumb to the anti-theological fury are bent on convincing men that there are motives for living and consolations for having been born , even though there shall come a time , at the end of some tens or hundreds or millions of centuries , when all human consciousness shall have ceased to exist . 
And these motives for living and working , this thing which some call humanism , are the amazing products of the affective and emotional hollowness of rationalism and of its stupendous hypocrisy -- a hypocrisy bent on sacrificing sincerity to veracity , and sworn not to confess that reason is a dissolvent and disconsolatory power . 
Must I repeat again what I have already said about all this business of manufacturing culture , of progressing , of realizing good , truth , and beauty , of establishing justice on earth , of ameliorating life for those who shall come after us , of subserving I know not what destiny , and all this without our taking thought for the ultimate end of each one of us ? 
Must I again declare to you the supreme vacuity of culture , of science , of art , of good , of truth , of beauty , of justice ... of all these beautiful conceptions , if at the last , in four days or in four millions of centuries -- it matters not which -- no human consciousness shall exist to appropriate this civilization , this science , art , good , truth , beauty , justice , and all the rest ? 
Many and very various have been the rationalist devices -- more or less rational -- by means of which from the days of the Epicureans and the Stoics it has been sought to discover rational consolation in truth and to convince men , although those who sought so to do remained themselves unconvinced , that there are motives for working and lures for living , even though the human consciousness be destined some day to disappear . 
The Epicurean attitude , the extreme and grossest expression of which is `` Let us eat and drink , for to-morrow we die , '' or the Horatian carpe diem , which may be rendered by `` Live for the day , '' does not differ in its essence from the Stoic attitude with its `` Accomplish what the moral conscience dictates to thee , and afterward let it be as it may be . '' 
Both attitudes have a common base ; and pleasure for pleasure 's sake comes to the same as duty for duty 's sake . 
Spinoza , the most logical and consistent of atheists -- I mean of those who deny the persistence of individual consciousness through indefinite future time -- and at the same time the most pious , Spinoza devoted the fifth and last part of his Ethic to elucidating the path that leads to liberty and to determining the concept of happiness . 
The concept ! 
Concept , not feeling ! 
For Spinoza , who was a terrible intellectualist , happiness -LRB- beatitudo -RRB- is a concept , and the love of God an intellectual love . 
After establishing in proposition xxi . 
of the fifth part that `` the mind can imagine nothing , neither can it remember anything that is past , save during the continuance of the body '' -- which is equivalent to denying the immortality of the soul , since a soul which , disjoined from the body in which it lived , does not remember its past , is neither immortal nor is it a soul -- he goes on to affirm in proposition xxiii . 
that `` the human mind can not be absolutely destroyed with the body , but there remains of it something which is eternal , '' and this eternity of the mind is a certain mode of thinking . 
But do not let yourselves be deceived ; there is no such eternity of the individual mind . 
Everything is sub æternitatis specie -- that is to say , pure illusion . 
Nothing could be more dreary , nothing more desolating , nothing more anti-vital than this happiness , this beatitudo , of Spinoza , that consists in the intellectual love of the mind towards God , which is nothing else but the very love with which God loves Himself -LRB- prop , xxxvi . -RRB- . 
Our happiness -- that is to say , our liberty -- consists in the constant and eternal love of God towards men . 
So affirms the corollary to this thirty-sixth proposition . 
And all this in order to arrive at the conclusion , which is the final and crowning proposition of the whole Ethic , that happiness is not the reward of virtue , but virtue itself . 
The everlasting refrain ! 
Or , to put it plainly , we proceed from God and to God we return , which , translated into concrete language , the language of life and feeling , means that my personal consciousness sprang from nothingness , from my unconsciousness , and to nothingness it will return . 
And this most dreary and desolating voice of Spinoza is the very voice of reason . 
And the liberty of which he tells us is a terrible liberty . 
And against Spinoza and his doctrine of happiness there is only one irresistible argument , the argument ad hominem . 
Was he happy , Benedict Spinoza , while , to allay his inner unhappiness , he was discoursing of happiness ? 
Was he free ? 
In the corollary to proposition xli . 
of this same final and most tragic part of that tremendous tragedy of his Ethic , the poor desperate Jew of Amsterdam discourses of the common persuasion of the vulgar of the truth of eternal life . 
Let us hear what he says : `` It would appear that they esteem piety and religion -- and , indeed , all that is referred to fortitude or strength of mind -- as burdens which they expect to lay down after death , when they hope to receive a reward for their servitude , not for their piety and religion in this life . 
Nor is it even this hope alone that leads them ; the fear of frightful punishments with which they are menaced after death also influences them to live -- in so far as their impotence and poverty of spirit permits -- in conformity with the prescription of the Divine law . 
And were not this hope and this fear infused into the minds of men -- but , on the contrary , did they believe that the soul perished with the body , and that , beyond the grave , there was no other life prepared for the wretched who had borne the burden of piety in this -- they would return to their natural inclinations , preferring to accommodate everything to their own liking , and would follow fortune rather than reason . 
But all this appears no less absurd than it would be to suppose that a man , because he did not believe that he could nourish his body eternally with wholesome food , would saturate himself with deadly poisons ; or than if because believing that his soul was not eternal and immortal , he should therefore prefer to be without a soul -LRB- amens -RRB- and to live without reason ; all of which is so absurd as to be scarcely worth refuting -LRB- quæ adeo absurda sunt , ut vix recenseri mereantur -RRB- . '' 
When a thing is said to be not worth refuting you may be sure that either it is flagrantly stupid -- in which case all comment is superfluous -- or it is something formidable , the very crux of the problem . 
And this it is in this case . 
Yes ! 
poor Portuguese Jew exiled in Holland , yes ! 
that he who is convinced without a vestige of doubt , without the faintest hope of any saving uncertainty , that his soul is not immortal , should prefer to be without a soul -LRB- amens -RRB- , or irrational , or idiot , that he should prefer not to have been born , is a supposition that has nothing , absolutely nothing , absurd in it . 
Was he happy , the poor Jewish intellectualist definer of intellectual love and of happiness ? 
For that and no other is the problem . 
`` What does it profit thee to know the definition of compunction if thou dost not feel it ? '' 
says à Kempis . 
And what profits it to discuss or to define happiness if you can not thereby achieve happiness ? 
Not inapposite in this connection is that terrible story that Diderot tells of a eunuch who desired to take lessons in esthetics from a native of Marseilles in order that he might be better qualified to select the slaves destined for the harem of the Sultan , his master . 
At the end of the first lesson , a physiological lesson , brutally and carnally physiological , the eunuch exclaimed bitterly , `` It is evident that I shall never know esthetics ! '' 
Even so , and just as eunuchs will never know esthetics as applied to the selection of beautiful women , so neither will pure rationalists ever know ethics , nor will they ever succeed in defining happiness , for happiness is a thing that is lived and felt , not a thing that is reasoned about or defined . 
And you have another rationalist , one not sad or submissive , like Spinoza , but rebellious , and though concealing a despair not less bitter , making a hypocritical pretence of light-heartedness , you have Nietzsche , who discovered mathematically -LRB- !!! -RRB- 
that counterfeit of the immortality of the soul which is called `` eternal recurrence , '' and which is in fact the most stupendous tragi-comedy or comi-tragedy . 
The number of atoms or irreducible primary elements being finite and the universe eternal , a combination identical with that which at present exists must at some future time be reproduced , and therefore that which now is must be repeated an infinite number of times . 
This is evident , and just as I shall live again the life that I am now living , so I have already lived it before an infinite number of times , for there is an eternity that stretches into the past -- a parte ante -- just as there will be one stretching into the future -- a parte post . 
But , unfortunately , it happens that I remember none of my previous existences , and perhaps it is impossible that I should remember them , for two things absolutely and completely identical are but one . 
Instead of supposing that we live in a finite universe , composed of a finite number of irreducible primary elements , suppose that we live in an infinite universe , without limits in space -- which concrete infinity is not less inconceivable than the concrete eternity in time -- then it will follow that this system of ours , that of the Milky Way , is repeated an infinite number of times in the infinite of space , and that therefore I am now living an infinite number of lives , all exactly identical . 
A jest , as you see , but one not less comic -- that is to say , not less tragic -- than that of Nietzsche , that of the laughing lion . 
And why does the lion laugh ? 
I think he laughs with rage , because he can never succeed in finding consolation in the thought that he has been the same lion before and is destined to be the same lion again . 
But if Spinoza and Nietzsche were indeed both rationalists , each after his own manner , they were not spiritual eunuchs ; they had heart , feeling , and , above all , hunger , a mad hunger for eternity , for immortality . 
The physical eunuch does not feel the need of reproducing himself carnally , in the body , and neither does the spiritual eunuch feel the hunger for self-perpetuation . 
Certain it is that there are some who assert that reason suffices them , and they counsel us to desist from seeking to penetrate into the impenetrable . 
But of those who say that they have no need of any faith in an eternal personal life to furnish them with incentives to living and motives for action , I know not well how to think . 
A man blind from birth may also assure us that he feels no great longing to enjoy the world of sight nor suffers any great anguish from not having enjoyed it , and we must needs believe him , for what is wholly unknown can not be the object of desire -- nihil volitum quin præcognitum , there can be no volition save of things already known . 
But I can not be persuaded that he who has once in his life , either in his youth or for some other brief space of time , cherished the belief in the immortality of the soul , will ever find peace without it . 
And of this sort of blindness from birth there are but few instances among us , and then only by a kind of strange aberration . 
For the merely and exclusively rational man is an aberration and nothing but an aberration . 
More sincere , much more sincere , are those who say : `` We must not talk about it , for in talking about it we only waste our time and weaken our will ; let us do our duty here and hereafter let come what may . '' 
But this sincerity hides a yet deeper insincerity . 
May it perhaps be that by saying `` We must not talk about it , '' they succeed in not thinking about it ? 
Our will is weakened ? 
And what then ? 
We lose the capacity for human action ? 
And what then ? 
It is very convenient to tell a man whom a fatal disease condemns to an early death , and who knows it , not to think about it . 
Meglio oprando obliar , senzá indagarlo , Questo enorme mister del universo ! 
`` Better to work and to forget and not to probe into this vast mystery of the universe ! '' 
Carducci wrote in his Idilio Maremmano , the same Carducci who at the close of his ode Sul Monte Mario tells us how the earth , the mother of the fugitive soul , must roll its burden of glory and sorrow round the sun `` until , worn out beneath the equator , mocked by the last flames of dying heat , the exhausted human race is reduced to a single man and woman , who , standing in the midst of dead woods , surrounded by sheer mountains , livid , with glassy eyes watch thee , O sun , set across the immense frozen waste . '' 
But is it possible for us to give ourselves to any serious and lasting work , forgetting the vast mystery of the universe and abandoning all attempt to understand it ? 
Is it possible to contemplate the vast All with a serene soul , in the spirit of the Lucretian piety , if we are conscious of the thought that a time must come when this All will no longer be reflected in any human consciousness ? 
Cain , in Byron 's poem , asks of Lucifer , the prince of the intellectuals , `` Are ye happy ? '' 
and Lucifer replies , `` We are mighty . '' 
Cain questions again , `` Are ye happy ? '' 
and then the great Intellectual says to him : `` No ; art thou ? '' 
And further on , this same Lucifer says to Adah , the sister and wife of Cain : `` Choose betwixt love and knowledge -- since there is no other choice . '' 
And in the same stupendous poem , when Cain says that the tree of the knowledge of good and evil was a lying tree , for `` we know nothing ; at least it promised knowledge at the price of death , '' Lucifer answers him : `` It may be death leads to the highest knowledge '' -- that is to say , to nothingness . 
To this word knowledge which Lord Byron uses in the above quotations , the Spanish ciencia , the French science , the German Wissenschaft , is often opposed the word wisdom , sabiduria , sagesse , Weisheit . 
Knowledge comes , but Wisdom lingers , and he bears a laden breast , Full of sad experience , moving toward the stillness of his rest , says another lord , Tennyson , in his Locksley Hall . 
And what is this wisdom which we have to seek chiefly in the poets , leaving knowledge on one side ? 
It is well enough to say with Matthew Arnold in his Introduction to Wordsworth 's poems , that poetry is reality and philosophy illusion ; but reason is always reason and reality is always reality , that which can be proved to exist externally to us , whether we find in it consolation or despair . 
I do not know why so many people were scandalized , or pretended to be scandalized , when Brunetière proclaimed again the bankruptcy of science . 
For science as a substitute for religion and reason as a substitute for faith have always fallen to pieces . 
Science will be able to satisfy , and in fact does satisfy in an increasing measure , our increasing logical or intellectual needs , our desire to know and understand the truth ; but science does not satisfy the needs of our heart and our will , and far from satisfying our hunger for immortality it contradicts it . 
Rational truth and life stand in opposition to one another . 
And is it possible that there is any other truth than rational truth ? 
It must remain established , therefore , that reason -- human reason -- within its limits , not only does not prove rationally that the soul is immortal or that the human consciousness shall preserve its indestructibility through the tracts of time to come , but that it proves rather -- within its limits , I repeat -- that the individual consciousness can not persist after the death of the physical organism upon which it depends . 
And these limits , within which I say that human reason proves this , are the limits of rationality , of what is known by demonstration . 
Beyond these limits is the irrational , which , whether it be called the super-rational or the infra-rational or the contra-rational , is all the same thing . 
Beyond these limits is the absurd of Tertullian , the impossible of the certum est , quia impossibile est . 
And this absurd can only base itself upon the most absolute uncertainty . 
The rational dissolution ends in dissolving reason itself ; it ends in the most absolute scepticism , in the phenomenalism of Hume or in the doctrine of absolute contingencies of Stuart Mill , the most consistent and logical of the positivists . 
The supreme triumph of reason , the analytical -- that is , the destructive and dissolvent -- faculty , is to cast doubt upon its own validity . 
The stomach that contains an ulcer ends by digesting itself ; and reason ends by destroying the immediate and absolute validity of the concept of truth and of the concept of necessity . 
Both concepts are relative ; there is no absolute truth , no absolute necessity . 
We call a concept true which agrees with the general system of all our concepts ; and we call a perception true which does not contradict the system of our perceptions . 
Truth is coherence . 
But as regards the whole system , the aggregate , as there is nothing outside of it of which we have knowledge , we can not say whether it is true or not . 
It is conceivable that the universe , as it exists in itself , outside of our consciousness , may be quite other than it appears to us , although this is a supposition that has no meaning for reason . 
And as regards necessity , is there an absolute necessity ? 
By necessary we mean merely that which is , and in so far as it is , for in another more transcendental sense , what absolute necessity , logical and independent of the fact that the universe exists , is there that there should be a universe or anything else at all ? 
Absolute relativism , which is neither more nor less than scepticism , in the most modern sense of the term , is the supreme triumph of the reasoning reason . 
Feeling does not succeed in converting consolation into truth , nor does reason succeed in converting truth into consolation . 
But reason going beyond truth itself , beyond the concept of reality itself , succeeds in plunging itself into the depths of scepticism . 
And in this abyss the scepticism of the reason encounters the despair of the heart , and this encounter leads to the discovery of a basis -- a terrible basis ! 
-- for consolation to build on . 
Let us ex Parce unicæ spes totius orbis . 
-- TERTULLIANUS , Adversus Marcionem , 5 . 
We have seen that the vital longing for human immortality finds no consolation in reason and that reason leaves us without incentive or consolation in life and life itself without real finality . 
But here , in the depths of the abyss , the despair of the heart and of the will and the scepticism of reason meet face to face and embrace like brothers . 
And we shall see it is from this embrace , a tragic -- that is to say , an intimately loving -- embrace , that the wellspring of life will flow , a life serious and terrible . 
Scepticism , uncertainty -- the position to which reason , by practising its analysis upon itself , upon its own validity , at last arrives -- is the foundation upon which the heart 's despair must build up its hope . 
Disillusioned , we had to abandon the position of those who seek to give consolation the force of rational and logical truth , pretending to prove the rationality , or at any rate the non-irrationality , of consolation ; and we had to abandon likewise the position of those who seek to give rational truth the force of consolation and of a motive for life . 
Neither the one nor the other of these positions satisfied us . 
The one is at variance with our reason , the other with our feeling . 
These two powers can never conclude peace and we must needs live by their war . 
We must make of this war , of war itself , the very condition of our spiritual life . 
Neither does this high debate admit of that indecent and repugnant expedient which the more or less parliamentary type of politician has devised and dubbed `` a formula of agreement , '' the property of which is to render it impossible for either side to claim to be victorious . 
There is no place here for a time-serving compromise . 
Perhaps a degenerate and cowardly reason might bring itself to propose some such formula of agreement , for in truth reason lives by formulas ; but life , which can not be formulated , life which lives and seeks to live for ever , does not submit to formulas . 
Its sole formula is : all or nothing . 
Feeling does not compound its differences with middle terms . 
Initium sapientiæ timor Domini , it is said , meaning perhaps timor mortis , or it may be , timor vitæ , which is the same thing . 
Always it comes about that the beginning of wisdom is a fear . 
Is it true to say of this saving scepticism which I am now going to discuss , that it is doubt ? 
It is doubt , yes , but it is much more than doubt . 
Doubt is commonly something very cold , of very little vitalizing force , and above all something rather artificial , especially since Descartes degraded it to the function of a method . 
The conflict between reason and life is something more than a doubt . 
For doubt is easily resolved into a comic element . 
The methodical doubt of Descartes is a comic doubt , a doubt purely theoretical and provisional -- that is to say , the doubt of a man who acts as if he doubted without really doubting . 
And because it was a stove-excogitated doubt , the man who deduced that he existed from the fact that he thought did not approve of `` those turbulent -LRB- brouillonnes -RRB- and restless persons who , being called neither by birth nor by fortune to the management of public affairs , are perpetually devising some new reformation , '' and he was pained by the suspicion that there might be something of this kind in his own writings . 
No , he , Descartes , proposed only to `` reform his own thoughts and to build upon ground that was wholly his . '' 
And he resolved not to accept anything as true when he did not recognize it clearly to be so , and to make a clean sweep of all prejudices and received ideas , to the end that he might construct his intellectual habitation anew . 
But `` as it is not enough , before beginning to rebuild one 's dwelling-house , to pull it down and to furnish materials and architects , or to study architecture oneself ... but it is also necessary to be provided with some other wherein to lodge conveniently while the work is in progress , '' he framed for himself a provisional ethic -- une morale de provision -- the first law of which was to observe the customs of his country and to keep always to the religion in which , by the grace of God , he had been instructed from his infancy , governing himself in all things according to the most moderate opinions . 
Yes , exactly , a provisional religion and even a provisional God ! 
And he chose the most moderate opinions `` because these are always the most convenient for practice . '' 
But it is best to proceed no further . 
This methodical or theoretical Cartesian doubt , this philosophical doubt excogitated in a stove , is not the doubt , is not the scepticism , is not the incertitude , that I am talking about here . 
No ! 
This other doubt is a passionate doubt , it is the eternal conflict between reason and feeling , science and life , logic and biotic . 
For science destroys the concept of personality by reducing it to a complex in continual flux from moment to moment -- that is to say , it destroys the very foundation of the spiritual and emotional life , which ranges itself unyieldingly against reason . 
And this doubt can not avail itself of any provisional ethic , but has to found its ethic , as we shall see , on the conflict itself , an ethic of battle , and itself has to serve as the foundation of religion . 
And it inhabits a house which is continually being demolished and which continually it has to rebuild . 
Without ceasing the will , I mean the will never to die , the spirit of unsubmissiveness to death , labours to build up the house of life , and without ceasing the keen blasts and stormy assaults of reason beat it down . 
And more than this , in the concrete vital problem that concerns us , reason takes up no position whatever . 
In truth , it does something worse than deny the immortality of the soul -- for that at any rate would be one solution -- it refuses even to recognize the problem as our vital desire presents it to us . 
In the rational and logical sense of the term problem , there is no such problem . 
This question of the immortality of the soul , of the persistence of the individual consciousness , is not rational , it falls outside reason . 
As a problem , and whatever solution it may receive , it is irrational . 
Rationally even the very propounding of the problem lacks sense . 
The immortality of the soul is as unconceivable as , in all strictness , is its absolute mortality . 
For the purpose of explaining the world and existence -- and such is the task of reason -- it is not necessary that we should suppose that our soul is either mortal or immortal . 
The mere enunciation of the problem is , therefore , an irrationality . 
Let us hear what our brother Kierkegaard has to say . 
`` The danger of abstract thought is seen precisely in respect of the problem of existence , the difficulty of which it solves by going round it , afterwards boasting that it has completely explained it . 
It explains immortality in general , and it does so in a remarkable way by identifying it with eternity -- with the eternity which is essentially the medium of thought . 
But with the immortality of each individually existing man , wherein precisely the difficulty lies , abstraction does not concern itself , is not interested in it . 
And yet the difficulty of existence lies just in the interest of the existing being -- the man who exists is infinitely interested in existing . 
Abstract thought besteads immortality only in order that it may kill me as an individual being with an individual existence , and so make me immortal , pretty much in the same way as that famous physician in one of Holberg 's plays , whose medicine , while it took away the patient 's fever , took away his life at the same time . 
An abstract thinker , who refuses to disclose and admit the relation that exists between his abstract thought and the fact that he is an existing being , produces a comic impression upon us , however accomplished and distinguished he may be , for he runs the risk of ceasing to be a man . 
While an effective man , compounded of infinitude and finitude , owes his effectiveness precisely to the conjunction of these two elements and is infinitely interested in existing , an abstract thinker , similarly compounded , is a double being , a fantastical being , who lives in the pure being of abstraction , and at times presents the sorry figure of a professor who lays aside this abstract essence as he lays aside his walking-stick . 
When one reads the Life of a thinker of this kind -- whose writings may be excellent -- one trembles at the thought of what it is to be a man . 
And when one reads in his writings that thinking and being are the same thing , one thinks , remembering his life , that that being , which is identical with thinking , is not precisely the same thing as being a man '' -LRB- Afsluttende uvidenskabelig Efterskrift , chap . 
iii . -RRB- . 
What intense passion -- that is to say , what truth -- there is in this bitter invective against Hegel , prototype of the rationalist ! 
-- for the rationalist takes away our fever by taking away our life , and promises us , instead of a concrete , an abstract immortality , as if the hunger for immortality that consumes us were an abstract and not a concrete hunger ! 
It may indeed be said that when once the dog is dead there is an end to the rabies , and that after I have died I shall no more be tortured by this rage of not dying , and that the fear of death , or more properly , of nothingness , is an irrational fear , but ... Yes , but ... Eppur si muove ! 
And it will go on moving . 
For it is the source of all movement ! 
I doubt , however , whether our brother Kierkegaard is altogether in the right , for this same abstract thinker , or thinker of abstractions , thinks in order that he may exist , that he may not cease to exist , or thinks perhaps in order to forget that he will have to cease to exist . 
This is the root of the passion for abstract thought . 
And possibly Hegel was as infinitely interested as Kierkegaard in his own concrete , individual existence , although the professional decorum of the state-philosopher compelled him to conceal the fact . 
Faith in immortality is irrational . 
And , notwithstanding , faith , life , and reason have mutual need of one another . 
This vital longing is not properly a problem , can not assume a logical status , can not be formulated in propositions susceptible of rational discussion ; but it announces itself in us as hunger announces itself . 
Neither can the wolf that throws itself with the fury of hunger upon its prey or with the fury of instinct upon the she-wolf , enunciate its impulse rationally and as a logical problem . 
Reason and faith are two enemies , neither of which can maintain itself without the other . 
The irrational demands to be rationalized and reason only can operate on the irrational . 
They are compelled to seek mutual support and association . 
But association in struggle , for struggle is a mode of association . 
In the world of living beings the struggle for life establishes an association , and a very close one , not only between those who unite together in combat against a common foe , but between the combatants themselves . 
And is there any possible association more intimate than that uniting the animal that eats another and the animal that is eaten , between the devourer and the devoured ? 
And if this is clearly seen in the struggle between individuals , it is still more evident in the struggle between peoples . 
War has always been the most effective factor of progress , even more than commerce . 
It is through war that conquerors and conquered learn to know each other and in consequence to love each other . 
Christianity , the foolishness of the Cross , the irrational faith that Christ rose from the dead in order to raise us from the dead , was saved by the rationalistic Hellenic culture , and this in its turn was saved by Christianity . 
Without Christianity the Renaissance would have been impossible . 
Without the Gospel , without St. Paul , the peoples who had traversed the Middle Ages would have understood neither Plato nor Aristotle . 
A purely rationalist tradition is as impossible as a tradition purely religious . 
It is frequently disputed whether the Reformation was born as the child of the Renaissance or as a protest against it , and both propositions may be said to be true , for the son is always born as a protest against the father . 
It is also said that it was the revived Greek classics that led men like Erasmus back to St. Paul and to primitive Christianity , which is the most irrational form of Christianity ; but it may be retorted that it was St. Paul , that it was the Christian irrationality underlying his Catholic theology , that led them back to the classics . 
`` Christianity is what it has come to be , '' it has been said , `` only through its alliance with antiquity , while with the Copts and Ethiopians it is but a kind of buffoonery . 
Islam developed under the influence of Persian and Greek culture , and under that of the Turks it has been transformed into a destructive barbarism . '' 
-LSB- 31 -RSB- We have emerged from the Middle Ages , from the medieval faith as ardent as it was at heart despairing , and not without its inward and abysmal incertitudes , and we have entered upon the age of rationalism , likewise not without its incertitudes . 
Faith in reason is exposed to the same rational indefensibility as all other faith . 
And we may say with Robert Browning , All we have gained , then , by our unbelief Is a life of doubt diversified by faith For one of faith diversified by doubt . 
-LRB- Bishop Blougram 's Apology . -RRB- 
And if , as I have said , faith , life , can only sustain itself by leaning upon reason , which renders it transmissible -- and above all transmissible from myself to myself -- that is to say , reflective and conscious -- it is none the less true that reason in its turn can only sustain itself by leaning upon faith , upon life , even if only upon faith in reason , faith in its availability for something more than mere knowing , faith in its availability for living . 
Nevertheless , neither is faith transmissible or rational , nor is reason vital . 
The will and the intelligence have need of one another , and the reverse of that old aphorism , nihil volitum quin præcognitum , nothing is willed but what is previously known , is not so paradoxical as at first sight it may appear -- nihil cognitum quin prævolitum , nothing is known but what is previously willed . 
Vinet , in his study of Cousin 's book on the Pensées of Pascal , says : `` The very knowledge of the mind as such has need of the heart . 
Without the desire to see there is no seeing ; in a great materialization of life and of thought there is no believing in the things of the spirit . '' 
We shall see presently that to believe is , in the first instance , to wish to believe . 
The will and the intelligence seek opposite ends : that we may absorb the world into ourselves , appropriate it to ourselves , is the aim of the will ; that we may be absorbed into the world , that of the intelligence . 
Opposite ends ? 
-- are they not rather one and the same ? 
No , they are not , although they may seem to be so . 
The intelligence is monist or pantheist , the will monotheist or egoist . 
The intelligence has no need of anything outside it to exercise itself upon ; it builds its foundation with ideas themselves , while the will requires matter . 
To know something is to make this something that I know myself ; but to avail myself of it , to dominate it , it has to remain distinct from myself . 
Philosophy and religion are enemies , and because they are enemies they have need of one another . 
There is no religion without some philosophic basis , no philosophy without roots in religion . 
Each lives by its contrary . 
The history of philosophy is , strictly speaking , a history of religion . 
And the attacks which are directed against religion from a presumed scientific or philosophical point of view are merely attacks from another but opposing religious point of view . 
`` The opposition which professedly exists between natural science and Christianity really exists between an impulse derived from natural religion blended with the scientific investigation of nature , and the validity of the Christian view of the world , which assures to spirit its pre-eminence over the entire world of nature , '' says Ritschl -LRB- Rechtfertgung und Versöhnung , iii . 
chap . 
iv . 
§ 28 -RRB- . 
Now this instinct is the instinct of rationality itself . 
And the critical idealism of Kant is of religious origin , and it is in order to save religion that Kant enlarged the limits of reason after having in a certain sense dissolved it in scepticism . 
The system of antitheses , contradictions , and antinomies , upon which Hegel constructed his absolute idealism , has its root and germ in Kant himself , and this root is an irrational root . 
We shall see later on , when we come to deal with faith , that faith is in its essence simply a matter of will , not of reason , that to believe is to wish to believe , and to believe in God is , before all and above all , to wish that there may be a God . 
In the same way , to believe in the immortality of the soul is to wish that the soul may be immortal , but to wish it with such force that this volition shall trample reason under foot and pass beyond it . 
But reason has its revenge . 
The instinct of knowing and the instinct of living , or rather of surviving , come into conflict . 
In his work on the Analysis of the Sensations and the Relation of the Physical to the Psychical , -LSB- 32 -RSB- Dr. E. Mach tells us that not even the investigator , the savant , der Forscher , is exempted from taking his part in the struggle for existence , that even the roads of science lead mouth-wards , and that in the actual conditions of the society in which we live the pure instinct of knowing , der reine Erkenntnisstrieb , is still no more than an ideal . 
And so it always will be . 
Primum vivere , deinde philosophari , or perhaps better , primum supervivere or superesse . 
Every position of permanent agreement or harmony between reason and life , between philosophy and religion , becomes impossible . 
And the tragic history of human thought is simply the history of a struggle between reason and life -- reason bent on rationalizing life and forcing it to submit to the inevitable , to mortality ; life bent on vitalizing reason and forcing it to serve as a support for its own vital desires . 
And this is the history of philosophy , inseparable from the history of religion . 
Our sense of the world of objective reality is necessarily subjective , human , anthropomorphic . 
And vitalism will always rise up against rationalism ; reason will always find itself confronted by will . 
Hence the rhythm of the history of philosophy and the alternation of periods in which life imposes itself , giving birth to spiritual forms , with those in which reason imposes itself , giving birth to materialist forms , although both of these classes of forms of belief may be disguised by other names . 
Neither reason nor life ever acknowledges itself vanquished . 
But we will return to this in the next chapter . 
The vital consequence of rationalism would be suicide . 
Kierkegaard puts it very well : `` The consequence for existence -LSB- 33 -RSB- of pure thought is suicide ... . 
We do not praise suicide but passion . 
The thinker , on the contrary , is a curious animal -- for a few spells during the day he is very intelligent , but , for the rest , he has nothing in common with man '' -LRB- Afsluttende uvidenskabelig Efterskrift , chap iii. , § 1 -RRB- . 
As the thinker , in spite of all , does not cease to be a man , he employs reason in the interests of life , whether he knows it or not . 
Life cheats reason and reason cheats life . 
Scholastic-Aristotelian philosophy fabricated in the interest of life a teleologic-evolutionist system , rational in appearance , which might serve as a support for our vital longing . 
This philosophy , the basis of the orthodox Christian supernaturalism , whether Catholic or Protestant , was , in its essence , merely a trick on the part of life to force reason to lend it its support . 
But reason supported it with such pressure that it ended by pulverizing it . 
I have read that the ex-Carmelite , Hyacinthe Loyson , declared that he could present himself before God with tranquillity , for he was at peace with his conscience and with his reason . 
With what conscience ? 
If with his religious conscience , then I do not understand . 
For it is a truth that no man can serve two masters , and least of all when , though they may sign truces and armistices and compromises , these two are enemies because of their conflicting interests . 
To all this someone is sure to object that life ought to subject itself to reason , to which we will reply that nobody ought to do what he is unable to do , and life can not subject itself to reason . 
`` Ought , therefore can , '' some Kantian will retort . 
To which we shall demur : `` Can not , therefore ought not . '' 
And life can not submit itself to reason , because the end of life is living and not understanding . 
Again , there are those who talk of the religious duty of resignation to mortality . 
This is indeed the very summit of aberration and insincerity . 
But someone is sure to oppose the idea of veracity to that of sincerity . 
Granted , and yet the two may very well be reconciled . 
Veracity , the homage I owe to what I believe to be rational , to what logically we call truth , moves me to affirm , in this case , that the immortality of the individual soul is a contradiction in terms , that it is something , not only irrational , but contra-rational ; but sincerity leads me to affirm also my refusal to resign myself to this previous affirmation and my protest against its validity . 
What I feel is a truth , at any rate as much a truth as what I see , touch , hear , or what is demonstrated to me -- nay , I believe it is more of a truth -- and sincerity obliges me not to hide what I feel . 
And life , quick to defend itself , searches for the weak point in reason and finds it in scepticism , which it straightway fastens upon , seeking to save itself by means of this stranglehold . 
It needs the weakness of its adversary . 
Nothing is sure . 
Everything is elusive and in the air . 
In an outburst of passion Lamennais exclaims : `` But what ! 
Shall we , losing all hope , shut our eyes and plunge into the voiceless depths of a universal scepticism ? 
Shall we doubt that we think , that we feel , that we are ? 
Nature does not allow it ; she forces us to believe even when our reason is not convinced . 
Absolute certainty and absolute doubt are both alike forbidden to us . 
We hover in a vague mean between these two extremes , as between being and nothingness ; for complete scepticism would be the extinction of the intelligence and the total death of man . 
But it is not given to man to annihilate himself ; there is in him something which invincibly resists destruction , I know not what vital faith , indomitable even by his will . 
Whether he likes it or not , he must believe , because he must act , because he must preserve himself . 
His reason , if he listened only to that , teaching him to doubt everything , itself included , would reduce him to a state of absolute inaction ; he would perish before even he had been able to prove to himself that he existed '' -LRB- Essai sur l'indifférence en matière de religion , iii ^ e partie , chap . 
lxvii . -RRB- . 
Reason , however , does not actually lead us to absolute scepticism . 
No ! 
Reason does not lead me and can not lead me to doubt that I exist . 
Whither reason does lead me is to vital scepticism , or more properly , to vital negation -- not merely to doubt , but to deny , that my consciousness survives my death . 
Scepticism is produced by the clash between reason and desire . 
And from this clash , from this embrace between despair and scepticism , is born that holy , that sweet , that saving incertitude , which is our supreme consolation . 
The absolute and complete certainty , on the one hand , that death is a complete , definite , irrevocable annihilation of personal consciousness , a certainty of the same order as the certainty that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles , or , on the other hand , the absolute and complete certainty that our personal consciousness is prolonged beyond death in these present or in other conditions , and above all including in itself that strange and adventitious addition of eternal rewards and punishments -- both of these certainties alike would make life impossible for us . 
In the most secret chamber of the spirit of him who believes himself convinced that death puts an end to his personal consciousness , his memory , for ever , and all unknown to him perhaps , there lurks a shadow , a vague shadow , a shadow of shadow , of uncertainty , and while he says within himself , `` Well , let us live this life that passes away , for there is no other ! '' 
the silence of this secret chamber speaks to him and murmurs , `` Who knows ! 
... '' He may not think he hears it , but he hears it nevertheless . 
And likewise in some secret place of the soul of the believer who most firmly holds the belief in a future life , there is a muffled voice , a voice of uncertainty , which whispers in the ear of his spirit , `` Who knows ! 
... '' These voices are like the humming of a mosquito when the south-west wind roars through the trees in the wood ; we can not distinguish this faint humming , yet nevertheless , merged in the clamour of the storm , it reaches the ear . 
Otherwise , without this uncertainty , how could we live ? 
`` Is there ? '' 
`` Is there not ? '' 
-- these are the bases of our inner life . 
There may be a rationalist who has never wavered in his conviction of the mortality of the soul , and there may be a vitalist who has never wavered in his faith in immortality ; but at the most this would only prove that just as there are natural monstrosities , so there are those who are stupid as regards heart and feeling , however great their intelligence , and those who are stupid intellectually , however great their virtue . 
But , in normal cases , I can not believe those who assure me that never , not in a fleeting moment , not in the hours of direst loneliness and grief , has this murmur of uncertainty breathed upon their consciousness . 
I do not understand those men who tell me that the prospect of the yonder side of death has never tormented them , that the thought of their own annihilation never disquiets them . 
For my part I do not wish to make peace between my heart and my head , between my faith and my reason -- I wish rather that there should be war between them ! 
In the ninth chapter of the Gospel according to Mark it is related how a man brought unto Jesus his son who was possessed by a dumb spirit , and wheresoever the spirit took him it tore him , causing him to foam and gnash his teeth and pine away , wherefore he sought to bring him to Jesus that he might cure him . 
And the Master , impatient of those who sought only for signs and wonders , exclaimed : `` O faithless generation , how long shall I be with you ? 
how long shall I suffer you ? 
bring him unto me '' -LRB- ver . 
