He found himself , then , about twenty-four hours behind-hand , thirty-five days after leaving London . 
The Carnatic was announced to leave Hong Kong at five the next morning . 
Mr. Fogg had sixteen hours in which to attend to his business there , which was to deposit Aouda safely with her wealthy relative . 
On landing , he conducted her to a palanquin , in which they repaired to the Club Hotel . 
A room was engaged for the young woman , and Mr. Fogg , after seeing that she wanted for nothing , set out in search of her cousin Jeejeeh . 
He instructed Passepartout to remain at the hotel until his return , that Aouda might not be left entirely alone . 
Mr. Fogg repaired to the Exchange , where , he did not doubt , every one would know so wealthy and considerable a personage as the Parsee merchant . 
Meeting a broker , he made the inquiry , to learn that Jeejeeh had left China two years before , and , retiring from business with an immense fortune , had taken up his residence in Europe -- in Holland the broker thought , with the merchants of which country he had principally traded . 
Phileas Fogg returned to the hotel , begged a moment 's conversation with Aouda , and without more ado , apprised her that Jeejeeh was no longer at Hong Kong , but probably in Holland . 
Aouda at first said nothing . 
She passed her hand across her forehead , and reflected a few moments . 
Then , in her sweet , soft voice , she said : `` What ought I to do , Mr. Fogg ? '' 
`` It is very simple , '' responded the gentleman . 
`` Go on to Europe . '' 
`` But I can not intrude -- '' `` You do not intrude , nor do you in the least embarrass my project . 
Passepartout ! '' 
`` Monsieur . '' 
`` Go to the Carnatic , and engage three cabins . '' 
Passepartout , delighted that the young woman , who was very gracious to him , was going to continue the journey with them , went off at a brisk gait to obey his master 's order . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TAKES A TOO GREAT INTEREST IN HIS MASTER , AND WHAT COMES OF IT Hong Kong is an island which came into the possession of the English by the Treaty of Nankin , after the war of 1842 ; and the colonising genius of the English has created upon it an important city and an excellent port . 
The island is situated at the mouth of the Canton River , and is separated by about sixty miles from the Portuguese town of Macao , on the opposite coast . 
Hong Kong has beaten Macao in the struggle for the Chinese trade , and now the greater part of the transportation of Chinese goods finds its depot at the former place . 
Docks , hospitals , wharves , a Gothic cathedral , a government house , macadamised streets , give to Hong Kong the appearance of a town in Kent or Surrey transferred by some strange magic to the antipodes . 
Passepartout wandered , with his hands in his pockets , towards the Victoria port , gazing as he went at the curious palanquins and other modes of conveyance , and the groups of Chinese , Japanese , and Europeans who passed to and fro in the streets . 
Hong Kong seemed to him not unlike Bombay , Calcutta , and Singapore , since , like them , it betrayed everywhere the evidence of English supremacy . 
At the Victoria port he found a confused mass of ships of all nations : English , French , American , and Dutch , men-of-war and trading vessels , Japanese and Chinese junks , sempas , tankas , and flower-boats , which formed so many floating parterres . 
Passepartout noticed in the crowd a number of the natives who seemed very old and were dressed in yellow . 
On going into a barber 's to get shaved he learned that these ancient men were all at least eighty years old , at which age they are permitted to wear yellow , which is the Imperial colour . 
Passepartout , without exactly knowing why , thought this very funny . 
On reaching the quay where they were to embark on the Carnatic , he was not astonished to find Fix walking up and down . 
The detective seemed very much disturbed and disappointed . 
`` This is bad , '' muttered Passepartout , `` for the gentlemen of the Reform Club ! '' 
He accosted Fix with a merry smile , as if he had not perceived that gentleman 's chagrin . 
The detective had , indeed , good reasons to inveigh against the bad luck which pursued him . 
The warrant had not come ! 
It was certainly on the way , but as certainly it could not now reach Hong Kong for several days ; and , this being the last English territory on Mr. Fogg 's route , the robber would escape , unless he could manage to detain him . 
`` Well , Monsieur Fix , '' said Passepartout , `` have you decided to go with us so far as America ? '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Fix , through his set teeth . 
`` Good ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout , laughing heartily . 
`` I knew you could not persuade yourself to separate from us . 
Come and engage your berth . '' 
They entered the steamer office and secured cabins for four persons . 
The clerk , as he gave them the tickets , informed them that , the repairs on the Carnatic having been completed , the steamer would leave that very evening , and not next morning , as had been announced . 
`` That will suit my master all the better , '' said Passepartout . 
`` I will go and let him know . '' 
Fix now decided to make a bold move ; he resolved to tell Passepartout all . 
It seemed to be the only possible means of keeping Phileas Fogg several days longer at Hong Kong . 
He accordingly invited his companion into a tavern which caught his eye on the quay . 
On entering , they found themselves in a large room handsomely decorated , at the end of which was a large camp-bed furnished with cushions . 
Several persons lay upon this bed in a deep sleep . 
At the small tables which were arranged about the room some thirty customers were drinking English beer , porter , gin , and brandy ; smoking , the while , long red clay pipes stuffed with little balls of opium mingled with essence of rose . 
From time to time one of the smokers , overcome with the narcotic , would slip under the table , whereupon the waiters , taking him by the head and feet , carried and laid him upon the bed . 
The bed already supported twenty of these stupefied sots . 
Fix and Passepartout saw that they were in a smoking-house haunted by those wretched , cadaverous , idiotic creatures to whom the English merchants sell every year the miserable drug called opium , to the amount of one million four hundred thousand pounds -- thousands devoted to one of the most despicable vices which afflict humanity ! 
The Chinese government has in vain attempted to deal with the evil by stringent laws . 
It passed gradually from the rich , to whom it was at first exclusively reserved , to the lower classes , and then its ravages could not be arrested . 
Opium is smoked everywhere , at all times , by men and women , in the Celestial Empire ; and , once accustomed to it , the victims can not dispense with it , except by suffering horrible bodily contortions and agonies . 
A great smoker can smoke as many as eight pipes a day ; but he dies in five years . 
It was in one of these dens that Fix and Passepartout , in search of a friendly glass , found themselves . 
Passepartout had no money , but willingly accepted Fix 's invitation in the hope of returning the obligation at some future time . 
They ordered two bottles of port , to which the Frenchman did ample justice , whilst Fix observed him with close attention . 
They chatted about the journey , and Passepartout was especially merry at the idea that Fix was going to continue it with them . 
When the bottles were empty , however , he rose to go and tell his master of the change in the time of the sailing of the Carnatic . 
Fix caught him by the arm , and said , `` Wait a moment . '' 
`` What for , Mr. Fix ? '' 
`` I want to have a serious talk with you . '' 
`` A serious talk ! '' 
cried Passepartout , drinking up the little wine that was left in the bottom of his glass . 
`` Well , we 'll talk about it to-morrow ; I have n't time now . '' 
`` Stay ! 
What I have to say concerns your master . '' 
Passepartout , at this , looked attentively at his companion . 
Fix 's face seemed to have a singular expression . 
He resumed his seat . 
`` What is it that you have to say ? '' 
Fix placed his hand upon Passepartout 's arm , and , lowering his voice , said , `` You have guessed who I am ? '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
said Passepartout , smiling . 
`` Then I 'm going to tell you everything -- '' `` Now that I know everything , my friend ! 
Ah ! 
that 's very good . 
But go on , go on . 
First , though , let me tell you that those gentlemen have put themselves to a useless expense . '' 
`` Useless ! '' 
said Fix . 
`` You speak confidently . 
It 's clear that you do n't know how large the sum is . '' 
`` Of course I do , '' returned Passepartout . 
`` Twenty thousand pounds . '' 
`` Fifty-five thousand ! '' 
answered Fix , pressing his companion 's hand . 
`` What ! '' 
cried the Frenchman . 
`` Has Monsieur Fogg dared -- fifty-five thousand pounds ! 
Well , there 's all the more reason for not losing an instant , '' he continued , getting up hastily . 
Fix pushed Passepartout back in his chair , and resumed : `` Fifty-five thousand pounds ; and if I succeed , I get two thousand pounds . 
If you 'll help me , I 'll let you have five hundred of them . '' 
`` Help you ? '' 
cried Passepartout , whose eyes were standing wide open . 
