`` You do not forget when you are due in London again ? '' 
asked Stuart . 
`` In eighty days ; on Saturday , the 21st of December , 1872 , at a quarter before nine p.m. Good-bye , gentlemen . '' 
Phileas Fogg and his servant seated themselves in a first-class carriage at twenty minutes before nine ; five minutes later the whistle screamed , and the train slowly glided out of the station . 
The night was dark , and a fine , steady rain was falling . 
Phileas Fogg , snugly ensconced in his corner , did not open his lips . 
Passepartout , not yet recovered from his stupefaction , clung mechanically to the carpet-bag , with its enormous treasure . 
Just as the train was whirling through Sydenham , Passepartout suddenly uttered a cry of despair . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` Alas ! 
In my hurry -- I -- I forgot -- '' `` What ? '' 
`` To turn off the gas in my room ! '' 
`` Very well , young man , '' returned Mr. Fogg , coolly ; `` it will burn -- at your expense . '' 
IN WHICH A NEW SPECIES OF FUNDS , UNKNOWN TO THE MONEYED MEN , APPEARS ON ` CHANGE Phileas Fogg rightly suspected that his departure from London would create a lively sensation at the West End . 
The news of the bet spread through the Reform Club , and afforded an exciting topic of conversation to its members . 
From the club it soon got into the papers throughout England . 
The boasted `` tour of the world '' was talked about , disputed , argued with as much warmth as if the subject were another Alabama claim . 
Some took sides with Phileas Fogg , but the large majority shook their heads and declared against him ; it was absurd , impossible , they declared , that the tour of the world could be made , except theoretically and on paper , in this minimum of time , and with the existing means of travelling . 
The Times , Standard , Morning Post , and Daily News , and twenty other highly respectable newspapers scouted Mr. Fogg 's project as madness ; the Daily Telegraph alone hesitatingly supported him . 
People in general thought him a lunatic , and blamed his Reform Club friends for having accepted a wager which betrayed the mental aberration of its proposer . 
Articles no less passionate than logical appeared on the question , for geography is one of the pet subjects of the English ; and the columns devoted to Phileas Fogg 's venture were eagerly devoured by all classes of readers . 
At first some rash individuals , principally of the gentler sex , espoused his cause , which became still more popular when the Illustrated London News came out with his portrait , copied from a photograph in the Reform Club . 
A few readers of the Daily Telegraph even dared to say , `` Why not , after all ? 
Stranger things have come to pass . '' 
At last a long article appeared , on the 7th of October , in the bulletin of the Royal Geographical Society , which treated the question from every point of view , and demonstrated the utter folly of the enterprise . 
Everything , it said , was against the travellers , every obstacle imposed alike by man and by nature . 
A miraculous agreement of the times of departure and arrival , which was impossible , was absolutely necessary to his success . 
He might , perhaps , reckon on the arrival of trains at the designated hours , in Europe , where the distances were relatively moderate ; but when he calculated upon crossing India in three days , and the United States in seven , could he rely beyond misgiving upon accomplishing his task ? 
There were accidents to machinery , the liability of trains to run off the line , collisions , bad weather , the blocking up by snow -- were not all these against Phileas Fogg ? 
Would he not find himself , when travelling by steamer in winter , at the mercy of the winds and fogs ? 
Is it uncommon for the best ocean steamers to be two or three days behind time ? 
But a single delay would suffice to fatally break the chain of communication ; should Phileas Fogg once miss , even by an hour ; a steamer , he would have to wait for the next , and that would irrevocably render his attempt vain . 
This article made a great deal of noise , and , being copied into all the papers , seriously depressed the advocates of the rash tourist . 
Everybody knows that England is the world of betting men , who are of a higher class than mere gamblers ; to bet is in the English temperament . 
Not only the members of the Reform , but the general public , made heavy wagers for or against Phileas Fogg , who was set down in the betting books as if he were a race-horse . 
Bonds were issued , and made their appearance on ` Change ; `` Phileas Fogg bonds '' were offered at par or at a premium , and a great business was done in them . 
But five days after the article in the bulletin of the Geographical Society appeared , the demand began to subside : `` Phileas Fogg '' declined . 
They were offered by packages , at first of five , then of ten , until at last nobody would take less than twenty , fifty , a hundred ! 
Lord Albemarle , an elderly paralytic gentleman , was now the only advocate of Phileas Fogg left . 
This noble lord , who was fastened to his chair , would have given his fortune to be able to make the tour of the world , if it took ten years ; and he bet five thousand pounds on Phileas Fogg . 
When the folly as well as the uselessness of the adventure was pointed out to him , he contented himself with replying , `` If the thing is feasible , the first to do it ought to be an Englishman . '' 
The Fogg party dwindled more and more , everybody was going against him , and the bets stood a hundred and fifty and two hundred to one ; and a week after his departure an incident occurred which deprived him of backers at any price . 
The commissioner of police was sitting in his office at nine o'clock one evening , when the following telegraphic dispatch was put into his hands : Suez to London . 
Rowan , Commissioner of Police , Scotland Yard : I 've found the bank robber , Phileas Fogg . 
Send with out delay warrant of arrest to Bombay . 
Fix , Detective . 
The effect of this dispatch was instantaneous . 
The polished gentleman disappeared to give place to the bank robber . 
His photograph , which was hung with those of the rest of the members at the Reform Club , was minutely examined , and it betrayed , feature by feature , the description of the robber which had been provided to the police . 
The mysterious habits of Phileas Fogg were recalled ; his solitary ways , his sudden departure ; and it seemed clear that , in undertaking a tour round the world on the pretext of a wager , he had had no other end in view than to elude the detectives , and throw them off his track . 
IN WHICH FIX , THE DETECTIVE , BETRAYS A VERY NATURAL IMPATIENCE The circumstances under which this telegraphic dispatch about Phileas Fogg was sent were as follows : The steamer Mongolia , belonging to the Peninsular and Oriental Company , built of iron , of two thousand eight hundred tons burden , and five hundred horse-power , was due at eleven o'clock a.m. on Wednesday , the 9th of October , at Suez . 
The Mongolia plied regularly between Brindisi and Bombay via the Suez Canal , and was one of the fastest steamers belonging to the company , always making more than ten knots an hour between Brindisi and Suez , and nine and a half between Suez and Bombay . 
Two men were promenading up and down the wharves , among the crowd of natives and strangers who were sojourning at this once straggling village -- now , thanks to the enterprise of M. Lesseps , a fast-growing town . 
One was the British consul at Suez , who , despite the prophecies of the English Government , and the unfavourable predictions of Stephenson , was in the habit of seeing , from his office window , English ships daily passing to and fro on the great canal , by which the old roundabout route from England to India by the Cape of Good Hope was abridged by at least a half . 
The other was a small , slight-built personage , with a nervous , intelligent face , and bright eyes peering out from under eyebrows which he was incessantly twitching . 
He was just now manifesting unmistakable signs of impatience , nervously pacing up and down , and unable to stand still for a moment . 
This was Fix , one of the detectives who had been dispatched from England in search of the bank robber ; it was his task to narrowly watch every passenger who arrived at Suez , and to follow up all who seemed to be suspicious characters , or bore a resemblance to the description of the criminal , which he had received two days before from the police headquarters at London . 
The detective was evidently inspired by the hope of obtaining the splendid reward which would be the prize of success , and awaited with a feverish impatience , easy to understand , the arrival of the steamer Mongolia . 
`` So you say , consul , '' asked he for the twentieth time , `` that this steamer is never behind time ? '' 
`` No , Mr. Fix , '' replied the consul . 
`` She was bespoken yesterday at Port Said , and the rest of the way is of no account to such a craft . 
I repeat that the Mongolia has been in advance of the time required by the company 's regulations , and gained the prize awarded for excess of speed . '' 
`` Does she come directly from Brindisi ? '' 
`` Directly from Brindisi ; she takes on the Indian mails there , and she left there Saturday at five p.m. Have patience , Mr. Fix ; she will not be late . 
But really , I do n't see how , from the description you have , you will be able to recognise your man , even if he is on board the Mongolia . '' 
`` A man rather feels the presence of these fellows , consul , than recognises them . 
You must have a scent for them , and a scent is like a sixth sense which combines hearing , seeing , and smelling . 
I 've arrested more than one of these gentlemen in my time , and , if my thief is on board , I 'll answer for it ; he 'll not slip through my fingers . '' 
`` I hope so , Mr. Fix , for it was a heavy robbery . '' 
`` A magnificent robbery , consul ; fifty-five thousand pounds ! 
We do n't often have such windfalls . 
Burglars are getting to be so contemptible nowadays ! 
A fellow gets hung for a handful of shillings ! '' 
`` Mr. Fix , '' said the consul , `` I like your way of talking , and hope you 'll succeed ; but I fear you will find it far from easy . 
Do n't you see , the description which you have there has a singular resemblance to an honest man ? '' 
`` Consul , '' remarked the detective , dogmatically , `` great robbers always resemble honest folks . 
Fellows who have rascally faces have only one course to take , and that is to remain honest ; otherwise they would be arrested off-hand . 
The artistic thing is , to unmask honest countenances ; it 's no light task , I admit , but a real art . '' 
Mr. Fix evidently was not wanting in a tinge of self-conceit . 
Little by little the scene on the quay became more animated ; sailors of various nations , merchants , ship-brokers , porters , fellahs , bustled to and fro as if the steamer were immediately expected . 
The weather was clear , and slightly chilly . 
The minarets of the town loomed above the houses in the pale rays of the sun . 
A jetty pier , some two thousand yards along , extended into the roadstead . 
A number of fishing-smacks and coasting boats , some retaining the fantastic fashion of ancient galleys , were discernible on the Red Sea . 
As he passed among the busy crowd , Fix , according to habit , scrutinised the passers-by with a keen , rapid glance . 
It was now half-past ten . 
`` The steamer does n't come ! '' 
he exclaimed , as the port clock struck . 
`` She ca n't be far off now , '' returned his companion . 
`` How long will she stop at Suez ? '' 
`` Four hours ; long enough to get in her coal . 
It is thirteen hundred and ten miles from Suez to Aden , at the other end of the Red Sea , and she has to take in a fresh coal supply . '' 
`` And does she go from Suez directly to Bombay ? '' 
`` Without putting in anywhere . '' 
`` Good ! '' 
said Fix . 
`` If the robber is on board he will no doubt get off at Suez , so as to reach the Dutch or French colonies in Asia by some other route . 
He ought to know that he would not be safe an hour in India , which is English soil . '' 
`` Unless , '' objected the consul , `` he is exceptionally shrewd . 
