The priests took their places in front of the judge , and the clerk proceeded to read in a loud voice a complaint of sacrilege against Phileas Fogg and his servant , who were accused of having violated a place held consecrated by the Brahmin religion . 
`` You hear the charge ? '' 
asked the judge . 
`` Yes , sir , '' replied Mr. Fogg , consulting his watch , `` and I admit it . '' 
`` You admit it ? '' 
`` I admit it , and I wish to hear these priests admit , in their turn , what they were going to do at the pagoda of Pillaji . '' 
The priests looked at each other ; they did not seem to understand what was said . 
`` Yes , '' cried Passepartout , warmly ; `` at the pagoda of Pillaji , where they were on the point of burning their victim . '' 
The judge stared with astonishment , and the priests were stupefied . 
`` What victim ? '' 
said Judge Obadiah . 
`` Burn whom ? 
In Bombay itself ? '' 
`` Bombay ? '' 
cried Passepartout . 
`` Certainly . 
We are not talking of the pagoda of Pillaji , but of the pagoda of Malabar Hill , at Bombay . '' 
`` And as a proof , '' added the clerk , `` here are the desecrator 's very shoes , which he left behind him . '' 
Whereupon he placed a pair of shoes on his desk . 
`` My shoes ! '' 
cried Passepartout , in his surprise permitting this imprudent exclamation to escape him . 
The confusion of master and man , who had quite forgotten the affair at Bombay , for which they were now detained at Calcutta , may be imagined . 
Fix the detective , had foreseen the advantage which Passepartout 's escapade gave him , and , delaying his departure for twelve hours , had consulted the priests of Malabar Hill . 
Knowing that the English authorities dealt very severely with this kind of misdemeanour , he promised them a goodly sum in damages , and sent them forward to Calcutta by the next train . 
Owing to the delay caused by the rescue of the young widow , Fix and the priests reached the Indian capital before Mr. Fogg and his servant , the magistrates having been already warned by a dispatch to arrest them should they arrive . 
Fix 's disappointment when he learned that Phileas Fogg had not made his appearance in Calcutta may be imagined . 
He made up his mind that the robber had stopped somewhere on the route and taken refuge in the southern provinces . 
For twenty-four hours Fix watched the station with feverish anxiety ; at last he was rewarded by seeing Mr. Fogg and Passepartout arrive , accompanied by a young woman , whose presence he was wholly at a loss to explain . 
He hastened for a policeman ; and this was how the party came to be arrested and brought before Judge Obadiah . 
Had Passepartout been a little less preoccupied , he would have espied the detective ensconced in a corner of the court-room , watching the proceedings with an interest easily understood ; for the warrant had failed to reach him at Calcutta , as it had done at Bombay and Suez . 
Judge Obadiah had unfortunately caught Passepartout 's rash exclamation , which the poor fellow would have given the world to recall . 
`` The facts are admitted ? '' 
asked the judge . 
`` Admitted , '' replied Mr. Fogg , coldly . 
`` Inasmuch , '' resumed the judge , `` as the English law protects equally and sternly the religions of the Indian people , and as the man Passepartout has admitted that he violated the sacred pagoda of Malabar Hill , at Bombay , on the 20th of October , I condemn the said Passepartout to imprisonment for fifteen days and a fine of three hundred pounds . '' 
`` Three hundred pounds ! '' 
cried Passepartout , startled at the largeness of the sum . 
`` Silence ! '' 
shouted the constable . 
`` And inasmuch , '' continued the judge , `` as it is not proved that the act was not done by the connivance of the master with the servant , and as the master in any case must be held responsible for the acts of his paid servant , I condemn Phileas Fogg to a week 's imprisonment and a fine of one hundred and fifty pounds . '' 
Fix rubbed his hands softly with satisfaction ; if Phileas Fogg could be detained in Calcutta a week , it would be more than time for the warrant to arrive . 
Passepartout was stupefied . 
This sentence ruined his master . 
A wager of twenty thousand pounds lost , because he , like a precious fool , had gone into that abominable pagoda ! 
Phileas Fogg , as self-composed as if the judgment did not in the least concern him , did not even lift his eyebrows while it was being pronounced . 
Just as the clerk was calling the next case , he rose , and said , `` I offer bail . '' 
`` You have that right , '' returned the judge . 
Fix 's blood ran cold , but he resumed his composure when he heard the judge announce that the bail required for each prisoner would be one thousand pounds . 
`` I will pay it at once , '' said Mr. Fogg , taking a roll of bank-bills from the carpet-bag , which Passepartout had by him , and placing them on the clerk 's desk . 
`` This sum will be restored to you upon your release from prison , '' said the judge . 
`` Meanwhile , you are liberated on bail . '' 
`` Come ! '' 
said Phileas Fogg to his servant . 
`` But let them at least give me back my shoes ! '' 
cried Passepartout angrily . 
`` Ah , these are pretty dear shoes ! '' 
he muttered , as they were handed to him . 
`` More than a thousand pounds apiece ; besides , they pinch my feet . '' 
Mr. Fogg , offering his arm to Aouda , then departed , followed by the crestfallen Passepartout . 
Fix still nourished hopes that the robber would not , after all , leave the two thousand pounds behind him , but would decide to serve out his week in jail , and issued forth on Mr. Fogg 's traces . 
That gentleman took a carriage , and the party were soon landed on one of the quays . 
The Rangoon was moored half a mile off in the harbour , its signal of departure hoisted at the mast-head . 
Eleven o'clock was striking ; Mr. Fogg was an hour in advance of time . 
Fix saw them leave the carriage and push off in a boat for the steamer , and stamped his feet with disappointment . 
`` The rascal is off , after all ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` Two thousand pounds sacrificed ! 
He 's as prodigal as a thief ! 
I 'll follow him to the end of the world if necessary ; but , at the rate he is going on , the stolen money will soon be exhausted . '' 
The detective was not far wrong in making this conjecture . 
Since leaving London , what with travelling expenses , bribes , the purchase of the elephant , bails , and fines , Mr. Fogg had already spent more than five thousand pounds on the way , and the percentage of the sum recovered from the bank robber promised to the detectives , was rapidly diminishing . 
IN WHICH FIX DOES NOT SEEM TO UNDERSTAND IN THE LEAST WHAT IS SAID TO HIM The Rangoon -- one of the Peninsular and Oriental Company 's boats plying in the Chinese and Japanese seas -- was a screw steamer , built of iron , weighing about seventeen hundred and seventy tons , and with engines of four hundred horse-power . 
She was as fast , but not as well fitted up , as the Mongolia , and Aouda was not as comfortably provided for on board of her as Phileas Fogg could have wished . 
However , the trip from Calcutta to Hong Kong only comprised some three thousand five hundred miles , occupying from ten to twelve days , and the young woman was not difficult to please . 
During the first days of the journey Aouda became better acquainted with her protector , and constantly gave evidence of her deep gratitude for what he had done . 
The phlegmatic gentleman listened to her , apparently at least , with coldness , neither his voice nor his manner betraying the slightest emotion ; but he seemed to be always on the watch that nothing should be wanting to Aouda 's comfort . 
He visited her regularly each day at certain hours , not so much to talk himself , as to sit and hear her talk . 
He treated her with the strictest politeness , but with the precision of an automaton , the movements of which had been arranged for this purpose . 
Aouda did not quite know what to make of him , though Passepartout had given her some hints of his master 's eccentricity , and made her smile by telling her of the wager which was sending him round the world . 
After all , she owed Phileas Fogg her life , and she always regarded him through the exalting medium of her gratitude . 
Aouda confirmed the Parsee guide 's narrative of her touching history . 
She did , indeed , belong to the highest of the native races of India . 
Many of the Parsee merchants have made great fortunes there by dealing in cotton ; and one of them , Sir Jametsee Jeejeebhoy , was made a baronet by the English government . 
Aouda was a relative of this great man , and it was his cousin , Jeejeeh , whom she hoped to join at Hong Kong . 
Whether she would find a protector in him she could not tell ; but Mr. Fogg essayed to calm her anxieties , and to assure her that everything would be mathematically -- he used the very word -- arranged . 
Aouda fastened her great eyes , `` clear as the sacred lakes of the Himalaya , '' upon him ; but the intractable Fogg , as reserved as ever , did not seem at all inclined to throw himself into this lake . 
The first few days of the voyage passed prosperously , amid favourable weather and propitious winds , and they soon came in sight of the great Andaman , the principal of the islands in the Bay of Bengal , with its picturesque Saddle Peak , two thousand four hundred feet high , looming above the waters . 
The steamer passed along near the shores , but the savage Papuans , who are in the lowest scale of humanity , but are not , as has been asserted , cannibals , did not make their appearance . 
The panorama of the islands , as they steamed by them , was superb . 
Vast forests of palms , arecs , bamboo , teakwood , of the gigantic mimosa , and tree-like ferns covered the foreground , while behind , the graceful outlines of the mountains were traced against the sky ; and along the coasts swarmed by thousands the precious swallows whose nests furnish a luxurious dish to the tables of the Celestial Empire . 
The varied landscape afforded by the Andaman Islands was soon passed , however , and the Rangoon rapidly approached the Straits of Malacca , which gave access to the China seas . 
What was detective Fix , so unluckily drawn on from country to country , doing all this while ? 
He had managed to embark on the Rangoon at Calcutta without being seen by Passepartout , after leaving orders that , if the warrant should arrive , it should be forwarded to him at Hong Kong ; and he hoped to conceal his presence to the end of the voyage . 
It would have been difficult to explain why he was on board without awakening Passepartout 's suspicions , who thought him still at Bombay . 
But necessity impelled him , nevertheless , to renew his acquaintance with the worthy servant , as will be seen . 
All the detective 's hopes and wishes were now centred on Hong Kong ; for the steamer 's stay at Singapore would be too brief to enable him to take any steps there . 
The arrest must be made at Hong Kong , or the robber would probably escape him for ever . 
Hong Kong was the last English ground on which he would set foot ; beyond , China , Japan , America offered to Fogg an almost certain refuge . 
If the warrant should at last make its appearance at Hong Kong , Fix could arrest him and give him into the hands of the local police , and there would be no further trouble . 
But beyond Hong Kong , a simple warrant would be of no avail ; an extradition warrant would be necessary , and that would result in delays and obstacles , of which the rascal would take advantage to elude justice . 
