`` Take him , guide , '' returned Mr. Fogg , `` and I shall still be your debtor . '' 
`` Good ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout . 
`` Take him , friend . 
Kiouni is a brave and faithful beast . '' 
And , going up to the elephant , he gave him several lumps of sugar , saying , `` Here , Kiouni , here , here . '' 
The elephant grunted out his satisfaction , and , clasping Passepartout around the waist with his trunk , lifted him as high as his head . 
Passepartout , not in the least alarmed , caressed the animal , which replaced him gently on the ground . 
Soon after , Phileas Fogg , Sir Francis Cromarty , and Passepartout , installed in a carriage with Aouda , who had the best seat , were whirling at full speed towards Benares . 
It was a run of eighty miles , and was accomplished in two hours . 
During the journey , the young woman fully recovered her senses . 
What was her astonishment to find herself in this carriage , on the railway , dressed in European habiliments , and with travellers who were quite strangers to her ! 
Her companions first set about fully reviving her with a little liquor , and then Sir Francis narrated to her what had passed , dwelling upon the courage with which Phileas Fogg had not hesitated to risk his life to save her , and recounting the happy sequel of the venture , the result of Passepartout 's rash idea . 
Mr. Fogg said nothing ; while Passepartout , abashed , kept repeating that `` it was n't worth telling . '' 
Aouda pathetically thanked her deliverers , rather with tears than words ; her fine eyes interpreted her gratitude better than her lips . 
Then , as her thoughts strayed back to the scene of the sacrifice , and recalled the dangers which still menaced her , she shuddered with terror . 
Phileas Fogg understood what was passing in Aouda 's mind , and offered , in order to reassure her , to escort her to Hong Kong , where she might remain safely until the affair was hushed up -- an offer which she eagerly and gratefully accepted . 
She had , it seems , a Parsee relation , who was one of the principal merchants of Hong Kong , which is wholly an English city , though on an island on the Chinese coast . 
At half-past twelve the train stopped at Benares . 
The Brahmin legends assert that this city is built on the site of the ancient Casi , which , like Mahomet 's tomb , was once suspended between heaven and earth ; though the Benares of to-day , which the Orientalists call the Athens of India , stands quite unpoetically on the solid earth , Passepartout caught glimpses of its brick houses and clay huts , giving an aspect of desolation to the place , as the train entered it . 
Benares was Sir Francis Cromarty 's destination , the troops he was rejoining being encamped some miles northward of the city . 
He bade adieu to Phileas Fogg , wishing him all success , and expressing the hope that he would come that way again in a less original but more profitable fashion . 
Mr. Fogg lightly pressed him by the hand . 
The parting of Aouda , who did not forget what she owed to Sir Francis , betrayed more warmth ; and , as for Passepartout , he received a hearty shake of the hand from the gallant general . 
The railway , on leaving Benares , passed for a while along the valley of the Ganges . 
Through the windows of their carriage the travellers had glimpses of the diversified landscape of Behar , with its mountains clothed in verdure , its fields of barley , wheat , and corn , its jungles peopled with green alligators , its neat villages , and its still thickly-leaved forests . 
Elephants were bathing in the waters of the sacred river , and groups of Indians , despite the advanced season and chilly air , were performing solemnly their pious ablutions . 
These were fervent Brahmins , the bitterest foes of Buddhism , their deities being Vishnu , the solar god , Shiva , the divine impersonation of natural forces , and Brahma , the supreme ruler of priests and legislators . 
What would these divinities think of India , anglicised as it is to-day , with steamers whistling and scudding along the Ganges , frightening the gulls which float upon its surface , the turtles swarming along its banks , and the faithful dwelling upon its borders ? 
The panorama passed before their eyes like a flash , save when the steam concealed it fitfully from the view ; the travellers could scarcely discern the fort of Chupenie , twenty miles south-westward from Benares , the ancient stronghold of the rajahs of Behar ; or Ghazipur and its famous rose-water factories ; or the tomb of Lord Cornwallis , rising on the left bank of the Ganges ; the fortified town of Buxar , or Patna , a large manufacturing and trading-place , where is held the principal opium market of India ; or Monghir , a more than European town , for it is as English as Manchester or Birmingham , with its iron foundries , edgetool factories , and high chimneys puffing clouds of black smoke heavenward . 
Night came on ; the train passed on at full speed , in the midst of the roaring of the tigers , bears , and wolves which fled before the locomotive ; and the marvels of Bengal , Golconda ruined Gour , Murshedabad , the ancient capital , Burdwan , Hugly , and the French town of Chandernagor , where Passepartout would have been proud to see his country 's flag flying , were hidden from their view in the darkness . 
Calcutta was reached at seven in the morning , and the packet left for Hong Kong at noon ; so that Phileas Fogg had five hours before him . 
According to his journal , he was due at Calcutta on the 25th of October , and that was the exact date of his actual arrival . 
He was therefore neither behind-hand nor ahead of time . 
The two days gained between London and Bombay had been lost , as has been seen , in the journey across India . 
But it is not to be supposed that Phileas Fogg regretted them . 
IN WHICH THE BAG OF BANKNOTES DISGORGES SOME THOUSANDS OF POUNDS MORE The train entered the station , and Passepartout jumping out first , was followed by Mr. Fogg , who assisted his fair companion to descend . 
Phileas Fogg intended to proceed at once to the Hong Kong steamer , in order to get Aouda comfortably settled for the voyage . 
He was unwilling to leave her while they were still on dangerous ground . 
Just as he was leaving the station a policeman came up to him , and said , `` Mr. Phileas Fogg ? '' 
`` I am he . '' 
`` Is this man your servant ? '' 
added the policeman , pointing to Passepartout . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Be so good , both of you , as to follow me . '' 
Mr. Fogg betrayed no surprise whatever . 
The policeman was a representative of the law , and law is sacred to an Englishman . 
Passepartout tried to reason about the matter , but the policeman tapped him with his stick , and Mr. Fogg made him a signal to obey . 
`` May this young lady go with us ? '' 
asked he . 
`` She may , '' replied the policeman . 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout were conducted to a palkigahri , a sort of four-wheeled carriage , drawn by two horses , in which they took their places and were driven away . 
No one spoke during the twenty minutes which elapsed before they reached their destination . 
They first passed through the `` black town , '' with its narrow streets , its miserable , dirty huts , and squalid population ; then through the `` European town , '' which presented a relief in its bright brick mansions , shaded by coconut-trees and bristling with masts , where , although it was early morning , elegantly dressed horsemen and handsome equipages were passing back and forth . 
The carriage stopped before a modest-looking house , which , however , did not have the appearance of a private mansion . 
The policeman having requested his prisoners for so , truly , they might be called-to descend , conducted them into a room with barred windows , and said : `` You will appear before Judge Obadiah at half-past eight . '' 
He then retired , and closed the door . 
`` Why , we are prisoners ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout , falling into a chair . 
Aouda , with an emotion she tried to conceal , said to Mr. Fogg : `` Sir , you must leave me to my fate ! 
It is on my account that you receive this treatment , it is for having saved me ! '' 
Phileas Fogg contented himself with saying that it was impossible . 
It was quite unlikely that he should be arrested for preventing a suttee . 
The complainants would not dare present themselves with such a charge . 
There was some mistake . 
Moreover , he would not , in any event , abandon Aouda , but would escort her to Hong Kong . 
`` But the steamer leaves at noon ! '' 
observed Passepartout , nervously . 
`` We shall be on board by noon , '' replied his master , placidly . 
It was said so positively that Passepartout could not help muttering to himself , `` Parbleu that 's certain ! 
Before noon we shall be on board . '' 
But he was by no means reassured . 
At half-past eight the door opened , the policeman appeared , and , requesting them to follow him , led the way to an adjoining hall . 
It was evidently a court-room , and a crowd of Europeans and natives already occupied the rear of the apartment . 
Mr. Fogg and his two companions took their places on a bench opposite the desks of the magistrate and his clerk . 
Immediately after , Judge Obadiah , a fat , round man , followed by the clerk , entered . 
He proceeded to take down a wig which was hanging on a nail , and put it hurriedly on his head . 
`` The first case , '' said he . 
Then , putting his hand to his head , he exclaimed , `` Heh ! 
This is not my wig ! '' 
`` No , your worship , '' returned the clerk , `` it is mine . '' 
`` My dear Mr. Oysterpuff , how can a judge give a wise sentence in a clerk 's wig ? '' 
The wigs were exchanged . 
Passepartout was getting nervous , for the hands on the face of the big clock over the judge seemed to go around with terrible rapidity . 
`` The first case , '' repeated Judge Obadiah . 
`` Phileas Fogg ? '' 
demanded Oysterpuff . 
`` I am here , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` Passepartout ? '' 
`` Present , '' responded Passepartout . 
`` Good , '' said the judge . 
`` You have been looked for , prisoners , for two days on the trains from Bombay . '' 
`` But of what are we accused ? '' 
asked Passepartout , impatiently . 
`` You are about to be informed . '' 
`` I am an English subject , sir , '' said Mr. Fogg , `` and I have the right -- '' `` Have you been ill-treated ? '' 
`` Not at all . '' 
`` Very well ; let the complainants come in . '' 
A door was swung open by order of the judge , and three Indian priests entered . 
`` That 's it , '' muttered Passepartout ; `` these are the rogues who were going to burn our young lady . '' 
