Colonel Proctor was one of the most seriously hurt ; he had fought bravely , and a ball had entered his groin . 
He was carried into the station with the other wounded passengers , to receive such attention as could be of avail . 
Aouda was safe ; and Phileas Fogg , who had been in the thickest of the fight , had not received a scratch . 
Fix was slightly wounded in the arm . 
But Passepartout was not to be found , and tears coursed down Aouda 's cheeks . 
All the passengers had got out of the train , the wheels of which were stained with blood . 
From the tyres and spokes hung ragged pieces of flesh . 
As far as the eye could reach on the white plain behind , red trails were visible . 
The last Sioux were disappearing in the south , along the banks of Republican River . 
Mr. Fogg , with folded arms , remained motionless . 
He had a serious decision to make . 
Aouda , standing near him , looked at him without speaking , and he understood her look . 
If his servant was a prisoner , ought he not to risk everything to rescue him from the Indians ? 
`` I will find him , living or dead , '' said he quietly to Aouda . 
`` Ah , Mr. -- Mr. Fogg ! '' 
cried she , clasping his hands and covering them with tears . 
`` Living , '' added Mr. Fogg , `` if we do not lose a moment . '' 
Phileas Fogg , by this resolution , inevitably sacrificed himself ; he pronounced his own doom . 
The delay of a single day would make him lose the steamer at New York , and his bet would be certainly lost . 
But as he thought , `` It is my duty , '' he did not hesitate . 
The commanding officer of Fort Kearney was there . 
A hundred of his soldiers had placed themselves in a position to defend the station , should the Sioux attack it . 
`` Sir , '' said Mr. Fogg to the captain , `` three passengers have disappeared . '' 
`` Dead ? '' 
asked the captain . 
`` Dead or prisoners ; that is the uncertainty which must be solved . 
Do you propose to pursue the Sioux ? '' 
`` That 's a serious thing to do , sir , '' returned the captain . 
`` These Indians may retreat beyond the Arkansas , and I can not leave the fort unprotected . '' 
`` The lives of three men are in question , sir , '' said Phileas Fogg . 
`` Doubtless ; but can I risk the lives of fifty men to save three ? '' 
`` I do n't know whether you can , sir ; but you ought to do so . '' 
`` Nobody here , '' returned the other , `` has a right to teach me my duty . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Mr. Fogg , coldly . 
`` I will go alone . '' 
`` You , sir ! '' 
cried Fix , coming up ; `` you go alone in pursuit of the Indians ? '' 
`` Would you have me leave this poor fellow to perish -- him to whom every one present owes his life ? 
I shall go . '' 
`` No , sir , you shall not go alone , '' cried the captain , touched in spite of himself . 
`` No ! 
you are a brave man . 
Thirty volunteers ! '' 
he added , turning to the soldiers . 
The whole company started forward at once . 
The captain had only to pick his men . 
Thirty were chosen , and an old sergeant placed at their head . 
`` Thanks , captain , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
`` Will you let me go with you ? '' 
asked Fix . 
`` Do as you please , sir . 
But if you wish to do me a favour , you will remain with Aouda . 
In case anything should happen to me -- '' A sudden pallor overspread the detective 's face . 
Separate himself from the man whom he had so persistently followed step by step ! 
Leave him to wander about in this desert ! 
Fix gazed attentively at Mr. Fogg , and , despite his suspicions and of the struggle which was going on within him , he lowered his eyes before that calm and frank look . 
`` I will stay , '' said he . 
A few moments after , Mr. Fogg pressed the young woman 's hand , and , having confided to her his precious carpet-bag , went off with the sergeant and his little squad . 
But , before going , he had said to the soldiers , `` My friends , I will divide five thousand dollars among you , if we save the prisoners . '' 
It was then a little past noon . 
Aouda retired to a waiting-room , and there she waited alone , thinking of the simple and noble generosity , the tranquil courage of Phileas Fogg . 
He had sacrificed his fortune , and was now risking his life , all without hesitation , from duty , in silence . 
Fix did not have the same thoughts , and could scarcely conceal his agitation . 
He walked feverishly up and down the platform , but soon resumed his outward composure . 
He now saw the folly of which he had been guilty in letting Fogg go alone . 
What ! 
This man , whom he had just followed around the world , was permitted now to separate himself from him ! 
He began to accuse and abuse himself , and , as if he were director of police , administered to himself a sound lecture for his greenness . 
`` I have been an idiot ! '' 
he thought , `` and this man will see it . 
He has gone , and wo n't come back ! 
But how is it that I , Fix , who have in my pocket a warrant for his arrest , have been so fascinated by him ? 
Decidedly , I am nothing but an ass ! '' 
So reasoned the detective , while the hours crept by all too slowly . 
He did not know what to do . 
Sometimes he was tempted to tell Aouda all ; but he could not doubt how the young woman would receive his confidences . 
What course should he take ? 
He thought of pursuing Fogg across the vast white plains ; it did not seem impossible that he might overtake him . 
Footsteps were easily printed on the snow ! 
But soon , under a new sheet , every imprint would be effaced . 
Fix became discouraged . 
He felt a sort of insurmountable longing to abandon the game altogether . 
He could now leave Fort Kearney station , and pursue his journey homeward in peace . 
Towards two o'clock in the afternoon , while it was snowing hard , long whistles were heard approaching from the east . 
A great shadow , preceded by a wild light , slowly advanced , appearing still larger through the mist , which gave it a fantastic aspect . 
No train was expected from the east , neither had there been time for the succour asked for by telegraph to arrive ; the train from Omaha to San Francisco was not due till the next day . 
The mystery was soon explained . 
The locomotive , which was slowly approaching with deafening whistles , was that which , having been detached from the train , had continued its route with such terrific rapidity , carrying off the unconscious engineer and stoker . 
It had run several miles , when , the fire becoming low for want of fuel , the steam had slackened ; and it had finally stopped an hour after , some twenty miles beyond Fort Kearney . 
Neither the engineer nor the stoker was dead , and , after remaining for some time in their swoon , had come to themselves . 
The train had then stopped . 
The engineer , when he found himself in the desert , and the locomotive without cars , understood what had happened . 
He could not imagine how the locomotive had become separated from the train ; but he did not doubt that the train left behind was in distress . 
He did not hesitate what to do . 
It would be prudent to continue on to Omaha , for it would be dangerous to return to the train , which the Indians might still be engaged in pillaging . 
Nevertheless , he began to rebuild the fire in the furnace ; the pressure again mounted , and the locomotive returned , running backwards to Fort Kearney . 
This it was which was whistling in the mist . 
The travellers were glad to see the locomotive resume its place at the head of the train . 
They could now continue the journey so terribly interrupted . 
Aouda , on seeing the locomotive come up , hurried out of the station , and asked the conductor , `` Are you going to start ? '' 
