The crowd swayed back , the banners and flags wavered , disappeared an instant , then reappeared in tatters . 
The undulations of the human surge reached the steps , while all the heads floundered on the surface like a sea agitated by a squall . 
Many of the black hats disappeared , and the greater part of the crowd seemed to have diminished in height . 
`` It is evidently a meeting , '' said Fix , `` and its object must be an exciting one . 
I should not wonder if it were about the Alabama , despite the fact that that question is settled . '' 
`` Perhaps , '' replied Mr. Fogg , simply . 
`` At least , there are two champions in presence of each other , the Honourable Mr. Camerfield and the Honourable Mr. Mandiboy . '' 
Aouda , leaning upon Mr. Fogg 's arm , observed the tumultuous scene with surprise , while Fix asked a man near him what the cause of it all was . 
Before the man could reply , a fresh agitation arose ; hurrahs and excited shouts were heard ; the staffs of the banners began to be used as offensive weapons ; and fists flew about in every direction . 
Thumps were exchanged from the tops of the carriages and omnibuses which had been blocked up in the crowd . 
Boots and shoes went whirling through the air , and Mr. Fogg thought he even heard the crack of revolvers mingling in the din , the rout approached the stairway , and flowed over the lower step . 
One of the parties had evidently been repulsed ; but the mere lookers-on could not tell whether Mandiboy or Camerfield had gained the upper hand . 
`` It would be prudent for us to retire , '' said Fix , who was anxious that Mr. Fogg should not receive any injury , at least until they got back to London . 
`` If there is any question about England in all this , and we were recognised , I fear it would go hard with us . '' 
`` An English subject -- '' began Mr. Fogg . 
He did not finish his sentence ; for a terrific hubbub now arose on the terrace behind the flight of steps where they stood , and there were frantic shouts of , `` Hurrah for Mandiboy ! 
Hip , hip , hurrah ! '' 
It was a band of voters coming to the rescue of their allies , and taking the Camerfield forces in flank . 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Fix found themselves between two fires ; it was too late to escape . 
The torrent of men , armed with loaded canes and sticks , was irresistible . 
Phileas Fogg and Fix were roughly hustled in their attempts to protect their fair companion ; the former , as cool as ever , tried to defend himself with the weapons which nature has placed at the end of every Englishman 's arm , but in vain . 
A big brawny fellow with a red beard , flushed face , and broad shoulders , who seemed to be the chief of the band , raised his clenched fist to strike Mr. Fogg , whom he would have given a crushing blow , had not Fix rushed in and received it in his stead . 
An enormous bruise immediately made its appearance under the detective 's silk hat , which was completely smashed in . 
`` Yankee ! '' 
exclaimed Mr. Fogg , darting a contemptuous look at the ruffian . 
`` Englishman ! '' 
returned the other . 
`` We will meet again ! '' 
`` When you please . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Phileas Fogg . 
And yours ? '' 
`` Colonel Stamp Proctor . '' 
The human tide now swept by , after overturning Fix , who speedily got upon his feet again , though with tattered clothes . 
Happily , he was not seriously hurt . 
His travelling overcoat was divided into two unequal parts , and his trousers resembled those of certain Indians , which fit less compactly than they are easy to put on . 
Aouda had escaped unharmed , and Fix alone bore marks of the fray in his black and blue bruise . 
`` Thanks , '' said Mr. Fogg to the detective , as soon as they were out of the crowd . 
`` No thanks are necessary , '' replied . 
Fix ; `` but let us go . '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` To a tailor 's . '' 
Such a visit was , indeed , opportune . 
The clothing of both Mr. Fogg and Fix was in rags , as if they had themselves been actively engaged in the contest between Camerfield and Mandiboy . 
An hour after , they were once more suitably attired , and with Aouda returned to the International Hotel . 
Passepartout was waiting for his master , armed with half a dozen six-barrelled revolvers . 
When he perceived Fix , he knit his brows ; but Aouda having , in a few words , told him of their adventure , his countenance resumed its placid expression . 
Fix evidently was no longer an enemy , but an ally ; he was faithfully keeping his word . 
Dinner over , the coach which was to convey the passengers and their luggage to the station drew up to the door . 
As he was getting in , Mr. Fogg said to Fix , `` You have not seen this Colonel Proctor again ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I will come back to America to find him , '' said Phileas Fogg calmly . 
`` It would not be right for an Englishman to permit himself to be treated in that way , without retaliating . '' 
The detective smiled , but did not reply . 
It was clear that Mr. Fogg was one of those Englishmen who , while they do not tolerate duelling at home , fight abroad when their honour is attacked . 
At a quarter before six the travellers reached the station , and found the train ready to depart . 
As he was about to enter it , Mr. Fogg called a porter , and said to him : `` My friend , was there not some trouble to-day in San Francisco ? '' 
`` It was a political meeting , sir , '' replied the porter . 
`` But I thought there was a great deal of disturbance in the streets . '' 
`` It was only a meeting assembled for an election . '' 
`` The election of a general-in-chief , no doubt ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` No , sir ; of a justice of the peace . '' 
Phileas Fogg got into the train , which started off at full speed . 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PARTY TRAVEL BY THE PACIFIC RAILROAD `` From ocean to ocean '' -- so say the Americans ; and these four words compose the general designation of the `` great trunk line '' which crosses the entire width of the United States . 
The Pacific Railroad is , however , really divided into two distinct lines : the Central Pacific , between San Francisco and Ogden , and the Union Pacific , between Ogden and Omaha . 
Five main lines connect Omaha with New York . 
New York and San Francisco are thus united by an uninterrupted metal ribbon , which measures no less than three thousand seven hundred and eighty-six miles . 
Between Omaha and the Pacific the railway crosses a territory which is still infested by Indians and wild beasts , and a large tract which the Mormons , after they were driven from Illinois in 1845 , began to colonise . 
The journey from New York to San Francisco consumed , formerly , under the most favourable conditions , at least six months . 
It is now accomplished in seven days . 
It was in 1862 that , in spite of the Southern Members of Congress , who wished a more southerly route , it was decided to lay the road between the forty-first and forty-second parallels . 
President Lincoln himself fixed the end of the line at Omaha , in Nebraska . 
The work was at once commenced , and pursued with true American energy ; nor did the rapidity with which it went on injuriously affect its good execution . 
The road grew , on the prairies , a mile and a half a day . 
A locomotive , running on the rails laid down the evening before , brought the rails to be laid on the morrow , and advanced upon them as fast as they were put in position . 
The Pacific Railroad is joined by several branches in Iowa , Kansas , Colorado , and Oregon . 
On leaving Omaha , it passes along the left bank of the Platte River as far as the junction of its northern branch , follows its southern branch , crosses the Laramie territory and the Wahsatch Mountains , turns the Great Salt Lake , and reaches Salt Lake City , the Mormon capital , plunges into the Tuilla Valley , across the American Desert , Cedar and Humboldt Mountains , the Sierra Nevada , and descends , via Sacramento , to the Pacific -- its grade , even on the Rocky Mountains , never exceeding one hundred and twelve feet to the mile . 
Such was the road to be traversed in seven days , which would enable Phileas Fogg -- at least , so he hoped -- to take the Atlantic steamer at New York on the 11th for Liverpool . 
The car which he occupied was a sort of long omnibus on eight wheels , and with no compartments in the interior . 
It was supplied with two rows of seats , perpendicular to the direction of the train on either side of an aisle which conducted to the front and rear platforms . 
These platforms were found throughout the train , and the passengers were able to pass from one end of the train to the other . 
It was supplied with saloon cars , balcony cars , restaurants , and smoking-cars ; theatre cars alone were wanting , and they will have these some day . 
The train left Oakland station at six o'clock . 
It was already night , cold and cheerless , the heavens being overcast with clouds which seemed to threaten snow . 
The train did not proceed rapidly ; counting the stoppages , it did not run more than twenty miles an hour , which was a sufficient speed , however , to enable it to reach Omaha within its designated time . 
There was but little conversation in the car , and soon many of the passengers were overcome with sleep . 
Passepartout found himself beside the detective ; but he did not talk to him . 
After recent events , their relations with each other had grown somewhat cold ; there could no longer be mutual sympathy or intimacy between them . 
Fix 's manner had not changed ; but Passepartout was very reserved , and ready to strangle his former friend on the slightest provocation . 
Snow began to fall an hour after they started , a fine snow , however , which happily could not obstruct the train ; nothing could be seen from the windows but a vast , white sheet , against which the smoke of the locomotive had a greyish aspect . 
At eight o'clock a steward entered the car and announced that the time for going to bed had arrived ; and in a few minutes the car was transformed into a dormitory . 
The backs of the seats were thrown back , bedsteads carefully packed were rolled out by an ingenious system , berths were suddenly improvised , and each traveller had soon at his disposition a comfortable bed , protected from curious eyes by thick curtains . 
The sheets were clean and the pillows soft . 
It only remained to go to bed and sleep which everybody did -- while the train sped on across the State of California . 
The country between San Francisco and Sacramento is not very hilly . 
The Central Pacific , taking Sacramento for its starting-point , extends eastward to meet the road from Omaha . 
The line from San Francisco to Sacramento runs in a north-easterly direction , along the American River , which empties into San Pablo Bay . 
The one hundred and twenty miles between these cities were accomplished in six hours , and towards midnight , while fast asleep , the travellers passed through Sacramento ; so that they saw nothing of that important place , the seat of the State government , with its fine quays , its broad streets , its noble hotels , squares , and churches . 
The train , on leaving Sacramento , and passing the junction , Roclin , Auburn , and Colfax , entered the range of the Sierra Nevada . 
