He rushed along the track , jumped on the rear platform of the train , and fell , exhausted , into one of the seats . 
Passepartout , who had been anxiously watching this amateur gymnast , approached him with lively interest , and learned that he had taken flight after an unpleasant domestic scene . 
When the Mormon had recovered his breath , Passepartout ventured to ask him politely how many wives he had ; for , from the manner in which he had decamped , it might be thought that he had twenty at least . 
`` One , sir , '' replied the Mormon , raising his arms heavenward -- `` one , and that was enough ! '' 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT DOES NOT SUCCEED IN MAKING ANYBODY LISTEN TO REASON The train , on leaving Great Salt Lake at Ogden , passed northward for an hour as far as Weber River , having completed nearly nine hundred miles from San Francisco . 
From this point it took an easterly direction towards the jagged Wahsatch Mountains . 
It was in the section included between this range and the Rocky Mountains that the American engineers found the most formidable difficulties in laying the road , and that the government granted a subsidy of forty-eight thousand dollars per mile , instead of sixteen thousand allowed for the work done on the plains . 
But the engineers , instead of violating nature , avoided its difficulties by winding around , instead of penetrating the rocks . 
One tunnel only , fourteen thousand feet in length , was pierced in order to arrive at the great basin . 
The track up to this time had reached its highest elevation at the Great Salt Lake . 
From this point it described a long curve , descending towards Bitter Creek Valley , to rise again to the dividing ridge of the waters between the Atlantic and the Pacific . 
There were many creeks in this mountainous region , and it was necessary to cross Muddy Creek , Green Creek , and others , upon culverts . 
Passepartout grew more and more impatient as they went on , while Fix longed to get out of this difficult region , and was more anxious than Phileas Fogg himself to be beyond the danger of delays and accidents , and set foot on English soil . 
At ten o'clock at night the train stopped at Fort Bridger station , and twenty minutes later entered Wyoming Territory , following the valley of Bitter Creek throughout . 
The next day , 7th December , they stopped for a quarter of an hour at Green River station . 
Snow had fallen abundantly during the night , but , being mixed with rain , it had half melted , and did not interrupt their progress . 
The bad weather , however , annoyed Passepartout ; for the accumulation of snow , by blocking the wheels of the cars , would certainly have been fatal to Mr. Fogg 's tour . 
`` What an idea ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Why did my master make this journey in winter ? 
Could n't he have waited for the good season to increase his chances ? '' 
While the worthy Frenchman was absorbed in the state of the sky and the depression of the temperature , Aouda was experiencing fears from a totally different cause . 
Several passengers had got off at Green River , and were walking up and down the platforms ; and among these Aouda recognised Colonel Stamp Proctor , the same who had so grossly insulted Phileas Fogg at the San Francisco meeting . 
Not wishing to be recognised , the young woman drew back from the window , feeling much alarm at her discovery . 
She was attached to the man who , however coldly , gave her daily evidences of the most absolute devotion . 
She did not comprehend , perhaps , the depth of the sentiment with which her protector inspired her , which she called gratitude , but which , though she was unconscious of it , was really more than that . 
Her heart sank within her when she recognised the man whom Mr. Fogg desired , sooner or later , to call to account for his conduct . 
Chance alone , it was clear , had brought Colonel Proctor on this train ; but there he was , and it was necessary , at all hazards , that Phileas Fogg should not perceive his adversary . 
Aouda seized a moment when Mr. Fogg was asleep to tell Fix and Passepartout whom she had seen . 
`` That Proctor on this train ! '' 
cried Fix . 
`` Well , reassure yourself , madam ; before he settles with Mr. Fogg ; he has got to deal with me ! 
It seems to me that I was the more insulted of the two . '' 
`` And , besides , '' added Passepartout , `` I 'll take charge of him , colonel as he is . '' 
`` Mr. Fix , '' resumed Aouda , `` Mr. Fogg will allow no one to avenge him . 
He said that he would come back to America to find this man . 
Should he perceive Colonel Proctor , we could not prevent a collision which might have terrible results . 
He must not see him . '' 
`` You are right , madam , '' replied Fix ; `` a meeting between them might ruin all . 
Whether he were victorious or beaten , Mr. Fogg would be delayed , and -- '' `` And , '' added Passepartout , `` that would play the game of the gentlemen of the Reform Club . 
In four days we shall be in New York . 
Well , if my master does not leave this car during those four days , we may hope that chance will not bring him face to face with this confounded American . 
We must , if possible , prevent his stirring out of it . '' 
The conversation dropped . 
Mr. Fogg had just woke up , and was looking out of the window . 
Soon after Passepartout , without being heard by his master or Aouda , whispered to the detective , `` Would you really fight for him ? '' 
`` I would do anything , '' replied Fix , in a tone which betrayed determined will , `` to get him back living to Europe ! '' 
Passepartout felt something like a shudder shoot through his frame , but his confidence in his master remained unbroken . 
Was there any means of detaining Mr. Fogg in the car , to avoid a meeting between him and the colonel ? 
It ought not to be a difficult task , since that gentleman was naturally sedentary and little curious . 
The detective , at least , seemed to have found a way ; for , after a few moments , he said to Mr. Fogg , `` These are long and slow hours , sir , that we are passing on the railway . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Mr. Fogg ; `` but they pass . '' 
`` You were in the habit of playing whist , '' resumed Fix , `` on the steamers . '' 
`` Yes ; but it would be difficult to do so here . 
I have neither cards nor partners . '' 
`` Oh , but we can easily buy some cards , for they are sold on all the American trains . 
And as for partners , if madam plays -- '' `` Certainly , sir , '' Aouda quickly replied ; `` I understand whist . 
It is part of an English education . '' 
`` I myself have some pretensions to playing a good game . 
Well , here are three of us , and a dummy -- '' `` As you please , sir , '' replied Phileas Fogg , heartily glad to resume his favourite pastime even on the railway . 
Passepartout was dispatched in search of the steward , and soon returned with two packs of cards , some pins , counters , and a shelf covered with cloth . 
The game commenced . 
Aouda understood whist sufficiently well , and even received some compliments on her playing from Mr. Fogg . 
As for the detective , he was simply an adept , and worthy of being matched against his present opponent . 
`` Now , '' thought Passepartout , `` we 've got him . 
He wo n't budge . '' 
At eleven in the morning the train had reached the dividing ridge of the waters at Bridger Pass , seven thousand five hundred and twenty-four feet above the level of the sea , one of the highest points attained by the track in crossing the Rocky Mountains . 
After going about two hundred miles , the travellers at last found themselves on one of those vast plains which extend to the Atlantic , and which nature has made so propitious for laying the iron road . 
On the declivity of the Atlantic basin the first streams , branches of the North Platte River , already appeared . 
The whole northern and eastern horizon was bounded by the immense semi-circular curtain which is formed by the southern portion of the Rocky Mountains , the highest being Laramie Peak . 
Between this and the railway extended vast plains , plentifully irrigated . 
On the right rose the lower spurs of the mountainous mass which extends southward to the sources of the Arkansas River , one of the great tributaries of the Missouri . 
At half-past twelve the travellers caught sight for an instant of Fort Halleck , which commands that section ; and in a few more hours the Rocky Mountains were crossed . 
There was reason to hope , then , that no accident would mark the journey through this difficult country . 
The snow had ceased falling , and the air became crisp and cold . 
Large birds , frightened by the locomotive , rose and flew off in the distance . 
No wild beast appeared on the plain . 
It was a desert in its vast nakedness . 
After a comfortable breakfast , served in the car , Mr. Fogg and his partners had just resumed whist , when a violent whistling was heard , and the train stopped . 
Passepartout put his head out of the door , but saw nothing to cause the delay ; no station was in view . 
Aouda and Fix feared that Mr. Fogg might take it into his head to get out ; but that gentleman contented himself with saying to his servant , `` See what is the matter . '' 
Passepartout rushed out of the car . 
Thirty or forty passengers had already descended , amongst them Colonel Stamp Proctor . 
The train had stopped before a red signal which blocked the way . 
The engineer and conductor were talking excitedly with a signal-man , whom the station-master at Medicine Bow , the next stopping place , had sent on before . 
The passengers drew around and took part in the discussion , in which Colonel Proctor , with his insolent manner , was conspicuous . 
Passepartout , joining the group , heard the signal-man say , `` No ! 
you ca n't pass . 
The bridge at Medicine Bow is shaky , and would not bear the weight of the train . '' 
This was a suspension-bridge thrown over some rapids , about a mile from the place where they now were . 
According to the signal-man , it was in a ruinous condition , several of the iron wires being broken ; and it was impossible to risk the passage . 
He did not in any way exaggerate the condition of the bridge . 
It may be taken for granted that , rash as the Americans usually are , when they are prudent there is good reason for it . 
Passepartout , not daring to apprise his master of what he heard , listened with set teeth , immovable as a statue . 
`` Hum ! '' 
cried Colonel Proctor ; `` but we are not going to stay here , I imagine , and take root in the snow ? '' 
`` Colonel , '' replied the conductor , `` we have telegraphed to Omaha for a train , but it is not likely that it will reach Medicine Bow is less than six hours . '' 
`` Six hours ! '' 
cried Passepartout . 
`` Certainly , '' returned the conductor , `` besides , it will take us as long as that to reach Medicine Bow on foot . '' 
