`` You are going to put to sea ? '' 
`` In an hour . '' 
`` You are bound for -- '' `` Bordeaux . '' 
`` And your cargo ? '' 
`` No freight . 
Going in ballast . '' 
`` Have you any passengers ? '' 
`` No passengers . 
Never have passengers . 
Too much in the way . '' 
`` Is your vessel a swift one ? '' 
`` Between eleven and twelve knots . 
The Henrietta , well known . '' 
`` Will you carry me and three other persons to Liverpool ? '' 
`` To Liverpool ? 
Why not to China ? '' 
`` I said Liverpool . '' 
`` No ! '' 
`` No ? '' 
`` No . 
I am setting out for Bordeaux , and shall go to Bordeaux . '' 
`` Money is no object ? '' 
`` None . '' 
The captain spoke in a tone which did not admit of a reply . 
`` But the owners of the Henrietta -- '' resumed Phileas Fogg . 
`` The owners are myself , '' replied the captain . 
`` The vessel belongs to me . '' 
`` I will freight it for you . '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I will buy it of you . '' 
`` No . '' 
Phileas Fogg did not betray the least disappointment ; but the situation was a grave one . 
It was not at New York as at Hong Kong , nor with the captain of the Henrietta as with the captain of the Tankadere . 
Up to this time money had smoothed away every obstacle . 
Now money failed . 
Still , some means must be found to cross the Atlantic on a boat , unless by balloon -- which would have been venturesome , besides not being capable of being put in practice . 
It seemed that Phileas Fogg had an idea , for he said to the captain , `` Well , will you carry me to Bordeaux ? '' 
`` No , not if you paid me two hundred dollars . '' 
`` I offer you two thousand . '' 
`` Apiece ? '' 
`` Apiece . '' 
`` And there are four of you ? '' 
`` Four . '' 
Captain Speedy began to scratch his head . 
There were eight thousand dollars to gain , without changing his route ; for which it was well worth conquering the repugnance he had for all kinds of passengers . 
Besides , passenger 's at two thousand dollars are no longer passengers , but valuable merchandise . 
`` I start at nine o'clock , '' said Captain Speedy , simply . 
`` Are you and your party ready ? '' 
`` We will be on board at nine o'clock , '' replied , no less simply , Mr. Fogg . 
It was half-past eight . 
To disembark from the Henrietta , jump into a hack , hurry to the St. Nicholas , and return with Aouda , Passepartout , and even the inseparable Fix was the work of a brief time , and was performed by Mr. Fogg with the coolness which never abandoned him . 
They were on board when the Henrietta made ready to weigh anchor . 
When Passepartout heard what this last voyage was going to cost , he uttered a prolonged `` Oh ! '' 
which extended throughout his vocal gamut . 
As for Fix , he said to himself that the Bank of England would certainly not come out of this affair well indemnified . 
When they reached England , even if Mr. Fogg did not throw some handfuls of bank-bills into the sea , more than seven thousand pounds would have been spent ! 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SHOWS HIMSELF EQUAL TO THE OCCASION An hour after , the Henrietta passed the lighthouse which marks the entrance of the Hudson , turned the point of Sandy Hook , and put to sea . 
During the day she skirted Long Island , passed Fire Island , and directed her course rapidly eastward . 
At noon the next day , a man mounted the bridge to ascertain the vessel 's position . 
It might be thought that this was Captain Speedy . 
Not the least in the world . 
It was Phileas Fogg , Esquire . 
As for Captain Speedy , he was shut up in his cabin under lock and key , and was uttering loud cries , which signified an anger at once pardonable and excessive . 
What had happened was very simple . 
Phileas Fogg wished to go to Liverpool , but the captain would not carry him there . 
Then Phileas Fogg had taken passage for Bordeaux , and , during the thirty hours he had been on board , had so shrewdly managed with his banknotes that the sailors and stokers , who were only an occasional crew , and were not on the best terms with the captain , went over to him in a body . 
This was why Phileas Fogg was in command instead of Captain Speedy ; why the captain was a prisoner in his cabin ; and why , in short , the Henrietta was directing her course towards Liverpool . 
It was very clear , to see Mr. Fogg manage the craft , that he had been a sailor . 
How the adventure ended will be seen anon . 
Aouda was anxious , though she said nothing . 
As for Passepartout , he thought Mr. Fogg 's manoeuvre simply glorious . 
The captain had said `` between eleven and twelve knots , '' and the Henrietta confirmed his prediction . 
If , then -- for there were `` ifs '' still -- the sea did not become too boisterous , if the wind did not veer round to the east , if no accident happened to the boat or its machinery , the Henrietta might cross the three thousand miles from New York to Liverpool in the nine days , between the 12th and the 21st of December . 
It is true that , once arrived , the affair on board the Henrietta , added to that of the Bank of England , might create more difficulties for Mr. Fogg than he imagined or could desire . 
During the first days , they went along smoothly enough . 
The sea was not very unpropitious , the wind seemed stationary in the north-east , the sails were hoisted , and the Henrietta ploughed across the waves like a real trans-Atlantic steamer . 
Passepartout was delighted . 
His master 's last exploit , the consequences of which he ignored , enchanted him . 
Never had the crew seen so jolly and dexterous a fellow . 
He formed warm friendships with the sailors , and amazed them with his acrobatic feats . 
He thought they managed the vessel like gentlemen , and that the stokers fired up like heroes . 
His loquacious good-humour infected everyone . 
He had forgotten the past , its vexations and delays . 
He only thought of the end , so nearly accomplished ; and sometimes he boiled over with impatience , as if heated by the furnaces of the Henrietta . 
Often , also , the worthy fellow revolved around Fix , looking at him with a keen , distrustful eye ; but he did not speak to him , for their old intimacy no longer existed . 
Fix , it must be confessed , understood nothing of what was going on . 
The conquest of the Henrietta , the bribery of the crew , Fogg managing the boat like a skilled seaman , amazed and confused him . 
He did not know what to think . 
For , after all , a man who began by stealing fifty-five thousand pounds might end by stealing a vessel ; and Fix was not unnaturally inclined to conclude that the Henrietta under Fogg 's command , was not going to Liverpool at all , but to some part of the world where the robber , turned into a pirate , would quietly put himself in safety . 
The conjecture was at least a plausible one , and the detective began to seriously regret that he had embarked on the affair . 
As for Captain Speedy , he continued to howl and growl in his cabin ; and Passepartout , whose duty it was to carry him his meals , courageous as he was , took the greatest precautions . 
Mr. Fogg did not seem even to know that there was a captain on board . 
On the 13th they passed the edge of the Banks of Newfoundland , a dangerous locality ; during the winter , especially , there are frequent fogs and heavy gales of wind . 
Ever since the evening before the barometer , suddenly falling , had indicated an approaching change in the atmosphere ; and during the night the temperature varied , the cold became sharper , and the wind veered to the south-east . 
This was a misfortune . 
Mr. Fogg , in order not to deviate from his course , furled his sails and increased the force of the steam ; but the vessel 's speed slackened , owing to the state of the sea , the long waves of which broke against the stern . 
She pitched violently , and this retarded her progress . 
The breeze little by little swelled into a tempest , and it was to be feared that the Henrietta might not be able to maintain herself upright on the waves . 
Passepartout 's visage darkened with the skies , and for two days the poor fellow experienced constant fright . 
But Phileas Fogg was a bold mariner , and knew how to maintain headway against the sea ; and he kept on his course , without even decreasing his steam . 
