Not wishing to expose Aouda to the discomforts of travelling in the open air , Mr. Fogg proposed to leave her with Passepartout at Fort Kearney , the servant taking upon himself to escort her to Europe by a better route and under more favourable conditions . 
But Aouda refused to separate from Mr. Fogg , and Passepartout was delighted with her decision ; for nothing could induce him to leave his master while Fix was with him . 
It would be difficult to guess the detective 's thoughts . 
Was this conviction shaken by Phileas Fogg 's return , or did he still regard him as an exceedingly shrewd rascal , who , his journey round the world completed , would think himself absolutely safe in England ? 
Perhaps Fix 's opinion of Phileas Fogg was somewhat modified ; but he was nevertheless resolved to do his duty , and to hasten the return of the whole party to England as much as possible . 
At eight o'clock the sledge was ready to start . 
The passengers took their places on it , and wrapped themselves up closely in their travelling-cloaks . 
The two great sails were hoisted , and under the pressure of the wind the sledge slid over the hardened snow with a velocity of forty miles an hour . 
The distance between Fort Kearney and Omaha , as the birds fly , is at most two hundred miles . 
If the wind held good , the distance might be traversed in five hours ; if no accident happened the sledge might reach Omaha by one o'clock . 
What a journey ! 
The travellers , huddled close together , could not speak for the cold , intensified by the rapidity at which they were going . 
The sledge sped on as lightly as a boat over the waves . 
When the breeze came skimming the earth the sledge seemed to be lifted off the ground by its sails . 
Mudge , who was at the rudder , kept in a straight line , and by a turn of his hand checked the lurches which the vehicle had a tendency to make . 
All the sails were up , and the jib was so arranged as not to screen the brigantine . 
A top-mast was hoisted , and another jib , held out to the wind , added its force to the other sails . 
Although the speed could not be exactly estimated , the sledge could not be going at less than forty miles an hour . 
`` If nothing breaks , '' said Mudge , `` we shall get there ! '' 
Mr. Fogg had made it for Mudge 's interest to reach Omaha within the time agreed on , by the offer of a handsome reward . 
The prairie , across which the sledge was moving in a straight line , was as flat as a sea . 
It seemed like a vast frozen lake . 
The railroad which ran through this section ascended from the south-west to the north-west by Great Island , Columbus , an important Nebraska town , Schuyler , and Fremont , to Omaha . 
It followed throughout the right bank of the Platte River . 
The sledge , shortening this route , took a chord of the arc described by the railway . 
Mudge was not afraid of being stopped by the Platte River , because it was frozen . 
The road , then , was quite clear of obstacles , and Phileas Fogg had but two things to fear -- an accident to the sledge , and a change or calm in the wind . 
But the breeze , far from lessening its force , blew as if to bend the mast , which , however , the metallic lashings held firmly . 
These lashings , like the chords of a stringed instrument , resounded as if vibrated by a violin bow . 
The sledge slid along in the midst of a plaintively intense melody . 
`` Those chords give the fifth and the octave , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
These were the only words he uttered during the journey . 
Aouda , cosily packed in furs and cloaks , was sheltered as much as possible from the attacks of the freezing wind . 
As for Passepartout , his face was as red as the sun 's disc when it sets in the mist , and he laboriously inhaled the biting air . 
With his natural buoyancy of spirits , he began to hope again . 
They would reach New York on the evening , if not on the morning , of the 11th , and there was still some chances that it would be before the steamer sailed for Liverpool . 
Passepartout even felt a strong desire to grasp his ally , Fix , by the hand . 
He remembered that it was the detective who procured the sledge , the only means of reaching Omaha in time ; but , checked by some presentiment , he kept his usual reserve . 
One thing , however , Passepartout would never forget , and that was the sacrifice which Mr. Fogg had made , without hesitation , to rescue him from the Sioux . 
Mr. Fogg had risked his fortune and his life . 
No ! 
His servant would never forget that ! 
While each of the party was absorbed in reflections so different , the sledge flew past over the vast carpet of snow . 
The creeks it passed over were not perceived . 
Fields and streams disappeared under the uniform whiteness . 
The plain was absolutely deserted . 
Between the Union Pacific road and the branch which unites Kearney with Saint Joseph it formed a great uninhabited island . 
Neither village , station , nor fort appeared . 
From time to time they sped by some phantom-like tree , whose white skeleton twisted and rattled in the wind . 
Sometimes flocks of wild birds rose , or bands of gaunt , famished , ferocious prairie-wolves ran howling after the sledge . 
Passepartout , revolver in hand , held himself ready to fire on those which came too near . 
Had an accident then happened to the sledge , the travellers , attacked by these beasts , would have been in the most terrible danger ; but it held on its even course , soon gained on the wolves , and ere long left the howling band at a safe distance behind . 
About noon Mudge perceived by certain landmarks that he was crossing the Platte River . 
He said nothing , but he felt certain that he was now within twenty miles of Omaha . 
In less than an hour he left the rudder and furled his sails , whilst the sledge , carried forward by the great impetus the wind had given it , went on half a mile further with its sails unspread . 
It stopped at last , and Mudge , pointing to a mass of roofs white with snow , said : `` We have got there ! '' 
Arrived ! 
Arrived at the station which is in daily communication , by numerous trains , with the Atlantic seaboard ! 
Passepartout and Fix jumped off , stretched their stiffened limbs , and aided Mr. Fogg and the young woman to descend from the sledge . 
Phileas Fogg generously rewarded Mudge , whose hand Passepartout warmly grasped , and the party directed their steps to the Omaha railway station . 
The Pacific Railroad proper finds its terminus at this important Nebraska town . 
Omaha is connected with Chicago by the Chicago and Rock Island Railroad , which runs directly east , and passes fifty stations . 
A train was ready to start when Mr. Fogg and his party reached the station , and they only had time to get into the cars . 
They had seen nothing of Omaha ; but Passepartout confessed to himself that this was not to be regretted , as they were not travelling to see the sights . 
The train passed rapidly across the State of Iowa , by Council Bluffs , Des Moines , and Iowa City . 
During the night it crossed the Mississippi at Davenport , and by Rock Island entered Illinois . 
The next day , which was the 10th , at four o'clock in the evening , it reached Chicago , already risen from its ruins , and more proudly seated than ever on the borders of its beautiful Lake Michigan . 
Nine hundred miles separated Chicago from New York ; but trains are not wanting at Chicago . 
Mr. Fogg passed at once from one to the other , and the locomotive of the Pittsburgh , Fort Wayne , and Chicago Railway left at full speed , as if it fully comprehended that that gentleman had no time to lose . 
It traversed Indiana , Ohio , Pennsylvania , and New Jersey like a flash , rushing through towns with antique names , some of which had streets and car-tracks , but as yet no houses . 
At last the Hudson came into view ; and , at a quarter-past eleven in the evening of the 11th , the train stopped in the station on the right bank of the river , before the very pier of the Cunard line . 
The China , for Liverpool , had started three-quarters of an hour before ! 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG ENGAGES IN A DIRECT STRUGGLE WITH BAD FORTUNE The China , in leaving , seemed to have carried off Phileas Fogg 's last hope . 
None of the other steamers were able to serve his projects . 
The Pereire , of the French Transatlantic Company , whose admirable steamers are equal to any in speed and comfort , did not leave until the 14th ; the Hamburg boats did not go directly to Liverpool or London , but to Havre ; and the additional trip from Havre to Southampton would render Phileas Fogg 's last efforts of no avail . 
The Inman steamer did not depart till the next day , and could not cross the Atlantic in time to save the wager . 
Mr. Fogg learned all this in consulting his Bradshaw , which gave him the daily movements of the trans-Atlantic steamers . 
Passepartout was crushed ; it overwhelmed him to lose the boat by three-quarters of an hour . 
It was his fault , for , instead of helping his master , he had not ceased putting obstacles in his path ! 
And when he recalled all the incidents of the tour , when he counted up the sums expended in pure loss and on his own account , when he thought that the immense stake , added to the heavy charges of this useless journey , would completely ruin Mr. Fogg , he overwhelmed himself with bitter self-accusations . 
Mr. Fogg , however , did not reproach him ; and , on leaving the Cunard pier , only said : `` We will consult about what is best to-morrow . 
Come . '' 
The party crossed the Hudson in the Jersey City ferryboat , and drove in a carriage to the St. Nicholas Hotel , on Broadway . 
Rooms were engaged , and the night passed , briefly to Phileas Fogg , who slept profoundly , but very long to Aouda and the others , whose agitation did not permit them to rest . 
The next day was the 12th of December . 
From seven in the morning of the 12th to a quarter before nine in the evening of the 21st there were nine days , thirteen hours , and forty-five minutes . 
If Phileas Fogg had left in the China , one of the fastest steamers on the Atlantic , he would have reached Liverpool , and then London , within the period agreed upon . 
Mr. Fogg left the hotel alone , after giving Passepartout instructions to await his return , and inform Aouda to be ready at an instant 's notice . 
He proceeded to the banks of the Hudson , and looked about among the vessels moored or anchored in the river , for any that were about to depart . 
Several had departure signals , and were preparing to put to sea at morning tide ; for in this immense and admirable port there is not one day in a hundred that vessels do not set out for every quarter of the globe . 
But they were mostly sailing vessels , of which , of course , Phileas Fogg could make no use . 
He seemed about to give up all hope , when he espied , anchored at the Battery , a cable 's length off at most , a trading vessel , with a screw , well-shaped , whose funnel , puffing a cloud of smoke , indicated that she was getting ready for departure . 
Phileas Fogg hailed a boat , got into it , and soon found himself on board the Henrietta , iron-hulled , wood-built above . 
He ascended to the deck , and asked for the captain , who forthwith presented himself . 
He was a man of fifty , a sort of sea-wolf , with big eyes , a complexion of oxidised copper , red hair and thick neck , and a growling voice . 
`` The captain ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` I am the captain . '' 
`` I am Phileas Fogg , of London . '' 
`` And I am Andrew Speedy , of Cardiff . '' 
