`` At once , madam . '' 
`` But the prisoners , our unfortunate fellow-travellers -- '' `` I can not interrupt the trip , '' replied the conductor . 
`` We are already three hours behind time . '' 
`` And when will another train pass here from San Francisco ? '' 
`` To-morrow evening , madam . '' 
`` To-morrow evening ! 
But then it will be too late ! 
We must wait -- '' `` It is impossible , '' responded the conductor . 
`` If you wish to go , please get in . '' 
`` I will not go , '' said Aouda . 
Fix had heard this conversation . 
A little while before , when there was no prospect of proceeding on the journey , he had made up his mind to leave Fort Kearney ; but now that the train was there , ready to start , and he had only to take his seat in the car , an irresistible influence held him back . 
The station platform burned his feet , and he could not stir . 
The conflict in his mind again began ; anger and failure stifled him . 
He wished to struggle on to the end . 
Meanwhile the passengers and some of the wounded , among them Colonel Proctor , whose injuries were serious , had taken their places in the train . 
The buzzing of the over-heated boiler was heard , and the steam was escaping from the valves . 
The engineer whistled , the train started , and soon disappeared , mingling its white smoke with the eddies of the densely falling snow . 
The detective had remained behind . 
Several hours passed . 
The weather was dismal , and it was very cold . 
Fix sat motionless on a bench in the station ; he might have been thought asleep . 
Aouda , despite the storm , kept coming out of the waiting-room , going to the end of the platform , and peering through the tempest of snow , as if to pierce the mist which narrowed the horizon around her , and to hear , if possible , some welcome sound . 
She heard and saw nothing . 
Then she would return , chilled through , to issue out again after the lapse of a few moments , but always in vain . 
Evening came , and the little band had not returned . 
Where could they be ? 
Had they found the Indians , and were they having a conflict with them , or were they still wandering amid the mist ? 
The commander of the fort was anxious , though he tried to conceal his apprehensions . 
As night approached , the snow fell less plentifully , but it became intensely cold . 
Absolute silence rested on the plains . 
Neither flight of bird nor passing of beast troubled the perfect calm . 
Throughout the night Aouda , full of sad forebodings , her heart stifled with anguish , wandered about on the verge of the plains . 
Her imagination carried her far off , and showed her innumerable dangers . 
What she suffered through the long hours it would be impossible to describe . 
Fix remained stationary in the same place , but did not sleep . 
Once a man approached and spoke to him , and the detective merely replied by shaking his head . 
Thus the night passed . 
At dawn , the half-extinguished disc of the sun rose above a misty horizon ; but it was now possible to recognise objects two miles off . 
Phileas Fogg and the squad had gone southward ; in the south all was still vacancy . 
It was then seven o'clock . 
The captain , who was really alarmed , did not know what course to take . 
Should he send another detachment to the rescue of the first ? 
Should he sacrifice more men , with so few chances of saving those already sacrificed ? 
His hesitation did not last long , however . 
Calling one of his lieutenants , he was on the point of ordering a reconnaissance , when gunshots were heard . 
Was it a signal ? 
The soldiers rushed out of the fort , and half a mile off they perceived a little band returning in good order . 
Mr. Fogg was marching at their head , and just behind him were Passepartout and the other two travellers , rescued from the Sioux . 
They had met and fought the Indians ten miles south of Fort Kearney . 
Shortly before the detachment arrived , Passepartout and his companions had begun to struggle with their captors , three of whom the Frenchman had felled with his fists , when his master and the soldiers hastened up to their relief . 
All were welcomed with joyful cries . 
Phileas Fogg distributed the reward he had promised to the soldiers , while Passepartout , not without reason , muttered to himself , `` It must certainly be confessed that I cost my master dear ! '' 
Fix , without saying a word , looked at Mr. Fogg , and it would have been difficult to analyse the thoughts which struggled within him . 
As for Aouda , she took her protector 's hand and pressed it in her own , too much moved to speak . 
Meanwhile , Passepartout was looking about for the train ; he thought he should find it there , ready to start for Omaha , and he hoped that the time lost might be regained . 
`` The train ! 
the train ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Gone , '' replied Fix . 
`` And when does the next train pass here ? '' 
said Phileas Fogg . 
`` Not till this evening . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
returned the impassible gentleman quietly . 
IN WHICH FIX , THE DETECTIVE , CONSIDERABLY FURTHERS THE INTERESTS OF PHILEAS FOGG Phileas Fogg found himself twenty hours behind time . 
Passepartout , the involuntary cause of this delay , was desperate . 
He had ruined his master ! 
At this moment the detective approached Mr. Fogg , and , looking him intently in the face , said : `` Seriously , sir , are you in great haste ? '' 
`` Quite seriously . '' 
`` I have a purpose in asking , '' resumed Fix . 
`` Is it absolutely necessary that you should be in New York on the 11th , before nine o'clock in the evening , the time that the steamer leaves for Liverpool ? '' 
`` It is absolutely necessary . '' 
`` And , if your journey had not been interrupted by these Indians , you would have reached New York on the morning of the 11th ? '' 
`` Yes ; with eleven hours to spare before the steamer left . '' 
`` Good ! 
you are therefore twenty hours behind . 
Twelve from twenty leaves eight . 
You must regain eight hours . 
Do you wish to try to do so ? '' 
`` On foot ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` No ; on a sledge , '' replied Fix . 
`` On a sledge with sails . 
A man has proposed such a method to me . '' 
It was the man who had spoken to Fix during the night , and whose offer he had refused . 
Phileas Fogg did not reply at once ; but Fix , having pointed out the man , who was walking up and down in front of the station , Mr. Fogg went up to him . 
An instant after , Mr. Fogg and the American , whose name was Mudge , entered a hut built just below the fort . 
There Mr. Fogg examined a curious vehicle , a kind of frame on two long beams , a little raised in front like the runners of a sledge , and upon which there was room for five or six persons . 
A high mast was fixed on the frame , held firmly by metallic lashings , to which was attached a large brigantine sail . 
This mast held an iron stay upon which to hoist a jib-sail . 
Behind , a sort of rudder served to guide the vehicle . 
It was , in short , a sledge rigged like a sloop . 
During the winter , when the trains are blocked up by the snow , these sledges make extremely rapid journeys across the frozen plains from one station to another . 
Provided with more sails than a cutter , and with the wind behind them , they slip over the surface of the prairies with a speed equal if not superior to that of the express trains . 
Mr. Fogg readily made a bargain with the owner of this land-craft . 
The wind was favourable , being fresh , and blowing from the west . 
The snow had hardened , and Mudge was very confident of being able to transport Mr. Fogg in a few hours to Omaha . 
Thence the trains eastward run frequently to Chicago and New York . 
It was not impossible that the lost time might yet be recovered ; and such an opportunity was not to be rejected . 
