`` Stay , '' replied Mr. Fogg calmly , without betraying in his features that by a supreme inspiration he was about to attempt once more to conquer ill-fortune . 
Queenstown is the Irish port at which the trans-Atlantic steamers stop to put off the mails . 
These mails are carried to Dublin by express trains always held in readiness to start ; from Dublin they are sent on to Liverpool by the most rapid boats , and thus gain twelve hours on the Atlantic steamers . 
Phileas Fogg counted on gaining twelve hours in the same way . 
Instead of arriving at Liverpool the next evening by the Henrietta , he would be there by noon , and would therefore have time to reach London before a quarter before nine in the evening . 
The Henrietta entered Queenstown Harbour at one o'clock in the morning , it then being high tide ; and Phileas Fogg , after being grasped heartily by the hand by Captain Speedy , left that gentleman on the levelled hulk of his craft , which was still worth half what he had sold it for . 
The party went on shore at once . 
Fix was greatly tempted to arrest Mr. Fogg on the spot ; but he did not . 
Why ? 
What struggle was going on within him ? 
Had he changed his mind about `` his man '' ? 
Did he understand that he had made a grave mistake ? 
He did not , however , abandon Mr. Fogg . 
They all got upon the train , which was just ready to start , at half-past one ; at dawn of day they were in Dublin ; and they lost no time in embarking on a steamer which , disdaining to rise upon the waves , invariably cut through them . 
Phileas Fogg at last disembarked on the Liverpool quay , at twenty minutes before twelve , 21st December . 
He was only six hours distant from London . 
But at this moment Fix came up , put his hand upon Mr. Fogg 's shoulder , and , showing his warrant , said , `` You are really Phileas Fogg ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
`` I arrest you in the Queen 's name ! '' 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AT LAST REACHES LONDON Phileas Fogg was in prison . 
He had been shut up in the Custom House , and he was to be transferred to London the next day . 
Passepartout , when he saw his master arrested , would have fallen upon Fix had he not been held back by some policemen . 
Aouda was thunderstruck at the suddenness of an event which she could not understand . 
Passepartout explained to her how it was that the honest and courageous Fogg was arrested as a robber . 
The young woman 's heart revolted against so heinous a charge , and when she saw that she could attempt to do nothing to save her protector , she wept bitterly . 
As for Fix , he had arrested Mr. Fogg because it was his duty , whether Mr. Fogg were guilty or not . 
The thought then struck Passepartout , that he was the cause of this new misfortune ! 
Had he not concealed Fix 's errand from his master ? 
When Fix revealed his true character and purpose , why had he not told Mr. Fogg ? 
If the latter had been warned , he would no doubt have given Fix proof of his innocence , and satisfied him of his mistake ; at least , Fix would not have continued his journey at the expense and on the heels of his master , only to arrest him the moment he set foot on English soil . 
Passepartout wept till he was blind , and felt like blowing his brains out . 
Aouda and he had remained , despite the cold , under the portico of the Custom House . 
Neither wished to leave the place ; both were anxious to see Mr. Fogg again . 
That gentleman was really ruined , and that at the moment when he was about to attain his end . 
This arrest was fatal . 
Having arrived at Liverpool at twenty minutes before twelve on the 21st of December , he had till a quarter before nine that evening to reach the Reform Club , that is , nine hours and a quarter ; the journey from Liverpool to London was six hours . 
If anyone , at this moment , had entered the Custom House , he would have found Mr. Fogg seated , motionless , calm , and without apparent anger , upon a wooden bench . 
He was not , it is true , resigned ; but this last blow failed to force him into an outward betrayal of any emotion . 
Was he being devoured by one of those secret rages , all the more terrible because contained , and which only burst forth , with an irresistible force , at the last moment ? 
No one could tell . 
There he sat , calmly waiting -- for what ? 
Did he still cherish hope ? 
Did he still believe , now that the door of this prison was closed upon him , that he would succeed ? 
However that may have been , Mr. Fogg carefully put his watch upon the table , and observed its advancing hands . 
Not a word escaped his lips , but his look was singularly set and stern . 
The situation , in any event , was a terrible one , and might be thus stated : if Phileas Fogg was honest he was ruined ; if he was a knave , he was caught . 
Did escape occur to him ? 
Did he examine to see if there were any practicable outlet from his prison ? 
Did he think of escaping from it ? 
Possibly ; for once he walked slowly around the room . 
But the door was locked , and the window heavily barred with iron rods . 
He sat down again , and drew his journal from his pocket . 
On the line where these words were written , `` 21st December , Saturday , Liverpool , '' he added , `` 80th day , 11.40 a.m. , '' and waited . 
The Custom House clock struck one . 
Mr. Fogg observed that his watch was two hours too fast . 
Two hours ! 
Admitting that he was at this moment taking an express train , he could reach London and the Reform Club by a quarter before nine , p.m. His forehead slightly wrinkled . 
At thirty-three minutes past two he heard a singular noise outside , then a hasty opening of doors . 
Passepartout 's voice was audible , and immediately after that of Fix . 
Phileas Fogg 's eyes brightened for an instant . 
The door swung open , and he saw Passepartout , Aouda , and Fix , who hurried towards him . 
Fix was out of breath , and his hair was in disorder . 
He could not speak . 
`` Sir , '' he stammered , `` sir -- forgive me -- most -- unfortunate resemblance -- robber arrested three days ago -- you are free ! '' 
Phileas Fogg was free ! 
He walked to the detective , looked him steadily in the face , and with the only rapid motion he had ever made in his life , or which he ever would make , drew back his arms , and with the precision of a machine knocked Fix down . 
`` Well hit ! '' 
cried Passepartout , `` Parbleu ! 
that 's what you might call a good application of English fists ! '' 
Fix , who found himself on the floor , did not utter a word . 
He had only received his deserts . 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout left the Custom House without delay , got into a cab , and in a few moments descended at the station . 
Phileas Fogg asked if there was an express train about to leave for London . 
It was forty minutes past two . 
The express train had left thirty-five minutes before . 
Phileas Fogg then ordered a special train . 
There were several rapid locomotives on hand ; but the railway arrangements did not permit the special train to leave until three o'clock . 
At that hour Phileas Fogg , having stimulated the engineer by the offer of a generous reward , at last set out towards London with Aouda and his faithful servant . 
It was necessary to make the journey in five hours and a half ; and this would have been easy on a clear road throughout . 
But there were forced delays , and when Mr. Fogg stepped from the train at the terminus , all the clocks in London were striking ten minutes before nine . '' 
Having made the tour of the world , he was behind-hand five minutes . 
He had lost the wager ! 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DOES NOT HAVE TO REPEAT HIS ORDERS TO PASSEPARTOUT TWICE The dwellers in Saville Row would have been surprised the next day , if they had been told that Phileas Fogg had returned home . 
His doors and windows were still closed , no appearance of change was visible . 
After leaving the station , Mr. Fogg gave Passepartout instructions to purchase some provisions , and quietly went to his domicile . 
He bore his misfortune with his habitual tranquillity . 
Ruined ! 
And by the blundering of the detective ! 
After having steadily traversed that long journey , overcome a hundred obstacles , braved many dangers , and still found time to do some good on his way , to fail near the goal by a sudden event which he could not have foreseen , and against which he was unarmed ; it was terrible ! 
But a few pounds were left of the large sum he had carried with him . 
There only remained of his fortune the twenty thousand pounds deposited at Barings , and this amount he owed to his friends of the Reform Club . 
So great had been the expense of his tour that , even had he won , it would not have enriched him ; and it is probable that he had not sought to enrich himself , being a man who rather laid wagers for honour 's sake than for the stake proposed . 
But this wager totally ruined him . 
Mr. Fogg 's course , however , was fully decided upon ; he knew what remained for him to do . 
A room in the house in Saville Row was set apart for Aouda , who was overwhelmed with grief at her protector 's misfortune . 
From the words which Mr. Fogg dropped , she saw that he was meditating some serious project . 
Knowing that Englishmen governed by a fixed idea sometimes resort to the desperate expedient of suicide , Passepartout kept a narrow watch upon his master , though he carefully concealed the appearance of so doing . 
First of all , the worthy fellow had gone up to his room , and had extinguished the gas burner , which had been burning for eighty days . 
He had found in the letter-box a bill from the gas company , and he thought it more than time to put a stop to this expense , which he had been doomed to bear . 
The night passed . 
