Fix thought over these probabilities during the long hours which he spent in his cabin , and kept repeating to himself , `` Now , either the warrant will be at Hong Kong , in which case I shall arrest my man , or it will not be there ; and this time it is absolutely necessary that I should delay his departure . 
I have failed at Bombay , and I have failed at Calcutta ; if I fail at Hong Kong , my reputation is lost : Cost what it may , I must succeed ! 
But how shall I prevent his departure , if that should turn out to be my last resource ? '' 
Fix made up his mind that , if worst came to worst , he would make a confidant of Passepartout , and tell him what kind of a fellow his master really was . 
That Passepartout was not Fogg 's accomplice , he was very certain . 
The servant , enlightened by his disclosure , and afraid of being himself implicated in the crime , would doubtless become an ally of the detective . 
But this method was a dangerous one , only to be employed when everything else had failed . 
A word from Passepartout to his master would ruin all . 
The detective was therefore in a sore strait . 
But suddenly a new idea struck him . 
The presence of Aouda on the Rangoon , in company with Phileas Fogg , gave him new material for reflection . 
Who was this woman ? 
What combination of events had made her Fogg 's travelling companion ? 
They had evidently met somewhere between Bombay and Calcutta ; but where ? 
Had they met accidentally , or had Fogg gone into the interior purposely in quest of this charming damsel ? 
Fix was fairly puzzled . 
He asked himself whether there had not been a wicked elopement ; and this idea so impressed itself upon his mind that he determined to make use of the supposed intrigue . 
Whether the young woman were married or not , he would be able to create such difficulties for Mr. Fogg at Hong Kong that he could not escape by paying any amount of money . 
But could he even wait till they reached Hong Kong ? 
Fogg had an abominable way of jumping from one boat to another , and , before anything could be effected , might get full under way again for Yokohama . 
Fix decided that he must warn the English authorities , and signal the Rangoon before her arrival . 
This was easy to do , since the steamer stopped at Singapore , whence there is a telegraphic wire to Hong Kong . 
He finally resolved , moreover , before acting more positively , to question Passepartout . 
It would not be difficult to make him talk ; and , as there was no time to lose , Fix prepared to make himself known . 
It was now the 30th of October , and on the following day the Rangoon was due at Singapore . 
Fix emerged from his cabin and went on deck . 
Passepartout was promenading up and down in the forward part of the steamer . 
The detective rushed forward with every appearance of extreme surprise , and exclaimed , `` You here , on the Rangoon ? '' 
`` What , Monsieur Fix , are you on board ? '' 
returned the really astonished Passepartout , recognising his crony of the Mongolia . 
`` Why , I left you at Bombay , and here you are , on the way to Hong Kong ! 
Are you going round the world too ? '' 
`` No , no , '' replied Fix ; `` I shall stop at Hong Kong -- at least for some days . '' 
`` Hum ! '' 
said Passepartout , who seemed for an instant perplexed . 
`` But how is it I have not seen you on board since we left Calcutta ? '' 
`` Oh , a trifle of sea-sickness -- I 've been staying in my berth . 
The Gulf of Bengal does not agree with me as well as the Indian Ocean . 
And how is Mr. Fogg ? '' 
`` As well and as punctual as ever , not a day behind time ! 
But , Monsieur Fix , you do n't know that we have a young lady with us . '' 
`` A young lady ? '' 
replied the detective , not seeming to comprehend what was said . 
Passepartout thereupon recounted Aouda 's history , the affair at the Bombay pagoda , the purchase of the elephant for two thousand pounds , the rescue , the arrest , and sentence of the Calcutta court , and the restoration of Mr. Fogg and himself to liberty on bail . 
Fix , who was familiar with the last events , seemed to be equally ignorant of all that Passepartout related ; and the later was charmed to find so interested a listener . 
`` But does your master propose to carry this young woman to Europe ? '' 
`` Not at all . 
We are simply going to place her under the protection of one of her relatives , a rich merchant at Hong Kong . '' 
`` Nothing to be done there , '' said Fix to himself , concealing his disappointment . 
`` A glass of gin , Mr. Passepartout ? '' 
`` Willingly , Monsieur Fix . 
We must at least have a friendly glass on board the Rangoon . '' 
SHOWING WHAT HAPPENED ON THE VOYAGE FROM SINGAPORE TO HONG KONG The detective and Passepartout met often on deck after this interview , though Fix was reserved , and did not attempt to induce his companion to divulge any more facts concerning Mr. Fogg . 
He caught a glimpse of that mysterious gentleman once or twice ; but Mr. Fogg usually confined himself to the cabin , where he kept Aouda company , or , according to his inveterate habit , took a hand at whist . 
Passepartout began very seriously to conjecture what strange chance kept Fix still on the route that his master was pursuing . 
It was really worth considering why this certainly very amiable and complacent person , whom he had first met at Suez , had then encountered on board the Mongolia , who disembarked at Bombay , which he announced as his destination , and now turned up so unexpectedly on the Rangoon , was following Mr. Fogg 's tracks step by step . 
What was Fix 's object ? 
Passepartout was ready to wager his Indian shoes -- which he religiously preserved -- that Fix would also leave Hong Kong at the same time with them , and probably on the same steamer . 
Passepartout might have cudgelled his brain for a century without hitting upon the real object which the detective had in view . 
He never could have imagined that Phileas Fogg was being tracked as a robber around the globe . 
But , as it is in human nature to attempt the solution of every mystery , Passepartout suddenly discovered an explanation of Fix 's movements , which was in truth far from unreasonable . 
Fix , he thought , could only be an agent of Mr. Fogg 's friends at the Reform Club , sent to follow him up , and to ascertain that he really went round the world as had been agreed upon . 
`` It 's clear ! '' 
repeated the worthy servant to himself , proud of his shrewdness . 
`` He 's a spy sent to keep us in view ! 
That is n't quite the thing , either , to be spying Mr. Fogg , who is so honourable a man ! 
Ah , gentlemen of the Reform , this shall cost you dear ! '' 
Passepartout , enchanted with his discovery , resolved to say nothing to his master , lest he should be justly offended at this mistrust on the part of his adversaries . 
But he determined to chaff Fix , when he had the chance , with mysterious allusions , which , however , need not betray his real suspicions . 
During the afternoon of Wednesday , 30th October , the Rangoon entered the Strait of Malacca , which separates the peninsula of that name from Sumatra . 
The mountainous and craggy islets intercepted the beauties of this noble island from the view of the travellers . 
The Rangoon weighed anchor at Singapore the next day at four a.m. , to receive coal , having gained half a day on the prescribed time of her arrival . 
Phileas Fogg noted this gain in his journal , and then , accompanied by Aouda , who betrayed a desire for a walk on shore , disembarked . 
Fix , who suspected Mr. Fogg 's every movement , followed them cautiously , without being himself perceived ; while Passepartout , laughing in his sleeve at Fix 's manoeuvres , went about his usual errands . 
The island of Singapore is not imposing in aspect , for there are no mountains ; yet its appearance is not without attractions . 
It is a park checkered by pleasant highways and avenues . 
A handsome carriage , drawn by a sleek pair of New Holland horses , carried Phileas Fogg and Aouda into the midst of rows of palms with brilliant foliage , and of clove-trees , whereof the cloves form the heart of a half-open flower . 
Pepper plants replaced the prickly hedges of European fields ; sago-bushes , large ferns with gorgeous branches , varied the aspect of this tropical clime ; while nutmeg-trees in full foliage filled the air with a penetrating perfume . 
Agile and grinning bands of monkeys skipped about in the trees , nor were tigers wanting in the jungles . 
After a drive of two hours through the country , Aouda and Mr. Fogg returned to the town , which is a vast collection of heavy-looking , irregular houses , surrounded by charming gardens rich in tropical fruits and plants ; and at ten o'clock they re-embarked , closely followed by the detective , who had kept them constantly in sight . 
Passepartout , who had been purchasing several dozen mangoes -- a fruit as large as good-sized apples , of a dark-brown colour outside and a bright red within , and whose white pulp , melting in the mouth , affords gourmands a delicious sensation -- was waiting for them on deck . 
He was only too glad to offer some mangoes to Aouda , who thanked him very gracefully for them . 
At eleven o'clock the Rangoon rode out of Singapore harbour , and in a few hours the high mountains of Malacca , with their forests , inhabited by the most beautifully-furred tigers in the world , were lost to view . 
Singapore is distant some thirteen hundred miles from the island of Hong Kong , which is a little English colony near the Chinese coast . 
Phileas Fogg hoped to accomplish the journey in six days , so as to be in time for the steamer which would leave on the 6th of November for Yokohama , the principal Japanese port . 
The Rangoon had a large quota of passengers , many of whom disembarked at Singapore , among them a number of Indians , Ceylonese , Chinamen , Malays , and Portuguese , mostly second-class travellers . 
The weather , which had hitherto been fine , changed with the last quarter of the moon . 
The sea rolled heavily , and the wind at intervals rose almost to a storm , but happily blew from the south-west , and thus aided the steamer 's progress . 
The captain as often as possible put up his sails , and under the double action of steam and sail the vessel made rapid progress along the coasts of Anam and Cochin China . 
Owing to the defective construction of the Rangoon , however , unusual precautions became necessary in unfavourable weather ; but the loss of time which resulted from this cause , while it nearly drove Passepartout out of his senses , did not seem to affect his master in the least . 
Passepartout blamed the captain , the engineer , and the crew , and consigned all who were connected with the ship to the land where the pepper grows . 
Perhaps the thought of the gas , which was remorselessly burning at his expense in Saville Row , had something to do with his hot impatience . 
`` You are in a great hurry , then , '' said Fix to him one day , `` to reach Hong Kong ? '' 
`` A very great hurry ! '' 
`` Mr. Fogg , I suppose , is anxious to catch the steamer for Yokohama ? '' 
`` Terribly anxious . '' 
`` You believe in this journey around the world , then ? '' 
`` Absolutely . 
Do n't you , Mr. Fix ? '' 
`` I ? 
