The Indian had begun already , by often irritating him , and feeding him every three months on sugar and butter , to impart to him a ferocity not in his nature , this method being often employed by those who train the Indian elephants for battle . 
Happily , however , for Mr. Fogg , the animal 's instruction in this direction had not gone far , and the elephant still preserved his natural gentleness . 
Kiouni -- this was the name of the beast -- could doubtless travel rapidly for a long time , and , in default of any other means of conveyance , Mr. Fogg resolved to hire him . 
But elephants are far from cheap in India , where they are becoming scarce , the males , which alone are suitable for circus shows , are much sought , especially as but few of them are domesticated . 
When therefore Mr. Fogg proposed to the Indian to hire Kiouni , he refused point-blank . 
Mr. Fogg persisted , offering the excessive sum of ten pounds an hour for the loan of the beast to Allahabad . 
Refused . 
Twenty pounds ? 
Refused also . 
Forty pounds ? 
Still refused . 
Passepartout jumped at each advance ; but the Indian declined to be tempted . 
Yet the offer was an alluring one , for , supposing it took the elephant fifteen hours to reach Allahabad , his owner would receive no less than six hundred pounds sterling . 
Phileas Fogg , without getting in the least flurried , then proposed to purchase the animal outright , and at first offered a thousand pounds for him . 
The Indian , perhaps thinking he was going to make a great bargain , still refused . 
Sir Francis Cromarty took Mr. Fogg aside , and begged him to reflect before he went any further ; to which that gentleman replied that he was not in the habit of acting rashly , that a bet of twenty thousand pounds was at stake , that the elephant was absolutely necessary to him , and that he would secure him if he had to pay twenty times his value . 
Returning to the Indian , whose small , sharp eyes , glistening with avarice , betrayed that with him it was only a question of how great a price he could obtain . 
Mr. Fogg offered first twelve hundred , then fifteen hundred , eighteen hundred , two thousand pounds . 
Passepartout , usually so rubicund , was fairly white with suspense . 
At two thousand pounds the Indian yielded . 
`` What a price , good heavens ! '' 
cried Passepartout , `` for an elephant . 
It only remained now to find a guide , which was comparatively easy . 
A young Parsee , with an intelligent face , offered his services , which Mr. Fogg accepted , promising so generous a reward as to materially stimulate his zeal . 
The elephant was led out and equipped . 
The Parsee , who was an accomplished elephant driver , covered his back with a sort of saddle-cloth , and attached to each of his flanks some curiously uncomfortable howdahs . 
Phileas Fogg paid the Indian with some banknotes which he extracted from the famous carpet-bag , a proceeding that seemed to deprive poor Passepartout of his vitals . 
Then he offered to carry Sir Francis to Allahabad , which the brigadier gratefully accepted , as one traveller the more would not be likely to fatigue the gigantic beast . 
Provisions were purchased at Kholby , and , while Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg took the howdahs on either side , Passepartout got astride the saddle-cloth between them . 
The Parsee perched himself on the elephant 's neck , and at nine o'clock they set out from the village , the animal marching off through the dense forest of palms by the shortest cut . 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND HIS COMPANIONS VENTURE ACROSS THE INDIAN FORESTS , AND WHAT ENSUED In order to shorten the journey , the guide passed to the left of the line where the railway was still in process of being built . 
This line , owing to the capricious turnings of the Vindhia Mountains , did not pursue a straight course . 
The Parsee , who was quite familiar with the roads and paths in the district , declared that they would gain twenty miles by striking directly through the forest . 
Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty , plunged to the neck in the peculiar howdahs provided for them , were horribly jostled by the swift trotting of the elephant , spurred on as he was by the skilful Parsee ; but they endured the discomfort with true British phlegm , talking little , and scarcely able to catch a glimpse of each other . 
As for Passepartout , who was mounted on the beast 's back , and received the direct force of each concussion as he trod along , he was very careful , in accordance with his master 's advice , to keep his tongue from between his teeth , as it would otherwise have been bitten off short . 
The worthy fellow bounced from the elephant 's neck to his rump , and vaulted like a clown on a spring-board ; yet he laughed in the midst of his bouncing , and from time to time took a piece of sugar out of his pocket , and inserted it in Kiouni 's trunk , who received it without in the least slackening his regular trot . 
After two hours the guide stopped the elephant , and gave him an hour for rest , during which Kiouni , after quenching his thirst at a neighbouring spring , set to devouring the branches and shrubs round about him . 
Neither Sir Francis nor Mr. Fogg regretted the delay , and both descended with a feeling of relief . 
`` Why , he 's made of iron ! '' 
exclaimed the general , gazing admiringly on Kiouni . 
`` Of forged iron , '' replied Passepartout , as he set about preparing a hasty breakfast . 
At noon the Parsee gave the signal of departure . 
The country soon presented a very savage aspect . 
Copses of dates and dwarf-palms succeeded the dense forests ; then vast , dry plains , dotted with scanty shrubs , and sown with great blocks of syenite . 
All this portion of Bundelcund , which is little frequented by travellers , is inhabited by a fanatical population , hardened in the most horrible practices of the Hindoo faith . 
The English have not been able to secure complete dominion over this territory , which is subjected to the influence of rajahs , whom it is almost impossible to reach in their inaccessible mountain fastnesses . 
The travellers several times saw bands of ferocious Indians , who , when they perceived the elephant striding across-country , made angry arid threatening motions . 
The Parsee avoided them as much as possible . 
Few animals were observed on the route ; even the monkeys hurried from their path with contortions and grimaces which convulsed Passepartout with laughter . 
In the midst of his gaiety , however , one thought troubled the worthy servant . 
What would Mr. Fogg do with the elephant when he got to Allahabad ? 
Would he carry him on with him ? 
Impossible ! 
The cost of transporting him would make him ruinously expensive . 
Would he sell him , or set him free ? 
The estimable beast certainly deserved some consideration . 
Should Mr. Fogg choose to make him , Passepartout , a present of Kiouni , he would be very much embarrassed ; and these thoughts did not cease worrying him for a long time . 
The principal chain of the Vindhias was crossed by eight in the evening , and another halt was made on the northern slope , in a ruined bungalow . 
They had gone nearly twenty-five miles that day , and an equal distance still separated them from the station of Allahabad . 
The night was cold . 
The Parsee lit a fire in the bungalow with a few dry branches , and the warmth was very grateful , provisions purchased at Kholby sufficed for supper , and the travellers ate ravenously . 
The conversation , beginning with a few disconnected phrases , soon gave place to loud and steady snores . 
The guide watched Kiouni , who slept standing , bolstering himself against the trunk of a large tree . 
Nothing occurred during the night to disturb the slumberers , although occasional growls front panthers and chatterings of monkeys broke the silence ; the more formidable beasts made no cries or hostile demonstration against the occupants of the bungalow . 
Sir Francis slept heavily , like an honest soldier overcome with fatigue . 
Passepartout was wrapped in uneasy dreams of the bouncing of the day before . 
As for Mr. Fogg , he slumbered as peacefully as if he had been in his serene mansion in Saville Row . 
The journey was resumed at six in the morning ; the guide hoped to reach Allahabad by evening . 
In that case , Mr. Fogg would only lose a part of the forty-eight hours saved since the beginning of the tour . 
Kiouni , resuming his rapid gait , soon descended the lower spurs of the Vindhias , and towards noon they passed by the village of Kallenger , on the Cani , one of the branches of the Ganges . 
The guide avoided inhabited places , thinking it safer to keep the open country , which lies along the first depressions of the basin of the great river . 
Allahabad was now only twelve miles to the north-east . 
They stopped under a clump of bananas , the fruit of which , as healthy as bread and as succulent as cream , was amply partaken of and appreciated . 
At two o'clock the guide entered a thick forest which extended several miles ; he preferred to travel under cover of the woods . 
They had not as yet had any unpleasant encounters , and the journey seemed on the point of being successfully accomplished , when the elephant , becoming restless , suddenly stopped . 
It was then four o'clock . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
asked Sir Francis , putting out his head . 
`` I do n't know , officer , '' replied the Parsee , listening attentively to a confused murmur which came through the thick branches . 
The murmur soon became more distinct ; it now seemed like a distant concert of human voices accompanied by brass instruments . 
Passepartout was all eyes and ears . 
Mr. Fogg patiently waited without a word . 
The Parsee jumped to the ground , fastened the elephant to a tree , and plunged into the thicket . 
He soon returned , saying : `` A procession of Brahmins is coming this way . 
We must prevent their seeing us , if possible . '' 
The guide unloosed the elephant and led him into a thicket , at the same time asking the travellers not to stir . 
He held himself ready to bestride the animal at a moment 's notice , should flight become necessary ; but he evidently thought that the procession of the faithful would pass without perceiving them amid the thick foliage , in which they were wholly concealed . 
The discordant tones of the voices and instruments drew nearer , and now droning songs mingled with the sound of the tambourines and cymbals . 
The head of the procession soon appeared beneath the trees , a hundred paces away ; and the strange figures who performed the religious ceremony were easily distinguished through the branches . 
First came the priests , with mitres on their heads , and clothed in long lace robes . 
They were surrounded by men , women , and children , who sang a kind of lugubrious psalm , interrupted at regular intervals by the tambourines and cymbals ; while behind them was drawn a car with large wheels , the spokes of which represented serpents entwined with each other . 
Upon the car , which was drawn by four richly caparisoned zebus , stood a hideous statue with four arms , the body coloured a dull red , with haggard eyes , dishevelled hair , protruding tongue , and lips tinted with betel . 
It stood upright upon the figure of a prostrate and headless giant . 
Sir Francis , recognising the statue , whispered , `` The goddess Kali ; the goddess of love and death . '' 
`` Of death , perhaps , '' muttered back Passepartout , `` but of love -- that ugly old hag ? 
Never ! '' 
The Parsee made a motion to keep silence . 
A group of old fakirs were capering and making a wild ado round the statue ; these were striped with ochre , and covered with cuts whence their blood issued drop by drop -- stupid fanatics , who , in the great Indian ceremonies , still throw themselves under the wheels of Juggernaut . 
Some Brahmins , clad in all the sumptuousness of Oriental apparel , and leading a woman who faltered at every step , followed . 
This woman was young , and as fair as a European . 
