Her head and neck , shoulders , ears , arms , hands , and toes were loaded down with jewels and gems with bracelets , earrings , and rings ; while a tunic bordered with gold , and covered with a light muslin robe , betrayed the outline of her form . 
The guards who followed the young woman presented a violent contrast to her , armed as they were with naked sabres hung at their waists , and long damascened pistols , and bearing a corpse on a palanquin . 
It was the body of an old man , gorgeously arrayed in the habiliments of a rajah , wearing , as in life , a turban embroidered with pearls , a robe of tissue of silk and gold , a scarf of cashmere sewed with diamonds , and the magnificent weapons of a Hindoo prince . 
Next came the musicians and a rearguard of capering fakirs , whose cries sometimes drowned the noise of the instruments ; these closed the procession . 
Sir Francis watched the procession with a sad countenance , and , turning to the guide , said , `` A suttee . '' 
The Parsee nodded , and put his finger to his lips . 
The procession slowly wound under the trees , and soon its last ranks disappeared in the depths of the wood . 
The songs gradually died away ; occasionally cries were heard in the distance , until at last all was silence again . 
Phileas Fogg had heard what Sir Francis said , and , as soon as the procession had disappeared , asked : `` What is a suttee ? '' 
`` A suttee , '' returned the general , `` is a human sacrifice , but a voluntary one . 
The woman you have just seen will be burned to-morrow at the dawn of day . '' 
`` Oh , the scoundrels ! '' 
cried Passepartout , who could not repress his indignation . 
`` And the corpse ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` Is that of the prince , her husband , '' said the guide ; `` an independent rajah of Bundelcund . '' 
`` Is it possible , '' resumed Phileas Fogg , his voice betraying not the least emotion , `` that these barbarous customs still exist in India , and that the English have been unable to put a stop to them ? '' 
`` These sacrifices do not occur in the larger portion of India , '' replied Sir Francis ; `` but we have no power over these savage territories , and especially here in Bundelcund . 
The whole district north of the Vindhias is the theatre of incessant murders and pillage . '' 
`` The poor wretch ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout , `` to be burned alive ! '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Sir Francis , `` burned alive . 
And , if she were not , you can not conceive what treatment she would be obliged to submit to from her relatives . 
They would shave off her hair , feed her on a scanty allowance of rice , treat her with contempt ; she would be looked upon as an unclean creature , and would die in some corner , like a scurvy dog . 
The prospect of so frightful an existence drives these poor creatures to the sacrifice much more than love or religious fanaticism . 
Sometimes , however , the sacrifice is really voluntary , and it requires the active interference of the Government to prevent it . 
Several years ago , when I was living at Bombay , a young widow asked permission of the governor to be burned along with her husband 's body ; but , as you may imagine , he refused . 
The woman left the town , took refuge with an independent rajah , and there carried out her self-devoted purpose . '' 
While Sir Francis was speaking , the guide shook his head several times , and now said : `` The sacrifice which will take place to-morrow at dawn is not a voluntary one . '' 
`` How do you know ? '' 
`` Everybody knows about this affair in Bundelcund . '' 
`` But the wretched creature did not seem to be making any resistance , '' observed Sir Francis . 
`` That was because they had intoxicated her with fumes of hemp and opium . '' 
`` But where are they taking her ? '' 
`` To the pagoda of Pillaji , two miles from here ; she will pass the night there . '' 
`` And the sacrifice will take place -- '' `` To-morrow , at the first light of dawn . '' 
The guide now led the elephant out of the thicket , and leaped upon his neck . 
Just at the moment that he was about to urge Kiouni forward with a peculiar whistle , Mr. Fogg stopped him , and , turning to Sir Francis Cromarty , said , `` Suppose we save this woman . '' 
`` Save the woman , Mr. Fogg ! '' 
`` I have yet twelve hours to spare ; I can devote them to that . '' 
`` Why , you are a man of heart ! '' 
`` Sometimes , '' replied Phileas Fogg , quietly ; `` when I have the time . '' 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT RECEIVES A NEW PROOF THAT FORTUNE FAVORS THE BRAVE The project was a bold one , full of difficulty , perhaps impracticable . 
Mr. Fogg was going to risk life , or at least liberty , and therefore the success of his tour . 
But he did not hesitate , and he found in Sir Francis Cromarty an enthusiastic ally . 
As for Passepartout , he was ready for anything that might be proposed . 
His master 's idea charmed him ; he perceived a heart , a soul , under that icy exterior . 
He began to love Phileas Fogg . 
There remained the guide : what course would he adopt ? 
Would he not take part with the Indians ? 
In default of his assistance , it was necessary to be assured of his neutrality . 
Sir Francis frankly put the question to him . 
`` Officers , '' replied the guide , `` I am a Parsee , and this woman is a Parsee . 
Command me as you will . '' 
`` Excellent ! '' 
said Mr. Fogg . 
`` However , '' resumed the guide , `` it is certain , not only that we shall risk our lives , but horrible tortures , if we are taken . '' 
`` That is foreseen , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` I think we must wait till night before acting . '' 
`` I think so , '' said the guide . 
The worthy Indian then gave some account of the victim , who , he said , was a celebrated beauty of the Parsee race , and the daughter of a wealthy Bombay merchant . 
She had received a thoroughly English education in that city , and , from her manners and intelligence , would be thought an European . 
Her name was Aouda . 
Left an orphan , she was married against her will to the old rajah of Bundelcund ; and , knowing the fate that awaited her , she escaped , was retaken , and devoted by the rajah 's relatives , who had an interest in her death , to the sacrifice from which it seemed she could not escape . 
The Parsee 's narrative only confirmed Mr. Fogg and his companions in their generous design . 
It was decided that the guide should direct the elephant towards the pagoda of Pillaji , which he accordingly approached as quickly as possible . 
They halted , half an hour afterwards , in a copse , some five hundred feet from the pagoda , where they were well concealed ; but they could hear the groans and cries of the fakirs distinctly . 
They then discussed the means of getting at the victim . 
The guide was familiar with the pagoda of Pillaji , in which , as he declared , the young woman was imprisoned . 
Could they enter any of its doors while the whole party of Indians was plunged in a drunken sleep , or was it safer to attempt to make a hole in the walls ? 
This could only be determined at the moment and the place themselves ; but it was certain that the abduction must be made that night , and not when , at break of day , the victim was led to her funeral pyre . 
Then no human intervention could save her . 
As soon as night fell , about six o'clock , they decided to make a reconnaissance around the pagoda . 
The cries of the fakirs were just ceasing ; the Indians were in the act of plunging themselves into the drunkenness caused by liquid opium mingled with hemp , and it might be possible to slip between them to the temple itself . 
The Parsee , leading the others , noiselessly crept through the wood , and in ten minutes they found themselves on the banks of a small stream , whence , by the light of the rosin torches , they perceived a pyre of wood , on the top of which lay the embalmed body of the rajah , which was to be burned with his wife . 
The pagoda , whose minarets loomed above the trees in the deepening dusk , stood a hundred steps away . 
`` Come ! '' 
whispered the guide . 
He slipped more cautiously than ever through the brush , followed by his companions ; the silence around was only broken by the low murmuring of the wind among the branches . 
Soon the Parsee stopped on the borders of the glade , which was lit up by the torches . 
The ground was covered by groups of the Indians , motionless in their drunken sleep ; it seemed a battlefield strewn with the dead . 
Men , women , and children lay together . 
In the background , among the trees , the pagoda of Pillaji loomed distinctly . 
Much to the guide 's disappointment , the guards of the rajah , lighted by torches , were watching at the doors and marching to and fro with naked sabres ; probably the priests , too , were watching within . 
The Parsee , now convinced that it was impossible to force an entrance to the temple , advanced no farther , but led his companions back again . 
Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis Cromarty also saw that nothing could be attempted in that direction . 
They stopped , and engaged in a whispered colloquy . 
`` It is only eight now , '' said the brigadier , `` and these guards may also go to sleep . '' 
`` It is not impossible , '' returned the Parsee . 
They lay down at the foot of a tree , and waited . 
The time seemed long ; the guide ever and anon left them to take an observation on the edge of the wood , but the guards watched steadily by the glare of the torches , and a dim light crept through the windows of the pagoda . 
They waited till midnight ; but no change took place among the guards , and it became apparent that their yielding to sleep could not be counted on . 
The other plan must be carried out ; an opening in the walls of the pagoda must be made . 
It remained to ascertain whether the priests were watching by the side of their victim as assiduously as were the soldiers at the door . 
After a last consultation , the guide announced that he was ready for the attempt , and advanced , followed by the others . 
They took a roundabout way , so as to get at the pagoda on the rear . 
They reached the walls about half-past twelve , without having met anyone ; here there was no guard , nor were there either windows or doors . 
The night was dark . 
The moon , on the wane , scarcely left the horizon , and was covered with heavy clouds ; the height of the trees deepened the darkness . 
It was not enough to reach the walls ; an opening in them must be accomplished , and to attain this purpose the party only had their pocket-knives . 
