Why does Mr. So-and-So never hang his key on its nail on Tuesday ? 
Why does he always take the narrow streets ? 
Why does Madame always descend from her hackney-coach before reaching her house ? 
Why does she send out to purchase six sheets of note paper , when she has a `` whole stationer 's shop full of it ? '' 
etc. . 
There exist beings who , for the sake of obtaining the key to these enigmas , which are , moreover , of no consequence whatever to them , spend more money , waste more time , take more trouble , than would be required for ten good actions , and that gratuitously , for their own pleasure , without receiving any other payment for their curiosity than curiosity . 
They will follow up such and such a man or woman for whole days ; they will do sentry duty for hours at a time on the corners of the streets , under alley-way doors at night , in cold and rain ; they will bribe errand-porters , they will make the drivers of hackney-coaches and lackeys tipsy , buy a waiting-maid , suborn a porter . 
Why ? 
For no reason . 
A pure passion for seeing , knowing , and penetrating into things . 
A pure itch for talking . 
And often these secrets once known , these mysteries made public , these enigmas illuminated by the light of day , bring on catastrophies , duels , failures , the ruin of families , and broken lives , to the great joy of those who have `` found out everything , '' without any interest in the matter , and by pure instinct . 
A sad thing . 
Certain persons are malicious solely through a necessity for talking . 
Their conversation , the chat of the drawing-room , gossip of the anteroom , is like those chimneys which consume wood rapidly ; they need a great amount of combustibles ; and their combustibles are furnished by their neighbors . 
So Fantine was watched . 
In addition , many a one was jealous of her golden hair and of her white teeth . 
It was remarked that in the workroom she often turned aside , in the midst of the rest , to wipe away a tear . 
These were the moments when she was thinking of her child ; perhaps , also , of the man whom she had loved . 
Breaking the gloomy bonds of the past is a mournful task . 
It was observed that she wrote twice a month at least , and that she paid the carriage on the letter . 
They managed to obtain the address : Monsieur , Monsieur Thenardier , inn-keeper at Montfermeil . 
The public writer , a good old man who could not fill his stomach with red wine without emptying his pocket of secrets , was made to talk in the wine-shop . 
In short , it was discovered that Fantine had a child . 
`` She must be a pretty sort of a woman . '' 
An old gossip was found , who made the trip to Montfermeil , talked to the Thenardiers , and said on her return : `` For my five and thirty francs I have freed my mind . 
I have seen the child . '' 
The gossip who did this thing was a gorgon named Madame Victurnien , the guardian and door-keeper of every one 's virtue . 
Madame Victurnien was fifty-six , and re-enforced the mask of ugliness with the mask of age . 
A quavering voice , a whimsical mind . 
This old dame had once been young -- astonishing fact ! 
In her youth , in ' 93 , she had married a monk who had fled from his cloister in a red cap , and passed from the Bernardines to the Jacobins . 
She was dry , rough , peevish , sharp , captious , almost venomous ; all this in memory of her monk , whose widow she was , and who had ruled over her masterfully and bent her to his will . 
She was a nettle in which the rustle of the cassock was visible . 
At the Restoration she had turned bigot , and that with so much energy that the priests had forgiven her her monk . 
She had a small property , which she bequeathed with much ostentation to a religious community . 
She was in high favor at the episcopal palace of Arras . 
So this Madame Victurnien went to Montfermeil , and returned with the remark , `` I have seen the child . '' 
All this took time . 
Fantine had been at the factory for more than a year , when , one morning , the superintendent of the workroom handed her fifty francs from the mayor , told her that she was no longer employed in the shop , and requested her , in the mayor 's name , to leave the neighborhood . 
This was the very month when the Thenardiers , after having demanded twelve francs instead of six , had just exacted fifteen francs instead of twelve . 
Fantine was overwhelmed . 
She could not leave the neighborhood ; she was in debt for her rent and furniture . 
Fifty francs was not sufficient to cancel this debt . 
She stammered a few supplicating words . 
The superintendent ordered her to leave the shop on the instant . 
Besides , Fantine was only a moderately good workwoman . 
Overcome with shame , even more than with despair , she quitted the shop , and returned to her room . 
So her fault was now known to every one . 
She no longer felt strong enough to say a word . 
She was advised to see the mayor ; she did not dare . 
The mayor had given her fifty francs because he was good , and had dismissed her because he was just . 
She bowed before the decision . 
MADAME VICTURNIEN 'S SUCCESS So the monk 's widow was good for something . 
But M. Madeleine had heard nothing of all this . 
Life is full of just such combinations of events . 
M. Madeleine was in the habit of almost never entering the women 's workroom . 
At the head of this room he had placed an elderly spinster , whom the priest had provided for him , and he had full confidence in this superintendent , -- a truly respectable person , firm , equitable , upright , full of the charity which consists in giving , but not having in the same degree that charity which consists in understanding and in forgiving . 
M. Madeleine relied wholly on her . 
The best men are often obliged to delegate their authority . 
It was with this full power , and the conviction that she was doing right , that the superintendent had instituted the suit , judged , condemned , and executed Fantine . 
As regards the fifty francs , she had given them from a fund which M. Madeleine had intrusted to her for charitable purposes , and for giving assistance to the workwomen , and of which she rendered no account . 
Fantine tried to obtain a situation as a servant in the neighborhood ; she went from house to house . 
No one would have her . 
She could not leave town . 
The second-hand dealer , to whom she was in debt for her furniture -- and what furniture ! 
-- said to her , `` If you leave , I will have you arrested as a thief . '' 
The householder , whom she owed for her rent , said to her , `` You are young and pretty ; you can pay . '' 
She divided the fifty francs between the landlord and the furniture-dealer , returned to the latter three-quarters of his goods , kept only necessaries , and found herself without work , without a trade , with nothing but her bed , and still about fifty francs in debt . 
She began to make coarse shirts for soldiers of the garrison , and earned twelve sous a day . 
Her daughter cost her ten . 
It was at this point that she began to pay the Thenardiers irregularly . 
However , the old woman who lighted her candle for her when she returned at night , taught her the art of living in misery . 
Back of living on little , there is the living on nothing . 
These are the two chambers ; the first is dark , the second is black . 
Fantine learned how to live without fire entirely in the winter ; how to give up a bird which eats a half a farthing 's worth of millet every two days ; how to make a coverlet of one 's petticoat , and a petticoat of one 's coverlet ; how to save one 's candle , by taking one 's meals by the light of the opposite window . 
No one knows all that certain feeble creatures , who have grown old in privation and honesty , can get out of a sou . 
It ends by being a talent . 
Fantine acquired this sublime talent , and regained a little courage . 
At this epoch she said to a neighbor , `` Bah ! 
I say to myself , by only sleeping five hours , and working all the rest of the time at my sewing , I shall always manage to nearly earn my bread . 
And , then , when one is sad , one eats less . 
Well , sufferings , uneasiness , a little bread on one hand , trouble on the other , -- all this will support me . '' 
It would have been a great happiness to have her little girl with her in this distress . 
She thought of having her come . 
But what then ! 
Make her share her own destitution ! 
And then , she was in debt to the Thenardiers ! 
How could she pay them ? 
And the journey ! 
How pay for that ? 
The old woman who had given her lessons in what may be called the life of indigence , was a sainted spinster named Marguerite , who was pious with a true piety , poor and charitable towards the poor , and even towards the rich , knowing how to write just sufficiently to sign herself Marguerite , and believing in God , which is science . 
There are many such virtuous people in this lower world ; some day they will be in the world above . 
This life has a morrow . 
At first , Fantine had been so ashamed that she had not dared to go out . 
When she was in the street , she divined that people turned round behind her , and pointed at her ; every one stared at her and no one greeted her ; the cold and bitter scorn of the passers-by penetrated her very flesh and soul like a north wind . 
It seems as though an unfortunate woman were utterly bare beneath the sarcasm and the curiosity of all in small towns . 
In Paris , at least , no one knows you , and this obscurity is a garment . 
Oh ! 
how she would have liked to betake herself to Paris ! 
