Master Scaufflaire continued : -- `` That it may rain ? '' 
M. Madeleine raised his head and said : -- `` The tilbury and the horse will be in front of my door to-morrow morning at half-past four o'clock . '' 
`` Of course , Monsieur le Maire , '' replied Scaufflaire ; then , scratching a speck in the wood of the table with his thumb-nail , he resumed with that careless air which the Flemings understand so well how to mingle with their shrewdness : -- `` But this is what I am thinking of now : Monsieur le Maire has not told me where he is going . 
Where is Monsieur le Maire going ? '' 
He had been thinking of nothing else since the beginning of the conversation , but he did not know why he had not dared to put the question . 
`` Are your horse 's forelegs good ? '' 
said M. Madeleine . 
`` Yes , Monsieur le Maire . 
You must hold him in a little when going down hill . 
Are there many descends between here and the place whither you are going ? '' 
`` Do not forget to be at my door at precisely half-past four o'clock to-morrow morning , '' replied M. Madeleine ; and he took his departure . 
The Fleming remained `` utterly stupid , '' as he himself said some time afterwards . 
The mayor had been gone two or three minutes when the door opened again ; it was the mayor once more . 
He still wore the same impassive and preoccupied air . 
`` Monsieur Scaufflaire , '' said he , `` at what sum do you estimate the value of the horse and tilbury which you are to let to me , -- the one bearing the other ? '' 
`` The one dragging the other , Monsieur le Maire , '' said the Fleming , with a broad smile . 
`` So be it . 
Well ? '' 
`` Does Monsieur le Maire wish to purchase them or me ? '' 
`` No ; but I wish to guarantee you in any case . 
You shall give me back the sum at my return . 
At what value do you estimate your horse and cabriolet ? '' 
`` Five hundred francs , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` Here it is . '' 
M. Madeleine laid a bank-bill on the table , then left the room ; and this time he did not return . 
Master Scaufflaire experienced a frightful regret that he had not said a thousand francs . 
Besides the horse and tilbury together were worth but a hundred crowns . 
The Fleming called his wife , and related the affair to her . 
`` Where the devil could Monsieur le Maire be going ? '' 
They held counsel together . 
`` He is going to Paris , '' said the wife . 
`` I do n't believe it , '' said the husband . 
M. Madeleine had forgotten the paper with the figures on it , and it lay on the chimney-piece . 
The Fleming picked it up and studied it . 
`` Five , six , eight and a half ? 
That must designate the posting relays . '' 
He turned to his wife : -- `` I have found out . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` It is five leagues from here to Hesdin , six from Hesdin to Saint-Pol , eight and a half from Saint-Pol to Arras . 
He is going to Arras . '' 
Meanwhile , M. Madeleine had returned home . 
He had taken the longest way to return from Master Scaufflaire 's , as though the parsonage door had been a temptation for him , and he had wished to avoid it . 
He ascended to his room , and there he shut himself up , which was a very simple act , since he liked to go to bed early . 
Nevertheless , the portress of the factory , who was , at the same time , M. Madeleine 's only servant , noticed that the latter 's light was extinguished at half-past eight , and she mentioned it to the cashier when he came home , adding : -- `` Is Monsieur le Maire ill ? 
I thought he had a rather singular air . '' 
This cashier occupied a room situated directly under M. Madeleine 's chamber . 
He paid no heed to the portress 's words , but went to bed and to sleep . 
Towards midnight he woke up with a start ; in his sleep he had heard a noise above his head . 
He listened ; it was a footstep pacing back and forth , as though some one were walking in the room above him . 
He listened more attentively , and recognized M. Madeleine 's step . 
This struck him as strange ; usually , there was no noise in M. Madeleine 's chamber until he rose in the morning . 
A moment later the cashier heard a noise which resembled that of a cupboard being opened , and then shut again ; then a piece of furniture was disarranged ; then a pause ensued ; then the step began again . 
The cashier sat up in bed , quite awake now , and staring ; and through his window-panes he saw the reddish gleam of a lighted window reflected on the opposite wall ; from the direction of the rays , it could only come from the window of M. Madeleine 's chamber . 
The reflection wavered , as though it came rather from a fire which had been lighted than from a candle . 
The shadow of the window-frame was not shown , which indicated that the window was wide open . 
The fact that this window was open in such cold weather was surprising . 
The cashier fell asleep again . 
An hour or two later he waked again . 
The same step was still passing slowly and regularly back and forth overhead . 
The reflection was still visible on the wall , but now it was pale and peaceful , like the reflection of a lamp or of a candle . 
The window was still open . 
This is what had taken place in M. Madeleine 's room . 
A TEMPEST IN A SKULL The reader has , no doubt , already divined that M. Madeleine is no other than Jean Valjean . 
We have already gazed into the depths of this conscience ; the moment has now come when we must take another look into it . 
We do so not without emotion and trepidation . 
There is nothing more terrible in existence than this sort of contemplation . 
The eye of the spirit can nowhere find more dazzling brilliance and more shadow than in man ; it can fix itself on no other thing which is more formidable , more complicated , more mysterious , and more infinite . 
There is a spectacle more grand than the sea ; it is heaven : there is a spectacle more grand than heaven ; it is the inmost recesses of the soul . 
To make the poem of the human conscience , were it only with reference to a single man , were it only in connection with the basest of men , would be to blend all epics into one superior and definitive epic . 
Conscience is the chaos of chimeras , of lusts , and of temptations ; the furnace of dreams ; the lair of ideas of which we are ashamed ; it is the pandemonium of sophisms ; it is the battlefield of the passions . 
Penetrate , at certain hours , past the livid face of a human being who is engaged in reflection , and look behind , gaze into that soul , gaze into that obscurity . 
There , beneath that external silence , battles of giants , like those recorded in Homer , are in progress ; skirmishes of dragons and hydras and swarms of phantoms , as in Milton ; visionary circles , as in Dante . 
What a solemn thing is this infinity which every man bears within him , and which he measures with despair against the caprices of his brain and the actions of his life ! 
Alighieri one day met with a sinister-looking door , before which he hesitated . 
Here is one before us , upon whose threshold we hesitate . 
Let us enter , nevertheless . 
We have but little to add to what the reader already knows of what had happened to Jean Valjean after the adventure with Little Gervais . 
From that moment forth he was , as we have seen , a totally different man . 
What the Bishop had wished to make of him , that he carried out . 
It was more than a transformation ; it was a transfiguration . 
He succeeded in disappearing , sold the Bishop 's silver , reserving only the candlesticks as a souvenir , crept from town to town , traversed France , came to M. sur M. , conceived the idea which we have mentioned , accomplished what we have related , succeeded in rendering himself safe from seizure and inaccessible , and , thenceforth , established at M. sur M. , happy in feeling his conscience saddened by the past and the first half of his existence belied by the last , he lived in peace , reassured and hopeful , having henceforth only two thoughts , -- to conceal his name and to sanctify his life ; to escape men and to return to God . 
These two thoughts were so closely intertwined in his mind that they formed but a single one there ; both were equally absorbing and imperative and ruled his slightest actions . 
In general , they conspired to regulate the conduct of his life ; they turned him towards the gloom ; they rendered him kindly and simple ; they counselled him to the same things . 
Sometimes , however , they conflicted . 
In that case , as the reader will remember , the man whom all the country of M. sur M. called M. Madeleine did not hesitate to sacrifice the first to the second -- his security to his virtue . 
Thus , in spite of all his reserve and all his prudence , he had preserved the Bishop 's candlesticks , worn mourning for him , summoned and interrogated all the little Savoyards who passed that way , collected information regarding the families at Faverolles , and saved old Fauchelevent 's life , despite the disquieting insinuations of Javert . 
It seemed , as we have already remarked , as though he thought , following the example of all those who have been wise , holy , and just , that his first duty was not towards himself . 
At the same time , it must be confessed , nothing just like this had yet presented itself . 
Never had the two ideas which governed the unhappy man whose sufferings we are narrating , engaged in so serious a struggle . 
He understood this confusedly but profoundly at the very first words pronounced by Javert , when the latter entered his study . 
At the moment when that name , which he had buried beneath so many layers , was so strangely articulated , he was struck with stupor , and as though intoxicated with the sinister eccentricity of his destiny ; and through this stupor he felt that shudder which precedes great shocks . 
He bent like an oak at the approach of a storm , like a soldier at the approach of an assault . 
He felt shadows filled with thunders and lightnings descending upon his head . 
As he listened to Javert , the first thought which occurred to him was to go , to run and denounce himself , to take that Champmathieu out of prison and place himself there ; this was as painful and as poignant as an incision in the living flesh . 
Then it passed away , and he said to himself , `` We will see ! 
We will see ! '' 
He repressed this first , generous instinct , and recoiled before heroism . 
It would be beautiful , no doubt , after the Bishop 's holy words , after so many years of repentance and abnegation , in the midst of a penitence admirably begun , if this man had not flinched for an instant , even in the presence of so terrible a conjecture , but had continued to walk with the same step towards this yawning precipice , at the bottom of which lay heaven ; that would have been beautiful ; but it was not thus . 
We must render an account of the things which went on in this soul , and we can only tell what there was there . 
He was carried away , at first , by the instinct of self-preservation ; he rallied all his ideas in haste , stifled his emotions , took into consideration Javert 's presence , that great danger , postponed all decision with the firmness of terror , shook off thought as to what he had to do , and resumed his calmness as a warrior picks up his buckler . 
