The great boots of the sewermen never ventured further than certain well-known points . 
We were then very near the epoch when the scavenger 's carts , from the summit of which Sainte-Foix fraternized with the Marquis de Crequi , discharged their loads directly into the sewer . 
As for cleaning out , -- that function was entrusted to the pouring rains which encumbered rather than swept away . 
Rome left some poetry to her sewer , and called it the Gemoniae ; Paris insulted hers , and entitled it the Polypus-Hole . 
Science and superstition were in accord , in horror . 
The Polypus hole was no less repugnant to hygiene than to legend . 
The goblin was developed under the fetid covering of the Mouffetard sewer ; the corpses of the Marmousets had been cast into the sewer de la Barillerie ; Fagon attributed the redoubtable malignant fever of 1685 to the great hiatus of the sewer of the Marais , which remained yawning until 1833 in the Rue Saint-Louis , almost opposite the sign of the Gallant Messenger . 
The mouth of the sewer of the Rue de la Mortellerie was celebrated for the pestilences which had their source there ; with its grating of iron , with points simulating a row of teeth , it was like a dragon 's maw in that fatal street , breathing forth hell upon men . 
The popular imagination seasoned the sombre Parisian sink with some indescribably hideous intermixture of the infinite . 
The sewer had no bottom . 
The sewer was the lower world . 
The idea of exploring these leprous regions did not even occur to the police . 
To try that unknown thing , to cast the plummet into that shadow , to set out on a voyage of discovery in that abyss -- who would have dared ? 
It was alarming . 
Nevertheless , some one did present himself . 
The cess-pool had its Christopher Columbus . 
One day , in 1805 , during one of the rare apparitions which the Emperor made in Paris , the Minister of the Interior , some Decres or Cretet or other , came to the master 's intimate levee . 
In the Carrousel there was audible the clanking of swords of all those extraordinary soldiers of the great Republic , and of the great Empire ; then Napoleon 's door was blocked with heroes ; men from the Rhine , from the Escaut , from the Adige , and from the Nile ; companions of Joubert , of Desaix , of Marceau , of Hoche , of Kleber ; the aerostiers of Fleurus , the grenadiers of Mayence , the pontoon-builders of Genoa , hussars whom the Pyramids had looked down upon , artillerists whom Junot 's cannon-ball had spattered with mud , cuirassiers who had taken by assault the fleet lying at anchor in the Zuyderzee ; some had followed Bonaparte upon the bridge of Lodi , others had accompanied Murat in the trenches of Mantua , others had preceded Lannes in the hollow road of Montebello . 
The whole army of that day was present there , in the court-yard of the Tuileries , represented by a squadron or a platoon , and guarding Napoleon in repose ; and that was the splendid epoch when the grand army had Marengo behind it and Austerlitz before it . 
-- `` Sire , '' said the Minister of the Interior to Napoleon , `` yesterday I saw the most intrepid man in your Empire . '' 
-- `` What man is that ? '' 
said the Emperor brusquely , `` and what has he done ? '' 
-- `` He wants to do something , Sire . '' 
-- `` What is it ? '' 
-- `` To visit the sewers of Paris . '' 
This man existed and his name was Bruneseau . 
The visit took place . 
It was a formidable campaign ; a nocturnal battle against pestilence and suffocation . 
It was , at the same time , a voyage of discovery . 
One of the survivors of this expedition , an intelligent workingman , who was very young at the time , related curious details with regard to it , several years ago , which Bruneseau thought himself obliged to omit in his report to the prefect of police , as unworthy of official style . 
The processes of disinfection were , at that epoch , extremely rudimentary . 
Hardly had Bruneseau crossed the first articulations of that subterranean network , when eight laborers out of the twenty refused to go any further . 
The operation was complicated ; the visit entailed the necessity of cleaning ; hence it was necessary to cleanse and at the same time , to proceed ; to note the entrances of water , to count the gratings and the vents , to lay out in detail the branches , to indicate the currents at the point where they parted , to define the respective bounds of the divers basins , to sound the small sewers grafted on the principal sewer , to measure the height under the key-stone of each drain , and the width , at the spring of the vaults as well as at the bottom , in order to determine the arrangements with regard to the level of each water-entrance , either of the bottom of the arch , or on the soil of the street . 
They advanced with toil . 
The lanterns pined away in the foul atmosphere . 
From time to time , a fainting sewerman was carried out . 
At certain points , there were precipices . 
The soil had given away , the pavement had crumbled , the sewer had changed into a bottomless well ; they found nothing solid ; a man disappeared suddenly ; they had great difficulty in getting him out again . 
On the advice of Fourcroy , they lighted large cages filled with tow steeped in resin , from time to time , in spots which had been sufficiently disinfected . 
In some places , the wall was covered with misshapen fungi , -- one would have said tumors ; the very stone seemed diseased within this unbreathable atmosphere . 
Bruneseau , in his exploration , proceeded down hill . 
At the point of separation of the two water-conduits of the Grand-Hurleur , he deciphered upon a projecting stone the date of 1550 ; this stone indicated the limits where Philibert Delorme , charged by Henri II . 
with visiting the subterranean drains of Paris , had halted . 
This stone was the mark of the sixteenth century on the sewer ; Bruneseau found the handiwork of the seventeenth century once more in the Ponceau drain of the old Rue Vielle-du-Temple , vaulted between 1600 and 1650 ; and the handiwork of the eighteenth in the western section of the collecting canal , walled and vaulted in 1740 . 
These two vaults , especially the less ancient , that of 1740 , were more cracked and decrepit than the masonry of the belt sewer , which dated from 1412 , an epoch when the brook of fresh water of Menilmontant was elevated to the dignity of the Grand Sewer of Paris , an advancement analogous to that of a peasant who should become first valet de chambre to the King ; something like Gros-Jean transformed into Lebel . 
Here and there , particularly beneath the Court-House , they thought they recognized the hollows of ancient dungeons , excavated in the very sewer itself . 
Hideous in-pace . 
An iron neck-collar was hanging in one of these cells . 
They walled them all up . 
Some of their finds were singular ; among others , the skeleton of an ourang-outan , who had disappeared from the Jardin des Plantes in 1800 , a disappearance probably connected with the famous and indisputable apparition of the devil in the Rue des Bernardins , in the last year of the eighteenth century . 
The poor devil had ended by drowning himself in the sewer . 
Beneath this long , arched drain which terminated at the Arche-Marion , a perfectly preserved rag-picker 's basket excited the admiration of all connoisseurs . 
Everywhere , the mire , which the sewermen came to handle with intrepidity , abounded in precious objects , jewels of gold and silver , precious stones , coins . 
If a giant had filtered this cesspool , he would have had the riches of centuries in his lair . 
At the point where the two branches of the Rue du Temple and of the Rue Sainte-Avoye separate , they picked up a singular Huguenot medal in copper , bearing on one side the pig hooded with a cardinal 's hat , and on the other , a wolf with a tiara on his head . 
The most surprising rencounter was at the entrance to the Grand Sewer . 
This entrance had formerly been closed by a grating of which nothing but the hinges remained . 
From one of these hinges hung a dirty and shapeless rag which , arrested there in its passage , no doubt , had floated there in the darkness and finished its process of being torn apart . 
Bruneseau held his lantern close to this rag and examined it . 
It was of very fine batiste , and in one of the corners , less frayed than the rest , they made out a heraldic coronet and embroidered above these seven letters : LAVBESP . 
The crown was the coronet of a Marquis , and the seven letters signified Laubespine . 
They recognized the fact , that what they had before their eyes was a morsel of the shroud of Marat . 
Marat in his youth had had amorous intrigues . 
This was when he was a member of the household of the Comte d'Artois , in the capacity of physician to the Stables . 
From these love affairs , historically proved , with a great lady , he had retained this sheet . 
As a waif or a souvenir . 
At his death , as this was the only linen of any fineness which he had in his house , they buried him in it . 
Some old women had shrouded him for the tomb in that swaddling-band in which the tragic Friend of the people had enjoyed voluptuousness . 
Bruneseau passed on . 
They left that rag where it hung ; they did not put the finishing touch to it . 
Did this arise from scorn or from respect ? 
Marat deserved both . 
And then , destiny was there sufficiently stamped to make them hesitate to touch it . 
Besides , the things of the sepulchre must be left in the spot which they select . 
In short , the relic was a strange one . 
A Marquise had slept in it ; Marat had rotted in it ; it had traversed the Pantheon to end with the rats of the sewer . 
This chamber rag , of which Watteau would formerly have joyfully sketched every fold , had ended in becoming worthy of the fixed gaze of Dante . 
The whole visit to the subterranean stream of filth of Paris lasted seven years , from 1805 to 1812 . 
As he proceeded , Bruneseau drew , directed , and completed considerable works ; in 1808 he lowered the arch of the Ponceau , and , everywhere creating new lines , he pushed the sewer , in 1809 , under the Rue Saint-Denis as far as the fountain of the Innocents ; in 1810 , under the Rue Froidmanteau and under the Salpetriere ; in 1811 under the Rue Neuve-des-Petits-Peres , under the Rue du Mail , under the Rue de l'Echarpe , under the Place Royale ; in 1812 , under the Rue de la Paix , and under the Chaussee d'Antin . 
At the same time , he had the whole net-work disinfected and rendered healthful . 
In the second year of his work , Bruneseau engaged the assistance of his son-in-law Nargaud . 
It was thus that , at the beginning of the century , ancient society cleansed its double bottom , and performed the toilet of its sewer . 
There was that much clean , at all events . 
Tortuous , cracked , unpaved , full of fissures , intersected by gullies , jolted by eccentric elbows , mounting and descending illogically , fetid , wild , fierce , submerged in obscurity , with cicatrices on its pavements and scars on its walls , terrible , -- such was , retrospectively viewed , the antique sewer of Paris . 
Ramifications in every direction , crossings , of trenches , branches , goose-feet , stars , as in military mines , coecum , blind alleys , vaults lined with saltpetre , pestiferous pools , scabby sweats , on the walls , drops dripping from the ceilings , darkness ; nothing could equal the horror of this old , waste crypt , the digestive apparatus of Babylon , a cavern , ditch , gulf pierced with streets , a titanic mole-burrow , where the mind seems to behold that enormous blind mole , the past , prowling through the shadows , in the filth which has been splendor . 
This , we repeat , was the sewer of the past . 
PRESENT PROGRESS To-day the sewer is clean , cold , straight , correct . 
It almost realizes the ideal of what is understood in England by the word `` respectable . '' 
It is proper and grayish ; laid out by rule and line ; one might almost say as though it came out of a bandbox . 
It resembles a tradesman who has become a councillor of state . 
One can almost see distinctly there . 
The mire there comports itself with decency . 
At first , one might readily mistake it for one of those subterranean corridors , which were so common in former days , and so useful in flights of monarchs and princes , in those good old times , `` when the people loved their kings . '' 
The present sewer is a beautiful sewer ; the pure style reigns there ; the classical rectilinear alexandrine which , driven out of poetry , appears to have taken refuge in architecture , seems mingled with all the stones of that long , dark and whitish vault ; each outlet is an arcade ; the Rue de Rivoli serves as pattern even in the sewer . 
However , if the geometrical line is in place anywhere , it is certainly in the drainage trench of a great city . 
There , everything should be subordinated to the shortest road . 
The sewer has , nowadays , assumed a certain official aspect . 
The very police reports , of which it sometimes forms the subject , no longer are wanting in respect towards it . 
The words which characterize it in administrative language are sonorous and dignified . 
What used to be called a gut is now called a gallery ; what used to be called a hole is now called a surveying orifice . 
