Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own ; injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the prefect . 
He was really in doubt . 
Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark . 
Sadness , uneasiness , anxiety , depression , this fresh misfortune of being forced to flee by night , to seek a chance refuge in Paris for Cosette and himself , the necessity of regulating his pace to the pace of the child -- all this , without his being aware of it , had altered Jean Valjean 's walk , and impressed on his bearing such senility , that the police themselves , incarnate in the person of Javert , might , and did in fact , make a mistake . 
The impossibility of approaching too close , his costume of an emigre preceptor , the declaration of Thenardier which made a grandfather of him , and , finally , the belief in his death in prison , added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in Javert 's mind . 
For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his papers ; but if the man was not Jean Valjean , and if this man was not a good , honest old fellow living on his income , he was probably some merry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the obscure web of Parisian misdeeds , some chief of a dangerous band , who gave alms to conceal his other talents , which was an old dodge . 
He had trusty fellows , accomplices ' retreats in case of emergencies , in which he would , no doubt , take refuge . 
All these turns which he was making through the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and honest man . 
To arrest him too hastily would be `` to kill the hen that laid the golden eggs . '' 
Where was the inconvenience in waiting ? 
Javert was very sure that he would not escape . 
Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind , putting to himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage . 
It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise , that , thanks to the brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop , he decidedly recognized Jean Valjean . 
There are in this world two beings who give a profound start , -- the mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey . 
Javert gave that profound start . 
As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean , the formidable convict , he perceived that there were only three of them , and he asked for reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise . 
One puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel . 
This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with his agents came near causing him to lose the trail . 
He speedily divined , however , that Jean Valjean would want to put the river between his pursuers and himself . 
He bent his head and reflected like a blood-hound who puts his nose to the ground to make sure that he is on the right scent . 
Javert , with his powerful rectitude of instinct , went straight to the bridge of Austerlitz . 
A word with the toll-keeper furnished him with the information which he required : `` Have you seen a man with a little girl ? '' 
`` I made him pay two sous , '' replied the toll-keeper . 
Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small illuminated spot on the other side of the water , leading Cosette by the hand . 
He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine ; he remembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap , and of the sole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
He made sure of his back burrows , as huntsmen say ; he hastily despatched one of his agents , by a roundabout way , to guard that issue . 
A patrol which was returning to the Arsenal post having passed him , he made a requisition on it , and caused it to accompany him . 
In such games soldiers are aces . 
Moreover , the principle is , that in order to get the best of a wild boar , one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs . 
These combinations having been effected , feeling that Jean Valjean was caught between the blind alley Genrot on the right , his agent on the left , and himself , Javert , in the rear , he took a pinch of snuff . 
Then he began the game . 
He experienced one ecstatic and infernal moment ; he allowed his man to go on ahead , knowing that he had him safe , but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long as possible , happy at the thought that he was taken and yet at seeing him free , gloating over him with his gaze , with that voluptuousness of the spider which allows the fly to flutter , and of the cat which lets the mouse run . 
Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality , -- the obscure movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers . 
What a delight this strangling is ! 
Javert was enjoying himself . 
The meshes of his net were stoutly knotted . 
He was sure of success ; all he had to do now was to close his hand . 
Accompanied as he was , the very idea of resistance was impossible , however vigorous , energetic , and desperate Jean Valjean might be . 
Javert advanced slowly , sounding , searching on his way all the nooks of the street like so many pockets of thieves . 
When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there . 
His exasperation can be imagined . 
He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus ; that agent , who had remained imperturbably at his post , had not seen the man pass . 
It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns ; that is to say , he escapes although he has the pack on his very heels , and then the oldest huntsmen know not what to say . 
Duvivier , Ligniville , and Desprez halt short . 
In a discomfiture of this sort , Artonge exclaims , `` It was not a stag , but a sorcerer . '' 
Javert would have liked to utter the same cry . 
His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage . 
It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia , that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India , that Caesar made mistakes in the war in Africa , that Cyrus was at fault in the war in Scythia , and that Javert blundered in this campaign against Jean Valjean . 
He was wrong , perhaps , in hesitating in his recognition of the exconvict . 
The first glance should have sufficed him . 
He was wrong in not arresting him purely and simply in the old building ; he was wrong in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue de Pontoise . 
He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in the full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin . 
Advice is certainly useful ; it is a good thing to know and to interrogate those of the dogs who deserve confidence ; but the hunter can not be too cautious when he is chasing uneasy animals like the wolf and the convict . 
Javert , by taking too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on the trail , alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart , and so made him run . 
Above all , he was wrong in that after he had picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz , he played that formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a thread . 
He thought himself stronger than he was , and believed that he could play at the game of the mouse and the lion . 
At the same time , he reckoned himself as too weak , when he judged it necessary to obtain reinforcement . 
Fatal precaution , waste of precious time ! 
Javert committed all these blunders , and none the less was one of the cleverest and most correct spies that ever existed . 
He was , in the full force of the term , what is called in venery a knowing dog . 
But what is there that is perfect ? 
Great strategists have their eclipses . 
The greatest follies are often composed , like the largest ropes , of a multitude of strands . 
Take the cable thread by thread , take all the petty determining motives separately , and you can break them one after the other , and you say , `` That is all there is of it ! '' 
Braid them , twist them together ; the result is enormous : it is Attila hesitating between Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west ; it is Hannibal tarrying at Capua ; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube . 
However that may be , even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjean had escaped him , Javert did not lose his head . 
Sure that the convict who had broken his ban could not be far off , he established sentinels , he organized traps and ambuscades , and beat the quarter all that night . 
The first thing he saw was the disorder in the street lantern whose rope had been cut . 
A precious sign which , however , led him astray , since it caused him to turn all his researches in the direction of the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
In this blind alley there were tolerably low walls which abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of waste land . 
Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction . 
The fact is , that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot , he would probably have done so and have been lost . 
Javert explored these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been hunting for a needle . 
At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook , and returned to the Prefecture of Police , as much ashamed as a police spy who had been captured by a robber might have been . 
NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS Nothing , half a century ago , more resembled every other carriage gate than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus . 
This entrance , which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion , permitted a view of two things , neither of which have anything very funereal about them , -- a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines , and the face of a lounging porter . 
Above the wall , at the bottom of the court , tall trees were visible . 
When a ray of sunlight enlivened the courtyard , when a glass of wine cheered up the porter , it was difficult to pass Number 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smiling impression of it . 
Nevertheless , it was a sombre place of which one had had a glimpse . 
The threshold smiled ; the house prayed and wept . 
If one succeeded in passing the porter , which was not easy , -- which was even nearly impossible for every one , for there was an open sesame ! 
which it was necessary to know , -- if , the porter once passed , one entered a little vestibule on the right , on which opened a staircase shut in between two walls and so narrow that only one person could ascend it at a time , if one did not allow one 's self to be alarmed by a daubing of canary yellow , with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase , if one ventured to ascend it , one crossed a first landing , then a second , and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellow wash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable persistency . 
Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows . 
The corridor took a turn and became dark . 
If one doubled this cape , one arrived a few paces further on , in front of a door which was all the more mysterious because it was not fastened . 
If one opened it , one found one 's self in a little chamber about six feet square , tiled , well-scrubbed , clean , cold , and hung with nankin paper with green flowers , at fifteen sous the roll . 
A white , dull light fell from a large window , with tiny panes , on the left , which usurped the whole width of the room . 
One gazed about , but saw no one ; one listened , one heard neither a footstep nor a human murmur . 
The walls were bare , the chamber was not furnished ; there was not even a chair . 
One looked again , and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangular hole , about a foot square , with a grating of interlacing iron bars , black , knotted , solid , which formed squares -- I had almost said meshes -- of less than an inch and a half in diagonal length . 
The little green flowers of the nankin paper ran in a calm and orderly manner to those iron bars , without being startled or thrown into confusion by their funereal contact . 
Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfully thin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole , this grating would have prevented it . 
It did not allow the passage of the body , but it did allow the passage of the eyes ; that is to say , of the mind . 
This seems to have occurred to them , for it had been re-enforced by a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear , and pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of a strainer . 
At the bottom of this plate , an aperture had been pierced exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box . 
A bit of tape attached to a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening . 
If the tape was pulled , a bell rang , and one heard a voice very near at hand , which made one start . 
`` Who is there ? '' 
the voice demanded . 
It was a woman 's voice , a gentle voice , so gentle that it was mournful . 
