She was still young ; she was barely thirty . 
If this crouching woman had stood upright , her lofty stature and her frame of a perambulating colossus suitable for fairs , might have frightened the traveller at the outset , troubled her confidence , and disturbed what caused what we have to relate to vanish . 
A person who is seated instead of standing erect -- destinies hang upon such a thing as that . 
The traveller told her story , with slight modifications . 
That she was a working-woman ; that her husband was dead ; that her work in Paris had failed her , and that she was on her way to seek it elsewhere , in her own native parts ; that she had left Paris that morning on foot ; that , as she was carrying her child , and felt fatigued , she had got into the Villemomble coach when she met it ; that from Villemomble she had come to Montfermeil on foot ; that the little one had walked a little , but not much , because she was so young , and that she had been obliged to take her up , and the jewel had fallen asleep . 
At this word she bestowed on her daughter a passionate kiss , which woke her . 
The child opened her eyes , great blue eyes like her mother 's , and looked at -- what ? 
Nothing ; with that serious and sometimes severe air of little children , which is a mystery of their luminous innocence in the presence of our twilight of virtue . 
One would say that they feel themselves to be angels , and that they know us to be men . 
Then the child began to laugh ; and although the mother held fast to her , she slipped to the ground with the unconquerable energy of a little being which wished to run . 
All at once she caught sight of the two others in the swing , stopped short , and put out her tongue , in sign of admiration . 
Mother Thenardier released her daughters , made them descend from the swing , and said : -- `` Now amuse yourselves , all three of you . '' 
Children become acquainted quickly at that age , and at the expiration of a minute the little Thenardiers were playing with the new-comer at making holes in the ground , which was an immense pleasure . 
The new-comer was very gay ; the goodness of the mother is written in the gayety of the child ; she had seized a scrap of wood which served her for a shovel , and energetically dug a cavity big enough for a fly . 
The grave-digger 's business becomes a subject for laughter when performed by a child . 
The two women pursued their chat . 
`` What is your little one 's name ? '' 
`` Cosette . '' 
For Cosette , read Euphrasie . 
The child 's name was Euphrasie . 
But out of Euphrasie the mother had made Cosette by that sweet and graceful instinct of mothers and of the populace which changes Josepha into Pepita , and Francoise into Sillette . 
It is a sort of derivative which disarranges and disconcerts the whole science of etymologists . 
We have known a grandmother who succeeded in turning Theodore into Gnon . 
`` How old is she ? '' 
`` She is going on three . '' 
`` That is the age of my eldest . '' 
In the meantime , the three little girls were grouped in an attitude of profound anxiety and blissfulness ; an event had happened ; a big worm had emerged from the ground , and they were afraid ; and they were in ecstasies over it . 
Their radiant brows touched each other ; one would have said that there were three heads in one aureole . 
`` How easily children get acquainted at once ! '' 
exclaimed Mother Thenardier ; `` one would swear that they were three sisters ! '' 
This remark was probably the spark which the other mother had been waiting for . 
She seized the Thenardier 's hand , looked at her fixedly , and said : -- `` Will you keep my child for me ? '' 
The Thenardier made one of those movements of surprise which signify neither assent nor refusal . 
Cosette 's mother continued : -- `` You see , I can not take my daughter to the country . 
My work will not permit it . 
With a child one can find no situation . 
People are ridiculous in the country . 
It was the good God who caused me to pass your inn . 
When I caught sight of your little ones , so pretty , so clean , and so happy , it overwhelmed me . 
I said : ` Here is a good mother . 
That is just the thing ; that will make three sisters . ' 
And then , it will not be long before I return . 
Will you keep my child for me ? '' 
`` I must see about it , '' replied the Thenardier . 
`` I will give you six francs a month . '' 
Here a man 's voice called from the depths of the cook-shop : -- `` Not for less than seven francs . 
And six months paid in advance . '' 
`` Six times seven makes forty-two , '' said the Thenardier . 
`` I will give it , '' said the mother . 
`` And fifteen francs in addition for preliminary expenses , '' added the man 's voice . 
`` Total , fifty-seven francs , '' said Madame Thenardier . 
And she hummed vaguely , with these figures : -- `` It must be , said a warrior . '' 
`` I will pay it , '' said the mother . 
`` I have eighty francs . 
I shall have enough left to reach the country , by travelling on foot . 
I shall earn money there , and as soon as I have a little I will return for my darling . '' 
The man 's voice resumed : -- `` The little one has an outfit ? '' 
`` That is my husband , '' said the Thenardier . 
`` Of course she has an outfit , the poor treasure . 
-- I understood perfectly that it was your husband . 
-- And a beautiful outfit , too ! 
a senseless outfit , everything by the dozen , and silk gowns like a lady . 
It is here , in my carpet-bag . '' 
`` You must hand it over , '' struck in the man 's voice again . 
`` Of course I shall give it to you , '' said the mother . 
`` It would be very queer if I were to leave my daughter quite naked ! '' 
The master 's face appeared . 
`` That 's good , '' said he . 
The bargain was concluded . 
The mother passed the night at the inn , gave up her money and left her child , fastened her carpet-bag once more , now reduced in volume by the removal of the outfit , and light henceforth and set out on the following morning , intending to return soon . 
People arrange such departures tranquilly ; but they are despairs ! 
A neighbor of the Thenardiers met this mother as she was setting out , and came back with the remark : -- `` I have just seen a woman crying in the street so that it was enough to rend your heart . '' 
When Cosette 's mother had taken her departure , the man said to the woman : -- `` That will serve to pay my note for one hundred and ten francs which falls due to-morrow ; I lacked fifty francs . 
Do you know that I should have had a bailiff and a protest after me ? 
You played the mouse-trap nicely with your young ones . '' 
`` Without suspecting it , '' said the woman . 
FIRST SKETCH OF TWO UNPREPOSSESSING FIGURES The mouse which had been caught was a pitiful specimen ; but the cat rejoices even over a lean mouse . 
Who were these Thenardiers ? 
Let us say a word or two of them now . 
We will complete the sketch later on . 
These beings belonged to that bastard class composed of coarse people who have been successful , and of intelligent people who have descended in the scale , which is between the class called `` middle '' and the class denominated as `` inferior , '' and which combines some of the defects of the second with nearly all the vices of the first , without possessing the generous impulse of the workingman nor the honest order of the bourgeois . 
They were of those dwarfed natures which , if a dull fire chances to warm them up , easily become monstrous . 
There was in the woman a substratum of the brute , and in the man the material for a blackguard . 
Both were susceptible , in the highest degree , of the sort of hideous progress which is accomplished in the direction of evil . 
There exist crab-like souls which are continually retreating towards the darkness , retrograding in life rather than advancing , employing experience to augment their deformity , growing incessantly worse , and becoming more and more impregnated with an ever-augmenting blackness . 
This man and woman possessed such souls . 
Thenardier , in particular , was troublesome for a physiognomist . 
One can only look at some men to distrust them ; for one feels that they are dark in both directions . 
They are uneasy in the rear and threatening in front . 
There is something of the unknown about them . 
One can no more answer for what they have done than for what they will do . 
The shadow which they bear in their glance denounces them . 
From merely hearing them utter a word or seeing them make a gesture , one obtains a glimpse of sombre secrets in their past and of sombre mysteries in their future . 
This Thenardier , if he himself was to be believed , had been a soldier -- a sergeant , he said . 
He had probably been through the campaign of 1815 , and had even conducted himself with tolerable valor , it would seem . 
We shall see later on how much truth there was in this . 
The sign of his hostelry was in allusion to one of his feats of arms . 
He had painted it himself ; for he knew how to do a little of everything , and badly . 
It was at the epoch when the ancient classical romance which , after having been Clelie , was no longer anything but Lodoiska , still noble , but ever more and more vulgar , having fallen from Mademoiselle de Scuderi to Madame Bournon-Malarme , and from Madame de Lafayette to Madame Barthelemy-Hadot , was setting the loving hearts of the portresses of Paris aflame , and even ravaging the suburbs to some extent . 
Madame Thenardier was just intelligent enough to read this sort of books . 
