Why , that is very bad ! 
You have oppressions and palpitations of the heart ? 
That must not be ! 
You blush and turn pale , when a certain being clad in black appears at the end of a certain green walk ? 
But that is abominable ! '' 
She would not have understood , and she would have replied : `` What fault is there of mine in a matter in which I have no power and of which I know nothing ? '' 
It turned out that the love which presented itself was exactly suited to the state of her soul . 
It was a sort of admiration at a distance , a mute contemplation , the deification of a stranger . 
It was the apparition of youth to youth , the dream of nights become a reality yet remaining a dream , the longed-for phantom realized and made flesh at last , but having as yet , neither name , nor fault , nor spot , nor exigence , nor defect ; in a word , the distant lover who lingered in the ideal , a chimaera with a form . 
Any nearer and more palpable meeting would have alarmed Cosette at this first stage , when she was still half immersed in the exaggerated mists of the cloister . 
She had all the fears of children and all the fears of nuns combined . 
The spirit of the convent , with which she had been permeated for the space of five years , was still in the process of slow evaporation from her person , and made everything tremble around her . 
In this situation he was not a lover , he was not even an admirer , he was a vision . 
She set herself to adoring Marius as something charming , luminous , and impossible . 
As extreme innocence borders on extreme coquetry , she smiled at him with all frankness . 
Every day , she looked forward to the hour for their walk with impatience , she found Marius there , she felt herself unspeakably happy , and thought in all sincerity that she was expressing her whole thought when she said to Jean Valjean : -- `` What a delicious garden that Luxembourg is ! '' 
Marius and Cosette were in the dark as to one another . 
They did not address each other , they did not salute each other , they did not know each other ; they saw each other ; and like stars of heaven which are separated by millions of leagues , they lived by gazing at each other . 
It was thus that Cosette gradually became a woman and developed , beautiful and loving , with a consciousness of her beauty , and in ignorance of her love . 
She was a coquette to boot through her ignorance . 
TO ONE SADNESS OPPOSE A SADNESS AND A HALF All situations have their instincts . 
Old and eternal Mother Nature warned Jean Valjean in a dim way of the presence of Marius . 
Jean Valjean shuddered to the very bottom of his soul . 
Jean Valjean saw nothing , knew nothing , and yet he scanned with obstinate attention , the darkness in which he walked , as though he felt on one side of him something in process of construction , and on the other , something which was crumbling away . 
Marius , also warned , and , in accordance with the deep law of God , by that same Mother Nature , did all he could to keep out of sight of `` the father . '' 
Nevertheless , it came to pass that Jean Valjean sometimes espied him . 
Marius ' manners were no longer in the least natural . 
He exhibited ambiguous prudence and awkward daring . 
He no longer came quite close to them as formerly . 
He seated himself at a distance and pretended to be reading ; why did he pretend that ? 
Formerly he had come in his old coat , now he wore his new one every day ; Jean Valjean was not sure that he did not have his hair curled , his eyes were very queer , he wore gloves ; in short , Jean Valjean cordially detested this young man . 
Cosette allowed nothing to be divined . 
Without knowing just what was the matter with her she was convinced that there was something in it , and that it must be concealed . 
There was a coincidence between the taste for the toilet which had recently come to Cosette , and the habit of new clothes developed by that stranger which was very repugnant to Jean Valjean . 
It might be accidental , no doubt , certainly , but it was a menacing accident . 
He never opened his mouth to Cosette about this stranger . 
One day , however , he could not refrain from so doing , and , with that vague despair which suddenly casts the lead into the depths of its despair , he said to her : `` What a very pedantic air that young man has ! '' 
Cosette , but a year before only an indifferent little girl , would have replied : `` Why , no , he is charming . '' 
Ten years later , with the love of Marius in her heart , she would have answered : `` A pedant , and insufferable to the sight ! 
You are right ! '' 
-- At the moment in life and the heart which she had then attained , she contented herself with replying , with supreme calmness : `` That young man ! '' 
As though she now beheld him for the first time in her life . 
`` How stupid I am ! '' 
thought Jean Valjean . 
`` She had not noticed him . 
It is I who have pointed him out to her . '' 
Oh , simplicity of the old ! 
oh , the depth of children ! 
It is one of the laws of those fresh years of suffering and trouble , of those vivacious conflicts between a first love and the first obstacles , that the young girl does not allow herself to be caught in any trap whatever , and that the young man falls into every one . 
Jean Valjean had instituted an undeclared war against Marius , which Marius , with the sublime stupidity of his passion and his age , did not divine . 
Jean Valjean laid a host of ambushes for him ; he changed his hour , he changed his bench , he forgot his handkerchief , he came alone to the Luxembourg ; Marius dashed headlong into all these snares ; and to all the interrogation marks planted by Jean Valjean in his pathway , he ingenuously answered `` yes . '' 
But Cosette remained immured in her apparent unconcern and in her imperturbable tranquillity , so that Jean Valjean arrived at the following conclusion : `` That ninny is madly in love with Cosette , but Cosette does not even know that he exists . '' 
None the less did he bear in his heart a mournful tremor . 
The minute when Cosette would love might strike at any moment . 
Does not everything begin with indifference ? 
Only once did Cosette make a mistake and alarm him . 
He rose from his seat to depart , after a stay of three hours , and she said : `` What , already ? '' 
Jean Valjean had not discontinued his trips to the Luxembourg , as he did not wish to do anything out of the way , and as , above all things , he feared to arouse Cosette ; but during the hours which were so sweet to the lovers , while Cosette was sending her smile to the intoxicated Marius , who perceived nothing else now , and who now saw nothing in all the world but an adored and radiant face , Jean Valjean was fixing on Marius flashing and terrible eyes . 
He , who had finally come to believe himself incapable of a malevolent feeling , experienced moments when Marius was present , in which he thought he was becoming savage and ferocious once more , and he felt the old depths of his soul , which had formerly contained so much wrath , opening once more and rising up against that young man . 
It almost seemed to him that unknown craters were forming in his bosom . 
What ! 
he was there , that creature ! 
What was he there for ? 
He came creeping about , smelling out , examining , trying ! 
He came , saying : `` Hey ! 
Why not ? '' 
He came to prowl about his , Jean Valjean 's , life ! 
to prowl about his happiness , with the purpose of seizing it and bearing it away ! 
Jean Valjean added : `` Yes , that 's it ! 
What is he in search of ? 
An adventure ! 
What does he want ? 
A love affair ! 
A love affair ! 
And I ? 
What ! 
I have been first , the most wretched of men , and then the most unhappy , and I have traversed sixty years of life on my knees , I have suffered everything that man can suffer , I have grown old without having been young , I have lived without a family , without relatives , without friends , without life , without children , I have left my blood on every stone , on every bramble , on every mile-post , along every wall , I have been gentle , though others have been hard to me , and kind , although others have been malicious , I have become an honest man once more , in spite of everything , I have repented of the evil that I have done and have forgiven the evil that has been done to me , and at the moment when I receive my recompense , at the moment when it is all over , at the moment when I am just touching the goal , at the moment when I have what I desire , it is well , it is good , I have paid , I have earned it , all this is to take flight , all this will vanish , and I shall lose Cosette , and I shall lose my life , my joy , my soul , because it has pleased a great booby to come and lounge at the Luxembourg . '' 
Then his eyes were filled with a sad and extraordinary gleam . 
It was no longer a man gazing at a man ; it was no longer an enemy surveying an enemy . 
It was a dog scanning a thief . 
The reader knows the rest . 
Marius pursued his senseless course . 
One day he followed Cosette to the Rue de l'Ouest . 
Another day he spoke to the porter . 
The porter , on his side , spoke , and said to Jean Valjean : `` Monsieur , who is that curious young man who is asking for you ? '' 
On the morrow Jean Valjean bestowed on Marius that glance which Marius at last perceived . 
A week later , Jean Valjean had taken his departure . 
He swore to himself that he would never again set foot either in the Luxembourg or in the Rue de l'Ouest . 
He returned to the Rue Plumet . 
Cosette did not complain , she said nothing , she asked no questions , she did not seek to learn his reasons ; she had already reached the point where she was afraid of being divined , and of betraying herself . 
Jean Valjean had no experience of these miseries , the only miseries which are charming and the only ones with which he was not acquainted ; the consequence was that he did not understand the grave significance of Cosette 's silence . 
He merely noticed that she had grown sad , and he grew gloomy . 
On his side and on hers , inexperience had joined issue . 
Once he made a trial . 
He asked Cosette : -- `` Would you like to come to the Luxembourg ? '' 
A ray illuminated Cosette 's pale face . 
`` Yes , '' said she . 
They went thither . 
Three months had elapsed . 
Marius no longer went there . 
