Hence the name of Corinthe . 
Nothing is more natural to drunken men than ellipses . 
The ellipsis is the zig-zag of the phrase . 
Corinthe gradually dethroned the Pot-aux-Roses . 
The last proprietor of the dynasty , Father Hucheloup , no longer acquainted even with the tradition , had the post painted blue . 
A room on the ground floor , where the bar was situated , one on the first floor containing a billiard-table , a wooden spiral staircase piercing the ceiling , wine on the tables , smoke on the walls , candles in broad daylight , -- this was the style of this cabaret . 
A staircase with a trap-door in the lower room led to the cellar . 
On the second floor were the lodgings of the Hucheloup family . 
They were reached by a staircase which was a ladder rather than a staircase , and had for their entrance only a private door in the large room on the first floor . 
Under the roof , in two mansard attics , were the nests for the servants . 
The kitchen shared the ground-floor with the tap-room . 
Father Hucheloup had , possibly , been born a chemist , but the fact is that he was a cook ; people did not confine themselves to drinking alone in his wine-shop , they also ate there . 
Hucheloup had invented a capital thing which could be eaten nowhere but in his house , stuffed carps , which he called carpes au gras . 
These were eaten by the light of a tallow candle or of a lamp of the time of Louis XVI. , on tables to which were nailed waxed cloths in lieu of table-cloths . 
People came thither from a distance . 
Hucheloup , one fine morning , had seen fit to notify passers-by of this `` specialty '' ; he had dipped a brush in a pot of black paint , and as he was an orthographer on his own account , as well as a cook after his own fashion , he had improvised on his wall this remarkable inscription : -- CARPES HO GRAS . 
One winter , the rain-storms and the showers had taken a fancy to obliterate the S which terminated the first word , and the G which began the third ; this is what remained : -- CARPE HO RAS . 
Time and rain assisting , a humble gastronomical announcement had become a profound piece of advice . 
In this way it came about , that though he knew no French , Father Hucheloup understood Latin , that he had evoked philosophy from his kitchen , and that , desirous simply of effacing Lent , he had equalled Horace . 
And the striking thing about it was , that that also meant : `` Enter my wine-shop . '' 
Nothing of all this is in existence now . 
The Mondetour labyrinth was disembowelled and widely opened in 1847 , and probably no longer exists at the present moment . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie and Corinthe have disappeared beneath the pavement of the Rue Rambuteau . 
As we have already said , Corinthe was the meeting-place if not the rallying-point , of Courfeyrac and his friends . 
It was Grantaire who had discovered Corinthe . 
He had entered it on account of the Carpe horas , and had returned thither on account of the Carpes au gras . 
There they drank , there they ate , there they shouted ; they did not pay much , they paid badly , they did not pay at all , but they were always welcome . 
Father Hucheloup was a jovial host . 
Hucheloup , that amiable man , as was just said , was a wine-shop-keeper with a mustache ; an amusing variety . 
He always had an ill-tempered air , seemed to wish to intimidate his customers , grumbled at the people who entered his establishment , and had rather the mien of seeking a quarrel with them than of serving them with soup . 
And yet , we insist upon the word , people were always welcome there . 
This oddity had attracted customers to his shop , and brought him young men , who said to each other : `` Come hear Father Hucheloup growl . '' 
He had been a fencing-master . 
All of a sudden , he would burst out laughing . 
A big voice , a good fellow . 
He had a comic foundation under a tragic exterior , he asked nothing better than to frighten you , very much like those snuff-boxes which are in the shape of a pistol . 
The detonation makes one sneeze . 
Mother Hucheloup , his wife , was a bearded and a very homely creature . 
About 1830 , Father Hucheloup died . 
With him disappeared the secret of stuffed carps . 
His inconsolable widow continued to keep the wine-shop . 
But the cooking deteriorated , and became execrable ; the wine , which had always been bad , became fearfully bad . 
Nevertheless , Courfeyrac and his friends continued to go to Corinthe , -- out of pity , as Bossuet said . 
The Widow Hucheloup was breathless and misshapen and given to rustic recollections . 
She deprived them of their flatness by her pronunciation . 
She had a way of her own of saying things , which spiced her reminiscences of the village and of her springtime . 
It had formerly been her delight , so she affirmed , to hear the loups-de-gorge -LRB- rouges-gorges -RRB- chanter dans les ogrepines -LRB- aubepines -RRB- -- to hear the redbreasts sing in the hawthorn-trees . 
The hall on the first floor , where `` the restaurant '' was situated , was a large and long apartment encumbered with stools , chairs , benches , and tables , and with a crippled , lame , old billiard-table . 
It was reached by a spiral staircase which terminated in the corner of the room at a square hole like the hatchway of a ship . 
This room , lighted by a single narrow window , and by a lamp that was always burning , had the air of a garret . 
All the four-footed furniture comported itself as though it had but three legs -- the whitewashed walls had for their only ornament the following quatrain in honor of Mame Hucheloup : -- Elle etonne a dix pas , elle epouvente a deux , Une verrue habite en son nez hasardeux ; On tremble a chaque instant qu'elle ne vous la mouche Et qu'un beau jour son nez ne tombe dans sa bouche . 
-LSB- 48 -RSB- -LSB- 48 -RSB- She astounds at ten paces , she frightens at two , a wart inhabits her hazardous nose ; you tremble every instant lest she should blow it at you , and lest , some fine day , her nose should tumble into her mouth . 
This was scrawled in charcoal on the wall . 
Mame Hucheloup , a good likeness , went and came from morning till night before this quatrain with the most perfect tranquillity . 
Two serving-maids , named Matelote and Gibelotte , -LSB- 49 -RSB- and who had never been known by any other names , helped Mame Hucheloup to set on the tables the jugs of poor wine , and the various broths which were served to the hungry patrons in earthenware bowls . 
Matelote , large , plump , redhaired , and noisy , the favorite ex-sultana of the defunct Hucheloup , was homelier than any mythological monster , be it what it may ; still , as it becomes the servant to always keep in the rear of the mistress , she was less homely than Mame Hucheloup . 
Gibelotte , tall , delicate , white with a lymphatic pallor , with circles round her eyes , and drooping lids , always languid and weary , afflicted with what may be called chronic lassitude , the first up in the house and the last in bed , waited on every one , even the other maid , silently and gently , smiling through her fatigue with a vague and sleepy smile . 
-LSB- 49 -RSB- Matelote : a culinary preparation of various fishes . 
Gibelotte : stewed rabbits . 
Before entering the restaurant room , the visitor read on the door the following line written there in chalk by Courfeyrac : -- Regale si tu peux et mange si tu l'oses . 
-LSB- 50 -RSB- -LSB- 50 -RSB- Treat if you can , and eat if you dare . 
PRELIMINARY GAYETIES Laigle de Meaux , as the reader knows , lived more with Joly than elsewhere . 
He had a lodging , as a bird has one on a branch . 
The two friends lived together , ate together , slept together . 
They had everything in common , even Musichetta , to some extent . 
They were , what the subordinate monks who accompany monks are called , bini . 
On the morning of the 5th of June , they went to Corinthe to breakfast . 
Joly , who was all stuffed up , had a catarrh which Laigle was beginning to share . 
Laigle 's coat was threadbare , but Joly was well dressed . 
It was about nine o'clock in the morning , when they opened the door of Corinthe . 
They ascended to the first floor . 
Matelote and Gibelotte received them . 
`` Oysters , cheese , and ham , '' said Laigle . 
And they seated themselves at a table . 
The wine-shop was empty ; there was no one there but themselves . 
Gibelotte , knowing Joly and Laigle , set a bottle of wine on the table . 
While they were busy with their first oysters , a head appeared at the hatchway of the staircase , and a voice said : -- `` I am passing by . 
I smell from the street a delicious odor of Brie cheese . 
I enter . '' 
It was Grantaire . 
Grantaire took a stool and drew up to the table . 
At the sight of Grantaire , Gibelotte placed two bottles of wine on the table . 
That made three . 
`` Are you going to drink those two bottles ? '' 
Laigle inquired of Grantaire . 
Grantaire replied : -- `` All are ingenious , thou alone art ingenuous . 
Two bottles never yet astonished a man . '' 
The others had begun by eating , Grantaire began by drinking . 
Half a bottle was rapidly gulped down . 
`` So you have a hole in your stomach ? '' 
began Laigle again . 
`` You have one in your elbow , '' said Grantaire . 
And after having emptied his glass , he added : -- `` Ah , by the way , Laigle of the funeral oration , your coat is old . '' 
`` I should hope so , '' retorted Laigle . 
`` That 's why we get on well together , my coat and I . 
It has acquired all my folds , it does not bind me anywhere , it is moulded on my deformities , it falls in with all my movements , I am only conscious of it because it keeps me warm . 
Old coats are just like old friends . '' 
`` That 's true , '' ejaculated Joly , striking into the dialogue , `` an old goat is an old abi '' -LRB- ami , friend -RRB- . 
`` Especially in the mouth of a man whose head is stuffed up , '' said Grantaire . 
`` Grantaire , '' demanded Laigle , `` have you just come from the boulevard ? '' 
