Nevertheless , there was always a great deal of mystery about these leaders , and no certain fact can invalidate the singular arrogance of this reply made later on by a man accused before the Court of Peers : -- `` Who was your leader ? '' 
`` I knew of none and I recognized none . '' 
There was nothing but words , transparent but vague ; sometimes idle reports , rumors , hearsay . 
Other indications cropped up . 
A carpenter , occupied in nailing boards to a fence around the ground on which a house was in process of construction , in the Rue de Reuilly found on that plot the torn fragment of a letter on which were still legible the following lines : -- The committee must take measures to prevent recruiting in the sections for the different societies . 
And , as a postscript : -- We have learned that there are guns in the Rue du Faubourg-Poissonniere , No. 5 -LSB- bis -RSB- , to the number of five or six thousand , in the house of a gunsmith in that court . 
The section owns no arms . 
What excited the carpenter and caused him to show this thing to his neighbors was the fact , that a few paces further on he picked up another paper , torn like the first , and still more significant , of which we reproduce a facsimile , because of the historical interest attaching to these strange documents : -- + ------------------------------------------------------------ + | Q | C | D | E | Learn this list by heart . 
After so doing | | | | | | you will tear it up . 
The men admitted | | | | | | will do the same when you have transmitted | | | | | | their orders to them . 
| | | | | | Health and Fraternity , | | | | | | u og a fe L. | + ------------------------------------------------------------ + It was only later on that the persons who were in the secret of this find at the time , learned the significance of those four capital letters : quinturions , centurions , decurions , eclaireurs -LSB- scouts -RSB- , and the sense of the letters : u og a fe , which was a date , and meant April 15th , 1832 . 
Under each capital letter were inscribed names followed by very characteristic notes . 
Thus : Q. Bannerel . 
8 guns , 83 cartridges . 
A safe man . 
-- C. Boubiere . 
1 pistol , 40 cartridges . 
-- D. Rollet . 
1 foil , 1 pistol , 1 pound of powder . 
-- E. Tessier . 
1 sword , 1 cartridge-box . 
Exact . 
-- Terreur . 
8 guns . 
Brave , etc. . 
Finally , this carpenter found , still in the same enclosure , a third paper on which was written in pencil , but very legibly , this sort of enigmatical list : -- Unite : Blanchard : Arbre-Sec . 
6 . 
Barra . 
Soize . 
Salle-au-Comte . 
Kosciusko . 
Aubry the Butcher ? 
J. J. R. Caius Gracchus . 
Right of revision . 
Dufond . 
Four . 
Fall of the Girondists . 
Derbac . 
Maubuee . 
Washington . 
Pinson . 
1 pistol , 86 cartridges . 
Marseillaise . 
Sovereignty of the people . 
Michel . 
Quincampoix . 
Sword . 
Hoche . 
Marceau . 
Plato . 
Arbre-Sec . 
Warsaw . 
Tilly , crier of the Populaire . 
The honest bourgeois into whose hands this list fell knew its significance . 
It appears that this list was the complete nomenclature of the sections of the fourth arondissement of the Society of the Rights of Man , with the names and dwellings of the chiefs of sections . 
To-day , when all these facts which were obscure are nothing more than history , we may publish them . 
It should be added , that the foundation of the Society of the Rights of Man seems to have been posterior to the date when this paper was found . 
Perhaps this was only a rough draft . 
Still , according to all the remarks and the words , according to written notes , material facts begin to make their appearance . 
In the Rue Popincourt , in the house of a dealer in bric-abrac , there were seized seven sheets of gray paper , all folded alike lengthwise and in four ; these sheets enclosed twenty-six squares of this same gray paper folded in the form of a cartridge , and a card , on which was written the following : -- Saltpetre ... 12 ounces . 
Sulphur ... 2 ounces . 
Charcoal ... 2 ounces and a half . 
Water ... 2 ounces . 
The report of the seizure stated that the drawer exhaled a strong smell of powder . 
A mason returning from his day 's work , left behind him a little package on a bench near the bridge of Austerlitz . 
This package was taken to the police station . 
It was opened , and in it were found two printed dialogues , signed Lahautiere , a song entitled : `` Workmen , band together , '' and a tin box full of cartridges . 
One artisan drinking with a comrade made the latter feel him to see how warm he was ; the other man felt a pistol under his waistcoat . 
In a ditch on the boulevard , between Pere-Lachaise and the Barriere du Trone , at the most deserted spot , some children , while playing , discovered beneath a mass of shavings and refuse bits of wood , a bag containing a bullet-mould , a wooden punch for the preparation of cartridges , a wooden bowl , in which there were grains of hunting-powder , and a little cast-iron pot whose interior presented evident traces of melted lead . 
Police agents , making their way suddenly and unexpectedly at five o'clock in the morning , into the dwelling of a certain Pardon , who was afterwards a member of the Barricade-Merry section and got himself killed in the insurrection of April , 1834 , found him standing near his bed , and holding in his hand some cartridges which he was in the act of preparing . 
Towards the hour when workingmen repose , two men were seen to meet between the Barriere Picpus and the Barriere Charenton in a little lane between two walls , near a wine-shop , in front of which there was a `` Jeu de Siam . '' 
-LSB- 33 -RSB- One drew a pistol from beneath his blouse and handed it to the other . 
As he was handing it to him , he noticed that the perspiration of his chest had made the powder damp . 
He primed the pistol and added more powder to what was already in the pan . 
Then the two men parted . 
-LSB- 33 -RSB- A game of ninepins , in which one side of the ball is smaller than the other , so that it does not roll straight , but describes a curve on the ground . 
A certain Gallais , afterwards killed in the Rue Beaubourg in the affair of April , boasted of having in his house seven hundred cartridges and twenty-four flints . 
The government one day received a warning that arms and two hundred thousand cartridges had just been distributed in the faubourg . 
On the following week thirty thousand cartridges were distributed . 
The remarkable point about it was , that the police were not able to seize a single one . 
An intercepted letter read : `` The day is not far distant when , within four hours by the clock , eighty thousand patriots will be under arms . '' 
All this fermentation was public , one might almost say tranquil . 
The approaching insurrection was preparing its storm calmly in the face of the government . 
No singularity was lacking to this still subterranean crisis , which was already perceptible . 
The bourgeois talked peaceably to the working-classes of what was in preparation . 
They said : `` How is the rising coming along ? '' 
in the same tone in which they would have said : `` How is your wife ? '' 
A furniture-dealer , of the Rue Moreau , inquired : `` Well , when are you going to make the attack ? '' 
Another shop-keeper said : -- `` The attack will be made soon . '' 
`` I know it . 
A month ago , there were fifteen thousand of you , now there are twenty-five thousand . '' 
He offered his gun , and a neighbor offered a small pistol which he was willing to sell for seven francs . 
Moreover , the revolutionary fever was growing . 
Not a point in Paris nor in France was exempt from it . 
The artery was beating everywhere . 
Like those membranes which arise from certain inflammations and form in the human body , the network of secret societies began to spread all over the country . 
From the associations of the Friends of the People , which was at the same time public and secret , sprang the Society of the Rights of Man , which also dated from one of the orders of the day : Pluviose , Year 40 of the republican era , which was destined to survive even the mandate of the Court of Assizes which pronounced its dissolution , and which did not hesitate to bestow on its sections significant names like the following : -- Pikes . 
Tocsin . 
Signal cannon . 
Phrygian cap . 
