If Wellington had not begun , Blucher could not have finished . 
This Cambronne , this man spending his last hour , this unknown soldier , this infinitesimal of war , realizes that here is a falsehood , a falsehood in a catastrophe , and so doubly agonizing ; and at the moment when his rage is bursting forth because of it , he is offered this mockery , -- life ! 
How could he restrain himself ? 
Yonder are all the kings of Europe , the general 's flushed with victory , the Jupiter 's darting thunderbolts ; they have a hundred thousand victorious soldiers , and back of the hundred thousand a million ; their cannon stand with yawning mouths , the match is lighted ; they grind down under their heels the Imperial guards , and the grand army ; they have just crushed Napoleon , and only Cambronne remains , -- only this earthworm is left to protest . 
He will protest . 
Then he seeks for the appropriate word as one seeks for a sword . 
His mouth froths , and the froth is the word . 
In face of this mean and mighty victory , in face of this victory which counts none victorious , this desperate soldier stands erect . 
He grants its overwhelming immensity , but he establishes its triviality ; and he does more than spit upon it . 
Borne down by numbers , by superior force , by brute matter , he finds in his soul an expression : `` Excrement ! '' 
We repeat it , -- to use that word , to do thus , to invent such an expression , is to be the conqueror ! 
The spirit of mighty days at that portentous moment made its descent on that unknown man . 
Cambronne invents the word for Waterloo as Rouget invents the `` Marseillaise , '' under the visitation of a breath from on high . 
An emanation from the divine whirlwind leaps forth and comes sweeping over these men , and they shake , and one of them sings the song supreme , and the other utters the frightful cry . 
This challenge of titanic scorn Cambronne hurls not only at Europe in the name of the Empire , -- that would be a trifle : he hurls it at the past in the name of the Revolution . 
It is heard , and Cambronne is recognized as possessed by the ancient spirit of the Titans . 
Danton seems to be speaking ! 
Kleber seems to be bellowing ! 
At that word from Cambronne , the English voice responded , `` Fire ! '' 
The batteries flamed , the hill trembled , from all those brazen mouths belched a last terrible gush of grape-shot ; a vast volume of smoke , vaguely white in the light of the rising moon , rolled out , and when the smoke dispersed , there was no longer anything there . 
That formidable remnant had been annihilated ; the Guard was dead . 
The four walls of the living redoubt lay prone , and hardly was there discernible , here and there , even a quiver in the bodies ; it was thus that the French legions , greater than the Roman legions , expired on Mont-Saint-Jean , on the soil watered with rain and blood , amid the gloomy grain , on the spot where nowadays Joseph , who drives the post-wagon from Nivelles , passes whistling , and cheerfully whipping up his horse at four o'clock in the morning . 
QUOT LIBRAS IN DUCE ? 
The battle of Waterloo is an enigma . 
It is as obscure to those who won it as to those who lost it . 
For Napoleon it was a panic ; -LSB- 10 -RSB- Blucher sees nothing in it but fire ; Wellington understands nothing in regard to it . 
Look at the reports . 
The bulletins are confused , the commentaries involved . 
Some stammer , others lisp . 
Jomini divides the battle of Waterloo into four moments ; Muffling cuts it up into three changes ; Charras alone , though we hold another judgment than his on some points , seized with his haughty glance the characteristic outlines of that catastrophe of human genius in conflict with divine chance . 
All the other historians suffer from being somewhat dazzled , and in this dazzled state they fumble about . 
It was a day of lightning brilliancy ; in fact , a crumbling of the military monarchy which , to the vast stupefaction of kings , drew all the kingdoms after it -- the fall of force , the defeat of war . 
-LSB- 10 -RSB- `` A battle terminated , a day finished , false measures repaired , greater successes assured for the morrow , -- all was lost by a moment of panic , terror . '' 
-- Napoleon , Dictees de Sainte Helene . 
In this event , stamped with superhuman necessity , the part played by men amounts to nothing . 
If we take Waterloo from Wellington and Blucher , do we thereby deprive England and Germany of anything ? 
No . 
Neither that illustrious England nor that august Germany enter into the problem of Waterloo . 
Thank Heaven , nations are great , independently of the lugubrious feats of the sword . 
Neither England , nor Germany , nor France is contained in a scabbard . 
At this epoch when Waterloo is only a clashing of swords , above Blucher , Germany has Schiller ; above Wellington , England has Byron . 
A vast dawn of ideas is the peculiarity of our century , and in that aurora England and Germany have a magnificent radiance . 
They are majestic because they think . 
The elevation of level which they contribute to civilization is intrinsic with them ; it proceeds from themselves and not from an accident . 
The aggrandizement which they have brought to the nineteenth century has not Waterloo as its source . 
It is only barbarous peoples who undergo rapid growth after a victory . 
That is the temporary vanity of torrents swelled by a storm . 
Civilized people , especially in our day , are neither elevated nor abased by the good or bad fortune of a captain . 
Their specific gravity in the human species results from something more than a combat . 
Their honor , thank God ! 
their dignity , their intelligence , their genius , are not numbers which those gamblers , heroes and conquerors , can put in the lottery of battles . 
Often a battle is lost and progress is conquered . 
There is less glory and more liberty . 
The drum holds its peace ; reason takes the word . 
It is a game in which he who loses wins . 
Let us , therefore , speak of Waterloo coldly from both sides . 
Let us render to chance that which is due to chance , and to God that which is due to God . 
What is Waterloo ? 
A victory ? 
No . 
The winning number in the lottery . 
The quine -LSB- 11 -RSB- won by Europe , paid by France . 
-LSB- 11 -RSB- Five winning numbers in a lottery . 
It was not worth while to place a lion there . 
Waterloo , moreover , is the strangest encounter in history . 
Napoleon and Wellington . 
They are not enemies ; they are opposites . 
Never did God , who is fond of antitheses , make a more striking contrast , a more extraordinary comparison . 
On one side , precision , foresight , geometry , prudence , an assured retreat , reserves spared , with an obstinate coolness , an imperturbable method , strategy , which takes advantage of the ground , tactics , which preserve the equilibrium of battalions , carnage , executed according to rule , war regulated , watch in hand , nothing voluntarily left to chance , the ancient classic courage , absolute regularity ; on the other , intuition , divination , military oddity , superhuman instinct , a flaming glance , an indescribable something which gazes like an eagle , and which strikes like the lightning , a prodigious art in disdainful impetuosity , all the mysteries of a profound soul , associated with destiny ; the stream , the plain , the forest , the hill , summoned , and in a manner , forced to obey , the despot going even so far as to tyrannize over the field of battle ; faith in a star mingled with strategic science , elevating but perturbing it . 
Wellington was the Bareme of war ; Napoleon was its Michael Angelo ; and on this occasion , genius was vanquished by calculation . 
On both sides some one was awaited . 
It was the exact calculator who succeeded . 
Napoleon was waiting for Grouchy ; he did not come . 
Wellington expected Blucher ; he came . 
Wellington is classic war taking its revenge . 
Bonaparte , at his dawning , had encountered him in Italy , and beaten him superbly . 
The old owl had fled before the young vulture . 
The old tactics had been not only struck as by lightning , but disgraced . 
Who was that Corsican of six and twenty ? 
What signified that splendid ignoramus , who , with everything against him , nothing in his favor , without provisions , without ammunition , without cannon , without shoes , almost without an army , with a mere handful of men against masses , hurled himself on Europe combined , and absurdly won victories in the impossible ? 
Whence had issued that fulminating convict , who almost without taking breath , and with the same set of combatants in hand , pulverized , one after the other , the five armies of the emperor of Germany , upsetting Beaulieu on Alvinzi , Wurmser on Beaulieu , Melas on Wurmser , Mack on Melas ? 
Who was this novice in war with the effrontery of a luminary ? 
The academical military school excommunicated him , and as it lost its footing ; hence , the implacable rancor of the old Caesarism against the new ; of the regular sword against the flaming sword ; and of the exchequer against genius . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , that rancor had the last word . 
and beneath Lodi , Montebello , Montenotte , Mantua , Arcola , it wrote : Waterloo . 
A triumph of the mediocres which is sweet to the majority . 
Destiny consented to this irony . 
In his decline , Napoleon found Wurmser , the younger , again in front of him . 
In fact , to get Wurmser , it sufficed to blanch the hair of Wellington . 
Waterloo is a battle of the first order , won by a captain of the second . 
That which must be admired in the battle of Waterloo , is England ; the English firmness , the English resolution , the English blood ; the superb thing about England there , no offence to her , was herself . 
It was not her captain ; it was her army . 
Wellington , oddly ungrateful , declares in a letter to Lord Bathurst , that his army , the army which fought on the 18th of June , 1815 , was a `` detestable army . '' 
What does that sombre intermingling of bones buried beneath the furrows of Waterloo think of that ? 
England has been too modest in the matter of Wellington . 
To make Wellington so great is to belittle England . 
Wellington is nothing but a hero like many another . 
Those Scotch Grays , those Horse Guards , those regiments of Maitland and of Mitchell , that infantry of Pack and Kempt , that cavalry of Ponsonby and Somerset , those Highlanders playing the pibroch under the shower of grape-shot , those battalions of Rylandt , those utterly raw recruits , who hardly knew how to handle a musket holding their own against Essling 's and Rivoli 's old troops , -- that is what was grand . 
Wellington was tenacious ; in that lay his merit , and we are not seeking to lessen it : but the least of his foot-soldiers and of his cavalry would have been as solid as he . 
The iron soldier is worth as much as the Iron Duke . 
