People suffer in the light ; excess burns . 
The flame is the enemy of the wing . 
To burn without ceasing to fly , -- therein lies the marvel of genius . 
When you shall have learned to know , and to love , you will still suffer . 
The day is born in tears . 
The luminous weep , if only over those in darkness . 
ROOTS Slang is the tongue of those who sit in darkness . 
Thought is moved in its most sombre depths , social philosophy is bidden to its most poignant meditations , in the presence of that enigmatic dialect at once so blighted and rebellious . 
Therein lies chastisement made visible . 
Every syllable has an air of being marked . 
The words of the vulgar tongue appear therein wrinkled and shrivelled , as it were , beneath the hot iron of the executioner . 
Some seem to be still smoking . 
Such and such a phrase produces upon you the effect of the shoulder of a thief branded with the fleur-de-lys , which has suddenly been laid bare . 
Ideas almost refuse to be expressed in these substantives which are fugitives from justice . 
Metaphor is sometimes so shameless , that one feels that it has worn the iron neck-fetter . 
Moreover , in spite of all this , and because of all this , this strange dialect has by rights , its own compartment in that great impartial case of pigeon-holes where there is room for the rusty farthing as well as for the gold medal , and which is called literature . 
Slang , whether the public admit the fact or not has its syntax and its poetry . 
It is a language . 
Yes , by the deformity of certain terms , we recognize the fact that it was chewed by Mandrin , and by the splendor of certain metonymies , we feel that Villon spoke it . 
That exquisite and celebrated verse -- Mais ou sont les neiges d'antan ? 
But where are the snows of years gone by ? 
is a verse of slang . 
Antam -- ante annum -- is a word of Thunes slang , which signified the past year , and by extension , formerly . 
Thirty-five years ago , at the epoch of the departure of the great chain-gang , there could be read in one of the cells at Bicetre , this maxim engraved with a nail on the wall by a king of Thunes condemned to the galleys : Les dabs d'antan trimaient siempre pour la pierre du Coesre . 
This means Kings in days gone by always went and had themselves anointed . 
In the opinion of that king , anointment meant the galleys . 
The word decarade , which expresses the departure of heavy vehicles at a gallop , is attributed to Villon , and it is worthy of him . 
This word , which strikes fire with all four of its feet , sums up in a masterly onomatopoeia the whole of La Fontaine 's admirable verse : -- Six forts chevaux tiraient un coche . 
Six stout horses drew a coach . 
From a purely literary point of view , few studies would prove more curious and fruitful than the study of slang . 
It is a whole language within a language , a sort of sickly excrescence , an unhealthy graft which has produced a vegetation , a parasite which has its roots in the old Gallic trunk , and whose sinister foliage crawls all over one side of the language . 
This is what may be called the first , the vulgar aspect of slang . 
But , for those who study the tongue as it should be studied , that is to say , as geologists study the earth , slang appears like a veritable alluvial deposit . 
According as one digs a longer or shorter distance into it , one finds in slang , below the old popular French , Provencal , Spanish , Italian , Levantine , that language of the Mediterranean ports , English and German , the Romance language in its three varieties , French , Italian , and Romance Romance , Latin , and finally Basque and Celtic . 
A profound and unique formation . 
A subterranean edifice erected in common by all the miserable . 
Each accursed race has deposited its layer , each suffering has dropped its stone there , each heart has contributed its pebble . 
A throng of evil , base , or irritated souls , who have traversed life and have vanished into eternity , linger there almost entirely visible still beneath the form of some monstrous word . 
Do you want Spanish ? 
The old Gothic slang abounded in it . 
Here is boffete , a box on the ear , which is derived from bofeton ; vantane , window -LRB- later on vanterne -RRB- , which comes from vantana ; gat , cat , which comes from gato ; acite , oil , which comes from aceyte . 
Do you want Italian ? 
Here is spade , sword , which comes from spada ; carvel , boat , which comes from caravella . 
Do you want English ? 
Here is bichot , which comes from bishop ; raille , spy , which comes from rascal , rascalion ; pilche , a case , which comes from pilcher , a sheath . 
Do you want German ? 
Here is the caleur , the waiter , kellner ; the hers , the master , herzog -LRB- duke -RRB- . 
Do you want Latin ? 
Here is frangir , to break , frangere ; affurer , to steal , fur ; cadene , chain , catena . 
There is one word which crops up in every language of the continent , with a sort of mysterious power and authority . 
It is the word magnus ; the Scotchman makes of it his mac , which designates the chief of the clan ; Mac-Farlane , Mac-Callumore , the great Farlane , the great Callumore -LSB- 41 -RSB- ; slang turns it into meck and later le meg , that is to say , God . 
Would you like Basque ? 
Here is gahisto , the devil , which comes from gaiztoa , evil ; sorgabon , good night , which comes from gabon , good evening . 
Do you want Celtic ? 
Here is blavin , a handkerchief , which comes from blavet , gushing water ; menesse , a woman -LRB- in a bad sense -RRB- , which comes from meinec , full of stones ; barant , brook , from baranton , fountain ; goffeur , locksmith , from goff , blacksmith ; guedouze , death , which comes from guenn-du , black-white . 
Finally , would you like history ? 
Slang calls crowns les malteses , a souvenir of the coin in circulation on the galleys of Malta . 
-LSB- 41 -RSB- It must be observed , however , that mac in Celtic means son . 
In addition to the philological origins just indicated , slang possesses other and still more natural roots , which spring , so to speak , from the mind of man itself . 
In the first place , the direct creation of words . 
Therein lies the mystery of tongues . 
To paint with words , which contains figures one knows not how or why , is the primitive foundation of all human languages , what may be called their granite . 
Slang abounds in words of this description , immediate words , words created instantaneously no one knows either where or by whom , without etymology , without analogies , without derivatives , solitary , barbarous , sometimes hideous words , which at times possess a singular power of expression and which live . 
The executioner , le taule ; the forest , le sabri ; fear , flight , taf ; the lackey , le larbin ; the mineral , the prefect , the minister , pharos ; the devil , le rabouin . 
Nothing is stranger than these words which both mask and reveal . 
Some , le rabouin , for example , are at the same time grotesque and terrible , and produce on you the effect of a cyclopean grimace . 
ln the second place , metaphor . 
The peculiarity of a language which is desirous of saying all yet concealing all is that it is rich in figures . 
Metaphor is an enigma , wherein the thief who is plotting a stroke , the prisoner who is arranging an escape , take refuge . 
No idiom is more metaphorical than slang : devisser le coco -LRB- to unscrew the nut -RRB- , to twist the neck ; tortiller -LRB- to wriggle -RRB- , to eat ; etre gerbe , to be tried ; a rat , a bread thief ; il lansquine , it rains , a striking , ancient figure which partly bears its date about it , which assimilates long oblique lines of rain , with the dense and slanting pikes of the lancers , and which compresses into a single word the popular expression : it rains halberds . 
Sometimes , in proportion as slang progresses from the first epoch to the second , words pass from the primitive and savage sense to the metaphorical sense . 
The devil ceases to be le rabouin , and becomes le boulanger -LRB- the baker -RRB- , who puts the bread into the oven . 
This is more witty , but less grand , something like Racine after Corneille , like Euripides after AEschylus . 
Certain slang phrases which participate in the two epochs and have at once the barbaric character and the metaphorical character resemble phantasmagories . 
Les sorgueuers vont solliciter des gails a la lune -- the prowlers are going to steal horses by night , -- this passes before the mind like a group of spectres . 
One knows not what one sees . 
In the third place , the expedient . 
Slang lives on the language . 
It uses it in accordance with its fancy , it dips into it hap-hazard , and it often confines itself , when occasion arises , to alter it in a gross and summary fashion . 
Occasionally , with the ordinary words thus deformed and complicated with words of pure slang , picturesque phrases are formed , in which there can be felt the mixture of the two preceding elements , the direct creation and the metaphor : le cab jaspine , je marronne que la roulotte de Pantin trime dans le sabri , the dog is barking , I suspect that the diligence for Paris is passing through the woods . 
Le dab est sinve , la dabuge est merloussiere , la fee est bative , the bourgeois is stupid , the bourgeoise is cunning , the daughter is pretty . 
Generally , to throw listeners off the track , slang confines itself to adding to all the words of the language without distinction , an ignoble tail , a termination in aille , in orgue , in iergue , or in uche . 
Thus : Vousiergue trouvaille bonorgue ce gigotmuche ? 
Do you think that leg of mutton good ? 
A phrase addressed by Cartouche to a turnkey in order to find out whether the sum offered for his escape suited him . 
The termination in mar has been added recently . 
Slang , being the dialect of corruption , quickly becomes corrupted itself . 
Besides this , as it is always seeking concealment , as soon as it feels that it is understood , it changes its form . 
Contrary to what happens with every other vegetation , every ray of light which falls upon it kills whatever it touches . 
Thus slang is in constant process of decomposition and recomposition ; an obscure and rapid work which never pauses . 
It passes over more ground in ten years than a language in ten centuries . 
Thus le larton -LRB- bread -RRB- becomes le lartif ; le gail -LRB- horse -RRB- becomes le gaye ; la fertanche -LRB- straw -RRB- becomes la fertille ; le momignard -LRB- brat -RRB- , le momacque ; les fiques -LRB- duds -RRB- , frusques ; la chique -LRB- the church -RRB- , l'egrugeoir ; le colabre -LRB- neck -RRB- , le colas . 
The devil is at first , gahisto , then le rabouin , then the baker ; the priest is a ratichon , then the boar -LRB- le sanglier -RRB- ; the dagger is le vingt-deux -LRB- twenty-two -RRB- , then le surin , then le lingre ; the police are railles , then roussins , then rousses , then marchands de lacets -LRB- dealers in stay-laces -RRB- , then coquers , then cognes ; the executioner is le taule , then Charlot , l'atigeur , then le becquillard . 
In the seventeenth century , to fight was `` to give each other snuff '' ; in the nineteenth it is `` to chew each other 's throats . '' 
There have been twenty different phrases between these two extremes . 
Cartouche 's talk would have been Hebrew to Lacenaire . 
All the words of this language are perpetually engaged in flight like the men who utter them . 
Still , from time to time , and in consequence of this very movement , the ancient slang crops up again and becomes new once more . 
It has its headquarters where it maintains its sway . 
The Temple preserved the slang of the seventeenth century ; Bicetre , when it was a prison , preserved the slang of Thunes . 
