Had he not another and a grand object , which was the true one -- to save , not his person , but his soul ; to become honest and good once more ; to be a just man ? 
Was it not that above all , that alone , which he had always desired , which the Bishop had enjoined upon him -- to shut the door on his past ? 
But he was not shutting it ! 
great God ! 
he was re-opening it by committing an infamous action ! 
He was becoming a thief once more , and the most odious of thieves ! 
He was robbing another of his existence , his life , his peace , his place in the sunshine . 
He was becoming an assassin . 
He was murdering , morally murdering , a wretched man . 
He was inflicting on him that frightful living death , that death beneath the open sky , which is called the galleys . 
On the other hand , to surrender himself to save that man , struck down with so melancholy an error , to resume his own name , to become once more , out of duty , the convict Jean Valjean , that was , in truth , to achieve his resurrection , and to close forever that hell whence he had just emerged ; to fall back there in appearance was to escape from it in reality . 
This must be done ! 
He had done nothing if he did not do all this ; his whole life was useless ; all his penitence was wasted . 
There was no longer any need of saying , `` What is the use ? '' 
He felt that the Bishop was there , that the Bishop was present all the more because he was dead , that the Bishop was gazing fixedly at him , that henceforth Mayor Madeleine , with all his virtues , would be abominable to him , and that the convict Jean Valjean would be pure and admirable in his sight ; that men beheld his mask , but that the Bishop saw his face ; that men saw his life , but that the Bishop beheld his conscience . 
So he must go to Arras , deliver the false Jean Valjean , and denounce the real one . 
Alas ! 
that was the greatest of sacrifices , the most poignant of victories , the last step to take ; but it must be done . 
Sad fate ! 
he would enter into sanctity only in the eyes of God when he returned to infamy in the eyes of men . 
`` Well , said he , `` let us decide upon this ; let us do our duty ; let us save this man . '' 
He uttered these words aloud , without perceiving that he was speaking aloud . 
He took his books , verified them , and put them in order . 
He flung in the fire a bundle of bills which he had against petty and embarrassed tradesmen . 
He wrote and sealed a letter , and on the envelope it might have been read , had there been any one in his chamber at the moment , To Monsieur Laffitte , Banker , Rue d'Artois , Paris . 
He drew from his secretary a pocket-book which contained several bank-notes and the passport of which he had made use that same year when he went to the elections . 
Any one who had seen him during the execution of these various acts , into which there entered such grave thought , would have had no suspicion of what was going on within him . 
Only occasionally did his lips move ; at other times he raised his head and fixed his gaze upon some point of the wall , as though there existed at that point something which he wished to elucidate or interrogate . 
When he had finished the letter to M. Laffitte , he put it into his pocket , together with the pocket-book , and began his walk once more . 
His revery had not swerved from its course . 
He continued to see his duty clearly , written in luminous letters , which flamed before his eyes and changed its place as he altered the direction of his glance : -- `` Go ! 
Tell your name ! 
Denounce yourself ! '' 
In the same way he beheld , as though they had passed before him in visible forms , the two ideas which had , up to that time , formed the double rule of his soul , -- the concealment of his name , the sanctification of his life . 
For the first time they appeared to him as absolutely distinct , and he perceived the distance which separated them . 
He recognized the fact that one of these ideas was , necessarily , good , while the other might become bad ; that the first was self-devotion , and that the other was personality ; that the one said , my neighbor , and that the other said , myself ; that one emanated from the light , and the other from darkness . 
They were antagonistic . 
He saw them in conflict . 
In proportion as he meditated , they grew before the eyes of his spirit . 
They had now attained colossal statures , and it seemed to him that he beheld within himself , in that infinity of which we were recently speaking , in the midst of the darkness and the lights , a goddess and a giant contending . 
He was filled with terror ; but it seemed to him that the good thought was getting the upper hand . 
He felt that he was on the brink of the second decisive crisis of his conscience and of his destiny ; that the Bishop had marked the first phase of his new life , and that Champmathieu marked the second . 
After the grand crisis , the grand test . 
But the fever , allayed for an instant , gradually resumed possession of him . 
A thousand thoughts traversed his mind , but they continued to fortify him in his resolution . 
One moment he said to himself that he was , perhaps , taking the matter too keenly ; that , after all , this Champmathieu was not interesting , and that he had actually been guilty of theft . 
He answered himself : `` If this man has , indeed , stolen a few apples , that means a month in prison . 
It is a long way from that to the galleys . 
And who knows ? 
Did he steal ? 
Has it been proved ? 
The name of Jean Valjean overwhelms him , and seems to dispense with proofs . 
Do not the attorneys for the Crown always proceed in this manner ? 
He is supposed to be a thief because he is known to be a convict . '' 
In another instant the thought had occurred to him that , when he denounced himself , the heroism of his deed might , perhaps , be taken into consideration , and his honest life for the last seven years , and what he had done for the district , and that they would have mercy on him . 
But this supposition vanished very quickly , and he smiled bitterly as he remembered that the theft of the forty sous from little Gervais put him in the position of a man guilty of a second offence after conviction , that this affair would certainly come up , and , according to the precise terms of the law , would render him liable to penal servitude for life . 
He turned aside from all illusions , detached himself more and more from earth , and sought strength and consolation elsewhere . 
He told himself that he must do his duty ; that perhaps he should not be more unhappy after doing his duty than after having avoided it ; that if he allowed things to take their own course , if he remained at M. sur M. , his consideration , his good name , his good works , the deference and veneration paid to him , his charity , his wealth , his popularity , his virtue , would be seasoned with a crime . 
And what would be the taste of all these holy things when bound up with this hideous thing ? 
while , if he accomplished his sacrifice , a celestial idea would be mingled with the galleys , the post , the iron necklet , the green cap , unceasing toil , and pitiless shame . 
At length he told himself that it must be so , that his destiny was thus allotted , that he had not authority to alter the arrangements made on high , that , in any case , he must make his choice : virtue without and abomination within , or holiness within and infamy without . 
The stirring up of these lugubrious ideas did not cause his courage to fail , but his brain grow weary . 
He began to think of other things , of indifferent matters , in spite of himself . 
The veins in his temples throbbed violently ; he still paced to and fro ; midnight sounded first from the parish church , then from the town-hall ; he counted the twelve strokes of the two clocks , and compared the sounds of the two bells ; he recalled in this connection the fact that , a few days previously , he had seen in an ironmonger 's shop an ancient clock for sale , upon which was written the name , Antoine-Albin de Romainville . 
He was cold ; he lighted a small fire ; it did not occur to him to close the window . 
In the meantime he had relapsed into his stupor ; he was obliged to make a tolerably vigorous effort to recall what had been the subject of his thoughts before midnight had struck ; he finally succeeded in doing this . 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' he said to himself , `` I had resolved to inform against myself . '' 
And then , all of a sudden , he thought of Fantine . 
`` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` and what about that poor woman ? '' 
Here a fresh crisis declared itself . 
Fantine , by appearing thus abruptly in his revery , produced the effect of an unexpected ray of light ; it seemed to him as though everything about him were undergoing a change of aspect : he exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
but I have hitherto considered no one but myself ; it is proper for me to hold my tongue or to denounce myself , to conceal my person or to save my soul , to be a despicable and respected magistrate , or an infamous and venerable convict ; it is I , it is always I and nothing but I : but , good God ! 
all this is egotism ; these are diverse forms of egotism , but it is egotism all the same . 
What if I were to think a little about others ? 
The highest holiness is to think of others ; come , let us examine the matter . 
The I excepted , the I effaced , the I forgotten , what would be the result of all this ? 
What if I denounce myself ? 
I am arrested ; this Champmathieu is released ; I am put back in the galleys ; that is well -- and what then ? 
What is going on here ? 
Ah ! 
here is a country , a town , here are factories , an industry , workers , both men and women , aged grandsires , children , poor people ! 
All this I have created ; all these I provide with their living ; everywhere where there is a smoking chimney , it is I who have placed the brand on the hearth and meat in the pot ; I have created ease , circulation , credit ; before me there was nothing ; I have elevated , vivified , informed with life , fecundated , stimulated , enriched the whole country-side ; lacking me , the soul is lacking ; I take myself off , everything dies : and this woman , who has suffered so much , who possesses so many merits in spite of her fall ; the cause of all whose misery I have unwittingly been ! 
And that child whom I meant to go in search of , whom I have promised to her mother ; do I not also owe something to this woman , in reparation for the evil which I have done her ? 
If I disappear , what happens ? 
The mother dies ; the child becomes what it can ; that is what will take place , if I denounce myself . 
If I do not denounce myself ? 
come , let us see how it will be if I do not denounce myself . '' 
After putting this question to himself , he paused ; he seemed to undergo a momentary hesitation and trepidation ; but it did not last long , and he answered himself calmly : -- `` Well , this man is going to the galleys ; it is true , but what the deuce ! 
he has stolen ! 
There is no use in my saying that he has not been guilty of theft , for he has ! 
I remain here ; I go on : in ten years I shall have made ten millions ; I scatter them over the country ; I have nothing of my own ; what is that to me ? 
It is not for myself that I am doing it ; the prosperity of all goes on augmenting ; industries are aroused and animated ; factories and shops are multiplied ; families , a hundred families , a thousand families , are happy ; the district becomes populated ; villages spring up where there were only farms before ; farms rise where there was nothing ; wretchedness disappears , and with wretchedness debauchery , prostitution , theft , murder ; all vices disappear , all crimes : and this poor mother rears her child ; and behold a whole country rich and honest ! 
Ah ! 
I was a fool ! 
I was absurd ! 
what was that I was saying about denouncing myself ? 
I really must pay attention and not be precipitate about anything . 
What ! 
