`` No . '' 
`` We have just seen the head of the procession pass , Joly and I. '' `` It 's a marvellous sight , '' said Joly . 
`` How quiet this street is ! '' 
exclaimed Laigle . 
`` Who would suspect that Paris was turned upside down ? 
How plainly it is to be seen that in former days there were nothing but convents here ! 
In this neighborhood ! 
Du Breul and Sauval give a list of them , and so does the Abbe Lebeuf . 
They were all round here , they fairly swarmed , booted and barefooted , shaven , bearded , gray , black , white , Franciscans , Minims , Capuchins , Carmelites , Little Augustines , Great Augustines , old Augustines -- there was no end of them . '' 
`` Do n't let 's talk of monks , '' interrupted Grantaire , `` it makes one want to scratch one 's self . '' 
Then he exclaimed : -- `` Bouh ! 
I 've just swallowed a bad oyster . 
Now hypochondria is taking possession of me again . 
The oysters are spoiled , the servants are ugly . 
I hate the human race . 
I just passed through the Rue Richelieu , in front of the big public library . 
That pile of oyster-shells which is called a library is disgusting even to think of . 
What paper ! 
What ink ! 
What scrawling ! 
And all that has been written ! 
What rascal was it who said that man was a featherless biped ? 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- And then , I met a pretty girl of my acquaintance , who is as beautiful as the spring , worthy to be called Floreal , and who is delighted , enraptured , as happy as the angels , because a wretch yesterday , a frightful banker all spotted with small-pox , deigned to take a fancy to her ! 
Alas ! 
woman keeps on the watch for a protector as much as for a lover ; cats chase mice as well as birds . 
Two months ago that young woman was virtuous in an attic , she adjusted little brass rings in the eyelet-holes of corsets , what do you call it ? 
She sewed , she had a camp bed , she dwelt beside a pot of flowers , she was contented . 
Now here she is a bankeress . 
This transformation took place last night . 
I met the victim this morning in high spirits . 
The hideous point about it is , that the jade is as pretty to-day as she was yesterday . 
Her financier did not show in her face . 
Roses have this advantage or disadvantage over women , that the traces left upon them by caterpillars are visible . 
Ah ! 
there is no morality on earth . 
I call to witness the myrtle , the symbol of love , the laurel , the symbol of air , the olive , that ninny , the symbol of peace , the apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips , and the fig-tree , the grandfather of petticoats . 
As for right , do you know what right is ? 
The Gauls covet Clusium , Rome protects Clusium , and demands what wrong Clusium has done to them . 
Brennus answers : ` The wrong that Alba did to you , the wrong that Fidenae did to you , the wrong that the Eques , the Volsci , and the Sabines have done to you . 
They were your neighbors . 
The Clusians are ours . 
We understand neighborliness just as you do . 
You have stolen Alba , we shall take Clusium . ' 
Rome said : ` You shall not take Clusium . ' 
Brennus took Rome . 
Then he cried : ` Vae victis ! ' 
That is what right is . 
Ah ! 
what beasts of prey there are in this world ! 
What eagles ! 
It makes my flesh creep . '' 
-LSB- 51 -RSB- Bipede sans plume : biped without feathers -- pen . 
He held out his glass to Joly , who filled it , then he drank and went on , having hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine , of which no one , not even himself , had taken any notice : -- `` Brennus , who takes Rome , is an eagle ; the banker who takes the grisette is an eagle . 
There is no more modesty in the one case than in the other . 
So we believe in nothing . 
There is but one reality : drink . 
Whatever your opinion may be in favor of the lean cock , like the Canton of Uri , or in favor of the fat cock , like the Canton of Glaris , it matters little , drink . 
You talk to me of the boulevard , of that procession , et caetera , et caetera . 
Come now , is there going to be another revolution ? 
This poverty of means on the part of the good God astounds me . 
He has to keep greasing the groove of events every moment . 
There is a hitch , it wo n't work . 
Quick , a revolution ! 
The good God has his hands perpetually black with that cart-grease . 
If I were in his place , I 'd be perfectly simple about it , I would not wind up my mechanism every minute , I 'd lead the human race in a straightforward way , I 'd weave matters mesh by mesh , without breaking the thread , I would have no provisional arrangements , I would have no extraordinary repertory . 
What the rest of you call progress advances by means of two motors , men and events . 
But , sad to say , from time to time , the exceptional becomes necessary . 
The ordinary troupe suffices neither for event nor for men : among men geniuses are required , among events revolutions . 
Great accidents are the law ; the order of things can not do without them ; and , judging from the apparition of comets , one would be tempted to think that Heaven itself finds actors needed for its performance . 
At the moment when one expects it the least , God placards a meteor on the wall of the firmament . 
Some queer star turns up , underlined by an enormous tail . 
And that causes the death of Caesar . 
Brutus deals him a blow with a knife , and God a blow with a comet . 
Crac , and behold an aurora borealis , behold a revolution , behold a great man ; '93 in big letters , Napoleon on guard , the comet of 1811 at the head of the poster . 
Ah ! 
what a beautiful blue theatre all studded with unexpected flashes ! 
Boum ! 
Boum ! 
extraordinary show ! 
Raise your eyes , boobies . 
Everything is in disorder , the star as well as the drama . 
Good God , it is too much and not enough . 
These resources , gathered from exception , seem magnificence and poverty . 
My friends , Providence has come down to expedients . 
What does a revolution prove ? 
That God is in a quandry . 
He effects a coup d'etat because he , God , has not been able to make both ends meet . 
In fact , this confirms me in my conjectures as to Jehovah 's fortune ; and when I see so much distress in heaven and on earth , from the bird who has not a grain of millet to myself without a hundred thousand livres of income , when I see human destiny , which is very badly worn , and even royal destiny , which is threadbare , witness the Prince de Conde hung , when I see winter , which is nothing but a rent in the zenith through which the wind blows , when I see so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning on the crests of hills , when I see the drops of dew , those mock pearls , when I see the frost , that paste , when I see humanity ripped apart and events patched up , and so many spots on the sun and so many holes in the moon , when I see so much misery everywhere , I suspect that God is not rich . 
The appearance exists , it is true , but I feel that he is hard up . 
He gives a revolution as a tradesman whose money-box is empty gives a ball . 
God must not be judged from appearances . 
Beneath the gilding of heaven I perceive a poverty-stricken universe . 
Creation is bankrupt . 
That is why I am discontented . 
Here it is the 4th of June , it is almost night ; ever since this morning I have been waiting for daylight to come ; it has not come , and I bet that it wo n't come all day . 
This is the inexactness of an ill-paid clerk . 
Yes , everything is badly arranged , nothing fits anything else , this old world is all warped , I take my stand on the opposition , everything goes awry ; the universe is a tease . 
It 's like children , those who want them have none , and those who do n't want them have them . 
Total : I 'm vexed . 
Besides , Laigle de Meaux , that bald-head , offends my sight . 
