Sumptuousness and splendor . 
A louis d'or has been stuck to a candle . 
There 's the epoch for you . 
My demand is that I may flee from it beyond the Sarmatians . 
Ah ! 
in 1787 , I predict that all was lost , from the day when I beheld the Duc de Rohan , Prince de Leon , Duc de Chabot , Duc de Montbazon , Marquis de Sonbise , Vicomte de Thouars , peer of France , go to Longchamps in a tapecu ! 
That has borne its fruits . 
In this century , men attend to business , they gamble on ` Change , they win money , they are stingy . 
People take care of their surfaces and varnish them ; every one is dressed as though just out of a band-box , washed , soaped , scraped , shaved , combed , waked , smoothed , rubbed , brushed , cleaned on the outside , irreproachable , polished as a pebble , discreet , neat , and at the same time , death of my life , in the depths of their consciences they have dung-heaps and cesspools that are enough to make a cow-herd who blows his nose in his fingers , recoil . 
I grant to this age the device : ` Dirty Cleanliness . ' 
Do n't be vexed , Marius , give me permission to speak ; I say no evil of the people as you see , I am always harping on your people , but do look favorably on my dealing a bit of a slap to the bourgeoisie . 
I belong to it . 
He who loves well lashes well . 
Thereupon , I say plainly , that now-a-days people marry , but that they no longer know how to marry . 
Ah ! 
it is true , I regret the grace of the ancient manners . 
I regret everything about them , their elegance , their chivalry , those courteous and delicate ways , that joyous luxury which every one possessed , music forming part of the wedding , a symphony above stairs , a beating of drums below stairs , the dances , the joyous faces round the table , the fine-spun gallant compliments , the songs , the fireworks , the frank laughter , the devil 's own row , the huge knots of ribbon . 
I regret the bride 's garter . 
The bride 's garter is cousin to the girdle of Venus . 
On what does the war of Troy turn ? 
On Helen 's garter , parbleu ! 
Why did they fight , why did Diomed the divine break over the head of Meriones that great brazen helmet of ten points ? 
why did Achilles and Hector hew each other up with vast blows of their lances ? 
Because Helen allowed Paris to take her garter . 
With Cosette 's garter , Homer would construct the Iliad . 
He would put in his poem , a loquacious old fellow , like me , and he would call him Nestor . 
My friends , in bygone days , in those amiable days of yore , people married wisely ; they had a good contract , and then they had a good carouse . 
As soon as Cujas had taken his departure , Gamacho entered . 
But , in sooth ! 
the stomach is an agreeable beast which demands its due , and which wants to have its wedding also . 
People supped well , and had at table a beautiful neighbor without a guimpe so that her throat was only moderately concealed . 
Oh ! 
the large laughing mouths , and how gay we were in those days ! 
youth was a bouquet ; every young man terminated in a branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses ; whether he was a shepherd or a warrior ; and if , by chance , one was a captain of dragoons , one found means to call oneself Florian . 
People thought much of looking well . 
They embroidered and tinted themselves . 
A bourgeois had the air of a flower , a Marquis had the air of a precious stone . 
People had no straps to their boots , they had no boots . 
They were spruce , shining , waved , lustrous , fluttering , dainty , coquettish , which did not at all prevent their wearing swords by their sides . 
The humming-bird has beak and claws . 
That was the day of the Galland Indies . 
One of the sides of that century was delicate , the other was magnificent ; and by the green cabbages ! 
people amused themselves . 
To-day , people are serious . 
The bourgeois is avaricious , the bourgeoise is a prude ; your century is unfortunate . 
People would drive away the Graces as being too low in the neck . 
Alas ! 
beauty is concealed as though it were ugliness . 
Since the revolution , everything , including the ballet-dancers , has had its trousers ; a mountebank dancer must be grave ; your rigadoons are doctrinarian . 
It is necessary to be majestic . 
People would be greatly annoyed if they did not carry their chins in their cravats . 
The ideal of an urchin of twenty when he marries , is to resemble M. Royer-Collard . 
And do you know what one arrives at with that majesty ? 
at being petty . 
Learn this : joy is not only joyous ; it is great . 
But be in love gayly then , what the deuce ! 
marry , when you marry , with fever and giddiness , and tumult , and the uproar of happiness ! 
Be grave in church , well and good . 
But , as soon as the mass is finished , sarpejou ! 
you must make a dream whirl around the bride . 
A marriage should be royal and chimerical ; it should promenade its ceremony from the cathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup . 
I have a horror of a paltry wedding . 
Ventregoulette ! 
be in Olympus for that one day , at least . 
Be one of the gods . 
Ah ! 
people might be sylphs . 
Games and Laughter , argiraspides ; they are stupids . 
My friends , every recently made bridegroom ought to be Prince Aldobrandini . 
Profit by that unique minute in life to soar away to the empyrean with the swans and the eagles , even if you do have to fall back on the morrow into the bourgeoisie of the frogs . 
Do n't economize on the nuptials , do not prune them of their splendors ; do n't scrimp on the day when you beam . 
The wedding is not the housekeeping . 
Oh ! 
if I were to carry out my fancy , it would be gallant , violins would be heard under the trees . 
Here is my programme : sky-blue and silver . 
I would mingle with the festival the rural divinities , I would convoke the Dryads and the Nereids . 
The nuptials of Amphitrite , a rosy cloud , nymphs with well dressed locks and entirely naked , an Academician offering quatrains to the goddess , a chariot drawn by marine monsters . 
`` Triton trottait devant , et tirait de sa conque Des sons si ravissants qu'il ravissait quiconque ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- -- there 's a festive programme , there 's a good one , or else I know nothing of such matters , deuce take it ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- `` Triton trotted on before , and drew from his conch-shell sounds so ravishing that he delighted everyone ! '' 
While the grandfather , in full lyrical effusion , was listening to himself , Cosette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely at each other . 
Aunt Gillenormand surveyed all this with her imperturbable placidity . 
Within the last five or six months she had experienced a certain amount of emotions . 
Marius returned , Marius brought back bleeding , Marius brought back from a barricade , Marius dead , then living , Marius reconciled , Marius betrothed , Marius wedding a poor girl , Marius wedding a millionairess . 
The six hundred thousand francs had been her last surprise . 
Then , her indifference of a girl taking her first communion returned to her . 
She went regularly to service , told her beads , read her euchology , mumbled Aves in one corner of the house , while I love you was being whispered in the other , and she beheld Marius and Cosette in a vague way , like two shadows . 
The shadow was herself . 
There is a certain state of inert asceticism in which the soul , neutralized by torpor , a stranger to that which may be designated as the business of living , receives no impressions , either human , or pleasant or painful , with the exception of earthquakes and catastrophes . 
This devotion , as Father Gillenormand said to his daughter , corresponds to a cold in the head . 
You smell nothing of life . 
Neither any bad , nor any good odor . 
Moreover , the six hundred thousand francs had settled the elderly spinster 's indecision . 
Her father had acquired the habit of taking her so little into account , that he had not consulted her in the matter of consent to Marius ' marriage . 
He had acted impetuously , according to his wont , having , a despot-turned slave , but a single thought , -- to satisfy Marius . 
As for the aunt , -- it had not even occurred to him that the aunt existed , and that she could have an opinion of her own , and , sheep as she was , this had vexed her . 
Somewhat resentful in her inmost soul , but impassible externally , she had said to herself : `` My father has settled the question of the marriage without reference to me ; I shall settle the question of the inheritance without consulting him . '' 
She was rich , in fact , and her father was not . 
She had reserved her decision on this point . 
It is probable that , had the match been a poor one , she would have left him poor . 
