He walked on , raising Marius in his arms , as far above the water as he could . 
The mire now reached to his knees , and the water to his waist . 
He could no longer retreat . 
This mud , dense enough for one man , could not , obviously , uphold two . 
Marius and Jean Valjean would have stood a chance of extricating themselves singly . 
Jean Valjean continued to advance , supporting the dying man , who was , perhaps , a corpse . 
The water came up to his arm-pits ; he felt that he was sinking ; it was only with difficulty that he could move in the depth of ooze which he had now reached . 
The density , which was his support , was also an obstacle . 
He still held Marius on high , and with an unheard-of expenditure of force , he advanced still ; but he was sinking . 
He had only his head above the water now and his two arms holding up Marius . 
In the old paintings of the deluge there is a mother holding her child thus . 
He sank still deeper , he turned his face to the rear , to escape the water , and in order that he might be able to breathe ; anyone who had seen him in that gloom would have thought that what he beheld was a mask floating on the shadows ; he caught a faint glimpse above him of the drooping head and livid face of Marius ; he made a desperate effort and launched his foot forward ; his foot struck something solid ; a point of support . 
It was high time . 
He straightened himself up , and rooted himself upon that point of support with a sort of fury . 
This produced upon him the effect of the first step in a staircase leading back to life . 
The point of support , thus encountered in the mire at the supreme moment , was the beginning of the other water-shed of the pavement , which had bent but had not given way , and which had curved under the water like a plank and in a single piece . 
Well built pavements form a vault and possess this sort of firmness . 
This fragment of the vaulting , partly submerged , but solid , was a veritable inclined plane , and , once on this plane , he was safe . 
Jean Valjean mounted this inclined plane and reached the other side of the quagmire . 
As he emerged from the water , he came in contact with a stone and fell upon his knees . 
He reflected that this was but just , and he remained there for some time , with his soul absorbed in words addressed to God . 
He rose to his feet , shivering , chilled , foul-smelling , bowed beneath the dying man whom he was dragging after him , all dripping with slime , and his soul filled with a strange light . 
ONE SOMETIMES RUNS AGROUND WHEN ONE FANCIES THAT ONE IS DISEMBARKING He set out on his way once more . 
However , although he had not left his life in the fontis , he seemed to have left his strength behind him there . 
That supreme effort had exhausted him . 
His lassitude was now such that he was obliged to pause for breath every three or four steps , and lean against the wall . 
Once he was forced to seat himself on the banquette in order to alter Marius ' position , and he thought that he should have to remain there . 
But if his vigor was dead , his energy was not . 
He rose again . 
He walked on desperately , almost fast , proceeded thus for a hundred paces , almost without drawing breath , and suddenly came in contact with the wall . 
He had reached an elbow of the sewer , and , arriving at the turn with head bent down , he had struck the wall . 
He raised his eyes , and at the extremity of the vault , far , very far away in front of him , he perceived a light . 
This time it was not that terrible light ; it was good , white light . 
It was daylight . 
Jean Valjean saw the outlet . 
A damned soul , who , in the midst of the furnace , should suddenly perceive the outlet of Gehenna , would experience what Jean Valjean felt . 
It would fly wildly with the stumps of its burned wings towards that radiant portal . 
Jean Valjean was no longer conscious of fatigue , he no longer felt Marius ' weight , he found his legs once more of steel , he ran rather than walked . 
As he approached , the outlet became more and more distinctly defined . 
It was a pointed arch , lower than the vault , which gradually narrowed , and narrower than the gallery , which closed in as the vault grew lower . 
The tunnel ended like the interior of a funnel ; a faulty construction , imitated from the wickets of penitentiaries , logical in a prison , illogical in a sewer , and which has since been corrected . 
Jean Valjean reached the outlet . 
There he halted . 
It certainly was the outlet , but he could not get out . 
The arch was closed by a heavy grating , and the grating , which , to all appearance , rarely swung on its rusty hinges , was clamped to its stone jamb by a thick lock , which , red with rust , seemed like an enormous brick . 
The keyhole could be seen , and the robust latch , deeply sunk in the iron staple . 
The door was plainly double-locked . 
It was one of those prison locks which old Paris was so fond of lavishing . 
Beyond the grating was the open air , the river , the daylight , the shore , very narrow but sufficient for escape . 
The distant quays , Paris , that gulf in which one so easily hides oneself , the broad horizon , liberty . 
On the right , down stream , the bridge of Jena was discernible , on the left , upstream , the bridge of the Invalides ; the place would have been a propitious one in which to await the night and to escape . 
It was one of the most solitary points in Paris ; the shore which faces the Grand-Caillou . 
Flies were entering and emerging through the bars of the grating . 
It might have been half-past eight o'clock in the evening . 
The day was declining . 
Jean Valjean laid Marius down along the wall , on the dry portion of the vaulting , then he went to the grating and clenched both fists round the bars ; the shock which he gave it was frenzied , but it did not move . 
The grating did not stir . 
Jean Valjean seized the bars one after the other , in the hope that he might be able to tear away the least solid , and to make of it a lever wherewith to raise the door or to break the lock . 
Not a bar stirred . 
The teeth of a tiger are not more firmly fixed in their sockets . 
No lever ; no prying possible . 
The obstacle was invincible . 
There was no means of opening the gate . 
Must he then stop there ? 
What was he to do ? 
What was to become of him ? 
He had not the strength to retrace his steps , to recommence the journey which he had already taken . 
Besides , how was he to again traverse that quagmire whence he had only extricated himself as by a miracle ? 
And after the quagmire , was there not the police patrol , which assuredly could not be twice avoided ? 
And then , whither was he to go ? 
What direction should he pursue ? 
To follow the incline would not conduct him to his goal . 
If he were to reach another outlet , he would find it obstructed by a plug or a grating . 
Every outlet was , undoubtedly , closed in that manner . 
Chance had unsealed the grating through which he had entered , but it was evident that all the other sewer mouths were barred . 
He had only succeeded in escaping into a prison . 
All was over . 
Everything that Jean Valjean had done was useless . 
Exhaustion had ended in failure . 
They were both caught in the immense and gloomy web of death , and Jean Valjean felt the terrible spider running along those black strands and quivering in the shadows . 
He turned his back to the grating , and fell upon the pavement , hurled to earth rather than seated , close to Marius , who still made no movement , and with his head bent between his knees . 
This was the last drop of anguish . 
Of what was he thinking during this profound depression ? 
Neither of himself nor of Marius . 
He was thinking of Cosette . 
THE TORN COAT-TAIL In the midst of this prostration , a hand was laid on his shoulder , and a low voice said to him : `` Half shares . '' 
Some person in that gloom ? 
Nothing so closely resembles a dream as despair . 
Jean Valjean thought that he was dreaming . 
He had heard no footsteps . 
Was it possible ? 
He raised his eyes . 
A man stood before him . 
This man was clad in a blouse ; his feet were bare ; he held his shoes in his left hand ; he had evidently removed them in order to reach Jean Valjean , without allowing his steps to be heard . 
Jean Valjean did not hesitate for an instant . 
Unexpected as was this encounter , this man was known to him . 
The man was Thenardier . 
Although awakened , so to speak , with a start , Jean Valjean , accustomed to alarms , and steeled to unforeseen shocks that must be promptly parried , instantly regained possession of his presence of mind . 
Moreover , the situation could not be made worse , a certain degree of distress is no longer capable of a crescendo , and Thenardier himself could add nothing to this blackness of this night . 
A momentary pause ensued . 
