Marius made a movement . 
`` Oh ! 
do n't go away , '' said she , `` it will not be long now . '' 
She was sitting almost upright , but her voice was very low and broken by hiccoughs . 
At intervals , the death rattle interrupted her . 
She put her face as near that of Marius as possible . 
She added with a strange expression : -- `` Listen , I do not wish to play you a trick . 
I have a letter in my pocket for you . 
I was told to put it in the post . 
I kept it . 
I did not want to have it reach you . 
But perhaps you will be angry with me for it when we meet again presently ? 
Take your letter . '' 
She grasped Marius ' hand convulsively with her pierced hand , but she no longer seemed to feel her sufferings . 
She put Marius ' hand in the pocket of her blouse . 
There , in fact , Marius felt a paper . 
`` Take it , '' said she . 
Marius took the letter . 
She made a sign of satisfaction and contentment . 
`` Now , for my trouble , promise me -- '' And she stopped . 
`` What ? '' 
asked Marius . 
`` Promise me ! '' 
`` I promise . '' 
`` Promise to give me a kiss on my brow when I am dead . 
-- I shall feel it . '' 
She dropped her head again on Marius ' knees , and her eyelids closed . 
He thought the poor soul had departed . 
Eponine remained motionless . 
All at once , at the very moment when Marius fancied her asleep forever , she slowly opened her eyes in which appeared the sombre profundity of death , and said to him in a tone whose sweetness seemed already to proceed from another world : -- `` And by the way , Monsieur Marius , I believe that I was a little bit in love with you . '' 
She tried to smile once more and expired . 
GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES Marius kept his promise . 
He dropped a kiss on that livid brow , where the icy perspiration stood in beads . 
This was no infidelity to Cosette ; it was a gentle and pensive farewell to an unhappy soul . 
It was not without a tremor that he had taken the letter which Eponine had given him . 
He had immediately felt that it was an event of weight . 
He was impatient to read it . 
The heart of man is so constituted that the unhappy child had hardly closed her eyes when Marius began to think of unfolding this paper . 
He laid her gently on the ground , and went away . 
Something told him that he could not peruse that letter in the presence of that body . 
He drew near to a candle in the tap-room . 
It was a small note , folded and sealed with a woman 's elegant care . 
The address was in a woman 's hand and ran : -- `` To Monsieur , Monsieur Marius Pontmercy , at M. Courfeyrac 's , Rue de la Verrerie , No. 16 . '' 
He broke the seal and read : -- `` My dearest , alas ! 
my father insists on our setting out immediately . 
We shall be this evening in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . 
In a week we shall be in England . 
COSETTE . 
June 4th . '' 
Such was the innocence of their love that Marius was not even acquainted with Cosette 's handwriting . 
What had taken place may be related in a few words . 
Eponine had been the cause of everything . 
After the evening of the 3d of June she had cherished a double idea , to defeat the projects of her father and the ruffians on the house of the Rue Plumet , and to separate Marius and Cosette . 
She had exchanged rags with the first young scamp she came across who had thought it amusing to dress like a woman , while Eponine disguised herself like a man . 
It was she who had conveyed to Jean Valjean in the Champ de Mars the expressive warning : `` Leave your house . '' 
Jean Valjean had , in fact , returned home , and had said to Cosette : `` We set out this evening and we go to the Rue de l'Homme Arme with Toussaint . 
Next week , we shall be in London . '' 
Cosette , utterly overwhelmed by this unexpected blow , had hastily penned a couple of lines to Marius . 
But how was she to get the letter to the post ? 
She never went out alone , and Toussaint , surprised at such a commission , would certainly show the letter to M. Fauchelevent . 
In this dilemma , Cosette had caught sight through the fence of Eponine in man 's clothes , who now prowled incessantly around the garden . 
Cosette had called to `` this young workman '' and had handed him five francs and the letter , saying : `` Carry this letter immediately to its address . '' 
Eponine had put the letter in her pocket . 
The next day , on the 5th of June , she went to Courfeyrac 's quarters to inquire for Marius , not for the purpose of delivering the letter , but , -- a thing which every jealous and loving soul will comprehend , -- `` to see . '' 
There she had waited for Marius , or at least for Courfeyrac , still for the purpose of seeing . 
When Courfeyrac had told her : `` We are going to the barricades , '' an idea flashed through her mind , to fling herself into that death , as she would have done into any other , and to thrust Marius into it also . 
She had followed Courfeyrac , had made sure of the locality where the barricade was in process of construction ; and , quite certain , since Marius had received no warning , and since she had intercepted the letter , that he would go at dusk to his trysting place for every evening , she had betaken herself to the Rue Plumet , had there awaited Marius , and had sent him , in the name of his friends , the appeal which would , she thought , lead him to the barricade . 
She reckoned on Marius ' despair when he should fail to find Cosette ; she was not mistaken . 
She had returned to the Rue de la Chanvrerie herself . 
What she did there the reader has just seen . 
She died with the tragic joy of jealous hearts who drag the beloved being into their own death , and who say : `` No one shall have him ! '' 
Marius covered Cosette 's letter with kisses . 
So she loved him ! 
For one moment the idea occurred to him that he ought not to die now . 
Then he said to himself : `` She is going away . 
Her father is taking her to England , and my grandfather refuses his consent to the marriage . 
Nothing is changed in our fates . '' 
Dreamers like Marius are subject to supreme attacks of dejection , and desperate resolves are the result . 
The fatigue of living is insupportable ; death is sooner over with . 
Then he reflected that he had still two duties to fulfil : to inform Cosette of his death and send her a final farewell , and to save from the impending catastrophe which was in preparation , that poor child , Eponine 's brother and Thenardier 's son . 
He had a pocket-book about him ; the same one which had contained the note-book in which he had inscribed so many thoughts of love for Cosette . 
He tore out a leaf and wrote on it a few lines in pencil : -- `` Our marriage was impossible . 
I asked my grandfather , he refused ; I have no fortune , neither hast thou . 
I hastened to thee , thou wert no longer there . 
Thou knowest the promise that I gave thee , I shall keep it . 
I die . 
I love thee . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee , and thou wilt smile . '' 
Having nothing wherewith to seal this letter , he contented himself with folding the paper in four , and added the address : -- `` To Mademoiselle Cosette Fauchelevent , at M. Fauchelevent 's , Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
Having folded the letter , he stood in thought for a moment , drew out his pocket-book again , opened it , and wrote , with the same pencil , these four lines on the first page : -- `` My name is Marius Pontmercy . 
Carry my body to my grandfather , M. Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 , in the Marais . '' 
He put his pocketbook back in his pocket , then he called Gavroche . 
The gamin , at the sound of Marius ' voice , ran up to him with his merry and devoted air . 
`` Will you do something for me ? '' 
`` Anything , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Good God ! 
if it had not been for you , I should have been done for . '' 
`` Do you see this letter ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Take it . 
