The manner in which they had repulsed the attack of the preceding night had caused them to almost disdain in advance the attack at dawn . 
They waited for it with a smile . 
They had no more doubt as to their success than as to their cause . 
Moreover , succor was , evidently , on the way to them . 
They reckoned on it . 
With that facility of triumphant prophecy which is one of the sources of strength in the French combatant , they divided the day which was at hand into three distinct phases . 
At six o'clock in the morning a regiment `` which had been labored with , '' would turn ; at noon , the insurrection of all Paris ; at sunset , revolution . 
They heard the alarm bell of Saint-Merry , which had not been silent for an instant since the night before ; a proof that the other barricade , the great one , Jeanne 's , still held out . 
All these hopes were exchanged between the different groups in a sort of gay and formidable whisper which resembled the warlike hum of a hive of bees . 
Enjolras reappeared . 
He returned from his sombre eagle flight into outer darkness . 
He listened for a moment to all this joy with folded arms , and one hand on his mouth . 
Then , fresh and rosy in the growing whiteness of the dawn , he said : `` The whole army of Paris is to strike . 
A third of the army is bearing down upon the barricades in which you now are . 
There is the National Guard in addition . 
I have picked out the shakos of the fifth of the line , and the standard-bearers of the sixth legion . 
In one hour you will be attacked . 
As for the populace , it was seething yesterday , to-day it is not stirring . 
There is nothing to expect ; nothing to hope for . 
Neither from a faubourg nor from a regiment . 
You are abandoned . '' 
These words fell upon the buzzing of the groups , and produced on them the effect caused on a swarm of bees by the first drops of a storm . 
A moment of indescribable silence ensued , in which death might have been heard flitting by . 
This moment was brief . 
A voice from the obscurest depths of the groups shouted to Enjolras : `` So be it . 
Let us raise the barricade to a height of twenty feet , and let us all remain in it . 
Citizens , let us offer the protests of corpses . 
Let us show that , if the people abandon the republicans , the republicans do not abandon the people . '' 
These words freed the thought of all from the painful cloud of individual anxieties . 
It was hailed with an enthusiastic acclamation . 
No one ever has known the name of the man who spoke thus ; he was some unknown blouse-wearer , a stranger , a man forgotten , a passing hero , that great anonymous , always mingled in human crises and in social geneses who , at a given moment , utters in a supreme fashion the decisive word , and who vanishes into the shadows after having represented for a minute , in a lightning flash , the people and God . 
This inexorable resolution so thoroughly impregnated the air of the 6th of June , 1832 , that , almost at the very same hour , on the barricade Saint-Merry , the insurgents were raising that clamor which has become a matter of history and which has been consigned to the documents in the case : -- `` What matters it whether they come to our assistance or not ? 
Let us get ourselves killed here , to the very last man . '' 
As the reader sees , the two barricades , though materially isolated , were in communication with each other . 
MINUS FIVE , PLUS ONE After the man who decreed the `` protest of corpses '' had spoken , and had given this formula of their common soul , there issued from all mouths a strangely satisfied and terrible cry , funereal in sense and triumphant in tone : `` Long live death ! 
Let us all remain here ! '' 
`` Why all ? '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` All ! 
All ! '' 
Enjolras resumed : `` The position is good ; the barricade is fine . 
Thirty men are enough . 
Why sacrifice forty ? '' 
They replied : `` Because not one will go away . '' 
`` Citizens , '' cried Enjolras , and there was an almost irritated vibration in his voice , `` this republic is not rich enough in men to indulge in useless expenditure of them . 
Vain-glory is waste . 
If the duty of some is to depart , that duty should be fulfilled like any other . '' 
Enjolras , the man-principle , had over his co-religionists that sort of omnipotent power which emanates from the absolute . 
Still , great as was this omnipotence , a murmur arose . 
A leader to the very finger-tips , Enjolras , seeing that they murmured , insisted . 
He resumed haughtily : `` Let those who are afraid of not numbering more than thirty say so . '' 
The murmurs redoubled . 
`` Besides , '' observed a voice in one group , `` it is easy enough to talk about leaving . 
The barricade is hemmed in . '' 
`` Not on the side of the Halles , '' said Enjolras . 
`` The Rue Mondetour is free , and through the Rue des Precheurs one can reach the Marche des Innocents . '' 
`` And there , '' went on another voice , `` you would be captured . 
You would fall in with some grand guard of the line or the suburbs ; they will spy a man passing in blouse and cap . 
` Whence come you ? ' 
` Do n't you belong to the barricade ? ' 
And they will look at your hands . 
You smell of powder . 
Shot . '' 
Enjolras , without making any reply , touched Combeferre 's shoulder , and the two entered the tap-room . 
They emerged thence a moment later . 
Enjolras held in his outstretched hands the four uniforms which he had laid aside . 
Combeferre followed , carrying the shoulder-belts and the shakos . 
`` With this uniform , '' said Enjolras , `` you can mingle with the ranks and escape ; here is enough for four . '' 
And he flung on the ground , deprived of its pavement , the four uniforms . 
No wavering took place in his stoical audience . 
Combeferre took the word . 
`` Come , said he , `` you must have a little pity . 
Do you know what the question is here ? 
It is a question of women . 
See here . 
Are there women or are there not ? 
Are there children or are there not ? 
Are there mothers , yes or no , who rock cradles with their foot and who have a lot of little ones around them ? 
Let that man of you who has never beheld a nurse 's breast raise his hand . 
Ah ! 
you want to get yourselves killed , so do I -- I , who am speaking to you ; but I do not want to feel the phantoms of women wreathing their arms around me . 
Die , if you will , but do n't make others die . 
Suicides like that which is on the brink of accomplishment here are sublime ; but suicide is narrow , and does not admit of extension ; and as soon as it touches your neighbors , suicide is murder . 
Think of the little blond heads ; think of the white locks . 
Listen , Enjolras has just told me that he saw at the corner of the Rue du Cygne a lighted casement , a candle in a poor window , on the fifth floor , and on the pane the quivering shadow of the head of an old woman , who had the air of having spent the night in watching . 
Perhaps she is the mother of some one of you . 
Well , let that man go , and make haste , to say to his mother : ` Here I am , mother ! ' 
Let him feel at ease , the task here will be performed all the same . 
When one supports one 's relatives by one 's toil , one has not the right to sacrifice one 's self . 
That is deserting one 's family . 
And those who have daughters ! 
what are you thinking of ? 
You get yourselves killed , you are dead , that is well . 
And tomorrow ? 
Young girls without bread -- that is a terrible thing . 
Man begs , woman sells . 
Ah ! 
those charming and gracious beings , so gracious and so sweet , who have bonnets of flowers , who fill the house with purity , who sing and prattle , who are like a living perfume , who prove the existence of angels in heaven by the purity of virgins on earth , that Jeanne , that Lise , that Mimi , those adorable and honest creatures who are your blessings and your pride , ah ! 
good God , they will suffer hunger ! 
What do you want me to say to you ? 
