God delivers over to men his visible will in events , an obscure text written in a mysterious tongue . 
Men immediately make translations of it ; translations hasty , incorrect , full of errors , of gaps , and of nonsense . 
Very few minds comprehend the divine language . 
The most sagacious , the calmest , the most profound , decipher slowly , and when they arrive with their text , the task has long been completed ; there are already twenty translations on the public place . 
From each remaining springs a party , and from each misinterpretation a faction ; and each party thinks that it alone has the true text , and each faction thinks that it possesses the light . 
Power itself is often a faction . 
There are , in revolutions , swimmers who go against the current ; they are the old parties . 
For the old parties who clung to heredity by the grace of God , think that revolutions , having sprung from the right to revolt , one has the right to revolt against them . 
Error . 
For in these revolutions , the one who revolts is not the people ; it is the king . 
Revolution is precisely the contrary of revolt . 
Every revolution , being a normal outcome , contains within itself its legitimacy , which false revolutionists sometimes dishonor , but which remains even when soiled , which survives even when stained with blood . 
Revolutions spring not from an accident , but from necessity . 
A revolution is a return from the fictitious to the real . 
It is because it must be that it is . 
None the less did the old legitimist parties assail the Revolution of 1830 with all the vehemence which arises from false reasoning . 
Errors make excellent projectiles . 
They strike it cleverly in its vulnerable spot , in default of a cuirass , in its lack of logic ; they attacked this revolution in its royalty . 
They shouted to it : `` Revolution , why this king ? '' 
Factions are blind men who aim correctly . 
This cry was uttered equally by the republicans . 
But coming from them , this cry was logical . 
What was blindness in the legitimists was clearness of vision in the democrats . 
1830 had bankrupted the people . 
The enraged democracy reproached it with this . 
Between the attack of the past and the attack of the future , the establishment of July struggled . 
It represented the minute at loggerheads on the one hand with the monarchical centuries , on the other hand with eternal right . 
In addition , and beside all this , as it was no longer revolution and had become a monarchy , 1830 was obliged to take precedence of all Europe . 
To keep the peace , was an increase of complication . 
A harmony established contrary to sense is often more onerous than a war . 
From this secret conflict , always muzzled , but always growling , was born armed peace , that ruinous expedient of civilization which in the harness of the European cabinets is suspicious in itself . 
The Royalty of July reared up , in spite of the fact that it caught it in the harness of European cabinets . 
Metternich would gladly have put it in kicking-straps . 
Pushed on in France by progress , it pushed on the monarchies , those loiterers in Europe . 
After having been towed , it undertook to tow . 
Meanwhile , within her , pauperism , the proletariat , salary , education , penal servitude , prostitution , the fate of the woman , wealth , misery , production , consumption , division , exchange , coin , credit , the rights of capital , the rights of labor , -- all these questions were multiplied above society , a terrible slope . 
Outside of political parties properly so called , another movement became manifest . 
Philosophical fermentation replied to democratic fermentation . 
The elect felt troubled as well as the masses ; in another manner , but quite as much . 
Thinkers meditated , while the soil , that is to say , the people , traversed by revolutionary currents , trembled under them with indescribably vague epileptic shocks . 
These dreamers , some isolated , others united in families and almost in communion , turned over social questions in a pacific but profound manner ; impassive miners , who tranquilly pushed their galleries into the depths of a volcano , hardly disturbed by the dull commotion and the furnaces of which they caught glimpses . 
This tranquillity was not the least beautiful spectacle of this agitated epoch . 
These men left to political parties the question of rights , they occupied themselves with the question of happiness . 
The well-being of man , that was what they wanted to extract from society . 
They raised material questions , questions of agriculture , of industry , of commerce , almost to the dignity of a religion . 
In civilization , such as it has formed itself , a little by the command of God , a great deal by the agency of man , interests combine , unite , and amalgamate in a manner to form a veritable hard rock , in accordance with a dynamic law , patiently studied by economists , those geologists of politics . 
These men who grouped themselves under different appellations , but who may all be designated by the generic title of socialists , endeavored to pierce that rock and to cause it to spout forth the living waters of human felicity . 
From the question of the scaffold to the question of war , their works embraced everything . 
To the rights of man , as proclaimed by the French Revolution , they added the rights of woman and the rights of the child . 
The reader will not be surprised if , for various reasons , we do not here treat in a thorough manner , from the theoretical point of view , the questions raised by socialism . 
We confine ourselves to indicating them . 
All the problems that the socialists proposed to themselves , cosmogonic visions , revery and mysticism being cast aside , can be reduced to two principal problems . 
First problem : To produce wealth . 
Second problem : To share it . 
The first problem contains the question of work . 
The second contains the question of salary . 
In the first problem the employment of forces is in question . 
In the second , the distribution of enjoyment . 
From the proper employment of forces results public power . 
From a good distribution of enjoyments results individual happiness . 
By a good distribution , not an equal but an equitable distribution must be understood . 
From these two things combined , the public power without , individual happiness within , results social prosperity . 
Social prosperity means the man happy , the citizen free , the nation great . 
England solves the first of these two problems . 
She creates wealth admirably , she divides it badly . 
This solution which is complete on one side only leads her fatally to two extremes : monstrous opulence , monstrous wretchedness . 
All enjoyments for some , all privations for the rest , that is to say , for the people ; privilege , exception , monopoly , feudalism , born from toil itself . 
A false and dangerous situation , which sates public power or private misery , which sets the roots of the State in the sufferings of the individual . 
A badly constituted grandeur in which are combined all the material elements and into which no moral element enters . 
Communism and agrarian law think that they solve the second problem . 
They are mistaken . 
Their division kills production . 
Equal partition abolishes emulation ; and consequently labor . 
It is a partition made by the butcher , which kills that which it divides . 
It is therefore impossible to pause over these pretended solutions . 
Slaying wealth is not the same thing as dividing it . 
The two problems require to be solved together , to be well solved . 
The two problems must be combined and made but one . 
Solve only the first of the two problems ; you will be Venice , you will be England . 
You will have , like Venice , an artificial power , or , like England , a material power ; you will be the wicked rich man . 
You will die by an act of violence , as Venice died , or by bankruptcy , as England will fall . 
And the world will allow to die and fall all that is merely selfishness , all that does not represent for the human race either a virtue or an idea . 
It is well understood here , that by the words Venice , England , we designate not the peoples , but social structures ; the oligarchies superposed on nations , and not the nations themselves . 
The nations always have our respect and our sympathy . 
Venice , as a people , will live again ; England , the aristocracy , will fall , but England , the nation , is immortal . 
That said , we continue . 
Solve the two problems , encourage the wealthy , and protect the poor , suppress misery , put an end to the unjust farming out of the feeble by the strong , put a bridle on the iniquitous jealousy of the man who is making his way against the man who has reached the goal , adjust , mathematically and fraternally , salary to labor , mingle gratuitous and compulsory education with the growth of childhood , and make of science the base of manliness , develop minds while keeping arms busy , be at one and the same time a powerful people and a family of happy men , render property democratic , not by abolishing it , but by making it universal , so that every citizen , without exception , may be a proprietor , an easier matter than is generally supposed ; in two words , learn how to produce wealth and how to distribute it , and you will have at once moral and material greatness ; and you will be worthy to call yourself France . 
This is what socialism said outside and above a few sects which have gone astray ; that is what it sought in facts , that is what it sketched out in minds . 
Efforts worthy of admiration ! 
Sacred attempts ! 
These doctrines , these theories , these resistances , the unforeseen necessity for the statesman to take philosophers into account , confused evidences of which we catch a glimpse , a new system of politics to be created , which shall be in accord with the old world without too much disaccord with the new revolutionary ideal , a situation in which it became necessary to use Lafayette to defend Polignac , the intuition of progress transparent beneath the revolt , the chambers and streets , the competitions to be brought into equilibrium around him , his faith in the Revolution , perhaps an eventual indefinable resignation born of the vague acceptance of a superior definitive right , his desire to remain of his race , his domestic spirit , his sincere respect for the people , his own honesty , preoccupied Louis Philippe almost painfully , and there were moments when strong and courageous as he was , he was overwhelmed by the difficulties of being a king . 
He felt under his feet a formidable disaggregation , which was not , nevertheless , a reduction to dust , France being more France than ever . 
Piles of shadows covered the horizon . 
A strange shade , gradually drawing nearer , extended little by little over men , over things , over ideas ; a shade which came from wraths and systems . 
Everything which had been hastily stifled was moving and fermenting . 
At times the conscience of the honest man resumed its breathing , so great was the discomfort of that air in which sophisms were intermingled with truths . 
Spirits trembled in the social anxiety like leaves at the approach of a storm . 
The electric tension was such that at certain instants , the first comer , a stranger , brought light . 
Then the twilight obscurity closed in again . 
At intervals , deep and dull mutterings allowed a judgment to be formed as to the quantity of thunder contained by the cloud . 
