I will explain to you , my children , and for that reason , also , I am glad to see you . 
Black jet comes from England , white jet comes from Norway . 
All this is in this paper , which you will read . 
For bracelets , I invented a way of substituting for slides of soldered sheet iron , slides of iron laid together . 
It is prettier , better and less costly . 
You will understand how much money can be made in that way . 
So Cosette 's fortune is really hers . 
I give you these details , in order that your mind may be set at rest . '' 
The portress had come upstairs and was gazing in at the half-open door . 
The doctor dismissed her . 
But he could not prevent this zealous woman from exclaiming to the dying man before she disappeared : `` Would you like a priest ? '' 
`` I have had one , '' replied Jean Valjean . 
And with his finger he seemed to indicate a point above his head where one would have said that he saw some one . 
It is probable , in fact , that the Bishop was present at this death agony . 
Cosette gently slipped a pillow under his loins . 
Jean Valjean resumed : `` Have no fear , Monsieur Pontmercy , I adjure you . 
The six hundred thousand francs really belong to Cosette . 
My life will have been wasted if you do not enjoy them ! 
We managed to do very well with those glass goods . 
We rivalled what is called Berlin jewellery . 
However , we could not equal the black glass of England . 
A gross , which contains twelve hundred very well cut grains , only costs three francs . '' 
When a being who is dear to us is on the point of death , we gaze upon him with a look which clings convulsively to him and which would fain hold him back . 
Cosette gave her hand to Marius , and both , mute with anguish , not knowing what to say to the dying man , stood trembling and despairing before him . 
Jean Valjean sank moment by moment . 
He was failing ; he was drawing near to the gloomy horizon . 
His breath had become intermittent ; a little rattling interrupted it . 
He found some difficulty in moving his forearm , his feet had lost all movement , and in proportion as the wretchedness of limb and feebleness of body increased , all the majesty of his soul was displayed and spread over his brow . 
The light of the unknown world was already visible in his eyes . 
His face paled and smiled . 
Life was no longer there , it was something else . 
His breath sank , his glance grew grander . 
He was a corpse on which the wings could be felt . 
He made a sign to Cosette to draw near , then to Marius ; the last minute of the last hour had , evidently , arrived . 
He began to speak to them in a voice so feeble that it seemed to come from a distance , and one would have said that a wall now rose between them and him . 
`` Draw near , draw near , both of you . 
I love you dearly . 
Oh ! 
how good it is to die like this ! 
And thou lovest me also , my Cosette . 
I knew well that thou still felt friendly towards thy poor old man . 
How kind it was of thee to place that pillow under my loins ! 
Thou wilt weep for me a little , wilt thou not ? 
Not too much . 
I do not wish thee to have any real griefs . 
You must enjoy yourselves a great deal , my children . 
I forgot to tell you that the profit was greater still on the buckles without tongues than on all the rest . 
A gross of a dozen dozens cost ten francs and sold for sixty . 
It really was a good business . 
So there is no occasion for surprise at the six hundred thousand francs , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
It is honest money . 
You may be rich with a tranquil mind . 
Thou must have a carriage , a box at the theatres now and then , and handsome ball dresses , my Cosette , and then , thou must give good dinners to thy friends , and be very happy . 
I was writing to Cosette a while ago . 
She will find my letter . 
I bequeath to her the two candlesticks which stand on the chimney-piece . 
They are of silver , but to me they are gold , they are diamonds ; they change candles which are placed in them into wax-tapers . 
I do not know whether the person who gave them to me is pleased with me yonder on high . 
I have done what I could . 
My children , you will not forget that I am a poor man , you will have me buried in the first plot of earth that you find , under a stone to mark the spot . 
This is my wish . 
No name on the stone . 
If Cosette cares to come for a little while now and then , it will give me pleasure . 
And you too , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
I must admit that I have not always loved you . 
I ask your pardon for that . 
Now she and you form but one for me . 
I feel very grateful to you . 
I am sure that you make Cosette happy . 
If you only knew , Monsieur Pontmercy , her pretty rosy cheeks were my delight ; when I saw her in the least pale , I was sad . 
In the chest of drawers , there is a bank-bill for five hundred francs . 
I have not touched it . 
It is for the poor . 
Cosette , dost thou see thy little gown yonder on the bed ? 
dost thou recognize it ? 
That was ten years ago , however . 
How time flies ! 
We have been very happy . 
All is over . 
Do not weep , my children , I am not going very far , I shall see you from there , you will only have to look at night , and you will see me smile . 
Cosette , dost thou remember Montfermeil ? 
Thou wert in the forest , thou wert greatly terrified ; dost thou remember how I took hold of the handle of the water-bucket ? 
That was the first time that I touched thy poor , little hand . 
It was so cold ! 
Ah ! 
your hands were red then , mademoiselle , they are very white now . 
And the big doll ! 
dost thou remember ? 
Thou didst call her Catherine . 
Thou regrettedest not having taken her to the convent ! 
How thou didst make me laugh sometimes , my sweet angel ! 
When it had been raining , thou didst float bits of straw on the gutters , and watch them pass away . 
One day I gave thee a willow battledore and a shuttlecock with yellow , blue and green feathers . 
Thou hast forgotten it . 
Thou wert roguish so young ! 
Thou didst play . 
Thou didst put cherries in thy ears . 
Those are things of the past . 
The forests through which one has passed with one 's child , the trees under which one has strolled , the convents where one has concealed oneself , the games , the hearty laughs of childhood , are shadows . 
I imagined that all that belonged to me . 
