It was a terrible moment . 
The ravine was there , unexpected , yawning , directly under the horses ' feet , two fathoms deep between its double slopes ; the second file pushed the first into it , and the third pushed on the second ; the horses reared and fell backward , landed on their haunches , slid down , all four feet in the air , crushing and overwhelming the riders ; and there being no means of retreat , -- the whole column being no longer anything more than a projectile , -- the force which had been acquired to crush the English crushed the French ; the inexorable ravine could only yield when filled ; horses and riders rolled there pell-mell , grinding each other , forming but one mass of flesh in this gulf : when this trench was full of living men , the rest marched over them and passed on . 
Almost a third of Dubois 's brigade fell into that abyss . 
This began the loss of the battle . 
A local tradition , which evidently exaggerates matters , says that two thousand horses and fifteen hundred men were buried in the hollow road of Ohain . 
This figure probably comprises all the other corpses which were flung into this ravine the day after the combat . 
Let us note in passing that it was Dubois 's sorely tried brigade which , an hour previously , making a charge to one side , had captured the flag of the Lunenburg battalion . 
Napoleon , before giving the order for this charge of Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had scrutinized the ground , but had not been able to see that hollow road , which did not even form a wrinkle on the surface of the plateau . 
Warned , nevertheless , and put on the alert by the little white chapel which marks its angle of junction with the Nivelles highway , he had probably put a question as to the possibility of an obstacle , to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide had answered No . 
We might almost affirm that Napoleon 's catastrophe originated in that sign of a peasant 's head . 
Other fatalities were destined to arise . 
Was it possible that Napoleon should have won that battle ? 
We answer No . 
Why ? 
Because of Wellington ? 
Because of Blucher ? 
No . 
Because of God . 
Bonaparte victor at Waterloo ; that does not come within the law of the nineteenth century . 
Another series of facts was in preparation , in which there was no longer any room for Napoleon . 
The ill will of events had declared itself long before . 
It was time that this vast man should fall . 
The excessive weight of this man in human destiny disturbed the balance . 
This individual alone counted for more than a universal group . 
These plethoras of all human vitality concentrated in a single head ; the world mounting to the brain of one man , -- this would be mortal to civilization were it to last . 
The moment had arrived for the incorruptible and supreme equity to alter its plan . 
Probably the principles and the elements , on which the regular gravitations of the moral , as of the material , world depend , had complained . 
Smoking blood , over-filled cemeteries , mothers in tears , -- these are formidable pleaders . 
When the earth is suffering from too heavy a burden , there are mysterious groanings of the shades , to which the abyss lends an ear . 
Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been decided on . 
He embarrassed God . 
Waterloo is not a battle ; it is a change of front on the part of the Universe . 
THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN The battery was unmasked at the same moment with the ravine . 
Sixty cannons and the thirteen squares darted lightning point-blank on the cuirassiers . 
The intrepid General Delort made the military salute to the English battery . 
The whole of the flying artillery of the English had re-entered the squares at a gallop . 
The cuirassiers had not had even the time for a halt . 
The disaster of the hollow road had decimated , but not discouraged them . 
They belonged to that class of men who , when diminished in number , increase in courage . 
Wathier 's column alone had suffered in the disaster ; Delort 's column , which Ney had deflected to the left , as though he had a presentiment of an ambush , had arrived whole . 
The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares . 
At full speed , with bridles loose , swords in their teeth pistols in fist , -- such was the attack . 
There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man until the soldier is changed into a statue , and when all this flesh turns into granite . 
The English battalions , desperately assaulted , did not stir . 
Then it was terrible . 
All the faces of the English squares were attacked at once . 
A frenzied whirl enveloped them . 
That cold infantry remained impassive . 
The first rank knelt and received the cuirassiers on their bayonets , the second ranks shot them down ; behind the second rank the cannoneers charged their guns , the front of the square parted , permitted the passage of an eruption of grape-shot , and closed again . 
The cuirassiers replied by crushing them . 
Their great horses reared , strode across the ranks , leaped over the bayonets and fell , gigantic , in the midst of these four living wells . 
The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these cuirassiers ; the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares . 
Files of men disappeared , ground to dust under the horses . 
The bayonets plunged into the bellies of these centaurs ; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably never been seen anywhere else . 
The squares , wasted by this mad cavalry , closed up their ranks without flinching . 
Inexhaustible in the matter of grape-shot , they created explosions in their assailants ' midst . 
The form of this combat was monstrous . 
These squares were no longer battalions , they were craters ; those cuirassiers were no longer cavalry , they were a tempest . 
Each square was a volcano attacked by a cloud ; lava contended with lightning . 
The square on the extreme right , the most exposed of all , being in the air , was almost annihilated at the very first shock . 
lt was formed of the 75th regiment of Highlanders . 
The bagpipe-player in the centre dropped his melancholy eyes , filled with the reflections of the forests and the lakes , in profound inattention , while men were being exterminated around him , and seated on a drum , with his pibroch under his arm , played the Highland airs . 
These Scotchmen died thinking of Ben Lothian , as did the Greeks recalling Argos . 
The sword of a cuirassier , which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it , put an end to the song by killing the singer . 
The cuirassiers , relatively few in number , and still further diminished by the catastrophe of the ravine , had almost the whole English army against them , but they multiplied themselves so that each man of them was equal to ten . 
Nevertheless , some Hanoverian battalions yielded . 
Wellington perceived it , and thought of his cavalry . 
Had Napoleon at that same moment thought of his infantry , he would have won the battle . 
This forgetfulness was his great and fatal mistake . 
All at once , the cuirassiers , who had been the assailants , found themselves assailed . 
The English cavalry was at their back . 
Before them two squares , behind them Somerset ; Somerset meant fourteen hundred dragoons of the guard . 
On the right , Somerset had Dornberg with the German light-horse , and on his left , Trip with the Belgian carabineers ; the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and in front , before and in the rear , by infantry and cavalry , had to face all sides . 
What mattered it to them ? 
They were a whirlwind . 
Their valor was something indescribable . 
In addition to this , they had behind them the battery , which was still thundering . 
It was necessary that it should be so , or they could never have been wounded in the back . 
One of their cuirasses , pierced on the shoulder by a ball from a biscayan , -LSB- 9 -RSB- is in the collection of the Waterloo Museum . 
-LSB- 9 -RSB- A heavy rifled gun . 
For such Frenchmen nothing less than such Englishmen was needed . 
It was no longer a hand-to-hand conflict ; it was a shadow , a fury , a dizzy transport of souls and courage , a hurricane of lightning swords . 
In an instant the fourteen hundred dragoon guards numbered only eight hundred . 
Fuller , their lieutenant-colonel , fell dead . 
Ney rushed up with the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's light-horse . 
The plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean was captured , recaptured , captured again . 
The cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry ; or , to put it more exactly , the whole of that formidable rout collared each other without releasing the other . 
The squares still held firm . 
There were a dozen assaults . 
Ney had four horses killed under him . 
Half the cuirassiers remained on the plateau . 
This conflict lasted two hours . 
The English army was profoundly shaken . 
There is no doubt that , had they not been enfeebled in their first shock by the disaster of the hollow road the cuirassiers would have overwhelmed the centre and decided the victory . 
This extraordinary cavalry petrified Clinton , who had seen Talavera and Badajoz . 
Wellington , three-quarters vanquished , admired heroically . 
He said in an undertone , `` Sublime ! '' 
The cuirassiers annihilated seven squares out of thirteen , took or spiked sixty pieces of ordnance , and captured from the English regiments six flags , which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of the Guard bore to the Emperor , in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance . 
Wellington 's situation had grown worse . 
