His step had suddenly become firm ; artisans had offered him their arms ; he had refused with a sign of the head . 
He advanced nearly to the front rank of the column , with the movement of a man who is marching and the countenance of a man who is sleeping . 
`` What a fierce old fellow ! '' 
muttered the students . 
The rumor spread through the troop that he was a former member of the Convention , -- an old regicide . 
The mob had turned in through the Rue de la Verrerie . 
Little Gavroche marched in front with that deafening song which made of him a sort of trumpet . 
He sang : `` Voici la lune qui paratt , Quand irons-nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tou tou tou Pour Chatou . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Pour avoir bu de grand matin La rosee a meme le thym , Deux moineaux etaient en ribotte . 
Zi zi zi Pour Passy . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` Et ces deux pauvres petits loups , Comme deux grives estaient souls ; Une tigre en riait dans sa grotte . 
Don don don Pour Meudon . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . 
`` L'un jurait et l'autre sacrait . 
Quand irons nous dans la foret ? 
Demandait Charlot a Charlotte . 
Tin tin tin Pour Pantin . 
Je n'ai qu'un Dieu , qu'un roi , qu'un liard , et qu'une botte . '' 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- They directed their course towards Saint-Merry . 
-LSB- 46 -RSB- Here is the morn appearing . 
When shall we go to the forest , Charlot asked Charlotte . 
Tou , tou , tou , for Chatou , I have but one God , one King , one half-farthing , and one boot . 
And these two poor little wolves were as tipsy as sparrows from having drunk dew and thyme very early in the morning . 
And these two poor little things were as drunk as thrushes in a vineyard ; a tiger laughed at them in his cave . 
The one cursed , the other swore . 
When shall we go to the forest ? 
Charlot asked Charlotte . 
RECRUITS The band augmented every moment . 
Near the Rue des Billettes , a man of lofty stature , whose hair was turning gray , and whose bold and daring mien was remarked by Courfeyrac , Enjolras , and Combeferre , but whom none of them knew , joined them . 
Gavroche , who was occupied in singing , whistling , humming , running on ahead and pounding on the shutters of the shops with the butt of his triggerless pistol ; paid no attention to this man . 
It chanced that in the Rue de la Verrerie , they passed in front of Courfeyrac 's door . 
`` This happens just right , '' said Courfeyrac , `` I have forgotten my purse , and I have lost my hat . '' 
He quitted the mob and ran up to his quarters at full speed . 
He seized an old hat and his purse . 
He also seized a large square coffer , of the dimensions of a large valise , which was concealed under his soiled linen . 
As he descended again at a run , the portress hailed him : -- `` Monsieur de Courfeyrac ! '' 
`` What 's your name , portress ? '' 
The portress stood bewildered . 
`` Why , you know perfectly well , I 'm the concierge ; my name is Mother Veuvain . '' 
`` Well , if you call me Monsieur de Courfeyrac again , I shall call you Mother de Veuvain . 
Now speak , what 's the matter ? 
What do you want ? '' 
`` There is some one who wants to speak with you . '' 
`` Who is it ? '' 
`` I do n't know . '' 
`` Where is he ? '' 
`` In my lodge . '' 
`` The devil ! '' 
ejaculated Courfeyrac . 
`` But the person has been waiting your return for over an hour , '' said the portress . 
At the same time , a sort of pale , thin , small , freckled , and youthful artisan , clad in a tattered blouse and patched trousers of ribbed velvet , and who had rather the air of a girl accoutred as a man than of a man , emerged from the lodge and said to Courfeyrac in a voice which was not the least in the world like a woman 's voice : -- `` Monsieur Marius , if you please . '' 
`` He is not here . '' 
`` Will he return this evening ? '' 
`` I know nothing about it . '' 
And Courfeyrac added : -- `` For my part , I shall not return . '' 
The young man gazed steadily at him and said : -- `` Why not ? '' 
`` Because . '' 
`` Where are you going , then ? '' 
`` What business is that of yours ? '' 
`` Would you like to have me carry your coffer for you ? '' 
`` I am going to the barricades . '' 
`` Would you like to have me go with you ? '' 
`` If you like ! '' 
replied Courfeyrac . 
`` The street is free , the pavements belong to every one . '' 
And he made his escape at a run to join his friends . 
When he had rejoined them , he gave the coffer to one of them to carry . 
It was only a quarter of an hour after this that he saw the young man , who had actually followed them . 
A mob does not go precisely where it intends . 
We have explained that a gust of wind carries it away . 
They overshot Saint-Merry and found themselves , without precisely knowing how , in the Rue Saint-Denis . 
HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION The Parisians who nowadays on entering on the Rue Rambuteau at the end near the Halles , notice on their right , opposite the Rue Mondetour , a basket-maker 's shop having for its sign a basket in the form of Napoleon the Great with this inscription : -- NAPOLEON IS MADE WHOLLY OF WILLOW , have no suspicion of the terrible scenes which this very spot witnessed hardly thirty years ago . 
It was there that lay the Rue de la Chanvrerie , which ancient deeds spell Chanverrerie , and the celebrated public-house called Corinthe . 
The reader will remember all that has been said about the barricade effected at this point , and eclipsed , by the way , by the barricade Saint-Merry . 
It was on this famous barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , now fallen into profound obscurity , that we are about to shed a little light . 
May we be permitted to recur , for the sake of clearness in the recital , to the simple means which we have already employed in the case of Waterloo . 
Persons who wish to picture to themselves in a tolerably exact manner the constitution of the houses which stood at that epoch near the Pointe Saint-Eustache , at the northeast angle of the Halles of Paris , where to-day lies the embouchure of the Rue Rambuteau , have only to imagine an N touching the Rue Saint-Denis with its summit and the Halles with its base , and whose two vertical bars should form the Rue de la Grande-Truanderie , and the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and whose transverse bar should be formed by the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie . 
The old Rue Mondetour cut the three strokes of the N at the most crooked angles . 
So that the labyrinthine confusion of these four streets sufficed to form , on a space three fathoms square , between the Halles and the Rue Saint-Denis on the one hand , and between the Rue du Cygne and the Rue des Precheurs on the other , seven islands of houses , oddly cut up , of varying sizes , placed crosswise and hap-hazard , and barely separated , like the blocks of stone in a dock , by narrow crannies . 
We say narrow crannies , and we can give no more just idea of those dark , contracted , many-angled alleys , lined with eight-story buildings . 
These buildings were so decrepit that , in the Rue de la Chanvrerie and the Rue de la Petite-Truanderie , the fronts were shored up with beams running from one house to another . 
The street was narrow and the gutter broad , the pedestrian there walked on a pavement that was always wet , skirting little stalls resembling cellars , big posts encircled with iron hoops , excessive heaps of refuse , and gates armed with enormous , century-old gratings . 
The Rue Rambuteau has devastated all that . 
The name of Mondetour paints marvellously well the sinuosities of that whole set of streets . 
A little further on , they are found still better expressed by the Rue Pirouette , which ran into the Rue Mondetour . 
The passer-by who got entangled from the Rue Saint-Denis in the Rue de la Chanvrerie beheld it gradually close in before him as though he had entered an elongated funnel . 
At the end of this street , which was very short , he found further passage barred in the direction of the Halles by a tall row of houses , and he would have thought himself in a blind alley , had he not perceived on the right and left two dark cuts through which he could make his escape . 
This was the Rue Mondetour , which on one side ran into the Rue de Precheurs , and on the other into the Rue du Cygne and the Petite-Truanderie . 
At the bottom of this sort of cul-de-sac , at the angle of the cutting on the right , there was to be seen a house which was not so tall as the rest , and which formed a sort of cape in the street . 
It is in this house , of two stories only , that an illustrious wine-shop had been merrily installed three hundred years before . 
This tavern created a joyous noise in the very spot which old Theophilus described in the following couplet : -- La branle le squelette horrible D'un pauvre amant qui se pendit . 
-LSB- 47 -RSB- -LSB- 47 -RSB- There swings the horrible skeleton of a poor lover who hung himself . 
The situation was good , and tavern-keepers succeeded each other there , from father to son . 
In the time of Mathurin Regnier , this cabaret was called the Pot-aux-Roses , and as the rebus was then in fashion , it had for its sign-board , a post -LRB- poteau -RRB- painted rose-color . 
In the last century , the worthy Natoire , one of the fantastic masters nowadays despised by the stiff school , having got drunk many times in this wine-shop at the very table where Regnier had drunk his fill , had painted , by way of gratitude , a bunch of Corinth grapes on the pink post . 
The keeper of the cabaret , in his joy , had changed his device and had caused to be placed in gilt letters beneath the bunch these words : `` At the Bunch of Corinth Grapes '' -LRB- `` Au Raisin de Corinthe '' -RRB- . 
