the best way to adore God is to love one 's wife . 
I love thee ! 
that 's my catechism . 
He who loves is orthodox . 
The oath of Henri IV . 
places sanctity somewhere between feasting and drunkenness . 
Ventre-saint-gris ! 
I do n't belong to the religion of that oath . 
Woman is forgotten in it . 
This astonishes me on the part of Henri IV . 
My friends , long live women ! 
I am old , they say ; it 's astonishing how much I feel in the mood to be young . 
I should like to go and listen to the bagpipes in the woods . 
Children who contrive to be beautiful and contented , -- that intoxicates me . 
I would like greatly to get married , if any one would have me . 
It is impossible to imagine that God could have made us for anything but this : to idolize , to coo , to preen ourselves , to be dove-like , to be dainty , to bill and coo our loves from morn to night , to gaze at one 's image in one 's little wife , to be proud , to be triumphant , to plume oneself ; that is the aim of life . 
There , let not that displease you which we used to think in our day , when we were young folks . 
Ah ! 
vertu-bamboche ! 
what charming women there were in those days , and what pretty little faces and what lovely lasses ! 
I committed my ravages among them . 
Then love each other . 
If people did not love each other , I really do not see what use there would be in having any springtime ; and for my own part , I should pray the good God to shut up all the beautiful things that he shows us , and to take away from us and put back in his box , the flowers , the birds , and the pretty maidens . 
My children , receive an old man 's blessing . 
The evening was gay , lively and agreeable . 
The grandfather 's sovereign good humor gave the key-note to the whole feast , and each person regulated his conduct on that almost centenarian cordiality . 
They danced a little , they laughed a great deal ; it was an amiable wedding . 
Goodman Days of Yore might have been invited to it . 
However , he was present in the person of Father Gillenormand . 
There was a tumult , then silence . 
The married pair disappeared . 
A little after midnight , the Gillenormand house became a temple . 
Here we pause . 
On the threshold of wedding nights stands a smiling angel with his finger on his lips . 
The soul enters into contemplation before that sanctuary where the celebration of love takes place . 
There should be flashes of light athwart such houses . 
The joy which they contain ought to make its escape through the stones of the walls in brilliancy , and vaguely illuminate the gloom . 
It is impossible that this sacred and fatal festival should not give off a celestial radiance to the infinite . 
Love is the sublime crucible wherein the fusion of the man and the woman takes place ; the being one , the being triple , the being final , the human trinity proceeds from it . 
This birth of two souls into one , ought to be an emotion for the gloom . 
The lover is the priest ; the ravished virgin is terrified . 
Something of that joy ascends to God . 
Where true marriage is , that is to say , where there is love , the ideal enters in . 
A nuptial bed makes a nook of dawn amid the shadows . 
If it were given to the eye of the flesh to scan the formidable and charming visions of the upper life , it is probable that we should behold the forms of night , the winged unknowns , the blue passers of the invisible , bend down , a throng of sombre heads , around the luminous house , satisfied , showering benedictions , pointing out to each other the virgin wife gently alarmed , sweetly terrified , and bearing the reflection of human bliss upon their divine countenances . 
If at that supreme hour , the wedded pair , dazzled with voluptuousness and believing themselves alone , were to listen , they would hear in their chamber a confused rustling of wings . 
Perfect happiness implies a mutual understanding with the angels . 
That dark little chamber has all heaven for its ceiling . 
When two mouths , rendered sacred by love , approach to create , it is impossible that there should not be , above that ineffable kiss , a quivering throughout the immense mystery of stars . 
These felicities are the true ones . 
There is no joy outside of these joys . 
Love is the only ecstasy . 
All the rest weeps . 
To love , or to have loved , -- this suffices . 
Demand nothing more . 
There is no other pearl to be found in the shadowy folds of life . 
To love is a fulfilment . 
THE INSEPARABLE What had become of Jean Valjean ? 
Immediately after having laughed , at Cosette 's graceful command , when no one was paying any heed to him , Jean Valjean had risen and had gained the antechamber unperceived . 
This was the very room which , eight months before , he had entered black with mud , with blood and powder , bringing back the grandson to the grandfather . 
The old wainscoting was garlanded with foliage and flowers ; the musicians were seated on the sofa on which they had laid Marius down . 
Basque , in a black coat , knee-breeches , white stockings and white gloves , was arranging roses round all of the dishes that were to be served . 
Jean Valjean pointed to his arm in its sling , charged Basque to explain his absence , and went away . 
The long windows of the dining-room opened on the street . 
Jean Valjean stood for several minutes , erect and motionless in the darkness , beneath those radiant windows . 
He listened . 
The confused sounds of the banquet reached his ear . 
He heard the loud , commanding tones of the grandfather , the violins , the clatter of the plates , the bursts of laughter , and through all that merry uproar , he distinguished Cosette 's sweet and joyous voice . 
He quitted the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , and returned to the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
In order to return thither , he took the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , and the Blancs-Manteaux ; it was a little longer , but it was the road through which , for the last three months , he had become accustomed to pass every day on his way from the Rue de l'Homme Arme to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , in order to avoid the obstructions and the mud in the Rue Vielle-du-Temple . 
This road , through which Cosette had passed , excluded for him all possibility of any other itinerary . 
Jean Valjean entered his lodgings . 
He lighted his candle and mounted the stairs . 
The apartment was empty . 
Even Toussaint was no longer there . 
Jean Valjean 's step made more noise than usual in the chambers . 
All the cupboards stood open . 
He penetrated to Cosette 's bedroom . 
There were no sheets on the bed . 
The pillow , covered with ticking , and without a case or lace , was laid on the blankets folded up on the foot of the mattress , whose covering was visible , and on which no one was ever to sleep again . 
All the little feminine objects which Cosette was attached to had been carried away ; nothing remained except the heavy furniture and the four walls . 
Toussaint 's bed was despoiled in like manner . 
One bed only was made up , and seemed to be waiting some one , and this was Jean Valjean 's bed . 
Jean Valjean looked at the walls , closed some of the cupboard doors , and went and came from one room to another . 
Then he sought his own chamber once more , and set his candle on a table . 
He had disengaged his arm from the sling , and he used his right hand as though it did not hurt him . 
He approached his bed , and his eyes rested , was it by chance ? 
was it intentionally ? 
on the inseparable of which Cosette had been jealous , on the little portmanteau which never left him . 
On his arrival in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , on the 4th of June , he had deposited it on a round table near the head of his bed . 
He went to this table with a sort of vivacity , took a key from his pocket , and opened the valise . 
From it he slowly drew forth the garments in which , ten years before , Cosette had quitted Montfermeil ; first the little gown , then the black fichu , then the stout , coarse child 's shoes which Cosette might almost have worn still , so tiny were her feet , then the fustian bodice , which was very thick , then the knitted petticoat , next the apron with pockets , then the woollen stockings . 
These stockings , which still preserved the graceful form of a tiny leg , were no longer than Jean Valjean 's hand . 
All this was black of hue . 
It was he who had brought those garments to Montfermeil for her . 
As he removed them from the valise , he laid them on the bed . 
He fell to thinking . 
He called up memories . 
It was in winter , in a very cold month of December , she was shivering , half-naked , in rags , her poor little feet were all red in their wooden shoes . 
He , Jean Valjean , had made her abandon those rags to clothe herself in these mourning habiliments . 
