As for us , all our glorification goes to the English soldier , to the English army , to the English people . 
If trophy there be , it is to England that the trophy is due . 
The column of Waterloo would be more just , if , instead of the figure of a man , it bore on high the statue of a people . 
But this great England will be angry at what we are saying here . 
She still cherishes , after her own 1688 and our 1789 , the feudal illusion . 
She believes in heredity and hierarchy . 
This people , surpassed by none in power and glory , regards itself as a nation , and not as a people . 
And as a people , it willingly subordinates itself and takes a lord for its head . 
As a workman , it allows itself to be disdained ; as a soldier , it allows itself to be flogged . 
It will be remembered , that at the battle of Inkermann a sergeant who had , it appears , saved the army , could not be mentioned by Lord Paglan , as the English military hierarchy does not permit any hero below the grade of an officer to be mentioned in the reports . 
That which we admire above all , in an encounter of the nature of Waterloo , is the marvellous cleverness of chance . 
A nocturnal rain , the wall of Hougomont , the hollow road of Ohain , Grouchy deaf to the cannon , Napoleon 's guide deceiving him , Bulow 's guide enlightening him , -- the whole of this cataclysm is wonderfully conducted . 
On the whole , let us say it plainly , it was more of a massacre than of a battle at Waterloo . 
Of all pitched battles , Waterloo is the one which has the smallest front for such a number of combatants . 
Napoleon three-quarters of a league ; Wellington , half a league ; seventy-two thousand combatants on each side . 
From this denseness the carnage arose . 
The following calculation has been made , and the following proportion established : Loss of men : at Austerlitz , French , fourteen per cent ; Russians , thirty per cent ; Austrians , forty-four per cent . 
At Wagram , French , thirteen per cent ; Austrians , fourteen . 
At the Moskowa , French , thirty-seven per cent ; Russians , forty-four . 
At Bautzen , French , thirteen per cent ; Russians and Prussians , fourteen . 
At Waterloo , French , fifty-six per cent ; the Allies , thirty-one . 
Total for Waterloo , forty-one per cent ; one hundred and forty-four thousand combatants ; sixty thousand dead . 
To-day the field of Waterloo has the calm which belongs to the earth , the impassive support of man , and it resembles all plains . 
At night , moreover , a sort of visionary mist arises from it ; and if a traveller strolls there , if he listens , if he watches , if he dreams like Virgil in the fatal plains of Philippi , the hallucination of the catastrophe takes possession of him . 
The frightful 18th of June lives again ; the false monumental hillock disappears , the lion vanishes in air , the battle-field resumes its reality , lines of infantry undulate over the plain , furious gallops traverse the horizon ; the frightened dreamer beholds the flash of sabres , the gleam of bayonets , the flare of bombs , the tremendous interchange of thunders ; he hears , as it were , the death rattle in the depths of a tomb , the vague clamor of the battle phantom ; those shadows are grenadiers , those lights are cuirassiers ; that skeleton Napoleon , that other skeleton is Wellington ; all this no longer exists , and yet it clashes together and combats still ; and the ravines are empurpled , and the trees quiver , and there is fury even in the clouds and in the shadows ; all those terrible heights , Hougomont , Mont-Saint-Jean , Frischemont , Papelotte , Plancenoit , appear confusedly crowned with whirlwinds of spectres engaged in exterminating each other . 
IS WATERLOO TO BE CONSIDERED GOOD ? 
There exists a very respectable liberal school which does not hate Waterloo . 
We do not belong to it . 
To us , Waterloo is but the stupefied date of liberty . 
That such an eagle should emerge from such an egg is certainly unexpected . 
If one places one 's self at the culminating point of view of the question , Waterloo is intentionally a counter-revolutionary victory . 
It is Europe against France ; it is Petersburg , Berlin , and Vienna against Paris ; it is the statu quo against the initiative ; it is the 14th of July , 1789 , attacked through the 20th of March , 1815 ; it is the monarchies clearing the decks in opposition to the indomitable French rioting . 
The final extinction of that vast people which had been in eruption for twenty-six years -- such was the dream . 
The solidarity of the Brunswicks , the Nassaus , the Romanoffs , the Hohenzollerns , the Hapsburgs with the Bourbons . 
Waterloo bears divine right on its crupper . 
It is true , that the Empire having been despotic , the kingdom by the natural reaction of things , was forced to be liberal , and that a constitutional order was the unwilling result of Waterloo , to the great regret of the conquerors . 
It is because revolution can not be really conquered , and that being providential and absolutely fatal , it is always cropping up afresh : before Waterloo , in Bonaparte overthrowing the old thrones ; after Waterloo , in Louis XVIII . 
granting and conforming to the charter . 
Bonaparte places a postilion on the throne of Naples , and a sergeant on the throne of Sweden , employing inequality to demonstrate equality ; Louis XVIII . 
at Saint-Ouen countersigns the declaration of the rights of man . 
If you wish to gain an idea of what revolution is , call it Progress ; and if you wish to acquire an idea of the nature of progress , call it To-morrow . 
To-morrow fulfils its work irresistibly , and it is already fulfilling it to-day . 
It always reaches its goal strangely . 
It employs Wellington to make of Foy , who was only a soldier , an orator . 
Foy falls at Hougomont and rises again in the tribune . 
Thus does progress proceed . 
There is no such thing as a bad tool for that workman . 
It does not become disconcerted , but adjusts to its divine work the man who has bestridden the Alps , and the good old tottering invalid of Father Elysee . 
It makes use of the gouty man as well as of the conqueror ; of the conqueror without , of the gouty man within . 
Waterloo , by cutting short the demolition of European thrones by the sword , had no other effect than to cause the revolutionary work to be continued in another direction . 
The slashers have finished ; it was the turn of the thinkers . 
The century that Waterloo was intended to arrest has pursued its march . 
That sinister victory was vanquished by liberty . 
In short , and incontestably , that which triumphed at Waterloo ; that which smiled in Wellington 's rear ; that which brought him all the marshals ' staffs of Europe , including , it is said , the staff of a marshal of France ; that which joyously trundled the barrows full of bones to erect the knoll of the lion ; that which triumphantly inscribed on that pedestal the date `` June 18 , 1815 '' ; that which encouraged Blucher , as he put the flying army to the sword ; that which , from the heights of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , hovered over France as over its prey , was the counter-revolution . 
It was the counter-revolution which murmured that infamous word `` dismemberment . '' 
On arriving in Paris , it beheld the crater close at hand ; it felt those ashes which scorched its feet , and it changed its mind ; it returned to the stammer of a charter . 
Let us behold in Waterloo only that which is in Waterloo . 
Of intentional liberty there is none . 
The counter-revolution was involuntarily liberal , in the same manner as , by a corresponding phenomenon , Napoleon was involuntarily revolutionary . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the mounted Robespierre was hurled from his saddle . 
A RECRUDESCENCE OF DIVINE RIGHT End of the dictatorship . 
A whole European system crumbled away . 
The Empire sank into a gloom which resembled that of the Roman world as it expired . 
Again we behold the abyss , as in the days of the barbarians ; only the barbarism of 1815 , which must be called by its pet name of the counter-revolution , was not long breathed , soon fell to panting , and halted short . 
The Empire was bewept , -- let us acknowledge the fact , -- and bewept by heroic eyes . 
If glory lies in the sword converted into a sceptre , the Empire had been glory in person . 
It had diffused over the earth all the light which tyranny can give a sombre light . 
We will say more ; an obscure light . 
Compared to the true daylight , it is night . 
This disappearance of night produces the effect of an eclipse . 
Louis XVIII . 
re-entered Paris . 
The circling dances of the 8th of July effaced the enthusiasms of the 20th of March . 
The Corsican became the antithesis of the Bearnese . 
The flag on the dome of the Tuileries was white . 
The exile reigned . 
Hartwell 's pine table took its place in front of the fleur-de-lys-strewn throne of Louis XIV . 
Bouvines and Fontenoy were mentioned as though they had taken place on the preceding day , Austerlitz having become antiquated . 
The altar and the throne fraternized majestically . 
One of the most undisputed forms of the health of society in the nineteenth century was established over France , and over the continent . 
Europe adopted the white cockade . 
Trestaillon was celebrated . 
The device non pluribus impar re-appeared on the stone rays representing a sun upon the front of the barracks on the Quai d'Orsay . 
Where there had been an Imperial Guard , there was now a red house . 
The Arc du Carrousel , all laden with badly borne victories , thrown out of its element among these novelties , a little ashamed , it may be , of Marengo and Arcola , extricated itself from its predicament with the statue of the Duc d'Angouleme . 
The cemetery of the Madeleine , a terrible pauper 's grave in 1793 , was covered with jasper and marble , since the bones of Louis XVI . 
and Marie Antoinette lay in that dust . 
In the moat of Vincennes a sepulchral shaft sprang from the earth , recalling the fact that the Duc d'Enghien had perished in the very month when Napoleon was crowned . 
Pope Pius VII. , who had performed the coronation very near this death , tranquilly bestowed his blessing on the fall as he had bestowed it on the elevation . 
At Schoenbrunn there was a little shadow , aged four , whom it was seditious to call the King of Rome . 
And these things took place , and the kings resumed their thrones , and the master of Europe was put in a cage , and the old regime became the new regime , and all the shadows and all the light of the earth changed place , because , on the afternoon of a certain summer 's day , a shepherd said to a Prussian in the forest , `` Go this way , and not that ! '' 
This 1815 was a sort of lugubrious April . 
Ancient unhealthy and poisonous realities were covered with new appearances . 
A lie wedded 1789 ; the right divine was masked under a charter ; fictions became constitutional ; prejudices , superstitions and mental reservations , with Article 14 in the heart , were varnished over with liberalism . 
It was the serpent 's change of skin . 
Man had been rendered both greater and smaller by Napoleon . 
Under this reign of splendid matter , the ideal had received the strange name of ideology ! 
It is a grave imprudence in a great man to turn the future into derision . 
The populace , however , that food for cannon which is so fond of the cannoneer , sought him with its glance . 
Where is he ? 
