-- THE EXCELLENCE OF MISFORTUNE MARIUS INDIGENT Life became hard for Marius . 
It was nothing to eat his clothes and his watch . 
He ate of that terrible , inexpressible thing that is called de la vache enrage ; that is to say , he endured great hardships and privations . 
A terrible thing it is , containing days without bread , nights without sleep , evenings without a candle , a hearth without a fire , weeks without work , a future without hope , a coat out at the elbows , an old hat which evokes the laughter of young girls , a door which one finds locked on one at night because one 's rent is not paid , the insolence of the porter and the cook-shop man , the sneers of neighbors , humiliations , dignity trampled on , work of whatever nature accepted , disgusts , bitterness , despondency . 
Marius learned how all this is eaten , and how such are often the only things which one has to devour . 
At that moment of his existence when a man needs his pride , because he needs love , he felt that he was jeered at because he was badly dressed , and ridiculous because he was poor . 
At the age when youth swells the heart with imperial pride , he dropped his eyes more than once on his dilapidated boots , and he knew the unjust shame and the poignant blushes of wretchedness . 
Admirable and terrible trial from which the feeble emerge base , from which the strong emerge sublime . 
A crucible into which destiny casts a man , whenever it desires a scoundrel or a demi-god . 
For many great deeds are performed in petty combats . 
There are instances of bravery ignored and obstinate , which defend themselves step by step in that fatal onslaught of necessities and turpitudes . 
Noble and mysterious triumphs which no eye beholds , which are requited with no renown , which are saluted with no trumpet blast . 
Life , misfortune , isolation , abandonment , poverty , are the fields of battle which have their heroes ; obscure heroes , who are , sometimes , grander than the heroes who win renown . 
Firm and rare natures are thus created ; misery , almost always a step-mother , is sometimes a mother ; destitution gives birth to might of soul and spirit ; distress is the nurse of pride ; unhappiness is a good milk for the magnanimous . 
There came a moment in Marius ' life , when he swept his own landing , when he bought his sou 's worth of Brie cheese at the fruiterer 's , when he waited until twilight had fallen to slip into the baker 's and purchase a loaf , which he carried off furtively to his attic as though he had stolen it . 
Sometimes there could be seen gliding into the butcher 's shop on the corner , in the midst of the bantering cooks who elbowed him , an awkward young man , carrying big books under his arm , who had a timid yet angry air , who , on entering , removed his hat from a brow whereon stood drops of perspiration , made a profound bow to the butcher 's astonished wife , asked for a mutton cutlet , paid six or seven sous for it , wrapped it up in a paper , put it under his arm , between two books , and went away . 
It was Marius . 
On this cutlet , which he cooked for himself , he lived for three days . 
On the first day he ate the meat , on the second he ate the fat , on the third he gnawed the bone . 
Aunt Gillenormand made repeated attempts , and sent him the sixty pistoles several times . 
Marius returned them on every occasion , saying that he needed nothing . 
He was still in mourning for his father when the revolution which we have just described was effected within him . 
From that time forth , he had not put off his black garments . 
But his garments were quitting him . 
The day came when he had no longer a coat . 
The trousers would go next . 
What was to be done ? 
Courfeyrac , to whom he had , on his side , done some good turns , gave him an old coat . 
For thirty sous , Marius got it turned by some porter or other , and it was a new coat . 
But this coat was green . 
Then Marius ceased to go out until after nightfall . 
This made his coat black . 
As he wished always to appear in mourning , he clothed himself with the night . 
In spite of all this , he got admitted to practice as a lawyer . 
He was supposed to live in Courfeyrac 's room , which was decent , and where a certain number of law-books backed up and completed by several dilapidated volumes of romance , passed as the library required by the regulations . 
He had his letters addressed to Courfeyrac 's quarters . 
When Marius became a lawyer , he informed his grandfather of the fact in a letter which was cold but full of submission and respect . 
M. Gillenormand trembled as he took the letter , read it , tore it in four pieces , and threw it into the waste-basket . 
Two or three days later , Mademoiselle Gillenormand heard her father , who was alone in his room , talking aloud to himself . 
He always did this whenever he was greatly agitated . 
She listened , and the old man was saying : `` If you were not a fool , you would know that one can not be a baron and a lawyer at the same time . '' 
MARIUS POOR It is the same with wretchedness as with everything else . 
It ends by becoming bearable . 
It finally assumes a form , and adjusts itself . 
One vegetates , that is to say , one develops in a certain meagre fashion , which is , however , sufficient for life . 
This is the mode in which the existence of Marius Pontmercy was arranged : He had passed the worst straits ; the narrow pass was opening out a little in front of him . 
By dint of toil , perseverance , courage , and will , he had managed to draw from his work about seven hundred francs a year . 
He had learned German and English ; thanks to Courfeyrac , who had put him in communication with his friend the publisher , Marius filled the modest post of utility man in the literature of the publishing house . 
He drew up prospectuses , translated newspapers , annotated editions , compiled biographies , etc. ; net product , year in and year out , seven hundred francs . 
He lived on it . 
How ? 
Not so badly . 
We will explain . 
Marius occupied in the Gorbeau house , for an annual sum of thirty francs , a den minus a fireplace , called a cabinet , which contained only the most indispensable articles of furniture . 
This furniture belonged to him . 
He gave three francs a month to the old principal tenant to come and sweep his hole , and to bring him a little hot water every morning , a fresh egg , and a penny roll . 
He breakfasted on this egg and roll . 
His breakfast varied in cost from two to four sous , according as eggs were dear or cheap . 
At six o'clock in the evening he descended the Rue Saint-Jacques to dine at Rousseau 's , opposite Basset 's , the stamp-dealer 's , on the corner of the Rue des Mathurins . 
He ate no soup . 
He took a six-sou plate of meat , a half-portion of vegetables for three sous , and a three-sou dessert . 
For three sous he got as much bread as he wished . 
As for wine , he drank water . 
When he paid at the desk where Madam Rousseau , at that period still plump and rosy majestically presided , he gave a sou to the waiter , and Madam Rousseau gave him a smile . 
Then he went away . 
For sixteen sous he had a smile and a dinner . 
This Restaurant Rousseau , where so few bottles and so many water carafes were emptied , was a calming potion rather than a restaurant . 
It no longer exists . 
The proprietor had a fine nickname : he was called Rousseau the Aquatic . 
Thus , breakfast four sous , dinner sixteen sous ; his food cost him twenty sous a day ; which made three hundred and sixty-five francs a year . 
Add the thirty francs for rent , and the thirty-six francs to the old woman , plus a few trifling expenses ; for four hundred and fifty francs , Marius was fed , lodged , and waited on . 
His clothing cost him a hundred francs , his linen fifty francs , his washing fifty francs ; the whole did not exceed six hundred and fifty francs . 
He was rich . 
He sometimes lent ten francs to a friend . 
Courfeyrac had once been able to borrow sixty francs of him . 
As far as fire was concerned , as Marius had no fireplace , he had `` simplified matters . '' 
Marius always had two complete suits of clothes , the one old , `` for every day '' ; the other , brand new for special occasions . 
Both were black . 
He had but three shirts , one on his person , the second in the commode , and the third in the washerwoman 's hands . 
He renewed them as they wore out . 
They were always ragged , which caused him to button his coat to the chin . 
It had required years for Marius to attain to this flourishing condition . 
Hard years ; difficult , some of them , to traverse , others to climb . 
Marius had not failed for a single day . 
He had endured everything in the way of destitution ; he had done everything except contract debts . 
He did himself the justice to say that he had never owed any one a sou . 
A debt was , to him , the beginning of slavery . 
He even said to himself , that a creditor is worse than a master ; for the master possesses only your person , a creditor possesses your dignity and can administer to it a box on the ear . 
Rather than borrow , he went without food . 
He had passed many a day fasting . 
Feeling that all extremes meet , and that , if one is not on one 's guard , lowered fortunes may lead to baseness of soul , he kept a jealous watch on his pride . 
Such and such a formality or action , which , in any other situation would have appeared merely a deference to him , now seemed insipidity , and he nerved himself against it . 
His face wore a sort of severe flush . 
He was timid even to rudeness . 
During all these trials he had felt himself encouraged and even uplifted , at times , by a secret force that he possessed within himself . 
The soul aids the body , and at certain moments , raises it . 
It is the only bird which bears up its own cage . 
Besides his father 's name , another name was graven in Marius ' heart , the name of Thenardier . 
Marius , with his grave and enthusiastic nature , surrounded with a sort of aureole the man to whom , in his thoughts , he owed his father 's life , -- that intrepid sergeant who had saved the colonel amid the bullets and the cannon-balls of Waterloo . 
He never separated the memory of this man from the memory of his father , and he associated them in his veneration . 
