`` Success . '' 
Enjolras shook his head and replied : `` Another quarter of an hour of this success , and there will not be any cartridges left in the barricade . '' 
It appears that Gavroche overheard this remark . 
GAVROCHE OUTSIDE Courfeyrac suddenly caught sight of some one at the base of the barricade , outside in the street , amid the bullets . 
Gavroche had taken a bottle basket from the wine-shop , had made his way out through the cut , and was quietly engaged in emptying the full cartridge-boxes of the National Guardsmen who had been killed on the slope of the redoubt , into his basket . 
`` What are you doing there ? '' 
asked Courfeyrac . 
Gavroche raised his face : -- `` I 'm filling my basket , citizen . '' 
`` Do n't you see the grape-shot ? '' 
Gavroche replied : `` Well , it is raining . 
What then ? '' 
Courfeyrac shouted : -- `` Come in ! '' 
`` Instanter , '' said Gavroche . 
And with a single bound he plunged into the street . 
It will be remembered that Fannicot 's company had left behind it a trail of bodies . 
Twenty corpses lay scattered here and there on the pavement , through the whole length of the street . 
Twenty cartouches for Gavroche meant a provision of cartridges for the barricade . 
The smoke in the street was like a fog . 
Whoever has beheld a cloud which has fallen into a mountain gorge between two peaked escarpments can imagine this smoke rendered denser and thicker by two gloomy rows of lofty houses . 
It rose gradually and was incessantly renewed ; hence a twilight which made even the broad daylight turn pale . 
The combatants could hardly see each other from one end of the street to the other , short as it was . 
This obscurity , which had probably been desired and calculated on by the commanders who were to direct the assault on the barricade , was useful to Gavroche . 
Beneath the folds of this veil of smoke , and thanks to his small size , he could advance tolerably far into the street without being seen . 
He rifled the first seven or eight cartridge-boxes without much danger . 
He crawled flat on his belly , galloped on all fours , took his basket in his teeth , twisted , glided , undulated , wound from one dead body to another , and emptied the cartridge-box or cartouche as a monkey opens a nut . 
They did not dare to shout to him to return from the barricade , which was quite near , for fear of attracting attention to him . 
On one body , that of a corporal , he found a powder-flask . 
`` For thirst , '' said he , putting it in his pocket . 
By dint of advancing , he reached a point where the fog of the fusillade became transparent . 
So that the sharpshooters of the line ranged on the outlook behind their paving-stone dike and the sharpshooters of the banlieue massed at the corner of the street suddenly pointed out to each other something moving through the smoke . 
At the moment when Gavroche was relieving a sergeant , who was lying near a stone door-post , of his cartridges , a bullet struck the body . 
`` Fichtre ! '' 
ejaculated Gavroche . 
`` They are killing my dead men for me . '' 
A second bullet struck a spark from the pavement beside him . 
-- A third overturned his basket . 
Gavroche looked and saw that this came from the men of the banlieue . 
He sprang to his feet , stood erect , with his hair flying in the wind , his hands on his hips , his eyes fixed on the National Guardsmen who were firing , and sang : `` On est laid a Nanterre , `` Men are ugly at Nanterre , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Et bete a Palaiseau , And dull at Palaiseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Then he picked up his basket , replaced the cartridges which had fallen from it , without missing a single one , and , advancing towards the fusillade , set about plundering another cartridge-box . 
There a fourth bullet missed him , again . 
Gavroche sang : `` Je ne suis pas notaire , `` I am not a notary , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Je suis un petit oiseau , I 'm a little bird , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
A fifth bullet only succeeded in drawing from him a third couplet . 
`` Joie est mon caractere , `` Joy is my character , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Misere est mon trousseau , Misery is my trousseau , C'est la faute a Rousseau . '' 
'T is the fault of Rousseau . '' 
Thus it went on for some time . 
It was a charming and terrible sight . 
Gavroche , though shot at , was teasing the fusillade . 
He had the air of being greatly diverted . 
It was the sparrow pecking at the sportsmen . 
To each discharge he retorted with a couplet . 
They aimed at him constantly , and always missed him . 
The National Guardsmen and the soldiers laughed as they took aim at him . 
He lay down , sprang to his feet , hid in the corner of a doorway , then made a bound , disappeared , re-appeared , scampered away , returned , replied to the grape-shot with his thumb at his nose , and , all the while , went on pillaging the cartouches , emptying the cartridge-boxes , and filling his basket . 
The insurgents , panting with anxiety , followed him with their eyes . 
The barricade trembled ; he sang . 
He was not a child , he was not a man ; he was a strange gamin-fairy . 
He might have been called the invulnerable dwarf of the fray . 
The bullets flew after him , he was more nimble than they . 
He played a fearful game of hide and seek with death ; every time that the flat-nosed face of the spectre approached , the urchin administered to it a fillip . 
One bullet , however , better aimed or more treacherous than the rest , finally struck the will-o ' - the-wisp of a child . 
Gavroche was seen to stagger , then he sank to the earth . 
The whole barricade gave vent to a cry ; but there was something of Antaeus in that pygmy ; for the gamin to touch the pavement is the same as for the giant to touch the earth ; Gavroche had fallen only to rise again ; he remained in a sitting posture , a long thread of blood streaked his face , he raised both arms in the air , glanced in the direction whence the shot had come , and began to sing : `` Je suis tombe par terre , `` I have fallen to the earth , C'est la faute a Voltaire ; 'T is the fault of Voltaire ; Le nez dans le ruisseau , With my nose in the gutter , C'est la faute a ... '' 'T is the fault of ... '' He did not finish . 
A second bullet from the same marksman stopped him short . 
This time he fell face downward on the pavement , and moved no more . 
This grand little soul had taken its flight . 
HOW FROM A BROTHER ONE BECOMES A FATHER At that same moment , in the garden of the Luxembourg , -- for the gaze of the drama must be everywhere present , -- two children were holding each other by the hand . 
One might have been seven years old , the other five . 
The rain having soaked them , they were walking along the paths on the sunny side ; the elder was leading the younger ; they were pale and ragged ; they had the air of wild birds . 
The smaller of them said : `` I am very hungry . '' 
The elder , who was already somewhat of a protector , was leading his brother with his left hand and in his right he carried a small stick . 
They were alone in the garden . 
The garden was deserted , the gates had been closed by order of the police , on account of the insurrection . 
The troops who had been bivouacking there had departed for the exigencies of combat . 
How did those children come there ? 
Perhaps they had escaped from some guard-house which stood ajar ; perhaps there was in the vicinity , at the Barriere d'Enfer ; or on the Esplanade de l'Observatoire , or in the neighboring carrefour , dominated by the pediment on which could be read : Invenerunt parvulum pannis involutum , some mountebank 's booth from which they had fled ; perhaps they had , on the preceding evening , escaped the eye of the inspectors of the garden at the hour of closing , and had passed the night in some one of those sentry-boxes where people read the papers ? 
The fact is , they were stray lambs and they seemed free . 
To be astray and to seem free is to be lost . 
These poor little creatures were , in fact , lost . 
These two children were the same over whom Gavroche had been put to some trouble , as the reader will recollect . 
Children of the Thenardiers , leased out to Magnon , attributed to M. Gillenormand , and now leaves fallen from all these rootless branches , and swept over the ground by the wind . 
Their clothing , which had been clean in Magnon 's day , and which had served her as a prospectus with M. Gillenormand , had been converted into rags . 
Henceforth these beings belonged to the statistics as `` Abandoned children , '' whom the police take note of , collect , mislay and find again on the pavements of Paris . 
It required the disturbance of a day like that to account for these miserable little creatures being in that garden . 
If the superintendents had caught sight of them , they would have driven such rags forth . 
Poor little things do not enter public gardens ; still , people should reflect that , as children , they have a right to flowers . 
These children were there , thanks to the locked gates . 
They were there contrary to the regulations . 
They had slipped into the garden and there they remained . 
Closed gates do not dismiss the inspectors , oversight is supposed to continue , but it grows slack and reposes ; and the inspectors , moved by the public anxiety and more occupied with the outside than the inside , no longer glanced into the garden , and had not seen the two delinquents . 
It had rained the night before , and even a little in the morning . 
But in June , showers do not count for much . 
An hour after a storm , it can hardly be seen that the beautiful blonde day has wept . 
The earth , in summer , is as quickly dried as the cheek of a child . 
At that period of the solstice , the light of full noonday is , so to speak , poignant . 
It takes everything . 
It applies itself to the earth , and superposes itself with a sort of suction . 
One would say that the sun was thirsty . 
A shower is but a glass of water ; a rainstorm is instantly drunk up . 
