The situation was alarming . 
For an instant , for two or three perhaps , this bit of wall was a shelter , but how was he to escape from this massacre ? 
He recalled the anguish which he had suffered in the Rue Polonceau eight years before , and in what manner he had contrived to make his escape ; it was difficult then , to-day it was impossible . 
He had before him that deaf and implacable house , six stories in height , which appeared to be inhabited only by a dead man leaning out of his window ; he had on his right the rather low barricade , which shut off the Rue de la Petite Truanderie ; to pass this obstacle seemed easy , but beyond the crest of the barrier a line of bayonets was visible . 
The troops of the line were posted on the watch behind that barricade . 
It was evident , that to pass the barricade was to go in quest of the fire of the platoon , and that any head which should run the risk of lifting itself above the top of that wall of stones would serve as a target for sixty shots . 
On his left he had the field of battle . 
Death lurked round the corner of that wall . 
What was to be done ? 
Only a bird could have extricated itself from this predicament . 
And it was necessary to decide on the instant , to devise some expedient , to come to some decision . 
Fighting was going on a few paces away ; fortunately , all were raging around a single point , the door of the wine-shop ; but if it should occur to one soldier , to one single soldier , to turn the corner of the house , or to attack him on the flank , all was over . 
Jean Valjean gazed at the house facing him , he gazed at the barricade at one side of him , then he looked at the ground , with the violence of the last extremity , bewildered , and as though he would have liked to pierce a hole there with his eyes . 
By dint of staring , something vaguely striking in such an agony began to assume form and outline at his feet , as though it had been a power of glance which made the thing desired unfold . 
A few paces distant he perceived , at the base of the small barrier so pitilessly guarded and watched on the exterior , beneath a disordered mass of paving-stones which partly concealed it , an iron grating , placed flat and on a level with the soil . 
This grating , made of stout , transverse bars , was about two feet square . 
The frame of paving-stones which supported it had been torn up , and it was , as it were , unfastened . 
Through the bars a view could be had of a dark aperture , something like the flue of a chimney , or the pipe of a cistern . 
Jean Valjean darted forward . 
His old art of escape rose to his brain like an illumination . 
To thrust aside the stones , to raise the grating , to lift Marius , who was as inert as a dead body , upon his shoulders , to descend , with this burden on his loins , and with the aid of his elbows and knees into that sort of well , fortunately not very deep , to let the heavy trap , upon which the loosened stones rolled down afresh , fall into its place behind him , to gain his footing on a flagged surface three metres below the surface , -- all this was executed like that which one does in dreams , with the strength of a giant and the rapidity of an eagle ; this took only a few minutes . 
Jean Valjean found himself with Marius , who was still unconscious , in a sort of long , subterranean corridor . 
There reigned profound peace , absolute silence , night . 
The impression which he had formerly experienced when falling from the wall into the convent recurred to him . 
Only , what he was carrying to-day was not Cosette ; it was Marius . 
He could barely hear the formidable tumult in the wine-shop , taken by assault , like a vague murmur overhead . 
THE LAND IMPOVERISHED BY THE SEA Paris casts twenty-five millions yearly into the water . 
And this without metaphor . 
How , and in what manner ? 
Day and night . 
With what object ? 
With no object . 
With what intention ? 
With no intention . 
Why ? 
For no reason . 
By means of what organ ? 
By means of its intestine . 
What is its intestine ? 
The sewer . 
Twenty-five millions is the most moderate approximative figure which the valuations of special science have set upon it . 
Science , after having long groped about , now knows that the most fecundating and the most efficacious of fertilizers is human manure . 
The Chinese , let us confess it to our shame , knew it before us . 
Not a Chinese peasant -- it is Eckberg who says this , -- goes to town without bringing back with him , at the two extremities of his bamboo pole , two full buckets of what we designate as filth . 
Thanks to human dung , the earth in China is still as young as in the days of Abraham . 
Chinese wheat yields a hundred fold of the seed . 
There is no guano comparable in fertility with the detritus of a capital . 
A great city is the most mighty of dung-makers . 
Certain success would attend the experiment of employing the city to manure the plain . 
If our gold is manure , our manure , on the other hand , is gold . 
What is done with this golden manure ? 
It is swept into the abyss . 
Fleets of vessels are despatched , at great expense , to collect the dung of petrels and penguins at the South Pole , and the incalculable element of opulence which we have on hand , we send to the sea . 
All the human and animal manure which the world wastes , restored to the land instead of being cast into the water , would suffice to nourish the world . 
Those heaps of filth at the gate-posts , those tumbrils of mud which jolt through the street by night , those terrible casks of the street department , those fetid drippings of subterranean mire , which the pavements hide from you , -- do you know what they are ? 
They are the meadow in flower , the green grass , wild thyme , thyme and sage , they are game , they are cattle , they are the satisfied bellows of great oxen in the evening , they are perfumed hay , they are golden wheat , they are the bread on your table , they are the warm blood in your veins , they are health , they are joy , they are life . 
This is the will of that mysterious creation which is transformation on earth and transfiguration in heaven . 
Restore this to the great crucible ; your abundance will flow forth from it . 
The nutrition of the plains furnishes the nourishment of men . 
You have it in your power to lose this wealth , and to consider me ridiculous to boot . 
This will form the master-piece of your ignorance . 
Statisticians have calculated that France alone makes a deposit of half a milliard every year , in the Atlantic , through the mouths of her rivers . 
Note this : with five hundred millions we could pay one quarter of the expenses of our budget . 
The cleverness of man is such that he prefers to get rid of these five hundred millions in the gutter . 
It is the very substance of the people that is carried off , here drop by drop , there wave after wave , the wretched outpour of our sewers into the rivers , and the gigantic collection of our rivers into the ocean . 
Every hiccough of our sewers costs us a thousand francs . 
From this spring two results , the land impoverished , and the water tainted . 
Hunger arising from the furrow , and disease from the stream . 
It is notorious , for example , that at the present hour , the Thames is poisoning London . 
So far as Paris is concerned , it has become indispensable of late , to transport the mouths of the sewers down stream , below the last bridge . 
A double tubular apparatus , provided with valves and sluices , sucking up and driving back , a system of elementary drainage , simple as the lungs of a man , and which is already in full working order in many communities in England , would suffice to conduct the pure water of the fields into our cities , and to send back to the fields the rich water of the cities , and this easy exchange , the simplest in the world , would retain among us the five hundred millions now thrown away . 
People are thinking of other things . 
The process actually in use does evil , with the intention of doing good . 
The intention is good , the result is melancholy . 
Thinking to purge the city , the population is blanched like plants raised in cellars . 
A sewer is a mistake . 
When drainage , everywhere , with its double function , restoring what it takes , shall have replaced the sewer , which is a simple impoverishing washing , then , this being combined with the data of a now social economy , the product of the earth will be increased tenfold , and the problem of misery will be singularly lightened . 
Add the suppression of parasitism , and it will be solved . 
In the meanwhile , the public wealth flows away to the river , and leakage takes place . 
Leakage is the word . 
Europe is being ruined in this manner by exhaustion . 
As for France , we have just cited its figures . 
Now , Paris contains one twenty-fifth of the total population of France , and Parisian guano being the richest of all , we understate the truth when we value the loss on the part of Paris at twenty-five millions in the half milliard which France annually rejects . 
These twenty-five millions , employed in assistance and enjoyment , would double the splendor of Paris . 
The city spends them in sewers . 
So that we may say that Paris 's great prodigality , its wonderful festival , its Beaujon folly , its orgy , its stream of gold from full hands , its pomp , its luxury , its magnificence , is its sewer system . 
It is in this manner that , in the blindness of a poor political economy , we drown and allow to float down stream and to be lost in the gulfs the well-being of all . 
There should be nets at Saint-Cloud for the public fortune . 
Economically considered , the matter can be summed up thus : Paris is a spendthrift . 
Paris , that model city , that patron of well-arranged capitals , of which every nation strives to possess a copy , that metropolis of the ideal , that august country of the initiative , of impulse and of effort , that centre and that dwelling of minds , that nation-city , that hive of the future , that marvellous combination of Babylon and Corinth , would make a peasant of the Fo-Kian shrug his shoulders , from the point of view which we have just indicated . 
Imitate Paris and you will ruin yourselves . 
Moreover , and particularly in this immemorial and senseless waste , Paris is itself an imitator . 
These surprising exhibitions of stupidity are not novel ; this is no young folly . 
The ancients did like the moderns . 
`` The sewers of Rome , '' says Liebig , `` have absorbed all the well-being of the Roman peasant . '' 
When the Campagna of Rome was ruined by the Roman sewer , Rome exhausted Italy , and when she had put Italy in her sewer , she poured in Sicily , then Sardinia , then Africa . 
The sewer of Rome has engulfed the world . 
This cess-pool offered its engulfment to the city and the universe . 
Urbi et orbi . 
Eternal city , unfathomable sewer . 
