`` Father , '' said she , in a very low voice , `` I am afraid . 
Who is coming yonder ? '' 
`` Hush ! '' 
replied the unhappy man ; `` it is Madame Thenardier . '' 
Cosette shuddered . 
He added : -- `` Say nothing . 
Do n't interfere with me . 
If you cry out , if you weep , the Thenardier is lying in wait for you . 
She is coming to take you back . '' 
Then , without haste , but without making a useless movement , with firm and curt precision , the more remarkable at a moment when the patrol and Javert might come upon him at any moment , he undid his cravat , passed it round Cosette 's body under the armpits , taking care that it should not hurt the child , fastened this cravat to one end of the rope , by means of that knot which seafaring men call a `` swallow knot , '' took the other end of the rope in his teeth , pulled off his shoes and stockings , which he threw over the wall , stepped upon the mass of masonry , and began to raise himself in the angle of the wall and the gable with as much solidity and certainty as though he had the rounds of a ladder under his feet and elbows . 
Half a minute had not elapsed when he was resting on his knees on the wall . 
Cosette gazed at him in stupid amazement , without uttering a word . 
Jean Valjean 's injunction , and the name of Madame Thenardier , had chilled her blood . 
All at once she heard Jean Valjean 's voice crying to her , though in a very low tone : -- `` Put your back against the wall . '' 
She obeyed . 
`` Do n't say a word , and do n't be alarmed , '' went on Jean Valjean . 
And she felt herself lifted from the ground . 
Before she had time to recover herself , she was on the top of the wall . 
Jean Valjean grasped her , put her on his back , took her two tiny hands in his large left hand , lay down flat on his stomach and crawled along on top of the wall as far as the cant . 
As he had guessed , there stood a building whose roof started from the top of the wooden barricade and descended to within a very short distance of the ground , with a gentle slope which grazed the linden-tree . 
A lucky circumstance , for the wall was much higher on this side than on the street side . 
Jean Valjean could only see the ground at a great depth below him . 
He had just reached the slope of the roof , and had not yet left the crest of the wall , when a violent uproar announced the arrival of the patrol . 
The thundering voice of Javert was audible : -- `` Search the blind alley ! 
The Rue Droit-Mur is guarded ! 
so is the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
I 'll answer for it that he is in the blind alley . '' 
The soldiers rushed into the Genrot alley . 
Jean Valjean allowed himself to slide down the roof , still holding fast to Cosette , reached the linden-tree , and leaped to the ground . 
Whether from terror or courage , Cosette had not breathed a sound , though her hands were a little abraded . 
THE BEGINNING OF AN ENIGMA Jean Valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast and of singular aspect ; one of those melancholy gardens which seem made to be looked at in winter and at night . 
This garden was oblong in shape , with an alley of large poplars at the further end , tolerably tall forest trees in the corners , and an unshaded space in the centre , where could be seen a very large , solitary tree , then several fruit-trees , gnarled and bristling like bushes , beds of vegetables , a melon patch , whose glass frames sparkled in the moonlight , and an old well . 
Here and there stood stone benches which seemed black with moss . 
The alleys were bordered with gloomy and very erect little shrubs . 
The grass had half taken possession of them , and a green mould covered the rest . 
Jean Valjean had beside him the building whose roof had served him as a means of descent , a pile of fagots , and , behind the fagots , directly against the wall , a stone statue , whose mutilated face was no longer anything more than a shapeless mask which loomed vaguely through the gloom . 
The building was a sort of ruin , where dismantled chambers were distinguishable , one of which , much encumbered , seemed to serve as a shed . 
The large building of the Rue Droit-Mur , which had a wing on the Rue Petit-Picpus , turned two facades , at right angles , towards this garden . 
These interior facades were even more tragic than the exterior . 
All the windows were grated . 
Not a gleam of light was visible at any one of them . 
The upper story had scuttles like prisons . 
One of those facades cast its shadow on the other , which fell over the garden like an immense black pall . 
No other house was visible . 
The bottom of the garden was lost in mist and darkness . 
Nevertheless , walls could be confusedly made out , which intersected as though there were more cultivated land beyond , and the low roofs of the Rue Polonceau . 
Nothing more wild and solitary than this garden could be imagined . 
There was no one in it , which was quite natural in view of the hour ; but it did not seem as though this spot were made for any one to walk in , even in broad daylight . 
Jean Valjean 's first care had been to get hold of his shoes and put them on again , then to step under the shed with Cosette . 
A man who is fleeing never thinks himself sufficiently hidden . 
The child , whose thoughts were still on the Thenardier , shared his instinct for withdrawing from sight as much as possible . 
Cosette trembled and pressed close to him . 
They heard the tumultuous noise of the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets ; the blows of their gun-stocks against the stones ; Javert 's appeals to the police spies whom he had posted , and his imprecations mingled with words which could not be distinguished . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour it seemed as though that species of stormy roar were becoming more distant . 
Jean Valjean held his breath . 
He had laid his hand lightly on Cosette 's mouth . 
However , the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm , that this frightful uproar , close and furious as it was , did not disturb him by so much as the shadow of a misgiving . 
It seemed as though those walls had been built of the deaf stones of which the Scriptures speak . 
All at once , in the midst of this profound calm , a fresh sound arose ; a sound as celestial , divine , ineffable , ravishing , as the other had been horrible . 
It was a hymn which issued from the gloom , a dazzling burst of prayer and harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of the night ; women 's voices , but voices composed at one and the same time of the pure accents of virgins and the innocent accents of children , -- voices which are not of the earth , and which resemble those that the newborn infant still hears , and which the dying man hears already . 
This song proceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above the garden . 
At the moment when the hubbub of demons retreated , one would have said that a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom . 
Cosette and Jean Valjean fell on their knees . 
They knew not what it was , they knew not where they were ; but both of them , the man and the child , the penitent and the innocent , felt that they must kneel . 
These voices had this strange characteristic , that they did not prevent the building from seeming to be deserted . 
It was a supernatural chant in an uninhabited house . 
While these voices were singing , Jean Valjean thought of nothing . 
He no longer beheld the night ; he beheld a blue sky . 
It seemed to him that he felt those wings which we all have within us , unfolding . 
The song died away . 
It may have lasted a long time . 
Jean Valjean could not have told . 
Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment . 
All fell silent again . 
There was no longer anything in the street ; there was nothing in the garden . 
That which had menaced , that which had reassured him , -- all had vanished . 
The breeze swayed a few dry weeds on the crest of the wall , and they gave out a faint , sweet , melancholy sound . 
CONTINUATION OF THE ENIGMA The night wind had risen , which indicated that it must be between one and two o'clock in the morning . 
Poor Cosette said nothing . 
As she had seated herself beside him and leaned her head against him , Jean Valjean had fancied that she was asleep . 
He bent down and looked at her . 
Cosette 's eyes were wide open , and her thoughtful air pained Jean Valjean . 
She was still trembling . 
`` Are you sleepy ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` I am very cold , '' she replied . 
A moment later she resumed : -- `` Is she still there ? '' 
`` Who ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Madame Thenardier . '' 
Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed to make Cosette keep silent . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said he , `` she is gone . 
You need fear nothing further . '' 
The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast . 
The ground was damp , the shed open on all sides , the breeze grew more keen every instant . 
The goodman took off his coat and wrapped it round Cosette . 
`` Are you less cold now ? '' 
said he . 
`` Oh , yes , father . '' 
