That said , he restored order in the netting , pushed the two children gently down on the bed , pressed their knees , in order to stretch them out at full length , and exclaimed : -- `` Since the good God is lighting his candle , I can blow out mine . 
Now , babes , now , my young humans , you must shut your peepers . 
It 's very bad not to sleep . 
It 'll make you swallow the strainer , or , as they say , in fashionable society , stink in the gullet . 
Wrap yourself up well in the hide ! 
I 'm going to put out the light . 
Are you ready ? '' 
`` Yes , '' murmured the elder , `` I 'm all right . 
I seem to have feathers under my head . '' 
`` People do n't say ` head , ' '' cried Gavroche , `` they say ` nut ' . '' 
The two children nestled close to each other , Gavroche finished arranging them on the mat , drew the blanket up to their very ears , then repeated , for the third time , his injunction in the hieratical tongue : -- `` Shut your peepers ! '' 
And he snuffed out his tiny light . 
Hardly had the light been extinguished , when a peculiar trembling began to affect the netting under which the three children lay . 
It consisted of a multitude of dull scratches which produced a metallic sound , as if claws and teeth were gnawing at the copper wire . 
This was accompanied by all sorts of little piercing cries . 
The little five-year-old boy , on hearing this hubbub overhead , and chilled with terror , jogged his brother 's elbow ; but the elder brother had already shut his peepers , as Gavroche had ordered . 
Then the little one , who could no longer control his terror , questioned Gavroche , but in a very low tone , and with bated breath : -- `` Sir ? '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
said Gavroche , who had just closed his eyes . 
`` What is that ? '' 
`` It 's the rats , '' replied Gavroche . 
And he laid his head down on the mat again . 
The rats , in fact , who swarmed by thousands in the carcass of the elephant , and who were the living black spots which we have already mentioned , had been held in awe by the flame of the candle , so long as it had been lighted ; but as soon as the cavern , which was the same as their city , had returned to darkness , scenting what the good story-teller Perrault calls `` fresh meat , '' they had hurled themselves in throngs on Gavroche 's tent , had climbed to the top of it , and had begun to bite the meshes as though seeking to pierce this new-fangled trap . 
Still the little one could not sleep . 
`` Sir ? '' 
he began again . 
`` Hey ? '' 
said Gavroche . 
`` What are rats ? '' 
`` They are mice . '' 
This explanation reassured the child a little . 
He had seen white mice in the course of his life , and he was not afraid of them . 
Nevertheless , he lifted up his voice once more . 
`` Sir ? '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
said Gavroche again . 
`` Why do n't you have a cat ? '' 
`` I did have one , '' replied Gavroche , `` I brought one here , but they ate her . '' 
This second explanation undid the work of the first , and the little fellow began to tremble again . 
The dialogue between him and Gavroche began again for the fourth time : -- `` Monsieur ? '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
`` Who was it that was eaten ? '' 
`` The cat . '' 
`` And who ate the cat ? '' 
`` The rats . '' 
`` The mice ? '' 
`` Yes , the rats . '' 
The child , in consternation , dismayed at the thought of mice which ate cats , pursued : -- `` Sir , would those mice eat us ? '' 
`` Would n't they just ! '' 
ejaculated Gavroche . 
The child 's terror had reached its climax . 
But Gavroche added : -- `` Do n't be afraid . 
They ca n't get in . 
And besides , I 'm here ! 
Here , catch hold of my hand . 
Hold your tongue and shut your peepers ! '' 
At the same time Gavroche grasped the little fellow 's hand across his brother . 
The child pressed the hand close to him , and felt reassured . 
Courage and strength have these mysterious ways of communicating themselves . 
Silence reigned round them once more , the sound of their voices had frightened off the rats ; at the expiration of a few minutes , they came raging back , but in vain , the three little fellows were fast asleep and heard nothing more . 
The hours of the night fled away . 
Darkness covered the vast Place de la Bastille . 
A wintry gale , which mingled with the rain , blew in gusts , the patrol searched all the doorways , alleys , enclosures , and obscure nooks , and in their search for nocturnal vagabonds they passed in silence before the elephant ; the monster , erect , motionless , staring open-eyed into the shadows , had the appearance of dreaming happily over his good deed ; and sheltered from heaven and from men the three poor sleeping children . 
In order to understand what is about to follow , the reader must remember , that , at that epoch , the Bastille guard-house was situated at the other end of the square , and that what took place in the vicinity of the elephant could neither be seen nor heard by the sentinel . 
Towards the end of that hour which immediately precedes the dawn , a man turned from the Rue Saint-Antoine at a run , made the circuit of the enclosure of the column of July , and glided between the palings until he was underneath the belly of the elephant . 
If any light had illuminated that man , it might have been divined from the thorough manner in which he was soaked that he had passed the night in the rain . 
Arrived beneath the elephant , he uttered a peculiar cry , which did not belong to any human tongue , and which a paroquet alone could have imitated . 
Twice he repeated this cry , of whose orthography the following barely conveys an idea : -- `` Kirikikiou ! '' 
At the second cry , a clear , young , merry voice responded from the belly of the elephant : -- `` Yes ! '' 
Almost immediately , the plank which closed the hole was drawn aside , and gave passage to a child who descended the elephant 's leg , and fell briskly near the man . 
It was Gavroche . 
The man was Montparnasse . 
As for his cry of Kirikikiou , -- that was , doubtless , what the child had meant , when he said : -- `` You will ask for Monsieur Gavroche . '' 
On hearing it , he had waked with a start , had crawled out of his `` alcove , '' pushing apart the netting a little , and carefully drawing it together again , then he had opened the trap , and descended . 
The man and the child recognized each other silently amid the gloom : Montparnasse confined himself to the remark : -- `` We need you . 
Come , lend us a hand . '' 
The lad asked for no further enlightenment . 
`` I 'm with you , '' said he . 
And both took their way towards the Rue Saint-Antoine , whence Montparnasse had emerged , winding rapidly through the long file of market-gardeners ' carts which descend towards the markets at that hour . 
The market-gardeners , crouching , half-asleep , in their wagons , amid the salads and vegetables , enveloped to their very eyes in their mufflers on account of the beating rain , did not even glance at these strange pedestrians . 
THE VICISSITUDES OF FLIGHT This is what had taken place that same night at the La Force : -- An escape had been planned between Babet , Brujon , Guelemer , and Thenardier , although Thenardier was in close confinement . 
Babet had arranged the matter for his own benefit , on the same day , as the reader has seen from Montparnasse 's account to Gavroche . 
Montparnasse was to help them from outside . 
Brujon , after having passed a month in the punishment cell , had had time , in the first place , to weave a rope , in the second , to mature a plan . 
In former times , those severe places where the discipline of the prison delivers the convict into his own hands , were composed of four stone walls , a stone ceiling , a flagged pavement , a camp bed , a grated window , and a door lined with iron , and were called dungeons ; but the dungeon was judged to be too terrible ; nowadays they are composed of an iron door , a grated window , a camp bed , a flagged pavement , four stone walls , and a stone ceiling , and are called chambers of punishment . 
A little light penetrates towards mid-day . 
The inconvenient point about these chambers which , as the reader sees , are not dungeons , is that they allow the persons who should be at work to think . 
So Brujon meditated , and he emerged from the chamber of punishment with a rope . 
As he had the name of being very dangerous in the Charlemagne courtyard , he was placed in the New Building . 
The first thing he found in the New Building was Guelemer , the second was a nail ; Guelemer , that is to say , crime ; a nail , that is to say , liberty . 
Brujon , of whom it is high time that the reader should have a complete idea , was , with an appearance of delicate health and a profoundly premeditated languor , a polished , intelligent sprig , and a thief , who had a caressing glance , and an atrocious smile . 
His glance resulted from his will , and his smile from his nature . 
His first studies in his art had been directed to roofs . 
He had made great progress in the industry of the men who tear off lead , who plunder the roofs and despoil the gutters by the process called double pickings . 
The circumstance which put the finishing touch on the moment peculiarly favorable for an attempt at escape , was that the roofers were re-laying and re-jointing , at that very moment , a portion of the slates on the prison . 
The Saint-Bernard courtyard was no longer absolutely isolated from the Charlemagne and the Saint-Louis courts . 
Up above there were scaffoldings and ladders ; in other words , bridges and stairs in the direction of liberty . 
The New Building , which was the most cracked and decrepit thing to be seen anywhere in the world , was the weak point in the prison . 
The walls were eaten by saltpetre to such an extent that the authorities had been obliged to line the vaults of the dormitories with a sheathing of wood , because stones were in the habit of becoming detached and falling on the prisoners in their beds . 
In spite of this antiquity , the authorities committed the error of confining in the New Building the most troublesome prisoners , of placing there `` the hard cases , '' as they say in prison parlance . 
