Each man had his collar , but the chain was for all ; so that if these four and twenty men had occasion to alight from the dray and walk , they were seized with a sort of inexorable unity , and were obliged to wind over the ground with the chain for a backbone , somewhat after the fashion of millepeds . 
In the back and front of each vehicle , two men armed with muskets stood erect , each holding one end of the chain under his foot . 
The iron necklets were square . 
The seventh vehicle , a huge rack-sided baggage wagon , without a hood , had four wheels and six horses , and carried a sonorous pile of iron boilers , cast-iron pots , braziers , and chains , among which were mingled several men who were pinioned and stretched at full length , and who seemed to be ill . 
This wagon , all lattice-work , was garnished with dilapidated hurdles which appeared to have served for former punishments . 
These vehicles kept to the middle of the road . 
On each side marched a double hedge of guards of infamous aspect , wearing three-cornered hats , like the soldiers under the Directory , shabby , covered with spots and holes , muffled in uniforms of veterans and the trousers of undertakers ' men , half gray , half blue , which were almost hanging in rags , with red epaulets , yellow shoulder belts , short sabres , muskets , and cudgels ; they were a species of soldier-blackguards . 
These myrmidons seemed composed of the abjectness of the beggar and the authority of the executioner . 
The one who appeared to be their chief held a postilion 's whip in his hand . 
All these details , blurred by the dimness of dawn , became more and more clearly outlined as the light increased . 
At the head and in the rear of the convoy rode mounted gendarmes , serious and with sword in fist . 
This procession was so long that when the first vehicle reached the barrier , the last was barely debauching from the boulevard . 
A throng , sprung , it is impossible to say whence , and formed in a twinkling , as is frequently the case in Paris , pressed forward from both sides of the road and looked on . 
In the neighboring lanes the shouts of people calling to each other and the wooden shoes of market-gardeners hastening up to gaze were audible . 
The men massed upon the drays allowed themselves to be jolted along in silence . 
They were livid with the chill of morning . 
They all wore linen trousers , and their bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes . 
The rest of their costume was a fantasy of wretchedness . 
Their accoutrements were horribly incongruous ; nothing is more funereal than the harlequin in rags . 
Battered felt hats , tarpaulin caps , hideous woollen nightcaps , and , side by side with a short blouse , a black coat broken at the elbow ; many wore women 's headgear , others had baskets on their heads ; hairy breasts were visible , and through the rent in their garments tattooed designs could be descried ; temples of Love , flaming hearts , Cupids ; eruptions and unhealthy red blotches could also be seen . 
Two or three had a straw rope attached to the cross-bar of the dray , and suspended under them like a stirrup , which supported their feet . 
One of them held in his hand and raised to his mouth something which had the appearance of a black stone and which he seemed to be gnawing ; it was bread which he was eating . 
There were no eyes there which were not either dry , dulled , or flaming with an evil light . 
The escort troop cursed , the men in chains did not utter a syllable ; from time to time the sound of a blow became audible as the cudgels descended on shoulder-blades or skulls ; some of these men were yawning ; their rags were terrible ; their feet hung down , their shoulders oscillated , their heads clashed together , their fetters clanked , their eyes glared ferociously , their fists clenched or fell open inertly like the hands of corpses ; in the rear of the convoy ran a band of children screaming with laughter . 
This file of vehicles , whatever its nature was , was mournful . 
It was evident that to-morrow , that an hour hence , a pouring rain might descend , that it might be followed by another and another , and that their dilapidated garments would be drenched , that once soaked , these men would not get dry again , that once chilled , they would not again get warm , that their linen trousers would be glued to their bones by the downpour , that the water would fill their shoes , that no lashes from the whips would be able to prevent their jaws from chattering , that the chain would continue to bind them by the neck , that their legs would continue to dangle , and it was impossible not to shudder at the sight of these human beings thus bound and passive beneath the cold clouds of autumn , and delivered over to the rain , to the blast , to all the furies of the air , like trees and stones . 
Blows from the cudgel were not omitted even in the case of the sick men , who lay there knotted with ropes and motionless on the seventh wagon , and who appeared to have been tossed there like sacks filled with misery . 
Suddenly , the sun made its appearance ; the immense light of the Orient burst forth , and one would have said that it had set fire to all those ferocious heads . 
Their tongues were unloosed ; a conflagration of grins , oaths , and songs exploded . 
The broad horizontal sheet of light severed the file in two parts , illuminating heads and bodies , leaving feet and wheels in the obscurity . 
Thoughts made their appearance on these faces ; it was a terrible moment ; visible demons with their masks removed , fierce souls laid bare . 
Though lighted up , this wild throng remained in gloom . 
Some , who were gay , had in their mouths quills through which they blew vermin over the crowd , picking out the women ; the dawn accentuated these lamentable profiles with the blackness of its shadows ; there was not one of these creatures who was not deformed by reason of wretchedness ; and the whole was so monstrous that one would have said that the sun 's brilliancy had been changed into the glare of the lightning . 
The wagon-load which headed the line had struck up a song , and were shouting at the top of their voices with a haggard joviality , a potpourri by Desaugiers , then famous , called The Vestal ; the trees shivered mournfully ; in the cross-lanes , countenances of bourgeois listened in an idiotic delight to these coarse strains droned by spectres . 
All sorts of distress met in this procession as in chaos ; here were to be found the facial angles of every sort of beast , old men , youths , bald heads , gray beards , cynical monstrosities , sour resignation , savage grins , senseless attitudes , snouts surmounted by caps , heads like those of young girls with corkscrew curls on the temples , infantile visages , and by reason of that , horrible thin skeleton faces , to which death alone was lacking . 
On the first cart was a negro , who had been a slave , in all probability , and who could make a comparison of his chains . 
The frightful leveller from below , shame , had passed over these brows ; at that degree of abasement , the last transformations were suffered by all in their extremest depths , and ignorance , converted into dulness , was the equal of intelligence converted into despair . 
There was no choice possible between these men who appeared to the eye as the flower of the mud . 
It was evident that the person who had had the ordering of that unclean procession had not classified them . 
These beings had been fettered and coupled pell-mell , in alphabetical disorder , probably , and loaded hap-hazard on those carts . 
Nevertheless , horrors , when grouped together , always end by evolving a result ; all additions of wretched men give a sum total , each chain exhaled a common soul , and each dray-load had its own physiognomy . 
By the side of the one where they were singing , there was one where they were howling ; a third where they were begging ; one could be seen in which they were gnashing their teeth ; another load menaced the spectators , another blasphemed God ; the last was as silent as the tomb . 
Dante would have thought that he beheld his seven circles of hell on the march . 
The march of the damned to their tortures , performed in sinister wise , not on the formidable and flaming chariot of the Apocalypse , but , what was more mournful than that , on the gibbet cart . 
One of the guards , who had a hook on the end of his cudgel , made a pretence from time to time , of stirring up this mass of human filth . 
An old woman in the crowd pointed them out to her little boy five years old , and said to him : `` Rascal , let that be a warning to you ! '' 
As the songs and blasphemies increased , the man who appeared to be the captain of the escort cracked his whip , and at that signal a fearful dull and blind flogging , which produced the sound of hail , fell upon the seven dray-loads ; many roared and foamed at the mouth ; which redoubled the delight of the street urchins who had hastened up , a swarm of flies on these wounds . 
Jean Valjean 's eyes had assumed a frightful expression . 
They were no longer eyes ; they were those deep and glassy objects which replace the glance in the case of certain wretched men , which seem unconscious of reality , and in which flames the reflection of terrors and of catastrophes . 
He was not looking at a spectacle , he was seeing a vision . 
He tried to rise , to flee , to make his escape ; he could not move his feet . 
Sometimes , the things that you see seize upon you and hold you fast . 
He remained nailed to the spot , petrified , stupid , asking himself , athwart confused and inexpressible anguish , what this sepulchral persecution signified , and whence had come that pandemonium which was pursuing him . 
All at once , he raised his hand to his brow , a gesture habitual to those whose memory suddenly returns ; he remembered that this was , in fact , the usual itinerary , that it was customary to make this detour in order to avoid all possibility of encountering royalty on the road to Fontainebleau , and that , five and thirty years before , he had himself passed through that barrier . 
Cosette was no less terrified , but in a different way . 
She did not understand ; what she beheld did not seem to her to be possible ; at length she cried : -- `` Father ! 
What are those men in those carts ? '' 
Jean Valjean replied : `` Convicts . '' 
`` Whither are they going ? '' 
`` To the galleys . '' 
At that moment , the cudgelling , multiplied by a hundred hands , became zealous , blows with the flat of the sword were mingled with it , it was a perfect storm of whips and clubs ; the convicts bent before it , a hideous obedience was evoked by the torture , and all held their peace , darting glances like chained wolves . 
Cosette trembled in every limb ; she resumed : -- `` Father , are they still men ? '' 
`` Sometimes , '' answered the unhappy man . 
It was the chain-gang , in fact , which had set out before daybreak from Bicetre , and had taken the road to Mans in order to avoid Fontainebleau , where the King then was . 
This caused the horrible journey to last three or four days longer ; but torture may surely be prolonged with the object of sparing the royal personage a sight of it . 
Jean Valjean returned home utterly overwhelmed . 
Such encounters are shocks , and the memory that they leave behind them resembles a thorough shaking up . 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean did not observe that , on his way back to the Rue de Babylone with Cosette , the latter was plying him with other questions on the subject of what they had just seen ; perhaps he was too much absorbed in his own dejection to notice her words and reply to them . 
But when Cosette was leaving him in the evening , to betake herself to bed , he heard her say in a low voice , and as though talking to herself : `` It seems to me , that if I were to find one of those men in my pathway , oh , my God , I should die merely from the sight of him close at hand . '' 
Fortunately , chance ordained that on the morrow of that tragic day , there was some official solemnity apropos of I know not what , -- fetes in Paris , a review in the Champ de Mars , jousts on the Seine , theatrical performances in the Champs-Elysees , fireworks at the Arc de l'Etoile , illuminations everywhere . 
Jean Valjean did violence to his habits , and took Cosette to see these rejoicings , for the purpose of diverting her from the memory of the day before , and of effacing , beneath the smiling tumult of all Paris , the abominable thing which had passed before her . 
The review with which the festival was spiced made the presence of uniforms perfectly natural ; Jean Valjean donned his uniform of a national guard with the vague inward feeling of a man who is betaking himself to shelter . 
However , this trip seemed to attain its object . 
Cosette , who made it her law to please her father , and to whom , moreover , all spectacles were a novelty , accepted this diversion with the light and easy good grace of youth , and did not pout too disdainfully at that flutter of enjoyment called a public fete ; so that Jean Valjean was able to believe that he had succeeded , and that no trace of that hideous vision remained . 
Some days later , one morning , when the sun was shining brightly , and they were both on the steps leading to the garden , another infraction of the rules which Jean Valjean seemed to have imposed upon himself , and to the custom of remaining in her chamber which melancholy had caused Cosette to adopt , Cosette , in a wrapper , was standing erect in that negligent attire of early morning which envelops young girls in an adorable way and which produces the effect of a cloud drawn over a star ; and , with her head bathed in light , rosy after a good sleep , submitting to the gentle glances of the tender old man , she was picking a daisy to pieces . 
Cosette did not know the delightful legend , I love a little , passionately , etc. -- who was there who could have taught her ? 
She was handling the flower instinctively , innocently , without a suspicion that to pluck a daisy apart is to do the same by a heart . 
If there were a fourth , and smiling Grace called Melancholy , she would have worn the air of that Grace . 
Jean Valjean was fascinated by the contemplation of those tiny fingers on that flower , and forgetful of everything in the radiance emitted by that child . 
A red-breast was warbling in the thicket , on one side . 
White cloudlets floated across the sky , so gayly , that one would have said that they had just been set at liberty . 
Cosette went on attentively tearing the leaves from her flower ; she seemed to be thinking about something ; but whatever it was , it must be something charming ; all at once she turned her head over her shoulder with the delicate languor of a swan , and said to Jean Valjean : `` Father , what are the galleys like ? '' 
A WOUND WITHOUT , HEALING WITHIN Thus their life clouded over by degrees . 
But one diversion , which had formerly been a happiness , remained to them , which was to carry bread to those who were hungry , and clothing to those who were cold . 
Cosette often accompanied Jean Valjean on these visits to the poor , on which they recovered some remnants of their former free intercourse ; and sometimes , when the day had been a good one , and they had assisted many in distress , and cheered and warmed many little children , Cosette was rather merry in the evening . 
It was at this epoch that they paid their visit to the Jondrette den . 
On the day following that visit , Jean Valjean made his appearance in the pavilion in the morning , calm as was his wont , but with a large wound on his left arm which was much inflamed , and very angry , which resembled a burn , and which he explained in some way or other . 
This wound resulted in his being detained in the house for a month with fever . 
He would not call in a doctor . 
When Cosette urged him , `` Call the dog-doctor , '' said he . 
Cosette dressed the wound morning and evening with so divine an air and such angelic happiness at being of use to him , that Jean Valjean felt all his former joy returning , his fears and anxieties dissipating , and he gazed at Cosette , saying : `` Oh ! 
what a kindly wound ! 
Oh ! 
what a good misfortune ! '' 
Cosette on perceiving that her father was ill , had deserted the pavilion and again taken a fancy to the little lodging and the back courtyard . 
She passed nearly all her days beside Jean Valjean and read to him the books which he desired . 
Generally they were books of travel . 
Jean Valjean was undergoing a new birth ; his happiness was reviving in these ineffable rays ; the Luxembourg , the prowling young stranger , Cosette 's coldness , -- all these clouds upon his soul were growing dim . 
He had reached the point where he said to himself : `` I imagined all that . 
I am an old fool . '' 
