Two of the `` chimney-builders '' pushed the drunken man into the corner near the heap of old iron with their feet . 
`` Babet , '' said Thenardier in a low tone to the man with the cudgel , `` why did you bring so many ; they were not needed . '' 
`` What can you do ? '' 
replied the man with the cudgel , `` they all wanted to be in it . 
This is a bad season . 
There 's no business going on . '' 
The pallet on which M. Leblanc had been thrown was a sort of hospital bed , elevated on four coarse wooden legs , roughly hewn . 
M. Leblanc let them take their own course . 
The ruffians bound him securely , in an upright attitude , with his feet on the ground at the head of the bed , the end which was most remote from the window , and nearest to the fireplace . 
When the last knot had been tied , Thenardier took a chair and seated himself almost facing M. Leblanc . 
Thenardier no longer looked like himself ; in the course of a few moments his face had passed from unbridled violence to tranquil and cunning sweetness . 
Marius found it difficult to recognize in that polished smile of a man in official life the almost bestial mouth which had been foaming but a moment before ; he gazed with amazement on that fantastic and alarming metamorphosis , and he felt as a man might feel who should behold a tiger converted into a lawyer . 
`` Monsieur -- '' said Thenardier . 
And dismissing with a gesture the ruffians who still kept their hands on M. Leblanc : -- `` Stand off a little , and let me have a talk with the gentleman . '' 
All retired towards the door . 
He went on : -- `` Monsieur , you did wrong to try to jump out of the window . 
You might have broken your leg . 
Now , if you will permit me , we will converse quietly . 
In the first place , I must communicate to you an observation which I have made which is , that you have not uttered the faintest cry . '' 
Thenardier was right , this detail was correct , although it had escaped Marius in his agitation . 
M. Leblanc had barely pronounced a few words , without raising his voice , and even during his struggle with the six ruffians near the window he had preserved the most profound and singular silence . 
Thenardier continued : -- `` Mon Dieu ! 
You might have shouted ` stop thief ' a bit , and I should not have thought it improper . 
` Murder ! ' 
That , too , is said occasionally , and , so far as I am concerned , I should not have taken it in bad part . 
It is very natural that you should make a little row when you find yourself with persons who do n't inspire you with sufficient confidence . 
You might have done that , and no one would have troubled you on that account . 
You would not even have been gagged . 
And I will tell you why . 
This room is very private . 
That 's its only recommendation , but it has that in its favor . 
You might fire off a mortar and it would produce about as much noise at the nearest police station as the snores of a drunken man . 
Here a cannon would make a boum , and the thunder would make a pouf . 
It 's a handy lodging . 
But , in short , you did not shout , and it is better so . 
I present you my compliments , and I will tell you the conclusion that I draw from that fact : My dear sir , when a man shouts , who comes ? 
The police . 
And after the police ? 
Justice . 
Well ! 
You have not made an outcry ; that is because you do n't care to have the police and the courts come in any more than we do . 
It is because , -- I have long suspected it , -- you have some interest in hiding something . 
On our side we have the same interest . 
So we can come to an understanding . '' 
As he spoke thus , it seemed as though Thenardier , who kept his eyes fixed on M. Leblanc , were trying to plunge the sharp points which darted from the pupils into the very conscience of his prisoner . 
Moreover , his language , which was stamped with a sort of moderated , subdued insolence and crafty insolence , was reserved and almost choice , and in that rascal , who had been nothing but a robber a short time previously , one now felt `` the man who had studied for the priesthood . '' 
The silence preserved by the prisoner , that precaution which had been carried to the point of forgetting all anxiety for his own life , that resistance opposed to the first impulse of nature , which is to utter a cry , all this , it must be confessed , now that his attention had been called to it , troubled Marius , and affected him with painful astonishment . 
Thenardier 's well-grounded observation still further obscured for Marius the dense mystery which enveloped that grave and singular person on whom Courfeyrac had bestowed the sobriquet of Monsieur Leblanc . 
But whoever he was , bound with ropes , surrounded with executioners , half plunged , so to speak , in a grave which was closing in upon him to the extent of a degree with every moment that passed , in the presence of Thenardier 's wrath , as in the presence of his sweetness , this man remained impassive ; and Marius could not refrain from admiring at such a moment the superbly melancholy visage . 
Here , evidently , was a soul which was inaccessible to terror , and which did not know the meaning of despair . 
Here was one of those men who command amazement in desperate circumstances . 
Extreme as was the crisis , inevitable as was the catastrophe , there was nothing here of the agony of the drowning man , who opens his horror-filled eyes under the water . 
Thenardier rose in an unpretending manner , went to the fireplace , shoved aside the screen , which he leaned against the neighboring pallet , and thus unmasked the brazier full of glowing coals , in which the prisoner could plainly see the chisel white-hot and spotted here and there with tiny scarlet stars . 
Then Thenardier returned to his seat beside M. Leblanc . 
`` I continue , '' said he . 
`` We can come to an understanding . 
Let us arrange this matter in an amicable way . 
I was wrong to lose my temper just now , I do n't know what I was thinking of , I went a great deal too far , I said extravagant things . 
For example , because you are a millionnaire , I told you that I exacted money , a lot of money , a deal of money . 
That would not be reasonable . 
Mon Dieu , in spite of your riches , you have expenses of your own -- who has not ? 
I do n't want to ruin you , I am not a greedy fellow , after all . 
I am not one of those people who , because they have the advantage of the position , profit by the fact to make themselves ridiculous . 
Why , I 'm taking things into consideration and making a sacrifice on my side . 
I only want two hundred thousand francs . '' 
M. Leblanc uttered not a word . 
Thenardier went on : -- `` You see that I put not a little water in my wine ; I 'm very moderate . 
I do n't know the state of your fortune , but I do know that you do n't stick at money , and a benevolent man like yourself can certainly give two hundred thousand francs to the father of a family who is out of luck . 
Certainly , you are reasonable , too ; you have n't imagined that I should take all the trouble I have to-day and organized this affair this evening , which has been labor well bestowed , in the opinion of these gentlemen , merely to wind up by asking you for enough to go and drink red wine at fifteen sous and eat veal at Desnoyer 's . 
Two hundred thousand francs -- it 's surely worth all that . 
This trifle once out of your pocket , I guarantee you that that 's the end of the matter , and that you have no further demands to fear . 
You will say to me : ` But I have n't two hundred thousand francs about me . ' 
Oh ! 
I 'm not extortionate . 
I do n't demand that . 
I only ask one thing of you . 
Have the goodness to write what I am about to dictate to you . '' 
Here Thenardier paused ; then he added , emphasizing his words , and casting a smile in the direction of the brazier : -- `` I warn you that I shall not admit that you do n't know how to write . '' 
A grand inquisitor might have envied that smile . 
Thenardier pushed the table close to M. Leblanc , and took an inkstand , a pen , and a sheet of paper from the drawer which he left half open , and in which gleamed the long blade of the knife . 
He placed the sheet of paper before M. Leblanc . 
`` Write , '' said he . 
The prisoner spoke at last . 
`` How do you expect me to write ? 
I am bound . '' 
`` That 's true , excuse me ! '' 
ejaculated Thenardier , `` you are quite right . '' 
And turning to Bigrenaille : -- `` Untie the gentleman 's right arm . '' 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , executed Thenardier 's order . 
When the prisoner 's right arm was free , Thenardier dipped the pen in the ink and presented it to him . 
`` Understand thoroughly , sir , that you are in our power , at our discretion , that no human power can get you out of this , and that we shall be really grieved if we are forced to proceed to disagreeable extremities . 
I know neither your name , nor your address , but I warn you , that you will remain bound until the person charged with carrying the letter which you are about to write shall have returned . 
Now , be so good as to write . '' 
`` What ? '' 
demanded the prisoner . 
`` I will dictate . '' 
M. Leblanc took the pen . 
Thenardier began to dictate : -- `` My daughter -- '' The prisoner shuddered , and raised his eyes to Thenardier . 
`` Put down ` My dear daughter ' -- '' said Thenardier . 
M. Leblanc obeyed . 
