Some unique chaplet ? 
Some authentic relic ? 
They lost themselves in conjectures . 
When the poor old woman died , they rushed to her cupboard more hastily than was fitting , perhaps , and opened it . 
They found the object beneath a triple linen cloth , like some consecrated paten . 
It was a Faenza platter representing little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary lads armed with enormous syringes . 
The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical postures . 
One of the charming little Loves is already fairly spitted . 
He is resisting , fluttering his tiny wings , and still making an effort to fly , but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air . 
Moral : Love conquered by the colic . 
This platter , which is very curious , and which had , possibly , the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea , was still in existence in September , 1845 ; it was for sale by a bric-a-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais . 
This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside because , said she , the parlor is too gloomy . 
ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION However , this almost sepulchral parlor , of which we have sought to convey an idea , is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity in other convents . 
At the convent of the Rue du Temple , in particular , which belonged , in truth , to another order , the black shutters were replaced by brown curtains , and the parlor itself was a salon with a polished wood floor , whose windows were draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames , a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face , painted bouquets , and even the head of a Turk . 
It is in that garden of the Temple convent , that stood that famous chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in France , and which bore the reputation among the good people of the eighteenth century of being the father of all the chestnut trees of the realm . 
As we have said , this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration , Benedictines quite different from those who depended on Citeaux . 
This order of the Perpetual Adoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than two hundred years . 
In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few days apart , in two churches in Paris , at Saint-Sulpice and at Saint-Jean en Greve , a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole town in an uproar . 
M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy , in which the Pope 's Nuncio officiated . 
But this expiation did not satisfy two sainted women , Madame Courtin , Marquise de Boucs , and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux . 
This outrage committed on `` the most holy sacrament of the altar , '' though but temporary , would not depart from these holy souls , and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a `` Perpetual Adoration '' in some female monastery . 
Both of them , one in 1652 , the other in 1653 , made donations of notable sums to Mother Catherine de Bar , called of the Holy Sacrament , a Benedictine nun , for the purpose of founding , to this pious end , a monastery of the order of Saint-Benoit ; the first permission for this foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz , Abbe of Saint-Germain , `` on condition that no woman could be received unless she contributed three hundred livres income , which amounts to six thousand livres , to the principal . '' 
After the Abbe of Saint-Germain , the king accorded letters-patent ; and all the rest , abbatial charter , and royal letters , was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament . 
Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment of the Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament at Paris . 
Their first convent was `` a new building '' in the Rue Cassette , out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Chateauvieux . 
This order , as it will be seen , was not to be confounded with the Benedictine nuns of Citeaux . 
It mounted back to the Abbe of Saint-Germain des Pres , in the same manner that the ladies of the Sacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits , and the sisters of charity to the general of the Lazarists . 
It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus , whose interior we have just shown . 
In 1657 , Pope Alexander VII . 
had authorized , by a special brief , the Bernardines of the Rue Petit-Picpus , to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictine nuns of the Holy Sacrament . 
But the two orders remained distinct none the less . 
END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS At the beginning of the Restoration , the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in its decay ; this forms a part of the general death of the order , which , after the eighteenth century , has been disappearing like all the religious orders . 
Contemplation is , like prayer , one of humanity 's needs ; but , like everything which the Revolution touched , it will be transformed , and from being hostile to social progress , it will become favorable to it . 
The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated . 
In 1840 , the Little Convent had disappeared , the school had disappeared . 
There were no longer any old women , nor young girls ; the first were dead , the latter had taken their departure . 
Volaverunt . 
The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature that it alarms , vocations recoil before it , the order receives no recruits . 
In 1845 , it still obtained lay-sisters here and there . 
But of professed nuns , none at all . 
Forty years ago , the nuns numbered nearly a hundred ; fifteen years ago there were not more than twenty-eight of them . 
How many are there to-day ? 
In 1847 , the prioress was young , a sign that the circle of choice was restricted . 
She was not forty years old . 
In proportion as the number diminishes , the fatigue increases , the service of each becomes more painful ; the moment could then be seen drawing near when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the heavy rule of Saint-Benoit . 
The burden is implacable , and remains the same for the few as for the many . 
It weighs down , it crushes . 
Thus they die . 
At the period when the author of this book still lived in Paris , two died . 
One was twenty-five years old , the other twenty-three . 
This latter can say , like Julia Alpinula : `` Hic jaceo . 
Vixi annos viginti et tres . '' 
It is in consequence of this decay that the convent gave up the education of girls . 
We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house without entering it , and without introducing the minds which accompany us , and which are listening to our tale , to the profit of some , perchance , of the melancholy history of Jean Valjean . 
We have penetrated into this community , full of those old practices which seem so novel to-day . 
It is the closed garden , hortus conclusus . 
We have spoken of this singular place in detail , but with respect , in so far , at least , as detail and respect are compatible . 
We do not understand all , but we insult nothing . 
We are equally far removed from the hosanna of Joseph de Maistre , who wound up by anointing the executioner , and from the sneer of Voltaire , who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross . 
An illogical act on Voltaire 's part , we may remark , by the way ; for Voltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas ; and even for those who deny superhuman incarnations , what does the crucifix represent ? 
The assassinated sage . 
In this nineteenth century , the religious idea is undergoing a crisis . 
People are unlearning certain things , and they do well , provided that , while unlearning them they learn this : There is no vacuum in the human heart . 
Certain demolitions take place , and it is well that they do , but on condition that they are followed by reconstructions . 
In the meantime , let us study things which are no more . 
It is necessary to know them , if only for the purpose of avoiding them . 
The counterfeits of the past assume false names , and gladly call themselves the future . 
This spectre , this past , is given to falsifying its own passport . 
Let us inform ourselves of the trap . 
Let us be on our guard . 
The past has a visage , superstition , and a mask , hypocrisy . 
Let us denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask . 
As for convents , they present a complex problem , -- a question of civilization , which condemns them ; a question of liberty , which protects them . 
THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA This book is a drama , whose leading personage is the Infinite . 
Man is the second . 
Such being the case , and a convent having happened to be on our road , it has been our duty to enter it . 
Why ? 
Because the convent , which is common to the Orient as well as to the Occident , to antiquity as well as to modern times , to paganism , to Buddhism , to Mahometanism , as well as to Christianity , is one of the optical apparatuses applied by man to the Infinite . 
This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certain ideas ; nevertheless , while absolutely maintaining our reserves , our restrictions , and even our indignations , we must say that every time we encounter man in the Infinite , either well or ill understood , we feel ourselves overpowered with respect . 
There is , in the synagogue , in the mosque , in the pagoda , in the wigwam , a hideous side which we execrate , and a sublime side , which we adore . 
What a contemplation for the mind , and what endless food for thought , is the reverberation of God upon the human wall ! 
THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT From the point of view of history , of reason , and of truth , monasticism is condemned . 
Monasteries , when they abound in a nation , are clogs in its circulation , cumbrous establishments , centres of idleness where centres of labor should exist . 
Monastic communities are to the great social community what the mistletoe is to the oak , what the wart is to the human body . 
Their prosperity and their fatness mean the impoverishment of the country . 
The monastic regime , good at the beginning of civilization , useful in the reduction of the brutal by the spiritual , is bad when peoples have reached their manhood . 
Moreover , when it becomes relaxed , and when it enters into its period of disorder , it becomes bad for the very reasons which rendered it salutary in its period of purity , because it still continues to set the example . 
Claustration has had its day . 
Cloisters , useful in the early education of modern civilization , have embarrassed its growth , and are injurious to its development . 
So far as institution and formation with relation to man are concerned , monasteries , which were good in the tenth century , questionable in the fifteenth , are detestable in the nineteenth . 
The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeleton two wonderful nations , Italy and Spain ; the one the light , the other the splendor of Europe for centuries ; and , at the present day , these two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce , thanks to the healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone . 
The convent -- the ancient female convent in particular , such as it still presents itself on the threshold of this century , in Italy , in Austria , in Spain -- is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages . 
The cloister , that cloister , is the point of intersection of horrors . 
The Catholic cloister , properly speaking , is wholly filled with the black radiance of death . 
The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all . 
There rise , in obscurity , beneath vaults filled with gloom , beneath domes vague with shadow , massive altars of Babel , as high as cathedrals ; there immense white crucifixes hang from chains in the dark ; there are extended , all nude on the ebony , great Christs of ivory ; more than bleeding , -- bloody ; hideous and magnificent , with their elbows displaying the bones , their knee-pans showing their integuments , their wounds showing their flesh , crowned with silver thorns , nailed with nails of gold , with blood drops of rubies on their brows , and diamond tears in their eyes . 
The diamonds and rubies seem wet , and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep , their sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges , their breasts crushed with wicker hurdles , their knees excoriated with prayer ; women who think themselves wives , spectres who think themselves seraphim . 
Do these women think ? 
No . 
Have they any will ? 
