The man who was walking in a bent attitude was an ex-convict , and what he was dragging on his shoulders was a corpse . 
Assassination caught in the very act , if ever there was such a thing . 
As for the theft , that is understood ; one does not kill a man gratis . 
This convict was on his way to fling the body into the river . 
One fact is to be noticed , that before reaching the exit grating , this convict , who had come a long distance in the sewer , must , necessarily , have encountered a frightful quagmire where it seems as though he might have left the body , but the sewermen would have found the assassinated man the very next day , while at work on the quagmire , and that did not suit the assassin 's plans . 
He had preferred to traverse that quagmire with his burden , and his exertions must have been terrible , for it is impossible to risk one 's life more completely ; I do n't understand how he could have come out of that alive . '' 
Marius ' chair approached still nearer . 
Thenardier took advantage of this to draw a long breath . 
He went on : `` Monsieur le Baron , a sewer is not the Champ de Mars . 
One lacks everything there , even room . 
When two men are there , they must meet . 
That is what happened . 
The man domiciled there and the passer-by were forced to bid each other good-day , greatly to the regret of both . 
The passer-by said to the inhabitant : -- `` You see what I have on my back , I must get out , you have the key , give it to me . '' 
That convict was a man of terrible strength . 
There was no way of refusing . 
Nevertheless , the man who had the key parleyed , simply to gain time . 
He examined the dead man , but he could see nothing , except that the latter was young , well dressed , with the air of being rich , and all disfigured with blood . 
While talking , the man contrived to tear and pull off behind , without the assassin perceiving it , a bit of the assassinated man 's coat . 
A document for conviction , you understand ; a means of recovering the trace of things and of bringing home the crime to the criminal . 
He put this document for conviction in his pocket . 
After which he opened the grating , made the man go out with his embarrassment on his back , closed the grating again , and ran off , not caring to be mixed up with the remainder of the adventure and above all , not wishing to be present when the assassin threw the assassinated man into the river . 
Now you comprehend . 
The man who was carrying the corpse was Jean Valjean ; the one who had the key is speaking to you at this moment ; and the piece of the coat ... '' Thenardier completed his phrase by drawing from his pocket , and holding , on a level with his eyes , nipped between his two thumbs and his two forefingers , a strip of torn black cloth , all covered with dark spots . 
Marius had sprung to his feet , pale , hardly able to draw his breath , with his eyes riveted on the fragment of black cloth , and , without uttering a word , without taking his eyes from that fragment , he retreated to the wall and fumbled with his right hand along the wall for a key which was in the lock of a cupboard near the chimney . 
He found the key , opened the cupboard , plunged his arm into it without looking , and without his frightened gaze quitting the rag which Thenardier still held outspread . 
But Thenardier continued : `` Monsieur le Baron , I have the strongest of reasons for believing that the assassinated young man was an opulent stranger lured into a trap by Jean Valjean , and the bearer of an enormous sum of money . '' 
`` The young man was myself , and here is the coat ! '' 
cried Marius , and he flung upon the floor an old black coat all covered with blood . 
Then , snatching the fragment from the hands of Thenardier , he crouched down over the coat , and laid the torn morsel against the tattered skirt . 
The rent fitted exactly , and the strip completed the coat . 
Thenardier was petrified . 
This is what he thought : `` I 'm struck all of a heap . '' 
Marius rose to his feet trembling , despairing , radiant . 
He fumbled in his pocket and stalked furiously to Thenardier , presenting to him and almost thrusting in his face his fist filled with bank-notes for five hundred and a thousand francs . 
`` You are an infamous wretch ! 
you are a liar , a calumniator , a villain . 
You came to accuse that man , you have only justified him ; you wanted to ruin him , you have only succeeded in glorifying him . 
And it is you who are the thief ! 
And it is you who are the assassin ! 
I saw you , Thenardier Jondrette , in that lair on the Rue de l'Hopital . 
I know enough about you to send you to the galleys and even further if I choose . 
Here are a thousand francs , bully that you are ! '' 
And he flung a thousand franc note at Thenardier . 
`` Ah ! 
Jondrette Thenardier , vile rascal ! 
Let this serve you as a lesson , you dealer in second-hand secrets , merchant of mysteries , rummager of the shadows , wretch ! 
Take these five hundred francs and get out of here ! 
Waterloo protects you . '' 
`` Waterloo ! '' 
growled Thenardier , pocketing the five hundred francs along with the thousand . 
`` Yes , assassin ! 
You there saved the life of a Colonel ... '' `` Of a General , '' said Thenardier , elevating his head . 
`` Of a Colonel ! '' 
repeated Marius in a rage . 
`` I would n't give a ha ` penny for a general . 
And you come here to commit infamies ! 
I tell you that you have committed all crimes . 
Go ! 
disappear ! 
Only be happy , that is all that I desire . 
Ah ! 
monster ! 
here are three thousand francs more . 
Take them . 
You will depart to-morrow , for America , with your daughter ; for your wife is dead , you abominable liar . 
I shall watch over your departure , you ruffian , and at that moment I will count out to you twenty thousand francs . 
Go get yourself hung elsewhere ! '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron ! '' 
replied Thenardier , bowing to the very earth , `` eternal gratitude . '' 
And Thenardier left the room , understanding nothing , stupefied and delighted with this sweet crushing beneath sacks of gold , and with that thunder which had burst forth over his head in bank-bills . 
Struck by lightning he was , but he was also content ; and he would have been greatly angered had he had a lightning rod to ward off such lightning as that . 
Let us finish with this man at once . 
Two days after the events which we are at this moment narrating , he set out , thanks to Marius ' care , for America under a false name , with his daughter Azelma , furnished with a draft on New York for twenty thousand francs . 
The moral wretchedness of Thenardier , the bourgeois who had missed his vocation , was irremediable . 
He was in America what he had been in Europe . 
Contact with an evil man sometimes suffices to corrupt a good action and to cause evil things to spring from it . 
With Marius ' money , Thenardier set up as a slave-dealer . 
As soon as Thenardier had left the house , Marius rushed to the garden , where Cosette was still walking . 
`` Cosette ! 
Cosette ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Come ! 
come quick ! 
Let us go . 
Basque , a carriage ! 
Cosette , come . 
Ah ! 
My God ! 
It was he who saved my life ! 
Let us not lose a minute ! 
Put on your shawl . '' 
Cosette thought him mad and obeyed . 
He could not breathe , he laid his hand on his heart to restrain its throbbing . 
He paced back and forth with huge strides , he embraced Cosette : `` Ah ! 
Cosette ! 
I am an unhappy wretch ! '' 
said he . 
Marius was bewildered . 
He began to catch a glimpse in Jean Valjean of some indescribably lofty and melancholy figure . 
