Such is Albion . 
I add , as the climax , that I have seen an Englishwoman dancing in a wreath of roses and blue spectacles . 
A fig then for England ! 
If I do not admire John Bull , shall I admire Brother Jonathan ? 
I have but little taste for that slave-holding brother . 
Take away Time is money , what remains of England ? 
Take away Cotton is king , what remains of America ? 
Germany is the lymph , Italy is the bile . 
Shall we go into ecstasies over Russia ? 
Voltaire admired it . 
He also admired China . 
I admit that Russia has its beauties , among others , a stout despotism ; but I pity the despots . 
Their health is delicate . 
A decapitated Alexis , a poignarded Peter , a strangled Paul , another Paul crushed flat with kicks , divers Ivans strangled , with their throats cut , numerous Nicholases and Basils poisoned , all this indicates that the palace of the Emperors of Russia is in a condition of flagrant insalubrity . 
All civilized peoples offer this detail to the admiration of the thinker ; war ; now , war , civilized war , exhausts and sums up all the forms of ruffianism , from the brigandage of the Trabuceros in the gorges of Mont Jaxa to the marauding of the Comanche Indians in the Doubtful Pass . 
` Bah ! ' 
you will say to me , ` but Europe is certainly better than Asia ? ' 
I admit that Asia is a farce ; but I do not precisely see what you find to laugh at in the Grand Lama , you peoples of the west , who have mingled with your fashions and your elegances all the complicated filth of majesty , from the dirty chemise of Queen Isabella to the chamber-chair of the Dauphin . 
Gentlemen of the human race , I tell you , not a bit of it ! 
It is at Brussels that the most beer is consumed , at Stockholm the most brandy , at Madrid the most chocolate , at Amsterdam the most gin , at London the most wine , at Constantinople the most coffee , at Paris the most absinthe ; there are all the useful notions . 
Paris carries the day , in short . 
In Paris , even the rag-pickers are sybarites ; Diogenes would have loved to be a rag-picker of the Place Maubert better than to be a philosopher at the Piraeus . 
Learn this in addition ; the wineshops of the ragpickers are called bibines ; the most celebrated are the Saucepan and The Slaughter-House . 
Hence , tea-gardens , goguettes , caboulots , bouibuis , mastroquets , bastringues , manezingues , bibines of the rag-pickers , caravanseries of the caliphs , I certify to you , I am a voluptuary , I eat at Richard 's at forty sous a head , I must have Persian carpets to roll naked Cleopatra in ! 
Where is Cleopatra ? 
Ah ! 
So it is you , Louison . 
Good day . '' 
-LSB- 24 -RSB- The slang term for a painter 's assistant . 
Thus did Grantaire , more than intoxicated , launch into speech , catching at the dish-washer in her passage , from his corner in the back room of the Cafe Musain . 
Bossuet , extending his hand towards him , tried to impose silence on him , and Grantaire began again worse than ever : -- `` Aigle de Meaux , down with your paws . 
You produce on me no effect with your gesture of Hippocrates refusing Artaxerxes ' bric-a-brac . 
I excuse you from the task of soothing me . 
Moreover , I am sad . 
What do you wish me to say to you ? 
Man is evil , man is deformed ; the butterfly is a success , man is a failure . 
God made a mistake with that animal . 
A crowd offers a choice of ugliness . 
The first comer is a wretch , Femme -- woman -- rhymes with infame , -- infamous . 
Yes , I have the spleen , complicated with melancholy , with homesickness , plus hypochondria , and I am vexed and I rage , and I yawn , and I am bored , and I am tired to death , and I am stupid ! 
Let God go to the devil ! '' 
`` Silence then , capital R ! '' 
resumed Bossuet , who was discussing a point of law behind the scenes , and who was plunged more than waist high in a phrase of judicial slang , of which this is the conclusion : -- '' -- And as for me , although I am hardly a legist , and at the most , an amateur attorney , I maintain this : that , in accordance with the terms of the customs of Normandy , at Saint-Michel , and for each year , an equivalent must be paid to the profit of the lord of the manor , saving the rights of others , and by all and several , the proprietors as well as those seized with inheritance , and that , for all emphyteuses , leases , freeholds , contracts of domain , mortgages -- '' `` Echo , plaintive nymph , '' hummed Grantaire . 
Near Grantaire , an almost silent table , a sheet of paper , an inkstand and a pen between two glasses of brandy , announced that a vaudeville was being sketched out . 
This great affair was being discussed in a low voice , and the two heads at work touched each other : `` Let us begin by finding names . 
When one has the names , one finds the subject . '' 
`` That is true . 
Dictate . 
I will write . '' 
`` Monsieur Dorimon . '' 
`` An independent gentleman ? '' 
`` Of course . '' 
`` His daughter , Celestine . '' '' 
-- tine . 
What next ? '' 
`` Colonel Sainval . '' 
`` Sainval is stale . 
I should say Valsin . '' 
Beside the vaudeville aspirants , another group , which was also taking advantage of the uproar to talk low , was discussing a duel . 
An old fellow of thirty was counselling a young one of eighteen , and explaining to him what sort of an adversary he had to deal with . 
`` The deuce ! 
Look out for yourself . 
He is a fine swordsman . 
His play is neat . 
He has the attack , no wasted feints , wrist , dash , lightning , a just parade , mathematical parries , bigre ! 
and he is left-handed . '' 
In the angle opposite Grantaire , Joly and Bahorel were playing dominoes , and talking of love . 
`` You are in luck , that you are , '' Joly was saying . 
`` You have a mistress who is always laughing . '' 
`` That is a fault of hers , '' returned Bahorel . 
`` One 's mistress does wrong to laugh . 
That encourages one to deceive her . 
To see her gay removes your remorse ; if you see her sad , your conscience pricks you . '' 
`` Ingrate ! 
a woman who laughs is such a good thing ! 
And you never quarrel ! '' 
`` That is because of the treaty which we have made . 
On forming our little Holy Alliance we assigned ourselves each our frontier , which we never cross . 
What is situated on the side of winter belongs to Vaud , on the side of the wind to Gex . 
Hence the peace . '' 
`` Peace is happiness digesting . '' 
`` And you , Jolllly , where do you stand in your entanglement with Mamselle -- you know whom I mean ? '' 
`` She sulks at me with cruel patience . '' 
`` Yet you are a lover to soften the heart with gauntness . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
`` In your place , I would let her alone . '' 
`` That is easy enough to say . '' 
`` And to do . 
Is not her name Musichetta ? '' 
`` Yes . 
Ah ! 
my poor Bahorel , she is a superb girl , very literary , with tiny feet , little hands , she dresses well , and is white and dimpled , with the eyes of a fortune-teller . 
I am wild over her . '' 
`` My dear fellow , then in order to please her , you must be elegant , and produce effects with your knees . 
Buy a good pair of trousers of double-milled cloth at Staub 's . 
That will assist . '' 
`` At what price ? '' 
shouted Grantaire . 
The third corner was delivered up to a poetical discussion . 
Pagan mythology was giving battle to Christian mythology . 
