With too much haste perhaps . 
Were they all dead ? 
Legend says they were not . 
It seems that on the night succeeding the interment , feeble voices were heard calling from the well . 
This well is isolated in the middle of the courtyard . 
Three walls , part stone , part brick , and simulating a small , square tower , and folded like the leaves of a screen , surround it on all sides . 
The fourth side is open . 
It is there that the water was drawn . 
The wall at the bottom has a sort of shapeless loophole , possibly the hole made by a shell . 
This little tower had a platform , of which only the beams remain . 
The iron supports of the well on the right form a cross . 
On leaning over , the eye is lost in a deep cylinder of brick which is filled with a heaped-up mass of shadows . 
The base of the walls all about the well is concealed in a growth of nettles . 
This well has not in front of it that large blue slab which forms the table for all wells in Belgium . 
The slab has here been replaced by a cross-beam , against which lean five or six shapeless fragments of knotty and petrified wood which resemble huge bones . 
There is no longer either pail , chain , or pulley ; but there is still the stone basin which served the overflow . 
The rain-water collects there , and from time to time a bird of the neighboring forests comes thither to drink , and then flies away . 
One house in this ruin , the farmhouse , is still inhabited . 
The door of this house opens on the courtyard . 
Upon this door , beside a pretty Gothic lock-plate , there is an iron handle with trefoils placed slanting . 
At the moment when the Hanoverian lieutenant , Wilda , grasped this handle in order to take refuge in the farm , a French sapper hewed off his hand with an axe . 
The family who occupy the house had for their grandfather Guillaume van Kylsom , the old gardener , dead long since . 
A woman with gray hair said to us : `` I was there . 
I was three years old . 
My sister , who was older , was terrified and wept . 
They carried us off to the woods . 
I went there in my mother 's arms . 
We glued our ears to the earth to hear . 
I imitated the cannon , and went boum ! 
boum ! '' 
A door opening from the courtyard on the left led into the orchard , so we were told . 
The orchard is terrible . 
It is in three parts ; one might almost say , in three acts . 
The first part is a garden , the second is an orchard , the third is a wood . 
These three parts have a common enclosure : on the side of the entrance , the buildings of the chateau and the farm ; on the left , a hedge ; on the right , a wall ; and at the end , a wall . 
The wall on the right is of brick , the wall at the bottom is of stone . 
One enters the garden first . 
It slopes downwards , is planted with gooseberry bushes , choked with a wild growth of vegetation , and terminated by a monumental terrace of cut stone , with balustrade with a double curve . 
It was a seignorial garden in the first French style which preceded Le Notre ; to-day it is ruins and briars . 
The pilasters are surmounted by globes which resemble cannon-balls of stone . 
Forty-three balusters can still be counted on their sockets ; the rest lie prostrate in the grass . 
Almost all bear scratches of bullets . 
One broken baluster is placed on the pediment like a fractured leg . 
It was in this garden , further down than the orchard , that six light-infantry men of the 1st , having made their way thither , and being unable to escape , hunted down and caught like bears in their dens , accepted the combat with two Hanoverian companies , one of which was armed with carbines . 
The Hanoverians lined this balustrade and fired from above . 
The infantry men , replying from below , six against two hundred , intrepid and with no shelter save the currant-bushes , took a quarter of an hour to die . 
One mounts a few steps and passes from the garden into the orchard , properly speaking . 
There , within the limits of those few square fathoms , fifteen hundred men fell in less than an hour . 
The wall seems ready to renew the combat . 
Thirty-eight loopholes , pierced by the English at irregular heights , are there still . 
In front of the sixth are placed two English tombs of granite . 
There are loopholes only in the south wall , as the principal attack came from that quarter . 
The wall is hidden on the outside by a tall hedge ; the French came up , thinking that they had to deal only with a hedge , crossed it , and found the wall both an obstacle and an ambuscade , with the English guards behind it , the thirty-eight loopholes firing at once a shower of grape-shot and balls , and Soye 's brigade was broken against it . 
Thus Waterloo began . 
Nevertheless , the orchard was taken . 
As they had no ladders , the French scaled it with their nails . 
They fought hand to hand amid the trees . 
All this grass has been soaked in blood . 
A battalion of Nassau , seven hundred strong , was overwhelmed there . 
The outside of the wall , against which Kellermann 's two batteries were trained , is gnawed by grape-shot . 
This orchard is sentient , like others , in the month of May . 
It has its buttercups and its daisies ; the grass is tall there ; the cart-horses browse there ; cords of hair , on which linen is drying , traverse the spaces between the trees and force the passer-by to bend his head ; one walks over this uncultivated land , and one 's foot dives into mole-holes . 
In the middle of the grass one observes an uprooted tree-bole which lies there all verdant . 
Major Blackmann leaned against it to die . 
Beneath a great tree in the neighborhood fell the German general , Duplat , descended from a French family which fled on the revocation of the Edict of Nantes . 
An aged and falling apple-tree leans far over to one side , its wound dressed with a bandage of straw and of clayey loam . 
Nearly all the apple-trees are falling with age . 
There is not one which has not had its bullet or its biscayan . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- The skeletons of dead trees abound in this orchard . 
Crows fly through their branches , and at the end of it is a wood full of violets . 
-LSB- 6 -RSB- A bullet as large as an egg . 
Bauduin , killed , Foy wounded , conflagration , massacre , carnage , a rivulet formed of English blood , French blood , German blood mingled in fury , a well crammed with corpses , the regiment of Nassau and the regiment of Brunswick destroyed , Duplat killed , Blackmann killed , the English Guards mutilated , twenty French battalions , besides the forty from Reille 's corps , decimated , three thousand men in that hovel of Hougomont alone cut down , slashed to pieces , shot , burned , with their throats cut , -- and all this so that a peasant can say to-day to the traveller : Monsieur , give me three francs , and if you like , I will explain to you the affair of Waterloo ! 
THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE , 1815 Let us turn back , -- that is one of the story-teller 's rights , -- and put ourselves once more in the year 1815 , and even a little earlier than the epoch when the action narrated in the first part of this book took place . 
If it had not rained in the night between the 17th and the 18th of June , 1815 , the fate of Europe would have been different . 
A few drops of water , more or less , decided the downfall of Napoleon . 
All that Providence required in order to make Waterloo the end of Austerlitz was a little more rain , and a cloud traversing the sky out of season sufficed to make a world crumble . 
The battle of Waterloo could not be begun until half-past eleven o'clock , and that gave Blucher time to come up . 
Why ? 
Because the ground was wet . 
The artillery had to wait until it became a little firmer before they could manoeuvre . 
Napoleon was an artillery officer , and felt the effects of this . 
The foundation of this wonderful captain was the man who , in the report to the Directory on Aboukir , said : Such a one of our balls killed six men . 
All his plans of battle were arranged for projectiles . 
The key to his victory was to make the artillery converge on one point . 
He treated the strategy of the hostile general like a citadel , and made a breach in it . 
He overwhelmed the weak point with grape-shot ; he joined and dissolved battles with cannon . 
There was something of the sharpshooter in his genius . 
To beat in squares , to pulverize regiments , to break lines , to crush and disperse masses , -- for him everything lay in this , to strike , strike , strike incessantly , -- and he intrusted this task to the cannon-ball . 
A redoubtable method , and one which , united with genius , rendered this gloomy athlete of the pugilism of war invincible for the space of fifteen years . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , he relied all the more on his artillery , because he had numbers on his side . 
Wellington had only one hundred and fifty-nine mouths of fire ; Napoleon had two hundred and forty . 
Suppose the soil dry , and the artillery capable of moving , the action would have begun at six o'clock in the morning . 
The battle would have been won and ended at two o'clock , three hours before the change of fortune in favor of the Prussians . 
What amount of blame attaches to Napoleon for the loss of this battle ? 
Is the shipwreck due to the pilot ? 
Was it the evident physical decline of Napoleon that complicated this epoch by an inward diminution of force ? 
Had the twenty years of war worn out the blade as it had worn the scabbard , the soul as well as the body ? 
Did the veteran make himself disastrously felt in the leader ? 
In a word , was this genius , as many historians of note have thought , suffering from an eclipse ? 
Did he go into a frenzy in order to disguise his weakened powers from himself ? 
