The first detail that struck the observer was , that the door could never have been anything but the door of a hovel , while the window , if it had been carved out of dressed stone instead of being in rough masonry , might have been the lattice of a lordly mansion . 
The door was nothing but a collection of worm-eaten planks roughly bound together by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs . 
It opened directly on a steep staircase of lofty steps , muddy , chalky , plaster-stained , dusty steps , of the same width as itself , which could be seen from the street , running straight up like a ladder and disappearing in the darkness between two walls . 
The top of the shapeless bay into which this door shut was masked by a narrow scantling in the centre of which a triangular hole had been sawed , which served both as wicket and air-hole when the door was closed . 
On the inside of the door the figures 52 had been traced with a couple of strokes of a brush dipped in ink , and above the scantling the same hand had daubed the number 50 , so that one hesitated . 
Where was one ? 
Above the door it said , `` Number 50 '' ; the inside replied , `` no , Number 52 . '' 
No one knows what dust-colored figures were suspended like draperies from the triangular opening . 
The window was large , sufficiently elevated , garnished with Venetian blinds , and with a frame in large square panes ; only these large panes were suffering from various wounds , which were both concealed and betrayed by an ingenious paper bandage . 
And the blinds , dislocated and unpasted , threatened passers-by rather than screened the occupants . 
The horizontal slats were missing here and there and had been naively replaced with boards nailed on perpendicularly ; so that what began as a blind ended as a shutter . 
This door with an unclean , and this window with an honest though dilapidated air , thus beheld on the same house , produced the effect of two incomplete beggars walking side by side , with different miens beneath the same rags , the one having always been a mendicant , and the other having once been a gentleman . 
The staircase led to a very vast edifice which resembled a shed which had been converted into a house . 
This edifice had , for its intestinal tube , a long corridor , on which opened to right and left sorts of compartments of varied dimensions which were inhabitable under stress of circumstances , and rather more like stalls than cells . 
These chambers received their light from the vague waste grounds in the neighborhood . 
All this was dark , disagreeable , wan , melancholy , sepulchral ; traversed according as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door , by cold rays or by icy winds . 
An interesting and picturesque peculiarity of this sort of dwelling is the enormous size of the spiders . 
To the left of the entrance door , on the boulevard side , at about the height of a man from the ground , a small window which had been walled up formed a square niche full of stones which the children had thrown there as they passed by . 
A portion of this building has recently been demolished . 
From what still remains of it one can form a judgment as to what it was in former days . 
As a whole , it was not over a hundred years old . 
A hundred years is youth in a church and age in a house . 
It seems as though man 's lodging partook of his ephemeral character , and God 's house of his eternity . 
The postmen called the house Number 50-52 ; but it was known in the neighborhood as the Gorbeau house . 
Let us explain whence this appellation was derived . 
Collectors of petty details , who become herbalists of anecdotes , and prick slippery dates into their memories with a pin , know that there was in Paris , during the last century , about 1770 , two attorneys at the Chatelet named , one Corbeau -LRB- Raven -RRB- , the other Renard -LRB- Fox -RRB- . 
The two names had been forestalled by La Fontaine . 
The opportunity was too fine for the lawyers ; they made the most of it . 
A parody was immediately put in circulation in the galleries of the court-house , in verses that limped a little : -- Maitre Corbeau , sur un dossier perche , -LSB- 13 -RSB- Tenait dans son bee une saisie executoire ; Maitre Renard , par l'odeur alleche , Lui fit a peu pres cette histoire : He ! 
bonjour . 
Etc. -LSB- 13 -RSB- Lawyer Corbeau , perched on a docket , held in his beak a writ of execution ; Lawyer Renard , attracted by the smell , addressed him nearly as follows , etc. . 
The two honest practitioners , embarrassed by the jests , and finding the bearing of their heads interfered with by the shouts of laughter which followed them , resolved to get rid of their names , and hit upon the expedient of applying to the king . 
Their petition was presented to Louis XV . 
on the same day when the Papal Nuncio , on the one hand , and the Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon on the other , both devoutly kneeling , were each engaged in putting on , in his Majesty 's presence , a slipper on the bare feet of Madame du Barry , who had just got out of bed . 
The king , who was laughing , continued to laugh , passed gayly from the two bishops to the two lawyers , and bestowed on these limbs of the law their former names , or nearly so . 
By the kings command , Maitre Corbeau was permitted to add a tail to his initial letter and to call himself Gorbeau . 
Maitre Renard was less lucky ; all he obtained was leave to place a P in front of his R , and to call himself Prenard ; so that the second name bore almost as much resemblance as the first . 
Now , according to local tradition , this Maitre Gorbeau had been the proprietor of the building numbered 50-52 on the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
He was even the author of the monumental window . 
Hence the edifice bore the name of the Gorbeau house . 
Opposite this house , among the trees of the boulevard , rose a great elm which was three-quarters dead ; almost directly facing it opens the Rue de la Barriere des Gobelins , a street then without houses , unpaved , planted with unhealthy trees , which was green or muddy according to the season , and which ended squarely in the exterior wall of Paris . 
An odor of copperas issued in puffs from the roofs of the neighboring factory . 
The barrier was close at hand . 
In 1823 the city wall was still in existence . 
This barrier itself evoked gloomy fancies in the mind . 
It was the road to Bicetre . 
It was through it that , under the Empire and the Restoration , prisoners condemned to death re-entered Paris on the day of their execution . 
It was there , that , about 1829 , was committed that mysterious assassination , called `` The assassination of the Fontainebleau barrier , '' whose authors justice was never able to discover ; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated , a frightful enigma which has never been unriddled . 
Take a few steps , and you come upon that fatal Rue Croulebarbe , where Ulbach stabbed the goat-girl of Ivry to the sound of thunder , as in the melodramas . 
A few paces more , and you arrive at the abominable pollarded elms of the Barriere Saint-Jacques , that expedient of the philanthropist to conceal the scaffold , that miserable and shameful Place de Grove of a shop-keeping and bourgeois society , which recoiled before the death penalty , neither daring to abolish it with grandeur , nor to uphold it with authority . 
Leaving aside this Place Saint-Jacques , which was , as it were , predestined , and which has always been horrible , probably the most mournful spot on that mournful boulevard , seven and thirty years ago , was the spot which even to-day is so unattractive , where stood the building Number 50-52 . 
Bourgeois houses only began to spring up there twenty-five years later . 
The place was unpleasant . 
In addition to the gloomy thoughts which assailed one there , one was conscious of being between the Salpetriere , a glimpse of whose dome could be seen , and Bicetre , whose outskirts one was fairly touching ; that is to say , between the madness of women and the madness of men . 
As far as the eye could see , one could perceive nothing but the abattoirs , the city wall , and the fronts of a few factories , resembling barracks or monasteries ; everywhere about stood hovels , rubbish , ancient walls blackened like cerecloths , new white walls like winding-sheets ; everywhere parallel rows of trees , buildings erected on a line , flat constructions , long , cold rows , and the melancholy sadness of right angles . 
Not an unevenness of the ground , not a caprice in the architecture , not a fold . 
The ensemble was glacial , regular , hideous . 
Nothing oppresses the heart like symmetry . 
It is because symmetry is ennui , and ennui is at the very foundation of grief . 
Despair yawns . 
Something more terrible than a hell where one suffers may be imagined , and that is a hell where one is bored . 
If such a hell existed , that bit of the Boulevard de l'Hopital might have formed the entrance to it . 
Nevertheless , at nightfall , at the moment when the daylight is vanishing , especially in winter , at the hour when the twilight breeze tears from the elms their last russet leaves , when the darkness is deep and starless , or when the moon and the wind are making openings in the clouds and losing themselves in the shadows , this boulevard suddenly becomes frightful . 
The black lines sink inwards and are lost in the shades , like morsels of the infinite . 
The passer-by can not refrain from recalling the innumerable traditions of the place which are connected with the gibbet . 
The solitude of this spot , where so many crimes have been committed , had something terrible about it . 
One almost had a presentiment of meeting with traps in that darkness ; all the confused forms of the darkness seemed suspicious , and the long , hollow square , of which one caught a glimpse between each tree , seemed graves : by day it was ugly ; in the evening melancholy ; by night it was sinister . 
In summer , at twilight , one saw , here and there , a few old women seated at the foot of the elm , on benches mouldy with rain . 
These good old women were fond of begging . 
However , this quarter , which had a superannuated rather than an antique air , was tending even then to transformation . 
Even at that time any one who was desirous of seeing it had to make haste . 
Each day some detail of the whole effect was disappearing . 
For the last twenty years the station of the Orleans railway has stood beside the old faubourg and distracted it , as it does to-day . 
Wherever it is placed on the borders of a capital , a railway station is the death of a suburb and the birth of a city . 
It seems as though , around these great centres of the movements of a people , the earth , full of germs , trembled and yawned , to engulf the ancient dwellings of men and to allow new ones to spring forth , at the rattle of these powerful machines , at the breath of these monstrous horses of civilization which devour coal and vomit fire . 
The old houses crumble and new ones rise . 
Since the Orleans railway has invaded the region of the Salpetriere , the ancient , narrow streets which adjoin the moats Saint-Victor and the Jardin des Plantes tremble , as they are violently traversed three or four times each day by those currents of coach fiacres and omnibuses which , in a given time , crowd back the houses to the right and the left ; for there are things which are odd when said that are rigorously exact ; and just as it is true to say that in large cities the sun makes the southern fronts of houses to vegetate and grow , it is certain that the frequent passage of vehicles enlarges streets . 
The symptoms of a new life are evident . 
In this old provincial quarter , in the wildest nooks , the pavement shows itself , the sidewalks begin to crawl and to grow longer , even where there are as yet no pedestrians . 
One morning , -- a memorable morning in July , 1845 , -- black pots of bitumen were seen smoking there ; on that day it might be said that civilization had arrived in the Rue de l'Ourcine , and that Paris had entered the suburb of Saint-Marceau . 
A NEST FOR OWL AND A WARBLER It was in front of this Gorbeau house that Jean Valjean halted . 
Like wild birds , he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest . 
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket , drew out a sort of a pass-key , opened the door , entered , closed it again carefully , and ascended the staircase , still carrying Cosette . 
At the top of the stairs he drew from his pocket another key , with which he opened another door . 
The chamber which he entered , and which he closed again instantly , was a kind of moderately spacious attic , furnished with a mattress laid on the floor , a table , and several chairs ; a stove in which a fire was burning , and whose embers were visible , stood in one corner . 
A lantern on the boulevard cast a vague light into this poor room . 
At the extreme end there was a dressing-room with a folding bed ; Jean Valjean carried the child to this bed and laid her down there without waking her . 
He struck a match and lighted a candle . 
All this was prepared beforehand on the table , and , as he had done on the previous evening , he began to scrutinize Cosette 's face with a gaze full of ecstasy , in which the expression of kindness and tenderness almost amounted to aberration . 
The little girl , with that tranquil confidence which belongs only to extreme strength and extreme weakness , had fallen asleep without knowing with whom she was , and continued to sleep without knowing where she was . 
Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child 's hand . 
Nine months before he had kissed the hand of the mother , who had also just fallen asleep . 
The same sad , piercing , religious sentiment filled his heart . 
He knelt beside Cosette 's bed . 
lt was broad daylight , and the child still slept . 
A wan ray of the December sun penetrated the window of the attic and lay upon the ceiling in long threads of light and shade . 
All at once a heavily laden carrier 's cart , which was passing along the boulevard , shook the frail bed , like a clap of thunder , and made it quiver from top to bottom . 
`` Yes , madame ! '' 
cried Cosette , waking with a start , `` here I am ! 
here I am ! '' 
