`` Can any one understand , '' exclaimed Feuilly bitterly , `` those men , -- -LSB- and he cited names , well-known names , even celebrated names , some belonging to the old army -RSB- -- who had promised to join us , and taken an oath to aid us , and who had pledged their honor to it , and who are our generals , and who abandon us ! '' 
And Combeferre restricted himself to replying with a grave smile . 
`` There are people who observe the rules of honor as one observes the stars , from a great distance . '' 
The interior of the barricade was so strewn with torn cartridges that one would have said that there had been a snowstorm . 
The assailants had numbers in their favor ; the insurgents had position . 
They were at the top of a wall , and they thundered point-blank upon the soldiers tripping over the dead and wounded and entangled in the escarpment . 
This barricade , constructed as it was and admirably buttressed , was really one of those situations where a handful of men hold a legion in check . 
Nevertheless , the attacking column , constantly recruited and enlarged under the shower of bullets , drew inexorably nearer , and now , little by little , step by step , but surely , the army closed in around the barricade as the vice grasps the wine-press . 
One assault followed another . 
The horror of the situation kept increasing . 
Then there burst forth on that heap of paving-stones , in that Rue de la Chanvrerie , a battle worthy of a wall of Troy . 
These haggard , ragged , exhausted men , who had had nothing to eat for four and twenty hours , who had not slept , who had but a few more rounds to fire , who were fumbling in their pockets which had been emptied of cartridges , nearly all of whom were wounded , with head or arm bandaged with black and blood-stained linen , with holes in their clothes from which the blood trickled , and who were hardly armed with poor guns and notched swords , became Titans . 
The barricade was ten times attacked , approached , assailed , scaled , and never captured . 
In order to form an idea of this struggle , it is necessary to imagine fire set to a throng of terrible courages , and then to gaze at the conflagration . 
It was not a combat , it was the interior of a furnace ; there mouths breathed the flame ; there countenances were extraordinary . 
The human form seemed impossible there , the combatants flamed forth there , and it was formidable to behold the going and coming in that red glow of those salamanders of the fray . 
The successive and simultaneous scenes of this grand slaughter we renounce all attempts at depicting . 
The epic alone has the right to fill twelve thousand verses with a battle . 
One would have pronounced this that hell of Brahmanism , the most redoubtable of the seventeen abysses , which the Veda calls the Forest of Swords . 
They fought hand to hand , foot to foot , with pistol shots , with blows of the sword , with their fists , at a distance , close at hand , from above , from below , from everywhere , from the roofs of the houses , from the windows of the wine-shop , from the cellar windows , whither some had crawled . 
They were one against sixty . 
The facade of Corinthe , half demolished , was hideous . 
The window , tattooed with grape-shot , had lost glass and frame and was nothing now but a shapeless hole , tumultuously blocked with paving-stones . 
Bossuet was killed ; Feuilly was killed ; Courfeyrac was killed ; Combeferre , transfixed by three blows from a bayonet in the breast at the moment when he was lifting up a wounded soldier , had only time to cast a glance to heaven when he expired . 
Marius , still fighting , was so riddled with wounds , particularly in the head , that his countenance disappeared beneath the blood , and one would have said that his face was covered with a red kerchief . 
Enjolras alone was not struck . 
When he had no longer any weapon , he reached out his hands to right and left and an insurgent thrust some arm or other into his fist . 
All he had left was the stumps of four swords ; one more than Francois I. at Marignan . 
Homer says : `` Diomedes cuts the throat of Axylus , son of Teuthranis , who dwelt in happy Arisba ; Euryalus , son of Mecistaeus , exterminates Dresos and Opheltios , Esepius , and that Pedasus whom the naiad Abarbarea bore to the blameless Bucolion ; Ulysses overthrows Pidytes of Percosius ; Antilochus , Ablerus ; Polypaetes , Astyalus ; Polydamas , Otos , of Cyllene ; and Teucer , Aretaon . 
Meganthios dies under the blows of Euripylus ' pike . 
Agamemnon , king of the heroes , flings to earth Elatos , born in the rocky city which is laved by the sounding river Satnois . '' 
In our old poems of exploits , Esplandian attacks the giant marquis Swantibore with a cobbler 's shoulder-stick of fire , and the latter defends himself by stoning the hero with towers which he plucks up by the roots . 
Our ancient mural frescoes show us the two Dukes of Bretagne and Bourbon , armed , emblazoned and crested in war-like guise , on horseback and approaching each other , their battle-axes in hand , masked with iron , gloved with iron , booted with iron , the one caparisoned in ermine , the other draped in azure : Bretagne with his lion between the two horns of his crown , Bourbon helmeted with a monster fleur de lys on his visor . 
But , in order to be superb , it is not necessary to wear , like Yvon , the ducal morion , to have in the fist , like Esplandian , a living flame , or , like Phyles , father of Polydamas , to have brought back from Ephyra a good suit of mail , a present from the king of men , Euphetes ; it suffices to give one 's life for a conviction or a loyalty . 
This ingenuous little soldier , yesterday a peasant of Bauce or Limousin , who prowls with his clasp-knife by his side , around the children 's nurses in the Luxembourg garden , this pale young student bent over a piece of anatomy or a book , a blond youth who shaves his beard with scissors , -- take both of them , breathe upon them with a breath of duty , place them face to face in the Carrefour Boucherat or in the blind alley Planche-Mibray , and let the one fight for his flag , and the other for his ideal , and let both of them imagine that they are fighting for their country ; the struggle will be colossal ; and the shadow which this raw recruit and this sawbones in conflict will produce in that grand epic field where humanity is striving , will equal the shadow cast by Megaryon , King of Lycia , tiger-filled , crushing in his embrace the immense body of Ajax , equal to the gods . 
FOOT TO FOOT When there were no longer any of the leaders left alive , except Enjolras and Marius at the two extremities of the barricade , the centre , which had so long sustained Courfeyrac , Joly , Bossuet , Feuilly and Combeferre , gave way . 
The cannon , though it had not effected a practicable breach , had made a rather large hollow in the middle of the redoubt ; there , the summit of the wall had disappeared before the balls , and had crumbled away ; and the rubbish which had fallen , now inside , now outside , had , as it accumulated , formed two piles in the nature of slopes on the two sides of the barrier , one on the inside , the other on the outside . 
The exterior slope presented an inclined plane to the attack . 
A final assault was there attempted , and this assault succeeded . 
The mass bristling with bayonets and hurled forward at a run , came up with irresistible force , and the serried front of battle of the attacking column made its appearance through the smoke on the crest of the battlements . 
This time , it was decisive . 
The group of insurgents who were defending the centre retreated in confusion . 
Then the gloomy love of life awoke once more in some of them . 
Many , finding themselves under the muzzles of this forest of guns , did not wish to die . 
This is a moment when the instinct of self-preservation emits howls , when the beast re-appears in men . 
They were hemmed in by the lofty , six-story house which formed the background of their redoubt . 
This house might prove their salvation . 
The building was barricaded , and walled , as it were , from top to bottom . 
Before the troops of the line had reached the interior of the redoubt , there was time for a door to open and shut , the space of a flash of lightning was sufficient for that , and the door of that house , suddenly opened a crack and closed again instantly , was life for these despairing men . 
Behind this house , there were streets , possible flight , space . 
They set to knocking at that door with the butts of their guns , and with kicks , shouting , calling , entreating , wringing their hands . 
No one opened . 
From the little window on the third floor , the head of the dead man gazed down upon them . 
But Enjolras and Marius , and the seven or eight rallied about them , sprang forward and protected them . 
Enjolras had shouted to the soldiers : `` Do n't advance ! '' 
and as an officer had not obeyed , Enjolras had killed the officer . 
He was now in the little inner court of the redoubt , with his back planted against the Corinthe building , a sword in one hand , a rifle in the other , holding open the door of the wine-shop which he barred against assailants . 
He shouted to the desperate men : -- `` There is but one door open ; this one . '' 
-- And shielding them with his body , and facing an entire battalion alone , he made them pass in behind him . 
All precipitated themselves thither . 
Enjolras , executing with his rifle , which he now used like a cane , what single-stick players call a `` covered rose '' round his head , levelled the bayonets around and in front of him , and was the last to enter ; and then ensued a horrible moment , when the soldiers tried to make their way in , and the insurgents strove to bar them out . 
The door was slammed with such violence , that , as it fell back into its frame , it showed the five fingers of a soldier who had been clinging to it , cut off and glued to the post . 
Marius remained outside . 
A shot had just broken his collar bone , he felt that he was fainting and falling . 
At that moment , with eyes already shut , he felt the shock of a vigorous hand seizing him , and the swoon in which his senses vanished , hardly allowed him time for the thought , mingled with a last memory of Cosette : -- `` I am taken prisoner . 
I shall be shot . '' 
Enjolras , not seeing Marius among those who had taken refuge in the wine-shop , had the same idea . 
But they had reached a moment when each man has not the time to meditate on his own death . 
Enjolras fixed the bar across the door , and bolted it , and double-locked it with key and chain , while those outside were battering furiously at it , the soldiers with the butts of their muskets , the sappers with their axes . 
The assailants were grouped about that door . 
The siege of the wine-shop was now beginning . 
The soldiers , we will observe , were full of wrath . 
The death of the artillery-sergeant had enraged them , and then , a still more melancholy circumstance . 
during the few hours which had preceded the attack , it had been reported among them that the insurgents were mutilating their prisoners , and that there was the headless body of a soldier in the wine-shop . 
This sort of fatal rumor is the usual accompaniment of civil wars , and it was a false report of this kind which , later on , produced the catastrophe of the Rue Transnonain . 
When the door was barricaded , Enjolras said to the others : `` Let us sell our lives dearly . '' 
Then he approached the table on which lay Mabeuf and Gavroche . 
Beneath the black cloth two straight and rigid forms were visible , one large , the other small , and the two faces were vaguely outlined beneath the cold folds of the shroud . 
A hand projected from beneath the winding sheet and hung near the floor . 
It was that of the old man . 
Enjolras bent down and kissed that venerable hand , just as he had kissed his brow on the preceding evening . 
These were the only two kisses which he had bestowed in the course of his life . 
Let us abridge the tale . 
The barricade had fought like a gate of Thebes ; the wine-shop fought like a house of Saragossa . 
These resistances are dogged . 
No quarter . 
No flag of truce possible . 
Men are willing to die , provided their opponent will kill them . 
When Suchet says : -- `` Capitulate , '' -- Palafox replies : `` After the war with cannon , the war with knives . '' 
Nothing was lacking in the capture by assault of the Hucheloup wine-shop ; neither paving-stones raining from the windows and the roof on the besiegers and exasperating the soldiers by crushing them horribly , nor shots fired from the attic-windows and the cellar , nor the fury of attack , nor , finally , when the door yielded , the frenzied madness of extermination . 
The assailants , rushing into the wine-shop , their feet entangled in the panels of the door which had been beaten in and flung on the ground , found not a single combatant there . 
The spiral staircase , hewn asunder with the axe , lay in the middle of the tap-room , a few wounded men were just breathing their last , every one who was not killed was on the first floor , and from there , through the hole in the ceiling , which had formed the entrance of the stairs , a terrific fire burst forth . 
It was the last of their cartridges . 
When they were exhausted , when these formidable men on the point of death had no longer either powder or ball , each grasped in his hands two of the bottles which Enjolras had reserved , and of which we have spoken , and held the scaling party in check with these frightfully fragile clubs . 
They were bottles of aquafortis . 
We relate these gloomy incidents of carnage as they occurred . 
The besieged man , alas ! 
converts everything into a weapon . 
Greek fire did not disgrace Archimedes , boiling pitch did not disgrace Bayard . 
All war is a thing of terror , and there is no choice in it . 
