The sand has covered them . 
He draws his feet out of the sand , he tries to retrace his steps , he turns back , he sinks in more deeply than before . 
The sand is up to his ankles , he tears himself free from it and flings himself to the left , the sand reaches to mid-leg , he flings himself to the right , the sand comes up to his knees . 
Then , with indescribable terror , he recognizes the fact that he is caught in a quicksand , and that he has beneath him that frightful medium in which neither man can walk nor fish can swim . 
He flings away his burden , if he have one , he lightens himself , like a ship in distress ; it is too late , the sand is above his knees . 
He shouts , he waves his hat , or his handkerchief , the sand continually gains on him ; if the beach is deserted , if the land is too far away , if the bank of sand is too ill-famed , there is no hero in the neighborhood , all is over , he is condemned to be engulfed . 
He is condemned to that terrible interment , long , infallible , implacable , which it is impossible to either retard or hasten , which lasts for hours , which will not come to an end , which seizes you erect , free , in the flush of health , which drags you down by the feet , which , at every effort that you attempt , at every shout that you utter , draws you a little lower , which has the air of punishing you for your resistance by a redoubled grasp , which forces a man to return slowly to earth , while leaving him time to survey the horizon , the trees , the verdant country , the smoke of the villages on the plain , the sails of the ships on the sea , the birds which fly and sing , the sun and the sky . 
This engulfment is the sepulchre which assumes a tide , and which mounts from the depths of the earth towards a living man . 
Each minute is an inexorable layer-out of the dead . 
The wretched man tries to sit down , to lie down , to climb ; every movement that he makes buries him deeper ; he straightens himself up , he sinks ; he feels that he is being swallowed up ; he shrieks , implores , cries to the clouds , wrings his hands , grows desperate . 
Behold him in the sand up to his belly , the sand reaches to his breast , he is only a bust now . 
He uplifts his hands , utters furious groans , clenches his nails on the beach , tries to cling fast to that ashes , supports himself on his elbows in order to raise himself from that soft sheath , and sobs frantically ; the sand mounts higher . 
The sand has reached his shoulders , the sand reaches to his throat ; only his face is visible now . 
His mouth cries aloud , the sand fills it ; silence . 
His eyes still gaze forth , the sand closes them , night . 
Then his brow decreases , a little hair quivers above the sand ; a hand projects , pierces the surface of the beach , waves and disappears . 
Sinister obliteration of a man . 
Sometimes a rider is engulfed with his horse ; sometimes the carter is swallowed up with his cart ; all founders in that strand . 
It is shipwreck elsewhere than in the water . 
It is the earth drowning a man . 
The earth , permeated with the ocean , becomes a pitfall . 
It presents itself in the guise of a plain , and it yawns like a wave . 
The abyss is subject to these treacheries . 
This melancholy fate , always possible on certain sea beaches , was also possible , thirty years ago , in the sewers of Paris . 
Before the important works , undertaken in 1833 , the subterranean drain of Paris was subject to these sudden slides . 
The water filtered into certain subjacent strata , which were particularly friable ; the foot-way , which was of flag-stones , as in the ancient sewers , or of cement on concrete , as in the new galleries , having no longer an underpinning , gave way . 
A fold in a flooring of this sort means a crack , means crumbling . 
The framework crumbled away for a certain length . 
This crevice , the hiatus of a gulf of mire , was called a fontis , in the special tongue . 
What is a fontis ? 
It is the quicksands of the seashore suddenly encountered under the surface of the earth ; it is the beach of Mont Saint-Michel in a sewer . 
The soaked soil is in a state of fusion , as it were ; all its molecules are in suspension in soft medium ; it is not earth and it is not water . 
The depth is sometimes very great . 
Nothing can be more formidable than such an encounter . 
If the water predominates , death is prompt , the man is swallowed up ; if earth predominates , death is slow . 
Can any one picture to himself such a death ? 
If being swallowed by the earth is terrible on the seashore , what is it in a cess-pool ? 
Instead of the open air , the broad daylight , the clear horizon , those vast sounds , those free clouds whence rains life , instead of those barks descried in the distance , of that hope under all sorts of forms , of probable passers-by , of succor possible up to the very last moment , -- instead of all this , deafness , blindness , a black vault , the inside of a tomb already prepared , death in the mire beneath a cover ! 
slow suffocation by filth , a stone box where asphyxia opens its claw in the mire and clutches you by the throat ; fetidness mingled with the death-rattle ; slime instead of the strand , sulfuretted hydrogen in place of the hurricane , dung in place of the ocean ! 
And to shout , to gnash one 's teeth , and to writhe , and to struggle , and to agonize , with that enormous city which knows nothing of it all , over one 's head ! 
Inexpressible is the horror of dying thus ! 
Death sometimes redeems his atrocity by a certain terrible dignity . 
On the funeral pile , in shipwreck , one can be great ; in the flames as in the foam , a superb attitude is possible ; one there becomes transfigured as one perishes . 
But not here . 
Death is filthy . 
It is humiliating to expire . 
The supreme floating visions are abject . 
Mud is synonymous with shame . 
It is petty , ugly , infamous . 
To die in a butt of Malvoisie , like Clarence , is permissible ; in the ditch of a scavenger , like Escoubleau , is horrible . 
To struggle therein is hideous ; at the same time that one is going through the death agony , one is floundering about . 
There are shadows enough for hell , and mire enough to render it nothing but a slough , and the dying man knows not whether he is on the point of becoming a spectre or a frog . 
Everywhere else the sepulchre is sinister ; here it is deformed . 
The depth of the fontis varied , as well as their length and their density , according to the more or less bad quality of the sub-soil . 
Sometimes a fontis was three or four feet deep , sometimes eight or ten ; sometimes the bottom was unfathomable . 
Here the mire was almost solid , there almost liquid . 
In the Luniere fontis , it would have taken a man a day to disappear , while he would have been devoured in five minutes by the Philippeaux slough . 
The mire bears up more or less , according to its density . 
A child can escape where a man will perish . 
The first law of safety is to get rid of every sort of load . 
Every sewerman who felt the ground giving way beneath him began by flinging away his sack of tools , or his back-basket , or his hod . 
The fontis were due to different causes : the friability of the soil ; some landslip at a depth beyond the reach of man ; the violent summer rains ; the incessant flooding of winter ; long , drizzling showers . 
Sometimes the weight of the surrounding houses on a marly or sandy soil forced out the vaults of the subterranean galleries and caused them to bend aside , or it chanced that a flooring vault burst and split under this crushing thrust . 
In this manner , the heaping up of the Parthenon , obliterated , a century ago , a portion of the vaults of Saint-Genevieve hill . 
When a sewer was broken in under the pressure of the houses , the mischief was sometimes betrayed in the street above by a sort of space , like the teeth of a saw , between the paving-stones ; this crevice was developed in an undulating line throughout the entire length of the cracked vault , and then , the evil being visible , the remedy could be promptly applied . 
It also frequently happened , that the interior ravages were not revealed by any external scar , and in that case , woe to the sewermen . 
When they entered without precaution into the sewer , they were liable to be lost . 
Ancient registers make mention of several scavengers who were buried in fontis in this manner . 
They give many names ; among others , that of the sewerman who was swallowed up in a quagmire under the man-hole of the Rue Careme-Prenant , a certain Blaise Poutrain ; this Blaise Poutrain was the brother of Nicholas Poutrain , who was the last grave-digger of the cemetery called the Charnier des Innocents , in 1785 , the epoch when that cemetery expired . 
There was also that young and charming Vicomte d'Escoubleau , of whom we have just spoken , one of the heroes of the siege of Lerida , where they delivered the assault in silk stockings , with violins at their head . 
D'Escoubleau , surprised one night at his cousin 's , the Duchess de Sourdis ' , was drowned in a quagmire of the Beautreillis sewer , in which he had taken refuge in order to escape from the Duke . 
Madame de Sourdis , when informed of his death , demanded her smelling-bottle , and forgot to weep , through sniffling at her salts . 
In such cases , there is no love which holds fast ; the sewer extinguishes it . 
Hero refuses to wash the body of Leander . 
Thisbe stops her nose in the presence of Pyramus and says : `` Phew ! '' 
THE FONTIS Jean Valjean found himself in the presence of a fontis . 
This sort of quagmire was common at that period in the subsoil of the Champs-Elysees , difficult to handle in the hydraulic works and a bad preservative of the subterranean constructions , on account of its excessive fluidity . 
This fluidity exceeds even the inconsistency of the sands of the Quartier Saint-Georges , which could only be conquered by a stone construction on a concrete foundation , and the clayey strata , infected with gas , of the Quartier des Martyrs , which are so liquid that the only way in which a passage was effected under the gallery des Martyrs was by means of a cast-iron pipe . 
When , in 1836 , the old stone sewer beneath the Faubourg Saint-Honore , in which we now see Jean Valjean , was demolished for the purpose of reconstructing it , the quicksand , which forms the subsoil of the Champs-Elysees as far as the Seine , presented such an obstacle , that the operation lasted nearly six months , to the great clamor of the dwellers on the riverside , particularly those who had hotels and carriages . 
The work was more than unhealthy ; it was dangerous . 
It is true that they had four months and a half of rain , and three floods of the Seine . 
The fontis which Jean Valjean had encountered was caused by the downpour of the preceding day . 
The pavement , badly sustained by the subjacent sand , had given way and had produced a stoppage of the water . 
Infiltration had taken place , a slip had followed . 
The dislocated bottom had sunk into the ooze . 
To what extent ? 
Impossible to say . 
The obscurity was more dense there than elsewhere . 
It was a pit of mire in a cavern of night . 
Jean Valjean felt the pavement vanishing beneath his feet . 
He entered this slime . 
There was water on the surface , slime at the bottom . 
He must pass it . 
To retrace his steps was impossible . 
Marius was dying , and Jean Valjean exhausted . 
Besides , where was he to go ? 
Jean Valjean advanced . 
Moreover , the pit seemed , for the first few steps , not to be very deep . 
But in proportion as he advanced , his feet plunged deeper . 
Soon he had the slime up to his calves and water above his knees . 
