The younger wedded the man of her dreams , but she died . 
The elder did not marry at all . 
At the moment when she makes her entrance into this history which we are relating , she was an antique virtue , an incombustible prude , with one of the sharpest noses , and one of the most obtuse minds that it is possible to see . 
A characteristic detail ; outside of her immediate family , no one had ever known her first name . 
She was called Mademoiselle Gillenormand , the elder . 
In the matter of cant , Mademoiselle Gillenormand could have given points to a miss . 
Her modesty was carried to the other extreme of blackness . 
She cherished a frightful memory of her life ; one day , a man had beheld her garter . 
Age had only served to accentuate this pitiless modesty . 
Her guimpe was never sufficiently opaque , and never ascended sufficiently high . 
She multiplied clasps and pins where no one would have dreamed of looking . 
The peculiarity of prudery is to place all the more sentinels in proportion as the fortress is the less menaced . 
Nevertheless , let him who can explain these antique mysteries of innocence , she allowed an officer of the Lancers , her grand nephew , named Theodule , to embrace her without displeasure . 
In spite of this favored Lancer , the label : Prude , under which we have classed her , suited her to absolute perfection . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand was a sort of twilight soul . 
Prudery is a demi-virtue and a demi-vice . 
To prudery she added bigotry , a well-assorted lining . 
She belonged to the society of the Virgin , wore a white veil on certain festivals , mumbled special orisons , revered `` the holy blood , '' venerated `` the sacred heart , '' remained for hours in contemplation before a rococo-jesuit altar in a chapel which was inaccessible to the rank and file of the faithful , and there allowed her soul to soar among little clouds of marble , and through great rays of gilded wood . 
She had a chapel friend , an ancient virgin like herself , named Mademoiselle Vaubois , who was a positive blockhead , and beside whom Mademoiselle Gillenormand had the pleasure of being an eagle . 
Beyond the Agnus Dei and Ave Maria , Mademoiselle Vaubois had no knowledge of anything except of the different ways of making preserves . 
Mademoiselle Vaubois , perfect in her style , was the ermine of stupidity without a single spot of intelligence . 
Let us say it plainly , Mademoiselle Gillenormand had gained rather than lost as she grew older . 
This is the case with passive natures . 
She had never been malicious , which is relative kindness ; and then , years wear away the angles , and the softening which comes with time had come to her . 
She was melancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did not herself know the secret . 
There breathed from her whole person the stupor of a life that was finished , and which had never had a beginning . 
She kept house for her father . 
M. Gillenormand had his daughter near him , as we have seen that Monseigneur Bienvenu had his sister with him . 
These households comprised of an old man and an old spinster are not rare , and always have the touching aspect of two weaknesses leaning on each other for support . 
There was also in this house , between this elderly spinster and this old man , a child , a little boy , who was always trembling and mute in the presence of M. Gillenormand . 
M. Gillenormand never addressed this child except in a severe voice , and sometimes , with uplifted cane : `` Here , sir ! 
rascal , scoundrel , come here ! 
-- Answer me , you scamp ! 
Just let me see you , you good-for-nothing ! '' 
etc. , etc. . 
He idolized him . 
This was his grandson . 
We shall meet with this child again later on . 
BOOK THIRD . 
-- THE GRANDFATHER AND THE GRANDSON AN ANCIENT SALON When M. Gillenormand lived in the Rue Servandoni , he had frequented many very good and very aristocratic salons . 
Although a bourgeois , M. Gillenormand was received in society . 
As he had a double measure of wit , in the first place , that which was born with him , and secondly , that which was attributed to him , he was even sought out and made much of . 
He never went anywhere except on condition of being the chief person there . 
There are people who will have influence at any price , and who will have other people busy themselves over them ; when they can not be oracles , they turn wags . 
M. Gillenormand was not of this nature ; his domination in the Royalist salons which he frequented cost his self-respect nothing . 
He was an oracle everywhere . 
It had happened to him to hold his own against M. de Bonald , and even against M. Bengy-Puy-Vallee . 
About 1817 , he invariably passed two afternoons a week in a house in his own neighborhood , in the Rue Ferou , with Madame la Baronne de T. , a worthy and respectable person , whose husband had been Ambassador of France to Berlin under Louis XVI . 
Baron de T. , who , during his lifetime , had gone very passionately into ecstasies and magnetic visions , had died bankrupt , during the emigration , leaving , as his entire fortune , some very curious Memoirs about Mesmer and his tub , in ten manuscript volumes , bound in red morocco and gilded on the edges . 
Madame de T. had not published the memoirs , out of pride , and maintained herself on a meagre income which had survived no one knew how . 
Madame de T. lived far from the Court ; `` a very mixed society , '' as she said , in a noble isolation , proud and poor . 
A few friends assembled twice a week about her widowed hearth , and these constituted a purely Royalist salon . 
They sipped tea there , and uttered groans or cries of horror at the century , the charter , the Bonapartists , the prostitution of the blue ribbon , or the Jacobinism of Louis XVIII. , according as the wind veered towards elegy or dithyrambs ; and they spoke in low tones of the hopes which were presented by Monsieur , afterwards Charles X . 
The songs of the fishwomen , in which Napoleon was called Nicolas , were received there with transports of joy . 
Duchesses , the most delicate and charming women in the world , went into ecstasies over couplets like the following , addressed to `` the federates '' : -- Refoncez dans vos culottes -LSB- 20 -RSB- Le bout d' chemis ' qui vous pend . 
Qu'on n ' dis ' pas qu ' les patriotes Ont arbore l' drapeau blanc ? 
-LSB- 20 -RSB- Tuck into your trousers the shirt-tail that is hanging out . 
Let it not be said that patriots have hoisted the white flag . 
There they amused themselves with puns which were considered terrible , with innocent plays upon words which they supposed to be venomous , with quatrains , with distiches even ; thus , upon the Dessolles ministry , a moderate cabinet , of which MM . 
Decazes and Deserre were members : -- Pour raffermir le trone ebranle sur sa base , -LSB- 21 -RSB- Il faut changer de sol , et de serre et de case . 
-LSB- 21 -RSB- In order to re-establish the shaken throne firmly on its base , soil -LRB- Des solles -RRB- , greenhouse and house -LRB- Decazes -RRB- must be changed . 
Or they drew up a list of the chamber of peers , `` an abominably Jacobin chamber , '' and from this list they combined alliances of names , in such a manner as to form , for example , phrases like the following : Damas . 
Sabran . 
Gouvion-Saint-Cyr . 
-- All this was done merrily . 
In that society , they parodied the Revolution . 
They used I know not what desires to give point to the same wrath in inverse sense . 
They sang their little Ca ira : -- Ah ! 
ca ira ca ira ca ira ! 
Les Bonapartistes a la lanterne ! 
Songs are like the guillotine ; they chop away indifferently , to-day this head , to-morrow that . 
It is only a variation . 
In the Fualdes affair , which belongs to this epoch , 1816 , they took part for Bastide and Jausion , because Fualdes was `` a Buonapartist . '' 
They designated the liberals as friends and brothers ; this constituted the most deadly insult . 
Like certain church towers , Madame de T. 's salon had two cocks . 
One of them was M. Gillenormand , the other was Comte de Lamothe-Valois , of whom it was whispered about , with a sort of respect : `` Do you know ? 
That is the Lamothe of the affair of the necklace . '' 
These singular amnesties do occur in parties . 
Let us add the following : in the bourgeoisie , honored situations decay through too easy relations ; one must beware whom one admits ; in the same way that there is a loss of caloric in the vicinity of those who are cold , there is a diminution of consideration in the approach of despised persons . 
The ancient society of the upper classes held themselves above this law , as above every other . 
Marigny , the brother of the Pompadour , had his entry with M. le Prince de Soubise . 
In spite of ? 
No , because . 
Du Barry , the god-father of the Vaubernier , was very welcome at the house of M. le Marechal de Richelieu . 
This society is Olympus . 
Mercury and the Prince de Guemenee are at home there . 
A thief is admitted there , provided he be a god . 
The Comte de Lamothe , who , in 1815 , was an old man seventy-five years of age , had nothing remarkable about him except his silent and sententious air , his cold and angular face , his perfectly polished manners , his coat buttoned up to his cravat , and his long legs always crossed in long , flabby trousers of the hue of burnt sienna . 
His face was the same color as his trousers . 
This M. de Lamothe was `` held in consideration '' in this salon on account of his `` celebrity '' and , strange to say , though true , because of his name of Valois . 
As for M. Gillenormand , his consideration was of absolutely first-rate quality . 
He had , in spite of his levity , and without its interfering in any way with his dignity , a certain manner about him which was imposing , dignified , honest , and lofty , in a bourgeois fashion ; and his great age added to it . 
One is not a century with impunity . 
The years finally produce around a head a venerable dishevelment . 
In addition to this , he said things which had the genuine sparkle of the old rock . 
Thus , when the King of Prussia , after having restored Louis XVIII. , came to pay the latter a visit under the name of the Count de Ruppin , he was received by the descendant of Louis XIV . 
somewhat as though he had been the Marquis de Brandebourg , and with the most delicate impertinence . 
M. Gillenormand approved : `` All kings who are not the King of France , '' said he , `` are provincial kings . '' 
One day , the following question was put and the following answer returned in his presence : `` To what was the editor of the Courrier Francais condemned ? '' 
`` To be suspended . '' 
