He repeated : -- `` Does no one volunteer ? '' 
THE FLAG : ACT SECOND Since they had arrived at Corinthe , and had begun the construction of the barricade , no attention had been paid to Father Mabeuf . 
M. Mabeuf had not quitted the mob , however ; he had entered the ground-floor of the wine-shop and had seated himself behind the counter . 
There he had , so to speak , retreated into himself . 
He no longer seemed to look or to think . 
Courfeyrac and others had accosted him two or three times , warning him of his peril , beseeching him to withdraw , but he did not hear them . 
When they were not speaking to him , his mouth moved as though he were replying to some one , and as soon as he was addressed , his lips became motionless and his eyes no longer had the appearance of being alive . 
Several hours before the barricade was attacked , he had assumed an attitude which he did not afterwards abandon , with both fists planted on his knees and his head thrust forward as though he were gazing over a precipice . 
Nothing had been able to move him from this attitude ; it did not seem as though his mind were in the barricade . 
When each had gone to take up his position for the combat , there remained in the tap-room where Javert was bound to the post , only a single insurgent with a naked sword , watching over Javert , and himself , Mabeuf . 
At the moment of the attack , at the detonation , the physical shock had reached him and had , as it were , awakened him ; he started up abruptly , crossed the room , and at the instant when Enjolras repeated his appeal : `` Does no one volunteer ? '' 
the old man was seen to make his appearance on the threshold of the wine-shop . 
His presence produced a sort of commotion in the different groups . 
A shout went up : -- `` It is the voter ! 
It is the member of the Convention ! 
It is the representative of the people ! '' 
It is probable that he did not hear them . 
He strode straight up to Enjolras , the insurgents withdrawing before him with a religious fear ; he tore the flag from Enjolras , who recoiled in amazement and then , since no one dared to stop or to assist him , this old man of eighty , with shaking head but firm foot , began slowly to ascend the staircase of paving-stones arranged in the barricade . 
This was so melancholy and so grand that all around him cried : `` Off with your hats ! '' 
At every step that he mounted , it was a frightful spectacle ; his white locks , his decrepit face , his lofty , bald , and wrinkled brow , his amazed and open mouth , his aged arm upholding the red banner , rose through the gloom and were enlarged in the bloody light of the torch , and the bystanders thought that they beheld the spectre of '93 emerging from the earth , with the flag of terror in his hand . 
When he had reached the last step , when this trembling and terrible phantom , erect on that pile of rubbish in the presence of twelve hundred invisible guns , drew himself up in the face of death and as though he were more powerful than it , the whole barricade assumed amid the darkness , a supernatural and colossal form . 
There ensued one of those silences which occur only in the presence of prodigies . 
In the midst of this silence , the old man waved the red flag and shouted : -- `` Long live the Revolution ! 
Long live the Republic ! 
Fraternity ! 
Equality ! 
and Death ! '' 
Those in the barricade heard a low and rapid whisper , like the murmur of a priest who is despatching a prayer in haste . 
It was probably the commissary of police who was making the legal summons at the other end of the street . 
Then the same piercing voice which had shouted : `` Who goes there ? '' 
shouted : -- `` Retire ! '' 
M. Mabeuf , pale , haggard , his eyes lighted up with the mournful flame of aberration , raised the flag above his head and repeated : -- `` Long live the Republic ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
said the voice . 
A second discharge , similar to the first , rained down upon the barricade . 
The old man fell on his knees , then rose again , dropped the flag and fell backwards on the pavement , like a log , at full length , with outstretched arms . 
Rivulets of blood flowed beneath him . 
His aged head , pale and sad , seemed to be gazing at the sky . 
One of those emotions which are superior to man , which make him forget even to defend himself , seized upon the insurgents , and they approached the body with respectful awe . 
`` What men these regicides were ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
Courfeyrac bent down to Enjolras ' ear : -- `` This is for yourself alone , I do not wish to dampen the enthusiasm . 
But this man was anything rather than a regicide . 
I knew him . 
His name was Father Mabeuf . 
I do not know what was the matter with him to-day . 
But he was a brave blockhead . 
Just look at his head . '' 
`` The head of a blockhead and the heart of a Brutus , '' replied Enjolras . 
Then he raised his voice : -- `` Citizens ! 
This is the example which the old give to the young . 
We hesitated , he came ! 
We were drawing back , he advanced ! 
This is what those who are trembling with age teach to those who tremble with fear ! 
This aged man is august in the eyes of his country . 
He has had a long life and a magnificent death ! 
Now , let us place the body under cover , that each one of us may defend this old man dead as he would his father living , and may his presence in our midst render the barricade impregnable ! '' 
A murmur of gloomy and energetic assent followed these words . 
Enjolras bent down , raised the old man 's head , and fierce as he was , he kissed him on the brow , then , throwing wide his arms , and handling this dead man with tender precaution , as though he feared to hurt it , he removed his coat , showed the bloody holes in it to all , and said : -- `` This is our flag now . '' 
GAVROCHE WOULD HAVE DONE BETTER TO ACCEPT ENJOLRAS ' CARBINE They threw a long black shawl of Widow Hucheloup 's over Father Mabeuf . 
Six men made a litter of their guns ; on this they laid the body , and bore it , with bared heads , with solemn slowness , to the large table in the tap-room . 
These men , wholly absorbed in the grave and sacred task in which they were engaged , thought no more of the perilous situation in which they stood . 
When the corpse passed near Javert , who was still impassive , Enjolras said to the spy : -- `` It will be your turn presently ! '' 
During all this time , Little Gavroche , who alone had not quitted his post , but had remained on guard , thought he espied some men stealthily approaching the barricade . 
All at once he shouted : -- `` Look out ! '' 
Courfeyrac , Enjolras , Jean Prouvaire , Combeferre , Joly , Bahorel , Bossuet , and all the rest ran tumultuously from the wine-shop . 
It was almost too late . 
They saw a glistening density of bayonets undulating above the barricade . 
Municipal guards of lofty stature were making their way in , some striding over the omnibus , others through the cut , thrusting before them the urchin , who retreated , but did not flee . 
The moment was critical . 
It was that first , redoubtable moment of inundation , when the stream rises to the level of the levee and when the water begins to filter through the fissures of dike . 
A second more and the barricade would have been taken . 
Bahorel dashed upon the first municipal guard who was entering , and killed him on the spot with a blow from his gun ; the second killed Bahorel with a blow from his bayonet . 
Another had already overthrown Courfeyrac , who was shouting : `` Follow me ! '' 
The largest of all , a sort of colossus , marched on Gavroche with his bayonet fixed . 
The urchin took in his arms Javert 's immense gun , levelled it resolutely at the giant , and fired . 
No discharge followed . 
Javert 's gun was not loaded . 
The municipal guard burst into a laugh and raised his bayonet at the child . 
Before the bayonet had touched Gavroche , the gun slipped from the soldier 's grasp , a bullet had struck the municipal guardsman in the centre of the forehead , and he fell over on his back . 
A second bullet struck the other guard , who had assaulted Courfeyrac in the breast , and laid him low on the pavement . 
This was the work of Marius , who had just entered the barricade . 
THE BARREL OF POWDER Marius , still concealed in the turn of the Rue Mondetour , had witnessed , shuddering and irresolute , the first phase of the combat . 
But he had not long been able to resist that mysterious and sovereign vertigo which may be designated as the call of the abyss . 
In the presence of the imminence of the peril , in the presence of the death of M. Mabeuf , that melancholy enigma , in the presence of Bahorel killed , and Courfeyrac shouting : `` Follow me ! '' 
of that child threatened , of his friends to succor or to avenge , all hesitation had vanished , and he had flung himself into the conflict , his two pistols in hand . 
With his first shot he had saved Gavroche , and with the second delivered Courfeyrac . 
Amid the sound of the shots , amid the cries of the assaulted guards , the assailants had climbed the entrenchment , on whose summit Municipal Guards , soldiers of the line and National Guards from the suburbs could now be seen , gun in hand , rearing themselves to more than half the height of their bodies . 
They already covered more than two-thirds of the barrier , but they did not leap into the enclosure , as though wavering in the fear of some trap . 
They gazed into the dark barricade as one would gaze into a lion 's den . 
The light of the torch illuminated only their bayonets , their bear-skin caps , and the upper part of their uneasy and angry faces . 
Marius had no longer any weapons ; he had flung away his discharged pistols after firing them ; but he had caught sight of the barrel of powder in the tap-room , near the door . 
As he turned half round , gazing in that direction , a soldier took aim at him . 
At the moment when the soldier was sighting Marius , a hand was laid on the muzzle of the gun and obstructed it . 
This was done by some one who had darted forward , -- the young workman in velvet trousers . 
The shot sped , traversed the hand and possibly , also , the workman , since he fell , but the ball did not strike Marius . 
All this , which was rather to be apprehended than seen through the smoke , Marius , who was entering the tap-room , hardly noticed . 
Still , he had , in a confused way , perceived that gun-barrel aimed at him , and the hand which had blocked it , and he had heard the discharge . 
But in moments like this , the things which one sees vacillate and are precipitated , and one pauses for nothing . 
One feels obscurely impelled towards more darkness still , and all is cloud . 
