`` So much the worse for my nephew ! 
he is wedding a beggar , let him be a beggar himself ! '' 
But Cosette 's half-million pleased the aunt , and altered her inward situation so far as this pair of lovers were concerned . 
One owes some consideration to six hundred thousand francs , and it was evident that she could not do otherwise than leave her fortune to these young people , since they did not need it . 
It was arranged that the couple should live with the grandfather -- M. Gillenormand insisted on resigning to them his chamber , the finest in the house . 
`` That will make me young again , '' he said . 
`` It 's an old plan of mine . 
I have always entertained the idea of having a wedding in my chamber . '' 
He furnished this chamber with a multitude of elegant trifles . 
He had the ceiling and walls hung with an extraordinary stuff , which he had by him in the piece , and which he believed to have emanated from Utrecht with a buttercup-colored satin ground , covered with velvet auricula blossoms . 
-- `` It was with that stuff , '' said he , `` that the bed of the Duchesse d'Anville at la Roche-Guyon was draped . '' 
-- On the chimney-piece , he set a little figure in Saxe porcelain , carrying a muff against her nude stomach . 
M. Gillenormand 's library became the lawyer 's study , which Marius needed ; a study , it will be remembered , being required by the council of the order . 
THE EFFECTS OF DREAMS MINGLED WITH HAPPINESS The lovers saw each other every day . 
Cosette came with M. Fauchelevent . 
-- `` This is reversing things , '' said Mademoiselle Gillenormand , `` to have the bride come to the house to do the courting like this . '' 
But Marius ' convalescence had caused the habit to become established , and the arm-chairs of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , better adapted to interviews than the straw chairs of the Rue de l'Homme Arme , had rooted it . 
Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw each other , but did not address each other . 
It seemed as though this had been agreed upon . 
Every girl needs a chaperon . 
Cosette could not have come without M. Fauchelevent . 
In Marius ' eyes , M. Fauchelevent was the condition attached to Cosette . 
He accepted it . 
By dint of discussing political matters , vaguely and without precision , from the point of view of the general amelioration of the fate of all men , they came to say a little more than `` yes '' and `` no . '' 
Once , on the subject of education , which Marius wished to have free and obligatory , multiplied under all forms lavished on every one , like the air and the sun in a word , respirable for the entire population , they were in unison , and they almost conversed . 
M. Fauchelevent talked well , and even with a certain loftiness of language -- still he lacked something indescribable . 
M. Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more , than a man of the world . 
Marius , inwardly , and in the depths of his thought , surrounded with all sorts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent , who was to him simply benevolent and cold . 
There were moments when doubts as to his own recollections occurred to him . 
There was a void in his memory , a black spot , an abyss excavated by four months of agony . 
-- Many things had been lost therein . 
He had come to the point of asking himself whether it were really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent , so serious and so calm a man , in the barricade . 
This was not , however , the only stupor which the apparitions and the disappearances of the past had left in his mind . 
It must not be supposed that he was delivered from all those obsessions of the memory which force us , even when happy , even when satisfied , to glance sadly behind us . 
The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons that have vanished contains neither thought nor love . 
At times , Marius clasped his face between his hands , and the vague and tumultuous past traversed the twilight which reigned in his brain . 
Again he beheld Mabeuf fall , he heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot , he felt beneath his lips the cold brow of Eponine ; Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Combeferre , Bossuet , Grantaire , all his friends rose erect before him , then dispersed into thin air . 
Were all those dear , sorrowful , valiant , charming or tragic beings merely dreams ? 
had they actually existed ? 
The revolt had enveloped everything in its smoke . 
These great fevers create great dreams . 
He questioned himself ; he felt himself ; all these vanished realities made him dizzy . 
Where were they all then ? 
was it really true that all were dead ? 
A fall into the shadows had carried off all except himself . 
It all seemed to him to have disappeared as though behind the curtain of a theatre . 
There are curtains like this which drop in life . 
God passes on to the following act . 
And he himself -- was he actually the same man ? 
He , the poor man , was rich ; he , the abandoned , had a family ; he , the despairing , was to marry Cosette . 
It seemed to him that he had traversed a tomb , and that he had entered into it black and had emerged from it white , and in that tomb the others had remained . 
At certain moments , all these beings of the past , returned and present , formed a circle around him , and overshadowed him ; then he thought of Cosette , and recovered his serenity ; but nothing less than this felicity could have sufficed to efface that catastrophe . 
M. Fauchelevent almost occupied a place among these vanished beings . 
Marius hesitated to believe that the Fauchelevent of the barricade was the same as this Fauchelevent in flesh and blood , sitting so gravely beside Cosette . 
The first was , probably , one of those nightmares occasioned and brought back by his hours of delirium . 
However , the natures of both men were rigid , no question from Marius to M. Fauchelevent was possible . 
Such an idea had not even occurred to him . 
We have already indicated this characteristic detail . 
Two men who have a secret in common , and who , by a sort of tacit agreement , exchange not a word on the subject , are less rare than is commonly supposed . 
Once only , did Marius make the attempt . 
He introduced into the conversation the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and , turning to M. Fauchelevent , he said to him : `` Of course , you are acquainted with that street ? '' 
`` What street ? '' 
`` The Rue de la Chanvrerie . '' 
`` I have no idea of the name of that street , '' replied M. Fauchelevent , in the most natural manner in the world . 
The response which bore upon the name of the street and not upon the street itself , appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it really was . 
`` Decidedly , '' thought he , `` I have been dreaming . 
I have been subject to a hallucination . 
It was some one who resembled him . 
M. Fauchelevent was not there . '' ' 
TWO MEN IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND Marius ' enchantment , great as it was , could not efface from his mind other pre-occupations . 
While the wedding was in preparation , and while awaiting the date fixed upon , he caused difficult and scrupulous retrospective researches to be made . 
He owed gratitude in various quarters ; he owed it on his father 's account , he owed it on his own . 
There was Thenardier ; there was the unknown man who had brought him , Marius , back to M. Gillenormand . 
Marius endeavored to find these two men , not intending to marry , to be happy , and to forget them , and fearing that , were these debts of gratitude not discharged , they would leave a shadow on his life , which promised so brightly for the future . 
It was impossible for him to leave all these arrears of suffering behind him , and he wished , before entering joyously into the future , to obtain a quittance from the past . 
That Thenardier was a villain detracted nothing from the fact that he had saved Colonel Pontmercy . 
Thenardier was a ruffian in the eyes of all the world except Marius . 
And Marius , ignorant of the real scene in the battle field of Waterloo , was not aware of the peculiar detail , that his father , so far as Thenardier was concerned was in the strange position of being indebted to the latter for his life , without being indebted to him for any gratitude . 
None of the various agents whom Marius employed succeeded in discovering any trace of Thenardier . 
Obliteration appeared to be complete in that quarter . 
Madame Thenardier had died in prison pending the trial . 
Thenardier and his daughter Azelma , the only two remaining of that lamentable group , had plunged back into the gloom . 
The gulf of the social unknown had silently closed above those beings . 
On the surface there was not visible so much as that quiver , that trembling , those obscure concentric circles which announce that something has fallen in , and that the plummet may be dropped . 
Madame Thenardier being dead , Boulatruelle being eliminated from the case , Claquesous having disappeared , the principal persons accused having escaped from prison , the trial connected with the ambush in the Gorbeau house had come to nothing . 
That affair had remained rather obscure . 
The bench of Assizes had been obliged to content themselves with two subordinates . 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , and Demi-Liard , alias Deux-Milliards , who had been inconsistently condemned , after a hearing of both sides of the case , to ten years in the galleys . 
Hard labor for life had been the sentence pronounced against the escaped and contumacious accomplices . 
Thenardier , the head and leader , had been , through contumacy , likewise condemned to death . 
This sentence was the only information remaining about Thenardier , casting upon that buried name its sinister light like a candle beside a bier . 
Moreover , by thrusting Thenardier back into the very remotest depths , through a fear of being re-captured , this sentence added to the density of the shadows which enveloped this man . 
As for the other person , as for the unknown man who had saved Marius , the researches were at first to some extent successful , then came to an abrupt conclusion . 
They succeeded in finding the carriage which had brought Marius to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire on the evening of the 6th of June . 
The coachman declared that , on the 6th of June , in obedience to the commands of a police-agent , he had stood from three o'clock in the afternoon until nightfall on the Quai des Champs-Elysees , above the outlet of the Grand Sewer ; that , towards nine o'clock in the evening , the grating of the sewer , which abuts on the bank of the river , had opened ; that a man had emerged therefrom , bearing on his shoulders another man , who seemed to be dead ; that the agent , who was on the watch at that point , had arrested the living man and had seized the dead man ; that , at the order of the police-agent , he , the coachman , had taken `` all those folks '' into his carriage ; that they had first driven to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; that they had there deposited the dead man ; that the dead man was Monsieur Marius , and that he , the coachman , recognized him perfectly , although he was alive `` this time '' ; that afterwards , they had entered the vehicle again , that he had whipped up his horses ; a few paces from the gate of the Archives , they had called to him to halt ; that there , in the street , they had paid him and left him , and that the police-agent had led the other man away ; that he knew nothing more ; that the night had been very dark . 
Marius , as we have said , recalled nothing . 
He only remembered that he had been seized from behind by an energetic hand at the moment when he was falling backwards into the barricade ; then , everything vanished so far as he was concerned . 
He had only regained consciousness at M. Gillenormand 's . 
He was lost in conjectures . 
He could not doubt his own identity . 
