The prisoner uttered not a syllable . 
After a pause , Thenardier continued : -- `` It 's very simple , as you see . 
There 'll be no harm done unless you wish that there should be harm done . 
I 'm telling you how things stand . 
I warn you so that you may be prepared . '' 
He paused : the prisoner did not break the silence , and Thenardier resumed : -- `` As soon as my wife returns and says to me : ` The Lark is on the way , ' we will release you , and you will be free to go and sleep at home . 
You see that our intentions are not evil . '' 
Terrible images passed through Marius ' mind . 
What ! 
That young girl whom they were abducting was not to be brought back ? 
One of those monsters was to bear her off into the darkness ? 
Whither ? 
And what if it were she ! 
It was clear that it was she . 
Marius felt his heart stop beating . 
What was he to do ? 
Discharge the pistol ? 
Place all those scoundrels in the hands of justice ? 
But the horrible man with the meat-axe would , none the less , be out of reach with the young girl , and Marius reflected on Thenardier 's words , of which he perceived the bloody significance : `` If you have me arrested , my comrade will give a turn of his thumb to the Lark . '' 
Now , it was not alone by the colonel 's testament , it was by his own love , it was by the peril of the one he loved , that he felt himself restrained . 
This frightful situation , which had already lasted above half an hour , was changing its aspect every moment . 
Marius had sufficient strength of mind to review in succession all the most heart-breaking conjectures , seeking hope and finding none . 
The tumult of his thoughts contrasted with the funereal silence of the den . 
In the midst of this silence , the door at the bottom of the staircase was heard to open and shut again . 
The prisoner made a movement in his bonds . 
`` Here 's the bourgeoise , '' said Thenardier . 
He had hardly uttered the words , when the Thenardier woman did in fact rush hastily into the room , red , panting , breathless , with flaming eyes , and cried , as she smote her huge hands on her thighs simultaneously : -- `` False address ! '' 
The ruffian who had gone with her made his appearance behind her and picked up his axe again . 
She resumed : -- `` Nobody there ! 
Rue Saint-Dominique , No. 17 , no Monsieur Urbain Fabre ! 
They know not what it means ! '' 
She paused , choking , then went on : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier ! 
That old fellow has duped you ! 
You are too good , you see ! 
If it had been me , I 'd have chopped the beast in four quarters to begin with ! 
And if he had acted ugly , I 'd have boiled him alive ! 
He would have been obliged to speak , and say where the girl is , and where he keeps his shiners ! 
That 's the way I should have managed matters ! 
People are perfectly right when they say that men are a deal stupider than women ! 
Nobody at No. 17 . 
It 's nothing but a big carriage gate ! 
No Monsieur Fabre in the Rue Saint-Dominique ! 
And after all that racing and fee to the coachman and all ! 
I spoke to both the porter and the portress , a fine , stout woman , and they know nothing about him ! '' 
Marius breathed freely once more . 
She , Ursule or the Lark , he no longer knew what to call her , was safe . 
While his exasperated wife vociferated , Thenardier had seated himself on the table . 
For several minutes he uttered not a word , but swung his right foot , which hung down , and stared at the brazier with an air of savage revery . 
Finally , he said to the prisoner , with a slow and singularly ferocious tone : `` A false address ? 
What did you expect to gain by that ? '' 
`` To gain time ! '' 
cried the prisoner in a thundering voice , and at the same instant he shook off his bonds ; they were cut . 
The prisoner was only attached to the bed now by one leg . 
Before the seven men had time to collect their senses and dash forward , he had bent down into the fireplace , had stretched out his hand to the brazier , and had then straightened himself up again , and now Thenardier , the female Thenardier , and the ruffians , huddled in amazement at the extremity of the hovel , stared at him in stupefaction , as almost free and in a formidable attitude , he brandished above his head the red-hot chisel , which emitted a threatening glow . 
The judicial examination to which the ambush in the Gorbeau house eventually gave rise , established the fact that a large sou piece , cut and worked in a peculiar fashion , was found in the garret , when the police made their descent on it . 
This sou piece was one of those marvels of industry , which are engendered by the patience of the galleys in the shadows and for the shadows , marvels which are nothing else than instruments of escape . 
These hideous and delicate products of wonderful art are to jewellers ' work what the metaphors of slang are to poetry . 
There are Benvenuto Cellinis in the galleys , just as there are Villons in language . 
The unhappy wretch who aspires to deliverance finds means sometimes without tools , sometimes with a common wooden-handled knife , to saw a sou into two thin plates , to hollow out these plates without affecting the coinage stamp , and to make a furrow on the edge of the sou in such a manner that the plates will adhere again . 
This can be screwed together and unscrewed at will ; it is a box . 
In this box he hides a watch-spring , and this watch-spring , properly handled , cuts good-sized chains and bars of iron . 
The unfortunate convict is supposed to possess merely a sou ; not at all , he possesses liberty . 
It was a large sou of this sort which , during the subsequent search of the police , was found under the bed near the window . 
They also found a tiny saw of blue steel which would fit the sou . 
It is probable that the prisoner had this sou piece on his person at the moment when the ruffians searched him , that he contrived to conceal it in his hand , and that afterward , having his right hand free , he unscrewed it , and used it as a saw to cut the cords which fastened him , which would explain the faint noise and almost imperceptible movements which Marius had observed . 
As he had not been able to bend down , for fear of betraying himself , he had not cut the bonds of his left leg . 
The ruffians had recovered from their first surprise . 
`` Be easy , '' said Bigrenaille to Thenardier . 
`` He still holds by one leg , and he ca n't get away . 
I 'll answer for that . 
I tied that paw for him . '' 
In the meanwhile , the prisoner had begun to speak : -- `` You are wretches , but my life is not worth the trouble of defending it . 
When you think that you can make me speak , that you can make me write what I do not choose to write , that you can make me say what I do not choose to say -- '' He stripped up his left sleeve , and added : -- `` See here . '' 
At the same moment he extended his arm , and laid the glowing chisel which he held in his left hand by its wooden handle on his bare flesh . 
The crackling of the burning flesh became audible , and the odor peculiar to chambers of torture filled the hovel . 
Marius reeled in utter horror , the very ruffians shuddered , hardly a muscle of the old man 's face contracted , and while the red-hot iron sank into the smoking wound , impassive and almost august , he fixed on Thenardier his beautiful glance , in which there was no hatred , and where suffering vanished in serene majesty . 
With grand and lofty natures , the revolts of the flesh and the senses when subjected to physical suffering cause the soul to spring forth , and make it appear on the brow , just as rebellions among the soldiery force the captain to show himself . 
`` Wretches ! '' 
said he , `` have no more fear of me than I have for you ! '' 
And , tearing the chisel from the wound , he hurled it through the window , which had been left open ; the horrible , glowing tool disappeared into the night , whirling as it flew , and fell far away on the snow . 
The prisoner resumed : -- `` Do what you please with me . '' 
He was disarmed . 
`` Seize him ! '' 
said Thenardier . 
Two of the ruffians laid their hands on his shoulder , and the masked man with the ventriloquist 's voice took up his station in front of him , ready to smash his skull at the slightest movement . 
At the same time , Marius heard below him , at the base of the partition , but so near that he could not see who was speaking , this colloquy conducted in a low tone : -- `` There is only one thing left to do . '' 
`` Cut his throat . '' 
`` That 's it . '' 
It was the husband and wife taking counsel together . 
Thenardier walked slowly towards the table , opened the drawer , and took out the knife . 
Marius fretted with the handle of his pistol . 
Unprecedented perplexity ! 
For the last hour he had had two voices in his conscience , the one enjoining him to respect his father 's testament , the other crying to him to rescue the prisoner . 
These two voices continued uninterruptedly that struggle which tormented him to agony . 
Up to that moment he had cherished a vague hope that he should find some means of reconciling these two duties , but nothing within the limits of possibility had presented itself . 
However , the peril was urgent , the last bounds of delay had been reached ; Thenardier was standing thoughtfully a few paces distant from the prisoner . 
Marius cast a wild glance about him , the last mechanical resource of despair . 
All at once a shudder ran through him . 
At his feet , on the table , a bright ray of light from the full moon illuminated and seemed to point out to him a sheet of paper . 
On this paper he read the following line written that very morning , in large letters , by the eldest of the Thenardier girls : -- `` THE BOBBIES ARE HERE . '' 
