they call the King of France `` le Marquis de Pantin . '' 
And behold , they are almost gay . 
A sort of gleam proceeds from these miserable wretches , as though their consciences were not heavy within them any more . 
These lamentable tribes of darkness have no longer merely the desperate audacity of actions , they possess the heedless audacity of mind . 
A sign that they are losing the sense of their criminality , and that they feel , even among thinkers and dreamers , some indefinable support which the latter themselves know not of . 
A sign that theft and pillage are beginning to filter into doctrines and sophisms , in such a way as to lose somewhat of their ugliness , while communicating much of it to sophisms and doctrines . 
A sign , in short , of some outbreak which is prodigious and near unless some diversion shall arise . 
Let us pause a moment . 
Whom are we accusing here ? 
Is it the eighteenth century ? 
Is it philosophy ? 
Certainly not . 
The work of the eighteenth century is healthy and good and wholesome . 
The encyclopedists , Diderot at their head ; the physiocrates , Turgot at their head ; the philosophers , Voltaire at their head ; the Utopians , Rousseau at their head , -- these are four sacred legions . 
Humanity 's immense advance towards the light is due to them . 
They are the four vanguards of the human race , marching towards the four cardinal points of progress . 
Diderot towards the beautiful , Turgot towards the useful , Voltaire towards the true , Rousseau towards the just . 
But by the side of and above the philosophers , there were the sophists , a venomous vegetation mingled with a healthy growth , hemlock in the virgin forest . 
While the executioner was burning the great books of the liberators of the century on the grand staircase of the court-house , writers now forgotten were publishing , with the King 's sanction , no one knows what strangely disorganizing writings , which were eagerly read by the unfortunate . 
Some of these publications , odd to say , which were patronized by a prince , are to be found in the Secret Library . 
These facts , significant but unknown , were imperceptible on the surface . 
Sometimes , in the very obscurity of a fact lurks its danger . 
It is obscure because it is underhand . 
Of all these writers , the one who probably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery was Restif de La Bretonne . 
This work , peculiar to the whole of Europe , effected more ravages in Germany than anywhere else . 
In Germany , during a given period , summed up by Schiller in his famous drama The Robbers , theft and pillage rose up in protest against property and labor , assimilated certain specious and false elementary ideas , which , though just in appearance , were absurd in reality , enveloped themselves in these ideas , disappeared within them , after a fashion , assumed an abstract name , passed into the state of theory , and in that shape circulated among the laborious , suffering , and honest masses , unknown even to the imprudent chemists who had prepared the mixture , unknown even to the masses who accepted it . 
Whenever a fact of this sort presents itself , the case is grave . 
Suffering engenders wrath ; and while the prosperous classes blind themselves or fall asleep , which is the same thing as shutting one 's eyes , the hatred of the unfortunate classes lights its torch at some aggrieved or ill-made spirit which dreams in a corner , and sets itself to the scrutiny of society . 
The scrutiny of hatred is a terrible thing . 
Hence , if the ill-fortune of the times so wills it , those fearful commotions which were formerly called jacqueries , beside which purely political agitations are the merest child 's play , which are no longer the conflict of the oppressed and the oppressor , but the revolt of discomfort against comfort . 
Then everything crumbles . 
Jacqueries are earthquakes of the people . 
It is this peril , possibly imminent towards the close of the eighteenth century , which the French Revolution , that immense act of probity , cut short . 
The French Revolution , which is nothing else than the idea armed with the sword , rose erect , and , with the same abrupt movement , closed the door of ill and opened the door of good . 
It put a stop to torture , promulgated the truth , expelled miasma , rendered the century healthy , crowned the populace . 
It may be said of it that it created man a second time , by giving him a second soul , the right . 
The nineteenth century has inherited and profited by its work , and to-day , the social catastrophe to which we lately alluded is simply impossible . 
Blind is he who announces it ! 
Foolish is he who fears it ! 
Revolution is the vaccine of Jacquerie . 
Thanks to the Revolution , social conditions have changed . 
Feudal and monarchical maladies no longer run in our blood . 
There is no more of the Middle Ages in our constitution . 
We no longer live in the days when terrible swarms within made irruptions , when one heard beneath his feet the obscure course of a dull rumble , when indescribable elevations from mole-like tunnels appeared on the surface of civilization , where the soil cracked open , where the roofs of caverns yawned , and where one suddenly beheld monstrous heads emerging from the earth . 
The revolutionary sense is a moral sense . 
The sentiment of right , once developed , develops the sentiment of duty . 
The law of all is liberty , which ends where the liberty of others begins , according to Robespierre 's admirable definition . 
Since ' 89 , the whole people has been dilating into a sublime individual ; there is not a poor man , who , possessing his right , has not his ray of sun ; the die-of-hunger feels within him the honesty of France ; the dignity of the citizen is an internal armor ; he who is free is scrupulous ; he who votes reigns . 
Hence incorruptibility ; hence the miscarriage of unhealthy lusts ; hence eyes heroically lowered before temptations . 
The revolutionary wholesomeness is such , that on a day of deliverance , a 14th of July , a 10th of August , there is no longer any populace . 
The first cry of the enlightened and increasing throngs is : death to thieves ! 
Progress is an honest man ; the ideal and the absolute do not filch pocket-handkerchiefs . 
By whom were the wagons containing the wealth of the Tuileries escorted in 1848 ? 
By the rag-pickers of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
Rags mounted guard over the treasure . 
Virtue rendered these tatterdemalions resplendent . 
In those wagons in chests , hardly closed , and some , even , half-open , amid a hundred dazzling caskets , was that ancient crown of France , studded with diamonds , surmounted by the carbuncle of royalty , by the Regent diamond , which was worth thirty millions . 
Barefooted , they guarded that crown . 
Hence , no more Jacquerie . 
I regret it for the sake of the skilful . 
The old fear has produced its last effects in that quarter ; and henceforth it can no longer be employed in politics . 
The principal spring of the red spectre is broken . 
Every one knows it now . 
The scare-crow scares no longer . 
The birds take liberties with the mannikin , foul creatures alight upon it , the bourgeois laugh at it . 
THE TWO DUTIES : TO WATCH AND TO HOPE This being the case , is all social danger dispelled ? 
Certainly not . 
There is no Jacquerie ; society may rest assured on that point ; blood will no longer rush to its head . 
But let society take heed to the manner in which it breathes . 
Apoplexy is no longer to be feared , but phthisis is there . 
Social phthisis is called misery . 
One can perish from being undermined as well as from being struck by lightning . 
Let us not weary of repeating , and sympathetic souls must not forget that this is the first of fraternal obligations , and selfish hearts must understand that the first of political necessities consists in thinking first of all of the disinherited and sorrowing throngs , in solacing , airing , enlightening , loving them , in enlarging their horizon to a magnificent extent , in lavishing upon them education in every form , in offering them the example of labor , never the example of idleness , in diminishing the individual burden by enlarging the notion of the universal aim , in setting a limit to poverty without setting a limit to wealth , in creating vast fields of public and popular activity , in having , like Briareus , a hundred hands to extend in all directions to the oppressed and the feeble , in employing the collective power for that grand duty of opening workshops for all arms , schools for all aptitudes , and laboratories for all degrees of intelligence , in augmenting salaries , diminishing trouble , balancing what should be and what is , that is to say , in proportioning enjoyment to effort and a glut to need ; in a word , in evolving from the social apparatus more light and more comfort for the benefit of those who suffer and those who are ignorant . 
And , let us say it , all this is but the beginning . 
The true question is this : labor can not be a law without being a right . 
We will not insist upon this point ; this is not the proper place for that . 
If nature calls itself Providence , society should call itself foresight . 
Intellectual and moral growth is no less indispensable than material improvement . 
To know is a sacrament , to think is the prime necessity , truth is nourishment as well as grain . 
A reason which fasts from science and wisdom grows thin . 
Let us enter equal complaint against stomachs and minds which do not eat . 
If there is anything more heart-breaking than a body perishing for lack of bread , it is a soul which is dying from hunger for the light . 
The whole of progress tends in the direction of solution . 
Some day we shall be amazed . 
As the human race mounts upward , the deep layers emerge naturally from the zone of distress . 
The obliteration of misery will be accomplished by a simple elevation of level . 
We should do wrong were we to doubt this blessed consummation . 
The past is very strong , it is true , at the present moment . 
It censures . 
This rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising . 
Behold , it is walking and advancing . 
It seems a victor ; this dead body is a conqueror . 
He arrives with his legions , superstitions , with his sword , despotism , with his banner , ignorance ; a while ago , he won ten battles . 
He advances , he threatens , he laughs , he is at our doors . 
Let us not despair , on our side . 
Let us sell the field on which Hannibal is encamped . 
What have we to fear , we who believe ? 
No such thing as a back-flow of ideas exists any more than there exists a return of a river on its course . 
But let those who do not desire a future reflect on this matter . 
When they say `` no '' to progress , it is not the future but themselves that they are condemning . 
