My father was a porter at the Prytaneum -LSB- Town-Hall -RSB- . 
He destined me for literature . 
But he had reverses . 
He had losses on ` change . 
I was obliged to renounce the profession of author . 
But I am still a public writer . '' 
`` So you are not a grave-digger , then ? '' 
returned Fauchelevent , clutching at this branch , feeble as it was . 
`` The one does not hinder the other . 
I cumulate . '' 
Fauchelevent did not understand this last word . 
`` Come have a drink , '' said he . 
Here a remark becomes necessary . 
Fauchelevent , whatever his anguish , offered a drink , but he did not explain himself on one point ; who was to pay ? 
Generally , Fauchelevent offered and Father Mestienne paid . 
An offer of a drink was the evident result of the novel situation created by the new grave-digger , and it was necessary to make this offer , but the old gardener left the proverbial quarter of an hour named after Rabelais in the dark , and that not unintentionally . 
As for himself , Fauchelevent did not wish to pay , troubled as he was . 
The grave-digger went on with a superior smile : -- `` One must eat . 
I have accepted Father Mestienne 's reversion . 
One gets to be a philosopher when one has nearly completed his classes . 
To the labor of the hand I join the labor of the arm . 
I have my scrivener 's stall in the market of the Rue de Sevres . 
You know ? 
the Umbrella Market . 
All the cooks of the Red Cross apply to me . 
I scribble their declarations of love to the raw soldiers . 
In the morning I write love letters ; in the evening I dig graves . 
Such is life , rustic . '' 
The hearse was still advancing . 
Fauchelevent , uneasy to the last degree , was gazing about him on all sides . 
Great drops of perspiration trickled down from his brow . 
`` But , '' continued the grave-digger , `` a man can not serve two mistresses . 
I must choose between the pen and the mattock . 
The mattock is ruining my hand . '' 
The hearse halted . 
The choir boy alighted from the mourning-coach , then the priest . 
One of the small front wheels of the hearse had run up a little on a pile of earth , beyond which an open grave was visible . 
`` What a farce this is ! '' 
repeated Fauchelevent in consternation . 
BETWEEN FOUR PLANKS Who was in the coffin ? 
The reader knows . 
Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there , and he could almost breathe . 
It is a strange thing to what a degree security of conscience confers security of the rest . 
Every combination thought out by Jean Valjean had been progressing , and progressing favorably , since the preceding day . 
He , like Fauchelevent , counted on Father Mestienne . 
He had no doubt as to the end . 
Never was there a more critical situation , never more complete composure . 
The four planks of the coffin breathe out a kind of terrible peace . 
It seemed as though something of the repose of the dead entered into Jean Valjean 's tranquillity . 
From the depths of that coffin he had been able to follow , and he had followed , all the phases of the terrible drama which he was playing with death . 
Shortly after Fauchelevent had finished nailing on the upper plank , Jean Valjean had felt himself carried out , then driven off . 
He knew , from the diminution in the jolting , when they left the pavements and reached the earth road . 
He had divined , from a dull noise , that they were crossing the bridge of Austerlitz . 
At the first halt , he had understood that they were entering the cemetery ; at the second halt , he said to himself : -- `` Here is the grave . '' 
Suddenly , he felt hands seize the coffin , then a harsh grating against the planks ; he explained it to himself as the rope which was being fastened round the casket in order to lower it into the cavity . 
Then he experienced a giddiness . 
The undertaker 's man and the grave-digger had probably allowed the coffin to lose its balance , and had lowered the head before the foot . 
He recovered himself fully when he felt himself horizontal and motionless . 
He had just touched the bottom . 
He had a certain sensation of cold . 
A voice rose above him , glacial and solemn . 
He heard Latin words , which he did not understand , pass over him , so slowly that he was able to catch them one by one : -- `` Qui dormiunt in terrae pulvere , evigilabunt ; alii in vitam aeternam , et alii in approbrium , ut videant semper . '' 
A child 's voice said : -- `` De profundis . '' 
The grave voice began again : -- `` Requiem aeternam dona ei , Domine . '' 
The child 's voice responded : -- `` Et lux perpetua luceat ei . '' 
He heard something like the gentle patter of several drops of rain on the plank which covered him . 
It was probably the holy water . 
He thought : `` This will be over soon now . 
Patience for a little while longer . 
The priest will take his departure . 
Fauchelevent will take Mestienne off to drink . 
I shall be left . 
Then Fauchelevent will return alone , and I shall get out . 
That will be the work of a good hour . '' 
The grave voice resumed `` Requiescat in pace . '' 
And the child 's voice said : -- `` Amen . '' 
Jean Valjean strained his ears , and heard something like retreating footsteps . 
`` There , they are going now , '' thought he . 
`` I am alone . '' 
All at once , he heard over his head a sound which seemed to him to be a clap of thunder . 
It was a shovelful of earth falling on the coffin . 
A second shovelful fell . 
One of the holes through which he breathed had just been stopped up . 
A third shovelful of earth fell . 
Then a fourth . 
There are things which are too strong for the strongest man . 
Jean Valjean lost consciousness . 
IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE ORIGIN OF THE SAYING : DO N'T LOSE THE CARD This is what had taken place above the coffin in which lay Jean Valjean . 
When the hearse had driven off , when the priest and the choir boy had entered the carriage again and taken their departure , Fauchelevent , who had not taken his eyes from the grave-digger , saw the latter bend over and grasp his shovel , which was sticking upright in the heap of dirt . 
Then Fauchelevent took a supreme resolve . 
He placed himself between the grave and the grave-digger , crossed his arms and said : -- `` I am the one to pay ! '' 
The grave-digger stared at him in amazement , and replied : -- `` What 's that , peasant ? '' 
Fauchelevent repeated : -- `` I am the one who pays ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` For the wine . '' 
`` What wine ? '' 
`` That Argenteuil wine . '' 
`` Where is the Argenteuil ? '' 
`` At the Bon Coing . '' 
