She is the first awake , the last asleep . 
She marches forwards . 
She is a seeker . 
This arises from the fact that she is an artist . 
The ideal is nothing but the culminating point of logic , the same as the beautiful is nothing but the summit of the true . 
Artistic peoples are also consistent peoples . 
To love beauty is to see the light . 
That is why the torch of Europe , that is to say of civilization , was first borne by Greece , who passed it on to Italy , who handed it on to France . 
Divine , illuminating nations of scouts ! 
Vitaelampada tradunt . 
It is an admirable thing that the poetry of a people is the element of its progress . 
The amount of civilization is measured by the quantity of imagination . 
Only , a civilizing people should remain a manly people . 
Corinth , yes ; Sybaris , no . 
Whoever becomes effeminate makes himself a bastard . 
He must be neither a dilettante nor a virtuoso : but he must be artistic . 
In the matter of civilization , he must not refine , but he must sublime . 
On this condition , one gives to the human race the pattern of the ideal . 
The modern ideal has its type in art , and its means is science . 
It is through science that it will realize that august vision of the poets , the socially beautiful . 
Eden will be reconstructed by A+B . 
At the point which civilization has now reached , the exact is a necessary element of the splendid , and the artistic sentiment is not only served , but completed by the scientific organ ; dreams must be calculated . 
Art , which is the conqueror , should have for support science , which is the walker ; the solidity of the creature which is ridden is of importance . 
The modern spirit is the genius of Greece with the genius of India as its vehicle ; Alexander on the elephant . 
Races which are petrified in dogma or demoralized by lucre are unfit to guide civilization . 
Genuflection before the idol or before money wastes away the muscles which walk and the will which advances . 
Hieratic or mercantile absorption lessens a people 's power of radiance , lowers its horizon by lowering its level , and deprives it of that intelligence , at once both human and divine of the universal goal , which makes missionaries of nations . 
Babylon has no ideal ; Carthage has no ideal . 
Athens and Rome have and keep , throughout all the nocturnal darkness of the centuries , halos of civilization . 
France is in the same quality of race as Greece and Italy . 
She is Athenian in the matter of beauty , and Roman in her greatness . 
Moreover , she is good . 
She gives herself . 
Oftener than is the case with other races , is she in the humor for self-devotion and sacrifice . 
Only , this humor seizes upon her , and again abandons her . 
And therein lies the great peril for those who run when she desires only to walk , or who walk on when she desires to halt . 
France has her relapses into materialism , and , at certain instants , the ideas which obstruct that sublime brain have no longer anything which recalls French greatness and are of the dimensions of a Missouri or a South Carolina . 
What is to be done in such a case ? 
The giantess plays at being a dwarf ; immense France has her freaks of pettiness . 
That is all . 
To this there is nothing to say . 
Peoples , like planets , possess the right to an eclipse . 
And all is well , provided that the light returns and that the eclipse does not degenerate into night . 
Dawn and resurrection are synonymous . 
The reappearance of the light is identical with the persistence of the I. Let us state these facts calmly . 
Death on the barricade or the tomb in exile , is an acceptable occasion for devotion . 
The real name of devotion is disinterestedness . 
Let the abandoned allow themselves to be abandoned , let the exiled allow themselves to be exiled , and let us confine ourselves to entreating great nations not to retreat too far , when they do retreat . 
One must not push too far in descent under pretext of a return to reason . 
Matter exists , the minute exists , interest exists , the stomach exists ; but the stomach must not be the sole wisdom . 
The life of the moment has its rights , we admit , but permanent life has its rights also . 
Alas ! 
the fact that one is mounted does not preclude a fall . 
This can be seen in history more frequently than is desirable : A nation is great , it tastes the ideal , then it bites the mire , and finds it good ; and if it be asked how it happens that it has abandoned Socrates for Falstaff , it replies : `` Because I love statesmen . '' 
One word more before returning to our subject , the conflict . 
A battle like the one which we are engaged in describing is nothing else than a convulsion towards the ideal . 
Progress trammelled is sickly , and is subject to these tragic epilepsies . 
With that malady of progress , civil war , we have been obliged to come in contact in our passage . 
This is one of the fatal phases , at once act and entr ` acte of that drama whose pivot is a social condemnation , and whose veritable title is Progress . 
Progress ! 
The cry to which we frequently give utterance is our whole thought ; and , at the point of this drama which we have now reached , the idea which it contains having still more than one trial to undergo , it is , perhaps , permitted to us , if not to lift the veil from it , to at least allow its light to shine through . 
The book which the reader has under his eye at this moment is , from one end to the other , as a whole and in detail , whatever may be its intermittences , exceptions and faults , the march from evil to good , from the unjust to the just , from night to day , from appetite to conscience , from rottenness to life , from hell to heaven , from nothingness to God . 
Point of departure : matter ; point of arrival : the soul . 
The hydra at the beginning , the angel at the end . 
THE HEROES All at once , the drum beat the charge . 
The attack was a hurricane . 
On the evening before , in the darkness , the barricade had been approached silently , as by a boa . 
Now , in broad daylight , in that widening street , surprise was decidedly impossible , rude force had , moreover , been unmasked , the cannon had begun the roar , the army hurled itself on the barricade . 
Fury now became skill . 
A powerful detachment of infantry of the line , broken at regular intervals , by the National Guard and the Municipal Guard on foot , and supported by serried masses which could be heard though not seen , debauched into the street at a run , with drums beating , trumpets braying , bayonets levelled , the sappers at their head , and , imperturbable under the projectiles , charged straight for the barricade with the weight of a brazen beam against a wall . 
The wall held firm . 
The insurgents fired impetuously . 
The barricade once scaled had a mane of lightning flashes . 
The assault was so furious , that for one moment , it was inundated with assailants ; but it shook off the soldiers as the lion shakes off the dogs , and it was only covered with besiegers as the cliff is covered with foam , to re-appear , a moment later , beetling , black and formidable . 
The column , forced to retreat , remained massed in the street , unprotected but terrible , and replied to the redoubt with a terrible discharge of musketry . 
Any one who has seen fireworks will recall the sheaf formed of interlacing lightnings which is called a bouquet . 
Let the reader picture to himself this bouquet , no longer vertical but horizontal , bearing a bullet , buck-shot or a biscaien at the tip of each one of its jets of flame , and picking off dead men one after another from its clusters of lightning . 
The barricade was underneath it . 
On both sides , the resolution was equal . 
The bravery exhibited there was almost barbarous and was complicated with a sort of heroic ferocity which began by the sacrifice of self . 
This was the epoch when a National Guardsman fought like a Zouave . 
The troop wished to make an end of it , insurrection was desirous of fighting . 
The acceptance of the death agony in the flower of youth and in the flush of health turns intrepidity into frenzy . 
In this fray , each one underwent the broadening growth of the death hour . 
The street was strewn with corpses . 
The barricade had Enjolras at one of its extremities and Marius at the other . 
Enjolras , who carried the whole barricade in his head , reserved and sheltered himself ; three soldiers fell , one after the other , under his embrasure , without having even seen him ; Marius fought unprotected . 
He made himself a target . 
He stood with more than half his body above the breastworks . 
There is no more violent prodigal than the avaricious man who takes the bit in his teeth ; there is no man more terrible in action than a dreamer . 
Marius was formidable and pensive . 
In battle he was as in a dream . 
One would have pronounced him a phantom engaged in firing a gun . 
The insurgents ' cartridges were giving out ; but not their sarcasms . 
In this whirlwind of the sepulchre in which they stood , they laughed . 
Courfeyrac was bare-headed . 
`` What have you done with your hat ? '' 
Bossuet asked him . 
Courfeyrac replied : `` They have finally taken it away from me with cannon-balls . '' 
Or they uttered haughty comments . 
