Go away ! '' 
The man dropped his head , picked up the knapsack which he had deposited on the ground , and took his departure . 
He chose the principal street . 
He walked straight on at a venture , keeping close to the houses like a sad and humiliated man . 
He did not turn round a single time . 
Had he done so , he would have seen the host of the Cross of Colbas standing on his threshold , surrounded by all the guests of his inn , and all the passers-by in the street , talking vivaciously , and pointing him out with his finger ; and , from the glances of terror and distrust cast by the group , he might have divined that his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town . 
He saw nothing of all this . 
People who are crushed do not look behind them . 
They know but too well the evil fate which follows them . 
Thus he proceeded for some time , walking on without ceasing , traversing at random streets of which he knew nothing , forgetful of his fatigue , as is often the case when a man is sad . 
All at once he felt the pangs of hunger sharply . 
Night was drawing near . 
He glanced about him , to see whether he could not discover some shelter . 
The fine hostelry was closed to him ; he was seeking some very humble public house , some hovel , however lowly . 
Just then a light flashed up at the end of the streets ; a pine branch suspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white sky of the twilight . 
He proceeded thither . 
It proved to be , in fact , a public house . 
The public house which is in the Rue de Chaffaut . 
The wayfarer halted for a moment , and peeped through the window into the interior of the low-studded room of the public house , illuminated by a small lamp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth . 
Some men were engaged in drinking there . 
The landlord was warming himself . 
An iron pot , suspended from a crane , bubbled over the flame . 
The entrance to this public house , which is also a sort of an inn , is by two doors . 
One opens on the street , the other upon a small yard filled with manure . 
The traveller dare not enter by the street door . 
He slipped into the yard , halted again , then raised the latch timidly and opened the door . 
`` Who goes there ? '' 
said the master . 
`` Some one who wants supper and bed . '' 
`` Good . 
We furnish supper and bed here . '' 
He entered . 
All the men who were drinking turned round . 
The lamp illuminated him on one side , the firelight on the other . 
They examined him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack . 
The host said to him , `` There is the fire . 
The supper is cooking in the pot . 
Come and warm yourself , comrade . '' 
He approached and seated himself near the hearth . 
He stretched out his feet , which were exhausted with fatigue , to the fire ; a fine odor was emitted by the pot . 
All that could be distinguished of his face , beneath his cap , which was well pulled down , assumed a vague appearance of comfort , mingled with that other poignant aspect which habitual suffering bestows . 
It was , moreover , a firm , energetic , and melancholy profile . 
This physiognomy was strangely composed ; it began by seeming humble , and ended by seeming severe . 
The eye shone beneath its lashes like a fire beneath brushwood . 
One of the men seated at the table , however , was a fishmonger who , before entering the public house of the Rue de Chaffaut , had been to stable his horse at Labarre 's . 
It chanced that he had that very morning encountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras d'Asse and -- I have forgotten the name . 
I think it was Escoublon . 
Now , when he met him , the man , who then seemed already extremely weary , had requested him to take him on his crupper ; to which the fishmonger had made no reply except by redoubling his gait . 
This fishmonger had been a member half an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin Labarre , and had himself related his disagreeable encounter of the morning to the people at the Cross of Colbas . 
From where he sat he made an imperceptible sign to the tavern-keeper . 
The tavern-keeper went to him . 
They exchanged a few words in a low tone . 
The man had again become absorbed in his reflections . 
The tavern-keeper returned to the fireplace , laid his hand abruptly on the shoulder of the man , and said to him : -- `` You are going to get out of here . '' 
The stranger turned round and replied gently , `` Ah ! 
You know ? 
-- '' `` Yes . '' 
`` I was sent away from the other inn . '' 
`` And you are to be turned out of this one . '' 
`` Where would you have me go ? '' 
`` Elsewhere . '' 
The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed . 
As he went out , some children who had followed him from the Cross of Colbas , and who seemed to be lying in wait for him , threw stones at him . 
He retraced his steps in anger , and threatened them with his stick : the children dispersed like a flock of birds . 
He passed before the prison . 
At the door hung an iron chain attached to a bell . 
He rang . 
The wicket opened . 
`` Turnkey , '' said he , removing his cap politely , `` will you have the kindness to admit me , and give me a lodging for the night ? '' 
A voice replied : -- `` The prison is not an inn . 
Get yourself arrested , and you will be admitted . '' 
The wicket closed again . 
He entered a little street in which there were many gardens . 
Some of them are enclosed only by hedges , which lends a cheerful aspect to the street . 
In the midst of these gardens and hedges he caught sight of a small house of a single story , the window of which was lighted up . 
He peered through the pane as he had done at the public house . 
Within was a large whitewashed room , with a bed draped in printed cotton stuff , and a cradle in one corner , a few wooden chairs , and a double-barrelled gun hanging on the wall . 
A table was spread in the centre of the room . 
A copper lamp illuminated the tablecloth of coarse white linen , the pewter jug shining like silver , and filled with wine , and the brown , smoking soup-tureen . 
At this table sat a man of about forty , with a merry and open countenance , who was dandling a little child on his knees . 
Close by a very young woman was nursing another child . 
The father was laughing , the child was laughing , the mother was smiling . 
The stranger paused a moment in revery before this tender and calming spectacle . 
What was taking place within him ? 
He alone could have told . 
It is probable that he thought that this joyous house would be hospitable , and that , in a place where he beheld so much happiness , he would find perhaps a little pity . 
He tapped on the pane with a very small and feeble knock . 
They did not hear him . 
He tapped again . 
He heard the woman say , `` It seems to me , husband , that some one is knocking . '' 
`` No , '' replied the husband . 
He tapped a third time . 
The husband rose , took the lamp , and went to the door , which he opened . 
He was a man of lofty stature , half peasant , half artisan . 
He wore a huge leather apron , which reached to his left shoulder , and which a hammer , a red handkerchief , a powder-horn , and all sorts of objects which were upheld by the girdle , as in a pocket , caused to bulge out . 
He carried his head thrown backwards ; his shirt , widely opened and turned back , displayed his bull neck , white and bare . 
He had thick eyelashes , enormous black whiskers , prominent eyes , the lower part of his face like a snout ; and besides all this , that air of being on his own ground , which is indescribable . 
`` Pardon me , sir , '' said the wayfarer , `` Could you , in consideration of payment , give me a plate of soup and a corner of that shed yonder in the garden , in which to sleep ? 
Tell me ; can you ? 
For money ? '' 
