Terrible entanglement ! 
There was no longer any slope , for the corpses had levelled the road with the plain , and reached the brim like a well-filled bushel of barley . 
A heap of dead bodies in the upper part , a river of blood in the lower part -- such was that road on the evening of the 18th of June , 1815 . 
The blood ran even to the Nivelles highway , and there overflowed in a large pool in front of the abatis of trees which barred the way , at a spot which is still pointed out . 
It will be remembered that it was at the opposite point , in the direction of the Genappe road , that the destruction of the cuirassiers had taken place . 
The thickness of the layer of bodies was proportioned to the depth of the hollow road . 
Towards the middle , at the point where it became level , where Delort 's division had passed , the layer of corpses was thinner . 
The nocturnal prowler whom we have just shown to the reader was going in that direction . 
He was searching that vast tomb . 
He gazed about . 
He passed the dead in some sort of hideous review . 
He walked with his feet in the blood . 
All at once he paused . 
A few paces in front of him , in the hollow road , at the point where the pile of dead came to an end , an open hand , illumined by the moon , projected from beneath that heap of men . 
That hand had on its finger something sparkling , which was a ring of gold . 
The man bent over , remained in a crouching attitude for a moment , and when he rose there was no longer a ring on the hand . 
He did not precisely rise ; he remained in a stooping and frightened attitude , with his back turned to the heap of dead , scanning the horizon on his knees , with the whole upper portion of his body supported on his two forefingers , which rested on the earth , and his head peering above the edge of the hollow road . 
The jackal 's four paws suit some actions . 
Then coming to a decision , he rose to his feet . 
At that moment , he gave a terrible start . 
He felt some one clutch him from behind . 
He wheeled round ; it was the open hand , which had closed , and had seized the skirt of his coat . 
An honest man would have been terrified ; this man burst into a laugh . 
`` Come , '' said he , `` it 's only a dead body . 
I prefer a spook to a gendarme . '' 
But the hand weakened and released him . 
Effort is quickly exhausted in the grave . 
`` Well now , '' said the prowler , `` is that dead fellow alive ? 
Let 's see . '' 
He bent down again , fumbled among the heap , pushed aside everything that was in his way , seized the hand , grasped the arm , freed the head , pulled out the body , and a few moments later he was dragging the lifeless , or at least the unconscious , man , through the shadows of hollow road . 
He was a cuirassier , an officer , and even an officer of considerable rank ; a large gold epaulette peeped from beneath the cuirass ; this officer no longer possessed a helmet . 
A furious sword-cut had scarred his face , where nothing was discernible but blood . 
However , he did not appear to have any broken limbs , and , by some happy chance , if that word is permissible here , the dead had been vaulted above him in such a manner as to preserve him from being crushed . 
His eyes were still closed . 
On his cuirass he wore the silver cross of the Legion of Honor . 
The prowler tore off this cross , which disappeared into one of the gulfs which he had beneath his great coat . 
Then he felt of the officer 's fob , discovered a watch there , and took possession of it . 
Next he searched his waistcoat , found a purse and pocketed it . 
When he had arrived at this stage of succor which he was administering to this dying man , the officer opened his eyes . 
`` Thanks , '' he said feebly . 
The abruptness of the movements of the man who was manipulating him , the freshness of the night , the air which he could inhale freely , had roused him from his lethargy . 
The prowler made no reply . 
He raised his head . 
A sound of footsteps was audible in the plain ; some patrol was probably approaching . 
The officer murmured , for the death agony was still in his voice : -- `` Who won the battle ? '' 
`` The English , '' answered the prowler . 
The officer went on : -- `` Look in my pockets ; you will find a watch and a purse . 
Take them . '' 
It was already done . 
The prowler executed the required feint , and said : -- `` There is nothing there . '' 
`` I have been robbed , '' said the officer ; `` I am sorry for that . 
You should have had them . '' 
The steps of the patrol became more and more distinct . 
`` Some one is coming , '' said the prowler , with the movement of a man who is taking his departure . 
The officer raised his arm feebly , and detained him . 
`` You have saved my life . 
Who are you ? '' 
The prowler answered rapidly , and in a low voice : -- `` Like yourself , I belonged to the French army . 
I must leave you . 
If they were to catch me , they would shoot me . 
I have saved your life . 
Now get out of the scrape yourself . '' 
`` What is your rank ? '' 
`` Sergeant . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Thenardier . '' 
`` I shall not forget that name , '' said the officer ; `` and do you remember mine . 
My name is Pontmercy . '' 
BOOK SECOND . 
-- THE SHIP ORION NUMBER 24,601 BECOMES NUMBER 9,430 Jean Valjean had been recaptured . 
The reader will be grateful to us if we pass rapidly over the sad details . 
We will confine ourselves to transcribing two paragraphs published by the journals of that day , a few months after the surprising events which had taken place at M. sur M . 
These articles are rather summary . 
It must be remembered , that at that epoch the Gazette des Tribunaux was not yet in existence . 
We borrow the first from the Drapeau Blanc . 
It bears the date of July 25 , 1823 . 
An arrondissement of the Pas de Calais has just been the theatre of an event quite out of the ordinary course . 
A man , who was a stranger in the Department , and who bore the name of M. Madeleine , had , thanks to the new methods , resuscitated some years ago an ancient local industry , the manufacture of jet and of black glass trinkets . 
He had made his fortune in the business , and that of the arrondissement as well , we will admit . 
He had been appointed mayor , in recognition of his services . 
The police discovered that M. Madeleine was no other than an ex-convict who had broken his ban , condemned in 1796 for theft , and named Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean has been recommitted to prison . 
It appears that previous to his arrest he had succeeded in withdrawing from the hands of M. Laffitte , a sum of over half a million which he had lodged there , and which he had , moreover , and by perfectly legitimate means , acquired in his business . 
No one has been able to discover where Jean Valjean has concealed this money since his return to prison at Toulon . 
The second article , which enters a little more into detail , is an extract from the Journal de Paris , of the same date . 
A former convict , who had been liberated , named Jean Valjean , has just appeared before the Court of Assizes of the Var , under circumstances calculated to attract attention . 
This wretch had succeeded in escaping the vigilance of the police , he had changed his name , and had succeeded in getting himself appointed mayor of one of our small northern towns ; in this town he had established a considerable commerce . 
He has at last been unmasked and arrested , thanks to the indefatigable zeal of the public prosecutor . 
He had for his concubine a woman of the town , who died of a shock at the moment of his arrest . 
This scoundrel , who is endowed with Herculean strength , found means to escape ; but three or four days after his flight the police laid their hands on him once more , in Paris itself , at the very moment when he was entering one of those little vehicles which run between the capital and the village of Montfermeil -LRB- Seine-et-Oise -RRB- . 
He is said to have profited by this interval of three or four days of liberty , to withdraw a considerable sum deposited by him with one of our leading bankers . 
This sum has been estimated at six or seven hundred thousand francs . 
If the indictment is to be trusted , he has hidden it in some place known to himself alone , and it has not been possible to lay hands on it . 
However that may be , the said Jean Valjean has just been brought before the Assizes of the Department of the Var as accused of highway robbery accompanied with violence , about eight years ago , on the person of one of those honest children who , as the patriarch of Ferney has said , in immortal verse , '' ... Arrive from Savoy every year , And who , with gentle hands , do clear Those long canals choked up with soot . '' 
This bandit refused to defend himself . 
It was proved by the skilful and eloquent representative of the public prosecutor , that the theft was committed in complicity with others , and that Jean Valjean was a member of a band of robbers in the south . 
Jean Valjean was pronounced guilty and was condemned to the death penalty in consequence . 
This criminal refused to lodge an appeal . 
The king , in his inexhaustible clemency , has deigned to commute his penalty to that of penal servitude for life . 
Jean Valjean was immediately taken to the prison at Toulon . 
