He encountered Courfeyrac under the arcades of the Odeon , and said to him : `` Come and dine with me . '' 
They went off to Rousseau 's and spent six francs . 
Marius ate like an ogre . 
He gave the waiter six sous . 
At dessert , he said to Courfeyrac . 
`` Have you read the paper ? 
What a fine discourse Audry de Puyraveau delivered ! '' 
He was desperately in love . 
After dinner , he said to Courfeyrac : `` I will treat you to the play . '' 
They went to the Porte-Sainte-Martin to see Frederick in l'Auberge des Adrets . 
Marius was enormously amused . 
At the same time , he had a redoubled attack of shyness . 
On emerging from the theatre , he refused to look at the garter of a modiste who was stepping across a gutter , and Courfeyrac , who said : `` I should like to put that woman in my collection , '' almost horrified him . 
Courfeyrac invited him to breakfast at the Cafe Voltaire on the following morning . 
Marius went thither , and ate even more than on the preceding evening . 
He was very thoughtful and very merry . 
One would have said that he was taking advantage of every occasion to laugh uproariously . 
He tenderly embraced some man or other from the provinces , who was presented to him . 
A circle of students formed round the table , and they spoke of the nonsense paid for by the State which was uttered from the rostrum in the Sorbonne , then the conversation fell upon the faults and omissions in Guicherat 's dictionaries and grammars . 
Marius interrupted the discussion to exclaim : `` But it is very agreeable , all the same to have the cross ! '' 
`` That 's queer ! '' 
whispered Courfeyrac to Jean Prouvaire . 
`` No , '' responded Prouvaire , `` that 's serious . '' 
It was serious ; in fact , Marius had reached that first violent and charming hour with which grand passions begin . 
A glance had wrought all this . 
When the mine is charged , when the conflagration is ready , nothing is more simple . 
A glance is a spark . 
It was all over with him . 
Marius loved a woman . 
His fate was entering the unknown . 
The glance of women resembles certain combinations of wheels , which are tranquil in appearance yet formidable . 
You pass close to them every day , peaceably and with impunity , and without a suspicion of anything . 
A moment arrives when you forget that the thing is there . 
You go and come , dream , speak , laugh . 
All at once you feel yourself clutched ; all is over . 
The wheels hold you fast , the glance has ensnared you . 
It has caught you , no matter where or how , by some portion of your thought which was fluttering loose , by some distraction which had attacked you . 
You are lost . 
The whole of you passes into it . 
A chain of mysterious forces takes possession of you . 
You struggle in vain ; no more human succor is possible . 
You go on falling from gearing to gearing , from agony to agony , from torture to torture , you , your mind , your fortune , your future , your soul ; and , according to whether you are in the power of a wicked creature , or of a noble heart , you will not escape from this terrifying machine otherwise than disfigured with shame , or transfigured by passion . 
ADVENTURES OF THE LETTER U DELIVERED OVER TO CONJECTURES Isolation , detachment , from everything , pride , independence , the taste of nature , the absence of daily and material activity , the life within himself , the secret conflicts of chastity , a benevolent ecstasy towards all creation , had prepared Marius for this possession which is called passion . 
His worship of his father had gradually become a religion , and , like all religions , it had retreated to the depths of his soul . 
Something was required in the foreground . 
Love came . 
A full month elapsed , during which Marius went every day to the Luxembourg . 
When the hour arrived , nothing could hold him back . 
-- `` He is on duty , '' said Courfeyrac . 
Marius lived in a state of delight . 
It is certain that the young girl did look at him . 
He had finally grown bold , and approached the bench . 
Still , he did not pass in front of it any more , in obedience to the instinct of timidity and to the instinct of prudence common to lovers . 
He considered it better not to attract `` the attention of the father . '' 
He combined his stations behind the trees and the pedestals of the statues with a profound diplomacy , so that he might be seen as much as possible by the young girl and as little as possible by the old gentleman . 
Sometimes , he remained motionless by the half-hour together in the shade of a Leonidas or a Spartacus , holding in his hand a book , above which his eyes , gently raised , sought the beautiful girl , and she , on her side , turned her charming profile towards him with a vague smile . 
While conversing in the most natural and tranquil manner in the world with the white-haired man , she bent upon Marius all the reveries of a virginal and passionate eye . 
Ancient and time-honored manoeuvre which Eve understood from the very first day of the world , and which every woman understands from the very first day of her life ! 
her mouth replied to one , and her glance replied to another . 
It must be supposed , that M. Leblanc finally noticed something , for often , when Marius arrived , he rose and began to walk about . 
He had abandoned their accustomed place and had adopted the bench by the Gladiator , near the other end of the walk , as though with the object of seeing whether Marius would pursue them thither . 
Marius did not understand , and committed this error . 
`` The father '' began to grow inexact , and no longer brought `` his daughter '' every day . 
Sometimes , he came alone . 
Then Marius did not stay . 
Another blunder . 
Marius paid no heed to these symptoms . 
From the phase of timidity , he had passed , by a natural and fatal progress , to the phase of blindness . 
His love increased . 
He dreamed of it every night . 
And then , an unexpected bliss had happened to him , oil on the fire , a redoubling of the shadows over his eyes . 
One evening , at dusk , he had found , on the bench which `` M. Leblanc and his daughter '' had just quitted , a handkerchief , a very simple handkerchief , without embroidery , but white , and fine , and which seemed to him to exhale ineffable perfume . 
He seized it with rapture . 
This handkerchief was marked with the letters U. F. Marius knew nothing about this beautiful child , -- neither her family name , her Christian name nor her abode ; these two letters were the first thing of her that he had gained possession of , adorable initials , upon which he immediately began to construct his scaffolding . 
U was evidently the Christian name . 
`` Ursule ! '' 
he thought , `` what a delicious name ! '' 
He kissed the handkerchief , drank it in , placed it on his heart , on his flesh , during the day , and at night , laid it beneath his lips that he might fall asleep on it . 
`` I feel that her whole soul lies within it ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
This handkerchief belonged to the old gentleman , who had simply let it fall from his pocket . 
In the days which followed the finding of this treasure , he only displayed himself at the Luxembourg in the act of kissing the handkerchief and laying it on his heart . 
The beautiful child understood nothing of all this , and signified it to him by imperceptible signs . 
`` O modesty ! '' 
said Marius . 
THE VETERANS THEMSELVES CAN BE HAPPY Since we have pronounced the word modesty , and since we conceal nothing , we ought to say that once , nevertheless , in spite of his ecstasies , `` his Ursule '' caused him very serious grief . 
It was on one of the days when she persuaded M. Leblanc to leave the bench and stroll along the walk . 
A brisk May breeze was blowing , which swayed the crests of the plaintain-trees . 
The father and daughter , arm in arm , had just passed Marius ' bench . 
Marius had risen to his feet behind them , and was following them with his eyes , as was fitting in the desperate situation of his soul . 
All at once , a gust of wind , more merry than the rest , and probably charged with performing the affairs of Springtime , swept down from the nursery , flung itself on the alley , enveloped the young girl in a delicious shiver , worthy of Virgil 's nymphs , and the fawns of Theocritus , and lifted her dress , the robe more sacred than that of Isis , almost to the height of her garter . 
A leg of exquisite shape appeared . 
Marius saw it . 
He was exasperated and furious . 
The young girl had hastily thrust down her dress , with a divinely troubled motion , but he was none the less angry for all that . 
He was alone in the alley , it is true . 
But there might have been some one there . 
And what if there had been some one there ! 
Can any one comprehend such a thing ? 
What she had just done is horrible ! 
