The mother must have felt pleased in her grave , to see her daughter wearing mourning for her , and , above all , to see that she was properly clothed , and that she was warm . 
He thought of that forest of Montfermeil ; they had traversed it together , Cosette and he ; he thought of what the weather had been , of the leafless trees , of the wood destitute of birds , of the sunless sky ; it mattered not , it was charming . 
He arranged the tiny garments on the bed , the fichu next to the petticoat , the stockings beside the shoes , and he looked at them , one after the other . 
She was no taller than that , she had her big doll in her arms , she had put her louis d'or in the pocket of that apron , she had laughed , they walked hand in hand , she had no one in the world but him . 
Then his venerable , white head fell forward on the bed , that stoical old heart broke , his face was engulfed , so to speak , in Cosette 's garments , and if any one had passed up the stairs at that moment , he would have heard frightful sobs . 
THE IMMORTAL LIVER -LSB- 68 -RSB- -LSB- 68 -RSB- In allusion to the story of Prometheus . 
The old and formidable struggle , of which we have already witnessed so many phases , began once more . 
Jacob struggled with the angel but one night . 
Alas ! 
how many times have we beheld Jean Valjean seized bodily by his conscience , in the darkness , and struggling desperately against it ! 
Unheard-of conflict ! 
At certain moments the foot slips ; at other moments the ground crumbles away underfoot . 
How many times had that conscience , mad for the good , clasped and overthrown him ! 
How many times had the truth set her knee inexorably upon his breast ! 
How many times , hurled to earth by the light , had he begged for mercy ! 
How many times had that implacable spark , lighted within him , and upon him by the Bishop , dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind ! 
How many times had he risen to his feet in the combat , held fast to the rock , leaning against sophism , dragged in the dust , now getting the upper hand of his conscience , again overthrown by it ! 
How many times , after an equivoque , after the specious and treacherous reasoning of egotism , had he heard his irritated conscience cry in his ear : `` A trip ! 
you wretch ! '' 
How many times had his refractory thoughts rattled convulsively in his throat , under the evidence of duty ! 
Resistance to God . 
Funereal sweats . 
What secret wounds which he alone felt bleed ! 
What excoriations in his lamentable existence ! 
How many times he had risen bleeding , bruised , broken , enlightened , despair in his heart , serenity in his soul ! 
and , vanquished , he had felt himself the conqueror . 
And , after having dislocated , broken , and rent his conscience with red-hot pincers , it had said to him , as it stood over him , formidable , luminous , and tranquil : `` Now , go in peace ! '' 
But on emerging from so melancholy a conflict , what a lugubrious peace , alas ! 
Nevertheless , that night Jean Valjean felt that he was passing through his final combat . 
A heart-rending question presented itself . 
Predestinations are not all direct ; they do not open out in a straight avenue before the predestined man ; they have blind courts , impassable alleys , obscure turns , disturbing crossroads offering the choice of many ways . 
Jean Valjean had halted at that moment at the most perilous of these crossroads . 
He had come to the supreme crossing of good and evil . 
He had that gloomy intersection beneath his eyes . 
On this occasion once more , as had happened to him already in other sad vicissitudes , two roads opened out before him , the one tempting , the other alarming . 
Which was he to take ? 
He was counselled to the one which alarmed him whenever we fix our eyes on the darkness . 
Once more , Jean Valjean had the choice between Is it then true ? 
the soul may recover ; but not fate . 
This is the problem which presented itself to him : by that mysterious index finger which we all perceive the terrible port and the smiling ambush . 
Frightful thing ! 
an incurable destiny ! 
In what manner was Jean Valjean to behave in relation to the happiness of Cosette and Marius ? 
It was he who had willed that happiness , it was he who had brought it about ; he had , himself , buried it in his entrails , and at that moment , when he reflected on it , he was able to enjoy the sort of satisfaction which an armorer would experience on recognizing his factory mark on a knife , on withdrawing it , all smoking , from his own breast . 
Cosette had Marius , Marius possessed Cosette . 
They had everything , even riches . 
And this was his doing . 
But what was he , Jean Valjean , to do with this happiness , now that it existed , now that it was there ? 
Should he force himself on this happiness ? 
Should he treat it as belonging to him ? 
No doubt , Cosette did belong to another ; but should he , Jean Valjean , retain of Cosette all that he could retain ? 
Should he remain the sort of father , half seen but respected , which he had hitherto been ? 
Should he , without saying a word , bring his past to that future ? 
Should he present himself there , as though he had a right , and should he seat himself , veiled , at that luminous fireside ? 
Should he take those innocent hands into his tragic hands , with a smile ? 
Should he place upon the peaceful fender of the Gillenormand drawing-room those feet of his , which dragged behind them the disgraceful shadow of the law ? 
Should he enter into participation in the fair fortunes of Cosette and Marius ? 
Should he render the obscurity on his brow and the cloud upon theirs still more dense ? 
Should he place his catastrophe as a third associate in their felicity ? 
Should he continue to hold his peace ? 
In a word , should he be the sinister mute of destiny beside these two happy beings ? 
We must have become habituated to fatality and to encounters with it , in order to have the daring to raise our eyes when certain questions appear to us in all their horrible nakedness . 
Good or evil stands behind this severe interrogation point . 
What are you going to do ? 
demands the sphinx . 
This habit of trial Jean Valjean possessed . 
He gazed intently at the sphinx . 
He examined the pitiless problem under all its aspects . 
Cosette , that charming existence , was the raft of this shipwreck . 
What was he to do ? 
To cling fast to it , or to let go his hold ? 
If he clung to it , he should emerge from disaster , he should ascend again into the sunlight , he should let the bitter water drip from his garments and his hair , he was saved , he should live . 
And if he let go his hold ? 
Then the abyss . 
Thus he took sad council with his thoughts . 
Or , to speak more correctly , he fought ; he kicked furiously internally , now against his will , now against his conviction . 
Happily for Jean Valjean that he had been able to weep . 
That relieved him , possibly . 
But the beginning was savage . 
A tempest , more furious than the one which had formerly driven him to Arras , broke loose within him . 
The past surged up before him facing the present ; he compared them and sobbed . 
The silence of tears once opened , the despairing man writhed . 
He felt that he had been stopped short . 
Alas ! 
in this fight to the death between our egotism and our duty , when we thus retreat step by step before our immutable ideal , bewildered , furious , exasperated at having to yield , disputing the ground , hoping for a possible flight , seeking an escape , what an abrupt and sinister resistance does the foot of the wall offer in our rear ! 
To feel the sacred shadow which forms an obstacle ! 
The invisible inexorable , what an obsession ! 
Then , one is never done with conscience . 
Make your choice , Brutus ; make your choice , Cato . 
It is fathomless , since it is God . 
One flings into that well the labor of one 's whole life , one flings in one 's fortune , one flings in one 's riches , one flings in one 's success , one flings in one 's liberty or fatherland , one flings in one 's well-being , one flings in one 's repose , one flings in one 's joy ! 
More ! 
more ! 
more ! 
Empty the vase ! 
tip the urn ! 
One must finish by flinging in one 's heart . 
Somewhere in the fog of the ancient hells , there is a tun like that . 
Is not one pardonable , if one at last refuses ! 
Can the inexhaustible have any right ? 
