`` Yes , '' said Fantine ; `` that makes forty francs . '' 
She remained thoughtful , and began her work . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour she left her sewing and went to read the Thenardiers ' letter once more on the staircase . 
On her return , she said to Marguerite , who was at work beside her : -- `` What is a miliary fever ? 
Do you know ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered the old spinster ; `` it is a disease . '' 
`` Does it require many drugs ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
terrible drugs . '' 
`` How does one get it ? '' 
`` It is a malady that one gets without knowing how . '' 
`` Then it attacks children ? '' 
`` Children in particular . '' 
`` Do people die of it ? '' 
`` They may , '' said Marguerite . 
Fantine left the room and went to read her letter once more on the staircase . 
That evening she went out , and was seen to turn her steps in the direction of the Rue de Paris , where the inns are situated . 
The next morning , when Marguerite entered Fantine 's room before daylight , -- for they always worked together , and in this manner used only one candle for the two , -- she found Fantine seated on her bed , pale and frozen . 
She had not lain down . 
Her cap had fallen on her knees . 
Her candle had burned all night , and was almost entirely consumed . 
Marguerite halted on the threshold , petrified at this tremendous wastefulness , and exclaimed : -- `` Lord ! 
the candle is all burned out ! 
Something has happened . '' 
Then she looked at Fantine , who turned toward her her head bereft of its hair . 
Fantine had grown ten years older since the preceding night . 
`` Jesus ! '' 
said Marguerite , `` what is the matter with you , Fantine ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' replied Fantine . 
`` Quite the contrary . 
My child will not die of that frightful malady , for lack of succor . 
I am content . '' 
So saying , she pointed out to the spinster two napoleons which were glittering on the table . 
`` Ah ! 
Jesus God ! '' 
cried Marguerite . 
`` Why , it is a fortune ! 
Where did you get those louis d'or ? '' 
`` I got them , '' replied Fantine . 
At the same time she smiled . 
The candle illuminated her countenance . 
It was a bloody smile . 
A reddish saliva soiled the corners of her lips , and she had a black hole in her mouth . 
The two teeth had been extracted . 
She sent the forty francs to Montfermeil . 
After all it was a ruse of the Thenardiers to obtain money . 
Cosette was not ill . 
Fantine threw her mirror out of the window . 
She had long since quitted her cell on the second floor for an attic with only a latch to fasten it , next the roof ; one of those attics whose extremity forms an angle with the floor , and knocks you on the head every instant . 
The poor occupant can reach the end of his chamber as he can the end of his destiny , only by bending over more and more . 
She had no longer a bed ; a rag which she called her coverlet , a mattress on the floor , and a seatless chair still remained . 
A little rosebush which she had , had dried up , forgotten , in one corner . 
In the other corner was a butter-pot to hold water , which froze in winter , and in which the various levels of the water remained long marked by these circles of ice . 
She had lost her shame ; she lost her coquetry . 
A final sign . 
She went out , with dirty caps . 
Whether from lack of time or from indifference , she no longer mended her linen . 
As the heels wore out , she dragged her stockings down into her shoes . 
This was evident from the perpendicular wrinkles . 
She patched her bodice , which was old and worn out , with scraps of calico which tore at the slightest movement . 
The people to whom she was indebted made `` scenes '' and gave her no peace . 
She found them in the street , she found them again on her staircase . 
She passed many a night weeping and thinking . 
Her eyes were very bright , and she felt a steady pain in her shoulder towards the top of the left shoulder-blade . 
She coughed a great deal . 
She deeply hated Father Madeleine , but made no complaint . 
She sewed seventeen hours a day ; but a contractor for the work of prisons , who made the prisoners work at a discount , suddenly made prices fall , which reduced the daily earnings of working-women to nine sous . 
Seventeen hours of toil , and nine sous a day ! 
Her creditors were more pitiless than ever . 
The second-hand dealer , who had taken back nearly all his furniture , said to her incessantly , `` When will you pay me , you hussy ? '' 
What did they want of her , good God ! 
She felt that she was being hunted , and something of the wild beast developed in her . 
About the same time , Thenardier wrote to her that he had waited with decidedly too much amiability and that he must have a hundred francs at once ; otherwise he would turn little Cosette out of doors , convalescent as she was from her heavy illness , into the cold and the streets , and that she might do what she liked with herself , and die if she chose . 
`` A hundred francs , '' thought Fantine . 
`` But in what trade can one earn a hundred sous a day ? '' 
`` Come ! '' 
said she , `` let us sell what is left . '' 
The unfortunate girl became a woman of the town . 
CHRISTUS NOS LIBERAVIT What is this history of Fantine ? 
It is society purchasing a slave . 
From whom ? 
From misery . 
From hunger , cold , isolation , destitution . 
A dolorous bargain . 
A soul for a morsel of bread . 
Misery offers ; society accepts . 
The sacred law of Jesus Christ governs our civilization , but it does not , as yet , permeate it ; it is said that slavery has disappeared from European civilization . 
This is a mistake . 
It still exists ; but it weighs only upon the woman , and it is called prostitution . 
It weighs upon the woman , that is to say , upon grace , weakness , beauty , maternity . 
This is not one of the least of man 's disgraces . 
At the point in this melancholy drama which we have now reached , nothing is left to Fantine of that which she had formerly been . 
She has become marble in becoming mire . 
Whoever touches her feels cold . 
She passes ; she endures you ; she ignores you ; she is the severe and dishonored figure . 
Life and the social order have said their last word for her . 
All has happened to her that will happen to her . 
She has felt everything , borne everything , experienced everything , suffered everything , lost everything , mourned everything . 
She is resigned , with that resignation which resembles indifference , as death resembles sleep . 
She no longer avoids anything . 
