Cosette was , moreover , passing through that dangerous period , the fatal phase of feminine revery abandoned to itself , in which the isolated heart of a young girl resembles the tendrils of the vine which cling , as chance directs , to the capital of a marble column or to the post of a wine-shop : A rapid and decisive moment , critical for every orphan , be she rich or poor , for wealth does not prevent a bad choice ; misalliances are made in very high circles , real misalliance is that of souls ; and as many an unknown young man , without name , without birth , without fortune , is a marble column which bears up a temple of grand sentiments and grand ideas , so such and such a man of the world satisfied and opulent , who has polished boots and varnished words , if looked at not outside , but inside , a thing which is reserved for his wife , is nothing more than a block obscurely haunted by violent , unclean , and vinous passions ; the post of a drinking-shop . 
What did Cosette 's soul contain ? 
Passion calmed or lulled to sleep ; something limpid , brilliant , troubled to a certain depth , and gloomy lower down . 
The image of the handsome officer was reflected in the surface . 
Did a souvenir linger in the depths ? 
-- Quite at the bottom ? 
-- Possibly . 
Cosette did not know . 
A singular incident supervened . 
COSETTE 'S APPREHENSIONS During the first fortnight in April , Jean Valjean took a journey . 
This , as the reader knows , happened from time to time , at very long intervals . 
He remained absent a day or two days at the utmost . 
Where did he go ? 
No one knew , not even Cosette . 
Once only , on the occasion of one of these departures , she had accompanied him in a hackney-coach as far as a little blind-alley at the corner of which she read : Impasse de la Planchette . 
There he alighted , and the coach took Cosette back to the Rue de Babylone . 
It was usually when money was lacking in the house that Jean Valjean took these little trips . 
So Jean Valjean was absent . 
He had said : `` I shall return in three days . '' 
That evening , Cosette was alone in the drawing-room . 
In order to get rid of her ennui , she had opened her piano-organ , and had begun to sing , accompanying herself the while , the chorus from Euryanthe : `` Hunters astray in the wood ! '' 
which is probably the most beautiful thing in all the sphere of music . 
When she had finished , she remained wrapped in thought . 
All at once , it seemed to her that she heard the sound of footsteps in the garden . 
It could not be her father , he was absent ; it could not be Toussaint , she was in bed , and it was ten o'clock at night . 
She stepped to the shutter of the drawing-room , which was closed , and laid her ear against it . 
It seemed to her that it was the tread of a man , and that he was walking very softly . 
She mounted rapidly to the first floor , to her own chamber , opened a small wicket in her shutter , and peeped into the garden . 
The moon was at the full . 
Everything could be seen as plainly as by day . 
There was no one there . 
She opened the window . 
The garden was absolutely calm , and all that was visible was that the street was deserted as usual . 
Cosette thought that she had been mistaken . 
She thought that she had heard a noise . 
It was a hallucination produced by the melancholy and magnificent chorus of Weber , which lays open before the mind terrified depths , which trembles before the gaze like a dizzy forest , and in which one hears the crackling of dead branches beneath the uneasy tread of the huntsmen of whom one catches a glimpse through the twilight . 
She thought no more about it . 
Moreover , Cosette was not very timid by nature . 
There flowed in her veins some of the blood of the bohemian and the adventuress who runs barefoot . 
It will be remembered that she was more of a lark than a dove . 
There was a foundation of wildness and bravery in her . 
On the following day , at an earlier hour , towards nightfall , she was strolling in the garden . 
In the midst of the confused thoughts which occupied her , she fancied that she caught for an instant a sound similar to that of the preceding evening , as though some one were walking beneath the trees in the dusk , and not very far from her ; but she told herself that nothing so closely resembles a step on the grass as the friction of two branches which have moved from side to side , and she paid no heed to it . 
Besides , she could see nothing . 
She emerged from `` the thicket '' ; she had still to cross a small lawn to regain the steps . 
The moon , which had just risen behind her , cast Cosette 's shadow in front of her upon this lawn , as she came out from the shrubbery . 
Cosette halted in alarm . 
Beside her shadow , the moon outlined distinctly upon the turf another shadow , which was particularly startling and terrible , a shadow which had a round hat . 
It was the shadow of a man , who must have been standing on the border of the clump of shrubbery , a few paces in the rear of Cosette . 
She stood for a moment without the power to speak , or cry , or call , or stir , or turn her head . 
Then she summoned up all her courage , and turned round resolutely . 
There was no one there . 
She glanced on the ground . 
The figure had disappeared . 
She re-entered the thicket , searched the corners boldly , went as far as the gate , and found nothing . 
She felt herself absolutely chilled with terror . 
Was this another hallucination ? 
What ! 
Two days in succession ! 
One hallucination might pass , but two hallucinations ? 
The disquieting point about it was , that the shadow had assuredly not been a phantom . 
Phantoms do not wear round hats . 
On the following day Jean Valjean returned . 
Cosette told him what she thought she had heard and seen . 
She wanted to be reassured and to see her father shrug his shoulders and say to her : `` You are a little goose . '' 
Jean Valjean grew anxious . 
`` It can not be anything , '' said he . 
He left her under some pretext , and went into the garden , and she saw him examining the gate with great attention . 
During the night she woke up ; this time she was sure , and she distinctly heard some one walking close to the flight of steps beneath her window . 
She ran to her little wicket and opened it . 
In point of fact , there was a man in the garden , with a large club in his hand . 
Just as she was about to scream , the moon lighted up the man 's profile . 
It was her father . 
She returned to her bed , saying to herself : `` He is very uneasy ! '' 
Jean Valjean passed that night and the two succeeding nights in the garden . 
Cosette saw him through the hole in her shutter . 
On the third night , the moon was on the wane , and had begun to rise later ; at one o'clock in the morning , possibly , she heard a loud burst of laughter and her father 's voice calling her : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
She jumped out of bed , threw on her dressing-gown , and opened her window . 
Her father was standing on the grass-plot below . 
`` I have waked you for the purpose of reassuring you , '' said he ; `` look , there is your shadow with the round hat . '' 
And he pointed out to her on the turf a shadow cast by the moon , and which did indeed , bear considerable resemblance to the spectre of a man wearing a round hat . 
It was the shadow produced by a chimney-pipe of sheet iron , with a hood , which rose above a neighboring roof . 
Cosette joined in his laughter , all her lugubrious suppositions were allayed , and the next morning , as she was at breakfast with her father , she made merry over the sinister garden haunted by the shadows of iron chimney-pots . 
Jean Valjean became quite tranquil once more ; as for Cosette , she did not pay much attention to the question whether the chimney-pot was really in the direction of the shadow which she had seen , or thought she had seen , and whether the moon had been in the same spot in the sky . 
She did not question herself as to the peculiarity of a chimney-pot which is afraid of being caught in the act , and which retires when some one looks at its shadow , for the shadow had taken the alarm when Cosette had turned round , and Cosette had thought herself very sure of this . 
Cosette 's serenity was fully restored . 
The proof appeared to her to be complete , and it quite vanished from her mind , whether there could possibly be any one walking in the garden during the evening or at night . 
A few days later , however , a fresh incident occurred . 
ENRICHED WITH COMMENTARIES BY TOUSSAINT In the garden , near the railing on the street , there was a stone bench , screened from the eyes of the curious by a plantation of yoke-elms , but which could , in case of necessity , be reached by an arm from the outside , past the trees and the gate . 
One evening during that same month of April , Jean Valjean had gone out ; Cosette had seated herself on this bench after sundown . 
The breeze was blowing briskly in the trees , Cosette was meditating ; an objectless sadness was taking possession of her little by little , that invincible sadness evoked by the evening , and which arises , perhaps , who knows , from the mystery of the tomb which is ajar at that hour . 
Perhaps Fantine was within that shadow . 
Cosette rose , slowly made the tour of the garden , walking on the grass drenched in dew , and saying to herself , through the species of melancholy somnambulism in which she was plunged : `` Really , one needs wooden shoes for the garden at this hour . 
One takes cold . '' 
She returned to the bench . 
As she was about to resume her seat there , she observed on the spot which she had quitted , a tolerably large stone which had , evidently , not been there a moment before . 
Cosette gazed at the stone , asking herself what it meant . 
All at once the idea occurred to her that the stone had not reached the bench all by itself , that some one had placed it there , that an arm had been thrust through the railing , and this idea appeared to alarm her . 
This time , the fear was genuine ; the stone was there . 
No doubt was possible ; she did not touch it , fled without glancing behind her , took refuge in the house , and immediately closed with shutter , bolt , and bar the door-like window opening on the flight of steps . 
