This march savored of an attack , and certainly of a desire for conquest . 
So I say that he marched on the bench , as I should say : `` Hannibal marched on Rome . '' 
However , all his movements were purely mechanical , and he had interrupted none of the habitual preoccupations of his mind and labors . 
At that moment , he was thinking that the Manuel du Baccalaureat was a stupid book , and that it must have been drawn up by rare idiots , to allow of three tragedies of Racine and only one comedy of Moliere being analyzed therein as masterpieces of the human mind . 
There was a piercing whistling going on in his ears . 
As he approached the bench , he held fast to the folds in his coat , and fixed his eyes on the young girl . 
It seemed to him that she filled the entire extremity of the alley with a vague blue light . 
In proportion as he drew near , his pace slackened more and more . 
On arriving at some little distance from the bench , and long before he had reached the end of the walk , he halted , and could not explain to himself why he retraced his steps . 
He did not even say to himself that he would not go as far as the end . 
It was only with difficulty that the young girl could have perceived him in the distance and noted his fine appearance in his new clothes . 
Nevertheless , he held himself very erect , in case any one should be looking at him from behind . 
He attained the opposite end , then came back , and this time he approached a little nearer to the bench . 
He even got to within three intervals of trees , but there he felt an indescribable impossibility of proceeding further , and he hesitated . 
He thought he saw the young girl 's face bending towards him . 
But he exerted a manly and violent effort , subdued his hesitation , and walked straight ahead . 
A few seconds later , he rushed in front of the bench , erect and firm , reddening to the very ears , without daring to cast a glance either to the right or to the left , with his hand thrust into his coat like a statesman . 
At the moment when he passed , -- under the cannon of the place , -- he felt his heart beat wildly . 
As on the preceding day , she wore her damask gown and her crape bonnet . 
He heard an ineffable voice , which must have been `` her voice . '' 
She was talking tranquilly . 
She was very pretty . 
He felt it , although he made no attempt to see her . 
`` She could not , however , '' he thought , `` help feeling esteem and consideration for me , if she only knew that I am the veritable author of the dissertation on Marcos Obregon de la Ronde , which M. Francois de Neufchateau put , as though it were his own , at the head of his edition of Gil Blas . '' 
He went beyond the bench as far as the extremity of the walk , which was very near , then turned on his heel and passed once more in front of the lovely girl . 
This time , he was very pale . 
Moreover , all his emotions were disagreeable . 
As he went further from the bench and the young girl , and while his back was turned to her , he fancied that she was gazing after him , and that made him stumble . 
He did not attempt to approach the bench again ; he halted near the middle of the walk , and there , a thing which he never did , he sat down , and reflecting in the most profoundly indistinct depths of his spirit , that after all , it was hard that persons whose white bonnet and black gown he admired should be absolutely insensible to his splendid trousers and his new coat . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour , he rose , as though he were on the point of again beginning his march towards that bench which was surrounded by an aureole . 
But he remained standing there , motionless . 
For the first time in fifteen months , he said to himself that that gentleman who sat there every day with his daughter , had , on his side , noticed him , and probably considered his assiduity singular . 
For the first time , also , he was conscious of some irreverence in designating that stranger , even in his secret thoughts , by the sobriquet of M. le Blanc . 
He stood thus for several minutes , with drooping head , tracing figures in the sand , with the cane which he held in his hand . 
Then he turned abruptly in the direction opposite to the bench , to M. Leblanc and his daughter , and went home . 
That day he forgot to dine . 
At eight o'clock in the evening he perceived this fact , and as it was too late to go down to the Rue Saint-Jacques , he said : `` Never mind ! '' 
and ate a bit of bread . 
He did not go to bed until he had brushed his coat and folded it up with great care . 
DIVRS CLAPS OF THUNDER FALL ON MA'AM BOUGON On the following day , Ma'am Bougon , as Courfeyrac styled the old portress-principal-tenant , housekeeper of the Gorbeau hovel , Ma'am Bougon , whose name was , in reality , Madame Burgon , as we have found out , but this iconoclast , Courfeyrac , respected nothing , -- Ma'am Bougon observed , with stupefaction , that M. Marius was going out again in his new coat . 
He went to the Luxembourg again , but he did not proceed further than his bench midway of the alley . 
He seated himself there , as on the preceding day , surveying from a distance , and clearly making out , the white bonnet , the black dress , and above all , that blue light . 
He did not stir from it , and only went home when the gates of the Luxembourg closed . 
He did not see M. Leblanc and his daughter retire . 
He concluded that they had quitted the garden by the gate on the Rue de l'Ouest . 
Later on , several weeks afterwards , when he came to think it over , he could never recall where he had dined that evening . 
On the following day , which was the third , Ma'am Bougon was thunderstruck . 
Marius went out in his new coat . 
`` Three days in succession ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
She tried to follow him , but Marius walked briskly , and with immense strides ; it was a hippopotamus undertaking the pursuit of a chamois . 
She lost sight of him in two minutes , and returned breathless , three-quarters choked with asthma , and furious . 
`` If there is any sense , '' she growled , `` in putting on one 's best clothes every day , and making people run like this ! '' 
Marius betook himself to the Luxembourg . 
The young girl was there with M. Leblanc . 
Marius approached as near as he could , pretending to be busy reading a book , but he halted afar off , then returned and seated himself on his bench , where he spent four hours in watching the house-sparrows who were skipping about the walk , and who produced on him the impression that they were making sport of him . 
A fortnight passed thus . 
Marius went to the Luxembourg no longer for the sake of strolling there , but to seat himself always in the same spot , and that without knowing why . 
Once arrived there , he did not stir . 
He put on his new coat every morning , for the purpose of not showing himself , and he began all over again on the morrow . 
She was decidedly a marvellous beauty . 
The only remark approaching a criticism , that could be made , was , that the contradiction between her gaze , which was melancholy , and her smile , which was merry , gave a rather wild effect to her face , which sometimes caused this sweet countenance to become strange without ceasing to be charming . 
TAKEN PRISONER On one of the last days of the second week , Marius was seated on his bench , as usual , holding in his hand an open book , of which he had not turned a page for the last two hours . 
All at once he started . 
An event was taking place at the other extremity of the walk . 
Leblanc and his daughter had just left their seat , and the daughter had taken her father 's arm , and both were advancing slowly , towards the middle of the alley where Marius was . 
Marius closed his book , then opened it again , then forced himself to read ; he trembled ; the aureole was coming straight towards him . 
`` Ah ! 
good Heavens ! '' 
thought he , `` I shall not have time to strike an attitude . '' 
Still the white-haired man and the girl advanced . 
It seemed to him that this lasted for a century , and that it was but a second . 
`` What are they coming in this direction for ? '' 
he asked himself . 
`` What ! 
She will pass here ? 
Her feet will tread this sand , this walk , two paces from me ? '' 
He was utterly upset , he would have liked to be very handsome , he would have liked to own the cross . 
He heard the soft and measured sound of their approaching footsteps . 
He imagined that M. Leblanc was darting angry glances at him . 
`` Is that gentleman going to address me ? '' 
he thought to himself . 
He dropped his head ; when he raised it again , they were very near him . 
The young girl passed , and as she passed , she glanced at him . 
She gazed steadily at him , with a pensive sweetness which thrilled Marius from head to foot . 
It seemed to him that she was reproaching him for having allowed so long a time to elapse without coming as far as her , and that she was saying to him : `` I am coming myself . '' 
Marius was dazzled by those eyes fraught with rays and abysses . 
He felt his brain on fire . 
She had come to him , what joy ! 
And then , how she had looked at him ! 
She appeared to him more beautiful than he had ever seen her yet . 
Beautiful with a beauty which was wholly feminine and angelic , with a complete beauty which would have made Petrarch sing and Dante kneel . 
It seemed to him that he was floating free in the azure heavens . 
At the same time , he was horribly vexed because there was dust on his boots . 
He thought he felt sure that she had looked at his boots too . 
He followed her with his eyes until she disappeared . 
Then he started up and walked about the Luxembourg garden like a madman . 
It is possible that , at times , he laughed to himself and talked aloud . 
He was so dreamy when he came near the children 's nurses , that each one of them thought him in love with her . 
He quitted the Luxembourg , hoping to find her again in the street . 
