Here questions exfoliated , so to speak , into innumerable enigmas , abysses yawned at the bottoms of abysses , and Marius could no longer bend over Jean Valjean without becoming dizzy . 
What was this man-precipice ? 
The old symbols of Genesis are eternal ; in human society , such as it now exists , and until a broader day shall effect a change in it , there will always be two men , the one superior , the other subterranean ; the one which is according to good is Abel ; the other which is according to evil is Cain . 
What was this tender Cain ? 
What was this ruffian religiously absorbed in the adoration of a virgin , watching over her , rearing her , guarding her , dignifying her , and enveloping her , impure as he was himself , with purity ? 
What was that cess-pool which had venerated that innocence to such a point as not to leave upon it a single spot ? 
What was this Jean Valjean educating Cosette ? 
What was this figure of the shadows which had for its only object the preservation of the rising of a star from every shadow and from every cloud ? 
That was Jean Valjean 's secret ; that was also God 's secret . 
In the presence of this double secret , Marius recoiled . 
The one , in some sort , reassured him as to the other . 
God was as visible in this affair as was Jean Valjean . 
God has his instruments . 
He makes use of the tool which he wills . 
He is not responsible to men . 
Do we know how God sets about the work ? 
Jean Valjean had labored over Cosette . 
He had , to some extent , made that soul . 
That was incontestable . 
Well , what then ? 
The workman was horrible ; but the work was admirable . 
God produces his miracles as seems good to him . 
He had constructed that charming Cosette , and he had employed Jean Valjean . 
It had pleased him to choose this strange collaborator for himself . 
What account have we to demand of him ? 
Is this the first time that the dung-heap has aided the spring to create the rose ? 
Marius made himself these replies , and declared to himself that they were good . 
He had not dared to press Jean Valjean on all the points which we have just indicated , but he did not confess to himself that he did not dare to do it . 
He adored Cosette , he possessed Cosette , Cosette was splendidly pure . 
That was sufficient for him . 
What enlightenment did he need ? 
Cosette was a light . 
Does light require enlightenment ? 
He had everything ; what more could he desire ? 
All , -- is not that enough ? 
Jean Valjean 's personal affairs did not concern him . 
And bending over the fatal shadow of that man , he clung fast , convulsively , to the solemn declaration of that unhappy wretch : `` I am nothing to Cosette . 
Ten years ago I did not know that she was in existence . '' 
Jean Valjean was a passer-by . 
He had said so himself . 
Well , he had passed . 
Whatever he was , his part was finished . 
Henceforth , there remained Marius to fulfil the part of Providence to Cosette . 
Cosette had sought the azure in a person like herself , in her lover , her husband , her celestial male . 
Cosette , as she took her flight , winged and transfigured , left behind her on the earth her hideous and empty chrysalis , Jean Valjean . 
In whatever circle of ideas Marius revolved , he always returned to a certain horror for Jean Valjean . 
A sacred horror , perhaps , for , as we have just pointed out , he felt a quid divinum in that man . 
But do what he would , and seek what extenuation he would , he was certainly forced to fall back upon this : the man was a convict ; that is to say , a being who has not even a place in the social ladder , since he is lower than the very lowest rung . 
After the very last of men comes the convict . 
The convict is no longer , so to speak , in the semblance of the living . 
The law has deprived him of the entire quantity of humanity of which it can deprive a man . 
Marius , on penal questions , still held to the inexorable system , though he was a democrat and he entertained all the ideas of the law on the subject of those whom the law strikes . 
He had not yet accomplished all progress , we admit . 
He had not yet come to distinguish between that which is written by man and that which is written by God , between law and right . 
He had not examined and weighed the right which man takes to dispose of the irrevocable and the irreparable . 
He was not shocked by the word vindicte . 
He found it quite simple that certain breaches of the written law should be followed by eternal suffering , and he accepted , as the process of civilization , social damnation . 
He still stood at this point , though safe to advance infallibly later on , since his nature was good , and , at bottom , wholly formed of latent progress . 
In this stage of his ideas , Jean Valjean appeared to him hideous and repulsive . 
He was a man reproved , he was the convict . 
That word was for him like the sound of the trump on the Day of Judgment ; and , after having reflected upon Jean Valjean for a long time , his final gesture had been to turn away his head . 
Vade retro . 
Marius , if we must recognize and even insist upon the fact , while interrogating Jean Valjean to such a point that Jean Valjean had said : `` You are confessing me , '' had not , nevertheless , put to him two or three decisive questions . 
It was not that they had not presented themselves to his mind , but that he had been afraid of them . 
The Jondrette attic ? 
The barricade ? 
Javert ? 
Who knows where these revelations would have stopped ? 
Jean Valjean did not seem like a man who would draw back , and who knows whether Marius , after having urged him on , would not have himself desired to hold him back ? 
Has it not happened to all of us , in certain supreme conjunctures , to stop our ears in order that we may not hear the reply , after we have asked a question ? 
It is especially when one loves that one gives way to these exhibitions of cowardice . 
It is not wise to question sinister situations to the last point , particularly when the indissoluble side of our life is fatally intermingled with them . 
What a terrible light might have proceeded from the despairing explanations of Jean Valjean , and who knows whether that hideous glare would not have darted forth as far as Cosette ? 
Who knows whether a sort of infernal glow would not have lingered behind it on the brow of that angel ? 
The spattering of a lightning-flash is of the thunder also . 
Fatality has points of juncture where innocence itself is stamped with crime by the gloomy law of the reflections which give color . 
The purest figures may forever preserve the reflection of a horrible association . 
Rightly or wrongly , Marius had been afraid . 
He already knew too much . 
He sought to dull his senses rather than to gain further light . 
In dismay he bore off Cosette in his arms and shut his eyes to Jean Valjean . 
That man was the night , the living and horrible night . 
How should he dare to seek the bottom of it ? 
It is a terrible thing to interrogate the shadow . 
Who knows what its reply will be ? 
The dawn may be blackened forever by it . 
In this state of mind the thought that that man would , henceforth , come into any contact whatever with Cosette was a heartrending perplexity to Marius . 
He now almost reproached himself for not having put those formidable questions , before which he had recoiled , and from which an implacable and definitive decision might have sprung . 
He felt that he was too good , too gentle , too weak , if we must say the word . 
This weakness had led him to an imprudent concession . 
He had allowed himself to be touched . 
He had been in the wrong . 
He ought to have simply and purely rejected Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean played the part of fire , and that is what he should have done , and have freed his house from that man . 
He was vexed with himself , he was angry with that whirlwind of emotions which had deafened , blinded , and carried him away . 
He was displeased with himself . 
What was he to do now ? 
Jean Valjean 's visits were profoundly repugnant to him . 
What was the use in having that man in his house ? 
What did the man want ? 
