The insurgents , surprised but not terrified , had rallied . 
Enjolras had shouted : `` Wait ! 
Do n't fire at random ! '' 
In the first confusion , they might , in fact , wound each other . 
The majority of them had ascended to the window on the first story and to the attic windows , whence they commanded the assailants . 
The most determined , with Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , and Combeferre , had proudly placed themselves with their backs against the houses at the rear , unsheltered and facing the ranks of soldiers and guards who crowned the barricade . 
All this was accomplished without haste , with that strange and threatening gravity which precedes engagements . 
They took aim , point blank , on both sides : they were so close that they could talk together without raising their voices . 
When they had reached this point where the spark is on the brink of darting forth , an officer in a gorget extended his sword and said : -- `` Lay down your arms ! '' 
`` Fire ! '' 
replied Enjolras . 
The two discharges took place at the same moment , and all disappeared in smoke . 
An acrid and stifling smoke in which dying and wounded lay with weak , dull groans . 
When the smoke cleared away , the combatants on both sides could be seen to be thinned out , but still in the same positions , reloading in silence . 
All at once , a thundering voice was heard , shouting : -- `` Be off with you , or I 'll blow up the barricade ! '' 
All turned in the direction whence the voice proceeded . 
Marius had entered the tap-room , and had seized the barrel of powder , then he had taken advantage of the smoke , and the sort of obscure mist which filled the entrenched enclosure , to glide along the barricade as far as that cage of paving-stones where the torch was fixed . 
To tear it from the torch , to replace it by the barrel of powder , to thrust the pile of stones under the barrel , which was instantly staved in , with a sort of horrible obedience , -- all this had cost Marius but the time necessary to stoop and rise again ; and now all , National Guards , Municipal Guards , officers , soldiers , huddled at the other extremity of the barricade , gazed stupidly at him , as he stood with his foot on the stones , his torch in his hand , his haughty face illuminated by a fatal resolution , drooping the flame of the torch towards that redoubtable pile where they could make out the broken barrel of powder , and giving vent to that startling cry : -- `` Be off with you , or I 'll blow up the barricade ! '' 
Marius on that barricade after the octogenarian was the vision of the young revolution after the apparition of the old . 
`` Blow up the barricade ! '' 
said a sergeant , `` and yourself with it ! '' 
Marius retorted : `` And myself also . '' 
And he dropped the torch towards the barrel of powder . 
But there was no longer any one on the barrier . 
The assailants , abandoning their dead and wounded , flowed back pell-mell and in disorder towards the extremity of the street , and there were again lost in the night . 
It was a headlong flight . 
The barricade was free . 
END OF THE VERSES OF JEAN PROUVAIRE All flocked around Marius . 
Courfeyrac flung himself on his neck . 
`` Here you are ! '' 
`` What luck ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` You came in opportunely ! '' 
ejaculated Bossuet . 
`` If it had not been for you , I should have been dead ! '' 
began Courfeyrac again . 
`` If it had not been for you , I should have been gobbled up ! '' 
added Gavroche . 
Marius asked : -- `` Where is the chief ? '' 
`` You are he ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
Marius had had a furnace in his brain all day long ; now it was a whirlwind . 
This whirlwind which was within him , produced on him the effect of being outside of him and of bearing him away . 
It seemed to him that he was already at an immense distance from life . 
His two luminous months of joy and love , ending abruptly at that frightful precipice , Cosette lost to him , that barricade , M. Mabeuf getting himself killed for the Republic , himself the leader of the insurgents , -- all these things appeared to him like a tremendous nightmare . 
He was obliged to make a mental effort to recall the fact that all that surrounded him was real . 
Marius had already seen too much of life not to know that nothing is more imminent than the impossible , and that what it is always necessary to foresee is the unforeseen . 
He had looked on at his own drama as a piece which one does not understand . 
In the mists which enveloped his thoughts , he did not recognize Javert , who , bound to his post , had not so much as moved his head during the whole of the attack on the barricade , and who had gazed on the revolt seething around him with the resignation of a martyr and the majesty of a judge . 
Marius had not even seen him . 
In the meanwhile , the assailants did not stir , they could be heard marching and swarming through at the end of the street but they did not venture into it , either because they were awaiting orders or because they were awaiting reinforcements before hurling themselves afresh on this impregnable redoubt . 
The insurgents had posted sentinels , and some of them , who were medical students , set about caring for the wounded . 
They had thrown the tables out of the wine-shop , with the exception of the two tables reserved for lint and cartridges , and of the one on which lay Father Mabeuf ; they had added them to the barricade , and had replaced them in the tap-room with mattresses from the bed of the widow Hucheloup and her servants . 
On these mattresses they had laid the wounded . 
As for the three poor creatures who inhabited Corinthe , no one knew what had become of them . 
They were finally found , however , hidden in the cellar . 
A poignant emotion clouded the joy of the disencumbered barricade . 
The roll was called . 
One of the insurgents was missing . 
And who was it ? 
One of the dearest . 
One of the most valiant . 
Jean Prouvaire . 
He was sought among the wounded , he was not there . 
He was sought among the dead , he was not there . 
He was evidently a prisoner . 
Combeferre said to Enjolras : -- `` They have our friend ; we have their agent . 
Are you set on the death of that spy ? '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Enjolras ; `` but less so than on the life of Jean Prouvaire . '' 
This took place in the tap-room near Javert 's post . 
`` Well , '' resumed Combeferre , `` I am going to fasten my handkerchief to my cane , and go as a flag of truce , to offer to exchange our man for theirs . '' 
`` Listen , '' said Enjolras , laying his hand on Combeferre 's arm . 
At the end of the street there was a significant clash of arms . 
They heard a manly voice shout : -- `` Vive la France ! 
Long live France ! 
Long live the future ! '' 
They recognized the voice of Prouvaire . 
A flash passed , a report rang out . 
Silence fell again . 
`` They have killed him , '' exclaimed Combeferre . 
Enjolras glanced at Javert , and said to him : -- `` Your friends have just shot you . '' 
THE AGONY OF DEATH AFTER THE AGONY OF LIFE A peculiarity of this species of war is , that the attack of the barricades is almost always made from the front , and that the assailants generally abstain from turning the position , either because they fear ambushes , or because they are afraid of getting entangled in the tortuous streets . 
The insurgents ' whole attention had been directed , therefore , to the grand barricade , which was , evidently , the spot always menaced , and there the struggle would infallibly recommence . 
But Marius thought of the little barricade , and went thither . 
It was deserted and guarded only by the fire-pot which trembled between the paving-stones . 
Moreover , the Mondetour alley , and the branches of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie and the Rue du Cygne were profoundly calm . 
As Marius was withdrawing , after concluding his inspection , he heard his name pronounced feebly in the darkness . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
He started , for he recognized the voice which had called to him two hours before through the gate in the Rue Plumet . 
Only , the voice now seemed to be nothing more than a breath . 
He looked about him , but saw no one . 
Marius thought he had been mistaken , that it was an illusion added by his mind to the extraordinary realities which were clashing around him . 
He advanced a step , in order to quit the distant recess where the barricade lay . 
`` Monsieur Marius ! '' 
repeated the voice . 
This time he could not doubt that he had heard it distinctly ; he looked and saw nothing . 
`` At your feet , '' said the voice . 
He bent down , and saw in the darkness a form which was dragging itself towards him . 
It was crawling along the pavement . 
It was this that had spoken to him . 
