`` Well , wait for me a moment . 
I will soon be back . '' 
He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building , seeking a better shelter . 
He came across doors , but they were closed . 
There were bars at all the windows of the ground floor . 
Just after he had turned the inner angle of the edifice , he observed that he was coming to some arched windows , where he perceived a light . 
He stood on tiptoe and peeped through one of these windows . 
They all opened on a tolerably vast hall , paved with large flagstones , cut up by arcades and pillars , where only a tiny light and great shadows were visible . 
The light came from a taper which was burning in one corner . 
The apartment was deserted , and nothing was stirring in it . 
Nevertheless , by dint of gazing intently he thought he perceived on the ground something which appeared to be covered with a winding-sheet , and which resembled a human form . 
This form was lying face downward , flat on the pavement , with the arms extended in the form of a cross , in the immobility of death . 
One would have said , judging from a sort of serpent which undulated over the floor , that this sinister form had a rope round its neck . 
The whole chamber was bathed in that mist of places which are sparely illuminated , which adds to horror . 
Jean Valjean often said afterwards , that , although many funereal spectres had crossed his path in life , he had never beheld anything more blood-curdling and terrible than that enigmatical form accomplishing some inexplicable mystery in that gloomy place , and beheld thus at night . 
It was alarming to suppose that that thing was perhaps dead ; and still more alarming to think that it was perhaps alive . 
He had the courage to plaster his face to the glass , and to watch whether the thing would move . 
In spite of his remaining thus what seemed to him a very long time , the outstretched form made no movement . 
All at once he felt himself overpowered by an inexpressible terror , and he fled . 
He began to run towards the shed , not daring to look behind him . 
It seemed to him , that if he turned his head , he should see that form following him with great strides and waving its arms . 
He reached the ruin all out of breath . 
His knees were giving way beneath him ; the perspiration was pouring from him . 
Where was he ? 
Who could ever have imagined anything like that sort of sepulchre in the midst of Paris ! 
What was this strange house ? 
An edifice full of nocturnal mystery , calling to souls through the darkness with the voice of angels , and when they came , offering them abruptly that terrible vision ; promising to open the radiant portals of heaven , and then opening the horrible gates of the tomb ! 
And it actually was an edifice , a house , which bore a number on the street ! 
It was not a dream ! 
He had to touch the stones to convince himself that such was the fact . 
Cold , anxiety , uneasiness , the emotions of the night , had given him a genuine fever , and all these ideas were clashing together in his brain . 
He stepped up to Cosette . 
She was asleep . 
THE ENIGMA BECOMES DOUBLY MYSTERIOUS The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep . 
He sat down beside her and began to think . 
Little by little , as he gazed at her , he grew calm and regained possession of his freedom of mind . 
He clearly perceived this truth , the foundation of his life henceforth , that so long as she was there , so long as he had her near him , he should need nothing except for her , he should fear nothing except for her . 
He was not even conscious that he was very cold , since he had taken off his coat to cover her . 
Nevertheless , athwart this revery into which he had fallen he had heard for some time a peculiar noise . 
It was like the tinkling of a bell . 
This sound proceeded from the garden . 
It could be heard distinctly though faintly . 
It resembled the faint , vague music produced by the bells of cattle at night in the pastures . 
This noise made Valjean turn round . 
He looked and saw that there was some one in the garden . 
A being resembling a man was walking amid the bell-glasses of the melon beds , rising , stooping , halting , with regular movements , as though he were dragging or spreading out something on the ground . 
This person appeared to limp . 
Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy . 
For them everything is hostile and suspicious . 
They distrust the day because it enables people to see them , and the night because it aids in surprising them . 
A little while before he had shivered because the garden was deserted , and now he shivered because there was some one there . 
He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors . 
He said to himself that Javert and the spies had , perhaps , not taken their departure ; that they had , no doubt , left people on the watch in the street ; that if this man should discover him in the garden , he would cry out for help against thieves and deliver him up . 
He took the sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind a heap of old furniture , which was out of use , in the most remote corner of the shed . 
Cosette did not stir . 
From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melon patch . 
The strange thing about it was , that the sound of the bell followed each of this man 's movements . 
When the man approached , the sound approached ; when the man retreated , the sound retreated ; if he made any hasty gesture , a tremolo accompanied the gesture ; when he halted , the sound ceased . 
It appeared evident that the bell was attached to that man ; but what could that signify ? 
Who was this man who had a bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox ? 
As he put these questions to himself , he touched Cosette 's hands . 
They were icy cold . 
`` Ah ! 
good God ! '' 
he cried . 
He spoke to her in a low voice : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
She did not open her eyes . 
He shook her vigorously . 
She did not wake . 
`` Is she dead ? '' 
he said to himself , and sprang to his feet , quivering from head to foot . 
The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind . 
There are moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies , and violently force the partitions of our brains . 
When those we love are in question , our prudence invents every sort of madness . 
He remembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal . 
Cosette was pale , and had fallen at full length on the ground at his feet , without a movement . 
He listened to her breathing : she still breathed , but with a respiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction . 
How was he to warm her back to life ? 
How was he to rouse her ? 
All that was not connected with this vanished from his thoughts . 
He rushed wildly from the ruin . 
It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a fire in less than a quarter of an hour . 
THE MAN WITH THE BELL He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden . 
He had taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his waistcoat . 
The man 's head was bent down , and he did not see him approaching . 
In a few strides Jean Valjean stood beside him . 
Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry : -- `` One hundred francs ! '' 
The man gave a start and raised his eyes . 
`` You can earn a hundred francs , '' went on Jean Valjean , `` if you will grant me shelter for this night . '' 
The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean 's terrified countenance . 
`` What ! 
so it is you , Father Madeleine ! '' 
said the man . 
That name , thus pronounced , at that obscure hour , in that unknown spot , by that strange man , made Jean Valjean start back . 
He had expected anything but that . 
The person who thus addressed him was a bent and lame old man , dressed almost like a peasant , who wore on his left knee a leather knee-cap , whence hung a moderately large bell . 
His face , which was in the shadow , was not distinguishable . 
However , the goodman had removed his cap , and exclaimed , trembling all over : -- `` Ah , good God ! 
How come you here , Father Madeleine ? 
Where did you enter ? 
