It took the old king Charles X. from beneath that dais which had sheltered Louis XIV . 
and set him gently on the ground . 
It touched the royal personages only with sadness and precaution . 
It was not one man , it was not a few men , it was France , France entire , France victorious and intoxicated with her victory , who seemed to be coming to herself , and who put into practice , before the eyes of the whole world , these grave words of Guillaume du Vair after the day of the Barricades : -- `` It is easy for those who are accustomed to skim the favors of the great , and to spring , like a bird from bough to bough , from an afflicted fortune to a flourishing one , to show themselves harsh towards their Prince in his adversity ; but as for me , the fortune of my Kings and especially of my afflicted Kings , will always be venerable to me . '' 
The Bourbons carried away with them respect , but not regret . 
As we have just stated , their misfortune was greater than they were . 
They faded out in the horizon . 
The Revolution of July instantly had friends and enemies throughout the entire world . 
The first rushed toward her with joy and enthusiasm , the others turned away , each according to his nature . 
At the first blush , the princes of Europe , the owls of this dawn , shut their eyes , wounded and stupefied , and only opened them to threaten . 
A fright which can be comprehended , a wrath which can be pardoned . 
This strange revolution had hardly produced a shock ; it had not even paid to vanquished royalty the honor of treating it as an enemy , and of shedding its blood . 
In the eyes of despotic governments , who are always interested in having liberty calumniate itself , the Revolution of July committed the fault of being formidable and of remaining gentle . 
Nothing , however , was attempted or plotted against it . 
The most discontented , the most irritated , the most trembling , saluted it ; whatever our egotism and our rancor may be , a mysterious respect springs from events in which we are sensible of the collaboration of some one who is working above man . 
The Revolution of July is the triumph of right overthrowing the fact . 
A thing which is full of splendor . 
Right overthrowing the fact . 
Hence the brilliancy of the Revolution of 1830 , hence , also , its mildness . 
Right triumphant has no need of being violent . 
Right is the just and the true . 
The property of right is to remain eternally beautiful and pure . 
The fact , even when most necessary to all appearances , even when most thoroughly accepted by contemporaries , if it exist only as a fact , and if it contain only too little of right , or none at all , is infallibly destined to become , in the course of time , deformed , impure , perhaps , even monstrous . 
If one desires to learn at one blow , to what degree of hideousness the fact can attain , viewed at the distance of centuries , let him look at Machiavelli . 
Machiavelli is not an evil genius , nor a demon , nor a miserable and cowardly writer ; he is nothing but the fact . 
And he is not only the Italian fact ; he is the European fact , the fact of the sixteenth century . 
He seems hideous , and so he is , in the presence of the moral idea of the nineteenth . 
This conflict of right and fact has been going on ever since the origin of society . 
To terminate this duel , to amalgamate the pure idea with the humane reality , to cause right to penetrate pacifically into the fact and the fact into right , that is the task of sages . 
BADLY SEWED But the task of sages is one thing , the task of clever men is another . 
The Revolution of 1830 came to a sudden halt . 
As soon as a revolution has made the coast , the skilful make haste to prepare the shipwreck . 
The skilful in our century have conferred on themselves the title of Statesmen ; so that this word , statesmen , has ended by becoming somewhat of a slang word . 
It must be borne in mind , in fact , that wherever there is nothing but skill , there is necessarily pettiness . 
To say `` the skilful '' amounts to saying `` the mediocre . '' 
In the same way , to say `` statesmen '' is sometimes equivalent to saying `` traitors . '' 
If , then , we are to believe the skilful , revolutions like the Revolution of July are severed arteries ; a prompt ligature is indispensable . 
The right , too grandly proclaimed , is shaken . 
Also , right once firmly fixed , the state must be strengthened . 
Liberty once assured , attention must be directed to power . 
Here the sages are not , as yet , separated from the skilful , but they begin to be distrustful . 
Power , very good . 
But , in the first place , what is power ? 
In the second , whence comes it ? 
The skilful do not seem to hear the murmured objection , and they continue their manoeuvres . 
According to the politicians , who are ingenious in putting the mask of necessity on profitable fictions , the first requirement of a people after a revolution , when this people forms part of a monarchical continent , is to procure for itself a dynasty . 
In this way , say they , peace , that is to say , time to dress our wounds , and to repair the house , can be had after a revolution . 
The dynasty conceals the scaffolding and covers the ambulance . 
Now , it is not always easy to procure a dynasty . 
If it is absolutely necessary , the first man of genius or even the first man of fortune who comes to hand suffices for the manufacturing of a king . 
You have , in the first case , Napoleon ; in the second , Iturbide . 
But the first family that comes to hand does not suffice to make a dynasty . 
There is necessarily required a certain modicum of antiquity in a race , and the wrinkle of the centuries can not be improvised . 
If we place ourselves at the point of view of the `` statesmen , '' after making all allowances , of course , after a revolution , what are the qualities of the king which result from it ? 
He may be and it is useful for him to be a revolutionary ; that is to say , a participant in his own person in that revolution , that he should have lent a hand to it , that he should have either compromised or distinguished himself therein , that he should have touched the axe or wielded the sword in it . 
What are the qualities of a dynasty ? 
It should be national ; that is to say , revolutionary at a distance , not through acts committed , but by reason of ideas accepted . 
It should be composed of past and be historic ; be composed of future and be sympathetic . 
All this explains why the early revolutions contented themselves with finding a man , Cromwell or Napoleon ; and why the second absolutely insisted on finding a family , the House of Brunswick or the House of Orleans . 
Royal houses resemble those Indian fig-trees , each branch of which , bending over to the earth , takes root and becomes a fig-tree itself . 
Each branch may become a dynasty . 
On the sole condition that it shall bend down to the people . 
Such is the theory of the skilful . 
Here , then , lies the great art : to make a little render to success the sound of a catastrophe in order that those who profit by it may tremble from it also , to season with fear every step that is taken , to augment the curve of the transition to the point of retarding progress , to dull that aurora , to denounce and retrench the harshness of enthusiasm , to cut all angles and nails , to wad triumph , to muffle up right , to envelop the giant-people in flannel , and to put it to bed very speedily , to impose a diet on that excess of health , to put Hercules on the treatment of a convalescent , to dilute the event with the expedient , to offer to spirits thirsting for the ideal that nectar thinned out with a potion , to take one 's precautions against too much success , to garnish the revolution with a shade . 
1830 practised this theory , already applied to England by 1688 . 
1830 is a revolution arrested midway . 
Half of progress , quasi-right . 
Now , logic knows not the `` almost , '' absolutely as the sun knows not the candle . 
Who arrests revolutions half-way ? 
The bourgeoisie ? 
Why ? 
Because the bourgeoisie is interest which has reached satisfaction . 
Yesterday it was appetite , to-day it is plenitude , to-morrow it will be satiety . 
The phenomenon of 1814 after Napoleon was reproduced in 1830 after Charles X . 
The attempt has been made , and wrongly , to make a class of the bourgeoisie . 
The bourgeoisie is simply the contented portion of the people . 
The bourgeois is the man who now has time to sit down . 
A chair is not a caste . 
But through a desire to sit down too soon , one may arrest the very march of the human race . 
This has often been the fault of the bourgeoisie . 
One is not a class because one has committed a fault . 
Selfishness is not one of the divisions of the social order . 
Moreover , we must be just to selfishness . 
The state to which that part of the nation which is called the bourgeoisie aspired after the shock of 1830 was not the inertia which is complicated with indifference and laziness , and which contains a little shame ; it was not the slumber which presupposes a momentary forgetfulness accessible to dreams ; it was the halt . 
The halt is a word formed of a singular double and almost contradictory sense : a troop on the march , that is to say , movement ; a stand , that is to say , repose . 
The halt is the restoration of forces ; it is repose armed and on the alert ; it is the accomplished fact which posts sentinels and holds itself on its guard . 
The halt presupposes the combat of yesterday and the combat of to-morrow . 
It is the partition between 1830 and 1848 . 
What we here call combat may also be designated as progress . 
The bourgeoisie then , as well as the statesmen , required a man who should express this word Halt . 
An Although-Because . 
A composite individuality , signifying revolution and signifying stability , in other terms , strengthening the present by the evident compatibility of the past with the future . 
This man was `` already found . '' 
His name was Louis Philippe d'Orleans . 
The 221 made Louis Philippe King . 
Lafayette undertook the coronation . 
He called it the best of republics . 
The town-hall of Paris took the place of the Cathedral of Rheims . 
This substitution of a half-throne for a whole throne was `` the work of 1830 . '' 
When the skilful had finished , the immense vice of their solution became apparent . 
