The gamin is born a tiler as he is born a mariner . 
A roof inspires him with no more fear than a mast . 
There is no festival which comes up to an execution on the Place de Greve . 
Samson and the Abbe Montes are the truly popular names . 
They hoot at the victim in order to encourage him . 
They sometimes admire him . 
Lacenaire , when a gamin , on seeing the hideous Dautin die bravely , uttered these words which contain a future : `` I was jealous of him . '' 
In the brotherhood of gamins Voltaire is not known , but Papavoine is . 
`` Politicians '' are confused with assassins in the same legend . 
They have a tradition as to everybody 's last garment . 
It is known that Tolleron had a fireman 's cap , Avril an otter cap , Losvel a round hat , that old Delaporte was bald and bare-headed , that Castaing was all ruddy and very handsome , that Bories had a romantic small beard , that Jean Martin kept on his suspenders , that Lecouffe and his mother quarrelled . 
`` Do n't reproach each other for your basket , '' shouted a gamin to them . 
Another , in order to get a look at Debacker as he passed , and being too small in the crowd , caught sight of the lantern on the quay and climbed it . 
A gendarme stationed opposite frowned . 
`` Let me climb up , m ` sieu le gendarme , '' said the gamin . 
And , to soften the heart of the authorities he added : `` I will not fall . '' 
`` I do n't care if you do , '' retorted the gendarme . 
In the brotherhood of gamins , a memorable accident counts for a great deal . 
One reaches the height of consideration if one chances to cut one 's self very deeply , `` to the very bone . '' 
The fist is no mediocre element of respect . 
One of the things that the gamin is fondest of saying is : `` I am fine and strong , come now ! '' 
To be left-handed renders you very enviable . 
A squint is highly esteemed . 
IN WHICH THE READER WILL FIND A CHARMING SAYING OF THE LAST KING In summer , he metamorphoses himself into a frog ; and in the evening , when night is falling , in front of the bridges of Austerlitz and Jena , from the tops of coal wagons , and the washerwomen 's boats , he hurls himself headlong into the Seine , and into all possible infractions of the laws of modesty and of the police . 
Nevertheless the police keep an eye on him , and the result is a highly dramatic situation which once gave rise to a fraternal and memorable cry ; that cry which was celebrated about 1830 , is a strategic warning from gamin to gamin ; it scans like a verse from Homer , with a notation as inexpressible as the eleusiac chant of the Panathenaea , and in it one encounters again the ancient Evohe . 
Here it is : `` Ohe , Titi , oheee ! 
Here comes the bobby , here comes the p ` lice , pick up your duds and be off , through the sewer with you ! '' 
Sometimes this gnat -- that is what he calls himself -- knows how to read ; sometimes he knows how to write ; he always knows how to daub . 
He does not hesitate to acquire , by no one knows what mysterious mutual instruction , all the talents which can be of use to the public ; from 1815 to 1830 , he imitated the cry of the turkey ; from 1830 to 1848 , he scrawled pears on the walls . 
One summer evening , when Louis Philippe was returning home on foot , he saw a little fellow , no higher than his knee , perspiring and climbing up to draw a gigantic pear in charcoal on one of the pillars of the gate of Neuilly ; the King , with that good-nature which came to him from Henry IV. , helped the gamin , finished the pear , and gave the child a louis , saying : `` The pear is on that also . '' 
-LSB- 19 -RSB- The gamin loves uproar . 
A certain state of violence pleases him . 
He execrates `` the cures . '' 
One day , in the Rue de l'Universite , one of these scamps was putting his thumb to his nose at the carriage gate of No. 69 . 
`` Why are you doing that at the gate ? '' 
a passer-by asked . 
The boy replied : `` There is a cure there . '' 
It was there , in fact , that the Papal Nuncio lived . 
-LSB- 19 -RSB- Louis XVIII . 
is represented in comic pictures of that day as having a pear-shaped head . 
Nevertheless , whatever may be the Voltairianism of the small gamin , if the occasion to become a chorister presents itself , it is quite possible that he will accept , and in that case he serves the mass civilly . 
There are two things to which he plays Tantalus , and which he always desires without ever attaining them : to overthrow the government , and to get his trousers sewed up again . 
The gamin in his perfect state possesses all the policemen of Paris , and can always put the name to the face of any one which he chances to meet . 
He can tell them off on the tips of his fingers . 
He studies their habits , and he has special notes on each one of them . 
He reads the souls of the police like an open book . 
He will tell you fluently and without flinching : `` Such an one is a traitor ; such another is very malicious ; such another is great ; such another is ridiculous . '' 
-LRB- All these words : traitor , malicious , great , ridiculous , have a particular meaning in his mouth . -RRB- 
That one imagines that he owns the Pont-Neuf , and he prevents people from walking on the cornice outside the parapet ; that other has a mania for pulling person 's ears ; etc. , etc. . 
THE OLD SOUL OF GAUL There was something of that boy in Poquelin , the son of the fish-market ; Beaumarchais had something of it . 
Gaminerie is a shade of the Gallic spirit . 
Mingled with good sense , it sometimes adds force to the latter , as alcohol does to wine . 
Sometimes it is a defect . 
Homer repeats himself eternally , granted ; one may say that Voltaire plays the gamin . 
Camille Desmoulins was a native of the faubourgs . 
Championnet , who treated miracles brutally , rose from the pavements of Paris ; he had , when a small lad , inundated the porticos of Saint-Jean de Beauvais , and of Saint-Etienne du Mont ; he had addressed the shrine of Sainte-Genevieve familiarly to give orders to the phial of Saint Januarius . 
The gamin of Paris is respectful , ironical , and insolent . 
He has villainous teeth , because he is badly fed and his stomach suffers , and handsome eyes because he has wit . 
If Jehovah himself were present , he would go hopping up the steps of paradise on one foot . 
He is strong on boxing . 
All beliefs are possible to him . 
He plays in the gutter , and straightens himself up with a revolt ; his effrontery persists even in the presence of grape-shot ; he was a scapegrace , he is a hero ; like the little Theban , he shakes the skin from the lion ; Barra the drummer-boy was a gamin of Paris ; he Shouts : `` Forward ! '' 
as the horse of Scripture says `` Vah ! '' 
and in a moment he has passed from the small brat to the giant . 
This child of the puddle is also the child of the ideal . 
Measure that spread of wings which reaches from Moliere to Barra . 
To sum up the whole , and in one word , the gamin is a being who amuses himself , because he is unhappy . 
ECCE PARIS , ECCE HOMO To sum it all up once more , the Paris gamin of to-day , like the graeculus of Rome in days gone by , is the infant populace with the wrinkle of the old world on his brow . 
The gamin is a grace to the nation , and at the same time a disease ; a disease which must be cured , how ? 
By light . 
Light renders healthy . 
Light kindles . 
All generous social irradiations spring from science , letters , arts , education . 
Make men , make men . 
Give them light that they may warm you . 
Sooner or later the splendid question of universal education will present itself with the irresistible authority of the absolute truth ; and then , those who govern under the superintendence of the French idea will have to make this choice ; the children of France or the gamins of Paris ; flames in the light or will-o ' - the-wisps in the gloom . 
The gamin expresses Paris , and Paris expresses the world . 
For Paris is a total . 
Paris is the ceiling of the human race . 
The whole of this prodigious city is a foreshortening of dead manners and living manners . 
He who sees Paris thinks he sees the bottom of all history with heaven and constellations in the intervals . 
Paris has a capital , the Town-Hall , a Parthenon , Notre-Dame , a Mount Aventine , the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , an Asinarium , the Sorbonne , a Pantheon , the Pantheon , a Via Sacra , the Boulevard des Italiens , a temple of the winds , opinion ; and it replaces the Gemoniae by ridicule . 
Its majo is called `` faraud , '' its Transteverin is the man of the faubourgs , its hammal is the market-porter , its lazzarone is the pegre , its cockney is the native of Ghent . 
Everything that exists elsewhere exists at Paris . 
The fishwoman of Dumarsais can retort on the herb-seller of Euripides , the discobols Vejanus lives again in the Forioso , the tight-rope dancer . 
Therapontigonus Miles could walk arm in arm with Vadeboncoeur the grenadier , Damasippus the second-hand dealer would be happy among bric-a-brac merchants , Vincennes could grasp Socrates in its fist as just as Agora could imprison Diderot , Grimod de la Reyniere discovered larded roast beef , as Curtillus invented roast hedgehog , we see the trapeze which figures in Plautus reappear under the vault of the Arc of l'Etoile , the sword-eater of Poecilus encountered by Apuleius is a sword-swallower on the PontNeuf , the nephew of Rameau and Curculio the parasite make a pair , Ergasilus could get himself presented to Cambaceres by d'Aigrefeuille ; the four dandies of Rome : Alcesimarchus , Phoedromus , Diabolus , and Argyrippus , descend from Courtille in Labatut 's posting-chaise ; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in front of Congrio than would Charles Nodier in front of Punchinello ; Marto is not a tigress , but Pardalisca was not a dragon ; Pantolabus the wag jeers in the Cafe Anglais at Nomentanus the fast liver , Hermogenus is a tenor in the Champs-Elysees , and round him , Thracius the beggar , clad like Bobeche , takes up a collection ; the bore who stops you by the button of your coat in the Tuileries makes you repeat after a lapse of two thousand years Thesprion 's apostrophe : Quis properantem me prehendit pallio ? 
The wine on Surene is a parody of the wine of Alba , the red border of Desaugiers forms a balance to the great cutting of Balatro , Pere Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains same gleams as the Esquiliae , and the grave of the poor bought for five years , is certainly the equivalent of the slave 's hived coffin . 
Seek something that Paris has not . 
The vat of Trophonius contains nothing that is not in Mesmer 's tub ; Ergaphilas lives again in Cagliostro ; the Brahmin Vasaphanta become incarnate in the Comte de Saint-Germain ; the cemetery of Saint-Medard works quite as good miracles as the Mosque of Oumoumie at Damascus . 
Paris has an AEsop-Mayeux , and a Canidia , Mademoiselle Lenormand . 
It is terrified , like Delphos at the fulgurating realities of the vision ; it makes tables turn as Dodona did tripods . 
It places the grisette on the throne , as Rome placed the courtesan there ; and , taking it altogether , if Louis XV . 
is worse than Claudian , Madame Dubarry is better than Messalina . 
Paris combines in an unprecedented type , which has existed and which we have elbowed , Grecian nudity , the Hebraic ulcer , and the Gascon pun . 
It mingles Diogenes , Job , and Jack-pudding , dresses up a spectre in old numbers of the Constitutional , and makes Chodruc Duclos . 
Although Plutarch says : the tyrant never grows old , Rome , under Sylla as under Domitian , resigned itself and willingly put water in its wine . 
The Tiber was a Lethe , if the rather doctrinary eulogium made of it by Varus Vibiscus is to be credited : Contra Gracchos Tiberim habemus , Bibere Tiberim , id est seditionem oblivisci . 
Paris drinks a million litres of water a day , but that does not prevent it from occasionally beating the general alarm and ringing the tocsin . 
With that exception , Paris is amiable . 
It accepts everything royally ; it is not too particular about its Venus ; its Callipyge is Hottentot ; provided that it is made to laugh , it condones ; ugliness cheers it , deformity provokes it to laughter , vice diverts it ; be eccentric and you may be an eccentric ; even hypocrisy , that supreme cynicism , does not disgust it ; it is so literary that it does not hold its nose before Basile , and is no more scandalized by the prayer of Tartuffe than Horace was repelled by the `` hiccup '' of Priapus . 
