Indigestion is charged by the good God with preaching morality to stomachs . 
And remember this : each one of our passions , even love , has a stomach which must not be filled too full . 
In all things the word finis must be written in good season ; self-control must be exercised when the matter becomes urgent ; the bolt must be drawn on appetite ; one must set one 's own fantasy to the violin , and carry one 's self to the post . 
The sage is the man who knows how , at a given moment , to effect his own arrest . 
Have some confidence in me , for I have succeeded to some extent in my study of the law , according to the verdict of my examinations , for I know the difference between the question put and the question pending , for I have sustained a thesis in Latin upon the manner in which torture was administered at Rome at the epoch when Munatius Demens was quaestor of the Parricide ; because I am going to be a doctor , apparently it does not follow that it is absolutely necessary that I should be an imbecile . 
I recommend you to moderation in your desires . 
It is true that my name is Felix Tholomyes ; I speak well . 
Happy is he who , when the hour strikes , takes a heroic resolve , and abdicates like Sylla or Origenes . '' 
Favourite listened with profound attention . 
`` Felix , '' said she , `` what a pretty word ! 
I love that name . 
It is Latin ; it means prosper . '' 
Tholomyes went on : -- `` Quirites , gentlemen , caballeros , my friends . 
Do you wish never to feel the prick , to do without the nuptial bed , and to brave love ? 
Nothing more simple . 
Here is the receipt : lemonade , excessive exercise , hard labor ; work yourself to death , drag blocks , sleep not , hold vigil , gorge yourself with nitrous beverages , and potions of nymphaeas ; drink emulsions of poppies and agnus castus ; season this with a strict diet , starve yourself , and add thereto cold baths , girdles of herbs , the application of a plate of lead , lotions made with the subacetate of lead , and fomentations of oxycrat . '' 
`` I prefer a woman , '' said Listolier . 
`` Woman , '' resumed Tholomyes ; `` distrust her . 
Woe to him who yields himself to the unstable heart of woman ! 
Woman is perfidious and disingenuous . 
She detests the serpent from professional jealousy . 
The serpent is the shop over the way . '' 
`` Tholomyes ! '' 
cried Blachevelle , `` you are drunk ! '' 
`` Pardieu , '' said Tholomyes . 
`` Then be gay , '' resumed Blachevelle . 
`` I agree to that , '' responded Tholomyes . 
And , refilling his glass , he rose . 
`` Glory to wine ! 
Nunc te , Bacche , canam ! 
Pardon me ladies ; that is Spanish . 
And the proof of it , senoras , is this : like people , like cask . 
The arrobe of Castile contains sixteen litres ; the cantaro of Alicante , twelve ; the almude of the Canaries , twenty-five ; the cuartin of the Balearic Isles , twenty-six ; the boot of Tzar Peter , thirty . 
Long live that Tzar who was great , and long live his boot , which was still greater ! 
Ladies , take the advice of a friend ; make a mistake in your neighbor if you see fit . 
The property of love is to err . 
A love affair is not made to crouch down and brutalize itself like an English serving-maid who has callouses on her knees from scrubbing . 
It is not made for that ; it errs gayly , our gentle love . 
It has been said , error is human ; I say , error is love . 
Ladies , I idolize you all . 
O Zephine , O Josephine , face more than irregular , you would be charming were you not all askew . 
You have the air of a pretty face upon which some one has sat down by mistake . 
As for Favourite , O nymphs and muses ! 
one day when Blachevelle was crossing the gutter in the Rue Guerin-Boisseau , he espied a beautiful girl with white stockings well drawn up , which displayed her legs . 
This prologue pleased him , and Blachevelle fell in love . 
The one he loved was Favourite . 
O Favourite , thou hast Ionian lips . 
There was a Greek painter named Euphorion , who was surnamed the painter of the lips . 
That Greek alone would have been worthy to paint thy mouth . 
Listen ! 
before thee , there was never a creature worthy of the name . 
Thou wert made to receive the apple like Venus , or to eat it like Eve ; beauty begins with thee . 
I have just referred to Eve ; it is thou who hast created her . 
Thou deservest the letters-patent of the beautiful woman . 
O Favourite , I cease to address you as ` thou , ' because I pass from poetry to prose . 
You were speaking of my name a little while ago . 
That touched me ; but let us , whoever we may be , distrust names . 
They may delude us . 
I am called Felix , and I am not happy . 
Words are liars . 
Let us not blindly accept the indications which they afford us . 
It would be a mistake to write to Liege -LSB- 2 -RSB- for corks , and to Pau for gloves . 
Miss Dahlia , were I in your place , I would call myself Rosa . 
A flower should smell sweet , and woman should have wit . 
I say nothing of Fantine ; she is a dreamer , a musing , thoughtful , pensive person ; she is a phantom possessed of the form of a nymph and the modesty of a nun , who has strayed into the life of a grisette , but who takes refuge in illusions , and who sings and prays and gazes into the azure without very well knowing what she sees or what she is doing , and who , with her eyes fixed on heaven , wanders in a garden where there are more birds than are in existence . 
O Fantine , know this : I , Tholomyes , I am all illusion ; but she does not even hear me , that blond maid of Chimeras ! 
as for the rest , everything about her is freshness , suavity , youth , sweet morning light . 
O Fantine , maid worthy of being called Marguerite or Pearl , you are a woman from the beauteous Orient . 
Ladies , a second piece of advice : do not marry ; marriage is a graft ; it takes well or ill ; avoid that risk . 
But bah ! 
what am I saying ? 
I am wasting my words . 
Girls are incurable on the subject of marriage , and all that we wise men can say will not prevent the waistcoat-makers and the shoe-stitchers from dreaming of husbands studded with diamonds . 
Well , so be it ; but , my beauties , remember this , you eat too much sugar . 
You have but one fault , O woman , and that is nibbling sugar . 
O nibbling sex , your pretty little white teeth adore sugar . 
Now , heed me well , sugar is a salt . 
All salts are withering . 
Sugar is the most desiccating of all salts ; it sucks the liquids of the blood through the veins ; hence the coagulation , and then the solidification of the blood ; hence tubercles in the lungs , hence death . 
That is why diabetes borders on consumption . 
Then , do not crunch sugar , and you will live . 
I turn to the men : gentlemen , make conquest , rob each other of your well-beloved without remorse . 
Chassez across . 
In love there are no friends . 
Everywhere where there is a pretty woman hostility is open . 
No quarter , war to the death ! 
a pretty woman is a casus belli ; a pretty woman is flagrant misdemeanor . 
All the invasions of history have been determined by petticoats . 
Woman is man 's right . 
Romulus carried off the Sabines ; William carried off the Saxon women ; Caesar carried off the Roman women . 
The man who is not loved soars like a vulture over the mistresses of other men ; and for my own part , to all those unfortunate men who are widowers , I throw the sublime proclamation of Bonaparte to the army of Italy : `` Soldiers , you are in need of everything ; the enemy has it . '' 
-LSB- 2 -RSB- Liege : a cork-tree . 
Pau : a jest on peau , skin . 
Tholomyes paused . 
`` Take breath , Tholomyes , '' said Blachevelle . 
At the same moment Blachevelle , supported by Listolier and Fameuil , struck up to a plaintive air , one of those studio songs composed of the first words which come to hand , rhymed richly and not at all , as destitute of sense as the gesture of the tree and the sound of the wind , which have their birth in the vapor of pipes , and are dissipated and take their flight with them . 
This is the couplet by which the group replied to Tholomyes ' harangue : -- `` The father turkey-cocks so grave Some money to an agent gave , That master good Clermont-Tonnerre Might be made pope on Saint Johns ' day fair . 
But this good Clermont could not be Made pope , because no priest was he ; And then their agent , whose wrath burned , With all their money back returned . '' 
This was not calculated to calm Tholomyes ' improvisation ; he emptied his glass , filled , refilled it , and began again : -- `` Down with wisdom ! 
Forget all that I have said . 
