There 's nothing there . '' 
`` Except the sermon , '' said Gavroche . 
`` But you , '' went on Montparnasse , `` where are you bound for now ? '' 
Gavroche pointed to his two proteges , and said : -- `` I 'm going to put these infants to bed . '' 
`` Whereabouts is the bed ? '' 
`` At my house . '' 
`` Where 's your house ? '' 
`` At my house . '' 
`` So you have a lodging ? '' 
`` Yes , I have . '' 
`` And where is your lodging ? '' 
`` In the elephant , '' said Gavroche . 
Montparnasse , though not naturally inclined to astonishment , could not restrain an exclamation . 
`` In the elephant ! '' 
`` Well , yes , in the elephant ! '' 
retorted Gavroche . 
`` Kekcaa ? '' 
This is another word of the language which no one writes , and which every one speaks . 
Kekcaa signifies : Quest que c'est que cela a ? 
-LSB- What 's the matter with that ? -RSB- 
The urchin 's profound remark recalled Montparnasse to calmness and good sense . 
He appeared to return to better sentiments with regard to Gavroche 's lodging . 
`` Of course , '' said he , `` yes , the elephant . 
Is it comfortable there ? '' 
`` Very , '' said Gavroche . 
`` It 's really bully there . 
There ai n't any draughts , as there are under the bridges . '' 
`` How do you get in ? '' 
`` Oh , I get in . '' 
`` So there is a hole ? '' 
demanded Montparnasse . 
`` Parbleu ! 
I should say so . 
But you must n't tell . 
It 's between the fore legs . 
The bobbies have n't seen it . '' 
`` And you climb up ? 
Yes , I understand . '' 
`` A turn of the hand , cric , crac , and it 's all over , no one there . '' 
After a pause , Gavroche added : -- `` I shall have a ladder for these children . '' 
Montparnasse burst out laughing : -- `` Where the devil did you pick up those young ` uns ? '' 
Gavroche replied with great simplicity : -- `` They are some brats that a wig-maker made me a present of . '' 
Meanwhile , Montparnasse had fallen to thinking : -- `` You recognized me very readily , '' he muttered . 
He took from his pocket two small objects which were nothing more than two quills wrapped in cotton , and thrust one up each of his nostrils . 
This gave him a different nose . 
`` That changes you , '' remarked Gavroche , `` you are less homely so , you ought to keep them on all the time . '' 
Montparnasse was a handsome fellow , but Gavroche was a tease . 
`` Seriously , '' demanded Montparnasse , `` how do you like me so ? '' 
The sound of his voice was different also . 
In a twinkling , Montparnasse had become unrecognizable . 
`` Oh ! 
Do play Porrichinelle for us ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche . 
The two children , who had not been listening up to this point , being occupied themselves in thrusting their fingers up their noses , drew near at this name , and stared at Montparnasse with dawning joy and admiration . 
Unfortunately , Montparnasse was troubled . 
He laid his hand on Gavroche 's shoulder , and said to him , emphasizing his words : `` Listen to what I tell you , boy ! 
if I were on the square with my dog , my knife , and my wife , and if you were to squander ten sous on me , I would n't refuse to work , but this is n't Shrove Tuesday . '' 
This odd phrase produced a singular effect on the gamin . 
He wheeled round hastily , darted his little sparkling eyes about him with profound attention , and perceived a police sergeant standing with his back to them a few paces off . 
Gavroche allowed an : `` Ah ! 
good ! '' 
to escape him , but immediately suppressed it , and shaking Montparnasse 's hand : -- `` Well , good evening , '' said he , `` I 'm going off to my elephant with my brats . 
Supposing that you should need me some night , you can come and hunt me up there . 
I lodge on the entresol . 
There is no porter . 
You will inquire for Monsieur Gavroche . '' 
`` Very good , '' said Montparnasse . 
And they parted , Montparnasse betaking himself in the direction of the Greve , and Gavroche towards the Bastille . 
The little one of five , dragged along by his brother who was dragged by Gavroche , turned his head back several times to watch `` Porrichinelle '' as he went . 
The ambiguous phrase by means of which Montparnasse had warned Gavroche of the presence of the policeman , contained no other talisman than the assonance dig repeated five or six times in different forms . 
This syllable , dig , uttered alone or artistically mingled with the words of a phrase , means : `` Take care , we can no longer talk freely . '' 
There was besides , in Montparnasse 's sentence , a literary beauty which was lost upon Gavroche , that is mon dogue , ma dague et ma digue , a slang expression of the Temple , which signifies my dog , my knife , and my wife , greatly in vogue among clowns and the red-tails in the great century when Moliere wrote and Callot drew . 
Twenty years ago , there was still to be seen in the southwest corner of the Place de la Bastille , near the basin of the canal , excavated in the ancient ditch of the fortress-prison , a singular monument , which has already been effaced from the memories of Parisians , and which deserved to leave some trace , for it was the idea of a `` member of the Institute , the General-in-chief of the army of Egypt . '' 
We say monument , although it was only a rough model . 
But this model itself , a marvellous sketch , the grandiose skeleton of an idea of Napoleon 's , which successive gusts of wind have carried away and thrown , on each occasion , still further from us , had become historical and had acquired a certain definiteness which contrasted with its provisional aspect . 
It was an elephant forty feet high , constructed of timber and masonry , bearing on its back a tower which resembled a house , formerly painted green by some dauber , and now painted black by heaven , the wind , and time . 
In this deserted and unprotected corner of the place , the broad brow of the colossus , his trunk , his tusks , his tower , his enormous crupper , his four feet , like columns produced , at night , under the starry heavens , a surprising and terrible form . 
It was a sort of symbol of popular force . 
It was sombre , mysterious , and immense . 
It was some mighty , visible phantom , one knew not what , standing erect beside the invisible spectre of the Bastille . 
Few strangers visited this edifice , no passer-by looked at it . 
It was falling into ruins ; every season the plaster which detached itself from its sides formed hideous wounds upon it . 
`` The aediles , '' as the expression ran in elegant dialect , had forgotten it ever since 1814 . 
There it stood in its corner , melancholy , sick , crumbling , surrounded by a rotten palisade , soiled continually by drunken coachmen ; cracks meandered athwart its belly , a lath projected from its tail , tall grass flourished between its legs ; and , as the level of the place had been rising all around it for a space of thirty years , by that slow and continuous movement which insensibly elevates the soil of large towns , it stood in a hollow , and it looked as though the ground were giving way beneath it . 
It was unclean , despised , repulsive , and superb , ugly in the eyes of the bourgeois , melancholy in the eyes of the thinker . 
There was something about it of the dirt which is on the point of being swept out , and something of the majesty which is on the point of being decapitated . 
As we have said , at night , its aspect changed . 
Night is the real element of everything that is dark . 
As soon as twilight descended , the old elephant became transfigured ; he assumed a tranquil and redoubtable appearance in the formidable serenity of the shadows . 
Being of the past , he belonged to night ; and obscurity was in keeping with his grandeur . 
This rough , squat , heavy , hard , austere , almost misshapen , but assuredly majestic monument , stamped with a sort of magnificent and savage gravity , has disappeared , and left to reign in peace , a sort of gigantic stove , ornamented with its pipe , which has replaced the sombre fortress with its nine towers , very much as the bourgeoisie replaces the feudal classes . 
It is quite natural that a stove should be the symbol of an epoch in which a pot contains power . 
This epoch will pass away , people have already begun to understand that , if there can be force in a boiler , there can be no force except in the brain ; in other words , that which leads and drags on the world , is not locomotives , but ideas . 
Harness locomotives to ideas , -- that is well done ; but do not mistake the horse for the rider . 
At all events , to return to the Place de la Bastille , the architect of this elephant succeeded in making a grand thing out of plaster ; the architect of the stove has succeeded in making a pretty thing out of bronze . 
This stove-pipe , which has been baptized by a sonorous name , and called the column of July , this monument of a revolution that miscarried , was still enveloped in 1832 , in an immense shirt of woodwork , which we regret , for our part , and by a vast plank enclosure , which completed the task of isolating the elephant . 
It was towards this corner of the place , dimly lighted by the reflection of a distant street lamp , that the gamin guided his two `` brats . '' 
The reader must permit us to interrupt ourselves here and to remind him that we are dealing with simple reality , and that twenty years ago , the tribunals were called upon to judge , under the charge of vagabondage , and mutilation of a public monument , a child who had been caught asleep in this very elephant of the Bastille . 
This fact noted , we proceed . 
On arriving in the vicinity of the colossus , Gavroche comprehended the effect which the infinitely great might produce on the infinitely small , and said : -- `` Do n't be scared , infants . '' 
