One has no need of the light for that . 
So be it . 
I shall die by starlight . '' 
The old man turned to the shepherd lad : -- `` Go to thy bed ; thou wert awake all last night ; thou art tired . '' 
The child entered the hut . 
The old man followed him with his eyes , and added , as though speaking to himself : -- `` I shall die while he sleeps . 
The two slumbers may be good neighbors . '' 
The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been . 
He did not think he discerned God in this manner of dying ; let us say the whole , for these petty contradictions of great hearts must be indicated like the rest : he , who on occasion , was so fond of laughing at `` His Grace , '' was rather shocked at not being addressed as Monseigneur , and he was almost tempted to retort `` citizen . '' 
He was assailed by a fancy for peevish familiarity , common enough to doctors and priests , but which was not habitual with him . 
This man , after all , this member of the Convention , this representative of the people , had been one of the powerful ones of the earth ; for the first time in his life , probably , the Bishop felt in a mood to be severe . 
Meanwhile , the member of the Convention had been surveying him with a modest cordiality , in which one could have distinguished , possibly , that humility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returning to dust . 
The Bishop , on his side , although he generally restrained his curiosity , which , in his opinion , bordered on a fault , could not refrain from examining the member of the Convention with an attention which , as it did not have its course in sympathy , would have served his conscience as a matter of reproach , in connection with any other man . 
A member of the Convention produced on him somewhat the effect of being outside the pale of the law , even of the law of charity . 
G -- , calm , his body almost upright , his voice vibrating , was one of those octogenarians who form the subject of astonishment to the physiologist . 
The Revolution had many of these men , proportioned to the epoch . 
In this old man one was conscious of a man put to the proof . 
Though so near to his end , he preserved all the gestures of health . 
In his clear glance , in his firm tone , in the robust movement of his shoulders , there was something calculated to disconcert death . 
Azrael , the Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre , would have turned back , and thought that he had mistaken the door . 
G -- seemed to be dying because he willed it so . 
There was freedom in his agony . 
His legs alone were motionless . 
It was there that the shadows held him fast . 
His feet were cold and dead , but his head survived with all the power of life , and seemed full of light . 
G -- , at this solemn moment , resembled the king in that tale of the Orient who was flesh above and marble below . 
There was a stone there . 
The Bishop sat down . 
The exordium was abrupt . 
`` I congratulate you , '' said he , in the tone which one uses for a reprimand . 
`` You did not vote for the death of the king , after all . '' 
The old member of the Convention did not appear to notice the bitter meaning underlying the words `` after all . '' 
He replied . 
The smile had quite disappeared from his face . 
`` Do not congratulate me too much , sir . 
I did vote for the death of the tyrant . '' 
It was the tone of austerity answering the tone of severity . 
`` What do you mean to say ? '' 
resumed the Bishop . 
`` I mean to say that man has a tyrant , -- ignorance . 
I voted for the death of that tyrant . 
That tyrant engendered royalty , which is authority falsely understood , while science is authority rightly understood . 
Man should be governed only by science . '' 
`` And conscience , '' added the Bishop . 
`` It is the same thing . 
Conscience is the quantity of innate science which we have within us . '' 
Monseigneur Bienvenu listened in some astonishment to this language , which was very new to him . 
The member of the Convention resumed : -- `` So far as Louis XVI . 
was concerned , I said ` no . ' 
I did not think that I had the right to kill a man ; but I felt it my duty to exterminate evil . 
I voted the end of the tyrant , that is to say , the end of prostitution for woman , the end of slavery for man , the end of night for the child . 
In voting for the Republic , I voted for that . 
I voted for fraternity , concord , the dawn . 
I have aided in the overthrow of prejudices and errors . 
The crumbling away of prejudices and errors causes light . 
We have caused the fall of the old world , and the old world , that vase of miseries , has become , through its upsetting upon the human race , an urn of joy . '' 
`` Mixed joy , '' said the Bishop . 
`` You may say troubled joy , and to-day , after that fatal return of the past , which is called 1814 , joy which has disappeared ! 
Alas ! 
The work was incomplete , I admit : we demolished the ancient regime in deeds ; we were not able to suppress it entirely in ideas . 
To destroy abuses is not sufficient ; customs must be modified . 
The mill is there no longer ; the wind is still there . '' 
`` You have demolished . 
It may be of use to demolish , but I distrust a demolition complicated with wrath . '' 
`` Right has its wrath , Bishop ; and the wrath of right is an element of progress . 
In any case , and in spite of whatever may be said , the French Revolution is the most important step of the human race since the advent of Christ . 
Incomplete , it may be , but sublime . 
It set free all the unknown social quantities ; it softened spirits , it calmed , appeased , enlightened ; it caused the waves of civilization to flow over the earth . 
It was a good thing . 
The French Revolution is the consecration of humanity . '' 
The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring : -- `` Yes ? ' 
93 ! '' 
The member of the Convention straightened himself up in his chair with an almost lugubrious solemnity , and exclaimed , so far as a dying man is capable of exclamation : -- `` Ah , there you go ; ' 93 ! 
I was expecting that word . 
A cloud had been forming for the space of fifteen hundred years ; at the end of fifteen hundred years it burst . 
You are putting the thunderbolt on its trial . '' 
The Bishop felt , without , perhaps , confessing it , that something within him had suffered extinction . 
Nevertheless , he put a good face on the matter . 
He replied : -- `` The judge speaks in the name of justice ; the priest speaks in the name of pity , which is nothing but a more lofty justice . 
A thunderbolt should commit no error . '' 
And he added , regarding the member of the Convention steadily the while , `` Louis XVII . ? '' 
The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop 's arm . 
`` Louis XVII . ! 
let us see . 
For whom do you mourn ? 
is it for the innocent child ? 
very good ; in that case I mourn with you . 
Is it for the royal child ? 
I demand time for reflection . 
To me , the brother of Cartouche , an innocent child who was hung up by the armpits in the Place de Greve , until death ensued , for the sole crime of having been the brother of Cartouche , is no less painful than the grandson of Louis XV. , an innocent child , martyred in the tower of the Temple , for the sole crime of having been grandson of Louis XV . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the Bishop , `` I like not this conjunction of names . '' 
`` Cartouche ? 
Louis XV . ? 
To which of the two do you object ? '' 
A momentary silence ensued . 
The Bishop almost regretted having come , and yet he felt vaguely and strangely shaken . 
The conventionary resumed : -- `` Ah , Monsieur Priest , you love not the crudities of the true . 
Christ loved them . 
He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple . 
His scourge , full of lightnings , was a harsh speaker of truths . 
