And he held out the envelope containing the four letters . 
She clapped her hands and exclaimed : -- `` We have been looking everywhere for that ! '' 
Then she eagerly seized the package and opened the envelope , saying as she did so : -- `` Dieu de Dieu ! 
how my sister and I have hunted ! 
And it was you who found it ! 
On the boulevard , was it not ? 
It must have been on the boulevard ? 
You see , we let it fall when we were running . 
It was that brat of a sister of mine who was so stupid . 
When we got home , we could not find it anywhere . 
As we did not wish to be beaten , as that is useless , as that is entirely useless , as that is absolutely useless , we said that we had carried the letters to the proper persons , and that they had said to us : ` Nix . ' 
So here they are , those poor letters ! 
And how did you find out that they belonged to me ? 
Ah ! 
yes , the writing . 
So it was you that we jostled as we passed last night . 
We could n't see . 
I said to my sister : ` Is it a gentleman ? ' 
My sister said to me : ` I think it is a gentleman . ' '' 
In the meanwhile she had unfolded the petition addressed to `` the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas . '' 
`` Here ! '' 
said she , `` this is for that old fellow who goes to mass . 
By the way , this is his hour . 
I 'll go and carry it to him . 
Perhaps he will give us something to breakfast on . '' 
Then she began to laugh again , and added : -- `` Do you know what it will mean if we get a breakfast today ? 
It will mean that we shall have had our breakfast of the day before yesterday , our breakfast of yesterday , our dinner of to-day , and all that at once , and this morning . 
Come ! 
Parbleu ! 
if you are not satisfied , dogs , burst ! '' 
This reminded Marius of the wretched girl 's errand to himself . 
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket , and found nothing there . 
The young girl went on , and seemed to have no consciousness of Marius ' presence . 
`` I often go off in the evening . 
Sometimes I do n't come home again . 
Last winter , before we came here , we lived under the arches of the bridges . 
We huddled together to keep from freezing . 
My little sister cried . 
How melancholy the water is ! 
When I thought of drowning myself , I said to myself : ` No , it 's too cold . ' 
I go out alone , whenever I choose , I sometimes sleep in the ditches . 
Do you know , at night , when I walk along the boulevard , I see the trees like forks , I see houses , all black and as big as Notre Dame , I fancy that the white walls are the river , I say to myself : ` Why , there 's water there ! ' 
The stars are like the lamps in illuminations , one would say that they smoked and that the wind blew them out , I am bewildered , as though horses were breathing in my ears ; although it is night , I hear hand-organs and spinning-machines , and I do n't know what all . 
I think people are flinging stones at me , I flee without knowing whither , everything whirls and whirls . 
You feel very queer when you have had no food . '' 
And then she stared at him with a bewildered air . 
By dint of searching and ransacking his pockets , Marius had finally collected five francs sixteen sous . 
This was all he owned in the world for the moment . 
`` At all events , '' he thought , `` there is my dinner for to-day , and to-morrow we will see . '' 
He kept the sixteen sous , and handed the five francs to the young girl . 
She seized the coin . 
`` Good ! '' 
said she , `` the sun is shining ! '' 
And , as though the sun had possessed the property of melting the avalanches of slang in her brain , she went on : -- `` Five francs ! 
the shiner ! 
a monarch ! 
in this hole ! 
Ai n't this fine ! 
You 're a jolly thief ! 
I 'm your humble servant ! 
Bravo for the good fellows ! 
Two days ' wine ! 
and meat ! 
and stew ! 
we 'll have a royal feast ! 
and a good fill ! '' 
She pulled her chemise up on her shoulders , made a low bow to Marius , then a familiar sign with her hand , and went towards the door , saying : -- `` Good morning , sir . 
It 's all right . 
I 'll go and find my old man . '' 
As she passed , she caught sight of a dry crust of bread on the commode , which was moulding there amid the dust ; she flung herself upon it and bit into it , muttering : -- `` That 's good ! 
it 's hard ! 
it breaks my teeth ! '' 
Then she departed . 
A PROVIDENTIAL PEEP-HOLE Marius had lived for five years in poverty , in destitution , even in distress , but he now perceived that he had not known real misery . 
True misery he had but just had a view of . 
It was its spectre which had just passed before his eyes . 
In fact , he who has only beheld the misery of man has seen nothing ; the misery of woman is what he must see ; he who has seen only the misery of woman has seen nothing ; he must see the misery of the child . 
When a man has reached his last extremity , he has reached his last resources at the same time . 
Woe to the defenceless beings who surround him ! 
Work , wages , bread , fire , courage , good will , all fail him simultaneously . 
The light of day seems extinguished without , the moral light within ; in these shadows man encounters the feebleness of the woman and the child , and bends them violently to ignominy . 
Then all horrors become possible . 
Despair is surrounded with fragile partitions which all open on either vice or crime . 
Health , youth , honor , all the shy delicacies of the young body , the heart , virginity , modesty , that epidermis of the soul , are manipulated in sinister wise by that fumbling which seeks resources , which encounters opprobrium , and which accomodates itself to it . 
Fathers , mothers , children , brothers , sisters , men , women , daughters , adhere and become incorporated , almost like a mineral formation , in that dusky promiscuousness of sexes , relationships , ages , infamies , and innocences . 
They crouch , back to back , in a sort of hut of fate . 
They exchange woe-begone glances . 
Oh , the unfortunate wretches ! 
How pale they are ! 
How cold they are ! 
It seems as though they dwelt in a planet much further from the sun than ours . 
This young girl was to Marius a sort of messenger from the realm of sad shadows . 
She revealed to him a hideous side of the night . 
Marius almost reproached himself for the preoccupations of revery and passion which had prevented his bestowing a glance on his neighbors up to that day . 
The payment of their rent had been a mechanical movement , which any one would have yielded to ; but he , Marius , should have done better than that . 
What ! 
only a wall separated him from those abandoned beings who lived gropingly in the dark outside the pale of the rest of the world , he was elbow to elbow with them , he was , in some sort , the last link of the human race which they touched , he heard them live , or rather , rattle in the death agony beside him , and he paid no heed to them ! 
Every day , every instant , he heard them walking on the other side of the wall , he heard them go , and come , and speak , and he did not even lend an ear ! 
And groans lay in those words , and he did not even listen to them , his thoughts were elsewhere , given up to dreams , to impossible radiances , to loves in the air , to follies ; and all the while , human creatures , his brothers in Jesus Christ , his brothers in the people , were agonizing in vain beside him ! 
He even formed a part of their misfortune , and he aggravated it . 
