He gazed with terror on this beauty , which was blossoming out ever more triumphant and superb beside him , beneath his very eyes , on the innocent and formidable brow of that child , from the depths of her homeliness , of his old age , of his misery , of his reprobation . 
He said to himself : `` How beautiful she is ! 
What is to become of me ? '' 
There , moreover , lay the difference between his tenderness and the tenderness of a mother . 
What he beheld with anguish , a mother would have gazed upon with joy . 
The first symptoms were not long in making their appearance . 
On the very morrow of the day on which she had said to herself : `` Decidedly I am beautiful ! '' 
Cosette began to pay attention to her toilet . 
She recalled the remark of that passer-by : `` Pretty , but badly dressed , '' the breath of an oracle which had passed beside her and had vanished , after depositing in her heart one of the two germs which are destined , later on , to fill the whole life of woman , coquetry . 
Love is the other . 
With faith in her beauty , the whole feminine soul expanded within her . 
She conceived a horror for her merinos , and shame for her plush hat . 
Her father had never refused her anything . 
She at once acquired the whole science of the bonnet , the gown , the mantle , the boot , the cuff , the stuff which is in fashion , the color which is becoming , that science which makes of the Parisian woman something so charming , so deep , and so dangerous . 
The words heady woman were invented for the Parisienne . 
In less than a month , little Cosette , in that Thebaid of the Rue de Babylone , was not only one of the prettiest , but one of the `` best dressed '' women in Paris , which means a great deal more . 
She would have liked to encounter her `` passer-by , '' to see what he would say , and to `` teach him a lesson ! '' 
The truth is , that she was ravishing in every respect , and that she distinguished the difference between a bonnet from Gerard and one from Herbaut in the most marvellous way . 
Jean Valjean watched these ravages with anxiety . 
He who felt that he could never do anything but crawl , walk at the most , beheld wings sprouting on Cosette . 
Moreover , from the mere inspection of Cosette 's toilet , a woman would have recognized the fact that she had no mother . 
Certain little proprieties , certain special conventionalities , were not observed by Cosette . 
A mother , for instance , would have told her that a young girl does not dress in damask . 
The first day that Cosette went out in her black damask gown and mantle , and her white crape bonnet , she took Jean Valjean 's arm , gay , radiant , rosy , proud , dazzling . 
`` Father , '' she said , `` how do you like me in this guise ? '' 
Jean Valjean replied in a voice which resembled the bitter voice of an envious man : `` Charming ! '' 
He was the same as usual during their walk . 
On their return home , he asked Cosette : -- `` Wo n't you put on that other gown and bonnet again , -- you know the ones I mean ? '' 
This took place in Cosette 's chamber . 
Cosette turned towards the wardrobe where her cast-off schoolgirl 's clothes were hanging . 
`` That disguise ! '' 
said she . 
`` Father , what do you want me to do with it ? 
Oh no , the idea ! 
I shall never put on those horrors again . 
With that machine on my head , I have the air of Madame Mad-dog . '' 
Jean Valjean heaved a deep sigh . 
From that moment forth , he noticed that Cosette , who had always heretofore asked to remain at home , saying : `` Father , I enjoy myself more here with you , '' now was always asking to go out . 
In fact , what is the use of having a handsome face and a delicious costume if one does not display them ? 
He also noticed that Cosette had no longer the same taste for the back garden . 
Now she preferred the garden , and did not dislike to promenade back and forth in front of the railed fence . 
Jean Valjean , who was shy , never set foot in the garden . 
He kept to his back yard , like a dog . 
Cosette , in gaining the knowledge that she was beautiful , lost the grace of ignoring it . 
An exquisite grace , for beauty enhanced by ingenuousness is ineffable , and nothing is so adorable as a dazzling and innocent creature who walks along , holding in her hand the key to paradise without being conscious of it . 
But what she had lost in ingenuous grace , she gained in pensive and serious charm . 
Her whole person , permeated with the joy of youth , of innocence , and of beauty , breathed forth a splendid melancholy . 
It was at this epoch that Marius , after the lapse of six months , saw her once more at the Luxembourg . 
THE BATTLE BEGUN Cosette in her shadow , like Marius in his , was all ready to take fire . 
Destiny , with its mysterious and fatal patience , slowly drew together these two beings , all charged and all languishing with the stormy electricity of passion , these two souls which were laden with love as two clouds are laden with lightning , and which were bound to overflow and mingle in a look like the clouds in a flash of fire . 
The glance has been so much abused in love romances that it has finally fallen into disrepute . 
One hardly dares to say , nowadays , that two beings fell in love because they looked at each other . 
That is the way people do fall in love , nevertheless , and the only way . 
The rest is nothing , but the rest comes afterwards . 
Nothing is more real than these great shocks which two souls convey to each other by the exchange of that spark . 
At that particular hour when Cosette unconsciously darted that glance which troubled Marius , Marius had no suspicion that he had also launched a look which disturbed Cosette . 
He caused her the same good and the same evil . 
She had been in the habit of seeing him for a long time , and she had scrutinized him as girls scrutinize and see , while looking elsewhere . 
Marius still considered Cosette ugly , when she had already begun to think Marius handsome . 
But as he paid no attention to her , the young man was nothing to her . 
Still , she could not refrain from saying to herself that he had beautiful hair , beautiful eyes , handsome teeth , a charming tone of voice when she heard him conversing with his comrades , that he held himself badly when he walked , if you like , but with a grace that was all his own , that he did not appear to be at all stupid , that his whole person was noble , gentle , simple , proud , and that , in short , though he seemed to be poor , yet his air was fine . 
On the day when their eyes met at last , and said to each other those first , obscure , and ineffable things which the glance lisps , Cosette did not immediately understand . 
She returned thoughtfully to the house in the Rue de l'Ouest , where Jean Valjean , according to his custom , had come to spend six weeks . 
The next morning , on waking , she thought of that strange young man , so long indifferent and icy , who now seemed to pay attention to her , and it did not appear to her that this attention was the least in the world agreeable to her . 
She was , on the contrary , somewhat incensed at this handsome and disdainful individual . 
A substratum of war stirred within her . 
It struck her , and the idea caused her a wholly childish joy , that she was going to take her revenge at last . 
Knowing that she was beautiful , she was thoroughly conscious , though in an indistinct fashion , that she possessed a weapon . 
Women play with their beauty as children do with a knife . 
They wound themselves . 
The reader will recall Marius ' hesitations , his palpitations , his terrors . 
He remained on his bench and did not approach . 
This vexed Cosette . 
One day , she said to Jean Valjean : `` Father , let us stroll about a little in that direction . '' 
Seeing that Marius did not come to her , she went to him . 
In such cases , all women resemble Mahomet . 
And then , strange to say , the first symptom of true love in a young man is timidity ; in a young girl it is boldness . 
This is surprising , and yet nothing is more simple . 
It is the two sexes tending to approach each other and assuming , each the other 's qualities . 
That day , Cosette 's glance drove Marius beside himself , and Marius ' glance set Cosette to trembling . 
Marius went away confident , and Cosette uneasy . 
From that day forth , they adored each other . 
The first thing that Cosette felt was a confused and profound melancholy . 
It seemed to her that her soul had become black since the day before . 
She no longer recognized it . 
The whiteness of soul in young girls , which is composed of coldness and gayety , resembles snow . 
It melts in love , which is its sun . 
Cosette did not know what love was . 
She had never heard the word uttered in its terrestrial sense . 
On the books of profane music which entered the convent , amour -LRB- love -RRB- was replaced by tambour -LRB- drum -RRB- or pandour . 
This created enigmas which exercised the imaginations of the big girls , such as : Ah , how delightful is the drum ! 
or , Pity is not a pandour . 
But Cosette had left the convent too early to have occupied herself much with the `` drum . '' 
Therefore , she did not know what name to give to what she now felt . 
Is any one the less ill because one does not know the name of one 's malady ? 
She loved with all the more passion because she loved ignorantly . 
She did not know whether it was a good thing or a bad thing , useful or dangerous , eternal or temporary , allowable or prohibited ; she loved . 
She would have been greatly astonished , had any one said to her : `` You do not sleep ? 
But that is forbidden ! 
You do not eat ? 
