Why did you leave my house ? 
To go and become a Republican ! 
Pssst ! 
In the first place , the people want none of your republic , they have common sense , they know well that there always have been kings , and that there always will be ; they know well that the people are only the people , after all , they make sport of it , of your republic -- do you understand , idiot ? 
Is it not a horrible caprice ? 
To fall in love with Pere Duchesne , to make sheep 's - eyes at the guillotine , to sing romances , and play on the guitar under the balcony of ' 93 -- it 's enough to make one spit on all these young fellows , such fools are they ! 
They are all alike . 
Not one escapes . 
It suffices for them to breathe the air which blows through the street to lose their senses . 
The nineteenth century is poison . 
The first scamp that happens along lets his beard grow like a goat 's , thinks himself a real scoundrel , and abandons his old relatives . 
He 's a Republican , he 's a romantic . 
What does that mean , romantic ? 
Do me the favor to tell me what it is . 
All possible follies . 
A year ago , they ran to Hernani . 
Now , I just ask you , Hernani ! 
antitheses ! 
abominations which are not even written in French ! 
And then , they have cannons in the courtyard of the Louvre . 
Such are the rascalities of this age ! '' 
`` You are right , uncle , '' said Theodule . 
M. Gillenormand resumed : -- `` Cannons in the courtyard of the Museum ! 
For what purpose ? 
Do you want to fire grape-shot at the Apollo Belvedere ? 
What have those cartridges to do with the Venus de Medici ? 
Oh ! 
the young men of the present day are all blackguards ! 
What a pretty creature is their Benjamin Constant ! 
And those who are not rascals are simpletons ! 
They do all they can to make themselves ugly , they are badly dressed , they are afraid of women , in the presence of petticoats they have a mendicant air which sets the girls into fits of laughter ; on my word of honor , one would say the poor creatures were ashamed of love . 
They are deformed , and they complete themselves by being stupid ; they repeat the puns of Tiercelin and Potier , they have sack coats , stablemen 's waistcoats , shirts of coarse linen , trousers of coarse cloth , boots of coarse leather , and their rigmarole resembles their plumage . 
One might make use of their jargon to put new soles on their old shoes . 
And all this awkward batch of brats has political opinions , if you please . 
Political opinions should be strictly forbidden . 
They fabricate systems , they recast society , they demolish the monarchy , they fling all laws to the earth , they put the attic in the cellar 's place and my porter in the place of the King , they turn Europe topsy-turvy , they reconstruct the world , and all their love affairs consist in staring slily at the ankles of the laundresses as these women climb into their carts . 
Ah ! 
Marius ! 
Ah ! 
you blackguard ! 
to go and vociferate on the public place ! 
to discuss , to debate , to take measures ! 
They call that measures , just God ! 
Disorder humbles itself and becomes silly . 
I have seen chaos , I now see a mess . 
Students deliberating on the National Guard , -- such a thing could not be seen among the Ogibewas nor the Cadodaches ! 
Savages who go naked , with their noddles dressed like a shuttlecock , with a club in their paws , are less of brutes than those bachelors of arts ! 
The four-penny monkeys ! 
And they set up for judges ! 
Those creatures deliberate and ratiocinate ! 
The end of the world is come ! 
This is plainly the end of this miserable terraqueous globe ! 
A final hiccough was required , and France has emitted it . 
Deliberate , my rascals ! 
Such things will happen so long as they go and read the newspapers under the arcades of the Odeon . 
That costs them a sou , and their good sense , and their intelligence , and their heart and their soul , and their wits . 
They emerge thence , and decamp from their families . 
All newspapers are pests ; all , even the Drapeau Blanc ! 
At bottom , Martainville was a Jacobin . 
Ah ! 
just Heaven ! 
you may boast of having driven your grandfather to despair , that you may ! '' 
`` That is evident , '' said Theodule . 
And profiting by the fact that M. Gillenormand was taking breath , the lancer added in a magisterial manner : -- `` There should be no other newspaper than the Moniteur , and no other book than the Annuaire Militaire . '' 
M. Gillenormand continued : -- `` It is like their Sieyes ! 
A regicide ending in a senator ; for that is the way they always end . 
They give themselves a scar with the address of thou as citizens , in order to get themselves called , eventually , Monsieur le Comte . 
Monsieur le Comte as big as my arm , assassins of September . 
The philosopher Sieyes ! 
I will do myself the justice to say , that I have never had any better opinion of the philosophies of all those philosophers , than of the spectacles of the grimacer of Tivoli ! 
One day I saw the Senators cross the Quai Malplaquet in mantles of violet velvet sown with bees , with hats a la Henri IV . 
They were hideous . 
One would have pronounced them monkeys from the tiger 's court . 
Citizens , I declare to you , that your progress is madness , that your humanity is a dream , that your revolution is a crime , that your republic is a monster , that your young and virgin France comes from the brothel , and I maintain it against all , whoever you may be , whether journalists , economists , legists , or even were you better judges of liberty , of equality , and fraternity than the knife of the guillotine ! 
And that I announce to you , my flne fellows ! '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
cried the lieutenant , `` that is wonderfully true . '' 
M. Gillenormand paused in a gesture which he had begun , wheeled round , stared Lancer Theodule intently in the eyes , and said to him : -- `` You are a fool . '' 
THE SOBRIQUET : MODE OF FORMATION OF FAMILY NAMES Marius was , at this epoch , a handsome young man , of medium stature , with thick and intensely black hair , a lofty and intelligent brow , well-opened and passionate nostrils , an air of calmness and sincerity , and with something indescribably proud , thoughtful , and innocent over his whole countenance . 
His profile , all of whose lines were rounded , without thereby losing their firmness , had a certain Germanic sweetness , which has made its way into the French physiognomy by way of Alsace and Lorraine , and that complete absence of angles which rendered the Sicambres so easily recognizable among the Romans , and which distinguishes the leonine from the aquiline race . 
He was at that period of life when the mind of men who think is composed , in nearly equal parts , of depth and ingenuousness . 
A grave situation being given , he had all that is required to be stupid : one more turn of the key , and he might be sublime . 
His manners were reserved , cold , polished , not very genial . 
As his mouth was charming , his lips the reddest , and his teeth the whitest in the world , his smile corrected the severity of his face , as a whole . 
At certain moments , that pure brow and that voluptuous smile presented a singular contrast . 
His eyes were small , but his glance was large . 
At the period of his most abject misery , he had observed that young girls turned round when he passed by , and he fled or hid , with death in his soul . 
He thought that they were staring at him because of his old clothes , and that they were laughing at them ; the fact is , that they stared at him because of his grace , and that they dreamed of him . 
This mute misunderstanding between him and the pretty passers-by had made him shy . 
He chose none of them for the excellent reason that he fled from all of them . 
He lived thus indefinitely , -- stupidly , as Courfeyrac said . 
Courfeyrac also said to him : `` Do not aspire to be venerable '' -LSB- they called each other thou ; it is the tendency of youthful friendships to slip into this mode of address -RSB- . 
`` Let me give you a piece of advice , my dear fellow . 
Do n't read so many books , and look a little more at the lasses . 
The jades have some good points about them , O Marius ! 
By dint of fleeing and blushing , you will become brutalized . '' 
On other occasions , Courfeyrac encountered him and said : -- `` Good morning , Monsieur l'Abbe ! '' 
When Courfeyrac had addressed to him some remark of this nature , Marius avoided women , both young and old , more than ever for a week to come , and he avoided Courfeyrac to boot . 
Nevertheless , there existed in all the immensity of creation , two women whom Marius did not flee , and to whom he paid no attention whatever . 
In truth , he would have been very much amazed if he had been informed that they were women . 
