So you are going to have that all to yourself , you scamp ! 
Ah ! 
my rogue , you are getting off nicely with me , you are happy ; if I were not fifteen years too old , we would fight with swords to see which of us should have her . 
Come now ! 
I am in love with you , mademoiselle . 
It 's perfectly simple . 
It is your right . 
You are in the right . 
Ah ! 
what a sweet , charming little wedding this will make ! 
Our parish is Saint-Denis du Saint Sacrament , but I will get a dispensation so that you can be married at Saint-Paul . 
The church is better . 
It was built by the Jesuits . 
It is more coquettish . 
It is opposite the fountain of Cardinal de Birague . 
The masterpiece of Jesuit architecture is at Namur . 
It is called Saint-Loup . 
You must go there after you are married . 
It is worth the journey . 
Mademoiselle , I am quite of your mind , I think girls ought to marry ; that is what they are made for . 
There is a certain Sainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed . 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- It 's a fine thing to remain a spinster , but it is chilly . 
The Bible says : Multiply . 
In order to save the people , Jeanne d'Arc is needed ; but in order to make people , what is needed is Mother Goose . 
So , marry , my beauties . 
I really do not see the use in remaining a spinster ! 
I know that they have their chapel apart in the church , and that they fall back on the Society of the Virgin ; but , sapristi , a handsome husband , a fine fellow , and at the expiration of a year , a big , blond brat who nurses lustily , and who has fine rolls of fat on his thighs , and who musses up your breast in handfuls with his little rosy paws , laughing the while like the dawn , -- that 's better than holding a candle at vespers , and chanting Turris eburnea ! '' 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- In allusion to the expression , coiffer Sainte-Catherine , `` to remain unmarried . '' 
The grandfather executed a pirouette on his eighty-year-old heels , and began to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more : `` Ainsi , bornant les cours de tes revasseries , Alcippe , il est donc vrai , dans peu tu te maries . '' 
-LSB- 63 -RSB- -LSB- 63 -RSB- `` Thus , hemming in the course of thy musings , Alcippus , it is true that thou wilt wed ere long . '' 
`` By the way ! '' 
`` What is it , father ? '' 
`` Have not you an intimate friend ? '' 
`` Yes , Courfeyrac . '' 
`` What has become of him ? '' 
`` He is dead . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
He seated himself near them , made Cosette sit down , and took their four hands in his aged and wrinkled hands : `` She is exquisite , this darling . 
She 's a masterpiece , this Cosette ! 
She is a very little girl and a very great lady . 
She will only be a Baroness , which is a come down for her ; she was born a Marquise . 
What eyelashes she has ! 
Get it well fixed in your noddles , my children , that you are in the true road . 
Love each other . 
Be foolish about it . 
Love is the folly of men and the wit of God . 
Adore each other . 
Only , '' he added , suddenly becoming gloomy , `` what a misfortune ! 
It has just occurred to me ! 
More than half of what I possess is swallowed up in an annuity ; so long as I live , it will not matter , but after my death , a score of years hence , ah ! 
my poor children , you will not have a sou ! 
Your beautiful white hands , Madame la Baronne , will do the devil the honor of pulling him by the tail . '' 
-LSB- 64 -RSB- -LSB- 64 -RSB- Tirer le diable par la queue , `` to live from hand to mouth . '' 
At this point they heard a grave and tranquil voice say : `` Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent possesses six hundred thousand francs . '' 
It was the voice of Jean Valjean . 
So far he had not uttered a single word , no one seemed to be aware that he was there , and he had remained standing erect and motionless , behind all these happy people . 
`` What has Mademoiselle Euphrasie to do with the question ? '' 
inquired the startled grandfather . 
`` I am she , '' replied Cosette . 
`` Six hundred thousand francs ? '' 
resumed M. Gillenormand . 
`` Minus fourteen or fifteen thousand francs , possibly , '' said Jean Valjean . 
And he laid on the table the package which Mademoiselle Gillenormand had mistaken for a book . 
Jean Valjean himself opened the package ; it was a bundle of bank-notes . 
They were turned over and counted . 
There were five hundred notes for a thousand francs each , and one hundred and sixty-eight of five hundred . 
In all , five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs . 
`` This is a fine book , '' said M. Gillenormand . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
murmured the aunt . 
`` This arranges things well , does it not , Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior ? '' 
said the grandfather . 
`` That devil of a Marius has ferreted out the nest of a millionaire grisette in his tree of dreams ! 
Just trust to the love affairs of young folks now , will you ! 
Students find studentesses with six hundred thousand francs . 
Cherubino works better than Rothschild . '' 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
repeated Mademoiselle Gillenormand , in a low tone . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four ! 
one might as well say six hundred thousand ! '' 
As for Marius and Cosette , they were gazing at each other while this was going on ; they hardly heeded this detail . 
DEPOSIT YOUR MONEY IN A FOREST RATHER THAN WITH A NOTARY The reader has , no doubt , understood , without necessitating a lengthy explanation , that Jean Valjean , after the Champmathieu affair , had been able , thanks to his first escape of a few days ' duration , to come to Paris and to withdraw in season , from the hands of Laffitte , the sum earned by him , under the name of Monsieur Madeleine , at Montreuil-sur-Mer ; and that fearing that he might be recaptured , -- which eventually happened -- he had buried and hidden that sum in the forest of Montfermeil , in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom . 
The sum , six hundred and thirty thousand francs , all in bank-bills , was not very bulky , and was contained in a box ; only , in order to preserve the box from dampness , he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut shavings . 
In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures , the Bishop 's candlesticks . 
It will be remembered that he had carried off the candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil-sur-Mer . 
The man seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle , was Jean Valjean . 
Later on , every time that Jean Valjean needed money , he went to get it in the Blaru-bottom . 
Hence the absences which we have mentioned . 
He had a pickaxe somewhere in the heather , in a hiding-place known to himself alone . 
When he beheld Marius convalescent , feeling that the hour was at hand , when that money might prove of service , he had gone to get it ; it was he again , whom Boulatruelle had seen in the woods , but on this occasion , in the morning instead of in the evening . 
Boulatreulle inherited his pickaxe . 
The actual sum was five hundred and eighty-four thousand , five hundred francs . 
Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself . 
-- `` We shall see hereafter , '' he thought . 
The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousand francs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in ten years , from 1823 to 1833 . 
The five years of his stay in the convent had cost only five thousand francs . 
Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney-piece , where they glittered to the great admiration of Toussaint . 
Moreover , Jean Valjean knew that he was delivered from Javert . 
The story had been told in his presence , and he had verified the fact in the Moniteur , how a police inspector named Javert had been found drowned under a boat belonging to some laundresses , between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf , and that a writing left by this man , otherwise irreproachable and highly esteemed by his superiors , pointed to a fit of mental aberration and a suicide . 
-- `` In fact , '' thought Jean Valjean , `` since he left me at liberty , once having got me in his power , he must have been already mad . '' 
