What he had just done smacked of theft . 
At last the candle was lighted ; he leaned his elbows on the table , unfolded the paper , and read . 
In violent emotions , one does not read , one flings to the earth , so to speak , the paper which one holds , one clutches it like a victim , one crushes it , one digs into it the nails of one 's wrath , or of one 's joy ; one hastens to the end , one leaps to the beginning ; attention is at fever heat ; it takes up in the gross , as it were , the essential points ; it seizes on one point , and the rest disappears . 
In Marius ' note to Cosette , Jean Valjean saw only these words : -- `` I die . 
When thou readest this , my soul will be near thee . '' 
In the presence of these two lines , he was horribly dazzled ; he remained for a moment , crushed , as it were , by the change of emotion which was taking place within him , he stared at Marius ' note with a sort of intoxicated amazement , he had before his eyes that splendor , the death of a hated individual . 
He uttered a frightful cry of inward joy . 
So it was all over . 
The catastrophe had arrived sooner than he had dared to hope . 
The being who obstructed his destiny was disappearing . 
That man had taken himself off of his own accord , freely , willingly . 
This man was going to his death , and he , Jean Valjean , had had no hand in the matter , and it was through no fault of his . 
Perhaps , even , he is already dead . 
Here his fever entered into calculations . 
No , he is not dead yet . 
The letter had evidently been intended for Cosette to read on the following morning ; after the two discharges that were heard between eleven o'clock and midnight , nothing more has taken place ; the barricade will not be attacked seriously until daybreak ; but that makes no difference , from the moment when `` that man '' is concerned in this war , he is lost ; he is caught in the gearing . 
Jean Valjean felt himself delivered . 
So he was about to find himself alone with Cosette once more . 
The rivalry would cease ; the future was beginning again . 
He had but to keep this note in his pocket . 
Cosette would never know what had become of that man . 
All that there requires to be done is to let things take their own course . 
This man can not escape . 
If he is not already dead , it is certain that he is about to die . 
What good fortune ! 
Having said all this to himself , he became gloomy . 
Then he went down stairs and woke up the porter . 
About an hour later , Jean Valjean went out in the complete costume of a National Guard , and with his arms . 
The porter had easily found in the neighborhood the wherewithal to complete his equipment . 
He had a loaded gun and a cartridge-box filled with cartridges . 
He strode off in the direction of the markets . 
GAVROCHE 'S EXCESS OF ZEAL In the meantime , Gavroche had had an adventure . 
Gavroche , after having conscientiously stoned the lantern in the Rue du Chaume , entered the Rue des Vielles-Haudriettes , and not seeing `` even a cat '' there , he thought the opportunity a good one to strike up all the song of which he was capable . 
His march , far from being retarded by his singing , was accelerated by it . 
He began to sow along the sleeping or terrified houses these incendiary couplets : -- `` L'oiseau medit dans les charmilles , Et pretend qu ` hier Atala Avec un Russe s ` en alla . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Mon ami Pierrot , tu babilles , Parce que l'autre jour Mila Cogna sa vitre et m ` appela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Les drolesses sont fort gentilles , Leur poison qui m ` ensorcela Griserait Monsieur Orfila . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` J'aime l'amour et les bisbilles , J'aime Agnes , j' aime Pamela , Lisa en m ` allumant se brula . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jadis , quand je vis les mantilles De Suzette et de Zeila , Mon ame aleurs plis se mela , Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Amour , quand dans l'ombre ou tu brilles , Tu coiffes de roses Lola , Je me damnerais pour cela . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Jeanne a ton miroir tu t ` habilles ! 
Mon coeur un beau jour s ` envola . 
Je crois que c'est Jeanne qui l' a. Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Le soir , en sortant des quadrilles , Je montre aux etoiles Stella , Et je leur dis : ` Regardez-la . ' 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . '' 
-LSB- 56 -RSB- -LSB- 56 -RSB- `` The bird slanders in the elms , And pretends that yesterday , Atala Went off with a Russian , Where fair maids go . 
Lon la . 
My friend Pierrot , thou pratest , because Mila knocked at her pane the other day and called me . 
The jades are very charming , their poison which bewitched me would intoxicate Monsieur Orfila . 
I 'm fond of love and its bickerings , I love Agnes , I love Pamela , Lise burned herself in setting me aflame . 
In former days when I saw the mantillas of Suzette and of Zeila , my soul mingled with their folds . 
Love , when thou gleamest in the dark thou crownest Lola with roses , I would lose my soul for that . 
Jeanne , at thy mirror thou deckest thyself ! 
One fine day , my heart flew forth . 
I think that it is Jeanne who has it . 
At night , when I come from the quadrilles , I show Stella to the stars , and I say to them : `` Behold her . '' 
Where fair maids go , lon la . 
Gavroche , as he sang , was lavish of his pantomime . 
Gesture is the strong point of the refrain . 
His face , an inexhaustible repertory of masks , produced grimaces more convulsing and more fantastic than the rents of a cloth torn in a high gale . 
Unfortunately , as he was alone , and as it was night , this was neither seen nor even visible . 
Such wastes of riches do occur . 
All at once , he stopped short . 
`` Let us interrupt the romance , '' said he . 
His feline eye had just descried , in the recess of a carriage door , what is called in painting , an ensemble , that is to say , a person and a thing ; the thing was a hand-cart , the person was a man from Auvergene who was sleeping therein . 
The shafts of the cart rested on the pavement , and the Auvergnat 's head was supported against the front of the cart . 
His body was coiled up on this inclined plane and his feet touched the ground . 
Gavroche , with his experience of the things of this world , recognized a drunken man . 
He was some corner errand-man who had drunk too much and was sleeping too much . 
`` There now , '' thought Gavroche , `` that 's what the summer nights are good for . 
We 'll take the cart for the Republic , and leave the Auvergnat for the Monarchy . '' 
His mind had just been illuminated by this flash of light : -- `` How bully that cart would look on our barricade ! '' 
The Auvergnat was snoring . 
Gavroche gently tugged at the cart from behind , and at the Auvergnat from the front , that is to say , by the feet , and at the expiration of another minute the imperturbable Auvergnat was reposing flat on the pavement . 
The cart was free . 
Gavroche , habituated to facing the unexpected in all quarters , had everything about him . 
He fumbled in one of his pockets , and pulled from it a scrap of paper and a bit of red pencil filched from some carpenter . 
He wrote : -- `` French Republic . '' 
`` Received thy cart . '' 
And he signed it : `` GAVROCHE . '' 
That done , he put the paper in the pocket of the still snoring Auvergnat 's velvet vest , seized the cart shafts in both hands , and set off in the direction of the Halles , pushing the cart before him at a hard gallop with a glorious and triumphant uproar . 
This was perilous . 
There was a post at the Royal Printing Establishment . 
Gavroche did not think of this . 
This post was occupied by the National Guards of the suburbs . 
The squad began to wake up , and heads were raised from camp beds . 
Two street lanterns broken in succession , that ditty sung at the top of the lungs . 
This was a great deal for those cowardly streets , which desire to go to sleep at sunset , and which put the extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour . 
For the last hour , that boy had been creating an uproar in that peaceable arrondissement , the uproar of a fly in a bottle . 
The sergeant of the banlieue lent an ear . 
He waited . 
He was a prudent man . 
The mad rattle of the cart , filled to overflowing the possible measure of waiting , and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance . 
`` There 's a whole band of them there ! '' 
said he , `` let us proceed gently . '' 
It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had emerged from its box and that it was stalking abroad through the quarter . 
