`` The rendezvous is appointed outside , '' said Theodule . 
`` Let 's have a look at the lass . '' 
And he advanced on the tips of his boots towards the corner which Marius had turned . 
On arriving there , he halted in amazement . 
Marius , with his forehead clasped in his hands , was kneeling upon the grass on a grave . 
He had strewn his bouquet there . 
At the extremity of the grave , on a little swelling which marked the head , there stood a cross of black wood with this name in white letters : COLONEL BARON PONTMERCY . 
Marius ' sobs were audible . 
The `` lass '' was a grave . 
MARBLE AGAINST GRANITE It was hither that Marius had come on the first occasion of his absenting himself from Paris . 
It was hither that he had come every time that M. Gillenormand had said : `` He is sleeping out . '' 
Lieutenant Theodule was absolutely put out of countenance by this unexpected encounter with a sepulchre ; he experienced a singular and disagreeable sensation which he was incapable of analyzing , and which was composed of respect for the tomb , mingled with respect for the colonel . 
He retreated , leaving Marius alone in the cemetery , and there was discipline in this retreat . 
Death appeared to him with large epaulets , and he almost made the military salute to him . 
Not knowing what to write to his aunt , he decided not to write at all ; and it is probable that nothing would have resulted from the discovery made by Theodule as to the love affairs of Marius , if , by one of those mysterious arrangements which are so frequent in chance , the scene at Vernon had not had an almost immediate counter-shock at Paris . 
Marius returned from Vernon on the third day , in the middle of the morning , descended at his grandfather 's door , and , wearied by the two nights spent in the diligence , and feeling the need of repairing his loss of sleep by an hour at the swimming-school , he mounted rapidly to his chamber , took merely time enough to throw off his travelling-coat , and the black ribbon which he wore round his neck , and went off to the bath . 
M.Gillenormand , who had risen betimes like all old men in good health , had heard his entrance , and had made haste to climb , as quickly as his old legs permitted , the stairs to the upper story where Marius lived , in order to embrace him , and to question him while so doing , and to find out where he had been . 
But the youth had taken less time to descend than the old man had to ascend , and when Father Gillenormand entered the attic , Marius was no longer there . 
The bed had not been disturbed , and on the bed lay , outspread , but not defiantly the great-coat and the black ribbon . 
`` I like this better , '' said M. Gillenormand . 
And a moment later , he made his entrance into the salon , where Mademoiselle Gillenormand was already seated , busily embroidering her cart-wheels . 
The entrance was a triumphant one . 
M. Gillenormand held in one hand the great-coat , and in the other the neck-ribbon , and exclaimed : -- `` Victory ! 
We are about to penetrate the mystery ! 
We are going to learn the most minute details ; we are going to lay our finger on the debaucheries of our sly friend ! 
Here we have the romance itself . 
I have the portrait ! '' 
In fact , a case of black shagreen , resembling a medallion portrait , was suspended from the ribbon . 
The old man took this case and gazed at it for some time without opening it , with that air of enjoyment , rapture , and wrath , with which a poor hungry fellow beholds an admirable dinner which is not for him , pass under his very nose . 
`` For this evidently is a portrait . 
I know all about such things . 
That is worn tenderly on the heart . 
How stupid they are ! 
Some abominable fright that will make us shudder , probably ! 
Young men have such bad taste nowadays ! '' 
`` Let us see , father , '' said the old spinster . 
The case opened by the pressure of a spring . 
They found in it nothing but a carefully folded paper . 
`` From the same to the same , '' said M. Gillenormand , bursting with laughter . 
`` I know what it is . 
A billet-doux . '' 
`` Ah ! 
let us read it ! '' 
said the aunt . 
And she put on her spectacles . 
They unfolded the paper and read as follows : -- `` For my son . 
-- The Emperor made me a Baron on the battlefield of Waterloo . 
Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I purchased with my blood , my son shall take it and bear it . 
That he will be worthy of it is a matter of course . '' 
The feelings of father and daughter can not be described . 
They felt chilled as by the breath of a death 's - head . 
They did not exchange a word . 
Only , M. Gillenormand said in a low voice and as though speaking to himself : -- `` It is the slasher 's handwriting . '' 
The aunt examined the paper , turned it about in all directions , then put it back in its case . 
At the same moment a little oblong packet , enveloped in blue paper , fell from one of the pockets of the great-coat . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand picked it up and unfolded the blue paper . 
It contained Marius ' hundred cards . 
She handed one of them to M. Gillenormand , who read : Le Baron Marius Pontmercy . 
The old man rang the bell . 
Nicolette came . 
M. Gillenormand took the ribbon , the case , and the coat , flung them all on the floor in the middle of the room , and said : -- `` Carry those duds away . '' 
A full hour passed in the most profound silence . 
The old man and the old spinster had seated themselves with their backs to each other , and were thinking , each on his own account , the same things , in all probability . 
At the expiration of this hour , Aunt Gillenormand said : -- `` A pretty state of things ! '' 
A few moments later , Marius made his appearance . 
He entered . 
Even before he had crossed the threshold , he saw his grandfather holding one of his own cards in his hand , and on catching sight of him , the latter exclaimed with his air of bourgeois and grinning superiority which was something crushing : -- `` Well ! 
well ! 
well ! 
well ! 
well ! 
so you are a baron now . 
I present you my compliments . 
What is the meaning of this ? '' 
Marius reddened slightly and replied : -- `` It means that I am the son of my father . '' 
M. Gillenormand ceased to laugh , and said harshly : -- `` I am your father . '' 
`` My father , '' retorted Marius , with downcast eyes and a severe air , `` was a humble and heroic man , who served the Republic and France gloriously , who was great in the greatest history that men have ever made , who lived in the bivouac for a quarter of a century , beneath grape-shot and bullets , in snow and mud by day , beneath rain at night , who captured two flags , who received twenty wounds , who died forgotten and abandoned , and who never committed but one mistake , which was to love too fondly two ingrates , his country and myself . '' 
This was more than M. Gillenormand could bear to hear . 
At the word republic , he rose , or , to speak more correctly , he sprang to his feet . 
Every word that Marius had just uttered produced on the visage of the old Royalist the effect of the puffs of air from a forge upon a blazing brand . 
From a dull hue he had turned red , from red , purple , and from purple , flame-colored . 
`` Marius ! '' 
he cried . 
`` Abominable child ! 
I do not know what your father was ! 
I do not wish to know ! 
I know nothing about that , and I do not know him ! 
But what I do know is , that there never was anything but scoundrels among those men ! 
They were all rascals , assassins , red-caps , thieves ! 
I say all ! 
I say all ! 
I know not one ! 
I say all ! 
Do you hear me , Marius ! 
See here , you are no more a baron than my slipper is ! 
They were all bandits in the service of Robespierre ! 
All who served B-u-o-naparte were brigands ! 
They were all traitors who betrayed , betrayed , betrayed their legitimate king ! 
All cowards who fled before the Prussians and the English at Waterloo ! 
That is what I do know ! 
