I have seen some people . 
He will come here this evening at six o'clock . 
To bring sixty francs , the rascal ! 
Did you notice how I played that game on him , my sixty francs , my landlord , my fourth of February ? 
I do n't even owe for one quarter ! 
Is n't he a fool ! 
So he will come at six o'clock ! 
That 's the hour when our neighbor goes to his dinner . 
Mother Bougon is off washing dishes in the city . 
There 's not a soul in the house . 
The neighbor never comes home until eleven o'clock . 
The children shall stand on watch . 
You shall help us . 
He will give in . '' 
`` And what if he does not give in ? '' 
demanded his wife . 
Jondrette made a sinister gesture , and said : -- `` We 'll fix him . '' 
And he burst out laughing . 
This was the first time Marius had seen him laugh . 
The laugh was cold and sweet , and provoked a shudder . 
Jondrette opened a cupboard near the fireplace , and drew from it an old cap , which he placed on his head , after brushing it with his sleeve . 
`` Now , '' said he , `` I 'm going out . 
I have some more people that I must see . 
Good ones . 
You 'll see how well the whole thing will work . 
I shall be away as short a time as possible , it 's a fine stroke of business , do you look after the house . '' 
And with both fists thrust into the pockets of his trousers , he stood for a moment in thought , then exclaimed : -- `` Do you know , it 's mighty lucky , by the way , that he did n't recognize me ! 
If he had recognized me on his side , he would not have come back again . 
He would have slipped through our fingers ! 
It was my beard that saved us ! 
my romantic beard ! 
my pretty little romantic beard ! '' 
And again he broke into a laugh . 
He stepped to the window . 
The snow was still falling , and streaking the gray of the sky . 
`` What beastly weather ! '' 
said he . 
Then lapping his overcoat across his breast : -- `` This rind is too large for me . 
Never mind , '' he added , `` he did a devilish good thing in leaving it for me , the old scoundrel ! 
If it had n't been for that , I could n't have gone out , and everything would have gone wrong ! 
What small points things hang on , anyway ! '' 
And pulling his cap down over his eyes , he quitted the room . 
He had barely had time to take half a dozen steps from the door , when the door opened again , and his savage but intelligent face made its appearance once more in the opening . 
`` I came near forgetting , '' said he . 
`` You are to have a brazier of charcoal ready . '' 
And he flung into his wife 's apron the five-franc piece which the `` philanthropist '' had left with him . 
`` A brazier of charcoal ? '' 
asked his wife . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` How many bushels ? '' 
`` Two good ones . '' 
`` That will come to thirty sous . 
With the rest I will buy something for dinner . '' 
`` The devil , no . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Do n't go and spend the hundred-sou piece . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` Because I shall have to buy something , too . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` Something . '' 
`` How much shall you need ? '' 
`` Whereabouts in the neighborhood is there an ironmonger 's shop ? '' 
`` Rue Mouffetard . '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , at the corner of a street ; I can see the shop . '' 
`` But tell me how much you will need for what you have to purchase ? '' 
`` Fifty sous -- three francs . '' 
`` There wo n't be much left for dinner . '' 
`` Eating is not the point to-day . 
There 's something better to be done . '' 
`` That 's enough , my jewel . '' 
At this word from his wife , Jondrette closed the door again , and this time , Marius heard his step die away in the corridor of the hovel , and descend the staircase rapidly . 
At that moment , one o'clock struck from the church of Saint-Medard . 
SOLUS CUM SOLO , IN LOCO REMOTO , NON COGITABUNTUR ORARE PATER NOSTER Marius , dreamer as he was , was , as we have said , firm and energetic by nature . 
His habits of solitary meditation , while they had developed in him sympathy and compassion , had , perhaps , diminished the faculty for irritation , but had left intact the power of waxing indignant ; he had the kindliness of a brahmin , and the severity of a judge ; he took pity upon a toad , but he crushed a viper . 
Now , it was into a hole of vipers that his glance had just been directed , it was a nest of monsters that he had beneath his eyes . 
`` These wretches must be stamped upon , '' said he . 
Not one of the enigmas which he had hoped to see solved had been elucidated ; on the contrary , all of them had been rendered more dense , if anything ; he knew nothing more about the beautiful maiden of the Luxembourg and the man whom he called M. Leblanc , except that Jondrette was acquainted with them . 
Athwart the mysterious words which had been uttered , the only thing of which he caught a distinct glimpse was the fact that an ambush was in course of preparation , a dark but terrible trap ; that both of them were incurring great danger , she probably , her father certainly ; that they must be saved ; that the hideous plots of the Jondrettes must be thwarted , and the web of these spiders broken . 
He scanned the female Jondrette for a moment . 
She had pulled an old sheet-iron stove from a corner , and she was rummaging among the old heap of iron . 
He descended from the commode as softly as possible , taking care not to make the least noise . 
Amid his terror as to what was in preparation , and in the horror with which the Jondrettes had inspired him , he experienced a sort of joy at the idea that it might be granted to him perhaps to render a service to the one whom he loved . 
But how was it to be done ? 
How warn the persons threatened ? 
He did not know their address . 
They had reappeared for an instant before his eyes , and had then plunged back again into the immense depths of Paris . 
Should he wait for M. Leblanc at the door that evening at six o'clock , at the moment of his arrival , and warn him of the trap ? 
But Jondrette and his men would see him on the watch , the spot was lonely , they were stronger than he , they would devise means to seize him or to get him away , and the man whom Marius was anxious to save would be lost . 
One o'clock had just struck , the trap was to be sprung at six . 
Marius had five hours before him . 
There was but one thing to be done . 
He put on his decent coat , knotted a silk handkerchief round his neck , took his hat , and went out , without making any more noise than if he had been treading on moss with bare feet . 
Moreover , the Jondrette woman continued to rummage among her old iron . 
Once outside of the house , he made for the Rue du Petit-Banquier . 
He had almost reached the middle of this street , near a very low wall which a man can easily step over at certain points , and which abuts on a waste space , and was walking slowly , in consequence of his preoccupied condition , and the snow deadened the sound of his steps ; all at once he heard voices talking very close by . 
He turned his head , the street was deserted , there was not a soul in it , it was broad daylight , and yet he distinctly heard voices . 
It occurred to him to glance over the wall which he was skirting . 
There , in fact , sat two men , flat on the snow , with their backs against the wall , talking together in subdued tones . 
These two persons were strangers to him ; one was a bearded man in a blouse , and the other a long-haired individual in rags . 
