Then he entered through a gap in the fence into the elephant 's enclosure and helped the young ones to clamber through the breach . 
The two children , somewhat frightened , followed Gavroche without uttering a word , and confided themselves to this little Providence in rags which had given them bread and had promised them a shelter . 
There , extended along the fence , lay a ladder which by day served the laborers in the neighboring timber-yard . 
Gavroche raised it with remarkable vigor , and placed it against one of the elephant 's forelegs . 
Near the point where the ladder ended , a sort of black hole in the belly of the colossus could be distinguished . 
Gavroche pointed out the ladder and the hole to his guests , and said to them : -- `` Climb up and go in . '' 
The two little boys exchanged terrified glances . 
`` You 're afraid , brats ! '' 
exclaimed Gavroche . 
And he added : -- `` You shall see ! '' 
He clasped the rough leg of the elephant , and in a twinkling , without deigning to make use of the ladder , he had reached the aperture . 
He entered it as an adder slips through a crevice , and disappeared within , and an instant later , the two children saw his head , which looked pale , appear vaguely , on the edge of the shadowy hole , like a wan and whitish spectre . 
`` Well ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` climb up , young ` uns ! 
You 'll see how snug it is here ! 
Come up , you ! '' 
he said to the elder , `` I 'll lend you a hand . '' 
The little fellows nudged each other , the gamin frightened and inspired them with confidence at one and the same time , and then , it was raining very hard . 
The elder one undertook the risk . 
The younger , on seeing his brother climbing up , and himself left alone between the paws of this huge beast , felt greatly inclined to cry , but he did not dare . 
The elder lad climbed , with uncertain steps , up the rungs of the ladder ; Gavroche , in the meanwhile , encouraging him with exclamations like a fencing-master to his pupils , or a muleteer to his mules . 
`` Do n't be afraid ! 
-- That 's it ! 
-- Come on ! 
-- Put your feet there ! 
-- Give us your hand here ! 
-- Boldly ! '' 
And when the child was within reach , he seized him suddenly and vigorously by the arm , and pulled him towards him . 
`` Nabbed ! '' 
said he . 
The brat had passed through the crack . 
`` Now , '' said Gavroche , `` wait for me . 
Be so good as to take a seat , Monsieur . '' 
And making his way out of the hole as he had entered it , he slipped down the elephant 's leg with the agility of a monkey , landed on his feet in the grass , grasped the child of five round the body , and planted him fairly in the middle of the ladder , then he began to climb up behind him , shouting to the elder : -- `` I 'm going to boost him , do you tug . '' 
And in another instant , the small lad was pushed , dragged , pulled , thrust , stuffed into the hole , before he had time to recover himself , and Gavroche , entering behind him , and repulsing the ladder with a kick which sent it flat on the grass , began to clap his hands and to cry : -- `` Here we are ! 
Long live General Lafayette ! '' 
This explosion over , he added : -- `` Now , young ` uns , you are in my house . '' 
Gavroche was at home , in fact . 
Oh , unforeseen utility of the useless ! 
Charity of great things ! 
Goodness of giants ! 
This huge monument , which had embodied an idea of the Emperor 's , had become the box of a street urchin . 
The brat had been accepted and sheltered by the colossus . 
The bourgeois decked out in their Sunday finery who passed the elephant of the Bastille , were fond of saying as they scanned it disdainfully with their prominent eyes : `` What 's the good of that ? '' 
It served to save from the cold , the frost , the hail , and rain , to shelter from the winds of winter , to preserve from slumber in the mud which produces fever , and from slumber in the snow which produces death , a little being who had no father , no mother , no bread , no clothes , no refuge . 
It served to receive the innocent whom society repulsed . 
It served to diminish public crime . 
It was a lair open to one against whom all doors were shut . 
It seemed as though the miserable old mastodon , invaded by vermin and oblivion , covered with warts , with mould , and ulcers , tottering , worm-eaten , abandoned , condemned , a sort of mendicant colossus , asking alms in vain with a benevolent look in the midst of the cross-roads , had taken pity on that other mendicant , the poor pygmy , who roamed without shoes to his feet , without a roof over his head , blowing on his fingers , clad in rags , fed on rejected scraps . 
That was what the elephant of the Bastille was good for . 
This idea of Napoleon , disdained by men , had been taken back by God . 
That which had been merely illustrious , had become august . 
In order to realize his thought , the Emperor should have had porphyry , brass , iron , gold , marble ; the old collection of planks , beams and plaster sufficed for God . 
The Emperor had had the dream of a genius ; in that Titanic elephant , armed , prodigious , with trunk uplifted , bearing its tower and scattering on all sides its merry and vivifying waters , he wished to incarnate the people . 
God had done a grander thing with it , he had lodged a child there . 
The hole through which Gavroche had entered was a breach which was hardly visible from the outside , being concealed , as we have stated , beneath the elephant 's belly , and so narrow that it was only cats and homeless children who could pass through it . 
`` Let 's begin , '' said Gavroche , `` by telling the porter that we are not at home . '' 
And plunging into the darkness with the assurance of a person who is well acquainted with his apartments , he took a plank and stopped up the aperture . 
Again Gavroche plunged into the obscurity . 
The children heard the crackling of the match thrust into the phosphoric bottle . 
The chemical match was not yet in existence ; at that epoch the Fumade steel represented progress . 
A sudden light made them blink ; Gavroche had just managed to ignite one of those bits of cord dipped in resin which are called cellar rats . 
The cellar rat , which emitted more smoke than light , rendered the interior of the elephant confusedly visible . 
Gavroche 's two guests glanced about them , and the sensation which they experienced was something like that which one would feel if shut up in the great tun of Heidelberg , or , better still , like what Jonah must have felt in the biblical belly of the whale . 
An entire and gigantic skeleton appeared enveloping them . 
Above , a long brown beam , whence started at regular distances , massive , arching ribs , represented the vertebral column with its sides , stalactites of plaster depended from them like entrails , and vast spiders ' webs stretching from side to side , formed dirty diaphragms . 
Here and there , in the corners , were visible large blackish spots which had the appearance of being alive , and which changed places rapidly with an abrupt and frightened movement . 
Fragments which had fallen from the elephant 's back into his belly had filled up the cavity , so that it was possible to walk upon it as on a floor . 
The smaller child nestled up against his brother , and whispered to him : -- `` It 's black . '' 
This remark drew an exclamation from Gavroche . 
The petrified air of the two brats rendered some shock necessary . 
`` What 's that you are gabbling about there ? '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` Are you scoffing at me ? 
Are you turning up your noses ? 
Do you want the tuileries ? 
Are you brutes ? 
Come , say ! 
I warn you that I do n't belong to the regiment of simpletons . 
Ah , come now , are you brats from the Pope 's establishment ? '' 
A little roughness is good in cases of fear . 
It is reassuring . 
The two children drew close to Gavroche . 
Gavroche , paternally touched by this confidence , passed from grave to gentle , and addressing the smaller : -- `` Stupid , '' said he , accenting the insulting word , with a caressing intonation , `` it 's outside that it is black . 
Outside it 's raining , here it does not rain ; outside it 's cold , here there 's not an atom of wind ; outside there are heaps of people , here there 's no one ; outside there ai n't even the moon , here there 's my candle , confound it ! '' 
The two children began to look upon the apartment with less terror ; but Gavroche allowed them no more time for contemplation . 
`` Quick , '' said he . 
And he pushed them towards what we are very glad to be able to call the end of the room . 
There stood his bed . 
Gavroche 's bed was complete ; that is to say , it had a mattress , a blanket , and an alcove with curtains . 
The mattress was a straw mat , the blanket a rather large strip of gray woollen stuff , very warm and almost new . 
This is what the alcove consisted of : -- Three rather long poles , thrust into and consolidated , with the rubbish which formed the floor , that is to say , the belly of the elephant , two in front and one behind , and united by a rope at their summits , so as to form a pyramidal bundle . 
This cluster supported a trellis-work of brass wire which was simply placed upon it , but artistically applied , and held by fastenings of iron wire , so that it enveloped all three holes . 
A row of very heavy stones kept this network down to the floor so that nothing could pass under it . 
This grating was nothing else than a piece of the brass screens with which aviaries are covered in menageries . 
Gavroche 's bed stood as in a cage , behind this net . 
The whole resembled an Esquimaux tent . 
This trellis-work took the place of curtains . 
Gavroche moved aside the stones which fastened the net down in front , and the two folds of the net which lapped over each other fell apart . 
`` Down on all fours , brats ! '' 
