said Madame Thenardier , `` if the beast has not been watered , it must be . '' 
Then glancing about her : -- `` Well , now ! 
Where 's that other beast ? '' 
She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end of the table , almost under the drinkers ' feet . 
`` Are you coming ? '' 
shrieked Madame Thenardier . 
Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hidden herself . 
The Thenardier resumed : -- `` Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name , go and water that horse . '' 
`` But , Madame , '' said Cosette , feebly , `` there is no water . '' 
The Thenardier threw the street door wide open : -- `` Well , go and get some , then ! '' 
Cosette dropped her head , and went for an empty bucket which stood near the chimney-corner . 
This bucket was bigger than she was , and the child could have set down in it at her ease . 
The Thenardier returned to her stove , and tasted what was in the stewpan , with a wooden spoon , grumbling the while : -- `` There 's plenty in the spring . 
There never was such a malicious creature as that . 
I think I should have done better to strain my onions . '' 
Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous , pepper , and shallots . 
`` See here , Mam ` selle Toad , '' she added , `` on your way back , you will get a big loaf from the baker . 
Here 's a fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron ; she took the coin without saying a word , and put it in that pocket . 
Then she stood motionless , bucket in hand , the open door before her . 
She seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue . 
`` Get along with you ! '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
Cosette went out . 
The door closed behind her . 
ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL The line of open-air booths starting at the church , extended , as the reader will remember , as far as the hostelry of the Thenardiers . 
These booths were all illuminated , because the citizens would soon pass on their way to the midnight mass , with candles burning in paper funnels , which , as the schoolmaster , then seated at the table at the Thenardiers ' observed , produced `` a magical effect . '' 
In compensation , not a star was visible in the sky . 
The last of these stalls , established precisely opposite the Thenardiers ' door , was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel , glass , and magnificent objects of tin . 
In the first row , and far forwards , the merchant had placed on a background of white napkins , an immense doll , nearly two feet high , who was dressed in a robe of pink crepe , with gold wheat-ears on her head , which had real hair and enamel eyes . 
All that day , this marvel had been displayed to the wonderment of all passers-by under ten years of age , without a mother being found in Montfermeil sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to her child . 
Eponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it , and Cosette herself had ventured to cast a glance at it , on the sly , it is true . 
At the moment when Cosette emerged , bucket in hand , melancholy and overcome as she was , she could not refrain from lifting her eyes to that wonderful doll , towards the lady , as she called it . 
The poor child paused in amazement . 
She had not yet beheld that doll close to . 
The whole shop seemed a palace to her : the doll was not a doll ; it was a vision . 
It was joy , splendor , riches , happiness , which appeared in a sort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little being so profoundly engulfed in gloomy and chilly misery . 
With the sad and innocent sagacity of childhood , Cosette measured the abyss which separated her from that doll . 
She said to herself that one must be a queen , or at least a princess , to have a `` thing '' like that . 
She gazed at that beautiful pink dress , that beautiful smooth hair , and she thought , `` How happy that doll must be ! '' 
She could not take her eyes from that fantastic stall . 
The more she looked , the more dazzled she grew . 
She thought she was gazing at paradise . 
There were other dolls behind the large one , which seemed to her to be fairies and genii . 
The merchant , who was pacing back and forth in front of his shop , produced on her somewhat the effect of being the Eternal Father . 
In this adoration she forgot everything , even the errand with which she was charged . 
All at once the Thenardier 's coarse voice recalled her to reality : `` What , you silly jade ! 
you have not gone ? 
Wait ! 
I 'll give it to you ! 
I want to know what you are doing there ! 
Get along , you little monster ! '' 
The Thenardier had cast a glance into the street , and had caught sight of Cosette in her ecstasy . 
Cosette fled , dragging her pail , and taking the longest strides of which she was capable . 
THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE As the Thenardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is near the church , it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of Chelles that Cosette was obliged to go for her water . 
She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant . 
So long as she was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church , the lighted stalls illuminated the road ; but soon the last light from the last stall vanished . 
The poor child found herself in the dark . 
She plunged into it . 
Only , as a certain emotion overcame her , she made as much motion as possible with the handle of the bucket as she walked along . 
This made a noise which afforded her company . 
The further she went , the denser the darkness became . 
There was no one in the streets . 
However , she did encounter a woman , who turned around on seeing her , and stood still , muttering between her teeth : `` Where can that child be going ? 
Is it a werewolf child ? '' 
Then the woman recognized Cosette . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` it 's the Lark ! '' 
In this manner Cosette traversed the labyrinth of tortuous and deserted streets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side of Chelles . 
So long as she had the houses or even the walls only on both sides of her path , she proceeded with tolerable boldness . 
From time to time she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of a shutter -- this was light and life ; there were people there , and it reassured her . 
But in proportion as she advanced , her pace slackened mechanically , as it were . 
When she had passed the corner of the last house , Cosette paused . 
It had been hard to advance further than the last stall ; it became impossible to proceed further than the last house . 
She set her bucket on the ground , thrust her hand into her hair , and began slowly to scratch her head , -- a gesture peculiar to children when terrified and undecided what to do . 
It was no longer Montfermeil ; it was the open fields . 
Black and desert space was before her . 
She gazed in despair at that darkness , where there was no longer any one , where there were beasts , where there were spectres , possibly . 
She took a good look , and heard the beasts walking on the grass , and she distinctly saw spectres moving in the trees . 
Then she seized her bucket again ; fear had lent her audacity . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said she ; `` I will tell him that there was no more water ! '' 
And she resolutely re-entered Montfermeil . 
Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began to scratch her head again . 
Now it was the Thenardier who appeared to her , with her hideous , hyena mouth , and wrath flashing in her eyes . 
The child cast a melancholy glance before her and behind her . 
What was she to do ? 
What was to become of her ? 
Where was she to go ? 
In front of her was the spectre of the Thenardier ; behind her all the phantoms of the night and of the forest . 
It was before the Thenardier that she recoiled . 
She resumed her path to the spring , and began to run . 
She emerged from the village , she entered the forest at a run , no longer looking at or listening to anything . 
She only paused in her course when her breath failed her ; but she did not halt in her advance . 
She went straight before her in desperation . 
As she ran she felt like crying . 
The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely . 
She no longer thought , she no longer saw . 
The immensity of night was facing this tiny creature . 
On the one hand , all shadow ; on the other , an atom . 
It was only seven or eight minutes ' walk from the edge of the woods to the spring . 
