He who has not been a stubborn accuser in prosperity should hold his peace in the face of ruin . 
The denunciator of success is the only legitimate executioner of the fall . 
As for us , when Providence intervenes and strikes , we let it work . 
1812 commenced to disarm us . 
In 1813 the cowardly breach of silence of that taciturn legislative body , emboldened by catastrophe , possessed only traits which aroused indignation . 
And it was a crime to applaud , in 1814 , in the presence of those marshals who betrayed ; in the presence of that senate which passed from one dunghill to another , insulting after having deified ; in the presence of that idolatry which was loosing its footing and spitting on its idol , -- it was a duty to turn aside the head . 
In 1815 , when the supreme disasters filled the air , when France was seized with a shiver at their sinister approach , when Waterloo could be dimly discerned opening before Napoleon , the mournful acclamation of the army and the people to the condemned of destiny had nothing laughable in it , and , after making all allowance for the despot , a heart like that of the Bishop of D -- , ought not perhaps to have failed to recognize the august and touching features presented by the embrace of a great nation and a great man on the brink of the abyss . 
With this exception , he was in all things just , true , equitable , intelligent , humble and dignified , beneficent and kindly , which is only another sort of benevolence . 
He was a priest , a sage , and a man . 
It must be admitted , that even in the political views with which we have just reproached him , and which we are disposed to judge almost with severity , he was tolerant and easy , more so , perhaps , than we who are speaking here . 
The porter of the town-hall had been placed there by the Emperor . 
He was an old non-commissioned officer of the old guard , a member of the Legion of Honor at Austerlitz , as much of a Bonapartist as the eagle . 
This poor fellow occasionally let slip inconsiderate remarks , which the law then stigmatized as seditious speeches . 
After the imperial profile disappeared from the Legion of Honor , he never dressed himself in his regimentals , as he said , so that he should not be obliged to wear his cross . 
He had himself devoutly removed the imperial effigy from the cross which Napoleon had given him ; this made a hole , and he would not put anything in its place . 
`` I will die , '' he said , `` rather than wear the three frogs upon my heart ! '' 
He liked to scoff aloud at Louis XVIII . 
`` The gouty old creature in English gaiters ! '' 
he said ; `` let him take himself off to Prussia with that queue of his . '' 
He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the two things which he most detested , Prussia and England . 
He did it so often that he lost his place . 
There he was , turned out of the house , with his wife and children , and without bread . 
The Bishop sent for him , reproved him gently , and appointed him beadle in the cathedral . 
In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had , by dint of holy deeds and gentle manners , filled the town of D -- with a sort of tender and filial reverence . 
Even his conduct towards Napoleon had been accepted and tacitly pardoned , as it were , by the people , the good and weakly flock who adored their emperor , but loved their bishop . 
THE SOLITUDE OF MONSEIGNEUR WELCOME A bishop is almost always surrounded by a full squadron of little abbes , just as a general is by a covey of young officers . 
This is what that charming Saint Francois de Sales calls somewhere `` les pretres blancs-becs , '' callow priests . 
Every career has its aspirants , who form a train for those who have attained eminence in it . 
There is no power which has not its dependents . 
There is no fortune which has not its court . 
The seekers of the future eddy around the splendid present . 
Every metropolis has its staff of officials . 
Every bishop who possesses the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the seminary , which goes the round , and maintains good order in the episcopal palace , and mounts guard over monseigneur 's smile . 
To please a bishop is equivalent to getting one 's foot in the stirrup for a sub-diaconate . 
It is necessary to walk one 's path discreetly ; the apostleship does not disdain the canonship . 
Just as there are bigwigs elsewhere , there are big mitres in the Church . 
These are the bishops who stand well at Court , who are rich , well endowed , skilful , accepted by the world , who know how to pray , no doubt , but who know also how to beg , who feel little scruple at making a whole diocese dance attendance in their person , who are connecting links between the sacristy and diplomacy , who are abbes rather than priests , prelates rather than bishops . 
Happy those who approach them ! 
Being persons of influence , they create a shower about them , upon the assiduous and the favored , and upon all the young men who understand the art of pleasing , of large parishes , prebends , archidiaconates , chaplaincies , and cathedral posts , while awaiting episcopal honors . 
As they advance themselves , they cause their satellites to progress also ; it is a whole solar system on the march . 
Their radiance casts a gleam of purple over their suite . 
Their prosperity is crumbled up behind the scenes , into nice little promotions . 
The larger the diocese of the patron , the fatter the curacy for the favorite . 
And then , there is Rome . 
A bishop who understands how to become an archbishop , an archbishop who knows how to become a cardinal , carries you with him as conclavist ; you enter a court of papal jurisdiction , you receive the pallium , and behold ! 
you are an auditor , then a papal chamberlain , then monsignor , and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step , and between the Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot . 
Every skull-cap may dream of the tiara . 
The priest is nowadays the only man who can become a king in a regular manner ; and what a king ! 
the supreme king . 
Then what a nursery of aspirations is a seminary ! 
How many blushing choristers , how many youthful abbes bear on their heads Perrette 's pot of milk ! 
Who knows how easy it is for ambition to call itself vocation ? 
in good faith , perchance , and deceiving itself , devotee that it is . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu , poor , humble , retiring , was not accounted among the big mitres . 
This was plain from the complete absence of young priests about him . 
We have seen that he `` did not take '' in Paris . 
Not a single future dreamed of engrafting itself on this solitary old man . 
Not a single sprouting ambition committed the folly of putting forth its foliage in his shadow . 
His canons and grand-vicars were good old men , rather vulgar like himself , walled up like him in this diocese , without exit to a cardinalship , and who resembled their bishop , with this difference , that they were finished and he was completed . 
The impossibility of growing great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so well understood , that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the seminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix or of Auch , and went off in a great hurry . 
For , in short , we repeat it , men wish to be pushed . 
A saint who dwells in a paroxysm of abnegation is a dangerous neighbor ; he might communicate to you , by contagion , an incurable poverty , an anchylosis of the joints , which are useful in advancement , and in short , more renunciation than you desire ; and this infectious virtue is avoided . 
Hence the isolation of Monseigneur Bienvenu . 
We live in the midst of a gloomy society . 
Success ; that is the lesson which falls drop by drop from the slope of corruption . 
Be it said in passing , that success is a very hideous thing . 
Its false resemblance to merit deceives men . 
For the masses , success has almost the same profile as supremacy . 
Success , that Menaechmus of talent , has one dupe , -- history . 
Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it . 
In our day , a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its service , wears the livery of success , and performs the service of its antechamber . 
Succeed : theory . 
Prosperity argues capacity . 
Win in the lottery , and behold ! 
you are a clever man . 
He who triumphs is venerated . 
Be born with a silver spoon in your mouth ! 
everything lies in that . 
Be lucky , and you will have all the rest ; be happy , and people will think you great . 
Outside of five or six immense exceptions , which compose the splendor of a century , contemporary admiration is nothing but short-sightedness . 
Gilding is gold . 
It does no harm to be the first arrival by pure chance , so long as you do arrive . 
The common herd is an old Narcissus who adores himself , and who applauds the vulgar herd . 
That enormous ability by virtue of which one is Moses , Aeschylus , Dante , Michael Angelo , or Napoleon , the multitude awards on the spot , and by acclamation , to whomsoever attains his object , in whatsoever it may consist . 
Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy : let a false Corneille compose Tiridate ; let a eunuch come to possess a harem ; let a military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch ; let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the Sambre-and-Meuse , and construct for himself , out of this cardboard , sold as leather , four hundred thousand francs of income ; let a pork-packer espouse usury , and cause it to bring forth seven or eight millions , of which he is the father and of which it is the mother ; let a preacher become a bishop by force of his nasal drawl ; let the steward of a fine family be so rich on retiring from service that he is made minister of finances , -- and men call that Genius , just as they call the face of Mousqueton Beauty , and the mien of Claude Majesty . 
With the constellations of space they confound the stars of the abyss which are made in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks . 
WHAT HE BELIEVED We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D -- on the score of orthodoxy . 
In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood but respect . 
The conscience of the just man should be accepted on his word . 
Moreover , certain natures being given , we admit the possible development of all beauties of human virtue in a belief that differs from our own . 
What did he think of this dogma , or of that mystery ? 
These secrets of the inner tribunal of the conscience are known only to the tomb , where souls enter naked . 
The point on which we are certain is , that the difficulties of faith never resolved themselves into hypocrisy in his case . 
No decay is possible to the diamond . 
He believed to the extent of his powers . 
`` Credo in Patrem , '' he often exclaimed . 
Moreover , he drew from good works that amount of satisfaction which suffices to the conscience , and which whispers to a man , `` Thou art with God ! '' 
The point which we consider it our duty to note is , that outside of and beyond his faith , as it were , the Bishop possessed an excess of love . 
In was in that quarter , quia multum amavit , -- because he loved much -- that he was regarded as vulnerable by `` serious men , '' `` grave persons '' and `` reasonable people '' ; favorite locutions of our sad world where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry . 
What was this excess of love ? 
