On the following day the Toulon newspaper printed these lines : -- `` Nov. 17 , 1823 . 
Yesterday , a convict belonging to the detachment on board of the Orion , on his return from rendering assistance to a sailor , fell into the sea and was drowned . 
The body has not yet been found ; it is supposed that it is entangled among the piles of the Arsenal point : this man was committed under the number 9,430 , and his name was Jean Valjean . '' 
THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL Montfermeil is situated between Livry and Chelles , on the southern edge of that lofty table-land which separates the Ourcq from the Marne . 
At the present day it is a tolerably large town , ornamented all the year through with plaster villas , and on Sundays with beaming bourgeois . 
In 1823 there were at Montfermeil neither so many white houses nor so many well-satisfied citizens : it was only a village in the forest . 
Some pleasure-houses of the last century were to be met with there , to be sure , which were recognizable by their grand air , their balconies in twisted iron , and their long windows , whose tiny panes cast all sorts of varying shades of green on the white of the closed shutters ; but Montfermeil was none the less a village . 
Retired cloth-merchants and rusticating attorneys had not discovered it as yet ; it was a peaceful and charming place , which was not on the road to anywhere : there people lived , and cheaply , that peasant rustic life which is so bounteous and so easy ; only , water was rare there , on account of the elevation of the plateau . 
It was necessary to fetch it from a considerable distance ; the end of the village towards Gagny drew its water from the magnificent ponds which exist in the woods there . 
The other end , which surrounds the church and which lies in the direction of Chelles , found drinking-water only at a little spring half-way down the slope , near the road to Chelles , about a quarter of an hour from Montfermeil . 
Thus each household found it hard work to keep supplied with water . 
The large houses , the aristocracy , of which the Thenardier tavern formed a part , paid half a farthing a bucketful to a man who made a business of it , and who earned about eight sous a day in his enterprise of supplying Montfermeil with water ; but this good man only worked until seven o'clock in the evening in summer , and five in winter ; and night once come and the shutters on the ground floor once closed , he who had no water to drink went to fetch it for himself or did without it . 
This constituted the terror of the poor creature whom the reader has probably not forgotten , -- little Cosette . 
It will be remembered that Cosette was useful to the Thenardiers in two ways : they made the mother pay them , and they made the child serve them . 
So when the mother ceased to pay altogether , the reason for which we have read in preceding chapters , the Thenardiers kept Cosette . 
She took the place of a servant in their house . 
In this capacity she it was who ran to fetch water when it was required . 
So the child , who was greatly terrified at the idea of going to the spring at night , took great care that water should never be lacking in the house . 
Christmas of the year 1823 was particularly brilliant at Montfermeil . 
The beginning of the winter had been mild ; there had been neither snow nor frost up to that time . 
Some mountebanks from Paris had obtained permission of the mayor to erect their booths in the principal street of the village , and a band of itinerant merchants , under protection of the same tolerance , had constructed their stalls on the Church Square , and even extended them into Boulanger Alley , where , as the reader will perhaps remember , the Thenardiers ' hostelry was situated . 
These people filled the inns and drinking-shops , and communicated to that tranquil little district a noisy and joyous life . 
In order to play the part of a faithful historian , we ought even to add that , among the curiosities displayed in the square , there was a menagerie , in which frightful clowns , clad in rags and coming no one knew whence , exhibited to the peasants of Montfermeil in 1823 one of those horrible Brazilian vultures , such as our Royal Museum did not possess until 1845 , and which have a tricolored cockade for an eye . 
I believe that naturalists call this bird Caracara Polyborus ; it belongs to the order of the Apicides , and to the family of the vultures . 
Some good old Bonapartist soldiers , who had retired to the village , went to see this creature with great devotion . 
The mountebanks gave out that the tricolored cockade was a unique phenomenon made by God expressly for their menagerie . 
On Christmas eve itself , a number of men , carters , and peddlers , were seated at table , drinking and smoking around four or five candles in the public room of Thenardier 's hostelry . 
This room resembled all drinking-shop rooms , -- tables , pewter jugs , bottles , drinkers , smokers ; but little light and a great deal of noise . 
The date of the year 1823 was indicated , nevertheless , by two objects which were then fashionable in the bourgeois class : to wit , a kaleidoscope and a lamp of ribbed tin . 
The female Thenardier was attending to the supper , which was roasting in front of a clear fire ; her husband was drinking with his customers and talking politics . 
Besides political conversations which had for their principal subjects the Spanish war and M. le Duc d'Angouleme , strictly local parentheses , like the following , were audible amid the uproar : -- `` About Nanterre and Suresnes the vines have flourished greatly . 
When ten pieces were reckoned on there have been twelve . 
They have yielded a great deal of juice under the press . '' 
`` But the grapes can not be ripe ? '' 
`` In those parts the grapes should not be ripe ; the wine turns oily as soon as spring comes . '' 
`` Then it is very thin wine ? '' 
`` There are wines poorer even than these . 
The grapes must be gathered while green . '' 
Etc. . 
Or a miller would call out : -- `` Are we responsible for what is in the sacks ? 
We find in them a quantity of small seed which we can not sift out , and which we are obliged to send through the mill-stones ; there are tares , fennel , vetches , hempseed , fox-tail , and a host of other weeds , not to mention pebbles , which abound in certain wheat , especially in Breton wheat . 
I am not fond of grinding Breton wheat , any more than long-sawyers like to saw beams with nails in them . 
You can judge of the bad dust that makes in grinding . 
And then people complain of the flour . 
They are in the wrong . 
The flour is no fault of ours . '' 
In a space between two windows a mower , who was seated at table with a landed proprietor who was fixing on a price for some meadow work to be performed in the spring , was saying : -- `` It does no harm to have the grass wet . 
It cuts better . 
Dew is a good thing , sir . 
It makes no difference with that grass . 
Your grass is young and very hard to cut still . 
It 's terribly tender . 
It yields before the iron . '' 
Etc. . 
Cosette was in her usual place , seated on the cross-bar of the kitchen table near the chimney . 
She was in rags ; her bare feet were thrust into wooden shoes , and by the firelight she was engaged in knitting woollen stockings destined for the young Thenardiers . 
A very young kitten was playing about among the chairs . 
Laughter and chatter were audible in the adjoining room , from two fresh children 's voices : it was Eponine and Azelma . 
In the chimney-corner a cat-o ' - nine-tails was hanging on a nail . 
At intervals the cry of a very young child , which was somewhere in the house , rang through the noise of the dram-shop . 
It was a little boy who had been born to the Thenardiers during one of the preceding winters , -- `` she did not know why , '' she said , `` the result of the cold , '' -- and who was a little more than three years old . 
The mother had nursed him , but she did not love him . 
When the persistent clamor of the brat became too annoying , `` Your son is squalling , '' Thenardier would say ; `` do go and see what he wants . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
the mother would reply , `` he bothers me . '' 
And the neglected child continued to shriek in the dark . 
TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS So far in this book the Thenardiers have been viewed only in profile ; the moment has arrived for making the circuit of this couple , and considering it under all its aspects . 
Thenardier had just passed his fiftieth birthday ; Madame Thenardier was approaching her forties , which is equivalent to fifty in a woman ; so that there existed a balance of age between husband and wife . 
Our readers have possibly preserved some recollection of this Thenardier woman , ever since her first appearance , -- tall , blond , red , fat , angular , square , enormous , and agile ; she belonged , as we have said , to the race of those colossal wild women , who contort themselves at fairs with paving-stones hanging from their hair . 
She did everything about the house , -- made the beds , did the washing , the cooking , and everything else . 
Cosette was her only servant ; a mouse in the service of an elephant . 
Everything trembled at the sound of her voice , -- window panes , furniture , and people . 
Her big face , dotted with red blotches , presented the appearance of a skimmer . 
She had a beard . 
She was an ideal market-porter dressed in woman 's clothes . 
She swore splendidly ; she boasted of being able to crack a nut with one blow of her fist . 
Except for the romances which she had read , and which made the affected lady peep through the ogress at times , in a very queer way , the idea would never have occurred to any one to say of her , `` That is a woman . '' 
This Thenardier female was like the product of a wench engrafted on a fishwife . 
When one heard her speak , one said , `` That is a gendarme '' ; when one saw her drink , one said , `` That is a carter '' ; when one saw her handle Cosette , one said , `` That is the hangman . '' 
One of her teeth projected when her face was in repose . 
Thenardier was a small , thin , pale , angular , bony , feeble man , who had a sickly air and who was wonderfully healthy . 
His cunning began here ; he smiled habitually , by way of precaution , and was almost polite to everybody , even to the beggar to whom he refused half a farthing . 
He had the glance of a pole-cat and the bearing of a man of letters . 
He greatly resembled the portraits of the Abbe Delille . 
His coquetry consisted in drinking with the carters . 
No one had ever succeeded in rendering him drunk . 
He smoked a big pipe . 
He wore a blouse , and under his blouse an old black coat . 
He made pretensions to literature and to materialism . 
There were certain names which he often pronounced to support whatever things he might be saying , -- Voltaire , Raynal , Parny , and , singularly enough , Saint Augustine . 
He declared that he had `` a system . '' 
In addition , he was a great swindler . 
A filousophe -LSB- philosophe -RSB- , a scientific thief . 
The species does exist . 
It will be remembered that he pretended to have served in the army ; he was in the habit of relating with exuberance , how , being a sergeant in the 6th or the 9th light something or other , at Waterloo , he had alone , and in the presence of a squadron of death-dealing hussars , covered with his body and saved from death , in the midst of the grape-shot , `` a general , who had been dangerously wounded . '' 
Thence arose for his wall the flaring sign , and for his inn the name which it bore in the neighborhood , of `` the cabaret of the Sergeant of Waterloo . '' 
He was a liberal , a classic , and a Bonapartist . 
He had subscribed for the Champ d'Asile . 
It was said in the village that he had studied for the priesthood . 
We believe that he had simply studied in Holland for an inn-keeper . 
