Was this an accomplished fact ? 
Did the acceptance of that man form a part of the marriage now consummated ? 
Was there nothing to be done ? 
Had Marius wedded the convict as well ? 
In vain may one be crowned with light and joy , in vain may one taste the grand purple hour of life , happy love , such shocks would force even the archangel in his ecstasy , even the demigod in his glory , to shudder . 
As is always the case in changes of view of this nature , Marius asked himself whether he had nothing with which to reproach himself . 
Had he been wanting in divination ? 
Had he been wanting in prudence ? 
Had he involuntarily dulled his wits ? 
A little , perhaps . 
Had he entered upon this love affair , which had ended in his marriage to Cosette , without taking sufficient precautions to throw light upon the surroundings ? 
He admitted , -- it is thus , by a series of successive admissions of ourselves in regard to ourselves , that life amends us , little by little , -- he admitted the chimerical and visionary side of his nature , a sort of internal cloud peculiar to many organizations , and which , in paroxysms of passion and sorrow , dilates as the temperature of the soul changes , and invades the entire man , to such a degree as to render him nothing more than a conscience bathed in a mist . 
We have more than once indicated this characteristic element of Marius ' individuality . 
He recalled that , in the intoxication of his love , in the Rue Plumet , during those six or seven ecstatic weeks , he had not even spoke to Cosette of that drama in the Gorbeau hovel , where the victim had taken up such a singular line of silence during the struggle and the ensuing flight . 
How had it happened that he had not mentioned this to Cosette ? 
Yet it was so near and so terrible ! 
How had it come to pass that he had not even named the Thenardiers , and , particularly , on the day when he had encountered Eponine ? 
He now found it almost difficult to explain his silence of that time . 
Nevertheless , he could account for it . 
He recalled his benumbed state , his intoxication with Cosette , love absorbing everything , that catching away of each other into the ideal , and perhaps also , like the imperceptible quantity of reason mingled with this violent and charming state of the soul , a vague , dull instinct impelling him to conceal and abolish in his memory that redoubtable adventure , contact with which he dreaded , in which he did not wish to play any part , his agency in which he had kept secret , and in which he could be neither narrator nor witness without being an accuser . 
Moreover , these few weeks had been a flash of lightning ; there had been no time for anything except love . 
In short , having weighed everything , turned everything over in his mind , examined everything , whatever might have been the consequences if he had told Cosette about the Gorbeau ambush , even if he had discovered that Jean Valjean was a convict , would that have changed him , Marius ? 
Would that have changed her , Cosette ? 
Would he have drawn back ? 
Would he have adored her any the less ? 
Would he have refrained from marrying her ? 
No . 
Then there was nothing to regret , nothing with which he need reproach himself . 
All was well . 
There is a deity for those drunken men who are called lovers . 
Marius blind , had followed the path which he would have chosen had he been in full possession of his sight . 
Love had bandaged his eyes , in order to lead him whither ? 
To paradise . 
But this paradise was henceforth complicated with an infernal accompaniment . 
Marius ' ancient estrangement towards this man , towards this Fauchelevent who had turned into Jean Valjean , was at present mingled with horror . 
In this horror , let us state , there was some pity , and even a certain surprise . 
This thief , this thief guilty of a second offence , had restored that deposit . 
And what a deposit ! 
Six hundred thousand francs . 
He alone was in the secret of that deposit . 
He might have kept it all , he had restored it all . 
Moreover , he had himself revealed his situation . 
Nothing forced him to this . 
If any one learned who he was , it was through himself . 
In this avowal there was something more than acceptance of humiliation , there was acceptance of peril . 
For a condemned man , a mask is not a mask , it is a shelter . 
A false name is security , and he had rejected that false name . 
He , the galley-slave , might have hidden himself forever in an honest family ; he had withstood this temptation . 
And with what motive ? 
Through a conscientious scruple . 
He himself explained this with the irresistible accents of truth . 
In short , whatever this Jean Valjean might be , he was , undoubtedly , a conscience which was awakening . 
There existed some mysterious re-habilitation which had begun ; and , to all appearances , scruples had for a long time already controlled this man . 
Such fits of justice and goodness are not characteristic of vulgar natures . 
An awakening of conscience is grandeur of soul . 
Jean Valjean was sincere . 
This sincerity , visible , palpable , irrefragable , evident from the very grief that it caused him , rendered inquiries useless , and conferred authority on all that that man had said . 
Here , for Marius , there was a strange reversal of situations . 
What breathed from M. Fauchelevent ? 
distrust . 
What did Jean Valjean inspire ? 
confidence . 
In the mysterious balance of this Jean Valjean which the pensive Marius struck , he admitted the active principle , he admitted the passive principle , and he tried to reach a balance . 
But all this went on as in a storm . 
Marius , while endeavoring to form a clear idea of this man , and while pursuing Jean Valjean , so to speak , in the depths of his thought , lost him and found him again in a fatal mist . 
The deposit honestly restored , the probity of the confession -- these were good . 
This produced a lightening of the cloud , then the cloud became black once more . 
Troubled as were Marius ' memories , a shadow of them returned to him . 
After all , what was that adventure in the Jondrette attic ? 
Why had that man taken to flight on the arrival of the police , instead of entering a complaint ? 
Here Marius found the answer . 
Because that man was a fugitive from justice , who had broken his ban . 
Another question : Why had that man come to the barricade ? 
For Marius now once more distinctly beheld that recollection which had re-appeared in his emotions like sympathetic ink at the application of heat . 
This man had been in the barricade . 
He had not fought there . 
What had he come there for ? 
In the presence of this question a spectre sprang up and replied : `` Javert . '' 
Marius recalled perfectly now that funereal sight of Jean Valjean dragging the pinioned Javert out of the barricade , and he still heard behind the corner of the little Rue Mondetour that frightful pistol shot . 
Obviously , there was hatred between that police spy and the galley-slave . 
The one was in the other 's way . 
Jean Valjean had gone to the barricade for the purpose of revenging himself . 
He had arrived late . 
He probably knew that Javert was a prisoner there . 
The Corsican vendetta has penetrated to certain lower strata and has become the law there ; it is so simple that it does not astonish souls which are but half turned towards good ; and those hearts are so constituted that a criminal , who is in the path of repentance , may be scrupulous in the matter of theft and unscrupulous in the matter of vengeance . 
Jean Valjean had killed Javert . 
At least , that seemed to be evident . 
This was the final question , to be sure ; but to this there was no reply . 
This question Marius felt like pincers . 
How had it come to pass that Jean Valjean 's existence had elbowed that of Cosette for so long a period ? 
What melancholy sport of Providence was that which had placed that child in contact with that man ? 
Are there then chains for two which are forged on high ? 
and does God take pleasure in coupling the angel with the demon ? 
So a crime and an innocence can be room-mates in the mysterious galleys of wretchedness ? 
In that defiling of condemned persons which is called human destiny , can two brows pass side by side , the one ingenuous , the other formidable , the one all bathed in the divine whiteness of dawn , the other forever blemished by the flash of an eternal lightning ? 
Who could have arranged that inexplicable pairing off ? 
In what manner , in consequence of what prodigy , had any community of life been established between this celestial little creature and that old criminal ? 
Who could have bound the lamb to the wolf , and , what was still more incomprehensible , have attached the wolf to the lamb ? 
For the wolf loved the lamb , for the fierce creature adored the feeble one , for , during the space of nine years , the angel had had the monster as her point of support . 
Cosette 's childhood and girlhood , her advent in the daylight , her virginal growth towards life and light , had been sheltered by that hideous devotion . 
