retorted Gavroche . 
`` A glass door is an excellent thing in a barricade . 
It does not prevent an attack , but it prevents the enemy taking it . 
So you 've never prigged apples over a wall where there were broken bottles ? 
A glass door cuts the corns of the National Guard when they try to mount on the barricade . 
Pardi ! 
glass is a treacherous thing . 
Well , you have n't a very wildly lively imagination , comrades . '' 
However , he was furious over his triggerless pistol . 
He went from one to another , demanding : `` A gun , I want a gun ! 
Why do n't you give me a gun ? '' 
`` Give you a gun ! '' 
said Combeferre . 
`` Come now ! '' 
said Gavroche , `` why not ? 
I had one in 1830 when we had a dispute with Charles X. '' Enjolras shrugged his shoulders . 
`` When there are enough for the men , we will give some to the children . '' 
Gavroche wheeled round haughtily , and answered : -- `` If you are killed before me , I shall take yours . '' 
`` Gamin ! '' 
said Enjolras . 
`` Greenhorn ! '' 
said Gavroche . 
A dandy who had lost his way and who lounged past the end of the street created a diversion ! 
Gavroche shouted to him : -- `` Come with us , young fellow ! 
well now , do n't we do anything for this old country of ours ? '' 
The dandy fled . 
PREPARATIONS The journals of the day which said that that nearly impregnable structure , of the barricade of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , as they call it , reached to the level of the first floor , were mistaken . 
The fact is , that it did not exceed an average height of six or seven feet . 
It was built in such a manner that the combatants could , at their will , either disappear behind it or dominate the barrier and even scale its crest by means of a quadruple row of paving-stones placed on top of each other and arranged as steps in the interior . 
On the outside , the front of the barricade , composed of piles of paving-stones and casks bound together by beams and planks , which were entangled in the wheels of Anceau 's dray and of the overturned omnibus , had a bristling and inextricable aspect . 
An aperture large enough to allow a man to pass through had been made between the wall of the houses and the extremity of the barricade which was furthest from the wine-shop , so that an exit was possible at this point . 
The pole of the omnibus was placed upright and held up with ropes , and a red flag , fastened to this pole , floated over the barricade . 
The little Mondetour barricade , hidden behind the wine-shop building , was not visible . 
The two barricades united formed a veritable redoubt . 
Enjolras and Courfeyrac had not thought fit to barricade the other fragment of the Rue Mondetour which opens through the Rue des Precheurs an issue into the Halles , wishing , no doubt , to preserve a possible communication with the outside , and not entertaining much fear of an attack through the dangerous and difficult street of the Rue des Precheurs . 
With the exception of this issue which was left free , and which constituted what Folard in his strategical style would have termed a branch and taking into account , also , the narrow cutting arranged on the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the interior of the barricade , where the wine-shop formed a salient angle , presented an irregular square , closed on all sides . 
There existed an interval of twenty paces between the grand barrier and the lofty houses which formed the background of the street , so that one might say that the barricade rested on these houses , all inhabited , but closed from top to bottom . 
All this work was performed without any hindrance , in less than an hour , and without this handful of bold men seeing a single bear-skin cap or a single bayonet make their appearance . 
The very bourgeois who still ventured at this hour of riot to enter the Rue Saint-Denis cast a glance at the Rue de la Chanvrerie , caught sight of the barricade , and redoubled their pace . 
The two barricades being finished , and the flag run up , a table was dragged out of the wine-shop ; and Courfeyrac mounted on the table . 
Enjolras brought the square coffer , and Courfeyrac opened it . 
This coffer was filled with cartridges . 
When the mob saw the cartridges , a tremor ran through the bravest , and a momentary silence ensued . 
Courfeyrac distributed them with a smile . 
Each one received thirty cartridges . 
Many had powder , and set about making others with the bullets which they had run . 
As for the barrel of powder , it stood on a table on one side , near the door , and was held in reserve . 
The alarm beat which ran through all Paris , did not cease , but it had finally come to be nothing more than a monotonous noise to which they no longer paid any attention . 
This noise retreated at times , and again drew near , with melancholy undulations . 
They loaded the guns and carbines , all together , without haste , with solemn gravity . 
Enjolras went and stationed three sentinels outside the barricades , one in the Rue de la Chanvrerie , the second in the Rue des Precheurs , the third at the corner of the Rue de la Petite Truanderie . 
Then , the barricades having been built , the posts assigned , the guns loaded , the sentinels stationed , they waited , alone in those redoubtable streets through which no one passed any longer , surrounded by those dumb houses which seemed dead and in which no human movement palpitated , enveloped in the deepening shades of twilight which was drawing on , in the midst of that silence through which something could be felt advancing , and which had about it something tragic and terrifying , isolated , armed , determined , and tranquil . 
WAITING During those hours of waiting , what did they do ? 
We must needs tell , since this is a matter of history . 
While the men made bullets and the women lint , while a large saucepan of melted brass and lead , destined to the bullet-mould smoked over a glowing brazier , while the sentinels watched , weapon in hand , on the barricade , while Enjolras , whom it was impossible to divert , kept an eye on the sentinels , Combeferre , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Feuilly , Bossuet , Joly , Bahorel , and some others , sought each other out and united as in the most peaceful days of their conversations in their student life , and , in one corner of this wine-shop which had been converted into a casement , a couple of paces distant from the redoubt which they had built , with their carbines loaded and primed resting against the backs of their chairs , these fine young fellows , so close to a supreme hour , began to recite love verses . 
What verses ? 
These : -- Vous rappelez-vous notre douce vie , Lorsque nous etions si jeunes tous deux , Et que nous n'avions au coeur d'autre envie Que d'etre bien mis et d'etre amoureux , Lorsqu'en ajoutant votre age a mon age , Nous ne comptions pas a deux quarante ans , Et que , dans notre humble et petit menage , Tout , meme l'hiver , nous etait printemps ? 
Beaux jours ! 
Manuel etait fier et sage , Paris s ` asseyait a de saints banquets , Foy lancait la foudre , et votre corsage Avait une epingle ou je me piquais . 
Tout vous contemplait . 
Avocat sans causes , Quand je vous menais au Prado diner , Vous etiez jolie au point que les roses Me faisaient l'effet de se retourner . 
Je les entendais dire : Est elle belle ! 
Comme elle sent bon ! 
Quels cheveux a flots ! 
Sous son mantelet elle cache une aile , Son bonnet charmant est a peine eclos . 
J'errais avec toi , pressant ton bras souple . 
Les passants crovaient que l'amour charme Avait marie , dans notre heureux couple , Le doux mois d'avril au beau mois de mai . 
Nous vivions caches , contents , porte close , Devorant l'amour , bon fruit defendu , Ma bouche n'avait pas dit une chose Que deja ton coeur avait repondu . 
La Sorbonne etait l'endroit bucolique Ou je t ` adorais du soir au matin . 
C'est ainsi qu'une ame amoureuse applique La carte du Tendre au pays Latin . 
O place Maubert ! 
o place Dauphine ! 
Quand , dans le taudis frais et printanier , Tu tirais ton bas sur ton jambe fine , Je voyais un astre au fond du grenier . 
J'ai fort lu Platon , mais rien ne m ` en reste ; Mieux que Malebranche et que Lamennais , Tu me demontrais la bonte celeste Avec une fleur que tu me donnais . 
Je t ` obeissais , tu m ' etais soumise ; O grenier dore ! 
te lacer ! 
te voir Aller et venir des l'aube en chemise , Mirant ton jeune front a ton vieux miroir . 
Et qui done pourrait perde la memoire De ces temps d'aurore et de firmament , De rubans , de fleurs , de gaze et de moire , Ou l'amour begaye un argot charmant ? 
Nos jardins etaient un pot de tulipe ; Tu masquais la vitre avec un jupon ; Je prenais le bol de terre de pipe , Et je te donnais le tasse en japon . 
Et ces grands malheurs qui nous faisaient rire ! 
Ton manchon brule , ton boa perdu ! 
Et ce cher portrait du divin Shakespeare Qu'un soir pour souper nons avons vendu ! 
J'etais mendiant et toi charitable . 
Je baisais au vol tes bras frais et ronds . 
Dante in folio nous servait de table Pour manger gaiment un cent de marrons . 
La premiere fois qu'en mon joyeux bouge Je pris un baiser a ton levre en feu , Quand tu t ` en allais decoiffee et rouge , Je restai tout pale et je crus en Dieu ! 
Te rappelles-tu nos bonheurs sans nombre , Et tous ces fichus changes en chiffons ? 
Oh que de soupirs , de nos coeurs pleins d'ombre , Se sont envoles dans les cieux profonds ! 
-LSB- 53 -RSB- -LSB- 53 -RSB- Do you remember our sweet life , when we were both so young , and when we had no other desire in our hearts than to be well dressed and in love ? 
When , by adding your age to my age , we could not count forty years between us , and when , in our humble and tiny household , everything was spring to us even in winter . 
Fair days ! 
Manuel was proud and wise , Paris sat at sacred banquets , Foy launched thunderbolts , and your corsage had a pin on which I pricked myself . 
Everything gazed upon you . 
A briefless lawyer , when I took you to the Prado to dine , you were so beautiful that the roses seemed to me to turn round , and I heard them say : Is she not beautiful ! 
How good she smells ! 
What billowing hair ! 
Beneath her mantle she hides a wing . 
Her charming bonnet is hardly unfolded . 
I wandered with thee , pressing thy supple arm . 
The passers-by thought that love bewitched had wedded , in our happy couple , the gentle month of April to the fair month of May . 
