It is the language of wretchedness . 
We may be stopped ; the fact may be put to us in general terms , which is one way of attenuating it ; we may be told , that all trades , professions , it may be added , all the accidents of the social hierarchy and all forms of intelligence , have their own slang . 
The merchant who says : `` Montpellier not active , Marseilles fine quality , '' the broker on ` change who says : `` Assets at end of current month , '' the gambler who says : `` Tiers et tout , refait de pique , '' the sheriff of the Norman Isles who says : The holder in fee reverting to his landed estate can not claim the fruits of that estate during the hereditary seizure of the real estate by the mortgagor , '' the playwright who says : `` The piece was hissed , '' the comedian who says : `` I 've made a hit , '' the philosopher who says : `` Phenomenal triplicity , '' the huntsman who says : `` Voileci allais , Voileci fuyant , '' the phrenologist who says : `` Amativeness , combativeness , secretiveness , '' the infantry soldier who says : `` My shooting-iron , '' the cavalry-man who says : `` My turkey-cock , '' the fencing-master who says : `` Tierce , quarte , break , '' the printer who says : `` My shooting-stick and galley , '' -- all , printer , fencing-master , cavalry dragoon , infantry-man , phrenologist , huntsman , philosopher , comedian , playwright , sheriff , gambler , stock-broker , and merchant , speak slang . 
The painter who says : `` My grinder , '' the notary who says : `` My Skip-the-Gutter , '' the hairdresser who says : `` My mealyback , '' the cobbler who says : `` My cub , '' talks slang . 
Strictly speaking , if one absolutely insists on the point , all the different fashions of saying the right and the left , the sailor 's port and starboard , the scene-shifter 's court-side , and garden-side , the beadle 's Gospel-side and Epistle-side , are slang . 
There is the slang of the affected lady as well as of the precieuses . 
The Hotel Rambouillet nearly adjoins the Cour des Miracles . 
There is a slang of duchesses , witness this phrase contained in a love-letter from a very great lady and a very pretty woman of the Restoration : `` You will find in this gossip a fultitude of reasons why I should libertize . '' 
-LSB- 40 -RSB- Diplomatic ciphers are slang ; the pontifical chancellery by using 26 for Rome , grkztntgzyal for despatch , and abfxustgrnogrkzu tu XI . 
for the Due de Modena , speaks slang . 
The physicians of the Middle Ages who , for carrot , radish , and turnip , said Opoponach , perfroschinum , reptitalmus , dracatholicum , angelorum , postmegorum , talked slang . 
The sugar-manufacturer who says : `` Loaf , clarified , lumps , bastard , common , burnt , '' -- this honest manufacturer talks slang . 
A certain school of criticism twenty years ago , which used to say : `` Half of the works of Shakespeare consists of plays upon words and puns , '' -- talked slang . 
The poet , and the artist who , with profound understanding , would designate M. de Montmorency as `` a bourgeois , '' if he were not a judge of verses and statues , speak slang . 
The classic Academician who calls flowers `` Flora , '' fruits , `` Pomona , '' the sea , `` Neptune , '' love , `` fires , '' beauty , `` charms , '' a horse , `` a courser , '' the white or tricolored cockade , `` the rose of Bellona , '' the three-cornered hat , `` Mars ' triangle , '' -- that classical Academician talks slang . 
Algebra , medicine , botany , have each their slang . 
The tongue which is employed on board ship , that wonderful language of the sea , which is so complete and so picturesque , which was spoken by Jean Bart , Duquesne , Suffren , and Duperre , which mingles with the whistling of the rigging , the sound of the speaking-trumpets , the shock of the boarding-irons , the roll of the sea , the wind , the gale , the cannon , is wholly a heroic and dazzling slang , which is to the fierce slang of the thieves what the lion is to the jackal . 
-LSB- 40 -RSB- `` Vous trouverez dans ces potains-la , une foultitude de raisons pour que je me libertise . '' 
No doubt . 
But say what we will , this manner of understanding the word slang is an extension which every one will not admit . 
For our part , we reserve to the word its ancient and precise , circumscribed and determined significance , and we restrict slang to slang . 
The veritable slang and the slang that is pre-eminently slang , if the two words can be coupled thus , the slang immemorial which was a kingdom , is nothing else , we repeat , than the homely , uneasy , crafty , treacherous , venomous , cruel , equivocal , vile , profound , fatal tongue of wretchedness . 
There exists , at the extremity of all abasement and all misfortunes , a last misery which revolts and makes up its mind to enter into conflict with the whole mass of fortunate facts and reigning rights ; a fearful conflict , where , now cunning , now violent , unhealthy and ferocious at one and the same time , it attacks the social order with pin-pricks through vice , and with club-blows through crime . 
To meet the needs of this conflict , wretchedness has invented a language of combat , which is slang . 
To keep afloat and to rescue from oblivion , to hold above the gulf , were it but a fragment of some language which man has spoken and which would , otherwise , be lost , that is to say , one of the elements , good or bad , of which civilization is composed , or by which it is complicated , to extend the records of social observation ; is to serve civilization itself . 
This service Plautus rendered , consciously or unconsciously , by making two Carthaginian soldiers talk Phoenician ; that service Moliere rendered , by making so many of his characters talk Levantine and all sorts of dialects . 
Here objections spring up afresh . 
Phoenician , very good ! 
Levantine , quite right ! 
Even dialect , let that pass ! 
They are tongues which have belonged to nations or provinces ; but slang ! 
What is the use of preserving slang ? 
What is the good of assisting slang `` to survive '' ? 
To this we reply in one word , only . 
Assuredly , if the tongue which a nation or a province has spoken is worthy of interest , the language which has been spoken by a misery is still more worthy of attention and study . 
It is the language which has been spoken , in France , for example , for more than four centuries , not only by a misery , but by every possible human misery . 
And then , we insist upon it , the study of social deformities and infirmities , and the task of pointing them out with a view to remedy , is not a business in which choice is permitted . 
The historian of manners and ideas has no less austere a mission than the historian of events . 
The latter has the surface of civilization , the conflicts of crowns , the births of princes , the marriages of kings , battles , assemblages , great public men , revolutions in the daylight , everything on the exterior ; the other historian has the interior , the depths , the people who toil , suffer , wait , the oppressed woman , the agonizing child , the secret war between man and man , obscure ferocities , prejudices , plotted iniquities , the subterranean , the indistinct tremors of multitudes , the die-of-hunger , the counter-blows of the law , the secret evolution of souls , the go-bare-foot , the bare-armed , the disinherited , the orphans , the unhappy , and the infamous , all the forms which roam through the darkness . 
He must descend with his heart full of charity , and severity at the same time , as a brother and as a judge , to those impenetrable casemates where crawl , pell-mell , those who bleed and those who deal the blow , those who weep and those who curse , those who fast and those who devour , those who endure evil and those who inflict it . 
Have these historians of hearts and souls duties at all inferior to the historians of external facts ? 
Does any one think that Alighieri has any fewer things to say than Machiavelli ? 
Is the under side of civilization any less important than the upper side merely because it is deeper and more sombre ? 
Do we really know the mountain well when we are not acquainted with the cavern ? 
Let us say , moreover , parenthetically , that from a few words of what precedes a marked separation might be inferred between the two classes of historians which does not exist in our mind . 
No one is a good historian of the patent , visible , striking , and public life of peoples , if he is not , at the same time , in a certain measure , the historian of their deep and hidden life ; and no one is a good historian of the interior unless he understands how , at need , to be the historian of the exterior also . 
The history of manners and ideas permeates the history of events , and this is true reciprocally . 
They constitute two different orders of facts which correspond to each other , which are always interlaced , and which often bring forth results . 
All the lineaments which providence traces on the surface of a nation have their parallels , sombre but distinct , in their depths , and all convulsions of the depths produce ebullitions on the surface . 
True history being a mixture of all things , the true historian mingles in everything . 
Man is not a circle with a single centre ; he is an ellipse with a double focus . 
Facts form one of these , and ideas the other . 
Slang is nothing but a dressing-room where the tongue having some bad action to perform , disguises itself . 
There it clothes itself in word-masks , in metaphor-rags . 
In this guise it becomes horrible . 
One finds it difficult to recognize . 
Is it really the French tongue , the great human tongue ? 
Behold it ready to step upon the stage and to retort upon crime , and prepared for all the employments of the repertory of evil . 
It no longer walks , it hobbles ; it limps on the crutch of the Court of Miracles , a crutch metamorphosable into a club ; it is called vagrancy ; every sort of spectre , its dressers , have painted its face , it crawls and rears , the double gait of the reptile . 
Henceforth , it is apt at all roles , it is made suspicious by the counterfeiter , covered with verdigris by the forger , blacked by the soot of the incendiary ; and the murderer applies its rouge . 
When one listens , by the side of honest men , at the portals of society , one overhears the dialogues of those who are on the outside . 
One distinguishes questions and replies . 
One perceives , without understanding it , a hideous murmur , sounding almost like human accents , but more nearly resembling a howl than an articulate word . 
It is slang . 
The words are misshapen and stamped with an indescribable and fantastic bestiality . 
One thinks one hears hydras talking . 
It is unintelligible in the dark . 
It gnashes and whispers , completing the gloom with mystery . 
It is black in misfortune , it is blacker still in crime ; these two blacknesses amalgamated , compose slang . 
Obscurity in the atmosphere , obscurity in acts , obscurity in voices . 
Terrible , toad-like tongue which goes and comes , leaps , crawls , slobbers , and stirs about in monstrous wise in that immense gray fog composed of rain and night , of hunger , of vice , of falsehood , of injustice , of nudity , of suffocation , and of winter , the high noonday of the miserable . 
Let us have compassion on the chastised . 
Alas ! 
Who are we ourselves ? 
Who am I who now address you ? 
Who are you who are listening to me ? 
And are you very sure that we have done nothing before we were born ? 
The earth is not devoid of resemblance to a jail . 
Who knows whether man is not a recaptured offender against divine justice ? 
Look closely at life . 
It is so made , that everywhere we feel the sense of punishment . 
Are you what is called a happy man ? 
Well ! 
you are sad every day . 
Each day has its own great grief or its little care . 
Yesterday you were trembling for a health that is dear to you , to-day you fear for your own ; to-morrow it will be anxiety about money , the day after to-morrow the diatribe of a slanderer , the day after that , the misfortune of some friend ; then the prevailing weather , then something that has been broken or lost , then a pleasure with which your conscience and your vertebral column reproach you ; again , the course of public affairs . 
This without reckoning in the pains of the heart . 
And so it goes on . 
One cloud is dispelled , another forms . 
There is hardly one day out of a hundred which is wholly joyous and sunny . 
And you belong to that small class who are happy ! 
As for the rest of mankind , stagnating night rests upon them . 
Thoughtful minds make but little use of the phrase : the fortunate and the unfortunate . 
In this world , evidently the vestibule of another , there are no fortunate . 
The real human division is this : the luminous and the shady . 
To diminish the number of the shady , to augment the number of the luminous , -- that is the object . 
That is why we cry : Education ! 
science ! 
To teach reading , means to light the fire ; every syllable spelled out sparkles . 
However , he who says light does not , necessarily , say joy . 
