`` Do the job . 
I 'll stay here with the girl , and if she fails us -- '' He flashed the knife , which he held open in his hand , in the light of the lantern . 
Thenardier said not a word , and seemed ready for whatever the rest pleased . 
Brujon , who was somewhat of an oracle , and who had , as the reader knows , `` put up the job , '' had not as yet spoken . 
He seemed thoughtful . 
He had the reputation of not sticking at anything , and it was known that he had plundered a police post simply out of bravado . 
Besides this he made verses and songs , which gave him great authority . 
Babet interrogated him : -- `` You say nothing , Brujon ? '' 
Brujon remained silent an instant longer , then he shook his head in various ways , and finally concluded to speak : -- `` See here ; this morning I came across two sparrows fighting , this evening I jostled a woman who was quarrelling . 
All that 's bad . 
Let 's quit . '' 
They went away . 
As they went , Montparnasse muttered : -- `` Never mind ! 
if they had wanted , I 'd have cut her throat . '' 
Babet responded `` I would n't . 
I do n't hit a lady . '' 
At the corner of the street they halted and exchanged the following enigmatical dialogue in a low tone : -- `` Where shall we go to sleep to-night ? '' 
`` Under Pantin -LSB- Paris -RSB- . '' 
`` Have you the key to the gate , Thenardier ? '' 
`` Pardi . '' 
Eponine , who never took her eyes off of them , saw them retreat by the road by which they had come . 
She rose and began to creep after them along the walls and the houses . 
She followed them thus as far as the boulevard . 
There they parted , and she saw these six men plunge into the gloom , where they appeared to melt away . 
THINGS OF THE NIGHT After the departure of the ruffians , the Rue Plumet resumed its tranquil , nocturnal aspect . 
That which had just taken place in this street would not have astonished a forest . 
The lofty trees , the copses , the heaths , the branches rudely interlaced , the tall grass , exist in a sombre manner ; the savage swarming there catches glimpses of sudden apparitions of the invisible ; that which is below man distinguishes , through the mists , that which is beyond man ; and the things of which we living beings are ignorant there meet face to face in the night . 
Nature , bristling and wild , takes alarm at certain approaches in which she fancies that she feels the supernatural . 
The forces of the gloom know each other , and are strangely balanced by each other . 
Teeth and claws fear what they can not grasp . 
Blood-drinking bestiality , voracious appetites , hunger in search of prey , the armed instincts of nails and jaws which have for source and aim the belly , glare and smell out uneasily the impassive spectral forms straying beneath a shroud , erect in its vague and shuddering robe , and which seem to them to live with a dead and terrible life . 
These brutalities , which are only matter , entertain a confused fear of having to deal with the immense obscurity condensed into an unknown being . 
A black figure barring the way stops the wild beast short . 
That which emerges from the cemetery intimidates and disconcerts that which emerges from the cave ; the ferocious fear the sinister ; wolves recoil when they encounter a ghoul . 
MARIUS BECOMES PRACTICAL ONCE MORE TO THE EXTENT OF GIVING COSETTE HIS ADDRESS While this sort of a dog with a human face was mounting guard over the gate , and while the six ruffians were yielding to a girl , Marius was by Cosette 's side . 
Never had the sky been more studded with stars and more charming , the trees more trembling , the odor of the grass more penetrating ; never had the birds fallen asleep among the leaves with a sweeter noise ; never had all the harmonies of universal serenity responded more thoroughly to the inward music of love ; never had Marius been more captivated , more happy , more ecstatic . 
But he had found Cosette sad ; Cosette had been weeping . 
Her eyes were red . 
This was the first cloud in that wonderful dream . 
Marius ' first word had been : `` What is the matter ? '' 
And she had replied : `` This . '' 
Then she had seated herself on the bench near the steps , and while he tremblingly took his place beside her , she had continued : -- `` My father told me this morning to hold myself in readiness , because he has business , and we may go away from here . '' 
Marius shivered from head to foot . 
When one is at the end of one 's life , to die means to go away ; when one is at the beginning of it , to go away means to die . 
For the last six weeks , Marius had little by little , slowly , by degrees , taken possession of Cosette each day . 
As we have already explained , in the case of first love , the soul is taken long before the body ; later on , one takes the body long before the soul ; sometimes one does not take the soul at all ; the Faublas and the Prudhommes add : `` Because there is none '' ; but the sarcasm is , fortunately , a blasphemy . 
So Marius possessed Cosette , as spirits possess , but he enveloped her with all his soul , and seized her jealously with incredible conviction . 
He possessed her smile , her breath , her perfume , the profound radiance of her blue eyes , the sweetness of her skin when he touched her hand , the charming mark which she had on her neck , all her thoughts . 
Therefore , he possessed all Cosette 's dreams . 
He incessantly gazed at , and he sometimes touched lightly with his breath , the short locks on the nape of her neck , and he declared to himself that there was not one of those short hairs which did not belong to him , Marius . 
He gazed upon and adored the things that she wore , her knot of ribbon , her gloves , her sleeves , her shoes , her cuffs , as sacred objects of which he was the master . 
He dreamed that he was the lord of those pretty shell combs which she wore in her hair , and he even said to himself , in confused and suppressed stammerings of voluptuousness which did not make their way to the light , that there was not a ribbon of her gown , not a mesh in her stockings , not a fold in her bodice , which was not his . 
Beside Cosette he felt himself beside his own property , his own thing , his own despot and his slave . 
It seemed as though they had so intermingled their souls , that it would have been impossible to tell them apart had they wished to take them back again . 
-- `` This is mine . '' 
`` No , it is mine . '' 
`` I assure you that you are mistaken . 
This is my property . '' 
`` What you are taking as your own is myself . '' 
-- Marius was something that made a part of Cosette , and Cosette was something which made a part of Marius . 
Marius felt Cosette within him . 
To have Cosette , to possess Cosette , this , to him , was not to be distinguished from breathing . 
It was in the midst of this faith , of this intoxication , of this virgin possession , unprecedented and absolute , of this sovereignty , that these words : `` We are going away , '' fell suddenly , at a blow , and that the harsh voice of reality cried to him : `` Cosette is not yours ! '' 
Marius awoke . 
For six weeks Marius had been living , as we have said , outside of life ; those words , going away ! 
caused him to re-enter it harshly . 
He found not a word to say . 
Cosette merely felt that his hand was very cold . 
She said to him in her turn : `` What is the matter ? '' 
He replied in so low a tone that Cosette hardly heard him : -- `` I did not understand what you said . '' 
She began again : -- `` This morning my father told me to settle all my little affairs and to hold myself in readiness , that he would give me his linen to put in a trunk , that he was obliged to go on a journey , that we were to go away , that it is necessary to have a large trunk for me and a small one for him , and that all is to be ready in a week from now , and that we might go to England . '' 
`` But this is outrageous ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
It is certain , that , at that moment , no abuse of power , no violence , not one of the abominations of the worst tyrants , no action of Busiris , of Tiberius , or of Henry VIII. , could have equalled this in atrocity , in the opinion of Marius ; M. Fauchelevent taking his daughter off to England because he had business there . 
He demanded in a weak voice : -- `` And when do you start ? '' 
`` He did not say when . '' 
`` And when shall you return ? '' 
`` He did not say when . '' 
Marius rose and said coldly : -- `` Cosette , shall you go ? '' 
Cosette turned toward him her beautiful eyes , all filled with anguish , and replied in a sort of bewilderment : -- `` Where ? '' 
`` To England . 
Shall you go ? '' 
`` Why do you say you to me ? '' 
`` I ask you whether you will go ? '' 
`` What do you expect me to do ? '' 
she said , clasping her hands . 
`` So , you will go ? '' 
`` If my father goes . '' 
`` So , you will go ? '' 
Cosette took Marius ' hand , and pressed it without replying . 
`` Very well , '' said Marius , `` then I will go elsewhere . '' 
Cosette felt rather than understood the meaning of these words . 
She turned so pale that her face shone white through the gloom . 
She stammered : -- `` What do you mean ? '' 
Marius looked at her , then raised his eyes to heaven , and answered : `` Nothing . '' 
When his eyes fell again , he saw Cosette smiling at him . 
The smile of a woman whom one loves possesses a visible radiance , even at night . 
`` How silly we are ! 
Marius , I have an idea . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
