because it would have pleased me to play the grand and generous ; this is melodrama , after all ; because I should have thought of no one but myself , the idea ! 
for the sake of saving from a punishment , a trifle exaggerated , perhaps , but just at bottom , no one knows whom , a thief , a good-for-nothing , evidently , a whole country-side must perish ! 
a poor woman must die in the hospital ! 
a poor little girl must die in the street ! 
like dogs ; ah , this is abominable ! 
And without the mother even having seen her child once more , almost without the child 's having known her mother ; and all that for the sake of an old wretch of an apple-thief who , most assuredly , has deserved the galleys for something else , if not for that ; fine scruples , indeed , which save a guilty man and sacrifice the innocent , which save an old vagabond who has only a few years to live at most , and who will not be more unhappy in the galleys than in his hovel , and which sacrifice a whole population , mothers , wives , children . 
This poor little Cosette who has no one in the world but me , and who is , no doubt , blue with cold at this moment in the den of those Thenardiers ; those peoples are rascals ; and I was going to neglect my duty towards all these poor creatures ; and I was going off to denounce myself ; and I was about to commit that unspeakable folly ! 
Let us put it at the worst : suppose that there is a wrong action on my part in this , and that my conscience will reproach me for it some day , to accept , for the good of others , these reproaches which weigh only on myself ; this evil action which compromises my soul alone ; in that lies self-sacrifice ; in that alone there is virtue . '' 
He rose and resumed his march ; this time , he seemed to be content . 
Diamonds are found only in the dark places of the earth ; truths are found only in the depths of thought . 
It seemed to him , that , after having descended into these depths , after having long groped among the darkest of these shadows , he had at last found one of these diamonds , one of these truths , and that he now held it in his hand , and he was dazzled as he gazed upon it . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` this is right ; I am on the right road ; I have the solution ; I must end by holding fast to something ; my resolve is taken ; let things take their course ; let us no longer vacillate ; let us no longer hang back ; this is for the interest of all , not for my own ; I am Madeleine , and Madeleine I remain . 
Woe to the man who is Jean Valjean ! 
I am no longer he ; I do not know that man ; I no longer know anything ; it turns out that some one is Jean Valjean at the present moment ; let him look out for himself ; that does not concern me ; it is a fatal name which was floating abroad in the night ; if it halts and descends on a head , so much the worse for that head . '' 
He looked into the little mirror which hung above his chimney-piece , and said : -- `` Hold ! 
it has relieved me to come to a decision ; I am quite another man now . '' 
He proceeded a few paces further , then he stopped short . 
`` Come ! '' 
he said , `` I must not flinch before any of the consequences of the resolution which I have once adopted ; there are still threads which attach me to that Jean Valjean ; they must be broken ; in this very room there are objects which would betray me , dumb things which would bear witness against me ; it is settled ; all these things must disappear . '' 
He fumbled in his pocket , drew out his purse , opened it , and took out a small key ; he inserted the key in a lock whose aperture could hardly be seen , so hidden was it in the most sombre tones of the design which covered the wall-paper ; a secret receptacle opened , a sort of false cupboard constructed in the angle between the wall and the chimney-piece ; in this hiding-place there were some rags -- a blue linen blouse , an old pair of trousers , an old knapsack , and a huge thorn cudgel shod with iron at both ends . 
Those who had seen Jean Valjean at the epoch when he passed through D -- in October , 1815 , could easily have recognized all the pieces of this miserable outfit . 
He had preserved them as he had preserved the silver candlesticks , in order to remind himself continually of his starting-point , but he had concealed all that came from the galleys , and he had allowed the candlesticks which came from the Bishop to be seen . 
He cast a furtive glance towards the door , as though he feared that it would open in spite of the bolt which fastened it ; then , with a quick and abrupt movement , he took the whole in his arms at once , without bestowing so much as a glance on the things which he had so religiously and so perilously preserved for so many years , and flung them all , rags , cudgel , knapsack , into the fire . 
He closed the false cupboard again , and with redoubled precautions , henceforth unnecessary , since it was now empty , he concealed the door behind a heavy piece of furniture , which he pushed in front of it . 
After the lapse of a few seconds , the room and the opposite wall were lighted up with a fierce , red , tremulous glow . 
Everything was on fire ; the thorn cudgel snapped and threw out sparks to the middle of the chamber . 
As the knapsack was consumed , together with the hideous rags which it contained , it revealed something which sparkled in the ashes . 
By bending over , one could have readily recognized a coin , -- no doubt the forty-sou piece stolen from the little Savoyard . 
He did not look at the fire , but paced back and forth with the same step . 
All at once his eye fell on the two silver candlesticks , which shone vaguely on the chimney-piece , through the glow . 
`` Hold ! '' 
he thought ; `` the whole of Jean Valjean is still in them . 
They must be destroyed also . '' 
He seized the two candlesticks . 
There was still fire enough to allow of their being put out of shape , and converted into a sort of unrecognizable bar of metal . 
He bent over the hearth and warmed himself for a moment . 
He felt a sense of real comfort . 
`` How good warmth is ! '' 
said he . 
He stirred the live coals with one of the candlesticks . 
A minute more , and they were both in the fire . 
At that moment it seemed to him that he heard a voice within him shouting : `` Jean Valjean ! 
Jean Valjean ! '' 
His hair rose upright : he became like a man who is listening to some terrible thing . 
`` Yes , that 's it ! 
finish ! '' 
said the voice . 
`` Complete what you are about ! 
Destroy these candlesticks ! 
Annihilate this souvenir ! 
Forget the Bishop ! 
Forget everything ! 
Destroy this Champmathieu , do ! 
That is right ! 
Applaud yourself ! 
So it is settled , resolved , fixed , agreed : here is an old man who does not know what is wanted of him , who has , perhaps , done nothing , an innocent man , whose whole misfortune lies in your name , upon whom your name weighs like a crime , who is about to be taken for you , who will be condemned , who will finish his days in abjectness and horror . 
That is good ! 
Be an honest man yourself ; remain Monsieur le Maire ; remain honorable and honored ; enrich the town ; nourish the indigent ; rear the orphan ; live happy , virtuous , and admired ; and , during this time , while you are here in the midst of joy and light , there will be a man who will wear your red blouse , who will bear your name in ignominy , and who will drag your chain in the galleys . 
Yes , it is well arranged thus . 
Ah , wretch ! '' 
The perspiration streamed from his brow . 
He fixed a haggard eye on the candlesticks . 
But that within him which had spoken had not finished . 
The voice continued : -- `` Jean Valjean , there will be around you many voices , which will make a great noise , which will talk very loud , and which will bless you , and only one which no one will hear , and which will curse you in the dark . 
Well ! 
listen , infamous man ! 
All those benedictions will fall back before they reach heaven , and only the malediction will ascend to God . '' 
This voice , feeble at first , and which had proceeded from the most obscure depths of his conscience , had gradually become startling and formidable , and he now heard it in his very ear . 
It seemed to him that it had detached itself from him , and that it was now speaking outside of him . 
He thought that he heard the last words so distinctly , that he glanced around the room in a sort of terror . 
`` Is there any one here ? '' 
he demanded aloud , in utter bewilderment . 
Then he resumed , with a laugh which resembled that of an idiot : -- `` How stupid I am ! 
There can be no one ! '' 
There was some one ; but the person who was there was of those whom the human eye can not see . 
He placed the candlesticks on the chimney-piece . 
Then he resumed his monotonous and lugubrious tramp , which troubled the dreams of the sleeping man beneath him , and awoke him with a start . 
This tramping to and fro soothed and at the same time intoxicated him . 
It sometimes seems , on supreme occasions , as though people moved about for the purpose of asking advice of everything that they may encounter by change of place . 
After the lapse of a few minutes he no longer knew his position . 
He now recoiled in equal terror before both the resolutions at which he had arrived in turn . 
The two ideas which counselled him appeared to him equally fatal . 
What a fatality ! 
What conjunction that that Champmathieu should have been taken for him ; to be overwhelmed by precisely the means which Providence seemed to have employed , at first , to strengthen his position ! 
There was a moment when he reflected on the future . 
Denounce himself , great God ! 
Deliver himself up ! 
With immense despair he faced all that he should be obliged to leave , all that he should be obliged to take up once more . 
He should have to bid farewell to that existence which was so good , so pure , so radiant , to the respect of all , to honor , to liberty . 
He should never more stroll in the fields ; he should never more hear the birds sing in the month of May ; he should never more bestow alms on the little children ; he should never more experience the sweetness of having glances of gratitude and love fixed upon him ; he should quit that house which he had built , that little chamber ! 
Everything seemed charming to him at that moment . 
Never again should he read those books ; never more should he write on that little table of white wood ; his old portress , the only servant whom he kept , would never more bring him his coffee in the morning . 
Great God ! 
instead of that , the convict gang , the iron necklet , the red waistcoat , the chain on his ankle , fatigue , the cell , the camp bed all those horrors which he knew so well ! 
At his age , after having been what he was ! 
If he were only young again ! 
but to be addressed in his old age as `` thou '' by any one who pleased ; to be searched by the convict-guard ; to receive the galley-sergeant 's cudgellings ; to wear iron-bound shoes on his bare feet ; to have to stretch out his leg night and morning to the hammer of the roundsman who visits the gang ; to submit to the curiosity of strangers , who would be told : `` That man yonder is the famous Jean Valjean , who was mayor of M. sur M. '' ; and at night , dripping with perspiration , overwhelmed with lassitude , their green caps drawn over their eyes , to remount , two by two , the ladder staircase of the galleys beneath the sergeant 's whip . 
Oh , what misery ! 
Can destiny , then , be as malicious as an intelligent being , and become as monstrous as the human heart ? 
And do what he would , he always fell back upon the heartrending dilemma which lay at the foundation of his revery : `` Should he remain in paradise and become a demon ? 
