I have fulfilled this duty towards Cosette . 
I do not think that so slight a thing can be called a good action ; but if it be a good action , well , say that I have done it . 
Register this attenuating circumstance . 
To-day , Cosette passes out of my life ; our two roads part . 
Henceforth , I can do nothing for her . 
She is Madame Pontmercy . 
Her providence has changed . 
And Cosette gains by the change . 
All is well . 
As for the six hundred thousand francs , you do not mention them to me , but I forestall your thought , they are a deposit . 
How did that deposit come into my hands ? 
What does that matter ? 
I restore the deposit . 
Nothing more can be demanded of me . 
I complete the restitution by announcing my true name . 
That concerns me . 
I have a reason for desiring that you should know who I am . '' 
And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face . 
All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent . 
Certain gusts of destiny produce these billows in our souls . 
We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within us is dispersed ; we say the first things that occur to us , which are not always precisely those which should be said . 
There are sudden revelations which one can not bear , and which intoxicate like baleful wine . 
Marius was stupefied by the novel situation which presented itself to him , to the point of addressing that man almost like a person who was angry with him for this avowal . 
`` But why , '' he exclaimed , `` do you tell me all this ? 
Who forces you to do so ? 
You could have kept your secret to yourself . 
You are neither denounced , nor tracked nor pursued . 
You have a reason for wantonly making such a revelation . 
Conclude . 
There is something more . 
In what connection do you make this confession ? 
What is your motive ? '' 
`` My motive ? '' 
replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that one would have said that he was talking to himself rather than to Marius . 
`` From what motive , in fact , has this convict just said ` I am a convict ' ? 
Well , yes ! 
the motive is strange . 
It is out of honesty . 
Stay , the unfortunate point is that I have a thread in my heart , which keeps me fast . 
It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularly solid . 
All life falls in ruin around one ; one resists . 
Had I been able to tear out that thread , to break it , to undo the knot or to cut it , to go far away , I should have been safe . 
I had only to go away ; there are diligences in the Rue Bouloy ; you are happy ; I am going . 
I have tried to break that thread , I have jerked at it , it would not break , I tore my heart with it . 
Then I said : ` I can not live anywhere else than here . ' 
I must stay . 
Well , yes , you are right , I am a fool , why not simply remain here ? 
You offer me a chamber in this house , Madame Pontmercy is sincerely attached to me , she said to the arm-chair : ` Stretch out your arms to him , ' your grandfather demands nothing better than to have me , I suit him , we shall live together , and take our meals in common , I shall give Cosette my arm ... Madame Pontmercy , excuse me , it is a habit , we shall have but one roof , one table , one fire , the same chimney-corner in winter , the same promenade in summer , that is joy , that is happiness , that is everything . 
We shall live as one family . 
One family ! '' 
At that word , Jean Valjean became wild . 
He folded his arms , glared at the floor beneath his feet as though he would have excavated an abyss therein , and his voice suddenly rose in thundering tones : `` As one family ! 
No . 
I belong to no family . 
I do not belong to yours . 
I do not belong to any family of men . 
In houses where people are among themselves , I am superfluous . 
There are families , but there is nothing of the sort for me . 
I am an unlucky wretch ; I am left outside . 
Did I have a father and mother ? 
I almost doubt it . 
On the day when I gave that child in marriage , all came to an end . 
I have seen her happy , and that she is with a man whom she loves , and that there exists here a kind old man , a household of two angels , and all joys in that house , and that it was well , I said to myself : ` Enter thou not . ' 
I could have lied , it is true , have deceived you all , and remained Monsieur Fauchelevent . 
So long as it was for her , I could lie ; but now it would be for myself , and I must not . 
It was sufficient for me to hold my peace , it is true , and all would go on . 
You ask me what has forced me to speak ? 
a very odd thing ; my conscience . 
To hold my peace was very easy , however . 
I passed the night in trying to persuade myself to it ; you questioned me , and what I have just said to you is so extraordinary that you have the right to do it ; well , yes , I have passed the night in alleging reasons to myself , and I gave myself very good reasons , I have done what I could . 
But there are two things in which I have not succeeded ; in breaking the thread that holds me fixed , riveted and sealed here by the heart , or in silencing some one who speaks softly to me when I am alone . 
That is why I have come hither to tell you everything this morning . 
Everything or nearly everything . 
It is useless to tell you that which concerns only myself ; I keep that to myself . 
You know the essential points . 
So I have taken my mystery and have brought it to you . 
And I have disembowelled my secret before your eyes . 
It was not a resolution that was easy to take . 
I struggled all night long . 
Ah ! 
you think that I did not tell myself that this was no Champmathieu affair , that by concealing my name I was doing no one any injury , that the name of Fauchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself , out of gratitude for a service rendered to him , and that I might assuredly keep it , and that I should be happy in that chamber which you offer me , that I should not be in any one 's way , that I should be in my own little corner , and that , while you would have Cosette , I should have the idea that I was in the same house with her . 
Each one of us would have had his share of happiness . 
If I continued to be Monsieur Fauchelevent , that would arrange everything . 
Yes , with the exception of my soul . 
There was joy everywhere upon my surface , but the bottom of my soul remained black . 
It is not enough to be happy , one must be content . 
Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent , thus I should have concealed my true visage , thus , in the presence of your expansion , I should have had an enigma , thus , in the midst of your full noonday , I should have had shadows , thus , without crying ` ` ware , ' I should have simply introduced the galleys to your fireside , I should have taken my seat at your table with the thought that if you knew who I was , you would drive me from it , I should have allowed myself to be served by domestics who , had they known , would have said : ` How horrible ! ' 
I should have touched you with my elbow , which you have a right to dislike , I should have filched your clasps of the hand ! 
There would have existed in your house a division of respect between venerable white locks and tainted white locks ; at your most intimate hours , when all hearts thought themselves open to the very bottom to all the rest , when we four were together , your grandfather , you two and myself , a stranger would have been present ! 
I should have been side by side with you in your existence , having for my only care not to disarrange the cover of my dreadful pit . 
Thus , I , a dead man , should have thrust myself upon you who are living beings . 
I should have condemned her to myself forever . 
You and Cosette and I would have had all three of our heads in the green cap ! 
Does it not make you shudder ? 
I am only the most crushed of men ; I should have been the most monstrous of men . 
And I should have committed that crime every day ! 
And I should have had that face of night upon my visage every day ! 
every day ! 
And I should have communicated to you a share in my taint every day ! 
every day ! 
