At this word `` villain , '' the female Thenardier sprang from the bed , Thenardier grasped his chair as though he were about to crush it in his hands . 
`` Do n't you stir ! '' 
he shouted to his wife ; and , turning to M. Leblanc : -- `` Villain ! 
Yes , I know that you call us that , you rich gentlemen ! 
Stop ! 
it 's true that I became bankrupt , that I am in hiding , that I have no bread , that I have not a single sou , that I am a villain ! 
It 's three days since I have had anything to eat , so I 'm a villain ! 
Ah ! 
you folks warm your feet , you have Sakoski boots , you have wadded great-coats , like archbishops , you lodge on the first floor in houses that have porters , you eat truffles , you eat asparagus at forty francs the bunch in the month of January , and green peas , you gorge yourselves , and when you want to know whether it is cold , you look in the papers to see what the engineer Chevalier 's thermometer says about it . 
We , it is we who are thermometers . 
We do n't need to go out and look on the quay at the corner of the Tour de l'Horologe , to find out the number of degrees of cold ; we feel our blood congealing in our veins , and the ice forming round our hearts , and we say : ` There is no God ! ' 
And you come to our caverns , yes our caverns , for the purpose of calling us villains ! 
But we 'll devour you ! 
But we 'll devour you , poor little things ! 
Just see here , Mister millionnaire : I have been a solid man , I have held a license , I have been an elector , I am a bourgeois , that I am ! 
And it 's quite possible that you are not ! '' 
Here Thenardier took a step towards the men who stood near the door , and added with a shudder : -- `` When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like a cobbler ! '' 
Then addressing M. Leblanc with a fresh outburst of frenzy : -- `` And listen to this also , Mister philanthropist ! 
I 'm not a suspicious character , not a bit of it ! 
I 'm not a man whose name nobody knows , and who comes and abducts children from houses ! 
I 'm an old French soldier , I ought to have been decorated ! 
I was at Waterloo , so I was ! 
And in the battle I saved a general called the Comte of I do n't know what . 
He told me his name , but his beastly voice was so weak that I did n't hear . 
All I caught was Merci -LSB- thanks -RSB- . 
I 'd rather have had his name than his thanks . 
That would have helped me to find him again . 
The picture that you see here , and which was painted by David at Bruqueselles , -- do you know what it represents ? 
It represents me . 
David wished to immortalize that feat of prowess . 
I have that general on my back , and I am carrying him through the grape-shot . 
There 's the history of it ! 
That general never did a single thing for me ; he was no better than the rest ! 
But none the less , I saved his life at the risk of my own , and I have the certificate of the fact in my pocket ! 
I am a soldier of Waterloo , by all the furies ! 
And now that I have had the goodness to tell you all this , let 's have an end of it . 
I want money , I want a deal of money , I must have an enormous lot of money , or I 'll exterminate you , by the thunder of the good God ! '' 
Marius had regained some measure of control over his anguish , and was listening . 
The last possibility of doubt had just vanished . 
It certainly was the Thenardier of the will . 
Marius shuddered at that reproach of ingratitude directed against his father , and which he was on the point of so fatally justifying . 
His perplexity was redoubled . 
Moreover , there was in all these words of Thenardier , in his accent , in his gesture , in his glance which darted flames at every word , there was , in this explosion of an evil nature disclosing everything , in that mixture of braggadocio and abjectness , of pride and pettiness , of rage and folly , in that chaos of real griefs and false sentiments , in that immodesty of a malicious man tasting the voluptuous delights of violence , in that shameless nudity of a repulsive soul , in that conflagration of all sufferings combined with all hatreds , something which was as hideous as evil , and as heart-rending as the truth . 
The picture of the master , the painting by David which he had proposed that M. Leblanc should purchase , was nothing else , as the reader has divined , than the sign of his tavern painted , as it will be remembered , by himself , the only relic which he had preserved from his shipwreck at Montfermeil . 
As he had ceased to intercept Marius ' visual ray , Marius could examine this thing , and in the daub , he actually did recognize a battle , a background of smoke , and a man carrying another man . 
It was the group composed of Pontmercy and Thenardier ; the sergeant the rescuer , the colonel rescued . 
Marius was like a drunken man ; this picture restored his father to life in some sort ; it was no longer the signboard of the wine-shop at Montfermeil , it was a resurrection ; a tomb had yawned , a phantom had risen there . 
Marius heard his heart beating in his temples , he had the cannon of Waterloo in his ears , his bleeding father , vaguely depicted on that sinister panel terrified him , and it seemed to him that the misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him . 
When Thenardier had recovered his breath , he turned his bloodshot eyes on M. Leblanc , and said to him in a low , curt voice : -- `` What have you to say before we put the handcuffs on you ? '' 
M. Leblanc held his peace . 
In the midst of this silence , a cracked voice launched this lugubrious sarcasm from the corridor : -- `` If there 's any wood to be split , I 'm there ! '' 
It was the man with the axe , who was growing merry . 
At the same moment , an enormous , bristling , and clayey face made its appearance at the door , with a hideous laugh which exhibited not teeth , but fangs . 
It was the face of the man with the butcher 's axe . 
`` Why have you taken off your mask ? '' 
cried Thenardier in a rage . 
`` For fun , '' retorted the man . 
For the last few minutes M. Leblanc had appeared to be watching and following all the movements of Thenardier , who , blinded and dazzled by his own rage , was stalking to and fro in the den with full confidence that the door was guarded , and of holding an unarmed man fast , he being armed himself , of being nine against one , supposing that the female Thenardier counted for but one man . 
During his address to the man with the pole-axe , he had turned his back to M. Leblanc . 
M. Leblanc seized this moment , overturned the chair with his foot and the table with his fist , and with one bound , with prodigious agility , before Thenardier had time to turn round , he had reached the window . 
To open it , to scale the frame , to bestride it , was the work of a second only . 
He was half out when six robust fists seized him and dragged him back energetically into the hovel . 
These were the three `` chimney-builders , '' who had flung themselves upon him . 
At the same time the Thenardier woman had wound her hands in his hair . 
At the trampling which ensued , the other ruffians rushed up from the corridor . 
The old man on the bed , who seemed under the influence of wine , descended from the pallet and came reeling up , with a stone-breaker 's hammer in his hand . 
One of the `` chimney-builders , '' whose smirched face was lighted up by the candle , and in whom Marius recognized , in spite of his daubing , Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , lifted above M. Leblanc 's head a sort of bludgeon made of two balls of lead , at the two ends of a bar of iron . 
Marius could not resist this sight . 
`` My father , '' he thought , `` forgive me ! '' 
And his finger sought the trigger of his pistol . 
The shot was on the point of being discharged when Thenardier 's voice shouted : -- `` Do n't harm him ! '' 
This desperate attempt of the victim , far from exasperating Thenardier , had calmed him . 
There existed in him two men , the ferocious man and the adroit man . 
Up to that moment , in the excess of his triumph in the presence of the prey which had been brought down , and which did not stir , the ferocious man had prevailed ; when the victim struggled and tried to resist , the adroit man reappeared and took the upper hand . 
`` Do n't hurt him ! '' 
he repeated , and without suspecting it , his first success was to arrest the pistol in the act of being discharged , and to paralyze Marius , in whose opinion the urgency of the case disappeared , and who , in the face of this new phase , saw no inconvenience in waiting a while longer . 
Who knows whether some chance would not arise which would deliver him from the horrible alternative of allowing Ursule 's father to perish , or of destroying the colonel 's saviour ? 
A herculean struggle had begun . 
With one blow full in the chest , M. Leblanc had sent the old man tumbling , rolling in the middle of the room , then with two backward sweeps of his hand he had overthrown two more assailants , and he held one under each of his knees ; the wretches were rattling in the throat beneath this pressure as under a granite millstone ; but the other four had seized the formidable old man by both arms and the back of his neck , and were holding him doubled up over the two `` chimney-builders '' on the floor . 
Thus , the master of some and mastered by the rest , crushing those beneath him and stifling under those on top of him , endeavoring in vain to shake off all the efforts which were heaped upon him , M. Leblanc disappeared under the horrible group of ruffians like the wild boar beneath a howling pile of dogs and hounds . 
They succeeded in overthrowing him upon the bed nearest the window , and there they held him in awe . 
The Thenardier woman had not released her clutch on his hair . 
`` Do n't you mix yourself up in this affair , '' said Thenardier . 
`` You 'll tear your shawl . '' 
The Thenardier obeyed , as the female wolf obeys the male wolf , with a growl . 
`` Now , '' said Thenardier , `` search him , you other fellows ! '' 
M. Leblanc seemed to have renounced the idea of resistance . 
They searched him . 
He had nothing on his person except a leather purse containing six francs , and his handkerchief . 
Thenardier put the handkerchief into his own pocket . 
`` What ! 
No pocket-book ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` No , nor watch , '' replied one of the `` chimney-builders . '' 
`` Never mind , '' murmured the masked man who carried the big key , in the voice of a ventriloquist , `` he 's a tough old fellow . '' 
Thenardier went to the corner near the door , picked up a bundle of ropes and threw them at the men . 
`` Tie him to the leg of the bed , '' said he . 
And , catching sight of the old man who had been stretched across the room by the blow from M. Leblanc 's fist , and who made no movement , he added : -- `` Is Boulatruelle dead ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Bigrenaille , `` he 's drunk . '' 
`` Sweep him into a corner , '' said Thenardier . 
