An unheard-of virtue , supreme and sweet , humble in its immensity , appeared to him . 
The convict was transfigured into Christ . 
Marius was dazzled by this prodigy . 
He did not know precisely what he beheld , but it was grand . 
In an instant , a hackney-carriage stood in front of the door . 
Marius helped Cosette in and darted in himself . 
`` Driver , '' said he , `` Rue de l'Homme Arme , Number 7 . '' 
The carriage drove off . 
`` Ah ! 
what happiness ! '' 
ejaculated Cosette . 
`` Rue de l'Homme Arme , I did not dare to speak to you of that . 
We are going to see M. Jean . '' 
`` Thy father ! 
Cosette , thy father more than ever . 
Cosette , I guess it . 
You told me that you had never received the letter that I sent you by Gavroche . 
It must have fallen into his hands . 
Cosette , he went to the barricade to save me . 
As it is a necessity with him to be an angel , he saved others also ; he saved Javert . 
He rescued me from that gulf to give me to you . 
He carried me on his back through that frightful sewer . 
Ah ! 
I am a monster of ingratitude . 
Cosette , after having been your providence , he became mine . 
Just imagine , there was a terrible quagmire enough to drown one a hundred times over , to drown one in mire . 
Cosette ! 
he made me traverse it . 
I was unconscious ; I saw nothing , I heard nothing , I could know nothing of my own adventure . 
We are going to bring him back , to take him with us , whether he is willing or not , he shall never leave us again . 
If only he is at home ! 
Provided only that we can find him , I will pass the rest of my life in venerating him . 
Yes , that is how it should be , do you see , Cosette ? 
Gavroche must have delivered my letter to him . 
All is explained . 
You understand . '' 
Cosette did not understand a word . 
`` You are right , '' she said to him . 
Meanwhile the carriage rolled on . 
A NIGHT BEHIND WHICH THERE IS DAY Jean Valjean turned round at the knock which he heard on his door . 
`` Come in , '' he said feebly . 
The door opened . 
Cosette and Marius made their appearance . 
Cosette rushed into the room . 
Marius remained on the threshold , leaning against the jamb of the door . 
`` Cosette ! '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
And he sat erect in his chair , his arms outstretched and trembling , haggard , livid , gloomy , an immense joy in his eyes . 
Cosette , stifling with emotion , fell upon Jean Valjean 's breast . 
`` Father ! '' 
said she . 
Jean Valjean , overcome , stammered : `` Cosette ! 
she ! 
you ! 
Madame ! 
it is thou ! 
Ah ! 
my God ! '' 
And , pressed close in Cosette 's arms , he exclaimed : `` It is thou ! 
thou art here ! 
Thou dost pardon me then ! '' 
Marius , lowering his eyelids , in order to keep his tears from flowing , took a step forward and murmured between lips convulsively contracted to repress his sobs : `` My father ! '' 
`` And you also , you pardon me ! '' 
Jean Valjean said to him . 
Marius could find no words , and Jean Valjean added : `` Thanks . '' 
Cosette tore off her shawl and tossed her hat on the bed . 
`` It embarrasses me , '' said she . 
And , seating herself on the old man 's knees , she put aside his white locks with an adorable movement , and kissed his brow . 
Jean Valjean , bewildered , let her have her own way . 
Cosette , who only understood in a very confused manner , redoubled her caresses , as though she desired to pay Marius ' debt . 
Jean Valjean stammered : `` How stupid people are ! 
I thought that I should never see her again . 
Imagine , Monsieur Pontmercy , at the very moment when you entered , I was saying to myself : ` All is over . 
Here is her little gown , I am a miserable man , I shall never see Cosette again , ' and I was saying that at the very moment when you were mounting the stairs . 
Was not I an idiot ? 
Just see how idiotic one can be ! 
One reckons without the good God . 
The good God says : '' ` You fancy that you are about to be abandoned , stupid ! 
No . 
No , things will not go so . 
Come , there is a good man yonder who is in need of an angel . ' 
And the angel comes , and one sees one 's Cosette again ! 
and one sees one 's little Cosette once more ! 
Ah ! 
I was very unhappy . '' 
For a moment he could not speak , then he went on : `` I really needed to see Cosette a little bit now and then . 
A heart needs a bone to gnaw . 
But I was perfectly conscious that I was in the way . 
I gave myself reasons : ` They do not want you , keep in your own course , one has not the right to cling eternally . ' 
Ah ! 
God be praised , I see her once more ! 
Dost thou know , Cosette , thy husband is very handsome ? 
Ah ! 
what a pretty embroidered collar thou hast on , luckily . 
I am fond of that pattern . 
It was thy husband who chose it , was it not ? 
And then , thou shouldst have some cashmere shawls . 
Let me call her thou , Monsieur Pontmercy . 
It will not be for long . '' 
And Cosette began again : `` How wicked of you to have left us like that ! 
