There was still sufficient light to admit of reading . 
Besides this , Javert possessed in his eye the feline phosphorescence of night birds . 
He deciphered the few lines written by Marius , and muttered : `` Gillenormand , Rue des Filles-duCalvaire , No. 6 . '' 
Then he exclaimed : `` Coachman ! '' 
The reader will remember that the hackney-coach was waiting in case of need . 
Javert kept Marius ' pocket-book . 
A moment later , the carriage , which had descended by the inclined plane of the watering-place , was on the shore . 
Marius was laid upon the back seat , and Javert seated himself on the front seat beside Jean Valjean . 
The door slammed , and the carriage drove rapidly away , ascending the quays in the direction of the Bastille . 
They quitted the quays and entered the streets . 
The coachman , a black form on his box , whipped up his thin horses . 
A glacial silence reigned in the carriage . 
Marius , motionless , with his body resting in the corner , and his head drooping on his breast , his arms hanging , his legs stiff , seemed to be awaiting only a coffin ; Jean Valjean seemed made of shadow , and Javert of stone , and in that vehicle full of night , whose interior , every time that it passed in front of a street lantern , appeared to be turned lividly wan , as by an intermittent flash of lightning , chance had united and seemed to be bringing face to face the three forms of tragic immobility , the corpse , the spectre , and the statue . 
RETURN OF THE SON WHO WAS PRODIGAL OF HIS LIFE At every jolt over the pavement , a drop of blood trickled from Marius ' hair . 
Night had fully closed in when the carriage arrived at No. 6 , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
Javert was the first to alight ; he made sure with one glance of the number on the carriage gate , and , raising the heavy knocker of beaten iron , embellished in the old style , with a male goat and a satyr confronting each other , he gave a violent peal . 
The gate opened a little way and Javert gave it a push . 
The porter half made his appearance yawning , vaguely awake , and with a candle in his hand . 
Everyone in the house was asleep . 
People go to bed betimes in the Marais , especially on days when there is a revolt . 
This good , old quarter , terrified at the Revolution , takes refuge in slumber , as children , when they hear the Bugaboo coming , hide their heads hastily under their coverlet . 
In the meantime Jean Valjean and the coachman had taken Marius out of the carriage , Jean Valjean supporting him under the armpits , and the coachman under the knees . 
As they thus bore Marius , Jean Valjean slipped his hand under the latter 's clothes , which were broadly rent , felt his breast , and assured himself that his heart was still beating . 
It was even beating a little less feebly , as though the movement of the carriage had brought about a certain fresh access of life . 
Javert addressed the porter in a tone befitting the government , and the presence of the porter of a factious person . 
`` Some person whose name is Gillenormand ? '' 
`` Here . 
What do you want with him ? '' 
`` His son is brought back . '' 
`` His son ? '' 
said the porter stupidly . 
`` He is dead . '' 
Jean Valjean , who , soiled and tattered , stood behind Javert , and whom the porter was surveying with some horror , made a sign to him with his head that this was not so . 
The porter did not appear to understand either Javert 's words or Jean Valjean 's sign . 
Javert continued : `` He went to the barricade , and here he is . '' 
`` To the barricade ? '' 
ejaculated the porter . 
`` He has got himself killed . 
Go waken his father . '' 
The porter did not stir . 
`` Go along with you ! '' 
repeated Javert . 
And he added : `` There will be a funeral here to-morrow . '' 
For Javert , the usual incidents of the public highway were categorically classed , which is the beginning of foresight and surveillance , and each contingency had its own compartment ; all possible facts were arranged in drawers , as it were , whence they emerged on occasion , in variable quantities ; in the street , uproar , revolt , carnival , and funeral . 
The porter contented himself with waking Basque . 
Basque woke Nicolette ; Nicolette roused great-aunt Gillenormand . 
As for the grandfather , they let him sleep on , thinking that he would hear about the matter early enough in any case . 
Marius was carried up to the first floor , without any one in the other parts of the house being aware of the fact , and deposited on an old sofa in M. Gillenormand 's antechamber ; and while Basque went in search of a physician , and while Nicolette opened the linen-presses , Jean Valjean felt Javert touch him on the shoulder . 
He understood and descended the stairs , having behind him the step of Javert who was following him . 
The porter watched them take their departure as he had watched their arrival , in terrified somnolence . 
They entered the carriage once more , and the coachman mounted his box . 
`` Inspector Javert , '' said Jean , `` grant me yet another favor . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
demanded Javert roughly . 
`` Let me go home for one instant . 
Then you shall do whatever you like with me . '' 
Javert remained silent for a few moments , with his chin drawn back into the collar of his great-coat , then he lowered the glass and front : `` Driver , '' said he , `` Rue de l'Homme Arme , No. 7 . '' 
CONCUSSION IN THE ABSOLUTE They did not open their lips again during the whole space of their ride . 
What did Jean Valjean want ? 
To finish what he had begun ; to warn Cosette , to tell her where Marius was , to give her , possibly , some other useful information , to take , if he could , certain final measures . 
As for himself , so far as he was personally concerned , all was over ; he had been seized by Javert and had not resisted ; any other man than himself in like situation would , perhaps , have had some vague thoughts connected with the rope which Thenardier had given him , and of the bars of the first cell that he should enter ; but , let us impress it upon the reader , after the Bishop , there had existed in Jean Valjean a profound hesitation in the presence of any violence , even when directed against himself . 
Suicide , that mysterious act of violence against the unknown which may contain , in a measure , the death of the soul , was impossible to Jean Valjean . 
At the entrance to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , the carriage halted , the way being too narrow to admit of the entrance of vehicles . 
Javert and Jean Valjean alighted . 
The coachman humbly represented to `` monsieur l'Inspecteur , '' that the Utrecht velvet of his carriage was all spotted with the blood of the assassinated man , and with mire from the assassin . 
That is the way he understood it . 
He added that an indemnity was due him . 
At the same time , drawing his certificate book from his pocket , he begged the inspector to have the goodness to write him `` a bit of an attestation . '' 
Javert thrust aside the book which the coachman held out to him , and said : `` How much do you want , including your time of waiting and the drive ? '' 
`` It comes to seven hours and a quarter , '' replied the man , `` and my velvet was perfectly new . 
Eighty francs , Mr. Inspector . '' 
Javert drew four napoleons from his pocket and dismissed the carriage . 
Jean Valjean fancied that it was Javert 's intention to conduct him on foot to the post of the Blancs-Manteaux or to the post of the Archives , both of which are close at hand . 
They entered the street . 
It was deserted as usual . 
Javert followed Jean Valjean . 
They reached No. 7 . 
Jean Valjean knocked . 
The door opened . 
`` It is well , '' said Javert . 
`` Go up stairs . '' 
He added with a strange expression , and as though he were exerting an effort in speaking in this manner : `` I will wait for you here . '' 
Jean Valjean looked at Javert . 
This mode of procedure was but little in accord with Javert 's habits . 
However , he could not be greatly surprised that Javert should now have a sort of haughty confidence in him , the confidence of the cat which grants the mouse liberty to the length of its claws , seeing that Jean Valjean had made up his mind to surrender himself and to make an end of it . 
He pushed open the door , entered the house , called to the porter who was in bed and who had pulled the cord from his couch : `` It is I ! '' 
and ascended the stairs . 
On arriving at the first floor , he paused . 
All sorrowful roads have their stations . 
The window on the landing-place , which was a sash-window , was open . 
As in many ancient houses , the staircase got its light from without and had a view on the street . 
The street-lantern , situated directly opposite , cast some light on the stairs , and thus effected some economy in illumination . 
Jean Valjean , either for the sake of getting the air , or mechanically , thrust his head out of this window . 
He leaned out over the street . 
It is short , and the lantern lighted it from end to end . 
Jean Valjean was overwhelmed with amazement ; there was no longer any one there . 
Javert had taken his departure . 
THE GRANDFATHER Basque and the porter had carried Marius into the drawing-room , as he still lay stretched out , motionless , on the sofa upon which he had been placed on his arrival . 
The doctor who had been sent for had hastened thither . 
Aunt Gillenormand had risen . 
