We will not conduct the reader either to the mayor 's office or to the church . 
One does not follow a pair of lovers to that extent , and one is accustomed to turn one 's back on the drama as soon as it puts a wedding nosegay in its buttonhole . 
We will confine ourselves to noting an incident which , though unnoticed by the wedding party , marked the transit from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire to the church of Saint-Paul . 
At that epoch , the northern extremity of the Rue Saint-Louis was in process of repaving . 
It was barred off , beginning with the Rue du Pare-Royal . 
It was impossible for the wedding carriages to go directly to Saint-Paul . 
They were obliged to alter their course , and the simplest way was to turn through the boulevard . 
One of the invited guests observed that it was Shrove Tuesday , and that there would be a jam of vehicles . 
-- `` Why ? '' 
asked M. Gillenormand -- `` Because of the maskers . '' 
-- `` Capital , '' said the grandfather , `` let us go that way . 
These young folks are on the way to be married ; they are about to enter the serious part of life . 
This will prepare them for seeing a bit of the masquerade . '' 
They went by way of the boulevard . 
The first wedding coach held Cosette and Aunt Gillenormand , M. Gillenormand and Jean Valjean . 
Marius , still separated from his betrothed according to usage , did not come until the second . 
The nuptial train , on emerging from the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , became entangled in a long procession of vehicles which formed an endless chain from the Madeleine to the Bastille , and from the Bastille to the Madeleine . 
Maskers abounded on the boulevard . 
In spite of the fact that it was raining at intervals , Merry-Andrew , Pantaloon and Clown persisted . 
In the good humor of that winter of 1833 , Paris had disguised itself as Venice . 
Such Shrove Tuesdays are no longer to be seen now-a-days . 
Everything which exists being a scattered Carnival , there is no longer any Carnival . 
The sidewalks were overflowing with pedestrians and the windows with curious spectators . 
The terraces which crown the peristyles of the theatres were bordered with spectators . 
Besides the maskers , they stared at that procession -- peculiar to Shrove Tuesday as to Longchamps , -- of vehicles of every description , citadines , tapissieres , carioles , cabriolets marching in order , rigorously riveted to each other by the police regulations , and locked into rails , as it were . 
Any one in these vehicles is at once a spectator and a spectacle . 
Police-sergeants maintained , on the sides of the boulevard , these two interminable parallel files , moving in contrary directions , and saw to it that nothing interfered with that double current , those two brooks of carriages , flowing , the one down stream , the other up stream , the one towards the Chaussee d'Antin , the other towards the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The carriages of the peers of France and of the Ambassadors , emblazoned with coats of arms , held the middle of the way , going and coming freely . 
Certain joyous and magnificent trains , notably that of the Boeuf Gras , had the same privilege . 
In this gayety of Paris , England cracked her whip ; Lord Seymour 's post-chaise , harassed by a nickname from the populace , passed with great noise . 
In the double file , along which the municipal guards galloped like sheep-dogs , honest family coaches , loaded down with great-aunts and grandmothers , displayed at their doors fresh groups of children in disguise , Clowns of seven years of age , Columbines of six , ravishing little creatures , who felt that they formed an official part of the public mirth , who were imbued with the dignity of their harlequinade , and who possessed the gravity of functionaries . 
From time to time , a hitch arose somewhere in the procession of vehicles ; one or other of the two lateral files halted until the knot was disentangled ; one carriage delayed sufficed to paralyze the whole line . 
Then they set out again on the march . 
The wedding carriages were in the file proceeding towards the Bastille , and skirting the right side of the Boulevard . 
At the top of the Pont-aux-Choux , there was a stoppage . 
Nearly at the same moment , the other file , which was proceeding towards the Madeleine , halted also . 
At that point of the file there was a carriage-load of maskers . 
These carriages , or to speak more correctly , these wagon-loads of maskers are very familiar to Parisians . 
If they were missing on a Shrove Tuesday , or at the Mid-Lent , it would be taken in bad part , and people would say : `` There 's something behind that . 
Probably the ministry is about to undergo a change . '' 
A pile of Cassandras , Harlequins and Columbines , jolted along high above the passers-by , all possible grotesquenesses , from the Turk to the savage , Hercules supporting Marquises , fishwives who would have made Rabelais stop up his ears just as the Maenads made Aristophanes drop his eyes , tow wigs , pink tights , dandified hats , spectacles of a grimacer , three-cornered hats of Janot tormented with a butterfly , shouts directed at pedestrians , fists on hips , bold attitudes , bare shoulders , immodesty unchained ; a chaos of shamelessness driven by a coachman crowned with flowers ; this is what that institution was like . 
Greece stood in need of the chariot of Thespis , France stands in need of the hackney-coach of Vade . 
Everything can be parodied , even parody . 
The Saturnalia , that grimace of antique beauty , ends , through exaggeration after exaggeration , in Shrove Tuesday ; and the Bacchanal , formerly crowned with sprays of vine leaves and grapes , inundated with sunshine , displaying her marble breast in a divine semi-nudity , having at the present day lost her shape under the soaked rags of the North , has finally come to be called the Jack-pudding . 
The tradition of carriage-loads of maskers runs back to the most ancient days of the monarchy . 
The accounts of Louis XI . 
allot to the bailiff of the palace `` twenty sous , Tournois , for three coaches of mascarades in the cross-roads . '' 
In our day , these noisy heaps of creatures are accustomed to have themselves driven in some ancient cuckoo carriage , whose imperial they load down , or they overwhelm a hired landau , with its top thrown back , with their tumultuous groups . 
Twenty of them ride in a carriage intended for six . 
They cling to the seats , to the rumble , on the cheeks of the hood , on the shafts . 
They even bestride the carriage lamps . 
They stand , sit , lie , with their knees drawn up in a knot , and their legs hanging . 
The women sit on the men 's laps . 
Far away , above the throng of heads , their wild pyramid is visible . 
These carriage-loads form mountains of mirth in the midst of the rout . 
Colle , Panard and Piron flow from it , enriched with slang . 
This carriage which has become colossal through its freight , has an air of conquest . 
Uproar reigns in front , tumult behind . 
People vociferate , shout , howl , there they break forth and writhe with enjoyment ; gayety roars ; sarcasm flames forth , joviality is flaunted like a red flag ; two jades there drag farce blossomed forth into an apotheosis ; it is the triumphal car of laughter . 
A laughter that is too cynical to be frank . 
In truth , this laughter is suspicious . 
This laughter has a mission . 
It is charged with proving the Carnival to the Parisians . 
These fishwife vehicles , in which one feels one knows not what shadows , set the philosopher to thinking . 
There is government therein . 
There one lays one 's finger on a mysterious affinity between public men and public women . 
It certainly is sad that turpitude heaped up should give a sum total of gayety , that by piling ignominy upon opprobrium the people should be enticed , that the system of spying , and serving as caryatids to prostitution should amuse the rabble when it confronts them , that the crowd loves to behold that monstrous living pile of tinsel rags , half dung , half light , roll by on four wheels howling and laughing , that they should clap their hands at this glory composed of all shames , that there would be no festival for the populace , did not the police promenade in their midst these sorts of twenty-headed hydras of joy . 
But what can be done about it ? 
These be-ribboned and be-flowered tumbrils of mire are insulted and pardoned by the laughter of the public . 
The laughter of all is the accomplice of universal degradation . 
Certain unhealthy festivals disaggregate the people and convert them into the populace . 
And populaces , like tyrants , require buffoons . 
The King has Roquelaure , the populace has the Merry-Andrew . 
Paris is a great , mad city on every occasion that it is a great sublime city . 
There the Carnival forms part of politics . 
Paris , -- let us confess it -- willingly allows infamy to furnish it with comedy . 
She only demands of her masters -- when she has masters -- one thing : `` Paint me the mud . '' 
Rome was of the same mind . 
She loved Nero . 
Nero was a titanic lighterman . 
Chance ordained , as we have just said , that one of these shapeless clusters of masked men and women , dragged about on a vast calash , should halt on the left of the boulevard , while the wedding train halted on the right . 
The carriage-load of masks caught sight of the wedding carriage containing the bridal party opposite them on the other side of the boulevard . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said a masker , `` here 's a wedding . '' 
`` A sham wedding , '' retorted another . 
`` We are the genuine article . '' 
And , being too far off to accost the wedding party , and fearing also , the rebuke of the police , the two maskers turned their eyes elsewhere . 
At the end of another minute , the carriage-load of maskers had their hands full , the multitude set to yelling , which is the crowd 's caress to masquerades ; and the two maskers who had just spoken had to face the throng with their comrades , and did not find the entire repertory of projectiles of the fishmarkets too extensive to retort to the enormous verbal attacks of the populace . 
A frightful exchange of metaphors took place between the maskers and the crowd . 
In the meanwhile , two other maskers in the same carriage , a Spaniard with an enormous nose , an elderly air , and huge black moustache , and a gaunt fishwife , who was quite a young girl , masked with a loup , -LSB- 67 -RSB- had also noticed the wedding , and while their companions and the passers-by were exchanging insults , they had held a dialogue in a low voice . 
-LSB- 67 -RSB- A short mask . 
Their aside was covered by the tumult and was lost in it . 
The gusts of rain had drenched the front of the vehicle , which was wide open ; the breezes of February are not warm ; as the fishwife , clad in a low-necked gown , replied to the Spaniard , she shivered , laughed and coughed . 
Here is their dialogue : `` Say , now . '' 
`` What , daddy ? '' 
`` Do you see that old cove ? '' 
`` What old cove ? '' 
`` Yonder , in the first wedding-cart , on our side . '' 
`` The one with his arm hung up in a black cravat ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
