He replied in a low voice : -- `` How is that poor woman ? '' 
`` Not so bad just now ; but we have been very uneasy . '' 
She explained to him what had passed : that Fantine had been very ill the day before , and that she was better now , because she thought that the mayor had gone to Montfermeil to get her child . 
The sister dared not question the mayor ; but she perceived plainly from his air that he had not come from there . 
`` All that is good , '' said he ; `` you were right not to undeceive her . '' 
`` Yes , '' responded the sister ; `` but now , Mr. Mayor , she will see you and will not see her child . 
What shall we say to her ? '' 
He reflected for a moment . 
`` God will inspire us , '' said he . 
`` But we can not tell a lie , '' murmured the sister , half aloud . 
It was broad daylight in the room . 
The light fell full on M. Madeleine 's face . 
The sister chanced to raise her eyes to it . 
`` Good God , sir ! '' 
she exclaimed ; `` what has happened to you ? 
Your hair is perfectly white ! '' 
`` White ! '' 
said he . 
Sister Simplice had no mirror . 
She rummaged in a drawer , and pulled out the little glass which the doctor of the infirmary used to see whether a patient was dead and whether he no longer breathed . 
M. Madeleine took the mirror , looked at his hair , and said : -- `` Well ! '' 
He uttered the word indifferently , and as though his mind were on something else . 
The sister felt chilled by something strange of which she caught a glimpse in all this . 
He inquired : -- `` Can I see her ? '' 
`` Is not Monsieur le Maire going to have her child brought back to her ? '' 
said the sister , hardly venturing to put the question . 
`` Of course ; but it will take two or three days at least . '' 
`` If she were not to see Monsieur le Maire until that time , '' went on the sister , timidly , `` she would not know that Monsieur le Maire had returned , and it would be easy to inspire her with patience ; and when the child arrived , she would naturally think Monsieur le Maire had just come with the child . 
We should not have to enact a lie . '' 
M. Madeleine seemed to reflect for a few moments ; then he said with his calm gravity : -- `` No , sister , I must see her . 
I may , perhaps , be in haste . '' 
The nun did not appear to notice this word `` perhaps , '' which communicated an obscure and singular sense to the words of the mayor 's speech . 
She replied , lowering her eyes and her voice respectfully : -- `` In that case , she is asleep ; but Monsieur le Maire may enter . '' 
He made some remarks about a door which shut badly , and the noise of which might awaken the sick woman ; then he entered Fantine 's chamber , approached the bed and drew aside the curtains . 
She was asleep . 
Her breath issued from her breast with that tragic sound which is peculiar to those maladies , and which breaks the hearts of mothers when they are watching through the night beside their sleeping child who is condemned to death . 
But this painful respiration hardly troubled a sort of ineffable serenity which overspread her countenance , and which transfigured her in her sleep . 
Her pallor had become whiteness ; her cheeks were crimson ; her long golden lashes , the only beauty of her youth and her virginity which remained to her , palpitated , though they remained closed and drooping . 
Her whole person was trembling with an indescribable unfolding of wings , all ready to open wide and bear her away , which could be felt as they rustled , though they could not be seen . 
To see her thus , one would never have dreamed that she was an invalid whose life was almost despaired of . 
She resembled rather something on the point of soaring away than something on the point of dying . 
The branch trembles when a hand approaches it to pluck a flower , and seems to both withdraw and to offer itself at one and the same time . 
The human body has something of this tremor when the instant arrives in which the mysterious fingers of Death are about to pluck the soul . 
M. Madeleine remained for some time motionless beside that bed , gazing in turn upon the sick woman and the crucifix , as he had done two months before , on the day when he had come for the first time to see her in that asylum . 
They were both still there in the same attitude -- she sleeping , he praying ; only now , after the lapse of two months , her hair was gray and his was white . 
The sister had not entered with him . 
He stood beside the bed , with his finger on his lips , as though there were some one in the chamber whom he must enjoin to silence . 
She opened her eyes , saw him , and said quietly , with a smile : -- `` And Cosette ? '' 
FANTINE HAPPY She made no movement of either surprise or of joy ; she was joy itself . 
That simple question , `` And Cosette ? '' 
was put with so profound a faith , with so much certainty , with such a complete absence of disquiet and of doubt , that he found not a word of reply . 
She continued : -- `` I knew that you were there . 
I was asleep , but I saw you . 
I have seen you for a long , long time . 
I have been following you with my eyes all night long . 
You were in a glory , and you had around you all sorts of celestial forms . '' 
He raised his glance to the crucifix . 
`` But , '' she resumed , `` tell me where Cosette is . 
Why did not you place her on my bed against the moment of my waking ? '' 
He made some mechanical reply which he was never afterwards able to recall . 
Fortunately , the doctor had been warned , and he now made his appearance . 
He came to the aid of M. Madeleine . 
`` Calm yourself , my child , '' said the doctor ; `` your child is here . '' 
Fantine 's eyes beamed and filled her whole face with light . 
She clasped her hands with an expression which contained all that is possible to prayer in the way of violence and tenderness . 
`` Oh ! '' 
she exclaimed , `` bring her to me ! '' 
Touching illusion of a mother ! 
Cosette was , for her , still the little child who is carried . 
`` Not yet , '' said the doctor , `` not just now . 
You still have some fever . 
The sight of your child would agitate you and do you harm . 
You must be cured first . '' 
She interrupted him impetuously : -- `` But I am cured ! 
Oh , I tell you that I am cured ! 
What an ass that doctor is ! 
The idea ! 
I want to see my child ! '' 
`` You see , '' said the doctor , `` how excited you become . 
So long as you are in this state I shall oppose your having your child . 
It is not enough to see her ; it is necessary that you should live for her . 
When you are reasonable , I will bring her to you myself . '' 
The poor mother bowed her head . 
`` I beg your pardon , doctor , I really beg your pardon . 
Formerly I should never have spoken as I have just done ; so many misfortunes have happened to me , that I sometimes do not know what I am saying . 
I understand you ; you fear the emotion . 
I will wait as long as you like , but I swear to you that it would not have harmed me to see my daughter . 
I have been seeing her ; I have not taken my eyes from her since yesterday evening . 
Do you know ? 
If she were brought to me now , I should talk to her very gently . 
That is all . 
Is it not quite natural that I should desire to see my daughter , who has been brought to me expressly from Montfermeil ? 
I am not angry . 
I know well that I am about to be happy . 
All night long I have seen white things , and persons who smiled at me . 
When Monsieur le Docteur pleases , he shall bring me Cosette . 
I have no longer any fever ; I am well . 
I am perfectly conscious that there is nothing the matter with me any more ; but I am going to behave as though I were ill , and not stir , to please these ladies here . 
When it is seen that I am very calm , they will say , ` She must have her child . ' '' 
M. Madeleine was sitting on a chair beside the bed . 
