Should he return to hell and become an angel ? '' 
What was to be done ? 
Great God ! 
what was to be done ? 
The torment from which he had escaped with so much difficulty was unchained afresh within him . 
His ideas began to grow confused once more ; they assumed a kind of stupefied and mechanical quality which is peculiar to despair . 
The name of Romainville recurred incessantly to his mind , with the two verses of a song which he had heard in the past . 
He thought that Romainville was a little grove near Paris , where young lovers go to pluck lilacs in the month of April . 
He wavered outwardly as well as inwardly . 
He walked like a little child who is permitted to toddle alone . 
At intervals , as he combated his lassitude , he made an effort to recover the mastery of his mind . 
He tried to put to himself , for the last time , and definitely , the problem over which he had , in a manner , fallen prostrate with fatigue : Ought he to denounce himself ? 
Ought he to hold his peace ? 
He could not manage to see anything distinctly . 
The vague aspects of all the courses of reasoning which had been sketched out by his meditations quivered and vanished , one after the other , into smoke . 
He only felt that , to whatever course of action he made up his mind , something in him must die , and that of necessity , and without his being able to escape the fact ; that he was entering a sepulchre on the right hand as much as on the left ; that he was passing through a death agony , -- the agony of his happiness , or the agony of his virtue . 
Alas ! 
all his resolution had again taken possession of him . 
He was no further advanced than at the beginning . 
Thus did this unhappy soul struggle in its anguish . 
Eighteen hundred years before this unfortunate man , the mysterious Being in whom are summed up all the sanctities and all the sufferings of humanity had also long thrust aside with his hand , while the olive-trees quivered in the wild wind of the infinite , the terrible cup which appeared to Him dripping with darkness and overflowing with shadows in the depths all studded with stars . 
FORMS ASSUMED BY SUFFERING DURING SLEEP Three o'clock in the morning had just struck , and he had been walking thus for five hours , almost uninterruptedly , when he at length allowed himself to drop into his chair . 
There he fell asleep and had a dream . 
This dream , like the majority of dreams , bore no relation to the situation , except by its painful and heart-rending character , but it made an impression on him . 
This nightmare struck him so forcibly that he wrote it down later on . 
It is one of the papers in his own handwriting which he has bequeathed to us . 
We think that we have here reproduced the thing in strict accordance with the text . 
Of whatever nature this dream may be , the history of this night would be incomplete if we were to omit it : it is the gloomy adventure of an ailing soul . 
Here it is . 
On the envelope we find this line inscribed , `` The Dream I had that Night . '' 
`` I was in a plain ; a vast , gloomy plain , where there was no grass . 
It did not seem to me to be daylight nor yet night . 
`` I was walking with my brother , the brother of my childish years , the brother of whom , I must say , I never think , and whom I now hardly remember . 
`` We were conversing and we met some passers-by . 
We were talking of a neighbor of ours in former days , who had always worked with her window open from the time when she came to live on the street . 
As we talked we felt cold because of that open window . 
`` There were no trees in the plain . 
We saw a man passing close to us . 
He was entirely nude , of the hue of ashes , and mounted on a horse which was earth color . 
The man had no hair ; we could see his skull and the veins on it . 
In his hand he held a switch which was as supple as a vine-shoot and as heavy as iron . 
This horseman passed and said nothing to us . 
`` My brother said to me , ` Let us take to the hollow road . ' 
`` There existed a hollow way wherein one saw neither a single shrub nor a spear of moss . 
Everything was dirt-colored , even the sky . 
After proceeding a few paces , I received no reply when I spoke : I perceived that my brother was no longer with me . 
`` I entered a village which I espied . 
I reflected that it must be Romainville . 
-LRB- Why Romainville ? -RRB- 
-LSB- 5 -RSB- -LSB- 5 -RSB- This parenthesis is due to Jean Valjean . 
`` The first street that I entered was deserted . 
I entered a second street . 
Behind the angle formed by the two streets , a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I said to this Man : -- '' ` What country is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man made no reply . 
I saw the door of a house open , and I entered . 
`` The first chamber was deserted . 
I entered the second . 
Behind the door of this chamber a man was standing erect against the wall . 
I inquired of this man , ` Whose house is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man replied not . 
`` The house had a garden . 
I quitted the house and entered the garden . 
The garden was deserted . 
Behind the first tree I found a man standing upright . 
I said to this man , ` What garden is this ? 
Where am I ? ' 
The man did not answer . 
`` I strolled into the village , and perceived that it was a town . 
All the streets were deserted , all the doors were open . 
Not a single living being was passing in the streets , walking through the chambers or strolling in the gardens . 
But behind each angle of the walls , behind each door , behind each tree , stood a silent man . 
Only one was to be seen at a time . 
These men watched me pass . 
`` I left the town and began to ramble about the fields . 
`` After the lapse of some time I turned back and saw a great crowd coming up behind me . 
I recognized all the men whom I had seen in that town . 
They had strange heads . 
They did not seem to be in a hurry , yet they walked faster than I did . 
They made no noise as they walked . 
In an instant this crowd had overtaken and surrounded me . 
The faces of these men were earthen in hue . 
`` Then the first one whom I had seen and questioned on entering the town said to me : -- '' ` Whither are you going ! 
Do you not know that you have been dead this long time ? ' 
`` I opened my mouth to reply , and I perceived that there was no one near me . '' 
He woke . 
He was icy cold . 
A wind which was chill like the breeze of dawn was rattling the leaves of the window , which had been left open on their hinges . 
The fire was out . 
The candle was nearing its end . 
It was still black night . 
He rose , he went to the window . 
There were no stars in the sky even yet . 
From his window the yard of the house and the street were visible . 
A sharp , harsh noise , which made him drop his eyes , resounded from the earth . 
Below him he perceived two red stars , whose rays lengthened and shortened in a singular manner through the darkness . 
As his thoughts were still half immersed in the mists of sleep , `` Hold ! '' 
said he , `` there are no stars in the sky . 
