He chastely dropped his eyes before everything which was not the Republic . 
He was the marble lover of liberty . 
His speech was harshly inspired , and had the thrill of a hymn . 
He was subject to unexpected outbursts of soul . 
Woe to the love-affair which should have risked itself beside him ! 
If any grisette of the Place Cambrai or the Rue Saint-Jean-de-Beauvais , seeing that face of a youth escaped from college , that page 's mien , those long , golden lashes , those blue eyes , that hair billowing in the wind , those rosy cheeks , those fresh lips , those exquisite teeth , had conceived an appetite for that complete aurora , and had tried her beauty on Enjolras , an astounding and terrible glance would have promptly shown her the abyss , and would have taught her not to confound the mighty cherub of Ezekiel with the gallant Cherubino of Beaumarchais . 
By the side of Enjolras , who represented the logic of the Revolution , Combeferre represented its philosophy . 
Between the logic of the Revolution and its philosophy there exists this difference -- that its logic may end in war , whereas its philosophy can end only in peace . 
Combeferre complemented and rectified Enjolras . 
He was less lofty , but broader . 
He desired to pour into all minds the extensive principles of general ideas : he said : `` Revolution , but civilization '' ; and around the mountain peak he opened out a vast view of the blue sky . 
The Revolution was more adapted for breathing with Combeferre than with Enjolras . 
Enjolras expressed its divine right , and Combeferre its natural right . 
The first attached himself to Robespierre ; the second confined himself to Condorcet . 
Combeferre lived the life of all the rest of the world more than did Enjolras . 
If it had been granted to these two young men to attain to history , the one would have been the just , the other the wise man . 
Enjolras was the more virile , Combeferre the more humane . 
Homo and vir , that was the exact effect of their different shades . 
Combeferre was as gentle as Enjolras was severe , through natural whiteness . 
He loved the word citizen , but he preferred the word man . 
He would gladly have said : Hombre , like the Spanish . 
He read everything , went to the theatres , attended the courses of public lecturers , learned the polarization of light from Arago , grew enthusiastic over a lesson in which Geoffrey Sainte-Hilaire explained the double function of the external carotid artery , and the internal , the one which makes the face , and the one which makes the brain ; he kept up with what was going on , followed science step by step , compared Saint-Simon with Fourier , deciphered hieroglyphics , broke the pebble which he found and reasoned on geology , drew from memory a silkworm moth , pointed out the faulty French in the Dictionary of the Academy , studied Puysegur and Deleuze , affirmed nothing , not even miracles ; denied nothing , not even ghosts ; turned over the files of the Moniteur , reflected . 
He declared that the future lies in the hand of the schoolmaster , and busied himself with educational questions . 
He desired that society should labor without relaxation at the elevation of the moral and intellectual level , at coining science , at putting ideas into circulation , at increasing the mind in youthful persons , and he feared lest the present poverty of method , the paltriness from a literary point of view confined to two or three centuries called classic , the tyrannical dogmatism of official pedants , scholastic prejudices and routines should end by converting our colleges into artificial oyster beds . 
He was learned , a purist , exact , a graduate of the Polytechnic , a close student , and at the same time , thoughtful `` even to chimaeras , '' so his friends said . 
He believed in all dreams , railroads , the suppression of suffering in chirurgical operations , the fixing of images in the dark chamber , the electric telegraph , the steering of balloons . 
Moreover , he was not much alarmed by the citadels erected against the human mind in every direction , by superstition , despotism , and prejudice . 
He was one of those who think that science will eventually turn the position . 
Enjolras was a chief , Combeferre was a guide . 
One would have liked to fight under the one and to march behind the other . 
It is not that Combeferre was not capable of fighting , he did not refuse a hand-to-hand combat with the obstacle , and to attack it by main force and explosively ; but it suited him better to bring the human race into accord with its destiny gradually , by means of education , the inculcation of axioms , the promulgation of positive laws ; and , between two lights , his preference was rather for illumination than for conflagration . 
A conflagration can create an aurora , no doubt , but why not await the dawn ? 
A volcano illuminates , but daybreak furnishes a still better illumination . 
Possibly , Combeferre preferred the whiteness of the beautiful to the blaze of the sublime . 
A light troubled by smoke , progress purchased at the expense of violence , only half satisfied this tender and serious spirit . 
The headlong precipitation of a people into the truth , a ' 93 , terrified him ; nevertheless , stagnation was still more repulsive to him , in it he detected putrefaction and death ; on the whole , he preferred scum to miasma , and he preferred the torrent to the cesspool , and the falls of Niagara to the lake of Montfaucon . 
In short , he desired neither halt nor haste . 
While his tumultuous friends , captivated by the absolute , adored and invoked splendid revolutionary adventures , Combeferre was inclined to let progress , good progress , take its own course ; he may have been cold , but he was pure ; methodical , but irreproachable ; phlegmatic , but imperturbable . 
Combeferre would have knelt and clasped his hands to enable the future to arrive in all its candor , and that nothing might disturb the immense and virtuous evolution of the races . 
The good must be innocent , he repeated incessantly . 
And in fact , if the grandeur of the Revolution consists in keeping the dazzling ideal fixedly in view , and of soaring thither athwart the lightnings , with fire and blood in its talons , the beauty of progress lies in being spotless ; and there exists between Washington , who represents the one , and Danton , who incarnates the other , that difference which separates the swan from the angel with the wings of an eagle . 
Jean Prouvaire was a still softer shade than Combeferre . 
His name was Jehan , owing to that petty momentary freak which mingled with the powerful and profound movement whence sprang the very essential study of the Middle Ages . 
Jean Prouvaire was in love ; he cultivated a pot of flowers , played on the flute , made verses , loved the people , pitied woman , wept over the child , confounded God and the future in the same confidence , and blamed the Revolution for having caused the fall of a royal head , that of Andre Chenier . 
His voice was ordinarily delicate , but suddenly grew manly . 
He was learned even to erudition , and almost an Orientalist . 
Above all , he was good ; and , a very simple thing to those who know how nearly goodness borders on grandeur , in the matter of poetry , he preferred the immense . 
He knew Italian , Latin , Greek , and Hebrew ; and these served him only for the perusal of four poets : Dante , Juvenal , AEschylus , and Isaiah . 
In French , he preferred Corneille to Racine , and Agrippa d'Aubigne to Corneille . 
He loved to saunter through fields of wild oats and corn-flowers , and busied himself with clouds nearly as much as with events . 
His mind had two attitudes , one on the side towards man , the other on that towards God ; he studied or he contemplated . 
All day long , he buried himself in social questions , salary , capital , credit , marriage , religion , liberty of thought , education , penal servitude , poverty , association , property , production and sharing , the enigma of this lower world which covers the human ant-hill with darkness ; and at night , he gazed upon the planets , those enormous beings . 
Like Enjolras , he was wealthy and an only son . 
He spoke softly , bowed his head , lowered his eyes , smiled with embarrassment , dressed badly , had an awkward air , blushed at a mere nothing , and was very timid . 
Yet he was intrepid . 
Feuilly was a workingman , a fan-maker , orphaned both of father and mother , who earned with difficulty three francs a day , and had but one thought , to deliver the world . 
He had one other preoccupation , to educate himself ; he called this also , delivering himself . 
He had taught himself to read and write ; everything that he knew , he had learned by himself . 
Feuilly had a generous heart . 
The range of his embrace was immense . 
This orphan had adopted the peoples . 
As his mother had failed him , he meditated on his country . 
He brooded with the profound divination of the man of the people , over what we now call the idea of the nationality , had learned history with the express object of raging with full knowledge of the case . 
In this club of young Utopians , occupied chiefly with France , he represented the outside world . 
He had for his specialty Greece , Poland , Hungary , Roumania , Italy . 
He uttered these names incessantly , appropriately and inappropriately , with the tenacity of right . 
The violations of Turkey on Greece and Thessaly , of Russia on Warsaw , of Austria on Venice , enraged him . 
Above all things , the great violence of 1772 aroused him . 
There is no more sovereign eloquence than the true in indignation ; he was eloquent with that eloquence . 
He was inexhaustible on that infamous date of 1772 , on the subject of that noble and valiant race suppressed by treason , and that three-sided crime , on that monstrous ambush , the prototype and pattern of all those horrible suppressions of states , which , since that time , have struck many a noble nation , and have annulled their certificate of birth , so to speak . 
All contemporary social crimes have their origin in the partition of Poland . 
The partition of Poland is a theorem of which all present political outrages are the corollaries . 
There has not been a despot , nor a traitor for nearly a century back , who has not signed , approved , counter-signed , and copied , ne variatur , the partition of Poland . 
When the record of modern treasons was examined , that was the first thing which made its appearance . 
The congress of Vienna consulted that crime before consummating its own . 
1772 sounded the onset ; 1815 was the death of the game . 
Such was Feuilly 's habitual text . 
This poor workingman had constituted himself the tutor of Justice , and she recompensed him by rendering him great . 
The fact is , that there is eternity in right . 
Warsaw can no more be Tartar than Venice can be Teuton . 
Kings lose their pains and their honor in the attempt to make them so . 
Sooner or later , the submerged part floats to the surface and reappears . 
Greece becomes Greece again , Italy is once more Italy . 
The protest of right against the deed persists forever . 
The theft of a nation can not be allowed by prescription . 
These lofty deeds of rascality have no future . 
A nation can not have its mark extracted like a pocket handkerchief . 
Courfeyrac had a father who was called M. de Courfeyrac . 
One of the false ideas of the bourgeoisie under the Restoration as regards aristocracy and the nobility was to believe in the particle . 
The particle , as every one knows , possesses no significance . 
But the bourgeois of the epoch of la Minerve estimated so highly that poor de , that they thought themselves bound to abdicate it . 
M. de Chauvelin had himself called M. Chauvelin ; M. de Caumartin , M. Caumartin ; M. de Constant de Robecque , Benjamin Constant ; M. de Lafayette , M. Lafayette . 
Courfeyrac had not wished to remain behind the rest , and called himself plain Courfeyrac . 
We might almost , so far as Courfeyrac is concerned , stop here , and confine ourselves to saying with regard to what remains : `` For Courfeyrac , see Tholomyes . '' 
Courfeyrac had , in fact , that animation of youth which may be called the beaute du diable of the mind . 
Later on , this disappears like the playfulness of the kitten , and all this grace ends , with the bourgeois , on two legs , and with the tomcat , on four paws . 
This sort of wit is transmitted from generation to generation of the successive levies of youth who traverse the schools , who pass it from hand to hand , quasi cursores , and is almost always exactly the same ; so that , as we have just pointed out , any one who had listened to Courfeyrac in 1828 would have thought he heard Tholomyes in 1817 . 
Only , Courfeyrac was an honorable fellow . 
Beneath the apparent similarities of the exterior mind , the difference between him and Tholomyes was very great . 
The latent man which existed in the two was totally different in the first from what it was in the second . 
