Men fire in a square , in a passage , in a blind alley ; they take and re-take the barricade ; blood flows , the grape-shot riddles the fronts of the houses , the balls kill people in their beds , corpses encumber the streets . 
A few streets away , the shock of billiard-balls can be heard in the cafes . 
The theatres open their doors and present vaudevilles ; the curious laugh and chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled with war . 
Hackney-carriages go their way ; passers-by are going to a dinner somewhere in town . 
Sometimes in the very quarter where the fighting is going on . 
In 1831 , a fusillade was stopped to allow a wedding party to pass . 
At the time of the insurrection of 1839 , in the Rue Saint-Martin a little , infirm old man , pushing a hand-cart surmounted by a tricolored rag , in which he had carafes filled with some sort of liquid , went and came from barricade to troops and from troops to the barricade , offering his glasses of cocoa impartially , -- now to the Government , now to anarchy . 
Nothing can be stranger ; and this is the peculiar character of uprisings in Paris , which can not be found in any other capital . 
To this end , two things are requisite , the size of Paris and its gayety . 
The city of Voltaire and Napoleon is necessary . 
On this occasion , however , in the resort to arms of June 25th , 1832 , the great city felt something which was , perhaps , stronger than itself . 
It was afraid . 
Closed doors , windows , and shutters were to be seen everywhere , in the most distant and most `` disinterested '' quarters . 
The courageous took to arms , the poltroons hid . 
The busy and heedless passer-by disappeared . 
Many streets were empty at four o'clock in the morning . 
Alarming details were hawked about , fatal news was disseminated , -- that they were masters of the Bank ; -- that there were six hundred of them in the Cloister of Saint-Merry alone , entrenched and embattled in the church ; that the line was not to be depended on ; that Armand Carrel had been to see Marshal Clausel and that the Marshal had said : `` Get a regiment first '' ; that Lafayette was ill , but that he had said to them , nevertheless : `` I am with you . 
I will follow you wherever there is room for a chair '' ; that one must be on one 's guard ; that at night there would be people pillaging isolated dwellings in the deserted corners of Paris -LRB- there the imagination of the police , that Anne Radcliffe mixed up with the Government was recognizable -RRB- ; that a battery had been established in the Rue Aubry le Boucher ; that Lobau and Bugeaud were putting their heads together , and that , at midnight , or at daybreak at latest , four columns would march simultaneously on the centre of the uprising , the first coming from the Bastille , the second from the Porte Saint-Martin , the third from the Greve , the fourth from the Halles ; that perhaps , also , the troops would evacuate Paris and withdraw to the Champ-de-Mars ; that no one knew what would happen , but that this time , it certainly was serious . 
People busied themselves over Marshal Soult 's hesitations . 
Why did not he attack at once ? 
It is certain that he was profoundly absorbed . 
The old lion seemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom . 
Evening came , the theatres did not open ; the patrols circulated with an air of irritation ; passers-by were searched ; suspicious persons were arrested . 
By nine o'clock , more than eight hundred persons had been arrested , the Prefecture of Police was encumbered with them , so was the Conciergerie , so was La Force . 
At the Conciergerie in particular , the long vault which is called the Rue de Paris was littered with trusses of straw upon which lay a heap of prisoners , whom the man of Lyons , Lagrange , harangued valiantly . 
All that straw rustled by all these men , produced the sound of a heavy shower . 
Elsewhere prisoners slept in the open air in the meadows , piled on top of each other . 
Anxiety reigned everywhere , and a certain tremor which was not habitual with Paris . 
People barricaded themselves in their houses ; wives and mothers were uneasy ; nothing was to be heard but this : `` Ah ! 
my God ! 
He has not come home ! '' 
There was hardly even the distant rumble of a vehicle to be heard . 
People listened on their thresholds , to the rumors , the shouts , the tumult , the dull and indistinct sounds , to the things that were said : `` It is cavalry , '' or : `` Those are the caissons galloping , '' to the trumpets , the drums , the firing , and , above all , to that lamentable alarm peal from Saint-Merry . 
They waited for the first cannon-shot . 
Men sprang up at the corners of the streets and disappeared , shouting : `` Go home ! '' 
And people made haste to bolt their doors . 
They said : `` How will all this end ? '' 
From moment to moment , in proportion as the darkness descended , Paris seemed to take on a more mournful hue from the formidable flaming of the revolt . 
SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF GAVROCHE 'S POETRY . 
THE INFLUENCE OF AN ACADEMICIAN ON THIS POETRY At the instant when the insurrection , arising from the shock of the populace and the military in front of the Arsenal , started a movement in advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was following the hearse and which , through the whole length of the boulevards , weighed , so to speak , on the head of the procession , there arose a frightful ebb . 
The rout was shaken , their ranks were broken , all ran , fled , made their escape , some with shouts of attack , others with the pallor of flight . 
The great river which covered the boulevards divided in a twinkling , overflowed to right and left , and spread in torrents over two hundred streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has broken loose . 
At that moment , a ragged child who was coming down through the Rue Menilmontant , holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which he had just plucked on the heights of Belleville , caught sight of an old holster-pistol in the show-window of a bric-a-brac merchant 's shop . 
`` Mother What 's - your-name , I 'm going to borrow your machine . '' 
And off he ran with the pistol . 
Two minutes later , a flood of frightened bourgeois who were fleeing through the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse , encountered the lad brandishing his pistol and singing : -- La nuit on ne voit rien , Le jour on voit tres bien , D'un ecrit apocrypha Le bourgeois s ` ebouriffe , Pratiquez la vertu , Tutu , chapeau pointu ! 
-LSB- 44 -RSB- -LSB- 44 -RSB- At night one sees nothing , by day one sees very well ; the bourgeois gets flurried over an apocryphal scrawl , practice virtue , tutu , pointed hat ! 
It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars . 
On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger . 
Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march , and of all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion ? 
We know not . 
Who does know ? 
Himself , perhaps . 
However , Gavroche was well up in all the popular tunes in circulation , and he mingled with them his own chirpings . 
An observing urchin and a rogue , he made a potpourri of the voices of nature and the voices of Paris . 
He combined the repertory of the birds with the repertory of the workshops . 
He was acquainted with thieves , a tribe contiguous to his own . 
He had , it appears , been for three months apprenticed to a printer . 
He had one day executed a commission for M. Baour-Lormian , one of the Forty . 
Gavroche was a gamin of letters . 
Moreover , Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had offered the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously rainy night , it was to his own brothers that he had played the part of Providence . 
His brothers in the evening , his father in the morning ; that is what his night had been like . 
On quitting the Rue des Ballets at daybreak , he had returned in haste to the elephant , had artistically extracted from it the two brats , had shared with them some sort of breakfast which he had invented , and had then gone away , confiding them to that good mother , the street , who had brought him up , almost entirely . 
On leaving them , he had appointed to meet them at the same spot in the evening , and had left them this discourse by way of a farewell : `` I break a cane , otherwise expressed , I cut my stick , or , as they say at the court , I file off . 
If you do n't find papa and mamma , young ` uns , come back here this evening . 
I 'll scramble you up some supper , and I 'll give you a shakedown . '' 
The two children , picked up by some policeman and placed in the refuge , or stolen by some mountebank , or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a Paris , did not return . 
The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of these lost traces . 
Gavroche did not see them again . 
Ten or twelve weeks had elapsed since that night . 
More than once he had scratched the back of his head and said : `` Where the devil are my two children ? '' 
In the meantime , he had arrived , pistol in hand , in the Rue du Pont-aux-Choux . 
He noticed that there was but one shop open in that street , and , a matter worthy of reflection , that was a pastry-cook 's shop . 
This presented a providential occasion to eat another apple-turnover before entering the unknown . 
Gavroche halted , fumbled in his fob , turned his pocket inside out , found nothing , not even a sou , and began to shout : `` Help ! '' 
It is hard to miss the last cake . 
Nevertheless , Gavroche pursued his way . 
Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint-Louis . 
While traversing the Rue du Parc-Royal , he felt called upon to make good the loss of the apple-turnover which had been impossible , and he indulged himself in the immense delight of tearing down the theatre posters in broad daylight . 
A little further on , on catching sight of a group of comfortable-looking persons , who seemed to be landed proprietors , he shrugged his shoulders and spit out at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as they passed : `` How fat those moneyed men are ! 
They 're drunk ! 
They just wallow in good dinners . 
Ask 'em what they do with their money . 
They do n't know . 
They eat it , that 's what they do ! 
As much as their bellies will hold . '' 
GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH The brandishing of a triggerless pistol , grasped in one 's hand in the open street , is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his fervor increasing with every moment . 
Amid the scraps of the Marseillaise which he was singing , he shouted : -- `` All goes well . 
I suffer a great deal in my left paw , I 'm all broken up with rheumatism , but I 'm satisfied , citizens . 
All that the bourgeois have to do is to bear themselves well , I 'll sneeze them out subversive couplets . 
What are the police spies ? 
Dogs . 
And I 'd just like to have one of them at the end of my pistol . 
I 'm just from the boulevard , my friends . 
It 's getting hot there , it 's getting into a little boil , it 's simmering . 
It 's time to skim the pot . 
Forward march , men ! 
Let an impure blood inundate the furrows ! 
I give my days to my country , I shall never see my concubine more , Nini , finished , yes , Nini ? 
But never mind ! 
