Here he took fright ; his balance became disjointed ; one of the scales fell into the abyss , the other rose heavenward , and Javert was no less terrified by the one which was on high than by the one which was below . 
Without being in the least in the world what is called Voltairian or a philosopher , or incredulous , being , on the contrary , respectful by instinct , towards the established church , he knew it only as an august fragment of the social whole ; order was his dogma , and sufficed for him ; ever since he had attained to man 's estate and the rank of a functionary , he had centred nearly all his religion in the police . 
Being , -- and here we employ words without the least irony and in their most serious acceptation , being , as we have said , a spy as other men are priests . 
He had a superior , M. Gisquet ; up to that day he had never dreamed of that other superior , God . 
This new chief , God , he became unexpectedly conscious of , and he felt embarrassed by him . 
This unforeseen presence threw him off his bearings ; he did not know what to do with this superior , he , who was not ignorant of the fact that the subordinate is bound always to bow , that he must not disobey , nor find fault , nor discuss , and that , in the presence of a superior who amazes him too greatly , the inferior has no other resource than that of handing in his resignation . 
But how was he to set about handing in his resignation to God ? 
However things might stand , -- and it was to this point that he reverted constantly , -- one fact dominated everything else for him , and that was , that he had just committed a terrible infraction of the law . 
He had just shut his eyes on an escaped convict who had broken his ban . 
He had just set a galley-slave at large . 
He had just robbed the laws of a man who belonged to them . 
That was what he had done . 
He no longer understood himself . 
The very reasons for his action escaped him ; only their vertigo was left with him . 
Up to that moment he had lived with that blind faith which gloomy probity engenders . 
This faith had quitted him , this probity had deserted him . 
All that he had believed in melted away . 
Truths which he did not wish to recognize were besieging him , inexorably . 
Henceforth , he must be a different man . 
He was suffering from the strange pains of a conscience abruptly operated on for the cataract . 
He saw that which it was repugnant to him to behold . 
He felt himself emptied , useless , put out of joint with his past life , turned out , dissolved . 
Authority was dead within him . 
He had no longer any reason for existing . 
A terrible situation ! 
to be touched . 
To be granite and to doubt ! 
to be the statue of Chastisement cast in one piece in the mould of the law , and suddenly to become aware of the fact that one cherishes beneath one 's breast of bronze something absurd and disobedient which almost resembles a heart ! 
To come to the pass of returning good for good , although one has said to oneself up to that day that that good is evil ! 
to be the watch-dog , and to lick the intruder 's hand ! 
to be ice and melt ! 
to be the pincers and to turn into a hand ! 
to suddenly feel one 's fingers opening ! 
to relax one 's grip , -- what a terrible thing ! 
The man-projectile no longer acquainted with his route and retreating ! 
To be obliged to confess this to oneself : infallibility is not infallible , there may exist error in the dogma , all has not been said when a code speaks , society is not perfect , authority is complicated with vacillation , a crack is possible in the immutable , judges are but men , the law may err , tribunals may make a mistake ! 
to behold a rift in the immense blue pane of the firmament ! 
That which was passing in Javert was the Fampoux of a rectilinear conscience , the derailment of a soul , the crushing of a probity which had been irresistibly launched in a straight line and was breaking against God . 
It certainly was singular that the stoker of order , that the engineer of authority , mounted on the blind iron horse with its rigid road , could be unseated by a flash of light ! 
that the immovable , the direct , the correct , the geometrical , the passive , the perfect , could bend ! 
that there should exist for the locomotive a road to Damascus ! 
God , always within man , and refractory , He , the true conscience , to the false ; a prohibition to the spark to die out ; an order to the ray to remember the sun ; an injunction to the soul to recognize the veritable absolute when confronted with the fictitious absolute , humanity which can not be lost ; the human heart indestructible ; that splendid phenomenon , the finest , perhaps , of all our interior marvels , did Javert understand this ? 
Did Javert penetrate it ? 
Did Javert account for it to himself ? 
Evidently he did not . 
But beneath the pressure of that incontestable incomprehensibility he felt his brain bursting . 
He was less the man transfigured than the victim of this prodigy . 
In all this he perceived only the tremendous difficulty of existence . 
It seemed to him that , henceforth , his respiration was repressed forever . 
He was not accustomed to having something unknown hanging over his head . 
Up to this point , everything above him had been , to his gaze , merely a smooth , limpid and simple surface ; there was nothing incomprehensible , nothing obscure ; nothing that was not defined , regularly disposed , linked , precise , circumscribed , exact , limited , closed , fully provided for ; authority was a plane surface ; there was no fall in it , no dizziness in its presence . 
Javert had never beheld the unknown except from below . 
The irregular , the unforeseen , the disordered opening of chaos , the possible slip over a precipice -- this was the work of the lower regions , of rebels , of the wicked , of wretches . 
Now Javert threw himself back , and he was suddenly terrified by this unprecedented apparition : a gulf on high . 
What ! 
one was dismantled from top to bottom ! 
one was disconcerted , absolutely ! 
In what could one trust ! 
That which had been agreed upon was giving way ! 
What ! 
the defect in society 's armor could be discovered by a magnanimous wretch ! 
What ! 
an honest servitor of the law could suddenly find himself caught between two crimes -- the crime of allowing a man to escape and the crime of arresting him ! 
everything was not settled in the orders given by the State to the functionary ! 
There might be blind alleys in duty ! 
What , -- all this was real ! 
was it true that an ex-ruffian , weighed down with convictions , could rise erect and end by being in the right ? 
Was this credible ? 
were there cases in which the law should retire before transfigured crime , and stammer its excuses ? 
-- Yes , that was the state of the case ! 
and Javert saw it ! 
and Javert had touched it ! 
and not only could he not deny it , but he had taken part in it . 
These were realities . 
It was abominable that actual facts could reach such deformity . 
If facts did their duty , they would confine themselves to being proofs of the law ; facts -- it is God who sends them . 
Was anarchy , then , on the point of now descending from on high ? 
Thus , -- and in the exaggeration of anguish , and the optical illusion of consternation , all that might have corrected and restrained this impression was effaced , and society , and the human race , and the universe were , henceforth , summed up in his eyes , in one simple and terrible feature , -- thus the penal laws , the thing judged , the force due to legislation , the decrees of the sovereign courts , the magistracy , the government , prevention , repression , official cruelty , wisdom , legal infallibility , the principle of authority , all the dogmas on which rest political and civil security , sovereignty , justice , public truth , all this was rubbish , a shapeless mass , chaos ; he himself , Javert , the spy of order , incorruptibility in the service of the police , the bull-dog providence of society , vanquished and hurled to earth ; and , erect , at the summit of all that ruin , a man with a green cap on his head and a halo round his brow ; this was the astounding confusion to which he had come ; this was the fearful vision which he bore within his soul . 
Was this to be endured ? 
No . 
A violent state , if ever such existed . 
There were only two ways of escaping from it . 
One was to go resolutely to Jean Valjean , and restore to his cell the convict from the galleys . 
The other ... Javert quitted the parapet , and , with head erect this time , betook himself , with a firm tread , towards the station-house indicated by a lantern at one of the corners of the Place du Chatelet . 
On arriving there , he saw through the window a sergeant of police , and he entered . 
Policemen recognize each other by the very way in which they open the door of a station-house . 
Javert mentioned his name , showed his card to the sergeant , and seated himself at the table of the post on which a candle was burning . 
On a table lay a pen , a leaden inkstand and paper , provided in the event of possible reports and the orders of the night patrols . 
This table , still completed by its straw-seated chair , is an institution ; it exists in all police stations ; it is invariably ornamented with a box-wood saucer filled with sawdust and a wafer box of cardboard filled with red wafers , and it forms the lowest stage of official style . 
It is there that the literature of the State has its beginning . 
Javert took a pen and a sheet of paper , and began to write . 
This is what he wrote : A FEW OBSERVATIONS FOR THE GOOD OF THE SERVICE . 
`` In the first place : I beg Monsieur le Prefet to cast his eyes on this . 
`` Secondly : prisoners , on arriving after examination , take off their shoes and stand barefoot on the flagstones while they are being searched . 
Many of them cough on their return to prison . 
This entails hospital expenses . 
`` Thirdly : the mode of keeping track of a man with relays of police agents from distance to distance , is good , but , on important occasions , it is requisite that at least two agents should never lose sight of each other , so that , in case one agent should , for any cause , grow weak in his service , the other may supervise him and take his place . 
`` Fourthly : it is inexplicable why the special regulation of the prison of the Madelonettes interdicts the prisoner from having a chair , even by paying for it . 
`` Fifthly : in the Madelonettes there are only two bars to the canteen , so that the canteen woman can touch the prisoners with her hand . 
`` Sixthly : the prisoners called barkers , who summon the other prisoners to the parlor , force the prisoner to pay them two sous to call his name distinctly . 
