Impossible ! 
She was obliged to accustom herself to disrepute , as she had accustomed herself to indigence . 
Gradually she decided on her course . 
At the expiration of two or three months she shook off her shame , and began to go about as though there were nothing the matter . 
`` It is all the same to me , '' she said . 
She went and came , bearing her head well up , with a bitter smile , and was conscious that she was becoming brazen-faced . 
Madame Victurnien sometimes saw her passing , from her window , noticed the distress of `` that creature '' who , `` thanks to her , '' had been `` put back in her proper place , '' and congratulated herself . 
The happiness of the evil-minded is black . 
Excess of toil wore out Fantine , and the little dry cough which troubled her increased . 
She sometimes said to her neighbor , Marguerite , `` Just feel how hot my hands are ! '' 
Nevertheless , when she combed her beautiful hair in the morning with an old broken comb , and it flowed about her like floss silk , she experienced a moment of happy coquetry . 
RESULT OF THE SUCCESS She had been dismissed towards the end of the winter ; the summer passed , but winter came again . 
Short days , less work . 
Winter : no warmth , no light , no noonday , the evening joining on to the morning , fogs , twilight ; the window is gray ; it is impossible to see clearly at it . 
The sky is but a vent-hole . 
The whole day is a cavern . 
The sun has the air of a beggar . 
A frightful season ! 
Winter changes the water of heaven and the heart of man into a stone . 
Her creditors harrassed her . 
Fantine earned too little . 
Her debts had increased . 
The Thenardiers , who were not promptly paid , wrote to her constantly letters whose contents drove her to despair , and whose carriage ruined her . 
One day they wrote to her that her little Cosette was entirely naked in that cold weather , that she needed a woollen skirt , and that her mother must send at least ten francs for this . 
She received the letter , and crushed it in her hands all day long . 
That evening she went into a barber 's shop at the corner of the street , and pulled out her comb . 
Her admirable golden hair fell to her knees . 
`` What splendid hair ! '' 
exclaimed the barber . 
`` How much will you give me for it ? '' 
said she . 
`` Ten francs . '' 
`` Cut it off . '' 
She purchased a knitted petticoat and sent it to the Thenardiers . 
This petticoat made the Thenardiers furious . 
It was the money that they wanted . 
They gave the petticoat to Eponine . 
The poor Lark continued to shiver . 
Fantine thought : `` My child is no longer cold . 
I have clothed her with my hair . '' 
She put on little round caps which concealed her shorn head , and in which she was still pretty . 
Dark thoughts held possession of Fantine 's heart . 
When she saw that she could no longer dress her hair , she began to hate every one about her . 
She had long shared the universal veneration for Father Madeleine ; yet , by dint of repeating to herself that it was he who had discharged her , that he was the cause of her unhappiness , she came to hate him also , and most of all . 
When she passed the factory in working hours , when the workpeople were at the door , she affected to laugh and sing . 
An old workwoman who once saw her laughing and singing in this fashion said , `` There 's a girl who will come to a bad end . 
She took a lover , the first who offered , a man whom she did not love , out of bravado and with rage in her heart . 
He was a miserable scamp , a sort of mendicant musician , a lazy beggar , who beat her , and who abandoned her as she had taken him , in disgust . 
She adored her child . 
The lower she descended , the darker everything grew about her , the more radiant shone that little angel at the bottom of her heart . 
She said , `` When I get rich , I will have my Cosette with me ; '' and she laughed . 
Her cough did not leave her , and she had sweats on her back . 
One day she received from the Thenardiers a letter couched in the following terms : `` Cosette is ill with a malady which is going the rounds of the neighborhood . 
A miliary fever , they call it . 
Expensive drugs are required . 
This is ruining us , and we can no longer pay for them . 
If you do not send us forty francs before the week is out , the little one will be dead . '' 
She burst out laughing , and said to her old neighbor : `` Ah ! 
they are good ! 
Forty francs ! 
the idea ! 
That makes two napoleons ! 
Where do they think I am to get them ? 
These peasants are stupid , truly . '' 
Nevertheless she went to a dormer window in the staircase and read the letter once more . 
Then she descended the stairs and emerged , running and leaping and still laughing . 
Some one met her and said to her , `` What makes you so gay ? '' 
She replied : `` A fine piece of stupidity that some country people have written to me . 
They demand forty francs of me . 
So much for you , you peasants ! '' 
As she crossed the square , she saw a great many people collected around a carriage of eccentric shape , upon the top of which stood a man dressed in red , who was holding forth . 
He was a quack dentist on his rounds , who was offering to the public full sets of teeth , opiates , powders and elixirs . 
Fantine mingled in the group , and began to laugh with the rest at the harangue , which contained slang for the populace and jargon for respectable people . 
The tooth-puller espied the lovely , laughing girl , and suddenly exclaimed : `` You have beautiful teeth , you girl there , who are laughing ; if you want to sell me your palettes , I will give you a gold napoleon apiece for them . '' 
`` What are my palettes ? '' 
asked Fantine . 
`` The palettes , '' replied the dental professor , `` are the front teeth , the two upper ones . '' 
`` How horrible ! '' 
exclaimed Fantine . 
`` Two napoleons ! '' 
grumbled a toothless old woman who was present . 
`` Here 's a lucky girl ! '' 
Fantine fled and stopped her ears that she might not hear the hoarse voice of the man shouting to her : `` Reflect , my beauty ! 
two napoleons ; they may prove of service . 
If your heart bids you , come this evening to the inn of the Tillac d'Argent ; you will find me there . '' 
Fantine returned home . 
She was furious , and related the occurrence to her good neighbor Marguerite : `` Can you understand such a thing ? 
Is he not an abominable man ? 
How can they allow such people to go about the country ! 
Pull out my two front teeth ! 
Why , I should be horrible ! 
My hair will grow again , but my teeth ! 
Ah ! 
what a monster of a man ! 
I should prefer to throw myself head first on the pavement from the fifth story ! 
He told me that he should be at the Tillac d'Argent this evening . '' 
`` And what did he offer ? '' 
asked Marguerite . 
`` Two napoleons . '' 
`` That makes forty francs . '' 
