Or chance decreed that Marius should traverse Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau between Enjolras and Courfeyrac . 
Courfeyrac took his arm : -- `` Pay attention . 
This is the Rue Platriere , now called Rue Jean-Jacques Rousseau , on account of a singular household which lived in it sixty years ago . 
This consisted of Jean-Jacques and Therese . 
From time to time , little beings were born there . 
Therese gave birth to them , Jean-Jacques represented them as foundlings . '' 
And Enjolras addressed Courfeyrac roughly : -- `` Silence in the presence of Jean-Jacques ! 
I admire that man . 
He denied his own children , that may be ; but he adopted the people . '' 
Not one of these young men articulated the word : The Emperor . 
Jean Prouvaire alone sometimes said Napoleon ; all the others said `` Bonaparte . '' 
Enjolras pronounced it `` Buonaparte . '' 
Marius was vaguely surprised . 
Initium sapientiae . 
THE BACK ROOM OF THE CAFE MUSAIN One of the conversations among the young men , at which Marius was present and in which he sometimes joined , was a veritable shock to his mind . 
This took place in the back room of the Cafe Musain . 
Nearly all the Friends of the A B C had convened that evening . 
The argand lamp was solemnly lighted . 
They talked of one thing and another , without passion and with noise . 
With the exception of Enjolras and Marius , who held their peace , all were haranguing rather at hap-hazard . 
Conversations between comrades sometimes are subject to these peaceable tumults . 
It was a game and an uproar as much as a conversation . 
They tossed words to each other and caught them up in turn . 
They were chattering in all quarters . 
No woman was admitted to this back room , except Louison , the dish-washer of the cafe , who passed through it from time to time , to go to her washing in the `` lavatory . '' 
Grantaire , thoroughly drunk , was deafening the corner of which he had taken possession , reasoning and contradicting at the top of his lungs , and shouting : -- `` I am thirsty . 
Mortals , I am dreaming : that the tun of Heidelberg has an attack of apoplexy , and that I am one of the dozen leeches which will be applied to it . 
I want a drink . 
I desire to forget life . 
Life is a hideous invention of I know not whom . 
It lasts no time at all , and is worth nothing . 
One breaks one 's neck in living . 
Life is a theatre set in which there are but few practicable entrances . 
Happiness is an antique reliquary painted on one side only . 
Ecclesiastes says : ` All is vanity . ' 
I agree with that good man , who never existed , perhaps . 
Zero not wishing to go stark naked , clothed himself in vanity . 
O vanity ! 
The patching up of everything with big words ! 
a kitchen is a laboratory , a dancer is a professor , an acrobat is a gymnast , a boxer is a pugilist , an apothecary is a chemist , a wigmaker is an artist , a hodman is an architect , a jockey is a sportsman , a wood-louse is a pterigybranche . 
Vanity has a right and a wrong side ; the right side is stupid , it is the negro with his glass beads ; the wrong side is foolish , it is the philosopher with his rags . 
I weep over the one and I laugh over the other . 
What are called honors and dignities , and even dignity and honor , are generally of pinchbeck . 
Kings make playthings of human pride . 
Caligula made a horse a consul ; Charles II . 
made a knight of a sirloin . 
Wrap yourself up now , then , between Consul Incitatus and Baronet Roastbeef . 
As for the intrinsic value of people , it is no longer respectable in the least . 
Listen to the panegyric which neighbor makes of neighbor . 
White on white is ferocious ; if the lily could speak , what a setting down it would give the dove ! 
A bigoted woman prating of a devout woman is more venomous than the asp and the cobra . 
It is a shame that I am ignorant , otherwise I would quote to you a mass of things ; but I know nothing . 
For instance , I have always been witty ; when I was a pupil of Gros , instead of daubing wretched little pictures , I passed my time in pilfering apples ; rapin -LSB- 24 -RSB- is the masculine of rapine . 
So much for myself ; as for the rest of you , you are worth no more than I am . 
I scoff at your perfections , excellencies , and qualities . 
Every good quality tends towards a defect ; economy borders on avarice , the generous man is next door to the prodigal , the brave man rubs elbows with the braggart ; he who says very pious says a trifle bigoted ; there are just as many vices in virtue as there are holes in Diogenes ' cloak . 
Whom do you admire , the slain or the slayer , Caesar or Brutus ? 
Generally men are in favor of the slayer . 
Long live Brutus , he has slain ! 
There lies the virtue . 
Virtue , granted , but madness also . 
There are queer spots on those great men . 
The Brutus who killed Caesar was in love with the statue of a little boy . 
This statue was from the hand of the Greek sculptor Strongylion , who also carved that figure of an Amazon known as the Beautiful Leg , Eucnemos , which Nero carried with him in his travels . 
This Strongylion left but two statues which placed Nero and Brutus in accord . 
Brutus was in love with the one , Nero with the other . 
All history is nothing but wearisome repetition . 
One century is the plagiarist of the other . 
The battle of Marengo copies the battle of Pydna ; the Tolbiac of Clovis and the Austerlitz of Napoleon are as like each other as two drops of water . 
I do n't attach much importance to victory . 
Nothing is so stupid as to conquer ; true glory lies in convincing . 
But try to prove something ! 
If you are content with success , what mediocrity , and with conquering , what wretchedness ! 
Alas , vanity and cowardice everywhere . 
Everything obeys success , even grammar . 
Si volet usus , says Horace . 
Therefore I disdain the human race . 
Shall we descend to the party at all ? 
Do you wish me to begin admiring the peoples ? 
What people , if you please ? 
Shall it be Greece ? 
The Athenians , those Parisians of days gone by , slew Phocion , as we might say Coligny , and fawned upon tyrants to such an extent that Anacephorus said of Pisistratus : `` His urine attracts the bees . '' 
The most prominent man in Greece for fifty years was that grammarian Philetas , who was so small and so thin that he was obliged to load his shoes with lead in order not to be blown away by the wind . 
There stood on the great square in Corinth a statue carved by Silanion and catalogued by Pliny ; this statue represented Episthates . 
What did Episthates do ? 
He invented a trip . 
That sums up Greece and glory . 
Let us pass on to others . 
Shall I admire England ? 
Shall I admire France ? 
France ? 
Why ? 
Because of Paris ? 
I have just told you my opinion of Athens . 
England ? 
Why ? 
Because of London ? 
I hate Carthage . 
And then , London , the metropolis of luxury , is the headquarters of wretchedness . 
There are a hundred deaths a year of hunger in the parish of Charing-Cross alone . 
