Aunt Gillenormand went and came , in affright , wringing her hands and incapable of doing anything but saying : `` Heavens ! 
is it possible ? '' 
At times she added : `` Everything will be covered with blood . '' 
When her first horror had passed off , a certain philosophy of the situation penetrated her mind , and took form in the exclamation : `` It was bound to end in this way ! '' 
She did not go so far as : `` I told you so ! '' 
which is customary on this sort of occasion . 
At the physician 's orders , a camp bed had been prepared beside the sofa . 
The doctor examined Marius , and after having found that his pulse was still beating , that the wounded man had no very deep wound on his breast , and that the blood on the corners of his lips proceeded from his nostrils , he had him placed flat on the bed , without a pillow , with his head on the same level as his body , and even a trifle lower , and with his bust bare in order to facilitate respiration . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , on perceiving that they were undressing Marius , withdrew . 
She set herself to telling her beads in her own chamber . 
The trunk had not suffered any internal injury ; a bullet , deadened by the pocket-book , had turned aside and made the tour of his ribs with a hideous laceration , which was of no great depth , and consequently , not dangerous . 
The long , underground journey had completed the dislocation of the broken collar-bone , and the disorder there was serious . 
The arms had been slashed with sabre cuts . 
Not a single scar disfigured his face ; but his head was fairly covered with cuts ; what would be the result of these wounds on the head ? 
Would they stop short at the hairy cuticle , or would they attack the brain ? 
As yet , this could not be decided . 
A grave symptom was that they had caused a swoon , and that people do not always recover from such swoons . 
Moreover , the wounded man had been exhausted by hemorrhage . 
From the waist down , the barricade had protected the lower part of the body from injury . 
Basque and Nicolette tore up linen and prepared bandages ; Nicolette sewed them , Basque rolled them . 
As lint was lacking , the doctor , for the time being , arrested the bleeding with layers of wadding . 
Beside the bed , three candles burned on a table where the case of surgical instruments lay spread out . 
The doctor bathed Marius ' face and hair with cold water . 
A full pail was reddened in an instant . 
The porter , candle in hand , lighted them . 
The doctor seemed to be pondering sadly . 
From time to time , he made a negative sign with his head , as though replying to some question which he had inwardly addressed to himself . 
A bad sign for the sick man are these mysterious dialogues of the doctor with himself . 
At the moment when the doctor was wiping Marius ' face , and lightly touching his still closed eyes with his finger , a door opened at the end of the drawing-room , and a long , pallid figure made its appearance . 
This was the grandfather . 
The revolt had , for the past two days , deeply agitated , enraged and engrossed the mind of M. Gillenormand . 
He had not been able to sleep on the previous night , and he had been in a fever all day long . 
In the evening , he had gone to bed very early , recommending that everything in the house should be well barred , and he had fallen into a doze through sheer fatigue . 
Old men sleep lightly ; M. Gillenormand 's chamber adjoined the drawing-room , and in spite of all the precautions that had been taken , the noise had awakened him . 
Surprised at the rift of light which he saw under his door , he had risen from his bed , and had groped his way thither . 
He stood astonished on the threshold , one hand on the handle of the half-open door , with his head bent a little forward and quivering , his body wrapped in a white dressing-gown , which was straight and as destitute of folds as a winding-sheet ; and he had the air of a phantom who is gazing into a tomb . 
He saw the bed , and on the mattress that young man , bleeding , white with a waxen whiteness , with closed eyes and gaping mouth , and pallid lips , stripped to the waist , slashed all over with crimson wounds , motionless and brilliantly lighted up . 
The grandfather trembled from head to foot as powerfully as ossified limbs can tremble , his eyes , whose corneae were yellow on account of his great age , were veiled in a sort of vitreous glitter , his whole face assumed in an instant the earthy angles of a skull , his arms fell pendent , as though a spring had broken , and his amazement was betrayed by the outspreading of the fingers of his two aged hands , which quivered all over , his knees formed an angle in front , allowing , through the opening in his dressing-gown , a view of his poor bare legs , all bristling with white hairs , and he murmured : `` Marius ! '' 
`` Sir , '' said Basque , `` Monsieur has just been brought back . 
He went to the barricade , and ... '' `` He is dead ! '' 
cried the old man in a terrible voice . 
`` Ah ! 
The rascal ! '' 
Then a sort of sepulchral transformation straightened up this centenarian as erect as a young man . 
`` Sir , '' said he , `` you are the doctor . 
Begin by telling me one thing . 
He is dead , is he not ? '' 
The doctor , who was at the highest pitch of anxiety , remained silent . 
M. Gillenormand wrung his hands with an outburst of terrible laughter . 
`` He is dead ! 
He is dead ! 
He is dead ! 
He has got himself killed on the barricades ! 
Out of hatred to me ! 
He did that to spite me ! 
Ah ! 
You blood-drinker ! 
This is the way he returns to me ! 
Misery of my life , he is dead ! '' 
He went to the window , threw it wide open as though he were stifling , and , erect before the darkness , he began to talk into the street , to the night : `` Pierced , sabred , exterminated , slashed , hacked in pieces ! 
Just look at that , the villain ! 
He knew well that I was waiting for him , and that I had had his room arranged , and that I had placed at the head of my bed his portrait taken when he was a little child ! 
He knew well that he had only to come back , and that I had been recalling him for years , and that I remained by my fireside , with my hands on my knees , not knowing what to do , and that I was mad over it ! 
You knew well , that you had but to return and to say : ` It is I , ' and you would have been the master of the house , and that I should have obeyed you , and that you could have done whatever you pleased with your old numskull of a grandfather ! 
you knew that well , and you said : `` No , he is a Royalist , I will not go ! 
And you went to the barricades , and you got yourself killed out of malice ! 
To revenge yourself for what I said to you about Monsieur le Duc de Berry . 
It is infamous ! 
Go to bed then and sleep tranquilly ! 
he is dead , and this is my awakening . '' 
The doctor , who was beginning to be uneasy in both quarters , quitted Marius for a moment , went to M. Gillenormand , and took his arm . 
The grandfather turned round , gazed at him with eyes which seemed exaggerated in size and bloodshot , and said to him calmly : `` I thank you , sir . 
I am composed , I am a man , I witnessed the death of Louis XVI. , I know how to bear events . 
One thing is terrible and that is to think that it is your newspapers which do all the mischief . 
You will have scribblers , chatterers , lawyers , orators , tribunes , discussions , progress , enlightenment , the rights of man , the liberty of the press , and this is the way that your children will be brought home to you . 
Ah ! 
Marius ! 
It is abominable ! 
Killed ! 
Dead before me ! 
A barricade ! 
Ah , the scamp ! 
Doctor , you live in this quarter , I believe ? 
Oh ! 
I know you well . 
I see your cabriolet pass my window . 
I am going to tell you . 
You are wrong to think that I am angry . 
One does not fly into a rage against a dead man . 
That would be stupid . 
This is a child whom I have reared . 
I was already old while he was very young . 
He played in the Tuileries garden with his little shovel and his little chair , and in order that the inspectors might not grumble , I stopped up the holes that he made in the earth with his shovel , with my cane . 
One day he exclaimed : Down with Louis XVIII . ! 
and off he went . 
It was no fault of mine . 
He was all rosy and blond . 
His mother is dead . 
Have you ever noticed that all little children are blond ? 
Why is it so ? 
