When he cried , ` Sinite parvulos , ' he made no distinction between the little children . 
It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod . 
Innocence , Monsieur , is its own crown . 
Innocence has no need to be a highness . 
It is as august in rags as in fleurs de lys . '' 
`` That is true , '' said the Bishop in a low voice . 
`` I persist , '' continued the conventionary G -- `` You have mentioned Louis XVII . 
to me . 
Let us come to an understanding . 
Shall we weep for all the innocent , all martyrs , all children , the lowly as well as the exalted ? 
I agree to that . 
But in that case , as I have told you , we must go back further than ' 93 , and our tears must begin before Louis XVII . 
I will weep with you over the children of kings , provided that you will weep with me over the children of the people . '' 
`` I weep for all , '' said the Bishop . 
`` Equally ! '' 
exclaimed conventionary G -- ; `` and if the balance must incline , let it be on the side of the people . 
They have been suffering longer . '' 
Another silence ensued . 
The conventionary was the first to break it . 
He raised himself on one elbow , took a bit of his cheek between his thumb and his forefinger , as one does mechanically when one interrogates and judges , and appealed to the Bishop with a gaze full of all the forces of the death agony . 
It was almost an explosion . 
`` Yes , sir , the people have been suffering a long while . 
And hold ! 
that is not all , either ; why have you just questioned me and talked to me about Louis XVII . ? 
I know you not . 
Ever since I have been in these parts I have dwelt in this enclosure alone , never setting foot outside , and seeing no one but that child who helps me . 
Your name has reached me in a confused manner , it is true , and very badly pronounced , I must admit ; but that signifies nothing : clever men have so many ways of imposing on that honest goodman , the people . 
By the way , I did not hear the sound of your carriage ; you have left it yonder , behind the coppice at the fork of the roads , no doubt . 
I do not know you , I tell you . 
You have told me that you are the Bishop ; but that affords me no information as to your moral personality . 
In short , I repeat my question . 
Who are you ? 
You are a bishop ; that is to say , a prince of the church , one of those gilded men with heraldic bearings and revenues , who have vast prebends , -- the bishopric of D -- fifteen thousand francs settled income , ten thousand in perquisites ; total , twenty-five thousand francs , -- who have kitchens , who have liveries , who make good cheer , who eat moor-hens on Friday , who strut about , a lackey before , a lackey behind , in a gala coach , and who have palaces , and who roll in their carriages in the name of Jesus Christ who went barefoot ! 
You are a prelate , -- revenues , palace , horses , servants , good table , all the sensualities of life ; you have this like the rest , and like the rest , you enjoy it ; it is well ; but this says either too much or too little ; this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value of the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me . 
To whom do I speak ? 
Who are you ? '' 
The Bishop hung his head and replied , `` Vermis sum -- I am a worm . '' 
`` A worm of the earth in a carriage ? '' 
growled the conventionary . 
It was the conventionary 's turn to be arrogant , and the Bishop 's to be humble . 
The Bishop resumed mildly : -- `` So be it , sir . 
But explain to me how my carriage , which is a few paces off behind the trees yonder , how my good table and the moor-hens which I eat on Friday , how my twenty-five thousand francs income , how my palace and my lackeys prove that clemency is not a duty , and that '93 was not inexorable . 
The conventionary passed his hand across his brow , as though to sweep away a cloud . 
`` Before replying to you , '' he said , `` I beseech you to pardon me . 
I have just committed a wrong , sir . 
You are at my house , you are my guest , I owe you courtesy . 
You discuss my ideas , and it becomes me to confine myself to combating your arguments . 
Your riches and your pleasures are advantages which I hold over you in the debate ; but good taste dictates that I shall not make use of them . 
I promise you to make no use of them in the future . '' 
`` I thank you , '' said the Bishop . 
G -- resumed . 
`` Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me . 
Where were we ? 
What were you saying to me ? 
That '93 was inexorable ? '' 
`` Inexorable ; yes , '' said the Bishop . 
`` What think you of Marat clapping his hands at the guillotine ? '' 
`` What think you of Bossuet chanting the Te Deum over the dragonnades ? '' 
The retort was a harsh one , but it attained its mark with the directness of a point of steel . 
The Bishop quivered under it ; no reply occurred to him ; but he was offended by this mode of alluding to Bossuet . 
The best of minds will have their fetiches , and they sometimes feel vaguely wounded by the want of respect of logic . 
The conventionary began to pant ; the asthma of the agony which is mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice ; still , there was a perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes . 
He went on : -- `` Let me say a few words more in this and that direction ; I am willing . 
Apart from the Revolution , which , taken as a whole , is an immense human affirmation , '93 is , alas ! 
a rejoinder . 
You think it inexorable , sir ; but what of the whole monarchy , sir ? 
Carrier is a bandit ; but what name do you give to Montrevel ? 
Fouquier-Tainville is a rascal ; but what is your opinion as to Lamoignon-Baville ? 
Maillard is terrible ; but Saulx-Tavannes , if you please ? 
Duchene senior is ferocious ; but what epithet will you allow me for the elder Letellier ? 
Jourdan-Coupe-Tete is a monster ; but not so great a one as M. the Marquis de Louvois . 
Sir , sir , I am sorry for Marie Antoinette , archduchess and queen ; but I am also sorry for that poor Huguenot woman , who , in 1685 , under Louis the Great , sir , while with a nursing infant , was bound , naked to the waist , to a stake , and the child kept at a distance ; her breast swelled with milk and her heart with anguish ; the little one , hungry and pale , beheld that breast and cried and agonized ; the executioner said to the woman , a mother and a nurse , ` Abjure ! ' 
giving her her choice between the death of her infant and the death of her conscience . 
What say you to that torture of Tantalus as applied to a mother ? 
Bear this well in mind sir : the French Revolution had its reasons for existence ; its wrath will be absolved by the future ; its result is the world made better . 
From its most terrible blows there comes forth a caress for the human race . 
I abridge , I stop , I have too much the advantage ; moreover , I am dying . '' 
And ceasing to gaze at the Bishop , the conventionary concluded his thoughts in these tranquil words : -- `` Yes , the brutalities of progress are called revolutions . 
When they are over , this fact is recognized , -- that the human race has been treated harshly , but that it has progressed . '' 
The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop . 
One remained , however , and from this intrenchment , the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu 's resistance , came forth this reply , wherein appeared nearly all the harshness of the beginning : -- `` Progress should believe in God . 
Good can not have an impious servitor . 
He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race . '' 
The former representative of the people made no reply . 
He was seized with a fit of trembling . 
He looked towards heaven , and in his glance a tear gathered slowly . 
When the eyelid was full , the tear trickled down his livid cheek , and he said , almost in a stammer , quite low , and to himself , while his eyes were plunged in the depths : -- `` O thou ! 
O ideal ! 
Thou alone existest ! '' 
The Bishop experienced an indescribable shock . 
After a pause , the old man raised a finger heavenward and said : -- `` The infinite is . 
He is there . 
If the infinite had no person , person would be without limit ; it would not be infinite ; in other words , it would not exist . 
There is , then , an I . 
That I of the infinite is God . '' 
The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice , and with the shiver of ecstasy , as though he beheld some one . 
When he had spoken , his eyes closed . 
The effort had exhausted him . 
It was evident that he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had been left to him . 
That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in death . 
