`` If I set ten men to work . '' 
`` What if the spokes were to be tied together with ropes ? '' 
`` That could be done with the spokes , not with the hub ; and the felly is in a bad state , too . '' 
`` Is there any one in this village who lets out teams ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Is there another wheelwright ? '' 
The stableman and the wheelwright replied in concert , with a toss of the head `` No . '' 
He felt an immense joy . 
It was evident that Providence was intervening . 
That it was it who had broken the wheel of the tilbury and who was stopping him on the road . 
He had not yielded to this sort of first summons ; he had just made every possible effort to continue the journey ; he had loyally and scrupulously exhausted all means ; he had been deterred neither by the season , nor fatigue , nor by the expense ; he had nothing with which to reproach himself . 
If he went no further , that was no fault of his . 
It did not concern him further . 
It was no longer his fault . 
It was not the act of his own conscience , but the act of Providence . 
He breathed again . 
He breathed freely and to the full extent of his lungs for the first time since Javert 's visit . 
It seemed to him that the hand of iron which had held his heart in its grasp for the last twenty hours had just released him . 
It seemed to him that God was for him now , and was manifesting Himself . 
He said himself that he had done all he could , and that now he had nothing to do but retrace his steps quietly . 
If his conversation with the wheelwright had taken place in a chamber of the inn , it would have had no witnesses , no one would have heard him , things would have rested there , and it is probable that we should not have had to relate any of the occurrences which the reader is about to peruse ; but this conversation had taken place in the street . 
Any colloquy in the street inevitably attracts a crowd . 
There are always people who ask nothing better than to become spectators . 
While he was questioning the wheelwright , some people who were passing back and forth halted around them . 
After listening for a few minutes , a young lad , to whom no one had paid any heed , detached himself from the group and ran off . 
At the moment when the traveller , after the inward deliberation which we have just described , resolved to retrace his steps , this child returned . 
He was accompanied by an old woman . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the woman , `` my boy tells me that you wish to hire a cabriolet . '' 
These simple words uttered by an old woman led by a child made the perspiration trickle down his limbs . 
He thought that he beheld the hand which had relaxed its grasp reappear in the darkness behind him , ready to seize him once more . 
He answered : -- `` Yes , my good woman ; I am in search of a cabriolet which I can hire . '' 
And he hastened to add : -- `` But there is none in the place . '' 
`` Certainly there is , '' said the old woman . 
`` Where ? '' 
interpolated the wheelwright . 
`` At my house , '' replied the old woman . 
He shuddered . 
The fatal hand had grasped him again . 
The old woman really had in her shed a sort of basket spring-cart . 
The wheelwright and the stable-man , in despair at the prospect of the traveller escaping their clutches , interfered . 
`` It was a frightful old trap ; it rests flat on the axle ; it is an actual fact that the seats were suspended inside it by leather thongs ; the rain came into it ; the wheels were rusted and eaten with moisture ; it would not go much further than the tilbury ; a regular ramshackle old stage-wagon ; the gentleman would make a great mistake if he trusted himself to it , '' etc. , etc. . 
All this was true ; but this trap , this ramshackle old vehicle , this thing , whatever it was , ran on its two wheels and could go to Arras . 
He paid what was asked , left the tilbury with the wheelwright to be repaired , intending to reclaim it on his return , had the white horse put to the cart , climbed into it , and resumed the road which he had been travelling since morning . 
At the moment when the cart moved off , he admitted that he had felt , a moment previously , a certain joy in the thought that he should not go whither he was now proceeding . 
He examined this joy with a sort of wrath , and found it absurd . 
Why should he feel joy at turning back ? 
After all , he was taking this trip of his own free will . 
No one was forcing him to it . 
And assuredly nothing would happen except what he should choose . 
As he left Hesdin , he heard a voice shouting to him : `` Stop ! 
Stop ! '' 
He halted the cart with a vigorous movement which contained a feverish and convulsive element resembling hope . 
It was the old woman 's little boy . 
`` Monsieur , '' said the latter , `` it was I who got the cart for you . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` You have not given me anything . '' 
He who gave to all so readily thought this demand exorbitant and almost odious . 
`` Ah ! 
it 's you , you scamp ? '' 
said he ; `` you shall have nothing . '' 
He whipped up his horse and set off at full speed . 
He had lost a great deal of time at Hesdin . 
He wanted to make it good . 
The little horse was courageous , and pulled for two ; but it was the month of February , there had been rain ; the roads were bad . 
And then , it was no longer the tilbury . 
The cart was very heavy , and in addition , there were many ascents . 
He took nearly four hours to go from Hesdin to Saint-Pol ; four hours for five leagues . 
At Saint-Pol he had the horse unharnessed at the first inn he came to and led to the stable ; as he had promised Scaufflaire , he stood beside the manger while the horse was eating ; he thought of sad and confusing things . 
The inn-keeper 's wife came to the stable . 
`` Does not Monsieur wish to breakfast ? '' 
`` Come , that is true ; I even have a good appetite . '' 
He followed the woman , who had a rosy , cheerful face ; she led him to the public room where there were tables covered with waxed cloth . 
`` Make haste ! '' 
said he ; `` I must start again ; I am in a hurry . '' 
A big Flemish servant-maid placed his knife and fork in all haste ; he looked at the girl with a sensation of comfort . 
`` That is what ailed me , '' he thought ; `` I had not breakfasted . '' 
His breakfast was served ; he seized the bread , took a mouthful , and then slowly replaced it on the table , and did not touch it again . 
A carter was eating at another table ; he said to this man : -- `` Why is their bread so bitter here ? '' 
The carter was a German and did not understand him . 
He returned to the stable and remained near the horse . 
An hour later he had quitted Saint-Pol and was directing his course towards Tinques , which is only five leagues from Arras . 
What did he do during this journey ? 
Of what was he thinking ? 
As in the morning , he watched the trees , the thatched roofs , the tilled fields pass by , and the way in which the landscape , broken at every turn of the road , vanished ; this is a sort of contemplation which sometimes suffices to the soul , and almost relieves it from thought . 
What is more melancholy and more profound than to see a thousand objects for the first and the last time ? 
To travel is to be born and to die at every instant ; perhaps , in the vaguest region of his mind , be did make comparisons between the shifting horizon and our human existence : all the things of life are perpetually fleeing before us ; the dark and bright intervals are intermingled ; after a dazzling moment , an eclipse ; we look , we hasten , we stretch out our hands to grasp what is passing ; each event is a turn in the road , and , all at once , we are old ; we feel a shock ; all is black ; we distinguish an obscure door ; the gloomy horse of life , which has been drawing us halts , and we see a veiled and unknown person unharnessing amid the shadows . 
Twilight was falling when the children who were coming out of school beheld this traveller enter Tinques ; it is true that the days were still short ; he did not halt at Tinques ; as he emerged from the village , a laborer , who was mending the road with stones , raised his head and said to him : -- `` That horse is very much fatigued . '' 
The poor beast was , in fact , going at a walk . 
`` Are you going to Arras ? '' 
added the road-mender . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` If you go on at that rate you will not arrive very early . '' 
He stopped his horse , and asked the laborer : -- `` How far is it from here to Arras ? '' 
`` Nearly seven good leagues . '' 
`` How is that ? 
the posting guide only says five leagues and a quarter . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
returned the road-mender , `` so you do n't know that the road is under repair ? 
You will find it barred a quarter of an hour further on ; there is no way to proceed further . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
