There is a market for human flesh ; and it is not with your shadowy hands , shuddering around them , that you will prevent them from entering it ! 
Think of the street , think of the pavement covered with passers-by , think of the shops past which women go and come with necks all bare , and through the mire . 
These women , too , were pure once . 
Think of your sisters , those of you who have them . 
Misery , prostitution , the police , Saint-Lazare -- that is what those beautiful , delicate girls , those fragile marvels of modesty , gentleness and loveliness , fresher than lilacs in the month of May , will come to . 
Ah ! 
you have got yourselves killed ! 
You are no longer on hand ! 
That is well ; you have wished to release the people from Royalty , and you deliver over your daughters to the police . 
Friends , have a care , have mercy . 
Women , unhappy women , we are not in the habit of bestowing much thought on them . 
We trust to the women not having received a man 's education , we prevent their reading , we prevent their thinking , we prevent their occupying themselves with politics ; will you prevent them from going to the dead-house this evening , and recognizing your bodies ? 
Let us see , those who have families must be tractable , and shake hands with us and take themselves off , and leave us here alone to attend to this affair . 
I know well that courage is required to leave , that it is hard ; but the harder it is , the more meritorious . 
You say : ` I have a gun , I am at the barricade ; so much the worse , I shall remain there . ' 
So much the worse is easily said . 
My friends , there is a morrow ; you will not be here to-morrow , but your families will ; and what sufferings ! 
See , here is a pretty , healthy child , with cheeks like an apple , who babbles , prattles , chatters , who laughs , who smells sweet beneath your kiss , -- and do you know what becomes of him when he is abandoned ? 
I have seen one , a very small creature , no taller than that . 
His father was dead . 
Poor people had taken him in out of charity , but they had bread only for themselves . 
The child was always hungry . 
It was winter . 
He did not cry . 
You could see him approach the stove , in which there was never any fire , and whose pipe , you know , was of mastic and yellow clay . 
His breathing was hoarse , his face livid , his limbs flaccid , his belly prominent . 
He said nothing . 
If you spoke to him , he did not answer . 
He is dead . 
He was taken to the Necker Hospital , where I saw him . 
I was house-surgeon in that hospital . 
Now , if there are any fathers among you , fathers whose happiness it is to stroll on Sundays holding their child 's tiny hand in their robust hand , let each one of those fathers imagine that this child is his own . 
That poor brat , I remember , and I seem to see him now , when he lay nude on the dissecting table , how his ribs stood out on his skin like the graves beneath the grass in a cemetery . 
A sort of mud was found in his stomach . 
There were ashes in his teeth . 
Come , let us examine ourselves conscientiously and take counsel with our heart . 
Statistics show that the mortality among abandoned children is fifty-five per cent . 
I repeat , it is a question of women , it concerns mothers , it concerns young girls , it concerns little children . 
Who is talking to you of yourselves ? 
We know well what you are ; we know well that you are all brave , parbleu ! 
we know well that you all have in your souls the joy and the glory of giving your life for the great cause ; we know well that you feel yourselves elected to die usefully and magnificently , and that each one of you clings to his share in the triumph . 
Very well . 
But you are not alone in this world . 
There are other beings of whom you must think . 
You must not be egoists . '' 
All dropped their heads with a gloomy air . 
Strange contradictions of the human heart at its most sublime moments . 
Combeferre , who spoke thus , was not an orphan . 
He recalled the mothers of other men , and forgot his own . 
He was about to get himself killed . 
He was `` an egoist . '' 
Marius , fasting , fevered , having emerged in succession from all hope , and having been stranded in grief , the most sombre of shipwrecks , and saturated with violent emotions and conscious that the end was near , had plunged deeper and deeper into that visionary stupor which always precedes the fatal hour voluntarily accepted . 
A physiologist might have studied in him the growing symptoms of that febrile absorption known to , and classified by , science , and which is to suffering what voluptuousness is to pleasure . 
Despair , also , has its ecstasy . 
Marius had reached this point . 
He looked on at everything as from without ; as we have said , things which passed before him seemed far away ; he made out the whole , but did not perceive the details . 
He beheld men going and coming as through a flame . 
He heard voices speaking as at the bottom of an abyss . 
But this moved him . 
There was in this scene a point which pierced and roused even him . 
He had but one idea now , to die ; and he did not wish to be turned aside from it , but he reflected , in his gloomy somnambulism , that while destroying himself , he was not prohibited from saving some one else . 
He raised his voice . 
`` Enjolras and Combeferre are right , '' said he ; `` no unnecessary sacrifice . 
I join them , and you must make haste . 
Combeferre has said convincing things to you . 
There are some among you who have families , mothers , sisters , wives , children . 
Let such leave the ranks . '' 
No one stirred . 
`` Married men and the supporters of families , step out of the ranks ! '' 
repeated Marius . 
His authority was great . 
Enjolras was certainly the head of the barricade , but Marius was its savior . 
`` I order it , '' cried Enjolras . 
`` I entreat you , '' said Marius . 
Then , touched by Combeferre 's words , shaken by Enjolras ' order , touched by Marius ' entreaty , these heroic men began to denounce each other . 
-- `` It is true , '' said one young man to a full grown man , `` you are the father of a family . 
Go . '' 
-- `` It is your duty rather , '' retorted the man , `` you have two sisters whom you maintain . '' 
-- And an unprecedented controversy broke forth . 
Each struggled to determine which should not allow himself to be placed at the door of the tomb . 
`` Make haste , '' said Courfeyrac , `` in another quarter of an hour it will be too late . '' 
`` Citizens , '' pursued Enjolras , `` this is the Republic , and universal suffrage reigns . 
Do you yourselves designate those who are to go . '' 
They obeyed . 
After the expiration of a few minutes , five were unanimously selected and stepped out of the ranks . 
`` There are five of them ! '' 
exclaimed Marius . 
There were only four uniforms . 
`` Well , '' began the five , `` one must stay behind . '' 
And then a struggle arose as to who should remain , and who should find reasons for the others not remaining . 
The generous quarrel began afresh . 
`` You have a wife who loves you . '' 
-- `` You have your aged mother . '' 
-- '' You have neither father nor mother , and what is to become of your three little brothers ? '' 
-- `` You are the father of five children . '' 
-- `` You have a right to live , you are only seventeen , it is too early for you to die . '' 
These great revolutionary barricades were assembling points for heroism . 
The improbable was simple there . 
These men did not astonish each other . 
`` Be quick , '' repeated Courfeyrac . 
