Here , again , there was a magical word which it was necessary to know . 
If one did not know it , the voice ceased , the wall became silent once more , as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on the other side of it . 
If one knew the password , the voice resumed , `` Enter on the right . '' 
One then perceived on the right , facing the window , a glass door surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray . 
On raising the latch and crossing the threshold , one experienced precisely the same impression as when one enters at the theatre into a grated baignoire , before the grating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted . 
One was , in fact , in a sort of theatre-box , narrow , furnished with two old chairs , and a much-frayed straw matting , sparely illuminated by the vague light from the glass door ; a regular box , with its front just of a height to lean upon , bearing a tablet of black wood . 
This box was grated , only the grating of it was not of gilded wood , as at the opera ; it was a monstrous lattice of iron bars , hideously interlaced and riveted to the wall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists . 
The first minutes passed ; when one 's eyes began to grow used to this cellar-like half-twilight , one tried to pass the grating , but got no further than six inches beyond it . 
There he encountered a barrier of black shutters , re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood painted a gingerbread yellow . 
These shutters were divided into long , narrow slats , and they masked the entire length of the grating . 
They were always closed . 
At the expiration of a few moments one heard a voice proceeding from behind these shutters , and saying : -- `` I am here . 
What do you wish with me ? '' 
It was a beloved , sometimes an adored , voice . 
No one was visible . 
Hardly the sound of a breath was audible . 
It seemed as though it were a spirit which had been evoked , that was speaking to you across the walls of the tomb . 
If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare conditions , the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you ; the evoked spirit became an apparition . 
Behind the grating , behind the shutter , one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight , a head , of which only the mouth and the chin were visible ; the rest was covered with a black veil . 
One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe , and a form that was barely defined , covered with a black shroud . 
That head spoke with you , but did not look at you and never smiled at you . 
The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner that you saw her in the white , and she saw you in the black . 
This light was symbolical . 
Nevertheless , your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was made in that place shut off from all glances . 
A profound vagueness enveloped that form clad in mourning . 
Your eyes searched that vagueness , and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition . 
At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you could see nothing . 
What you beheld was night , emptiness , shadows , a wintry mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb , a sort of terrible peace , a silence from which you could gather nothing , not even sighs , a gloom in which you could distinguish nothing , not even phantoms . 
What you beheld was the interior of a cloister . 
It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was called the Convent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration . 
The box in which you stood was the parlor . 
The first voice which had addressed you was that of the portress who always sat motionless and silent , on the other side of the wall , near the square opening , screened by the iron grating and the plate with its thousand holes , as by a double visor . 
The obscurity which bathed the grated box arose from the fact that the parlor , which had a window on the side of the world , had none on the side of the convent . 
Profane eyes must see nothing of that sacred place . 
Nevertheless , there was something beyond that shadow ; there was a light ; there was life in the midst of that death . 
Although this was the most strictly walled of all convents , we shall endeavor to make our way into it , and to take the reader in , and to say , without transgressing the proper bounds , things which story-tellers have never seen , and have , therefore , never described . 
THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA This convent , which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in the Rue Petit-Picpus , was a community of Bernardines of the obedience of Martin Verga . 
These Bernardines were attached , in consequence , not to Clairvaux , like the Bernardine monks , but to Citeaux , like the Benedictine monks . 
In other words , they were the subjects , not of Saint Bernard , but of Saint Benoit . 
Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent knows that Martin Verga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines , with Salamanca for the head of the order , and Alcala as the branch establishment . 
This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic countries of Europe . 
There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one order on another . 
To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoit , which is here in question : there are attached to this order , without counting the obedience of Martin Verga , four congregations , -- two in Italy , Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua ; two in France , Cluny and Saint-Maur ; and nine orders , -- Vallombrosa , Granmont , the Celestins , the Camaldules , the Carthusians , the Humilies , the Olivateurs , the Silvestrins , and lastly , Citeaux ; for Citeaux itself , a trunk for other orders , is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoit . 
Citeaux dates from Saint Robert , Abbe de Molesme , in the diocese of Langres , in 1098 . 
Now it was in 529 that the devil , having retired to the desert of Subiaco -- he was old -- had he turned hermit ? 
-- was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo , where he dwelt , by Saint-Benoit , then aged seventeen . 
After the rule of the Carmelites , who go barefoot , wear a bit of willow on their throats , and never sit down , the harshest rule is that of the Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
They are clothed in black , with a guimpe , which , in accordance with the express command of Saint-Benoit , mounts to the chin . 
A robe of serge with large sleeves , a large woollen veil , the guimpe which mounts to the chin cut square on the breast , the band which descends over their brow to their eyes , -- this is their dress . 
All is black except the band , which is white . 
The novices wear the same habit , but all in white . 
The professed nuns also wear a rosary at their side . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual Adoration , like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , who , at the beginning of this century , had two houses in Paris , -- one at the Temple , the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve . 
However , the Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus , of whom we are speaking , were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve and at the Temple . 
There were numerous differences in their rule ; there were some in their costume . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus wore the black guimpe , and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament and of the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve wore a white one , and had , besides , on their breasts , a Holy Sacrament about three inches long , in silver gilt or gilded copper . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this Holy Sacrament . 
The Perpetual Adoration , which was common to the house of the Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple , leaves those two orders perfectly distinct . 
Their only resemblance lies in this practice of the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of Martin Verga , just as there existed a similarity in the study and the glorification of all the mysteries relating to the infancy , the life , and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin , between the two orders , which were , nevertheless , widely separated , and on occasion even hostile . 
The Oratory of Italy , established at Florence by Philip de Neri , and the Oratory of France , established by Pierre de Berulle . 
The Oratory of France claimed the precedence , since Philip de Neri was only a saint , while Berulle was a cardinal . 
Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round , abstain from meat , fast in Lent and on many other days which are peculiar to them , rise from their first sleep , from one to three o'clock in the morning , to read their breviary and chant matins , sleep in all seasons between serge sheets and on straw , make no use of the bath , never light a fire , scourge themselves every Friday , observe the rule of silence , speak to each other only during the recreation hours , which are very brief , and wear drugget chemises for six months in the year , from September 14th , which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross , until Easter . 
These six months are a modification : the rule says all the year , but this drugget chemise , intolerable in the heat of summer , produced fevers and nervous spasms . 
The use of it had to be restricted . 
Even with this palliation , when the nuns put on this chemise on the 14th of September , they suffer from fever for three or four days . 
Obedience , poverty , chastity , perseverance in their seclusion , -- these are their vows , which the rule greatly aggravates . 
The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers , who are called meres vocales because they have a voice in the chapter . 
A prioress can only be re-elected twice , which fixes the longest possible reign of a prioress at nine years . 
They never see the officiating priest , who is always hidden from them by a serge curtain nine feet in height . 
During the sermon , when the preacher is in the chapel , they drop their veils over their faces . 
They must always speak low , walk with their eyes on the ground and their heads bowed . 
One man only is allowed to enter the convent , -- the archbishop of the diocese . 
There is really one other , -- the gardener . 
But he is always an old man , and , in order that he may always be alone in the garden , and that the nuns may be warned to avoid him , a bell is attached to his knee . 
Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive . 
It is the canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation . 
As at the voice of Christ , ut voci Christi , at a gesture , at the first sign , ad nutum , ad primum signum , immediately , with cheerfulness , with perseverance , with a certain blind obedience , prompte , hilariter , perseveranter et caeca quadam obedientia , as the file in the hand of the workman , quasi limam in manibus fabri , without power to read or to write without express permission , legere vel scribere non addiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia . 
Each one of them in turn makes what they call reparation . 
The reparation is the prayer for all the sins , for all the faults , for all the dissensions , for all the violations , for all the iniquities , for all the crimes committed on earth . 
For the space of twelve consecutive hours , from four o'clock in the afternoon till four o'clock in the morning , or from four o'clock in the morning until four o'clock in the afternoon , the sister who is making reparation remains on her knees on the stone before the Holy Sacrament , with hands clasped , a rope around her neck . 
When her fatigue becomes unendurable , she prostrates herself flat on her face against the earth , with her arms outstretched in the form of a cross ; this is her only relief . 
In this attitude she prays for all the guilty in the universe . 
This is great to sublimity . 
As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle , it is called without distinction , to make reparation or to be at the post . 
The nuns even prefer , out of humility , this last expression , which contains an idea of torture and abasement . 
To make reparation is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed . 
The sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt to fall directly behind her . 
Besides this , there is always a sister kneeling before the Holy Sacrament . 
This station lasts an hour . 
They relieve each other like soldiers on guard . 
This is the Perpetual Adoration . 
The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped with peculiar solemnity , recalling , not the saints and martyrs , but moments in the life of Jesus Christ : as Mother Nativity , Mother Conception , Mother Presentation , Mother Passion . 
But the names of saints are not interdicted . 
When one sees them , one never sees anything but their mouths . 
All their teeth are yellow . 
No tooth-brush ever entered that convent . 
Brushing one 's teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is the loss of one 's soul . 
They never say my . 
They possess nothing of their own , and they must not attach themselves to anything . 
