Javert possessed this physiognomy minus the baseness . 
It is our conviction that if souls were visible to the eyes , we should be able to see distinctly that strange thing that each one individual of the human race corresponds to some one of the species of the animal creation ; and we could easily recognize this truth , hardly perceived by the thinker , that from the oyster to the eagle , from the pig to the tiger , all animals exist in man , and that each one of them is in a man . 
Sometimes even several of them at a time . 
Animals are nothing else than the figures of our virtues and our vices , straying before our eyes , the visible phantoms of our souls . 
God shows them to us in order to induce us to reflect . 
Only since animals are mere shadows , God has not made them capable of education in the full sense of the word ; what is the use ? 
On the contrary , our souls being realities and having a goal which is appropriate to them , God has bestowed on them intelligence ; that is to say , the possibility of education . 
Social education , when well done , can always draw from a soul , of whatever sort it may be , the utility which it contains . 
This , be it said , is of course from the restricted point of view of the terrestrial life which is apparent , and without prejudging the profound question of the anterior or ulterior personality of the beings which are not man . 
The visible I in nowise authorizes the thinker to deny the latent I. Having made this reservation , let us pass on . 
Now , if the reader will admit , for a moment , with us , that in every man there is one of the animal species of creation , it will be easy for us to say what there was in Police Officer Javert . 
The peasants of Asturias are convinced that in every litter of wolves there is one dog , which is killed by the mother because , otherwise , as he grew up , he would devour the other little ones . 
Give to this dog-son of a wolf a human face , and the result will be Javert . 
Javert had been born in prison , of a fortune-teller , whose husband was in the galleys . 
As he grew up , he thought that he was outside the pale of society , and he despaired of ever re-entering it . 
He observed that society unpardoningly excludes two classes of men , -- those who attack it and those who guard it ; he had no choice except between these two classes ; at the same time , he was conscious of an indescribable foundation of rigidity , regularity , and probity , complicated with an inexpressible hatred for the race of bohemians whence he was sprung . 
He entered the police ; he succeeded there . 
At forty years of age he was an inspector . 
During his youth he had been employed in the convict establishments of the South . 
Before proceeding further , let us come to an understanding as to the words , `` human face , '' which we have just applied to Javert . 
The human face of Javert consisted of a flat nose , with two deep nostrils , towards which enormous whiskers ascended on his cheeks . 
One felt ill at ease when he saw these two forests and these two caverns for the first time . 
When Javert laughed , -- and his laugh was rare and terrible , -- his thin lips parted and revealed to view not only his teeth , but his gums , and around his nose there formed a flattened and savage fold , as on the muzzle of a wild beast . 
Javert , serious , was a watchdog ; when he laughed , he was a tiger . 
As for the rest , he had very little skull and a great deal of jaw ; his hair concealed his forehead and fell over his eyebrows ; between his eyes there was a permanent , central frown , like an imprint of wrath ; his gaze was obscure ; his mouth pursed up and terrible ; his air that of ferocious command . 
This man was composed of two very simple and two very good sentiments , comparatively ; but he rendered them almost bad , by dint of exaggerating them , -- respect for authority , hatred of rebellion ; and in his eyes , murder , robbery , all crimes , are only forms of rebellion . 
He enveloped in a blind and profound faith every one who had a function in the state , from the prime minister to the rural policeman . 
He covered with scorn , aversion , and disgust every one who had once crossed the legal threshold of evil . 
He was absolute , and admitted no exceptions . 
On the one hand , he said , `` The functionary can make no mistake ; the magistrate is never the wrong . '' 
On the other hand , he said , `` These men are irremediably lost . 
Nothing good can come from them . '' 
He fully shared the opinion of those extreme minds which attribute to human law I know not what power of making , or , if the reader will have it so , of authenticating , demons , and who place a Styx at the base of society . 
He was stoical , serious , austere ; a melancholy dreamer , humble and haughty , like fanatics . 
His glance was like a gimlet , cold and piercing . 
His whole life hung on these two words : watchfulness and supervision . 
He had introduced a straight line into what is the most crooked thing in the world ; he possessed the conscience of his usefulness , the religion of his functions , and he was a spy as other men are priests . 
Woe to the man who fell into his hands ! 
He would have arrested his own father , if the latter had escaped from the galleys , and would have denounced his mother , if she had broken her ban . 
And he would have done it with that sort of inward satisfaction which is conferred by virtue . 
And , withal , a life of privation , isolation , abnegation , chastity , with never a diversion . 
It was implacable duty ; the police understood , as the Spartans understood Sparta , a pitiless lying in wait , a ferocious honesty , a marble informer , Brutus in Vidocq . 
Javert 's whole person was expressive of the man who spies and who withdraws himself from observation . 
The mystical school of Joseph de Maistre , which at that epoch seasoned with lofty cosmogony those things which were called the ultra newspapers , would not have failed to declare that Javert was a symbol . 
His brow was not visible ; it disappeared beneath his hat : his eyes were not visible , since they were lost under his eyebrows : his chin was not visible , for it was plunged in his cravat : his hands were not visible ; they were drawn up in his sleeves : and his cane was not visible ; he carried it under his coat . 
But when the occasion presented itself , there was suddenly seen to emerge from all this shadow , as from an ambuscade , a narrow and angular forehead , a baleful glance , a threatening chin , enormous hands , and a monstrous cudgel . 
In his leisure moments , which were far from frequent , he read , although he hated books ; this caused him to be not wholly illiterate . 
This could be recognized by some emphasis in his speech . 
As we have said , he had no vices . 
When he was pleased with himself , he permitted himself a pinch of snuff . 
Therein lay his connection with humanity . 
The reader will have no difficulty in understanding that Javert was the terror of that whole class which the annual statistics of the Ministry of Justice designates under the rubric , Vagrants . 
The name of Javert routed them by its mere utterance ; the face of Javert petrified them at sight . 
Such was this formidable man . 
Javert was like an eye constantly fixed on M. Madeleine . 
An eye full of suspicion and conjecture . 
M. Madeleine had finally perceived the fact ; but it seemed to be of no importance to him . 
He did not even put a question to Javert ; he neither sought nor avoided him ; he bore that embarrassing and almost oppressive gaze without appearing to notice it . 
He treated Javert with ease and courtesy , as he did all the rest of the world . 
It was divined , from some words which escaped Javert , that he had secretly investigated , with that curiosity which belongs to the race , and into which there enters as much instinct as will , all the anterior traces which Father Madeleine might have left elsewhere . 
He seemed to know , and he sometimes said in covert words , that some one had gleaned certain information in a certain district about a family which had disappeared . 
Once he chanced to say , as he was talking to himself , `` I think I have him ! '' 
Then he remained pensive for three days , and uttered not a word . 
It seemed that the thread which he thought he held had broken . 
Moreover , and this furnishes the necessary corrective for the too absolute sense which certain words might present , there can be nothing really infallible in a human creature , and the peculiarity of instinct is that it can become confused , thrown off the track , and defeated . 
Otherwise , it would be superior to intelligence , and the beast would be found to be provided with a better light than man . 
Javert was evidently somewhat disconcerted by the perfect naturalness and tranquillity of M. Madeleine . 
One day , nevertheless , his strange manner appeared to produce an impression on M. Madeleine . 
It was on the following occasion . 
FATHER FAUCHELEVENT One morning M. Madeleine was passing through an unpaved alley of M. sur M. ; he heard a noise , and saw a group some distance away . 
He approached . 
An old man named Father Fauchelevent had just fallen beneath his cart , his horse having tumbled down . 
This Fauchelevent was one of the few enemies whom M. Madeleine had at that time . 
When Madeleine arrived in the neighborhood , Fauchelevent , an ex-notary and a peasant who was almost educated , had a business which was beginning to be in a bad way . 
Fauchelevent had seen this simple workman grow rich , while he , a lawyer , was being ruined . 
This had filled him with jealousy , and he had done all he could , on every occasion , to injure Madeleine . 
Then bankruptcy had come ; and as the old man had nothing left but a cart and a horse , and neither family nor children , he had turned carter . 
The horse had two broken legs and could not rise . 
The old man was caught in the wheels . 
The fall had been so unlucky that the whole weight of the vehicle rested on his breast . 
The cart was quite heavily laden . 
Father Fauchelevent was rattling in the throat in the most lamentable manner . 
They had tried , but in vain , to drag him out . 
An unmethodical effort , aid awkwardly given , a wrong shake , might kill him . 
It was impossible to disengage him otherwise than by lifting the vehicle off of him . 
Javert , who had come up at the moment of the accident , had sent for a jack-screw . 
M. Madeleine arrived . 
People stood aside respectfully . 
`` Help ! '' 
cried old Fauchelevent . 
`` Who will be good and save the old man ? '' 
M.Madeleine turned towards those present : -- `` Is there a jack-screw to be had ? '' 
`` One has been sent for , '' answered the peasant . 
`` How long will it take to get it ? '' 
`` They have gone for the nearest , to Flachot 's place , where there is a farrier ; but it makes no difference ; it will take a good quarter of an hour . '' 
`` A quarter of an hour ! '' 
exclaimed Madeleine . 
It had rained on the preceding night ; the soil was soaked . 
The cart was sinking deeper into the earth every moment , and crushing the old carter 's breast more and more . 
It was evident that his ribs would be broken in five minutes more . 
