`` And now there 's the other one ! 
Will you hold your tongue , you hussy ? 
It 's a pretty sort of a place where convicts are magistrates , and where women of the town are cared for like countesses ! 
Ah ! 
But we are going to change all that ; it is high time ! '' 
He stared intently at Fantine , and added , once more taking into his grasp Jean Valjean 's cravat , shirt and collar : -- `` I tell you that there is no Monsieur Madeleine and that there is no Monsieur le Maire . 
There is a thief , a brigand , a convict named Jean Valjean ! 
And I have him in my grasp ! 
That 's what there is ! '' 
Fantine raised herself in bed with a bound , supporting herself on her stiffened arms and on both hands : she gazed at Jean Valjean , she gazed at Javert , she gazed at the nun , she opened her mouth as though to speak ; a rattle proceeded from the depths of her throat , her teeth chattered ; she stretched out her arms in her agony , opening her hands convulsively , and fumbling about her like a drowning person ; then suddenly fell back on her pillow . 
Her head struck the head-board of the bed and fell forwards on her breast , with gaping mouth and staring , sightless eyes . 
She was dead . 
Jean Valjean laid his hand upon the detaining hand of Javert , and opened it as he would have opened the hand of a baby ; then he said to Javert : -- `` You have murdered that woman . '' 
`` Let 's have an end of this ! '' 
shouted Javert , in a fury ; `` I am not here to listen to argument . 
Let us economize all that ; the guard is below ; march on instantly , or you 'll get the thumb-screws ! '' 
In the corner of the room stood an old iron bedstead , which was in a decidedly decrepit state , and which served the sisters as a camp-bed when they were watching with the sick . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to this bed , in a twinkling wrenched off the head-piece , which was already in a dilapidated condition , an easy matter to muscles like his , grasped the principal rod like a bludgeon , and glanced at Javert . 
Javert retreated towards the door . 
Jean Valjean , armed with his bar of iron , walked slowly up to Fantine 's couch . 
When he arrived there he turned and said to Javert , in a voice that was barely audible : -- `` I advise you not to disturb me at this moment . '' 
One thing is certain , and that is , that Javert trembled . 
It did occur to him to summon the guard , but Jean Valjean might avail himself of that moment to effect his escape ; so he remained , grasped his cane by the small end , and leaned against the door-post , without removing his eyes from Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean rested his elbow on the knob at the head of the bed , and his brow on his hand , and began to contemplate the motionless body of Fantine , which lay extended there . 
He remained thus , mute , absorbed , evidently with no further thought of anything connected with this life . 
Upon his face and in his attitude there was nothing but inexpressible pity . 
After a few moments of this meditation he bent towards Fantine , and spoke to her in a low voice . 
What did he say to her ? 
What could this man , who was reproved , say to that woman , who was dead ? 
What words were those ? 
No one on earth heard them . 
Did the dead woman hear them ? 
There are some touching illusions which are , perhaps , sublime realities . 
The point as to which there exists no doubt is , that Sister Simplice , the sole witness of the incident , often said that at the moment that Jean Valjean whispered in Fantine 's ear , she distinctly beheld an ineffable smile dawn on those pale lips , and in those dim eyes , filled with the amazement of the tomb . 
Jean Valjean took Fantine 's head in both his hands , and arranged it on the pillow as a mother might have done for her child ; then he tied the string of her chemise , and smoothed her hair back under her cap . 
That done , he closed her eyes . 
Fantine 's face seemed strangely illuminated at that moment . 
Death , that signifies entrance into the great light . 
Fantine 's hand was hanging over the side of the bed . 
Jean Valjean knelt down before that hand , lifted it gently , and kissed it . 
Then he rose , and turned to Javert . 
`` Now , '' said he , `` I am at your disposal . '' 
A SUITABLE TOMB Javert deposited Jean Valjean in the city prison . 
The arrest of M. Madeleine occasioned a sensation , or rather , an extraordinary commotion in M. sur M . 
We are sorry that we can not conceal the fact , that at the single word , `` He was a convict , '' nearly every one deserted him . 
In less than two hours all the good that he had done had been forgotten , and he was nothing but a `` convict from the galleys . '' 
It is just to add that the details of what had taken place at Arras were not yet known . 
All day long conversations like the following were to be heard in all quarters of the town : -- `` You do n't know ? 
He was a liberated convict ! '' 
`` Who ? '' 
`` The mayor . '' 
`` Bah ! 
M. Madeleine ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` His name was not Madeleine at all ; he had a frightful name , Bejean , Bojean , Boujean . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Good God ! '' 
`` He has been arrested . '' 
`` Arrested ! '' 
`` In prison , in the city prison , while waiting to be transferred . '' 
`` Until he is transferred ! '' 
`` He is to be transferred ! '' 
`` Where is he to be taken ? '' 
`` He will be tried at the Assizes for a highway robbery which he committed long ago . '' 
`` Well ! 
I suspected as much . 
That man was too good , too perfect , too affected . 
He refused the cross ; he bestowed sous on all the little scamps he came across . 
I always thought there was some evil history back of all that . '' 
The `` drawing-rooms '' particularly abounded in remarks of this nature . 
One old lady , a subscriber to the Drapeau Blanc , made the following remark , the depth of which it is impossible to fathom : -- `` I am not sorry . 
It will be a lesson to the Bonapartists ! '' 
It was thus that the phantom which had been called M. Madeleine vanished from M. sur M. Only three or four persons in all the town remained faithful to his memory . 
The old portress who had served him was among the number . 
On the evening of that day the worthy old woman was sitting in her lodge , still in a thorough fright , and absorbed in sad reflections . 
The factory had been closed all day , the carriage gate was bolted , the street was deserted . 
There was no one in the house but the two nuns , Sister Perpetue and Sister Simplice , who were watching beside the body of Fantine . 
Towards the hour when M. Madeleine was accustomed to return home , the good portress rose mechanically , took from a drawer the key of M. Madeleine 's chamber , and the flat candlestick which he used every evening to go up to his quarters ; then she hung the key on the nail whence he was accustomed to take it , and set the candlestick on one side , as though she was expecting him . 
Then she sat down again on her chair , and became absorbed in thought once more . 
The poor , good old woman bad done all this without being conscious of it . 
It was only at the expiration of two hours that she roused herself from her revery , and exclaimed , `` Hold ! 
My good God Jesus ! 
And I hung his key on the nail ! '' 
At that moment the small window in the lodge opened , a hand passed through , seized the key and the candlestick , and lighted the taper at the candle which was burning there . 
The portress raised her eyes , and stood there with gaping mouth , and a shriek which she confined to her throat . 
She knew that hand , that arm , the sleeve of that coat . 
It was M. Madeleine . 
It was several seconds before she could speak ; she had a seizure , as she said herself , when she related the adventure afterwards . 
`` Good God , Monsieur le Maire , '' she cried at last , `` I thought you were -- '' She stopped ; the conclusion of her sentence would have been lacking in respect towards the beginning . 
Jean Valjean was still Monsieur le Maire to her . 
He finished her thought . 
`` In prison , '' said he . 
`` I was there ; I broke a bar of one of the windows ; I let myself drop from the top of a roof , and here I am . 
I am going up to my room ; go and find Sister Simplice for me . 
She is with that poor woman , no doubt . '' 
The old woman obeyed in all haste . 
He gave her no orders ; he was quite sure that she would guard him better than he should guard himself . 
No one ever found out how he had managed to get into the courtyard without opening the big gates . 
He had , and always carried about him , a pass-key which opened a little side-door ; but he must have been searched , and his latch-key must have been taken from him . 
