is that all ! '' 
eh ! 
yes , childish prattle , repetitions , laughter at nothing , nonsense , everything that is deepest and most sublime in the world ! 
The only things which are worth the trouble of saying and hearing ! 
The man who has never heard , the man who has never uttered these absurdities , these paltry remarks , is an imbecile and a malicious fellow . 
Cosette said to Marius : -- `` Dost thou know ? 
-- '' -LSB- In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness , and without either of them being able to say how it had come about , they had begun to call each other thou . -RSB- 
`` Dost thou know ? 
My name is Euphrasie . '' 
`` Euphrasie ? 
Why , no , thy name is Cosette . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Cosette is a very ugly name that was given to me when I was a little thing . 
But my real name is Euphrasie . 
Dost thou like that name -- Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Yes . 
But Cosette is not ugly . '' 
`` Do you like it better than Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Why , yes . '' 
`` Then I like it better too . 
Truly , it is pretty , Cosette . 
Call me Cosette . '' 
And the smile that she added made of this dialogue an idyl worthy of a grove situated in heaven . 
On another occasion she gazed intently at him and exclaimed : -- `` Monsieur , you are handsome , you are good-looking , you are witty , you are not at all stupid , you are much more learned than I am , but I bid you defiance with this word : I love you ! '' 
And Marius , in the very heavens , thought he heard a strain sung by a star . 
Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed , and she said to him : -- `` Do n't cough , sir ; I will not have people cough on my domain without my permission . 
It 's very naughty to cough and to disturb me . 
I want you to be well , because , in the first place , if you were not well , I should be very unhappy . 
What should I do then ? '' 
And this was simply divine . 
Once Marius said to Cosette : -- `` Just imagine , I thought at one time that your name was Ursule . '' 
This made both of them laugh the whole evening . 
In the middle of another conversation , he chanced to exclaim : -- `` Oh ! 
One day , at the Luxembourg , I had a good mind to finish breaking up a veteran ! '' 
But he stopped short , and went no further . 
He would have been obliged to speak to Cosette of her garter , and that was impossible . 
This bordered on a strange theme , the flesh , before which that immense and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright . 
Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this , without anything else ; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet , to displace the old and accommodating bar of the chief-justice 's gate , to sit elbow to elbow on that bench , to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of the on-coming night , to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into the ample fall of Cosette 's gown , to caress her thumb-nail , to call her thou , to smell of the same flower , one after the other , forever , indefinitely . 
During this time , clouds passed above their heads . 
Every time that the wind blows it bears with it more of the dreams of men than of the clouds of heaven . 
This chaste , almost shy love was not devoid of gallantry , by any means . 
To pay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method of bestowing caresses , and he is half audacious who tries it . 
A compliment is something like a kiss through a veil . 
Voluptuousness mingles there with its sweet tiny point , while it hides itself . 
The heart draws back before voluptuousness only to love the more . 
Marius ' blandishments , all saturated with fancy , were , so to speak , of azure hue . 
The birds when they fly up yonder , in the direction of the angels , must hear such words . 
There were mingled with them , nevertheless , life , humanity , all the positiveness of which Marius was capable . 
It was what is said in the bower , a prelude to what will be said in the chamber ; a lyrical effusion , strophe and sonnet intermingled , pleasing hyperboles of cooing , all the refinements of adoration arranged in a bouquet and exhaling a celestial perfume , an ineffable twitter of heart to heart . 
`` Oh ! '' 
murmured Marius , `` how beautiful you are ! 
I dare not look at you . 
It is all over with me when I contemplate you . 
You are a grace . 
I know not what is the matter with me . 
The hem of your gown , when the tip of your shoe peeps from beneath , upsets me . 
And then , what an enchanted gleam when you open your thought even but a little ! 
You talk astonishingly good sense . 
It seems to me at times that you are a dream . 
Speak , I listen , I admire . 
Oh Cosette ! 
how strange it is and how charming ! 
I am really beside myself . 
You are adorable , Mademoiselle . 
I study your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope . '' 
And Cosette answered : -- `` I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed since this morning . '' 
Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue , which always turned with mutual consent upon love , as the little pith figures always turn on their peg . 
Cosette 's whole person was ingenuousness , ingenuity , transparency , whiteness , candor , radiance . 
It might have been said of Cosette that she was clear . 
She produced on those who saw her the sensation of April and dawn . 
There was dew in her eyes . 
Cosette was a condensation of the auroral light in the form of a woman . 
It was quite simple that Marius should admire her , since he adored her . 
But the truth is , that this little school-girl , fresh from the convent , talked with exquisite penetration and uttered , at times , all sorts of true and delicate sayings . 
Her prattle was conversation . 
She never made a mistake about anything , and she saw things justly . 
The woman feels and speaks with the tender instinct of the heart , which is infallible . 
No one understands so well as a woman , how to say things that are , at once , both sweet and deep . 
Sweetness and depth , they are the whole of woman ; in them lies the whole of heaven . 
In this full felicity , tears welled up to their eyes every instant . 
A crushed lady-bug , a feather fallen from a nest , a branch of hawthorn broken , aroused their pity , and their ecstasy , sweetly mingled with melancholy , seemed to ask nothing better than to weep . 
The most sovereign symptom of love is a tenderness that is , at times , almost unbearable . 
And , in addition to this , -- all these contradictions are the lightning play of love , -- they were fond of laughing , they laughed readily and with a delicious freedom , and so familiarly that they sometimes presented the air of two boys . 
Still , though unknown to hearts intoxicated with purity , nature is always present and will not be forgotten . 
She is there with her brutal and sublime object ; and however great may be the innocence of souls , one feels in the most modest private interview , the adorable and mysterious shade which separates a couple of lovers from a pair of friends . 
They idolized each other . 
The permanent and the immutable are persistent . 
People live , they smile , they laugh , they make little grimaces with the tips of their lips , they interlace their fingers , they call each other thou , and that does not prevent eternity . 
Two lovers hide themselves in the evening , in the twilight , in the invisible , with the birds , with the roses ; they fascinate each other in the darkness with their hearts which they throw into their eyes , they murmur , they whisper , and in the meantime , immense librations of the planets fill the infinite universe . 
THE BEWILDERMENT OF PERFECT HAPPINESS They existed vaguely , frightened at their happiness . 
They did not notice the cholera which decimated Paris precisely during that very month . 
They had confided in each other as far as possible , but this had not extended much further than their names . 
Marius had told Cosette that he was an orphan , that his name was Marius Pontmercy , that he was a lawyer , that he lived by writing things for publishers , that his father had been a colonel , that the latter had been a hero , and that he , Marius , was on bad terms with his grandfather who was rich . 
He had also hinted at being a baron , but this had produced no effect on Cosette . 
She did not know the meaning of the word . 
Marius was Marius . 
On her side , she had confided to him that she had been brought up at the Petit-Picpus convent , that her mother , like his own , was dead , that her father 's name was M. Fauchelevent , that he was very good , that he gave a great deal to the poor , but that he was poor himself , and that he denied himself everything though he denied her nothing . 
Strange to say , in the sort of symphony which Marius had lived since he had been in the habit of seeing Cosette , the past , even the most recent past , had become so confused and distant to him , that what Cosette told him satisfied him completely . 
It did not even occur to him to tell her about the nocturnal adventure in the hovel , about Thenardier , about the burn , and about the strange attitude and singular flight of her father . 
Marius had momentarily forgotten all this ; in the evening he did not even know that there had been a morning , what he had done , where he had breakfasted , nor who had spoken to him ; he had songs in his ears which rendered him deaf to every other thought ; he only existed at the hours when he saw Cosette . 
