Magnificent ! '' 
Between nine o'clock and half-past ten the whole army , incredible as it may appear , had taken up its position and ranged itself in six lines , forming , to repeat the Emperor 's expression , `` the figure of six V 's . '' 
A few moments after the formation of the battle-array , in the midst of that profound silence , like that which heralds the beginning of a storm , which precedes engagements , the Emperor tapped Haxo on the shoulder , as he beheld the three batteries of twelve-pounders , detached by his orders from the corps of Erlon , Reille , and Lobau , and destined to begin the action by taking Mont-Saint-Jean , which was situated at the intersection of the Nivelles and the Genappe roads , and said to him , `` There are four and twenty handsome maids , General . '' 
Sure of the issue , he encouraged with a smile , as they passed before him , the company of sappers of the first corps , which he had appointed to barricade Mont-Saint-Jean as soon as the village should be carried . 
All this serenity had been traversed by but a single word of haughty pity ; perceiving on his left , at a spot where there now stands a large tomb , those admirable Scotch Grays , with their superb horses , massing themselves , he said , `` It is a pity . '' 
Then he mounted his horse , advanced beyond Rossomme , and selected for his post of observation a contracted elevation of turf to the right of the road from Genappe to Brussels , which was his second station during the battle . 
The third station , the one adopted at seven o'clock in the evening , between La Belle-Alliance and La Haie-Sainte , is formidable ; it is a rather elevated knoll , which still exists , and behind which the guard was massed on a slope of the plain . 
Around this knoll the balls rebounded from the pavements of the road , up to Napoleon himself . 
As at Brienne , he had over his head the shriek of the bullets and of the heavy artillery . 
Mouldy cannon-balls , old sword-blades , and shapeless projectiles , eaten up with rust , were picked up at the spot where his horse ' feet stood . 
Scabra rubigine . 
A few years ago , a shell of sixty pounds , still charged , and with its fuse broken off level with the bomb , was unearthed . 
It was at this last post that the Emperor said to his guide , Lacoste , a hostile and terrified peasant , who was attached to the saddle of a hussar , and who turned round at every discharge of canister and tried to hide behind Napoleon : `` Fool , it is shameful ! 
You 'll get yourself killed with a ball in the back . '' 
He who writes these lines has himself found , in the friable soil of this knoll , on turning over the sand , the remains of the neck of a bomb , disintegrated , by the oxidization of six and forty years , and old fragments of iron which parted like elder-twigs between the fingers . 
Every one is aware that the variously inclined undulations of the plains , where the engagement between Napoleon and Wellington took place , are no longer what they were on June 18 , 1815 . 
By taking from this mournful field the wherewithal to make a monument to it , its real relief has been taken away , and history , disconcerted , no longer finds her bearings there . 
It has been disfigured for the sake of glorifying it . 
Wellington , when he beheld Waterloo once more , two years later , exclaimed , `` They have altered my field of battle ! '' 
Where the great pyramid of earth , surmounted by the lion , rises to-day , there was a hillock which descended in an easy slope towards the Nivelles road , but which was almost an escarpment on the side of the highway to Genappe . 
The elevation of this escarpment can still be measured by the height of the two knolls of the two great sepulchres which enclose the road from Genappe to Brussels : one , the English tomb , is on the left ; the other , the German tomb , is on the right . 
There is no French tomb . 
The whole of that plain is a sepulchre for France . 
Thanks to the thousands upon thousands of cartloads of earth employed in the hillock one hundred and fifty feet in height and half a mile in circumference , the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean is now accessible by an easy slope . 
On the day of battle , particularly on the side of La Haie-Sainte , it was abrupt and difficult of approach . 
The slope there is so steep that the English cannon could not see the farm , situated in the bottom of the valley , which was the centre of the combat . 
On the 18th of June , 1815 , the rains had still farther increased this acclivity , the mud complicated the problem of the ascent , and the men not only slipped back , but stuck fast in the mire . 
Along the crest of the plateau ran a sort of trench whose presence it was impossible for the distant observer to divine . 
What was this trench ? 
Let us explain . 
Braine-l'Alleud is a Belgian village ; Ohain is another . 
These villages , both of them concealed in curves of the landscape , are connected by a road about a league and a half in length , which traverses the plain along its undulating level , and often enters and buries itself in the hills like a furrow , which makes a ravine of this road in some places . 
In 1815 , as at the present day , this road cut the crest of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean between the two highways from Genappe and Nivelles ; only , it is now on a level with the plain ; it was then a hollow way . 
Its two slopes have been appropriated for the monumental hillock . 
This road was , and still is , a trench throughout the greater portion of its course ; a hollow trench , sometimes a dozen feet in depth , and whose banks , being too steep , crumbled away here and there , particularly in winter , under driving rains . 
Accidents happened here . 
The road was so narrow at the Braine-l'Alleud entrance that a passer-by was crushed by a cart , as is proved by a stone cross which stands near the cemetery , and which gives the name of the dead , Monsieur Bernard Debrye , Merchant of Brussels , and the date of the accident , February , 1637 . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- It was so deep on the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean that a peasant , Mathieu Nicaise , was crushed there , in 1783 , by a slide from the slope , as is stated on another stone cross , the top of which has disappeared in the process of clearing the ground , but whose overturned pedestal is still visible on the grassy slope to the left of the highway between La Haie-Sainte and the farm of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
-LSB- 8 -RSB- This is the inscription : -- D. O. M. CY A ETE ECRASE PAR MALHEUR SOUS UN CHARIOT , MONSIEUR BERNARD DE BRYE MARCHAND A BRUXELLE LE -LSB- Illegible -RSB- FEVRIER 1637 . 
On the day of battle , this hollow road whose existence was in no way indicated , bordering the crest of Mont-Saint-Jean , a trench at the summit of the escarpment , a rut concealed in the soil , was invisible ; that is to say , terrible . 
THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE So , on the morning of Waterloo , Napoleon was content . 
He was right ; the plan of battle conceived by him was , as we have seen , really admirable . 
The battle once begun , its very various changes , -- the resistance of Hougomont ; the tenacity of La Haie-Sainte ; the killing of Bauduin ; the disabling of Foy ; the unexpected wall against which Soye 's brigade was shattered ; Guilleminot 's fatal heedlessness when he had neither petard nor powder sacks ; the miring of the batteries ; the fifteen unescorted pieces overwhelmed in a hollow way by Uxbridge ; the small effect of the bombs falling in the English lines , and there embedding themselves in the rain-soaked soil , and only succeeding in producing volcanoes of mud , so that the canister was turned into a splash ; the uselessness of Pire 's demonstration on Braine-l'Alleud ; all that cavalry , fifteen squadrons , almost exterminated ; the right wing of the English badly alarmed , the left wing badly cut into ; Ney 's strange mistake in massing , instead of echelonning the four divisions of the first corps ; men delivered over to grape-shot , arranged in ranks twenty-seven deep and with a frontage of two hundred ; the frightful holes made in these masses by the cannon-balls ; attacking columns disorganized ; the side-battery suddenly unmasked on their flank ; Bourgeois , Donzelot , and Durutte compromised ; Quiot repulsed ; Lieutenant Vieux , that Hercules graduated at the Polytechnic School , wounded at the moment when he was beating in with an axe the door of La Haie-Sainte under the downright fire of the English barricade which barred the angle of the road from Genappe to Brussels ; Marcognet 's division caught between the infantry and the cavalry , shot down at the very muzzle of the guns amid the grain by Best and Pack , put to the sword by Ponsonby ; his battery of seven pieces spiked ; the Prince of Saxe-Weimar holding and guarding , in spite of the Comte d'Erlon , both Frischemont and Smohain ; the flag of the 105th taken , the flag of the 45th captured ; that black Prussian hussar stopped by runners of the flying column of three hundred light cavalry on the scout between Wavre and Plancenoit ; the alarming things that had been said by prisoners ; Grouchy 's delay ; fifteen hundred men killed in the orchard of Hougomont in less than an hour ; eighteen hundred men overthrown in a still shorter time about La Haie-Sainte , -- all these stormy incidents passing like the clouds of battle before Napoleon , had hardly troubled his gaze and had not overshadowed that face of imperial certainty . 
Napoleon was accustomed to gaze steadily at war ; he never added up the heart-rending details , cipher by cipher ; ciphers mattered little to him , provided that they furnished the total , victory ; he was not alarmed if the beginnings did go astray , since he thought himself the master and the possessor at the end ; he knew how to wait , supposing himself to be out of the question , and he treated destiny as his equal : he seemed to say to fate , Thou wilt not dare . 
Composed half of light and half of shadow , Napoleon thought himself protected in good and tolerated in evil . 
He had , or thought that he had , a connivance , one might almost say a complicity , of events in his favor , which was equivalent to the invulnerability of antiquity . 
Nevertheless , when one has Beresina , Leipzig , and Fontainebleau behind one , it seems as though one might distrust Waterloo . 
A mysterious frown becomes perceptible in the depths of the heavens . 
At the moment when Wellington retreated , Napoleon shuddered . 
He suddenly beheld the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean cleared , and the van of the English army disappear . 
It was rallying , but hiding itself . 
The Emperor half rose in his stirrups . 
The lightning of victory flashed from his eyes . 
Wellington , driven into a corner at the forest of Soignes and destroyed -- that was the definitive conquest of England by France ; it was Crecy , Poitiers , Malplaquet , and Ramillies avenged . 
The man of Marengo was wiping out Agincourt . 
So the Emperor , meditating on this terrible turn of fortune , swept his glass for the last time over all the points of the field of battle . 
His guard , standing behind him with grounded arms , watched him from below with a sort of religion . 
He pondered ; he examined the slopes , noted the declivities , scrutinized the clumps of trees , the square of rye , the path ; he seemed to be counting each bush . 
He gazed with some intentness at the English barricades of the two highways , -- two large abatis of trees , that on the road to Genappe above La Haie-Sainte , armed with two cannon , the only ones out of all the English artillery which commanded the extremity of the field of battle , and that on the road to Nivelles where gleamed the Dutch bayonets of Chasse 's brigade . 
Near this barricade he observed the old chapel of Saint Nicholas , painted white , which stands at the angle of the cross-road near Braine-l'Alleud ; he bent down and spoke in a low voice to the guide Lacoste . 
The guide made a negative sign with his head , which was probably perfidious . 
The Emperor straightened himself up and fell to thinking . 
Wellington had drawn back . 
All that remained to do was to complete this retreat by crushing him . 
Napoleon turning round abruptly , despatched an express at full speed to Paris to announce that the battle was won . 
Napoleon was one of those geniuses from whom thunder darts . 
He had just found his clap of thunder . 
He gave orders to Milhaud 's cuirassiers to carry the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
THE UNEXPECTED There were three thousand five hundred of them . 
They formed a front a quarter of a league in extent . 
They were giant men , on colossal horses . 
There were six and twenty squadrons of them ; and they had behind them to support them Lefebvre-Desnouettes 's division , -- the one hundred and six picked gendarmes , the light cavalry of the Guard , eleven hundred and ninety-seven men , and the lancers of the guard of eight hundred and eighty lances . 
They wore casques without horse-tails , and cuirasses of beaten iron , with horse-pistols in their holsters , and long sabre-swords . 
That morning the whole army had admired them , when , at nine o'clock , with braying of trumpets and all the music playing `` Let us watch o'er the Safety of the Empire , '' they had come in a solid column , with one of their batteries on their flank , another in their centre , and deployed in two ranks between the roads to Genappe and Frischemont , and taken up their position for battle in that powerful second line , so cleverly arranged by Napoleon , which , having on its extreme left Kellermann 's cuirassiers and on its extreme right Milhaud 's cuirassiers , had , so to speak , two wings of iron . 
Aide-de-camp Bernard carried them the Emperor 's orders . 
Ney drew his sword and placed himself at their head . 
The enormous squadrons were set in motion . 
Then a formidable spectacle was seen . 
All their cavalry , with upraised swords , standards and trumpets flung to the breeze , formed in columns by divisions , descended , by a simultaneous movement and like one man , with the precision of a brazen battering-ram which is effecting a breach , the hill of La Belle Alliance , plunged into the terrible depths in which so many men had already fallen , disappeared there in the smoke , then emerging from that shadow , reappeared on the other side of the valley , still compact and in close ranks , mounting at a full trot , through a storm of grape-shot which burst upon them , the terrible muddy slope of the table-land of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
They ascended , grave , threatening , imperturbable ; in the intervals between the musketry and the artillery , their colossal trampling was audible . 
Being two divisions , there were two columns of them ; Wathier 's division held the right , Delort 's division was on the left . 
It seemed as though two immense adders of steel were to be seen crawling towards the crest of the table-land . 
It traversed the battle like a prodigy . 
Nothing like it had been seen since the taking of the great redoubt of the Muskowa by the heavy cavalry ; Murat was lacking here , but Ney was again present . 
It seemed as though that mass had become a monster and had but one soul . 
Each column undulated and swelled like the ring of a polyp . 
They could be seen through a vast cloud of smoke which was rent here and there . 
A confusion of helmets , of cries , of sabres , a stormy heaving of the cruppers of horses amid the cannons and the flourish of trumpets , a terrible and disciplined tumult ; over all , the cuirasses like the scales on the hydra . 
These narrations seemed to belong to another age . 
Something parallel to this vision appeared , no doubt , in the ancient Orphic epics , which told of the centaurs , the old hippanthropes , those Titans with human heads and equestrian chests who scaled Olympus at a gallop , horrible , invulnerable , sublime -- gods and beasts . 
Odd numerical coincidence , -- twenty-six battalions rode to meet twenty-six battalions . 
Behind the crest of the plateau , in the shadow of the masked battery , the English infantry , formed into thirteen squares , two battalions to the square , in two lines , with seven in the first line , six in the second , the stocks of their guns to their shoulders , taking aim at that which was on the point of appearing , waited , calm , mute , motionless . 
They did not see the cuirassiers , and the cuirassiers did not see them . 
They listened to the rise of this flood of men . 
They heard the swelling noise of three thousand horse , the alternate and symmetrical tramp of their hoofs at full trot , the jingling of the cuirasses , the clang of the sabres and a sort of grand and savage breathing . 
There ensued a most terrible silence ; then , all at once , a long file of uplifted arms , brandishing sabres , appeared above the crest , and casques , trumpets , and standards , and three thousand heads with gray mustaches , shouting , `` Vive l'Empereur ! '' 
All this cavalry debouched on the plateau , and it was like the appearance of an earthquake . 
All at once , a tragic incident ; on the English left , on our right , the head of the column of cuirassiers reared up with a frightful clamor . 
On arriving at the culminating point of the crest , ungovernable , utterly given over to fury and their course of extermination of the squares and cannon , the cuirassiers had just caught sight of a trench , -- a trench between them and the English . 
It was the hollow road of Ohain . 
