What is he doing ? 
`` Napoleon is dead , '' said a passer-by to a veteran of Marengo and Waterloo . 
`` He dead ! '' 
cried the soldier ; `` you do n't know him . '' 
Imagination distrusted this man , even when overthrown . 
The depths of Europe were full of darkness after Waterloo . 
Something enormous remained long empty through Napoleon 's disappearance . 
The kings placed themselves in this void . 
Ancient Europe profited by it to undertake reforms . 
There was a Holy Alliance ; Belle-Alliance , Beautiful Alliance , the fatal field of Waterloo had said in advance . 
In presence and in face of that antique Europe reconstructed , the features of a new France were sketched out . 
The future , which the Emperor had rallied , made its entry . 
On its brow it bore the star , Liberty . 
The glowing eyes of all young generations were turned on it . 
Singular fact ! 
people were , at one and the same time , in love with the future , Liberty , and the past , Napoleon . 
Defeat had rendered the vanquished greater . 
Bonaparte fallen seemed more lofty than Napoleon erect . 
Those who had triumphed were alarmed . 
England had him guarded by Hudson Lowe , and France had him watched by Montchenu . 
His folded arms became a source of uneasiness to thrones . 
Alexander called him `` my sleeplessness . '' 
This terror was the result of the quantity of revolution which was contained in him . 
That is what explains and excuses Bonapartist liberalism . 
This phantom caused the old world to tremble . 
The kings reigned , but ill at their ease , with the rock of Saint Helena on the horizon . 
While Napoleon was passing through the death struggle at Longwood , the sixty thousand men who had fallen on the field of Waterloo were quietly rotting , and something of their peace was shed abroad over the world . 
The Congress of Vienna made the treaties in 1815 , and Europe called this the Restoration . 
This is what Waterloo was . 
But what matters it to the Infinite ? 
all that tempest , all that cloud , that war , then that peace ? 
All that darkness did not trouble for a moment the light of that immense Eye before which a grub skipping from one blade of grass to another equals the eagle soaring from belfry to belfry on the towers of Notre Dame . 
THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT Let us return -- it is a necessity in this book -- to that fatal battle-field . 
On the 18th of June the moon was full . 
Its light favored Blucher 's ferocious pursuit , betrayed the traces of the fugitives , delivered up that disastrous mass to the eager Prussian cavalry , and aided the massacre . 
Such tragic favors of the night do occur sometimes during catastrophes . 
After the last cannon-shot had been fired , the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean remained deserted . 
The English occupied the encampment of the French ; it is the usual sign of victory to sleep in the bed of the vanquished . 
They established their bivouac beyond Rossomme . 
The Prussians , let loose on the retreating rout , pushed forward . 
Wellington went to the village of Waterloo to draw up his report to Lord Bathurst . 
If ever the sic vos non vobis was applicable , it certainly is to that village of Waterloo . 
Waterloo took no part , and lay half a league from the scene of action . 
Mont-Saint-Jean was cannonaded , Hougomont was burned , La Haie-Sainte was taken by assault , Papelotte was burned , Plancenoit was burned , La Belle-Alliance beheld the embrace of the two conquerors ; these names are hardly known , and Waterloo , which worked not in the battle , bears off all the honor . 
We are not of the number of those who flatter war ; when the occasion presents itself , we tell the truth about it . 
War has frightful beauties which we have not concealed ; it has also , we acknowledge , some hideous features . 
One of the most surprising is the prompt stripping of the bodies of the dead after the victory . 
The dawn which follows a battle always rises on naked corpses . 
Who does this ? 
Who thus soils the triumph ? 
What hideous , furtive hand is that which is slipped into the pocket of victory ? 
What pickpockets are they who ply their trade in the rear of glory ? 
Some philosophers -- Voltaire among the number -- affirm that it is precisely those persons have made the glory . 
It is the same men , they say ; there is no relief corps ; those who are erect pillage those who are prone on the earth . 
The hero of the day is the vampire of the night . 
One has assuredly the right , after all , to strip a corpse a bit when one is the author of that corpse . 
For our own part , we do not think so ; it seems to us impossible that the same hand should pluck laurels and purloin the shoes from a dead man . 
One thing is certain , which is , that generally after conquerors follow thieves . 
But let us leave the soldier , especially the contemporary soldier , out of the question . 
Every army has a rear-guard , and it is that which must be blamed . 
Bat-like creatures , half brigands and lackeys ; all the sorts of vespertillos that that twilight called war engenders ; wearers of uniforms , who take no part in the fighting ; pretended invalids ; formidable limpers ; interloping sutlers , trotting along in little carts , sometimes accompanied by their wives , and stealing things which they sell again ; beggars offering themselves as guides to officers ; soldiers ' servants ; marauders ; armies on the march in days gone by , -- we are not speaking of the present , -- dragged all this behind them , so that in the special language they are called `` stragglers . '' 
No army , no nation , was responsible for those beings ; they spoke Italian and followed the Germans , then spoke French and followed the English . 
It was by one of these wretches , a Spanish straggler who spoke French , that the Marquis of Fervacques , deceived by his Picard jargon , and taking him for one of our own men , was traitorously slain and robbed on the battle-field itself , in the course of the night which followed the victory of Cerisoles . 
The rascal sprang from this marauding . 
The detestable maxim , Live on the enemy ! 
produced this leprosy , which a strict discipline alone could heal . 
There are reputations which are deceptive ; one does not always know why certain generals , great in other directions , have been so popular . 
Turenne was adored by his soldiers because he tolerated pillage ; evil permitted constitutes part of goodness . 
Turenne was so good that he allowed the Palatinate to be delivered over to fire and blood . 
The marauders in the train of an army were more or less in number , according as the chief was more or less severe . 
Hoche and Marceau had no stragglers ; Wellington had few , and we do him the justice to mention it . 
Nevertheless , on the night from the 18th to the 19th of June , the dead were robbed . 
Wellington was rigid ; he gave orders that any one caught in the act should be shot ; but rapine is tenacious . 
The marauders stole in one corner of the battlefield while others were being shot in another . 
The moon was sinister over this plain . 
Towards midnight , a man was prowling about , or rather , climbing in the direction of the hollow road of Ohain . 
To all appearance he was one of those whom we have just described , -- neither English nor French , neither peasant nor soldier , less a man than a ghoul attracted by the scent of the dead bodies having theft for his victory , and come to rifle Waterloo . 
He was clad in a blouse that was something like a great coat ; he was uneasy and audacious ; he walked forwards and gazed behind him . 
Who was this man ? 
The night probably knew more of him than the day . 
He had no sack , but evidently he had large pockets under his coat . 
From time to time he halted , scrutinized the plain around him as though to see whether he were observed , bent over abruptly , disturbed something silent and motionless on the ground , then rose and fled . 
His sliding motion , his attitudes , his mysterious and rapid gestures , caused him to resemble those twilight larvae which haunt ruins , and which ancient Norman legends call the Alleurs . 
Certain nocturnal wading birds produce these silhouettes among the marshes . 
A glance capable of piercing all that mist deeply would have perceived at some distance a sort of little sutler 's wagon with a fluted wicker hood , harnessed to a famished nag which was cropping the grass across its bit as it halted , hidden , as it were , behind the hovel which adjoins the highway to Nivelles , at the angle of the road from Mont-Saint-Jean to Braine l'Alleud ; and in the wagon , a sort of woman seated on coffers and packages . 
Perhaps there was some connection between that wagon and that prowler . 
The darkness was serene . 
Not a cloud in the zenith . 
What matters it if the earth be red ! 
the moon remains white ; these are the indifferences of the sky . 
In the fields , branches of trees broken by grape-shot , but not fallen , upheld by their bark , swayed gently in the breeze of night . 
A breath , almost a respiration , moved the shrubbery . 
Quivers which resembled the departure of souls ran through the grass . 
In the distance the coming and going of patrols and the general rounds of the English camp were audible . 
Hougomont and La Haie-Sainte continued to burn , forming , one in the west , the other in the east , two great flames which were joined by the cordon of bivouac fires of the English , like a necklace of rubies with two carbuncles at the extremities , as they extended in an immense semicircle over the hills along the horizon . 
We have described the catastrophe of the road of Ohain . 
The heart is terrified at the thought of what that death must have been to so many brave men . 
If there is anything terrible , if there exists a reality which surpasses dreams , it is this : to live , to see the sun ; to be in full possession of virile force ; to possess health and joy ; to laugh valiantly ; to rush towards a glory which one sees dazzling in front of one ; to feel in one 's breast lungs which breathe , a heart which beats , a will which reasons ; to speak , think , hope , love ; to have a mother , to have a wife , to have children ; to have the light -- and all at once , in the space of a shout , in less than a minute , to sink into an abyss ; to fall , to roll , to crush , to be crushed ; to see ears of wheat , flowers , leaves , branches ; not to be able to catch hold of anything ; to feel one 's sword useless , men beneath one , horses on top of one ; to struggle in vain , since one 's bones have been broken by some kick in the darkness ; to feel a heel which makes one 's eyes start from their sockets ; to bite horses ' shoes in one 's rage ; to stifle , to yell , to writhe ; to be beneath , and to say to one 's self , `` But just a little while ago I was a living man ! '' 
There , where that lamentable disaster had uttered its death-rattle , all was silence now . 
The edges of the hollow road were encumbered with horses and riders , inextricably heaped up . 
