Zero does not exist . 
Everything is something . 
Nothing is nothing . 
Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread . 
Even to see and to show does not suffice . 
Philosophy should be an energy ; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition of man . 
Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius ; in other words , the man of wisdom should be made to emerge from the man of felicity . 
Eden should be changed into a Lyceum . 
Science should be a cordial . 
To enjoy , -- what a sad aim , and what a paltry ambition ! 
The brute enjoys . 
To offer thought to the thirst of men , to give them all as an elixir the notion of God , to make conscience and science fraternize in them , to render them just by this mysterious confrontation ; such is the function of real philosophy . 
Morality is a blossoming out of truths . 
Contemplation leads to action . 
The absolute should be practicable . 
It is necessary that the ideal should be breathable , drinkable , and eatable to the human mind . 
It is the ideal which has the right to say : Take , this is my body , this is my blood . 
Wisdom is a holy communion . 
It is on this condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of science and becomes the one and sovereign mode of human rallying , and that philosophy herself is promoted to religion . 
Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it at its ease , without any other result than that of being convenient to curiosity . 
For our part , adjourning the development of our thought to another occasion , we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither understand man as a point of departure nor progress as an end , without those two forces which are their two motors : faith and love . 
Progress is the goal , the ideal is the type . 
What is this ideal ? 
It is God . 
Ideal , absolute , perfection , infinity : identical words . 
PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME History and philosophy have eternal duties , which are , at the same time , simple duties ; to combat Caiphas the High-priest , Draco the Lawgiver , Trimalcion the Legislator , Tiberius the Emperor ; this is clear , direct , and limpid , and offers no obscurity . 
But the right to live apart , even with its inconveniences and its abuses , insists on being stated and taken into account . 
Cenobitism is a human problem . 
When one speaks of convents , those abodes of error , but of innocence , of aberration but of good-will , of ignorance but of devotion , of torture but of martyrdom , it always becomes necessary to say either yes or no . 
A convent is a contradiction . 
Its object , salvation ; its means thereto , sacrifice . 
The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme abnegation . 
To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device of monasticism . 
In the cloister , one suffers in order to enjoy . 
One draws a bill of exchange on death . 
One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light . 
In the cloister , hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on paradise . 
The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with eternity . 
It does not seem to us , that on such a subject mockery is permissible . 
All about it is serious , the good as well as the bad . 
The just man frowns , but never smiles with a malicious sneer . 
We understand wrath , but not malice . 
FAITH , LAW A few words more . 
We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues , we despise the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal ; but we everywhere honor the thoughtful man . 
We salute the man who kneels . 
A faith ; this is a necessity for man . 
Woe to him who believes nothing . 
One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed . 
There is visible labor and invisible labor . 
To contemplate is to labor , to think is to act . 
Folded arms toil , clasped hands work . 
A gaze fixed on heaven is a work . 
Thales remained motionless for four years . 
He founded philosophy . 
In our opinion , cenobites are not lazy men , and recluses are not idlers . 
To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing . 
Without invalidating anything that we have just said , we believe that a perpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living . 
On this point , the priest and the philosopher agree . 
We must die . 
The Abbe de la Trappe replies to Horace . 
To mingle with one 's life a certain presence of the sepulchre , -- this is the law of the sage ; and it is the law of the ascetic . 
In this respect , the ascetic and the sage converge . 
There is a material growth ; we admit it . 
There is a moral grandeur ; we hold to that . 
Thoughtless and vivacious spirits say : -- `` What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery ? 
What purpose do they serve ? 
What do they do ? '' 
Alas ! 
In the presence of the darkness which environs us , and which awaits us , in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make of us , we reply : `` There is probably no work more divine than that performed by these souls . '' 
And we add : `` There is probably no work which is more useful . '' 
There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who never pray at all . 
In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought that is mingled with prayer . 
Leibnitz praying is grand , Voltaire adoring is fine . 
Deo erexit Voltaire . 
We are for religion as against religions . 
We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons , and the sublimity of prayer . 
Moreover , at this minute which we are now traversing , -- a minute which will not , fortunately , leave its impress on the nineteenth century , -- at this hour , when so many men have low brows and souls but little elevated , among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment , and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter , whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us . 
The monastery is a renunciation . 
Sacrifice wrongly directed is still sacrifice . 
To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of its own . 
Taken by itself , and ideally , and in order to examine the truth on all sides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted , the monastery , the female convent in particular , -- for in our century it is woman who suffers the most , and in this exile of the cloister there is something of protestation , -- the female convent has incontestably a certain majesty . 
This cloistered existence which is so austere , so depressing , a few of whose features we have just traced , is not life , for it is not liberty ; it is not the tomb , for it is not plenitude ; it is the strange place whence one beholds , as from the crest of a lofty mountain , on one side the abyss where we are , on the other , the abyss whither we shall go ; it is the narrow and misty frontier separating two worlds , illuminated and obscured by both at the same time , where the ray of life which has become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death ; it is the half obscurity of the tomb . 
We , who do not believe what these women believe , but who , like them , live by faith , -- we have never been able to think without a sort of tender and religious terror , without a sort of pity , that is full of envy , of those devoted , trembling and trusting creatures , of these humble and august souls , who dare to dwell on the very brink of the mystery , waiting between the world which is closed and heaven which is not yet open , turned towards the light which one can not see , possessing the sole happiness of thinking that they know where it is , aspiring towards the gulf , and the unknown , their eyes fixed motionless on the darkness , kneeling , bewildered , stupefied , shuddering , half lifted , at times , by the deep breaths of eternity . 
BOOK EIGHTH . 
-- CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT It was into this house that Jean Valjean had , as Fauchelevent expressed it , `` fallen from the sky . '' 
He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the Rue Polonceau . 
That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle of the night , was the nuns chanting matins ; that hall , of which he had caught a glimpse in the gloom , was the chapel . 
That phantom which he had seen stretched on the ground was the sister who was making reparation ; that bell , the sound of which had so strangely surprised him , was the gardener 's bell attached to the knee of Father Fauchelevent . 
Cosette once put to bed , Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had , as we have already seen , supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a good , crackling fire ; then , the only bed in the hut being occupied by Cosette , each threw himself on a truss of straw . 
Before he shut his eyes , Jean Valjean said : `` I must remain here henceforth . '' 
This remark trotted through Fauchelevent 's head all night long . 
To tell the truth , neither of them slept . 
Jean Valjean , feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on his scent , understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned to Paris . 
Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded him in this cloister . 
Jean Valjean had , henceforth , but one thought , -- to remain there . 
Now , for an unfortunate man in his position , this convent was both the safest and the most dangerous of places ; the most dangerous , because , as no men might enter there , if he were discovered , it was a flagrant offence , and Jean Valjean would find but one step intervening between the convent and prison ; the safest , because , if he could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there , who would ever seek him in such a place ? 
To dwell in an impossible place was safety . 
On his side , Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains . 
He began by declaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter . 
How had M. Madeleine got there , when the walls were what they were ? 
