The Petit-Picpus , of which no existing plan has preserved a trace , is indicated with sufficient clearness in the plan of 1727 , published at Paris by Denis Thierry , Rue Saint-Jacques , opposite the Rue du Platre ; and at Lyons , by Jean Girin , Rue Merciere , at the sign of Prudence . 
Petit-Picpus had , as we have just mentioned , a Y of streets , formed by the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , which spread out in two branches , taking on the left the name of Little Picpus Street , and on the right the name of the Rue Polonceau . 
The two limbs of the Y were connected at the apex as by a bar ; this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur . 
The Rue Polonceau ended there ; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on , and ascended towards the Lenoir market . 
A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the Rue Polonceau , and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur , turning abruptly at a right angle , in front of him the wall of that street , and on his right a truncated prolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur , which had no issue and was called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
It was here that Jean Valjean stood . 
As we have just said , on catching sight of that black silhouette standing on guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the Rue Petit-Picpus , he recoiled . 
There could be no doubt of it . 
That phantom was lying in wait for him . 
What was he to do ? 
The time for retreating was passed . 
That which he had perceived in movement an instant before , in the distant darkness , was Javert and his squad without a doubt . 
Javert was probably already at the commencement of the street at whose end Jean Valjean stood . 
Javert , to all appearances , was acquainted with this little labyrinth , and had taken his precautions by sending one of his men to guard the exit . 
These surmises , which so closely resembled proofs , whirled suddenly , like a handful of dust caught up by an unexpected gust of wind , through Jean Valjean 's mournful brain . 
He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot ; there he was cut off . 
He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus ; there stood a sentinel . 
He saw that black form standing out in relief against the white pavement , illuminated by the moon ; to advance was to fall into this man 's hands ; to retreat was to fling himself into Javert 's arms . 
Jean Valjean felt himself caught , as in a net , which was slowly contracting ; he gazed heavenward in despair . 
THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT In order to understand what follows , it is requisite to form an exact idea of the Droit-Mur lane , and , in particular , of the angle which one leaves on the left when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau into this lane . 
Droit-Mur lane was almost entirely bordered on the right , as far as the Rue Petit-Picpus , by houses of mean aspect ; on the left by a solitary building of severe outlines , composed of numerous parts which grew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the Rue Petit-Picpus side ; so that this building , which was very lofty on the Rue Petit-Picpus side , was tolerably low on the side adjoining the Rue Polonceau . 
There , at the angle of which we have spoken , it descended to such a degree that it consisted of merely a wall . 
This wall did not abut directly on the Street ; it formed a deeply retreating niche , concealed by its two corners from two observers who might have been , one in the Rue Polonceau , the other in the Rue Droit-Mur . 
Beginning with these angles of the niche , the wall extended along the Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49 , and along the Rue Droit-Mur , where the fragment was much shorter , as far as the gloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected , thus forming another retreating angle in the street . 
This gable was sombre of aspect ; only one window was visible , or , to speak more correctly , two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and kept constantly closed . 
The state of the places of which we are here giving a description is rigorously exact , and will certainly awaken a very precise memory in the mind of old inhabitants of the quarter . 
The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal and wretched door ; it was a vast , formless assemblage of perpendicular planks , the upper ones being broader than the lower , bound together by long transverse strips of iron . 
At one side there was a carriage gate of the ordinary dimensions , and which had evidently not been cut more than fifty years previously . 
A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche , and the wall was covered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau . 
In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself , this sombre building had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which tempted him . 
He ran his eyes rapidly over it ; he said to himself , that if he could contrive to get inside it , he might save himself . 
First he conceived an idea , then a hope . 
In the central portion of the front of this building , on the Rue Droit-Mur side , there were at all the windows of the different stories ancient cistern pipes of lead . 
The various branches of the pipes which led from one central pipe to all these little basins sketched out a sort of tree on the front . 
These ramifications of pipes with their hundred elbows imitated those old leafless vine-stocks which writhe over the fronts of old farm-houses . 
This odd espalier , with its branches of lead and iron , was the first thing that struck Jean Valjean . 
He seated Cosette with her back against a stone post , with an injunction to be silent , and ran to the spot where the conduit touched the pavement . 
Perhaps there was some way of climbing up by it and entering the house . 
But the pipe was dilapidated and past service , and hardly hung to its fastenings . 
Moreover , all the windows of this silent dwelling were grated with heavy iron bars , even the attic windows in the roof . 
And then , the moon fell full upon that facade , and the man who was watching at the corner of the street would have seen Jean Valjean in the act of climbing . 
And finally , what was to be done with Cosette ? 
How was she to be drawn up to the top of a three-story house ? 
He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe , and crawled along the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau . 
When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette , he noticed that no one could see him there . 
As we have just explained , he was concealed from all eyes , no matter from which direction they were approaching ; besides this , he was in the shadow . 
Finally , there were two doors ; perhaps they might be forced . 
The wall above which he saw the linden-tree and the ivy evidently abutted on a garden where he could , at least , hide himself , although there were as yet no leaves on the trees , and spend the remainder of the night . 
Time was passing ; he must act quickly . 
He felt over the carriage door , and immediately recognized the fact that it was impracticable outside and in . 
He approached the other door with more hope ; it was frightfully decrepit ; its very immensity rendered it less solid ; the planks were rotten ; the iron bands -- there were only three of them -- were rusted . 
It seemed as though it might be possible to pierce this worm-eaten barrier . 
On examining it he found that the door was not a door ; it had neither hinges , cross-bars , lock , nor fissure in the middle ; the iron bands traversed it from side to side without any break . 
Through the crevices in the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stone roughly cemented together , which passers-by might still have seen there ten years ago . 
He was forced to acknowledge with consternation that this apparent door was simply the wooden decoration of a building against which it was placed . 
It was easy to tear off a plank ; but then , one found one 's self face to face with a wall . 
WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS At that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible at some distance . 
Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street . 
Seven or eight soldiers , drawn up in a platoon , had just debouched into the Rue Polonceau . 
He saw the gleam of their bayonets . 
They were advancing towards him ; these soldiers , at whose head he distinguished Javert 's tall figure , advanced slowly and cautiously . 
They halted frequently ; it was plain that they were searching all the nooks of the walls and all the embrasures of the doors and alleys . 
This was some patrol that Javert had encountered -- there could be no mistake as to this surmise -- and whose aid he had demanded . 
Javert 's two acolytes were marching in their ranks . 
At the rate at which they were marching , and in consideration of the halts which they were making , it would take them about a quarter of an hour to reach the spot where Jean Valjean stood . 
It was a frightful moment . 
A few minutes only separated Jean Valjean from that terrible precipice which yawned before him for the third time . 
And the galleys now meant not only the galleys , but Cosette lost to him forever ; that is to say , a life resembling the interior of a tomb . 
There was but one thing which was possible . 
Jean Valjean had this peculiarity , that he carried , as one might say , two beggar 's pouches : in one he kept his saintly thoughts ; in the other the redoubtable talents of a convict . 
He rummaged in the one or the other , according to circumstances . 
Among his other resources , thanks to his numerous escapes from the prison at Toulon , he was , as it will be remembered , a past master in the incredible art of crawling up without ladder or climbing-irons , by sheer muscular force , by leaning on the nape of his neck , his shoulders , his hips , and his knees , by helping himself on the rare projections of the stone , in the right angle of a wall , as high as the sixth story , if need be ; an art which has rendered so celebrated and so alarming that corner of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris by which Battemolle , condemned to death , made his escape twenty years ago . 
Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied the linden ; it was about eighteen feet in height . 
The angle which it formed with the gable of the large building was filled , at its lower extremity , by a mass of masonry of a triangular shape , probably intended to preserve that too convenient corner from the rubbish of those dirty creatures called the passers-by . 
This practice of filling up corners of the wall is much in use in Paris . 
This mass was about five feet in height ; the space above the summit of this mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteen feet . 
The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping . 
Cosette was the difficulty , for she did not know how to climb a wall . 
Should he abandon her ? 
Jean Valjean did not once think of that . 
It was impossible to carry her . 
A man 's whole strength is required to successfully carry out these singular ascents . 
The least burden would disturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards . 
A rope would have been required ; Jean Valjean had none . 
Where was he to get a rope at midnight , in the Rue Polonceau ? 
Certainly , if Jean Valjean had had a kingdom , he would have given it for a rope at that moment . 
All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which sometimes dazzle , sometimes illuminate us . 
Jean Valjean 's despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post of the blind alley Genrot . 
At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris . 
At nightfall lanterns placed at regular distances were lighted ; they were ascended and descended by means of a rope , which traversed the street from side to side , and was adjusted in a groove of the post . 
The pulley over which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern in a little iron box , the key to which was kept by the lamp-lighter , and the rope itself was protected by a metal case . 
Jean Valjean , with the energy of a supreme struggle , crossed the street at one bound , entered the blind alley , broke the latch of the little box with the point of his knife , and an instant later he was beside Cosette once more . 
He had a rope . 
These gloomy inventors of expedients work rapidly when they are fighting against fatality . 
We have already explained that the lanterns had not been lighted that night . 
The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus naturally extinct , like the rest ; and one could pass directly under it without even noticing that it was no longer in its place . 
Nevertheless , the hour , the place , the darkness , Jean Valjean 's absorption , his singular gestures , his goings and comings , all had begun to render Cosette uneasy . 
Any other child than she would have given vent to loud shrieks long before . 
She contented herself with plucking Jean Valjean by the skirt of his coat . 
They could hear the sound of the patrol 's approach ever more and more distinctly . 
