They call everything our ; thus : our veil , our chaplet ; if they were speaking of their chemise , they would say our chemise . 
Sometimes they grow attached to some petty object , -- to a book of hours , a relic , a medal that has been blessed . 
As soon as they become aware that they are growing attached to this object , they must give it up . 
They recall the words of Saint Therese , to whom a great lady said , as she was on the point of entering her order , `` Permit me , mother , to send for a Bible to which I am greatly attached . '' 
`` Ah , you are attached to something ! 
In that case , do not enter our order ! '' 
Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up , to have a place of her own , a chamber . 
They live with their cells open . 
When they meet , one says , `` Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
The other responds , `` Forever . '' 
The same ceremony when one taps at the other 's door . 
Hardly has she touched the door when a soft voice on the other side is heard to say hastily , `` Forever ! '' 
Like all practices , this becomes mechanical by force of habit ; and one sometimes says forever before the other has had time to say the rather long sentence , `` Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar . '' 
Among the Visitandines the one who enters says : `` Ave Maria , '' and the one whose cell is entered says , `` Gratia plena . '' 
It is their way of saying good day , which is in fact full of grace . 
At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the church bell of the convent . 
At this signal prioress , vocal mothers , professed nuns , lay-sisters , novices , postulants , interrupt what they are saying , what they are doing , or what they are thinking , and all say in unison if it is five o'clock , for instance , `` At five o'clock and at all hours praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
If it is eight o'clock , `` At eight o'clock and at all hours ! '' 
and so on , according to the hour . 
This custom , the object of which is to break the thread of thought and to lead it back constantly to God , exists in many communities ; the formula alone varies . 
Thus at The Infant Jesus they say , `` At this hour and at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart ! '' 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga , cloistered fifty years ago at Petit-Picpus , chant the offices to a solemn psalmody , a pure Gregorian chant , and always with full voice during the whole course of the office . 
Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they pause , and say in a low voice , `` Jesus-Marie-Joseph . '' 
For the office of the dead they adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly descend to such a depth . 
The effect produced is striking and tragic . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altar for the burial of their community . 
The Government , as they say , does not permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when they die . 
This is an affliction to them , and causes them consternation as an infraction of the rules . 
They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best , -- permission to be interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient Vaugirard cemetery , which was made of land which had formerly belonged to their community . 
On Fridays the nuns hear high mass , vespers , and all the offices , as on Sunday . 
They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivals unknown to people of the world , of which the Church of France was so prodigal in the olden days , and of which it is still prodigal in Spain and Italy . 
Their stations in the chapel are interminable . 
As for the number and duration of their prayers we can convey no better idea of them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them : `` The prayers of the postulants are frightful , the prayers of the novices are still worse , and the prayers of the professed nuns are still worse . '' 
Once a week the chapter assembles : the prioress presides ; the vocal mothers assist . 
Each sister kneels in turn on the stones , and confesses aloud , in the presence of all , the faults and sins which she has committed during the week . 
The vocal mothers consult after each confession and inflict the penance aloud . 
Besides this confession in a loud tone , for which all faults in the least serious are reserved , they have for their venial offences what they call the coulpe . 
To make one 's coulpe means to prostrate one 's self flat on one 's face during the office in front of the prioress until the latter , who is never called anything but our mother , notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood of her stall that she can rise . 
The coulpe or peccavi , is made for a very small matter -- a broken glass , a torn veil , an involuntary delay of a few seconds at an office , a false note in church , etc. ; this suffices , and the coulpe is made . 
The coulpe is entirely spontaneous ; it is the culpable person herself -LRB- the word is etymologically in its place here -RRB- who judges herself and inflicts it on herself . 
On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors intone the offices before a large reading-desk with four places . 
One day one of the mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with Ecce , and instead of Ecce she uttered aloud the three notes do si sol ; for this piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a coulpe which lasted during the whole service : what rendered the fault enormous was the fact that the chapter had laughed . 
When a nun is summoned to the parlor , even were it the prioress herself , she drops her veil , as will be remembered , so that only her mouth is visible . 
The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers . 
The others can see only their immediate family , and that very rarely . 
If , by chance , an outsider presents herself to see a nun , or one whom she has known and loved in the outer world , a regular series of negotiations is required . 
If it is a woman , the authorization may sometimes be granted ; the nun comes , and they talk to her through the shutters , which are opened only for a mother or sister . 
It is unnecessary to say that permission is always refused to men . 
Such is the rule of Saint-Benoit , aggravated by Martin Verga . 
These nuns are not gay , rosy , and fresh , as the daughters of other orders often are . 
They are pale and grave . 
Between 1825 and 1830 three of them went mad . 
AUSTERITIES One is a postulant for two years at least , often for four ; a novice for four . 
It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to their order . 
In their cells , they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations , of which they must never speak . 
On the day when a novice makes her profession , she is dressed in her handsomest attire , she is crowned with white roses , her hair is brushed until it shines , and curled . 
Then she prostrates herself ; a great black veil is thrown over her , and the office for the dead is sung . 
Then the nuns separate into two files ; one file passes close to her , saying in plaintive accents , `` Our sister is dead '' ; and the other file responds in a voice of ecstasy , `` Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ ! '' 
At the epoch when this story takes place , a boarding-school was attached to the convent -- a boarding-school for young girls of noble and mostly wealthy families , among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de Saint-Aulaire and de Belissen , and an English girl bearing the illustrious Catholic name of Talbot . 
These young girls , reared by these nuns between four walls , grew up with a horror of the world and of the age . 
One of them said to us one day , `` The sight of the street pavement made me shudder from head to foot . '' 
They were dressed in blue , with a white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their breast . 
On certain grand festival days , particularly Saint Martha 's day , they were permitted , as a high favor and a supreme happiness , to dress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of Saint-Benoit for a whole day . 
In the early days the nuns were in the habit of lending them their black garments . 
This seemed profane , and the prioress forbade it . 
Only the novices were permitted to lend . 
It is remarkable that these performances , tolerated and encouraged , no doubt , in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit , were a genuine happiness and a real recreation for the scholars . 
They simply amused themselves with it . 
It was new ; it gave them a change . 
Candid reasons of childhood , which do not , however , succeed in making us worldlings comprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one 's hand and standing for hours together singing hard enough for four in front of a reading-desk . 
The pupils conformed , with the exception of the austerities , to all the practices of the convent . 
There was a certain young woman who entered the world , and who after many years of married life had not succeeded in breaking herself of the habit of saying in great haste whenever any one knocked at her door , `` forever ! '' 
Like the nuns , the pupils saw their relatives only in the parlor . 
Their very mothers did not obtain permission to embrace them . 
The following illustrates to what a degree severity on that point was carried . 
One day a young girl received a visit from her mother , who was accompanied by a little sister three years of age . 
The young girl wept , for she wished greatly to embrace her sister . 
Impossible . 
She begged that , at least , the child might be permitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could kiss it . 
This was almost indignantly refused . 
GAYETIES None the less , these young girls filled this grave house with charming souvenirs . 
At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister . 
The recreation hour struck . 
A door swung on its hinges . 
The birds said , `` Good ; here come the children ! '' 
An irruption of youth inundated that garden intersected with a cross like a shroud . 
Radiant faces , white foreheads , innocent eyes , full of merry light , all sorts of auroras , were scattered about amid these shadows . 
After the psalmodies , the bells , the peals , and knells and offices , the sound of these little girls burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees . 
The hive of joy was opened , and each one brought her honey . 
They played , they called to each other , they formed into groups , they ran about ; pretty little white teeth chattered in the corners ; the veils superintended the laughs from a distance , shades kept watch of the sunbeams , but what mattered it ? 
Still they beamed and laughed . 
Those four lugubrious walls had their moment of dazzling brilliancy . 
They looked on , vaguely blanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming of the hives . 
It was like a shower of roses falling athwart this house of mourning . 
The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns ; the gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence . 
Thanks to these children , there was , among so many austere hours , one hour of ingenuousness . 
The little ones skipped about ; the elder ones danced . 
In this cloister play was mingled with heaven . 
Nothing is so delightful and so august as all these fresh , expanding young souls . 
