Twenty months had barely elapsed since the Revolution of July , the year 1832 had opened with an aspect of something impending and threatening . 
The distress of the people , the laborers without bread , the last Prince de Conde engulfed in the shadows , Brussels expelling the Nassaus as Paris did the Bourbons , Belgium offering herself to a French Prince and giving herself to an English Prince , the Russian hatred of Nicolas , behind us the demons of the South , Ferdinand in Spain , Miguel in Portugal , the earth quaking in Italy , Metternich extending his hand over Bologna , France treating Austria sharply at Ancona , at the North no one knew what sinister sound of the hammer nailing up Poland in her coffin , irritated glances watching France narrowly all over Europe , England , a suspected ally , ready to give a push to that which was tottering and to hurl herself on that which should fall , the peerage sheltering itself behind Beccaria to refuse four heads to the law , the fleurs-de-lys erased from the King 's carriage , the cross torn from Notre Dame , Lafayette lessened , Laffitte ruined , Benjamin Constant dead in indigence , Casimir Perier dead in the exhaustion of his power ; political and social malady breaking out simultaneously in the two capitals of the kingdom , the one in the city of thought , the other in the city of toil ; at Paris civil war , at Lyons servile war ; in the two cities , the same glare of the furnace ; a crater-like crimson on the brow of the people ; the South rendered fanatic , the West troubled , the Duchesse de Berry in la Vendee , plots , conspiracies , risings , cholera , added the sombre roar of tumult of events to the sombre roar of ideas . 
FACTS WHENCE HISTORY SPRINGS AND WHICH HISTORY IGNORES Towards the end of April , everything had become aggravated . 
The fermentation entered the boiling state . 
Ever since 1830 , petty partial revolts had been going on here and there , which were quickly suppressed , but ever bursting forth afresh , the sign of a vast underlying conflagration . 
Something terrible was in preparation . 
Glimpses could be caught of the features still indistinct and imperfectly lighted , of a possible revolution . 
France kept an eye on Paris ; Paris kept an eye on the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine , which was in a dull glow , was beginning its ebullition . 
The wine-shops of the Rue de Charonne were , although the union of the two epithets seems singular when applied to wine-shops , grave and stormy . 
The government was there purely and simply called in question . 
There people publicly discussed the question of fighting or of keeping quiet . 
There were back shops where workingmen were made to swear that they would hasten into the street at the first cry of alarm , and `` that they would fight without counting the number of the enemy . '' 
This engagement once entered into , a man seated in the corner of the wine-shop `` assumed a sonorous tone , '' and said , `` You understand ! 
You have sworn ! '' 
Sometimes they went up stairs , to a private room on the first floor , and there scenes that were almost masonic were enacted . 
They made the initiated take oaths to render service to himself as well as to the fathers of families . 
That was the formula . 
In the tap-rooms , `` subversive '' pamphlets were read . 
They treated the government with contempt , says a secret report of that time . 
Words like the following could be heard there : -- `` I do n't know the names of the leaders . 
We folks shall not know the day until two hours beforehand . '' 
One workman said : `` There are three hundred of us , let each contribute ten sous , that will make one hundred and fifty francs with which to procure powder and shot . '' 
Another said : `` I do n't ask for six months , I do n't ask for even two . 
In less than a fortnight we shall be parallel with the government . 
With twenty-five thousand men we can face them . '' 
Another said : `` I do n't sleep at night , because I make cartridges all night . '' 
From time to time , men `` of bourgeois appearance , and in good coats '' came and `` caused embarrassment , '' and with the air of `` command , '' shook hands with the most important , and then went away . 
They never stayed more than ten minutes . 
Significant remarks were exchanged in a low tone : `` The plot is ripe , the matter is arranged . '' 
`` It was murmured by all who were there , '' to borrow the very expression of one of those who were present . 
The exaltation was such that one day , a workingman exclaimed , efore the whole wine-shop : `` We have no arms ! '' 
One of his comrades replied : `` The soldiers have ! '' 
thus parodying without being aware of the fact , Bonaparte 's proclamation to the army in Italy : `` When they had anything of a more secret nature on hand , '' adds one report , `` they did not communicate it to each other . '' 
It is not easy to understand what they could conceal after what they said . 
These reunions were sometimes periodical . 
At certain ones of them , there were never more than eight or ten persons present , and they were always the same . 
In others , any one entered who wished , and the room was so full that they were forced to stand . 
Some went thither through enthusiasm and passion ; others because it was on their way to their work . 
As during the Revolution , there were patriotic women in some of these wine-shops who embraced new-comers . 
Other expressive facts came to light . 
A man would enter a shop , drink , and go his way with the remark : `` Wine-merchant , the revolution will pay what is due to you . '' 
Revolutionary agents were appointed in a wine-shop facing the Rue de Charonne . 
The balloting was carried on in their caps . 
Workingmen met at the house of a fencing-master who gave lessons in the Rue de Cotte . 
There there was a trophy of arms formed of wooden broadswords , canes , clubs , and foils . 
One day , the buttons were removed from the foils . 
A workman said : `` There are twenty-five of us , but they do n't count on me , because I am looked upon as a machine . '' 
Later on , that machine became Quenisset . 
The indefinite things which were brewing gradually acquired a strange and indescribable notoriety . 
A woman sweeping off her doorsteps said to another woman : `` For a long time , there has been a strong force busy making cartridges . '' 
In the open street , proclamation could be seen addressed to the National Guard in the departments . 
One of these proclamations was signed : Burtot , wine-merchant . 
One day a man with his beard worn like a collar and with an Italian accent mounted a stone post at the door of a liquor-seller in the Marche Lenoir , and read aloud a singular document , which seemed to emanate from an occult power . 
Groups formed around him , and applauded . 
The passages which touched the crowd most deeply were collected and noted down . '' 
-- Our doctrines are trammelled , our proclamations torn , our bill-stickers are spied upon and thrown into prison . '' 
-- `` The breakdown which has recently taken place in cottons has converted to us many mediums . '' 
-- `` The future of nations is being worked out in our obscure ranks . '' 
-- '' Here are the fixed terms : action or reaction , revolution or counter-revolution . 
For , at our epoch , we no longer believe either in inertia or in immobility . 
For the people against the people , that is the question . 
There is no other . '' 
-- `` On the day when we cease to suit you , break us , but up to that day , help us to march on . '' 
All this in broad daylight . 
Other deeds , more audacious still , were suspicious in the eyes of the people by reason of their very audacity . 
On the 4th of April , 1832 , a passer-by mounted the post on the corner which forms the angle of the Rue Sainte-Marguerite and shouted : `` I am a Babouvist ! '' 
But beneath Babeuf , the people scented Gisquet . 
Among other things , this man said : -- `` Down with property ! 
The opposition of the left is cowardly and treacherous . 
When it wants to be on the right side , it preaches revolution , it is democratic in order to escape being beaten , and royalist so that it may not have to fight . 
The republicans are beasts with feathers . 
Distrust the republicans , citizens of the laboring classes . '' 
`` Silence , citizen spy ! '' 
cried an artisan . 
This shout put an end to the discourse . 
Mysterious incidents occurred . 
At nightfall , a workingman encountered near the canal a `` very well dressed man , '' who said to him : `` Whither are you bound , citizen ? '' 
`` Sir , '' replied the workingman , `` I have not the honor of your acquaintance . '' 
`` I know you very well , however . '' 
And the man added : `` Do n't be alarmed , I am an agent of the committee . 
You are suspected of not being quite faithful . 
You know that if you reveal anything , there is an eye fixed on you . '' 
Then he shook hands with the workingman and went away , saying : `` We shall meet again soon . '' 
The police , who were on the alert , collected singular dialogues , not only in the wine-shops , but in the street . 
`` Get yourself received very soon , '' said a weaver to a cabinet-maker . 
`` Why ? '' 
`` There is going to be a shot to fire . '' 
Two ragged pedestrians exchanged these remarkable replies , fraught with evident Jacquerie : -- `` Who governs us ? '' 
`` M. Philippe . '' 
`` No , it is the bourgeoisie . '' 
The reader is mistaken if he thinks that we take the word Jacquerie in a bad sense . 
The Jacques were the poor . 
On another occasion two men were heard to say to each other as they passed by : `` We have a good plan of attack . '' 
Only the following was caught of a private conversation between four men who were crouching in a ditch of the circle of the Barriere du Trone : -- `` Everything possible will be done to prevent his walking about Paris any more . '' 
Who was the he ? 
Menacing obscurity . 
`` The principal leaders , '' as they said in the faubourg , held themselves apart . 
It was supposed that they met for consultation in a wine-shop near the point Saint-Eustache . 
A certain Aug -- , chief of the Society aid for tailors , Rue Mondetour , had the reputation of serving as intermediary central between the leaders and the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
