Did he begin to waver under the delusion of a breath of adventure ? 
Had he become -- a grave matter in a general -- unconscious of peril ? 
Is there an age , in this class of material great men , who may be called the giants of action , when genius grows short-sighted ? 
Old age has no hold on the geniuses of the ideal ; for the Dantes and Michael Angelos to grow old is to grow in greatness ; is it to grow less for the Hannibals and the Bonapartes ? 
Had Napoleon lost the direct sense of victory ? 
Had he reached the point where he could no longer recognize the reef , could no longer divine the snare , no longer discern the crumbling brink of abysses ? 
Had he lost his power of scenting out catastrophes ? 
He who had in former days known all the roads to triumph , and who , from the summit of his chariot of lightning , pointed them out with a sovereign finger , had he now reached that state of sinister amazement when he could lead his tumultuous legions harnessed to it , to the precipice ? 
Was he seized at the age of forty-six with a supreme madness ? 
Was that titanic charioteer of destiny no longer anything more than an immense dare-devil ? 
We do not think so . 
His plan of battle was , by the confession of all , a masterpiece . 
To go straight to the centre of the Allies ' line , to make a breach in the enemy , to cut them in two , to drive the British half back on Hal , and the Prussian half on Tongres , to make two shattered fragments of Wellington and Blucher , to carry Mont-Saint-Jean , to seize Brussels , to hurl the German into the Rhine , and the Englishman into the sea . 
All this was contained in that battle , according to Napoleon . 
Afterwards people would see . 
Of course , we do not here pretend to furnish a history of the battle of Waterloo ; one of the scenes of the foundation of the story which we are relating is connected with this battle , but this history is not our subject ; this history , moreover , has been finished , and finished in a masterly manner , from one point of view by Napoleon , and from another point of view by a whole pleiad of historians . 
-LSB- 7 -RSB- -LSB- 7 -RSB- Walter Scott , Lamartine , Vaulabelle , Charras , Quinet , Thiers . 
As for us , we leave the historians at loggerheads ; we are but a distant witness , a passer-by on the plain , a seeker bending over that soil all made of human flesh , taking appearances for realities , perchance ; we have no right to oppose , in the name of science , a collection of facts which contain illusions , no doubt ; we possess neither military practice nor strategic ability which authorize a system ; in our opinion , a chain of accidents dominated the two leaders at Waterloo ; and when it becomes a question of destiny , that mysterious culprit , we judge like that ingenious judge , the populace . 
A Those persons who wish to gain a clear idea of the battle of Waterloo have only to place , mentally , on the ground , a capital A . 
The left limb of the A is the road to Nivelles , the right limb is the road to Genappe , the tie of the A is the hollow road to Ohain from Braine-l'Alleud . 
The top of the A is Mont-Saint-Jean , where Wellington is ; the lower left tip is Hougomont , where Reille is stationed with Jerome Bonaparte ; the right tip is the Belle-Alliance , where Napoleon was . 
At the centre of this chord is the precise point where the final word of the battle was pronounced . 
It was there that the lion has been placed , the involuntary symbol of the supreme heroism of the Imperial Guard . 
The triangle included in the top of the A , between the two limbs and the tie , is the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
The dispute over this plateau constituted the whole battle . 
The wings of the two armies extended to the right and left of the two roads to Genappe and Nivelles ; d'Erlon facing Picton , Reille facing Hill . 
Behind the tip of the A , behind the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean , is the forest of Soignes . 
As for the plain itself , let the reader picture to himself a vast undulating sweep of ground ; each rise commands the next rise , and all the undulations mount towards Mont-Saint-Jean , and there end in the forest . 
Two hostile troops on a field of battle are two wrestlers . 
It is a question of seizing the opponent round the waist . 
The one seeks to trip up the other . 
They clutch at everything : a bush is a point of support ; an angle of the wall offers them a rest to the shoulder ; for the lack of a hovel under whose cover they can draw up , a regiment yields its ground ; an unevenness in the ground , a chance turn in the landscape , a cross-path encountered at the right moment , a grove , a ravine , can stay the heel of that colossus which is called an army , and prevent its retreat . 
He who quits the field is beaten ; hence the necessity devolving on the responsible leader , of examining the most insignificant clump of trees , and of studying deeply the slightest relief in the ground . 
The two generals had attentively studied the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean , now called the plain of Waterloo . 
In the preceding year , Wellington , with the sagacity of foresight , had examined it as the possible seat of a great battle . 
Upon this spot , and for this duel , on the 18th of June , Wellington had the good post , Napoleon the bad post . 
The English army was stationed above , the French army below . 
It is almost superfluous here to sketch the appearance of Napoleon on horseback , glass in hand , upon the heights of Rossomme , at daybreak , on June 18 , 1815 . 
All the world has seen him before we can show him . 
That calm profile under the little three-cornered hat of the school of Brienne , that green uniform , the white revers concealing the star of the Legion of Honor , his great coat hiding his epaulets , the corner of red ribbon peeping from beneath his vest , his leather trousers , the white horse with the saddle-cloth of purple velvet bearing on the corners crowned N 's and eagles , Hessian boots over silk stockings , silver spurs , the sword of Marengo , -- that whole figure of the last of the Caesars is present to all imaginations , saluted with acclamations by some , severely regarded by others . 
That figure stood for a long time wholly in the light ; this arose from a certain legendary dimness evolved by the majority of heroes , and which always veils the truth for a longer or shorter time ; but to-day history and daylight have arrived . 
That light called history is pitiless ; it possesses this peculiar and divine quality , that , pure light as it is , and precisely because it is wholly light , it often casts a shadow in places where people had hitherto beheld rays ; from the same man it constructs two different phantoms , and the one attacks the other and executes justice on it , and the shadows of the despot contend with the brilliancy of the leader . 
Hence arises a truer measure in the definitive judgments of nations . 
Babylon violated lessens Alexander , Rome enchained lessens Caesar , Jerusalem murdered lessens Titus , tyranny follows the tyrant . 
It is a misfortune for a man to leave behind him the night which bears his form . 
THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES Every one is acquainted with the first phase of this battle ; a beginning which was troubled , uncertain , hesitating , menacing to both armies , but still more so for the English than for the French . 
It had rained all night , the earth had been cut up by the downpour , the water had accumulated here and there in the hollows of the plain as if in casks ; at some points the gear of the artillery carriages was buried up to the axles , the circingles of the horses were dripping with liquid mud . 
If the wheat and rye trampled down by this cohort of transports on the march had not filled in the ruts and strewn a litter beneath the wheels , all movement , particularly in the valleys , in the direction of Papelotte would have been impossible . 
The affair began late . 
Napoleon , as we have already explained , was in the habit of keeping all his artillery well in hand , like a pistol , aiming it now at one point , now at another , of the battle ; and it had been his wish to wait until the horse batteries could move and gallop freely . 
In order to do that it was necessary that the sun should come out and dry the soil . 
But the sun did not make its appearance . 
It was no longer the rendezvous of Austerlitz . 
When the first cannon was fired , the English general , Colville , looked at his watch , and noted that it was thirty-five minutes past eleven . 
The action was begun furiously , with more fury , perhaps , than the Emperor would have wished , by the left wing of the French resting on Hougomont . 
At the same time Napoleon attacked the centre by hurling Quiot 's brigade on La Haie-Sainte , and Ney pushed forward the right wing of the French against the left wing of the English , which rested on Papelotte . 
The attack on Hougomont was something of a feint ; the plan was to draw Wellington thither , and to make him swerve to the left . 
This plan would have succeeded if the four companies of the English guards and the brave Belgians of Perponcher 's division had not held the position solidly , and Wellington , instead of massing his troops there , could confine himself to despatching thither , as reinforcements , only four more companies of guards and one battalion from Brunswick . 
The attack of the right wing of the French on Papelotte was calculated , in fact , to overthrow the English left , to cut off the road to Brussels , to bar the passage against possible Prussians , to force Mont-Saint-Jean , to turn Wellington back on Hougomont , thence on Braine-l'Alleud , thence on Hal ; nothing easier . 
With the exception of a few incidents this attack succeeded Papelotte was taken ; La Haie-Sainte was carried . 
A detail to be noted . 
There was in the English infantry , particularly in Kempt 's brigade , a great many raw recruits . 
These young soldiers were valiant in the presence of our redoubtable infantry ; their inexperience extricated them intrepidly from the dilemma ; they performed particularly excellent service as skirmishers : the soldier skirmisher , left somewhat to himself , becomes , so to speak , his own general . 
These recruits displayed some of the French ingenuity and fury . 
This novice of an infantry had dash . 
This displeased Wellington . 
After the taking of La Haie-Sainte the battle wavered . 
There is in this day an obscure interval , from mid-day to four o'clock ; the middle portion of this battle is almost indistinct , and participates in the sombreness of the hand-to-hand conflict . 
Twilight reigns over it . 
We perceive vast fluctuations in that fog , a dizzy mirage , paraphernalia of war almost unknown to-day , pendant colbacks , floating sabre-taches , cross-belts , cartridge-boxes for grenades , hussar dolmans , red boots with a thousand wrinkles , heavy shakos garlanded with torsades , the almost black infantry of Brunswick mingled with the scarlet infantry of England , the English soldiers with great , white circular pads on the slopes of their shoulders for epaulets , the Hanoverian light-horse with their oblong casques of leather , with brass hands and red horse-tails , the Scotch with their bare knees and plaids , the great white gaiters of our grenadiers ; pictures , not strategic lines -- what Salvator Rosa requires , not what is suited to the needs of Gribeauval . 
A certain amount of tempest is always mingled with a battle . 
Quid obscurum , quid divinum . 
Each historian traces , to some extent , the particular feature which pleases him amid this pellmell . 
Whatever may be the combinations of the generals , the shock of armed masses has an incalculable ebb . 
During the action the plans of the two leaders enter into each other and become mutually thrown out of shape . 
Such a point of the field of battle devours more combatants than such another , just as more or less spongy soils soak up more or less quickly the water which is poured on them . 
It becomes necessary to pour out more soldiers than one would like ; a series of expenditures which are the unforeseen . 
The line of battle waves and undulates like a thread , the trails of blood gush illogically , the fronts of the armies waver , the regiments form capes and gulfs as they enter and withdraw ; all these reefs are continually moving in front of each other . 
Where the infantry stood the artillery arrives , the cavalry rushes in where the artillery was , the battalions are like smoke . 
There was something there ; seek it . 
It has disappeared ; the open spots change place , the sombre folds advance and retreat , a sort of wind from the sepulchre pushes forward , hurls back , distends , and disperses these tragic multitudes . 
What is a fray ? 
an oscillation ? 
The immobility of a mathematical plan expresses a minute , not a day . 
In order to depict a battle , there is required one of those powerful painters who have chaos in their brushes . 
Rembrandt is better than Vandermeulen ; Vandermeulen , exact at noon , lies at three o'clock . 
Geometry is deceptive ; the hurricane alone is trustworthy . 
That is what confers on Folard the right to contradict Polybius . 
Let us add , that there is a certain instant when the battle degenerates into a combat , becomes specialized , and disperses into innumerable detailed feats , which , to borrow the expression of Napoleon himself , `` belong rather to the biography of the regiments than to the history of the army . '' 
The historian has , in this case , the evident right to sum up the whole . 
He can not do more than seize the principal outlines of the struggle , and it is not given to any one narrator , however conscientious he may be , to fix , absolutely , the form of that horrible cloud which is called a battle . 
This , which is true of all great armed encounters , is particularly applicable to Waterloo . 
Nevertheless , at a certain moment in the afternoon the battle came to a point . 
FOUR O'CLOCK IN THE AFTERNOON Towards four o'clock the condition of the English army was serious . 
The Prince of Orange was in command of the centre , Hill of the right wing , Picton of the left wing . 
The Prince of Orange , desperate and intrepid , shouted to the Hollando-Belgians : `` Nassau ! 
Brunswick ! 
Never retreat ! '' 
Hill , having been weakened , had come up to the support of Wellington ; Picton was dead . 
At the very moment when the English had captured from the French the flag of the 105th of the line , the French had killed the English general , Picton , with a bullet through the head . 
