He is the son of one of those brigands of the Loire , but children are innocent of their fathers ' crimes . 
I remember when he was no higher than that . 
He could not manage to pronounce his Ds . 
He had a way of talking that was so sweet and indistinct that you would have thought it was a bird chirping . 
I remember that once , in front of the Hercules Farnese , people formed a circle to admire him and marvel at him , he was so handsome , was that child ! 
He had a head such as you see in pictures . 
I talked in a deep voice , and I frightened him with my cane , but he knew very well that it was only to make him laugh . 
In the morning , when he entered my room , I grumbled , but he was like the sunlight to me , all the same . 
One can not defend oneself against those brats . 
They take hold of you , they hold you fast , they never let you go again . 
The truth is , that there never was a cupid like that child . 
Now , what can you say for your Lafayettes , your Benjamin Constants , and your Tirecuir de Corcelles who have killed him ? 
This can not be allowed to pass in this fashion . '' 
He approached Marius , who still lay livid and motionless , and to whom the physician had returned , and began once more to wring his hands . 
The old man 's pallid lips moved as though mechanically , and permitted the passage of words that were barely audible , like breaths in the death agony : `` Ah ! 
heartless lad ! 
Ah ! 
clubbist ! 
Ah ! 
wretch ! 
Ah ! 
Septembrist ! '' 
Reproaches in the low voice of an agonizing man , addressed to a corpse . 
Little by little , as it is always indispensable that internal eruptions should come to the light , the sequence of words returned , but the grandfather appeared no longer to have the strength to utter them , his voice was so weak , and extinct , that it seemed to come from the other side of an abyss : `` It is all the same to me , I am going to die too , that I am . 
And to think that there is not a hussy in Paris who would not have been delighted to make this wretch happy ! 
A scamp who , instead of amusing himself and enjoying life , went off to fight and get himself shot down like a brute ! 
And for whom ? 
Why ? 
For the Republic ! 
Instead of going to dance at the Chaumiere , as it is the duty of young folks to do ! 
What 's the use of being twenty years old ? 
The Republic , a cursed pretty folly ! 
Poor mothers , beget fine boys , do ! 
Come , he is dead . 
That will make two funerals under the same carriage gate . 
So you have got yourself arranged like this for the sake of General Lamarque 's handsome eyes ! 
What had that General Lamarque done to you ? 
A slasher ! 
A chatter-box ! 
To get oneself killed for a dead man ! 
If that is n't enough to drive any one mad ! 
Just think of it ! 
At twenty ! 
And without so much as turning his head to see whether he was not leaving something behind him ! 
That 's the way poor , good old fellows are forced to die alone , now-adays . 
Perish in your corner , owl ! 
Well , after all , so much the better , that is what I was hoping for , this will kill me on the spot . 
I am too old , I am a hundred years old , I am a hundred thousand years old , I ought , by rights , to have been dead long ago . 
This blow puts an end to it . 
So all is over , what happiness ! 
What is the good of making him inhale ammonia and all that parcel of drugs ? 
You are wasting your trouble , you fool of a doctor ! 
Come , he 's dead , completely dead . 
I know all about it , I am dead myself too . 
He has n't done things by half . 
Yes , this age is infamous , infamous and that 's what I think of you , of your ideas , of your systems , of your masters , of your oracles , of your doctors , of your scape-graces of writers , of your rascally philosophers , and of all the revolutions which , for the last sixty years , have been frightening the flocks of crows in the Tuileries ! 
But you were pitiless in getting yourself killed like this , I shall not even grieve over your death , do you understand , you assassin ? '' 
At that moment , Marius slowly opened his eyes , and his glance , still dimmed by lethargic wonder , rested on M. Gillenormand . 
`` Marius ! '' 
cried the old man . 
`` Marius ! 
My little Marius ! 
my child ! 
my well-beloved son ! 
You open your eyes , you gaze upon me , you are alive , thanks ! '' 
And he fell fainting . 
Javert passed slowly down the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
He walked with drooping head for the first time in his life , and likewise , for the first time in his life , with his hands behind his back . 
Up to that day , Javert had borrowed from Napoleon 's attitudes , only that which is expressive of resolution , with arms folded across the chest ; that which is expressive of uncertainty -- with the hands behind the back -- had been unknown to him . 
Now , a change had taken place ; his whole person , slow and sombre , was stamped with anxiety . 
He plunged into the silent streets . 
Nevertheless , he followed one given direction . 
He took the shortest cut to the Seine , reached the Quai des Ormes , skirted the quay , passed the Greve , and halted at some distance from the post of the Place du Chatelet , at the angle of the Pont Notre-Dame . 
There , between the Notre-Dame and the Pont au Change on the one hand , and the Quai de la Megisserie and the Quai aux Fleurs on the other , the Seine forms a sort of square lake , traversed by a rapid . 
This point of the Seine is dreaded by mariners . 
Nothing is more dangerous than this rapid , hemmed in , at that epoch , and irritated by the piles of the mill on the bridge , now demolished . 
The two bridges , situated thus close together , augment the peril ; the water hurries in formidable wise through the arches . 
It rolls in vast and terrible waves ; it accumulates and piles up there ; the flood attacks the piles of the bridges as though in an effort to pluck them up with great liquid ropes . 
Men who fall in there never re-appear ; the best of swimmers are drowned there . 
Javert leaned both elbows on the parapet , his chin resting in both hands , and , while his nails were mechanically twined in the abundance of his whiskers , he meditated . 
A novelty , a revolution , a catastrophe had just taken place in the depths of his being ; and he had something upon which to examine himself . 
Javert was undergoing horrible suffering . 
For several hours , Javert had ceased to be simple . 
He was troubled ; that brain , so limpid in its blindness , had lost its transparency ; that crystal was clouded . 
Javert felt duty divided within his conscience , and he could not conceal the fact from himself . 
When he had so unexpectedly encountered Jean Valjean on the banks of the Seine , there had been in him something of the wolf which regains his grip on his prey , and of the dog who finds his master again . 
He beheld before him two paths , both equally straight , but he beheld two ; and that terrified him ; him , who had never in all his life known more than one straight line . 
And , the poignant anguish lay in this , that the two paths were contrary to each other . 
One of these straight lines excluded the other . 
Which of the two was the true one ? 
His situation was indescribable . 
To owe his life to a malefactor , to accept that debt and to repay it ; to be , in spite of himself , on a level with a fugitive from justice , and to repay his service with another service ; to allow it to be said to him , `` Go , '' and to say to the latter in his turn : `` Be free '' ; to sacrifice to personal motives duty , that general obligation , and to be conscious , in those personal motives , of something that was also general , and , perchance , superior , to betray society in order to remain true to his conscience ; that all these absurdities should be realized and should accumulate upon him , -- this was what overwhelmed him . 
One thing had amazed him , -- this was that Jean Valjean should have done him a favor , and one thing petrified him , -- that he , Javert , should have done Jean Valjean a favor . 
Where did he stand ? 
He sought to comprehend his position , and could no longer find his bearings . 
What was he to do now ? 
To deliver up Jean Valjean was bad ; to leave Jean Valjean at liberty was bad . 
In the first case , the man of authority fell lower than the man of the galleys , in the second , a convict rose above the law , and set his foot upon it . 
In both cases , dishonor for him , Javert . 
There was disgrace in any resolution at which he might arrive . 
