Habituated as she was to dissimulation through endeavoring to copy her husband in all his actions , these emotions were more than she could endure . 
She made haste to send her daughters to bed , then she asked the man 's permission to send Cosette off also ; `` for she has worked hard all day , '' she added with a maternal air . 
Cosette went off to bed , carrying Catherine in her arms . 
From time to time the Thenardier went to the other end of the room where her husband was , to relieve her soul , as she said . 
She exchanged with her husband words which were all the more furious because she dared not utter them aloud . 
`` Old beast ! 
What has he got in his belly , to come and upset us in this manner ! 
To want that little monster to play ! 
to give away forty-franc dolls to a jade that I would sell for forty sous , so I would ! 
A little more and he will be saying Your Majesty to her , as though to the Duchess de Berry ! 
Is there any sense in it ? 
Is he mad , then , that mysterious old fellow ? '' 
`` Why ! 
it is perfectly simple , '' replied Thenardier , `` if that amuses him ! 
It amuses you to have the little one work ; it amuses him to have her play . 
He 's all right . 
A traveller can do what he pleases when he pays for it . 
If the old fellow is a philanthropist , what is that to you ? 
If he is an imbecile , it does not concern you . 
What are you worrying for , so long as he has money ? '' 
The language of a master , and the reasoning of an innkeeper , neither of which admitted of any reply . 
The man had placed his elbows on the table , and resumed his thoughtful attitude . 
All the other travellers , both pedlers and carters , had withdrawn a little , and had ceased singing . 
They were staring at him from a distance , with a sort of respectful awe . 
This poorly dressed man , who drew `` hind-wheels '' from his pocket with so much ease , and who lavished gigantic dolls on dirty little brats in wooden shoes , was certainly a magnificent fellow , and one to be feared . 
Many hours passed . 
The midnight mass was over , the chimes had ceased , the drinkers had taken their departure , the drinking-shop was closed , the public room was deserted , the fire extinct , the stranger still remained in the same place and the same attitude . 
From time to time he changed the elbow on which he leaned . 
That was all ; but he had not said a word since Cosette had left the room . 
The Thenardiers alone , out of politeness and curiosity , had remained in the room . 
`` Is he going to pass the night in that fashion ? '' 
grumbled the Thenardier . 
When two o'clock in the morning struck , she declared herself vanquished , and said to her husband , `` I 'm going to bed . 
Do as you like . '' 
Her husband seated himself at a table in the corner , lighted a candle , and began to read the Courrier Francais . 
A good hour passed thus . 
The worthy inn-keeper had perused the Courrier Francais at least three times , from the date of the number to the printer 's name . 
The stranger did not stir . 
Thenardier fidgeted , coughed , spit , blew his nose , and creaked his chair . 
Not a movement on the man 's part . 
`` Is he asleep ? '' 
thought Thenardier . 
The man was not asleep , but nothing could arouse him . 
At last Thenardier took off his cap , stepped gently up to him , and ventured to say : -- `` Is not Monsieur going to his repose ? '' 
Not going to bed would have seemed to him excessive and familiar . 
To repose smacked of luxury and respect . 
These words possess the mysterious and admirable property of swelling the bill on the following day . 
A chamber where one sleeps costs twenty sous ; a chamber in which one reposes costs twenty francs . 
`` Well ! '' 
said the stranger , `` you are right . 
Where is your stable ? '' 
`` Sir ! '' 
exclaimed Thenardier , with a smile , `` I will conduct you , sir . '' 
He took the candle ; the man picked up his bundle and cudgel , and Thenardier conducted him to a chamber on the first floor , which was of rare splendor , all furnished in mahogany , with a low bedstead , curtained with red calico . 
`` What is this ? '' 
said the traveller . 
`` It is really our bridal chamber , '' said the tavern-keeper . 
`` My wife and I occupy another . 
This is only entered three or four times a year . '' 
`` I should have liked the stable quite as well , '' said the man , abruptly . 
Thenardier pretended not to hear this unamiable remark . 
He lighted two perfectly fresh wax candles which figured on the chimney-piece . 
A very good fire was flickering on the hearth . 
On the chimney-piece , under a glass globe , stood a woman 's head-dress in silver wire and orange flowers . 
`` And what is this ? '' 
resumed the stranger . 
`` That , sir , '' said Thenardier , `` is my wife 's wedding bonnet . '' 
The traveller surveyed the object with a glance which seemed to say , `` There really was a time , then , when that monster was a maiden ? '' 
Thenardier lied , however . 
When he had leased this paltry building for the purpose of converting it into a tavern , he had found this chamber decorated in just this manner , and had purchased the furniture and obtained the orange flowers at second hand , with the idea that this would cast a graceful shadow on `` his spouse , '' and would result in what the English call respectability for his house . 
When the traveller turned round , the host had disappeared . 
Thenardier had withdrawn discreetly , without venturing to wish him a good night , as he did not wish to treat with disrespectful cordiality a man whom he proposed to fleece royally the following morning . 
The inn-keeper retired to his room . 
His wife was in bed , but she was not asleep . 
When she heard her husband 's step she turned over and said to him : -- `` Do you know , I 'm going to turn Cosette out of doors to-morrow . '' 
Thenardier replied coldly : -- `` How you do go on ! '' 
They exchanged no further words , and a few moments later their candle was extinguished . 
As for the traveller , he had deposited his cudgel and his bundle in a corner . 
The landlord once gone , he threw himself into an arm-chair and remained for some time buried in thought . 
Then he removed his shoes , took one of the two candles , blew out the other , opened the door , and quitted the room , gazing about him like a person who is in search of something . 
He traversed a corridor and came upon a staircase . 
There he heard a very faint and gentle sound like the breathing of a child . 
He followed this sound , and came to a sort of triangular recess built under the staircase , or rather formed by the staircase itself . 
This recess was nothing else than the space under the steps . 
There , in the midst of all sorts of old papers and potsherds , among dust and spiders ' webs , was a bed -- if one can call by the name of bed a straw pallet so full of holes as to display the straw , and a coverlet so tattered as to show the pallet . 
No sheets . 
This was placed on the floor . 
In this bed Cosette was sleeping . 
The man approached and gazed down upon her . 
Cosette was in a profound sleep ; she was fully dressed . 
In the winter she did not undress , in order that she might not be so cold . 
Against her breast was pressed the doll , whose large eyes , wide open , glittered in the dark . 
From time to time she gave vent to a deep sigh as though she were on the point of waking , and she strained the doll almost convulsively in her arms . 
Beside her bed there was only one of her wooden shoes . 
A door which stood open near Cosette 's pallet permitted a view of a rather large , dark room . 
The stranger stepped into it . 
At the further extremity , through a glass door , he saw two small , very white beds . 
They belonged to Eponine and Azelma . 
Behind these beds , and half hidden , stood an uncurtained wicker cradle , in which the little boy who had cried all the evening lay asleep . 
The stranger conjectured that this chamber connected with that of the Thenardier pair . 
