To be buried in the vault under the altar of the chapel , not to go to profane earth ; to remain there in death where she prayed while living ; such was the last wish of Mother Crucifixion . 
She asked it of us ; that is to say , commanded us . '' 
`` But it is forbidden . '' 
`` Forbidden by men , enjoined by God . '' 
`` What if it became known ? '' 
`` We have confidence in you . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I am a stone in your walls . '' 
`` The chapter assembled . 
The vocal mothers , whom I have just consulted again , and who are now deliberating , have decided that Mother Crucifixion shall be buried , according to her wish , in her own coffin , under our altar . 
Think , Father Fauvent , if she were to work miracles here ! 
What a glory of God for the community ! 
And miracles issue from tombs . '' 
`` But , reverend Mother , if the agent of the sanitary commission -- '' `` Saint Benoit II. , in the matter of sepulture , resisted Constantine Pogonatus . '' 
`` But the commissary of police -- '' `` Chonodemaire , one of the seven German kings who entered among the Gauls under the Empire of Constantius , expressly recognized the right of nuns to be buried in religion , that is to say , beneath the altar . '' 
`` But the inspector from the Prefecture -- '' `` The world is nothing in the presence of the cross . 
Martin , the eleventh general of the Carthusians , gave to his order this device : Stat crux dum volvitur orbis . '' 
`` Amen , '' said Fauchelevent , who imperturbably extricated himself in this manner from the dilemma , whenever he heard Latin . 
Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long . 
On the day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison , bearing in his body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in , he halted in front of the first tree which he came to , harangued it and made very great efforts to convince it . 
The prioress , who was usually subjected to the barrier of silence , and whose reservoir was overfull , rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam which has broken away : -- `` I have on my right Benoit and on my left Bernard . 
Who was Bernard ? 
The first abbot of Clairvaux . 
Fontaines in Burgundy is a country that is blest because it gave him birth . 
His father was named Tecelin , and his mother Alethe . 
He began at Citeaux , to end in Clairvaux ; he was ordained abbot by the bishop of Chalon-sur-Saone , Guillaume de Champeaux ; he had seven hundred novices , and founded a hundred and sixty monasteries ; he overthrew Abeilard at the council of Sens in 1140 , and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple , and another sort of erring spirits who were called the Apostolics ; he confounded Arnauld de Brescia , darted lightning at the monk Raoul , the murderer of the Jews , dominated the council of Reims in 1148 , caused the condemnation of Gilbert de Porea , Bishop of Poitiers , caused the condemnation of Eon de l'Etoile , arranged the disputes of princes , enlightened King Louis the Young , advised Pope Eugene III. , regulated the Temple , preached the crusade , performed two hundred and fifty miracles during his lifetime , and as many as thirty-nine in one day . 
Who was Benoit ? 
He was the patriarch of Mont-Cassin ; he was the second founder of the Saintete Claustrale , he was the Basil of the West . 
His order has produced forty popes , two hundred cardinals , fifty patriarchs , sixteen hundred archbishops , four thousand six hundred bishops , four emperors , twelve empresses , forty-six kings , forty-one queens , three thousand six hundred canonized saints , and has been in existence for fourteen hundred years . 
On one side Saint Bernard , on the other the agent of the sanitary department ! 
On one side Saint Benoit , on the other the inspector of public ways ! 
The state , the road commissioners , the public undertaker , regulations , the administration , what do we know of all that ? 
There is not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to see how we are treated . 
We have not even the right to give our dust to Jesus Christ ! 
Your sanitary department is a revolutionary invention . 
God subordinated to the commissary of police ; such is the age . 
Silence , Fauvent ! '' 
Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath . 
The prioress continued : -- `` No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture . 
Only fanatics and those in error deny it . 
We live in times of terrible confusion . 
We do not know that which it is necessary to know , and we know that which we should ignore . 
We are ignorant and impious . 
In this age there exist people who do not distinguish between the very great Saint Bernard and the Saint Bernard denominated of the poor Catholics , a certain good ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century . 
Others are so blasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI . 
to the cross of Jesus Christ . 
Louis XVI . 
was merely a king . 
Let us beware of God ! 
There is no longer just nor unjust . 
The name of Voltaire is known , but not the name of Cesar de Bus . 
Nevertheless , Cesar de Bus is a man of blessed memory , and Voltaire one of unblessed memory . 
The last arch-bishop , the Cardinal de Perigord , did not even know that Charles de Gondren succeeded to Berulle , and Francois Bourgoin to Gondren , and Jean-Francois Senault to Bourgoin , and Father Sainte-Marthe to Jean-Francois Senault . 
The name of Father Coton is known , not because he was one of the three who urged the foundation of the Oratorie , but because he furnished Henri IV. , the Huguenot king , with the material for an oath . 
That which pleases people of the world in Saint Francois de Sales , is that he cheated at play . 
And then , religion is attacked . 
Why ? 
Because there have been bad priests , because Sagittaire , Bishop of Gap , was the brother of Salone , Bishop of Embrun , and because both of them followed Mommol . 
What has that to do with the question ? 
Does that prevent Martin de Tours from being a saint , and giving half of his cloak to a beggar ? 
They persecute the saints . 
They shut their eyes to the truth . 
Darkness is the rule . 
The most ferocious beasts are beasts which are blind . 
No one thinks of hell as a reality . 
Oh ! 
how wicked people are ! 
By order of the king signifies to-day , by order of the revolution . 
One no longer knows what is due to the living or to the dead . 
A holy death is prohibited . 
Burial is a civil matter . 
This is horrible . 
Saint Leo II . 
wrote two special letters , one to Pierre Notaire , the other to the king of the Visigoths , for the purpose of combating and rejecting , in questions touching the dead , the authority of the exarch and the supremacy of the Emperor . 
Gauthier , Bishop of Chalons , held his own in this matter against Otho , Duke of Burgundy . 
The ancient magistracy agreed with him . 
In former times we had voices in the chapter , even on matters of the day . 
The Abbot of Citeaux , the general of the order , was councillor by right of birth to the parliament of Burgundy . 
We do what we please with our dead . 
Is not the body of Saint Benoit himself in France , in the abbey of Fleury , called Saint Benoit-sur-Loire , although he died in Italy at Mont-Cassin , on Saturday , the 21st of the month of March , of the year 543 ? 
All this is incontestable . 
I abhor psalm-singers , I hate priors , I execrate heretics , but I should detest yet more any one who should maintain the contrary . 
One has only to read Arnoul Wion , Gabriel Bucelin , Trithemus , Maurolics , and Dom Luc d'Achery . '' 
The prioress took breath , then turned to Fauchelevent . 
`` Is it settled , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` It is settled , reverend Mother . '' 
`` We may depend on you ? '' 
`` I will obey . '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` I am entirely devoted to the convent . '' 
`` That is understood . 
You will close the coffin . 
The sisters will carry it to the chapel . 
The office for the dead will then be said . 
Then we shall return to the cloister . 
Between eleven o'clock and midnight , you will come with your iron bar . 
All will be done in the most profound secrecy . 
There will be in the chapel only the four Mother Precentors , Mother Ascension and yourself . '' 
`` And the sister at the post ? '' 
`` She will not turn round . '' 
