Here is our poor street all riddled with balls . 
They are a pack of rascals . 
Above all things , do n't open the door . '' 
-- And the house assumes the air of a tomb . 
The insurgent is in the death-throes in front of that house ; he sees the grape-shot and naked swords drawing near ; if he cries , he knows that they are listening to him , and that no one will come ; there stand walls which might protect him , there are men who might save him ; and these walls have ears of flesh , and these men have bowels of stone . 
Whom shall he reproach ? 
No one and every one . 
The incomplete times in which we live . 
It is always at its own risk and peril that Utopia is converted into revolution , and from philosophical protest becomes an armed protest , and from Minerva turns to Pallas . 
The Utopia which grows impatient and becomes revolt knows what awaits it ; it almost always comes too soon . 
Then it becomes resigned , and stoically accepts catastrophe in lieu of triumph . 
It serves those who deny it without complaint , even excusing them , and even disculpates them , and its magnanimity consists in consenting to abandonment . 
It is indomitable in the face of obstacles and gentle towards ingratitude . 
Is this ingratitude , however ? 
Yes , from the point of view of the human race . 
No , from the point of view of the individual . 
Progress is man 's mode of existence . 
The general life of the human race is called Progress , the collective stride of the human race is called Progress . 
Progress advances ; it makes the great human and terrestrial journey towards the celestial and the divine ; it has its halting places where it rallies the laggard troop , it has its stations where it meditates , in the presence of some splendid Canaan suddenly unveiled on its horizon , it has its nights when it sleeps ; and it is one of the poignant anxieties of the thinker that he sees the shadow resting on the human soul , and that he gropes in darkness without being able to awaken that slumbering Progress . 
`` God is dead , perhaps , '' said Gerard de Nerval one day to the writer of these lines , confounding progress with God , and taking the interruption of movement for the death of Being . 
He who despairs is in the wrong . 
Progress infallibly awakes , and , in short , we may say that it marches on , even when it is asleep , for it has increased in size . 
When we behold it erect once more , we find it taller . 
To be always peaceful does not depend on progress any more than it does on the stream ; erect no barriers , cast in no boulders ; obstacles make water froth and humanity boil . 
Hence arise troubles ; but after these troubles , we recognize the fact that ground has been gained . 
Until order , which is nothing else than universal peace , has been established , until harmony and unity reign , progress will have revolutions as its halting-places . 
What , then , is progress ? 
We have just enunciated it ; the permanent life of the peoples . 
Now , it sometimes happens , that the momentary life of individuals offers resistance to the eternal life of the human race . 
Let us admit without bitterness , that the individual has his distinct interests , and can , without forfeiture , stipulate for his interest , and defend it ; the present has its pardonable dose of egotism ; momentary life has its rights , and is not bound to sacrifice itself constantly to the future . 
The generation which is passing in its turn over the earth , is not forced to abridge it for the sake of the generations , its equal , after all , who will have their turn later on . 
-- `` I exist , '' murmurs that some one whose name is All . 
`` I am young and in love , I am old and I wish to repose , I am the father of a family , I toil , I prosper , I am successful in business , I have houses to lease , I have money in the government funds , I am happy , I have a wife and children , I have all this , I desire to live , leave me in peace . '' 
-- Hence , at certain hours , a profound cold broods over the magnanimous vanguard of the human race . 
Utopia , moreover , we must admit , quits its radiant sphere when it makes war . 
It , the truth of to-morrow , borrows its mode of procedure , battle , from the lie of yesterday . 
It , the future , behaves like the past . 
It , pure idea , becomes a deed of violence . 
It complicates its heroism with a violence for which it is just that it should be held to answer ; a violence of occasion and expedient , contrary to principle , and for which it is fatally punished . 
The Utopia , insurrection , fights with the old military code in its fist ; it shoots spies , it executes traitors ; it suppresses living beings and flings them into unknown darkness . 
It makes use of death , a serious matter . 
It seems as though Utopia had no longer any faith in radiance , its irresistible and incorruptible force . 
It strikes with the sword . 
Now , no sword is simple . 
Every blade has two edges ; he who wounds with the one is wounded with the other . 
Having made this reservation , and made it with all severity , it is impossible for us not to admire , whether they succeed or not , those the glorious combatants of the future , the confessors of Utopia . 
Even when they miscarry , they are worthy of veneration ; and it is , perhaps , in failure , that they possess the most majesty . 
Victory , when it is in accord with progress , merits the applause of the people ; but a heroic defeat merits their tender compassion . 
The one is magnificent , the other sublime . 
For our own part , we prefer martyrdom to success . 
John Brown is greater than Washington , and Pisacane is greater than Garibaldi . 
It certainly is necessary that some one should take the part of the vanquished . 
We are unjust towards these great men who attempt the future , when they fail . 
Revolutionists are accused of sowing fear abroad . 
Every barricade seems a crime . 
Their theories are incriminated , their aim suspected , their ulterior motive is feared , their conscience denounced . 
They are reproached with raising , erecting , and heaping up , against the reigning social state , a mass of miseries , of griefs , of iniquities , of wrongs , of despairs , and of tearing from the lowest depths blocks of shadow in order therein to embattle themselves and to combat . 
People shout to them : `` You are tearing up the pavements of hell ! '' 
They might reply : `` That is because our barricade is made of good intentions . '' 
The best thing , assuredly , is the pacific solution . 
In short , let us agree that when we behold the pavement , we think of the bear , and it is a good will which renders society uneasy . 
But it depends on society to save itself , it is to its own good will that we make our appeal . 
No violent remedy is necessary . 
To study evil amiably , to prove its existence , then to cure it . 
It is to this that we invite it . 
However that may be , even when fallen , above all when fallen , these men , who at every point of the universe , with their eyes fixed on France , are striving for the grand work with the inflexible logic of the ideal , are august ; they give their life a free offering to progress ; they accomplish the will of providence ; they perform a religious act . 
At the appointed hour , with as much disinterestedness as an actor who answers to his cue , in obedience to the divine stage-manager , they enter the tomb . 
And this hopeless combat , this stoical disappearance they accept in order to bring about the supreme and universal consequences , the magnificent and irresistibly human movement begun on the 14th of July , 1789 ; these soldiers are priests . 
The French revolution is an act of God . 
Moreover , there are , and it is proper to add this distinction to the distinctions already pointed out in another chapter , -- there are accepted revolutions , revolutions which are called revolutions ; there are refused revolutions , which are called riots . 
An insurrection which breaks out , is an idea which is passing its examination before the people . 
If the people lets fall a black ball , the idea is dried fruit ; the insurrection is a mere skirmish . 
Waging war at every summons and every time that Utopia desires it , is not the thing for the peoples . 
Nations have not always and at every hour the temperament of heroes and martyrs . 
They are positive . 
A priori , insurrection is repugnant to them , in the first place , because it often results in a catastrophe , in the second place , because it always has an abstraction as its point of departure . 
Because , and this is a noble thing , it is always for the ideal , and for the ideal alone , that those who sacrifice themselves do thus sacrifice themselves . 
An insurrection is an enthusiasm . 
Enthusiasm may wax wroth ; hence the appeal to arms . 
But every insurrection , which aims at a government or a regime , aims higher . 
Thus , for instance , and we insist upon it , what the chiefs of the insurrection of 1832 , and , in particular , the young enthusiasts of the Rue de la Chanvrerie were combating , was not precisely Louis Philippe . 
The majority of them , when talking freely , did justice to this king who stood midway between monarchy and revolution ; no one hated him . 
But they attacked the younger branch of the divine right in Louis Philippe as they had attacked its elder branch in Charles X. ; and that which they wished to overturn in overturning royalty in France , was , as we have explained , the usurpation of man over man , and of privilege over right in the entire universe . 
Paris without a king has as result the world without despots . 
This is the manner in which they reasoned . 
Their aim was distant no doubt , vague perhaps , and it retreated in the face of their efforts ; but it was great . 
Thus it is . 
And we sacrifice ourselves for these visions , which are almost always illusions for the sacrificed , but illusions with which , after all , the whole of human certainty is mingled . 
We throw ourselves into these tragic affairs and become intoxicated with that which we are about to do . 
Who knows ? 
We may succeed . 
We are few in number , we have a whole army arrayed against us ; but we are defending right , the natural law , the sovereignty of each one over himself from which no abdication is possible , justice and truth , and in case of need , we die like the three hundred Spartans . 
We do not think of Don Quixote but of Leonidas . 
And we march straight before us , and once pledged , we do not draw back , and we rush onwards with head held low , cherishing as our hope an unprecedented victory , revolution completed , progress set free again , the aggrandizement of the human race , universal deliverance ; and in the event of the worst , Thermopylae . 
These passages of arms for the sake of progress often suffer shipwreck , and we have just explained why . 
The crowd is restive in the presence of the impulses of paladins . 
Heavy masses , the multitudes which are fragile because of their very weight , fear adventures ; and there is a touch of adventure in the ideal . 
Moreover , and we must not forget this , interests which are not very friendly to the ideal and the sentimental are in the way . 
Sometimes the stomach paralyzes the heart . 
The grandeur and beauty of France lies in this , that she takes less from the stomach than other nations : she more easily knots the rope about her loins . 
