They are on earth now . '' 
But this confusion vanished ; a second sound similar to the first roused him thoroughly ; he looked and recognized the fact that these two stars were the lanterns of a carriage . 
By the light which they cast he was able to distinguish the form of this vehicle . 
It was a tilbury harnessed to a small white horse . 
The noise which he had heard was the trampling of the horse 's hoofs on the pavement . 
`` What vehicle is this ? '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Who is coming here so early in the morning ? '' 
At that moment there came a light tap on the door of his chamber . 
He shuddered from head to foot , and cried in a terrible voice : -- `` Who is there ? '' 
Some one said : -- `` I , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
He recognized the voice of the old woman who was his portress . 
`` Well ! '' 
he replied , `` what is it ? '' 
`` Monsieur le Maire , it is just five o'clock in the morning . '' 
`` What is that to me ? '' 
`` The cabriolet is here , Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` What cabriolet ? '' 
`` The tilbury . '' 
`` What tilbury ? '' 
`` Did not Monsieur le Maire order a tilbury ? '' 
`` No , '' said he . 
`` The coachman says that he has come for Monsieur le Maire . '' 
`` What coachman ? '' 
`` M. Scaufflaire 's coachman . '' 
`` M. Scaufflaire ? '' 
That name sent a shudder over him , as though a flash of lightning had passed in front of his face . 
`` Ah ! 
yes , '' he resumed ; `` M. Scaufflaire ! '' 
If the old woman could have seen him at that moment , she would have been frightened . 
A tolerably long silence ensued . 
He examined the flame of the candle with a stupid air , and from around the wick he took some of the burning wax , which he rolled between his fingers . 
The old woman waited for him . 
She even ventured to uplift her voice once more : -- `` What am I to say , Monsieur le Maire ? '' 
`` Say that it is well , and that I am coming down . '' 
HINDRANCES The posting service from Arras to M. sur M. was still operated at this period by small mail-wagons of the time of the Empire . 
These mail-wagons were two-wheeled cabriolets , upholstered inside with fawn-colored leather , hung on springs , and having but two seats , one for the postboy , the other for the traveller . 
The wheels were armed with those long , offensive axles which keep other vehicles at a distance , and which may still be seen on the road in Germany . 
The despatch box , an immense oblong coffer , was placed behind the vehicle and formed a part of it . 
This coffer was painted black , and the cabriolet yellow . 
These vehicles , which have no counterparts nowadays , had something distorted and hunchbacked about them ; and when one saw them passing in the distance , and climbing up some road to the horizon , they resembled the insects which are called , I think , termites , and which , though with but little corselet , drag a great train behind them . 
But they travelled at a very rapid rate . 
The post-wagon which set out from Arras at one o'clock every night , after the mail from Paris had passed , arrived at M. sur M. a little before five o'clock in the morning . 
That night the wagon which was descending to M. sur M. by the Hesdin road , collided at the corner of a street , just as it was entering the town , with a little tilbury harnessed to a white horse , which was going in the opposite direction , and in which there was but one person , a man enveloped in a mantle . 
The wheel of the tilbury received quite a violent shock . 
The postman shouted to the man to stop , but the traveller paid no heed and pursued his road at full gallop . 
`` That man is in a devilish hurry ! '' 
said the postman . 
The man thus hastening on was the one whom we have just seen struggling in convulsions which are certainly deserving of pity . 
Whither was he going ? 
He could not have told . 
Why was he hastening ? 
He did not know . 
He was driving at random , straight ahead . 
Whither ? 
To Arras , no doubt ; but he might have been going elsewhere as well . 
At times he was conscious of it , and he shuddered . 
He plunged into the night as into a gulf . 
Something urged him forward ; something drew him on . 
No one could have told what was taking place within him ; every one will understand it . 
What man is there who has not entered , at least once in his life , into that obscure cavern of the unknown ? 
However , he had resolved on nothing , decided nothing , formed no plan , done nothing . 
None of the actions of his conscience had been decisive . 
He was , more than ever , as he had been at the first moment . 
Why was he going to Arras ? 
He repeated what he had already said to himself when he had hired Scaufflaire 's cabriolet : that , whatever the result was to be , there was no reason why he should not see with his own eyes , and judge of matters for himself ; that this was even prudent ; that he must know what took place ; that no decision could be arrived at without having observed and scrutinized ; that one made mountains out of everything from a distance ; that , at any rate , when he should have seen that Champmathieu , some wretch , his conscience would probably be greatly relieved to allow him to go to the galleys in his stead ; that Javert would indeed be there ; and that Brevet , that Chenildieu , that Cochepaille , old convicts who had known him ; but they certainly would not recognize him ; -- bah ! 
what an idea ! 
that Javert was a hundred leagues from suspecting the truth ; that all conjectures and all suppositions were fixed on Champmathieu , and that there is nothing so headstrong as suppositions and conjectures ; that accordingly there was no danger . 
That it was , no doubt , a dark moment , but that he should emerge from it ; that , after all , he held his destiny , however bad it might be , in his own hand ; that he was master of it . 
He clung to this thought . 
At bottom , to tell the whole truth , he would have preferred not to go to Arras . 
Nevertheless , he was going thither . 
As he meditated , he whipped up his horse , which was proceeding at that fine , regular , and even trot which accomplishes two leagues and a half an hour . 
In proportion as the cabriolet advanced , he felt something within him draw back . 
At daybreak he was in the open country ; the town of M. sur M. lay far behind him . 
He watched the horizon grow white ; he stared at all the chilly figures of a winter 's dawn as they passed before his eyes , but without seeing them . 
The morning has its spectres as well as the evening . 
He did not see them ; but without his being aware of it , and by means of a sort of penetration which was almost physical , these black silhouettes of trees and of hills added some gloomy and sinister quality to the violent state of his soul . 
Each time that he passed one of those isolated dwellings which sometimes border on the highway , he said to himself , `` And yet there are people there within who are sleeping ! '' 
The trot of the horse , the bells on the harness , the wheels on the road , produced a gentle , monotonous noise . 
These things are charming when one is joyous , and lugubrious when one is sad . 
It was broad daylight when he arrived at Hesdin . 
He halted in front of the inn , to allow the horse a breathing spell , and to have him given some oats . 
The horse belonged , as Scaufflaire had said , to that small race of the Boulonnais , which has too much head , too much belly , and not enough neck and shoulders , but which has a broad chest , a large crupper , thin , fine legs , and solid hoofs -- a homely , but a robust and healthy race . 
The excellent beast had travelled five leagues in two hours , and had not a drop of sweat on his loins . 
He did not get out of the tilbury . 
The stableman who brought the oats suddenly bent down and examined the left wheel . 
`` Are you going far in this condition ? '' 
said the man . 
He replied , with an air of not having roused himself from his revery : -- `` Why ? '' 
`` Have you come from a great distance ? '' 
went on the man . 
`` Five leagues . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
`` Why do you say , ` Ah ? ' '' 
The man bent down once more , was silent for a moment , with his eyes fixed on the wheel ; then he rose erect and said : -- `` Because , though this wheel has travelled five leagues , it certainly will not travel another quarter of a league . '' 
He sprang out of the tilbury . 
`` What is that you say , my friend ? '' 
`` I say that it is a miracle that you should have travelled five leagues without you and your horse rolling into some ditch on the highway . 
Just see here ! '' 
