And the sergeant ventured out of the post with cautious tread . 
All at once , Gavroche , pushing his cart in front of him , and at the very moment when he was about to turn into the Rue des Vielles-Haudriettes , found himself face to face with a uniform , a shako , a plume , and a gun . 
For the second time , he stopped short . 
`` Hullo , '' said he , `` it 's him . 
Good day , public order . '' 
Gavroche 's amazement was always brief and speedily thawed . 
`` Where are you going , you rascal ? '' 
shouted the sergeant . 
`` Citizen , '' retorted Gavroche , `` I have n't called you ` bourgeois ' yet . 
Why do you insult me ? '' 
`` Where are you going , you rogue ? '' 
`` Monsieur , '' retorted Gavroche , `` perhaps you were a man of wit yesterday , but you have degenerated this morning . '' 
`` I ask you where are you going , you villain ? '' 
Gavroche replied : -- `` You speak prettily . 
Really , no one would suppose you as old as you are . 
You ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece . 
That would yield you five hundred francs . '' 
`` Where are you going ? 
Where are you going ? 
Where are you going , bandit ? '' 
Gavroche retorted again : -- `` What villainous words ! 
You must wipe your mouth better the first time that they give you suck . '' 
The sergeant lowered his bayonet . 
`` Will you tell me where you are going , you wretch ? '' 
`` General , '' said Gavroche `` I 'm on my way to look for a doctor for my wife who is in labor . '' 
`` To arms ! '' 
shouted the sergeant . 
The master-stroke of strong men consists in saving themselves by the very means that have ruined them ; Gavroche took in the whole situation at a glance . 
It was the cart which had told against him , it was the cart 's place to protect him . 
At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descent on Gavroche , the cart , converted into a projectile and launched with all the latter 's might , rolled down upon him furiously , and the sergeant , struck full in the stomach , tumbled over backwards into the gutter while his gun went off in the air . 
The men of the post had rushed out pell-mell at the sergeant 's shout ; the shot brought on a general random discharge , after which they reloaded their weapons and began again . 
This blind-man 's - buff musketry lasted for a quarter of an hour and killed several panes of glass . 
In the meanwhile , Gavroche , who had retraced his steps at full speed , halted five or six streets distant and seated himself , panting , on the stone post which forms the corner of the Enfants-Rouges . 
He listened . 
After panting for a few minutes , he turned in the direction where the fusillade was raging , lifted his left hand to a level with his nose and thrust it forward three times , as he slapped the back of his head with his right hand ; an imperious gesture in which Parisian street-urchindom has condensed French irony , and which is evidently efficacious , since it has already lasted half a century . 
This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection . 
`` Yes , '' said he , `` I 'm splitting with laughter , I 'm twisting with delight , I abound in joy , but I 'm losing my way , I shall have to take a roundabout way . 
If I only reach the barricade in season ! '' 
Thereupon he set out again on a run . 
And as he ran : -- `` Ah , by the way , where was I ? '' 
said he . 
And he resumed his ditty , as he plunged rapidly through the streets , and this is what died away in the gloom : -- `` Mais il reste encore des bastilles , Et je vais mettre le hola Dans l'orde public que voila . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Quelqu'un veut-il jouer aux quilles ? 
Tout l'ancien monde s ` ecroula Quand la grosse boule roula . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Vieux bon peuple , a coups de bequilles , Cassons ce Louvre ou s ` etala La monarchie en falbala . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . 
`` Nous en avons force les grilles , Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour la , Tenait mal et se decolla . 
Ou vont les belles filles , Lon la . '' 
-LSB- 57 -RSB- -LSB- 57 -RSB- But some prisons still remain , and I am going to put a stop to this sort of public order . 
Does any one wish to play at skittles ? 
The whole ancient world fell in ruin , when the big ball rolled . 
Good old folks , let us smash with our crutches that Louvre where the monarchy displayed itself in furbelows . 
We have forced its gates . 
On that day , King Charles X. did not stick well and came unglued . 
The post 's recourse to arms was not without result . 
The cart was conquered , the drunken man was taken prisoner . 
The first was put in the pound , the second was later on somewhat harassed before the councils of war as an accomplice . 
The public ministry of the day proved its indefatigable zeal in the defence of society , in this instance . 
Gavroche 's adventure , which has lingered as a tradition in the quarters of the Temple , is one of the most terrible souvenirs of the elderly bourgeois of the Marais , and is entitled in their memories : `` The nocturnal attack by the post of the Royal Printing Establishment . '' 
-LSB- The end of Volume IV . 
`` Saint Denis '' -RSB- VOLUME IV JEAN VALJEAN THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE SCYLLA OF THE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies can name do not belong to the period in which the action of this work is laid . 
These two barricades , both of them symbols , under two different aspects , of a redoubtable situation , sprang from the earth at the time of the fatal insurrection of June , 1848 , the greatest war of the streets that history has ever beheld . 
It sometimes happens that , even contrary to principles , even contrary to liberty , equality , and fraternity , even contrary to the universal vote , even contrary to the government , by all for all , from the depths of its anguish , of its discouragements and its destitutions , of its fevers , of its distresses , of its miasmas , of its ignorances , of its darkness , that great and despairing body , the rabble , protests against , and that the populace wages battle against , the people . 
Beggars attack the common right ; the ochlocracy rises against demos . 
These are melancholy days ; for there is always a certain amount of night even in this madness , there is suicide in this duel , and those words which are intended to be insults -- beggars , canaille , ochlocracy , populace -- exhibit , alas ! 
rather the fault of those who reign than the fault of those who suffer ; rather the fault of the privileged than the fault of the disinherited . 
For our own part , we never pronounce those words without pain and without respect , for when philosophy fathoms the facts to which they correspond , it often finds many a grandeur beside these miseries . 
Athens was an ochlocracy ; the beggars were the making of Holland ; the populace saved Rome more than once ; and the rabble followed Jesus Christ . 
There is no thinker who has not at times contemplated the magnificences of the lower classes . 
It was of this rabble that Saint Jerome was thinking , no doubt , and of all these poor people and all these vagabonds and all these miserable people whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs , when he uttered this mysterious saying : `` Fex urbis , lex orbis , '' -- the dregs of the city , the law of the earth . 
The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds , its violences contrary to all sense , directed against the principles which are its life , its masterful deeds against the right , are its popular coups d'etat and should be repressed . 
The man of probity sacrifices himself , and out of his very love for this crowd , he combats it . 
But how excusable he feels it even while holding out against it ! 
How he venerates it even while resisting it ! 
This is one of those rare moments when , while doing that which it is one 's duty to do , one feels something which disconcerts one , and which would dissuade one from proceeding further ; one persists , it is necessary , but conscience , though satisfied , is sad , and the accomplishment of duty is complicated with a pain at the heart . 
June , 1848 , let us hasten to say , was an exceptional fact , and almost impossible of classification , in the philosophy of history . 
All the words which we have just uttered , must be discarded , when it becomes a question of this extraordinary revolt , in which one feels the holy anxiety of toil claiming its rights . 
It was necessary to combat it , and this was a duty , for it attacked the republic . 
But what was June , 1848 , at bottom ? 
A revolt of the people against itself . 
Where the subject is not lost sight of , there is no digression ; may we , then , be permitted to arrest the reader 's attention for a moment on the two absolutely unique barricades of which we have just spoken and which characterized this insurrection . 
One blocked the entrance to the Faubourg Saint Antoine ; the other defended the approach to the Faubourg du Temple ; those before whom these two fearful masterpieces of civil war reared themselves beneath the brilliant blue sky of June , will never forget them . 
The Saint-Antoine barricade was tremendous ; it was three stories high , and seven hundred feet wide . 
It barred the vast opening of the faubourg , that is to say , three streets , from angle to angle ; ravined , jagged , cut up , divided , crenelated , with an immense rent , buttressed with piles that were bastions in themselves throwing out capes here and there , powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of the faubourg , it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of the formidable place which had seen the 14th of July . 
Nineteen barricades were ranged , one behind the other , in the depths of the streets behind this principal barricade . 
At the very sight of it , one felt the agonizing suffering in the immense faubourg , which had reached that point of extremity when a distress may become a catastrophe . 
Of what was that barricade made ? 
Of the ruins of three six-story houses demolished expressly , said some . 
Of the prodigy of all wraths , said others . 
It wore the lamentable aspect of all constructions of hatred , ruin . 
It might be asked : Who built this ? 
It might also be said : Who destroyed this ? 
It was the improvisation of the ebullition . 
Hold ! 
take this door ! 
this grating ! 
this penthouse ! 
this chimney-piece ! 
