Destiny has some extremities which rise perpendicularly from the impossible , and beyond which life is no longer anything but a precipice . 
Javert had reached one of those extremities . 
One of his anxieties consisted in being constrained to think . 
The very violence of all these conflicting emotions forced him to it . 
Thought was something to which he was unused , and which was peculiarly painful . 
In thought there always exists a certain amount of internal rebellion ; and it irritated him to have that within him . 
Thought on any subject whatever , outside of the restricted circle of his functions , would have been for him in any case useless and a fatigue ; thought on the day which had just passed was a torture . 
Nevertheless , it was indispensable that he should take a look into his conscience , after such shocks , and render to himself an account of himself . 
What he had just done made him shudder . 
He , Javert , had seen fit to decide , contrary to all the regulations of the police , contrary to the whole social and judicial organization , contrary to the entire code , upon a release ; this had suited him ; he had substituted his own affairs for the affairs of the public ; was not this unjustifiable ? 
Every time that he brought himself face to face with this deed without a name which he had committed , he trembled from head to foot . 
Upon what should he decide ? 
One sole resource remained to him ; to return in all haste to the Rue de l'Homme Arme , and commit Jean Valjean to prison . 
It was clear that that was what he ought to do . 
He could not . 
Something barred his way in that direction . 
Something ? 
What ? 
Is there in the world , anything outside of the tribunals , executory sentences , the police and the authorities ? 
Javert was overwhelmed . 
A galley-slave sacred ! 
A convict who could not be touched by the law ! 
And that the deed of Javert ! 
Was it not a fearful thing that Javert and Jean Valjean , the man made to proceed with vigor , the man made to submit , -- that these two men who were both the things of the law , should have come to such a pass , that both of them had set themselves above the law ? 
What then ! 
such enormities were to happen and no one was to be punished ! 
Jean Valjean , stronger than the whole social order , was to remain at liberty , and he , Javert , was to go on eating the government 's bread ! 
His revery gradually became terrible . 
He might , athwart this revery , have also reproached himself on the subject of that insurgent who had been taken to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; but he never even thought of that . 
The lesser fault was lost in the greater . 
Besides , that insurgent was , obviously , a dead man , and , legally , death puts an end to pursuit . 
Jean Valjean was the load which weighed upon his spirit . 
Jean Valjean disconcerted him . 
All the axioms which had served him as points of support all his life long , had crumbled away in the presence of this man . 
Jean Valjean 's generosity towards him , Javert , crushed him . 
Other facts which he now recalled , and which he had formerly treated as lies and folly , now recurred to him as realities . 
M. Madeleine re-appeared behind Jean Valjean , and the two figures were superposed in such fashion that they now formed but one , which was venerable . 
Javert felt that something terrible was penetrating his soul -- admiration for a convict . 
Respect for a galley-slave -- is that a possible thing ? 
He shuddered at it , yet could not escape from it . 
In vain did he struggle , he was reduced to confess , in his inmost heart , the sublimity of that wretch . 
This was odious . 
A benevolent malefactor , merciful , gentle , helpful , clement , a convict , returning good for evil , giving back pardon for hatred , preferring pity to vengeance , preferring to ruin himself rather than to ruin his enemy , saving him who had smitten him , kneeling on the heights of virtue , more nearly akin to an angel than to a man . 
Javert was constrained to admit to himself that this monster existed . 
Things could not go on in this manner . 
Certainly , and we insist upon this point , he had not yielded without resistance to that monster , to that infamous angel , to that hideous hero , who enraged almost as much as he amazed him . 
Twenty times , as he sat in that carriage face to face with Jean Valjean , the legal tiger had roared within him . 
A score of times he had been tempted to fling himself upon Jean Valjean , to seize him and devour him , that is to say , to arrest him . 
What more simple , in fact ? 
To cry out at the first post that they passed : -- `` Here is a fugitive from justice , who has broken his ban ! '' 
to summon the gendarmes and say to them : `` This man is yours ! '' 
then to go off , leaving that condemned man there , to ignore the rest and not to meddle further in the matter . 
This man is forever a prisoner of the law ; the law may do with him what it will . 
What could be more just ? 
Javert had said all this to himself ; he had wished to pass beyond , to act , to apprehend the man , and then , as at present , he had not been able to do it ; and every time that his arm had been raised convulsively towards Jean Valjean 's collar , his hand had fallen back again , as beneath an enormous weight , and in the depths of his thought he had heard a voice , a strange voice crying to him : -- `` It is well . 
Deliver up your savior . 
Then have the basin of Pontius Pilate brought and wash your claws . '' 
Then his reflections reverted to himself and beside Jean Valjean glorified he beheld himself , Javert , degraded . 
A convict was his benefactor ! 
But then , why had he permitted that man to leave him alive ? 
He had the right to be killed in that barricade . 
He should have asserted that right . 
It would have been better to summon the other insurgents to his succor against Jean Valjean , to get himself shot by force . 
His supreme anguish was the loss of certainty . 
He felt that he had been uprooted . 
The code was no longer anything more than a stump in his hand . 
He had to deal with scruples of an unknown species . 
There had taken place within him a sentimental revelation entirely distinct from legal affirmation , his only standard of measurement hitherto . 
To remain in his former uprightness did not suffice . 
A whole order of unexpected facts had cropped up and subjugated him . 
A whole new world was dawning on his soul : kindness accepted and repaid , devotion , mercy , indulgence , violences committed by pity on austerity , respect for persons , no more definitive condemnation , no more conviction , the possibility of a tear in the eye of the law , no one knows what justice according to God , running in inverse sense to justice according to men . 
He perceived amid the shadows the terrible rising of an unknown moral sun ; it horrified and dazzled him . 
An owl forced to the gaze of an eagle . 
He said to himself that it was true that there were exceptional cases , that authority might be put out of countenance , that the rule might be inadequate in the presence of a fact , that everything could not be framed within the text of the code , that the unforeseen compelled obedience , that the virtue of a convict might set a snare for the virtue of the functionary , that destiny did indulge in such ambushes , and he reflected with despair that he himself had not even been fortified against a surprise . 
He was forced to acknowledge that goodness did exist . 
This convict had been good . 
And he himself , unprecedented circumstance , had just been good also . 
So he was becoming depraved . 
He found that he was a coward . 
He conceived a horror of himself . 
Javert 's ideal , was not to be human , to be grand , to be sublime ; it was to be irreproachable . 
Now , he had just failed in this . 
How had he come to such a pass ? 
How had all this happened ? 
He could not have told himself . 
He clasped his head in both hands , but in spite of all that he could do , he could not contrive to explain it to himself . 
He had certainly always entertained the intention of restoring Jean Valjean to the law of which Jean Valjean was the captive , and of which he , Javert , was the slave . 
Not for a single instant while he held him in his grasp had he confessed to himself that he entertained the idea of releasing him . 
It was , in some sort , without his consciousness , that his hand had relaxed and had let him go free . 
All sorts of interrogation points flashed before his eyes . 
He put questions to himself , and made replies to himself , and his replies frightened him . 
He asked himself : `` What has that convict done , that desperate fellow , whom I have pursued even to persecution , and who has had me under his foot , and who could have avenged himself , and who owed it both to his rancor and to his safety , in leaving me my life , in showing mercy upon me ? 
His duty ? 
No . 
Something more . 
And I in showing mercy upon him in my turn -- what have I done ? 
My duty ? 
No . 
Something more . 
So there is something beyond duty ? '' 
