`` What riots ? '' 
`` Yes , they are fighting . '' 
`` Why are they fighting ? '' 
`` Ah , good Heavens ! '' 
ejaculated the gardener . 
`` In what direction ? '' 
went on M. Mabeuf . 
`` In the neighborhood of the Arsenal . '' 
Father Mabeuf went to his room , took his hat , mechanically sought for a book to place under his arm , found none , said : `` Ah ! 
truly ! '' 
and went off with a bewildered air . 
BOOK TENTH . 
-- THE 5TH OF JUNE , 1832 THE SURFACE OF THE QUESTION Of what is revolt composed ? 
Of nothing and of everything . 
Of an electricity disengaged , little by little , of a flame suddenly darting forth , of a wandering force , of a passing breath . 
This breath encounters heads which speak , brains which dream , souls which suffer , passions which burn , wretchedness which howls , and bears them away . 
Whither ? 
At random . 
Athwart the state , the laws , athwart prosperity and the insolence of others . 
Irritated convictions , embittered enthusiasms , agitated indignations , instincts of war which have been repressed , youthful courage which has been exalted , generous blindness ; curiosity , the taste for change , the thirst for the unexpected , the sentiment which causes one to take pleasure in reading the posters for the new play , and love , the prompter 's whistle , at the theatre ; the vague hatreds , rancors , disappointments , every vanity which thinks that destiny has bankrupted it ; discomfort , empty dreams , ambitious that are hedged about , whoever hopes for a downfall , some outcome , in short , at the very bottom , the rabble , that mud which catches fire , -- such are the elements of revolt . 
That which is grandest and that which is basest ; the beings who prowl outside of all bounds , awaiting an occasion , bohemians , vagrants , vagabonds of the cross-roads , those who sleep at night in a desert of houses with no other roof than the cold clouds of heaven , those who , each day , demand their bread from chance and not from toil , the unknown of poverty and nothingness , the bare-armed , the bare-footed , belong to revolt . 
Whoever cherishes in his soul a secret revolt against any deed whatever on the part of the state , of life or of fate , is ripe for riot , and , as soon as it makes its appearance , he begins to quiver , and to feel himself borne away with the whirlwind . 
Revolt is a sort of waterspout in the social atmosphere which forms suddenly in certain conditions of temperature , and which , as it eddies about , mounts , descends , thunders , tears , razes , crushes , demolishes , uproots , bearing with it great natures and small , the strong man and the feeble mind , the tree trunk and the stalk of straw . 
Woe to him whom it bears away as well as to him whom it strikes ! 
It breaks the one against the other . 
It communicates to those whom it seizes an indescribable and extraordinary power . 
It fills the first-comer with the force of events ; it converts everything into projectiles . 
It makes a cannon-ball of a rough stone , and a general of a porter . 
If we are to believe certain oracles of crafty political views , a little revolt is desirable from the point of view of power . 
System : revolt strengthens those governments which it does not overthrow . 
It puts the army to the test ; it consecrates the bourgeoisie , it draws out the muscles of the police ; it demonstrates the force of the social framework . 
It is an exercise in gymnastics ; it is almost hygiene . 
Power is in better health after a revolt , as a man is after a good rubbing down . 
Revolt , thirty years ago , was regarded from still other points of view . 
There is for everything a theory , which proclaims itself `` good sense '' ; Philintus against Alcestis ; mediation offered between the false and the true ; explanation , admonition , rather haughty extenuation which , because it is mingled with blame and excuse , thinks itself wisdom , and is often only pedantry . 
A whole political school called `` the golden mean '' has been the outcome of this . 
As between cold water and hot water , it is the lukewarm water party . 
This school with its false depth , all on the surface , which dissects effects without going back to first causes , chides from its height of a demi-science , the agitation of the public square . 
If we listen to this school , `` The riots which complicated the affair of 1830 deprived that great event of a portion of its purity . 
The Revolution of July had been a fine popular gale , abruptly followed by blue sky . 
They made the cloudy sky reappear . 
They caused that revolution , at first so remarkable for its unanimity , to degenerate into a quarrel . 
In the Revolution of July , as in all progress accomplished by fits and starts , there had been secret fractures ; these riots rendered them perceptible . 
It might have been said : ` Ah ! 
this is broken . ' 
After the Revolution of July , one was sensible only of deliverance ; after the riots , one was conscious of a catastrophe . 
`` All revolt closes the shops , depresses the funds , throws the Exchange into consternation , suspends commerce , clogs business , precipitates failures ; no more money , private fortunes rendered uneasy , public credit shaken , industry disconcerted , capital withdrawing , work at a discount , fear everywhere ; counter-shocks in every town . 
Hence gulfs . 
It has been calculated that the first day of a riot costs France twenty millions , the second day forty , the third sixty , a three days ' uprising costs one hundred and twenty millions , that is to say , if only the financial result be taken into consideration , it is equivalent to a disaster , a shipwreck or a lost battle , which should annihilate a fleet of sixty ships of the line . 
`` No doubt , historically , uprisings have their beauty ; the war of the pavements is no less grandiose , and no less pathetic , than the war of thickets : in the one there is the soul of forests , in the other the heart of cities ; the one has Jean Chouan , the other has a Jeanne . 
Revolts have illuminated with a red glare all the most original points of the Parisian character , generosity , devotion , stormy gayety , students proving that bravery forms part of intelligence , the National Guard invincible , bivouacs of shopkeepers , fortresses of street urchins , contempt of death on the part of passers-by . 
Schools and legions clashed together . 
After all , between the combatants , there was only a difference of age ; the race is the same ; it is the same stoical men who died at the age of twenty for their ideas , at forty for their families . 
The army , always a sad thing in civil wars , opposed prudence to audacity . 
Uprisings , while proving popular intrepidity , also educated the courage of the bourgeois . 
`` This is well . 
But is all this worth the bloodshed ? 
And to the bloodshed add the future darkness , progress compromised , uneasiness among the best men , honest liberals in despair , foreign absolutism happy in these wounds dealt to revolution by its own hand , the vanquished of 1830 triumphing and saying : ` We told you so ! ' 
Add Paris enlarged , possibly , but France most assuredly diminished . 
Add , for all must needs be told , the massacres which have too often dishonored the victory of order grown ferocious over liberty gone mad . 
To sum up all , uprisings have been disastrous . '' 
Thus speaks that approximation to wisdom with which the bourgeoisie , that approximation to the people , so willingly contents itself . 
For our parts , we reject this word uprisings as too large , and consequently as too convenient . 
We make a distinction between one popular movement and another popular movement . 
We do not inquire whether an uprising costs as much as a battle . 
Why a battle , in the first place ? 
Here the question of war comes up . 
Is war less of a scourge than an uprising is of a calamity ? 
And then , are all uprisings calamities ? 
And what if the revolt of July did cost a hundred and twenty millions ? 
The establishment of Philip V. in Spain cost France two milliards . 
Even at the same price , we should prefer the 14th of July . 
However , we reject these figures , which appear to be reasons and which are only words . 
An uprising being given , we examine it by itself . 
In all that is said by the doctrinarian objection above presented , there is no question of anything but effect , we seek the cause . 
We will be explicit . 
THE ROOT OF THE MATTER There is such a thing as an uprising , and there is such a thing as insurrection ; these are two separate phases of wrath ; one is in the wrong , the other is in the right . 
In democratic states , the only ones which are founded on justice , it sometimes happens that the fraction usurps ; then the whole rises and the necessary claim of its rights may proceed as far as resort to arms . 
In all questions which result from collective sovereignty , the war of the whole against the fraction is insurrection ; the attack of the fraction against the whole is revolt ; according as the Tuileries contain a king or the Convention , they are justly or unjustly attacked . 
The same cannon , pointed against the populace , is wrong on the 10th of August , and right on the 14th of Vendemiaire . 
Alike in appearance , fundamentally different in reality ; the Swiss defend the false , Bonaparte defends the true . 
That which universal suffrage has effected in its liberty and in its sovereignty can not be undone by the street . 
It is the same in things pertaining purely to civilization ; the instinct of the masses , clear-sighted to-day , may be troubled to-morrow . 
The same fury legitimate when directed against Terray and absurd when directed against Turgot . 
The destruction of machines , the pillage of warehouses , the breaking of rails , the demolition of docks , the false routes of multitudes , the refusal by the people of justice to progress , Ramus assassinated by students , Rousseau driven out of Switzerland and stoned , -- that is revolt . 
Israel against Moses , Athens against Phocian , Rome against Cicero , -- that is an uprising ; Paris against the Bastille , -- that is insurrection . 
The soldiers against Alexander , the sailors against Christopher Columbus , -- this is the same revolt ; impious revolt ; why ? 
Because Alexander is doing for Asia with the sword that which Christopher Columbus is doing for America with the compass ; Alexander like Columbus , is finding a world . 
These gifts of a world to civilization are such augmentations of light , that all resistance in that case is culpable . 
Sometimes the populace counterfeits fidelity to itself . 
The masses are traitors to the people . 
Is there , for example , anything stranger than that long and bloody protest of dealers in contraband salt , a legitimate chronic revolt , which , at the decisive moment , on the day of salvation , at the very hour of popular victory , espouses the throne , turns into chouannerie , and , from having been an insurrection against , becomes an uprising for , sombre masterpieces of ignorance ! 
The contraband salt dealer escapes the royal gibbets , and with a rope 's end round his neck , mounts the white cockade . 
`` Death to the salt duties , '' brings forth , `` Long live the King ! '' 
The assassins of Saint-Barthelemy , the cut-throats of September , the manslaughterers of Avignon , the assassins of Coligny , the assassins of Madam Lamballe , the assassins of Brune , Miquelets , Verdets , Cadenettes , the companions of Jehu , the chevaliers of Brassard , -- behold an uprising . 
La Vendee is a grand , catholic uprising . 
The sound of right in movement is recognizable , it does not always proceed from the trembling of excited masses ; there are mad rages , there are cracked bells , all tocsins do not give out the sound of bronze . 
The brawl of passions and ignorances is quite another thing from the shock of progress . 
Show me in what direction you are going . 
Rise , if you will , but let it be that you may grow great . 
