Homer would have come thither to laugh with Perrault ; and there was in that black garden , youth , health , noise , cries , giddiness , pleasure , happiness enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses , those of the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale , those of the throne as well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mere-Grand . 
In that house more than anywhere else , perhaps , arise those children 's sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of thoughtfulness . 
It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of five years exclaimed one day : `` Mother ! 
one of the big girls has just told me that I have only nine years and ten months longer to remain here . 
What happiness ! '' 
It was here , too , that this memorable dialogue took place : -- A Vocal Mother . 
Why are you weeping , my child ? 
The child -LRB- aged six -RRB- . 
I told Alix that I knew my French history . 
She says that I do not know it , but I do . 
Alix , the big girl -LRB- aged nine -RRB- . 
No ; she does not know it . 
The Mother . 
How is that , my child ? 
Alix . 
She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any question in the book , and she would answer it . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` She did not answer it . '' 
`` Let us see about it . 
What did you ask her ? '' 
`` I opened the book at random , as she proposed , and I put the first question that I came across . '' 
`` And what was the question ? '' 
`` It was , ` What happened after that ? ' '' 
It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedy paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder : -- `` How well bred ! 
it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just like a person ! '' 
It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once picked up a confession which had been written out in advance , in order that she might not forget it , by a sinner of seven years : -- `` Father , I accuse myself of having been avaricious . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having been an adulteress . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen . '' 
It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six years of age improvised the following tale , which was listened to by blue eyes aged four and five years : -- `` There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a great many flowers . 
They plucked the flowers and put them in their pockets . 
After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their playthings . 
There was a wolf in that country ; there was a great deal of forest ; and the wolf was in the forest ; and he ate the little cocks . '' 
And this other poem : -- `` There came a blow with a stick . 
`` It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat . 
`` It was not good for her ; it hurt her . 
`` Then a lady put Punchinello in prison . '' 
It was there that a little abandoned child , a foundling whom the convent was bringing up out of charity , uttered this sweet and heart-breaking saying . 
She heard the others talking of their mothers , and she murmured in her corner : -- `` As for me , my mother was not there when I was born ! '' 
There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through the corridors with her bunch of keys , and whose name was Sister Agatha . 
The big big girls -- those over ten years of age -- called her Agathocles . 
The refectory , a large apartment of an oblong square form , which received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the garden , was dark and damp , and , as the children say , full of beasts . 
All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects . 
Each of its four corners had received , in the language of the pupils , a special and expressive name . 
There was Spider corner , Caterpillar corner , Wood-louse corner , and Cricket corner . 
Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed . 
It was not so cold there as elsewhere . 
From the refectory the names had passed to the boarding-school , and there served as in the old College Mazarin to distinguish four nations . 
Every pupil belonged to one of these four nations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat at meals . 
One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enter the class-room through which he was passing . 
He inquired of another pupil , a charming brunette with rosy cheeks , who stood near him : -- `` Who is that ? '' 
`` She is a spider , Monseigneur . '' 
`` Bah ! 
And that one yonder ? '' 
`` She is a cricket . '' 
`` And that one ? '' 
`` She is a caterpillar . '' 
`` Really ! 
and yourself ? '' 
`` I am a wood-louse , Monseigneur . '' 
Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities . 
At the beginning of this century Ecouen was one of those strict and graceful places where young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august . 
At Ecouen , in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament , a distinction was made between virgins and florists . 
There were also the `` dais '' and the `` censors , '' -- the first who held the cords of the dais , and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament . 
The flowers belonged by right to the florists . 
Four `` virgins '' walked in advance . 
On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hear the question put in the dormitory , `` Who is a virgin ? '' 
Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a `` little one '' of seven years , to a `` big girl '' of sixteen , who took the head of the procession , while she , the little one , remained at the rear , `` You are a virgin , but I am not . '' 
DISTRACTIONS Above the door of the refectory this prayer , which was called the white Paternoster , and which possessed the property of bearing people straight to paradise , was inscribed in large black letters : -- `` Little white Paternoster , which God made , which God said , which God placed in paradise . 
In the evening , when I went to bed , I found three angels sitting on my bed , one at the foot , two at the head , the good Virgin Mary in the middle , who told me to lie down without hesitation . 
The good God is my father , the good Virgin is my mother , the three apostles are my brothers , the three virgins are my sisters . 
The shirt in which God was born envelopes my body ; Saint Margaret 's cross is written on my breast . 
Madame the Virgin was walking through the meadows , weeping for God , when she met M. Saint John . 
` Monsieur Saint John , whence come you ? ' 
` I come from Ave Salus . ' 
` You have not seen the good God ; where is he ? ' 
` He is on the tree of the Cross , his feet hanging , his hands nailed , a little cap of white thorns on his head . ' 
Whoever shall say this thrice at eventide , thrice in the morning , shall win paradise at the last . '' 
In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall under a triple coating of daubing paint . 
At the present time it is finally disappearing from the memories of several who were young girls then , and who are old women now . 
A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of this refectory , whose only door , as we think we have mentioned , opened on the garden . 
Two narrow tables , each flanked by two wooden benches , formed two long parallel lines from one end to the other of the refectory . 
The walls were white , the tables were black ; these two mourning colors constitute the only variety in convents . 
The meals were plain , and the food of the children themselves severe . 
A single dish of meat and vegetables combined , or salt fish -- such was their luxury . 
This meagre fare , which was reserved for the pupils alone , was , nevertheless , an exception . 
The children ate in silence , under the eye of the mother whose turn it was , who , if a fly took a notion to fly or to hum against the rule , opened and shut a wooden book from time to time . 
This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints , read aloud from a little pulpit with a desk , which was situated at the foot of the crucifix . 
The reader was one of the big girls , in weekly turn . 
At regular distances , on the bare tables , there were large , varnished bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and knives and forks , and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat or spoiled fish ; this was punished . 
These bowls were called ronds d'eau . 
The child who broke the silence `` made a cross with her tongue . '' 
Where ? 
On the ground . 
She licked the pavement . 
The dust , that end of all joys , was charged with the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaves which had been guilty of chirping . 
There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except as a unique copy , and which it is forbidden to read . 
It is the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate . 
Nemo regulas , seu constitutiones nostras , externis communicabit . 
The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book , and set to reading it with avidity , a reading which was often interrupted by the fear of being caught , which caused them to close the volume precipitately . 
