When love has fused and mingled two beings in a sacred and angelic unity , the secret of life has been discovered so far as they are concerned ; they are no longer anything more than the two boundaries of the same destiny ; they are no longer anything but the two wings of the same spirit . 
Love , soar . 
On the day when a woman as she passes before you emits light as she walks , you are lost , you love . 
But one thing remains for you to do : to think of her so intently that she is constrained to think of you . 
What love commences can be finished by God alone . 
True love is in despair and is enchanted over a glove lost or a handkerchief found , and eternity is required for its devotion and its hopes . 
It is composed both of the infinitely great and the infinitely little . 
If you are a stone , be adamant ; if you are a plant , be the sensitive plant ; if you are a man , be love . 
Nothing suffices for love . 
We have happiness , we desire paradise ; we possess paradise , we desire heaven . 
Oh ye who love each other , all this is contained in love . 
Understand how to find it there . 
Love has contemplation as well as heaven , and more than heaven , it has voluptuousness . 
`` Does she still come to the Luxembourg ? '' 
`` No , sir . '' 
`` This is the church where she attends mass , is it not ? '' 
`` She no longer comes here . '' 
`` Does she still live in this house ? '' 
`` She has moved away . '' 
`` Where has she gone to dwell ? '' 
`` She did not say . '' 
What a melancholy thing not to know the address of one 's soul ! 
Love has its childishness , other passions have their pettinesses . 
Shame on the passions which belittle man ! 
Honor to the one which makes a child of him ! 
There is one strange thing , do you know it ? 
I dwell in the night . 
There is a being who carried off my sky when she went away . 
Oh ! 
would that we were lying side by side in the same grave , hand in hand , and from time to time , in the darkness , gently caressing a finger , -- that would suffice for my eternity ! 
Ye who suffer because ye love , love yet more . 
To die of love , is to live in it . 
Love . 
A sombre and starry transfiguration is mingled with this torture . 
There is ecstasy in agony . 
Oh joy of the birds ! 
It is because they have nests that they sing . 
Love is a celestial respiration of the air of paradise . 
Deep hearts , sage minds , take life as God has made it ; it is a long trial , an incomprehensible preparation for an unknown destiny . 
This destiny , the true one , begins for a man with the first step inside the tomb . 
Then something appears to him , and he begins to distinguish the definitive . 
The definitive , meditate upon that word . 
The living perceive the infinite ; the definitive permits itself to be seen only by the dead . 
In the meanwhile , love and suffer , hope and contemplate . 
Woe , alas ! 
to him who shall have loved only bodies , forms , appearances ! 
Death will deprive him of all . 
Try to love souls , you will find them again . 
I encountered in the street , a very poor young man who was in love . 
His hat was old , his coat was worn , his elbows were in holes ; water trickled through his shoes , and the stars through his soul . 
What a grand thing it is to be loved ! 
What a far grander thing it is to love ! 
The heart becomes heroic , by dint of passion . 
It is no longer composed of anything but what is pure ; it no longer rests on anything that is not elevated and great . 
An unworthy thought can no more germinate in it , than a nettle on a glacier . 
The serene and lofty soul , inaccessible to vulgar passions and emotions , dominating the clouds and the shades of this world , its follies , its lies , its hatreds , its vanities , its miseries , inhabits the blue of heaven , and no longer feels anything but profound and subterranean shocks of destiny , as the crests of mountains feel the shocks of earthquake . 
If there did not exist some one who loved , the sun would become extinct . 
COSETTE AFTER THE LETTER As Cosette read , she gradually fell into thought . 
At the very moment when she raised her eyes from the last line of the note-book , the handsome officer passed triumphantly in front of the gate , -- it was his hour ; Cosette thought him hideous . 
She resumed her contemplation of the book . 
It was written in the most charming of chirography , thought Cosette ; in the same hand , but with divers inks , sometimes very black , again whitish , as when ink has been added to the inkstand , and consequently on different days . 
It was , then , a mind which had unfolded itself there , sigh by sigh , irregularly , without order , without choice , without object , hap-hazard . 
Cosette had never read anything like it . 
This manuscript , in which she already perceived more light than obscurity , produced upon her the effect of a half-open sanctuary . 
Each one of these mysterious lines shone before her eyes and inundated her heart with a strange radiance . 
The education which she had received had always talked to her of the soul , and never of love , very much as one might talk of the firebrand and not of the flame . 
This manuscript of fifteen pages suddenly and sweetly revealed to her all of love , sorrow , destiny , life , eternity , the beginning , the end . 
It was as if a hand had opened and suddenly flung upon her a handful of rays of light . 
In these few lines she felt a passionate , ardent , generous , honest nature , a sacred will , an immense sorrow , and an immense despair , a suffering heart , an ecstasy fully expanded . 
What was this manuscript ? 
A letter . 
A letter without name , without address , without date , without signature , pressing and disinterested , an enigma composed of truths , a message of love made to be brought by an angel and read by a virgin , an appointment made beyond the bounds of earth , the love-letter of a phantom to a shade . 
It was an absent one , tranquil and dejected , who seemed ready to take refuge in death and who sent to the absent love , his lady , the secret of fate , the key of life , love . 
This had been written with one foot in the grave and one finger in heaven . 
These lines , which had fallen one by one on the paper , were what might be called drops of soul . 
Now , from whom could these pages come ? 
Who could have penned them ? 
Cosette did not hesitate a moment . 
One man only . 
He ! 
Day had dawned once more in her spirit ; all had reappeared . 
She felt an unheard-of joy , and a profound anguish . 
It was he ! 
he who had written ! 
he was there ! 
it was he whose arm had been thrust through that railing ! 
While she was forgetful of him , he had found her again ! 
But had she forgotten him ? 
No , never ! 
She was foolish to have thought so for a single moment . 
She had always loved him , always adored him . 
The fire had been smothered , and had smouldered for a time , but she saw all plainly now ; it had but made headway , and now it had burst forth afresh , and had inflamed her whole being . 
This note-book was like a spark which had fallen from that other soul into hers . 
She felt the conflagration starting up once more . 
She imbued herself thoroughly with every word of the manuscript : `` Oh yes ! '' 
said she , `` how perfectly I recognize all that ! 
That is what I had already read in his eyes . '' 
As she was finishing it for the third time , Lieutenant Theodule passed the gate once more , and rattled his spurs upon the pavement . 
Cosette was forced to raise her eyes . 
She thought him insipid , silly , stupid , useless , foppish , displeasing , impertinent , and extremely ugly . 
