One day , her butcher , who had caught a glimpse of Jean Valjean , said to her : `` That 's a queer fish . '' 
She replied : `` He 's a saint . '' 
Neither Jean Valjean nor Cosette nor Toussaint ever entered or emerged except by the door on the Rue de Babylone . 
Unless seen through the garden gate it would have been difficult to guess that they lived in the Rue Plumet . 
That gate was always closed . 
Jean Valjean had left the garden uncultivated , in order not to attract attention . 
In this , possibly , he made a mistake . 
FOLIIS AC FRONDIBUS The garden thus left to itself for more than half a century had become extraordinary and charming . 
The passers-by of forty years ago halted to gaze at it , without a suspicion of the secrets which it hid in its fresh and verdant depths . 
More than one dreamer of that epoch often allowed his thoughts and his eyes to penetrate indiscreetly between the bars of that ancient , padlocked gate , twisted , tottering , fastened to two green and moss-covered pillars , and oddly crowned with a pediment of undecipherable arabesque . 
There was a stone bench in one corner , one or two mouldy statues , several lattices which had lost their nails with time , were rotting on the wall , and there were no walks nor turf ; but there was enough grass everywhere . 
Gardening had taken its departure , and nature had returned . 
Weeds abounded , which was a great piece of luck for a poor corner of land . 
The festival of gilliflowers was something splendid . 
Nothing in this garden obstructed the sacred effort of things towards life ; venerable growth reigned there among them . 
The trees had bent over towards the nettles , the plant had sprung upward , the branch had inclined , that which crawls on the earth had gone in search of that which expands in the air , that which floats on the wind had bent over towards that which trails in the moss ; trunks , boughs , leaves , fibres , clusters , tendrils , shoots , spines , thorns , had mingled , crossed , married , confounded themselves in each other ; vegetation in a deep and close embrace , had celebrated and accomplished there , under the well-pleased eye of the Creator , in that enclosure three hundred feet square , the holy mystery of fraternity , symbol of the human fraternity . 
This garden was no longer a garden , it was a colossal thicket , that is to say , something as impenetrable as a forest , as peopled as a city , quivering like a nest , sombre like a cathedral , fragrant like a bouquet , solitary as a tomb , living as a throng . 
In Floreal -LSB- 34 -RSB- this enormous thicket , free behind its gate and within its four walls , entered upon the secret labor of germination , quivered in the rising sun , almost like an animal which drinks in the breaths of cosmic love , and which feels the sap of April rising and boiling in its veins , and shakes to the wind its enormous wonderful green locks , sprinkled on the damp earth , on the defaced statues , on the crumbling steps of the pavilion , and even on the pavement of the deserted street , flowers like stars , dew like pearls , fecundity , beauty , life , joy , perfumes . 
At midday , a thousand white butterflies took refuge there , and it was a divine spectacle to see that living summer snow whirling about there in flakes amid the shade . 
There , in those gay shadows of verdure , a throng of innocent voices spoke sweetly to the soul , and what the twittering forgot to say the humming completed . 
In the evening , a dreamy vapor exhaled from the garden and enveloped it ; a shroud of mist , a calm and celestial sadness covered it ; the intoxicating perfume of the honeysuckles and convolvulus poured out from every part of it , like an exquisite and subtle poison ; the last appeals of the woodpeckers and the wagtails were audible as they dozed among the branches ; one felt the sacred intimacy of the birds and the trees ; by day the wings rejoice the leaves , by night the leaves protect the wings . 
-LSB- 34 -RSB- From April 19 to May 20 . 
In winter the thicket was black , dripping , bristling , shivering , and allowed some glimpse of the house . 
Instead of flowers on the branches and dew in the flowers , the long silvery tracks of the snails were visible on the cold , thick carpet of yellow leaves ; but in any fashion , under any aspect , at all seasons , spring , winter , summer , autumn , this tiny enclosure breathed forth melancholy , contemplation , solitude , liberty , the absence of man , the presence of God ; and the rusty old gate had the air of saying : `` This garden belongs to me . '' 
It was of no avail that the pavements of Paris were there on every side , the classic and splendid hotels of the Rue de Varennes a couple of paces away , the dome of the Invalides close at hand , the Chamber of Deputies not far off ; the carriages of the Rue de Bourgogne and of the Rue Saint-Dominique rumbled luxuriously , in vain , in the vicinity , in vain did the yellow , brown , white , and red omnibuses cross each other 's course at the neighboring cross-roads ; the Rue Plumet was the desert ; and the death of the former proprietors , the revolution which had passed over it , the crumbling away of ancient fortunes , absence , forgetfulness , forty years of abandonment and widowhood , had sufficed to restore to this privileged spot ferns , mulleins , hemlock , yarrow , tall weeds , great crimped plants , with large leaves of pale green cloth , lizards , beetles , uneasy and rapid insects ; to cause to spring forth from the depths of the earth and to reappear between those four walls a certain indescribable and savage grandeur ; and for nature , which disconcerts the petty arrangements of man , and which sheds herself always thoroughly where she diffuses herself at all , in the ant as well as in the eagle , to blossom out in a petty little Parisian garden with as much rude force and majesty as in a virgin forest of the New World . 
Nothing is small , in fact ; any one who is subject to the profound and penetrating influence of nature knows this . 
Although no absolute satisfaction is given to philosophy , either to circumscribe the cause or to limit the effect , the contemplator falls into those unfathomable ecstasies caused by these decompositions of force terminating in unity . 
Everything toils at everything . 
Algebra is applied to the clouds ; the radiation of the star profits the rose ; no thinker would venture to affirm that the perfume of the hawthorn is useless to the constellations . 
Who , then , can calculate the course of a molecule ? 
How do we know that the creation of worlds is not determined by the fall of grains of sand ? 
Who knows the reciprocal ebb and flow of the infinitely great and the infinitely little , the reverberations of causes in the precipices of being , and the avalanches of creation ? 
The tiniest worm is of importance ; the great is little , the little is great ; everything is balanced in necessity ; alarming vision for the mind . 
There are marvellous relations between beings and things ; in that inexhaustible whole , from the sun to the grub , nothing despises the other ; all have need of each other . 
The light does not bear away terrestrial perfumes into the azure depths , without knowing what it is doing ; the night distributes stellar essences to the sleeping flowers . 
All birds that fly have round their leg the thread of the infinite . 
Germination is complicated with the bursting forth of a meteor and with the peck of a swallow cracking its egg , and it places on one level the birth of an earthworm and the advent of Socrates . 
Where the telescope ends , the microscope begins . 
Which of the two possesses the larger field of vision ? 
Choose . 
A bit of mould is a pleiad of flowers ; a nebula is an ant-hill of stars . 
The same promiscuousness , and yet more unprecedented , exists between the things of the intelligence and the facts of substance . 
Elements and principles mingle , combine , wed , multiply with each other , to such a point that the material and the moral world are brought eventually to the same clearness . 
The phenomenon is perpetually returning upon itself . 
In the vast cosmic exchanges the universal life goes and comes in unknown quantities , rolling entirely in the invisible mystery of effluvia , employing everything , not losing a single dream , not a single slumber , sowing an animalcule here , crumbling to bits a planet there , oscillating and winding , making of light a force and of thought an element , disseminated and invisible , dissolving all , except that geometrical point , the I ; bringing everything back to the soul-atom ; expanding everything in God , entangling all activity , from summit to base , in the obscurity of a dizzy mechanism , attaching the flight of an insect to the movement of the earth , subordinating , who knows ? 
Were it only by the identity of the law , the evolution of the comet in the firmament to the whirling of the infusoria in the drop of water . 
A machine made of mind . 
Enormous gearing , the prime motor of which is the gnat , and whose final wheel is the zodiac . 
CHANGE OF GATE It seemed that this garden , created in olden days to conceal wanton mysteries , had been transformed and become fitted to shelter chaste mysteries . 
There were no longer either arbors , or bowling greens , or tunnels , or grottos ; there was a magnificent , dishevelled obscurity falling like a veil over all . 
Paphos had been made over into Eden . 
It is impossible to say what element of repentance had rendered this retreat wholesome . 
This flower-girl now offered her blossom to the soul . 
This coquettish garden , formerly decidedly compromised , had returned to virginity and modesty . 
A justice assisted by a gardener , a goodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lamoignon , and another goodman who thought that he was a continuation of Lenotre , had turned it about , cut , ruffled , decked , moulded it to gallantry ; nature had taken possession of it once more , had filled it with shade , and had arranged it for love . 
There was , also , in this solitude , a heart which was quite ready . 
Love had only to show himself ; he had here a temple composed of verdure , grass , moss , the sight of birds , tender shadows , agitated branches , and a soul made of sweetness , of faith , of candor , of hope , of aspiration , and of illusion . 
Cosette had left the convent when she was still almost a child ; she was a little more than fourteen , and she was at the `` ungrateful age '' ; we have already said , that with the exception of her eyes , she was homely rather than pretty ; she had no ungraceful feature , but she was awkward , thin , timid and bold at once , a grown-up little girl , in short . 
Her education was finished , that is to say , she has been taught religion , and even and above all , devotion ; then `` history , '' that is to say the thing that bears that name in convents , geography , grammar , the participles , the kings of France , a little music , a little drawing , etc. ; but in all other respects she was utterly ignorant , which is a great charm and a great peril . 
The soul of a young girl should not be left in the dark ; later on , mirages that are too abrupt and too lively are formed there , as in a dark chamber . 
She should be gently and discreetly enlightened , rather with the reflection of realities than with their harsh and direct light . 
A useful and graciously austere half-light which dissipates puerile fears and obviates falls . 
There is nothing but the maternal instinct , that admirable intuition composed of the memories of the virgin and the experience of the woman , which knows how this half-light is to be created and of what it should consist . 
Nothing supplies the place of this instinct . 
All the nuns in the world are not worth as much as one mother in the formation of a young girl 's soul . 
Cosette had had no mother . 
She had only had many mothers , in the plural . 
As for Jean Valjean , he was , indeed , all tenderness , all solicitude ; but he was only an old man and he knew nothing at all . 
Now , in this work of education , in this grave matter of preparing a woman for life , what science is required to combat that vast ignorance which is called innocence ! 
Nothing prepares a young girl for passions like the convent . 
The convent turns the thoughts in the direction of the unknown . 
The heart , thus thrown back upon itself , works downward within itself , since it can not overflow , and grows deep , since it can not expand . 
Hence visions , suppositions , conjectures , outlines of romances , a desire for adventures , fantastic constructions , edifices built wholly in the inner obscurity of the mind , sombre and secret abodes where the passions immediately find a lodgement as soon as the open gate permits them to enter . 
The convent is a compression which , in order to triumph over the human heart , should last during the whole life . 
On quitting the convent , Cosette could have found nothing more sweet and more dangerous than the house in the Rue Plumet . 
It was the continuation of solitude with the beginning of liberty ; a garden that was closed , but a nature that was acrid , rich , voluptuous , and fragrant ; the same dreams as in the convent , but with glimpses of young men ; a grating , but one that opened on the street . 
Still , when she arrived there , we repeat , she was only a child . 
Jean Valjean gave this neglected garden over to her . 
`` Do what you like with it , '' he said to her . 
This amused Cosette ; she turned over all the clumps and all the stones , she hunted for `` beasts '' ; she played in it , while awaiting the time when she would dream in it ; she loved this garden for the insects that she found beneath her feet amid the grass , while awaiting the day when she would love it for the stars that she would see through the boughs above her head . 
And then , she loved her father , that is to say , Jean Valjean , with all her soul , with an innocent filial passion which made the goodman a beloved and charming companion to her . 
It will be remembered that M. Madeleine had been in the habit of reading a great deal . 
Jean Valjean had continued this practice ; he had come to converse well ; he possessed the secret riches and the eloquence of a true and humble mind which has spontaneously cultivated itself . 
He retained just enough sharpness to season his kindness ; his mind was rough and his heart was soft . 
During their conversations in the Luxembourg , he gave her explanations of everything , drawing on what he had read , and also on what he had suffered . 
As she listened to him , Cosette 's eyes wandered vaguely about . 
This simple man sufficed for Cosette 's thought , the same as the wild garden sufficed for her eyes . 
When she had had a good chase after the butterflies , she came panting up to him and said : `` Ah ! 
How I have run ! '' 
He kissed her brow . 
Cosette adored the goodman . 
She was always at his heels . 
Where Jean Valjean was , there happiness was . 
Jean Valjean lived neither in the pavilion nor the garden ; she took greater pleasure in the paved back courtyard , than in the enclosure filled with flowers , and in his little lodge furnished with straw-seated chairs than in the great drawing-room hung with tapestry , against which stood tufted easy-chairs . 
Jean Valjean sometimes said to her , smiling at his happiness in being importuned : `` Do go to your own quarters ! 
Leave me alone a little ! '' 
She gave him those charming and tender scoldings which are so graceful when they come from a daughter to her father . 
`` Father , I am very cold in your rooms ; why do n't you have a carpet here and a stove ? '' 
`` Dear child , there are so many people who are better than I and who have not even a roof over their heads . '' 
`` Then why is there a fire in my rooms , and everything that is needed ? '' 
