`` Sus is superfluous , '' observed M. Gillenormand . 
-LSB- 22 -RSB- Remarks of this nature found a situation . 
-LSB- 22 -RSB- Suspendu , suspended ; pendu , hung . 
At the Te Deum on the anniversary of the return of the Bourbons , he said , on seeing M. de Talleyrand pass by : `` There goes his Excellency the Evil One . '' 
M. Gillenormand was always accompanied by his daughter , that tall mademoiselle , who was over forty and looked fifty , and by a handsome little boy of seven years , white , rosy , fresh , with happy and trusting eyes , who never appeared in that salon without hearing voices murmur around him : `` How handsome he is ! 
What a pity ! 
Poor child ! '' 
This child was the one of whom we dropped a word a while ago . 
He was called `` poor child , '' because he had for a father `` a brigand of the Loire . '' 
This brigand of the Loire was M. Gillenormand 's son-in-law , who has already been mentioned , and whom M. Gillenormand called `` the disgrace of his family . '' 
ONE OF THE RED SPECTRES OF THAT EPOCH Any one who had chanced to pass through the little town of Vernon at this epoch , and who had happened to walk across that fine monumental bridge , which will soon be succeeded , let us hope , by some hideous iron cable bridge , might have observed , had he dropped his eyes over the parapet , a man about fifty years of age wearing a leather cap , and trousers and a waistcoat of coarse gray cloth , to which something yellow which had been a red ribbon , was sewn , shod with wooden sabots , tanned by the sun , his face nearly black and his hair nearly white , a large scar on his forehead which ran down upon his cheek , bowed , bent , prematurely aged , who walked nearly every day , hoe and sickle in hand , in one of those compartments surrounded by walls which abut on the bridge , and border the left bank of the Seine like a chain of terraces , charming enclosures full of flowers of which one could say , were they much larger : `` these are gardens , '' and were they a little smaller : `` these are bouquets . '' 
All these enclosures abut upon the river at one end , and on a house at the other . 
The man in the waistcoat and the wooden shoes of whom we have just spoken , inhabited the smallest of these enclosures and the most humble of these houses about 1817 . 
He lived there alone and solitary , silently and poorly , with a woman who was neither young nor old , neither homely nor pretty , neither a peasant nor a bourgeoise , who served him . 
The plot of earth which he called his garden was celebrated in the town for the beauty of the flowers which he cultivated there . 
These flowers were his occupation . 
By dint of labor , of perseverance , of attention , and of buckets of water , he had succeeded in creating after the Creator , and he had invented certain tulips and certain dahlias which seemed to have been forgotten by nature . 
He was ingenious ; he had forestalled Soulange Bodin in the formation of little clumps of earth of heath mould , for the cultivation of rare and precious shrubs from America and China . 
He was in his alleys from the break of day , in summer , planting , cutting , hoeing , watering , walking amid his flowers with an air of kindness , sadness , and sweetness , sometimes standing motionless and thoughtful for hours , listening to the song of a bird in the trees , the babble of a child in a house , or with his eyes fixed on a drop of dew at the tip of a spear of grass , of which the sun made a carbuncle . 
His table was very plain , and he drank more milk than wine . 
A child could make him give way , and his servant scolded him . 
He was so timid that be seemed shy , he rarely went out , and he saw no one but the poor people who tapped at his pane and his cure , the Abbe Mabeuf , a good old man . 
Nevertheless , if the inhabitants of the town , or strangers , or any chance comers , curious to see his tulips , rang at his little cottage , he opened his door with a smile . 
He was the `` brigand of the Loire . '' 
Any one who had , at the same time , read military memoirs , biographies , the Moniteur , and the bulletins of the grand army , would have been struck by a name which occurs there with tolerable frequency , the name of Georges Pontmercy . 
When very young , this Georges Pontmercy had been a soldier in Saintonge 's regiment . 
The revolution broke out . 
Saintonge 's regiment formed a part of the army of the Rhine ; for the old regiments of the monarchy preserved their names of provinces even after the fall of the monarchy , and were only divided into brigades in 1794 . 
Pontmercy fought at Spire , at Worms , at Neustadt , at Turkheim , at Alzey , at Mayence , where he was one of the two hundred who formed Houchard 's rearguard . 
It was the twelfth to hold its ground against the corps of the Prince of Hesse , behind the old rampart of Andernach , and only rejoined the main body of the army when the enemy 's cannon had opened a breach from the cord of the parapet to the foot of the glacis . 
He was under Kleber at Marchiennes and at the battle of Mont-Palissel , where a ball from a biscaien broke his arm . 
Then he passed to the frontier of Italy , and was one of the thirty grenadiers who defended the Col de Tende with Joubert . 
Joubert was appointed its adjutant-general , and Pontmercy sub-lieutenant . 
Pontmercy was by Berthier 's side in the midst of the grape-shot of that day at Lodi which caused Bonaparte to say : `` Berthier has been cannoneer , cavalier , and grenadier . '' 
He beheld his old general , Joubert , fall at Novi , at the moment when , with uplifted sabre , he was shouting : `` Forward ! '' 
Having been embarked with his company in the exigencies of the campaign , on board a pinnace which was proceeding from Genoa to some obscure port on the coast , he fell into a wasps ' - nest of seven or eight English vessels . 
The Genoese commander wanted to throw his cannon into the sea , to hide the soldiers between decks , and to slip along in the dark as a merchant vessel . 
Pontmercy had the colors hoisted to the peak , and sailed proudly past under the guns of the British frigates . 
Twenty leagues further on , his audacity having increased , he attacked with his pinnace , and captured a large English transport which was carrying troops to Sicily , and which was so loaded down with men and horses that the vessel was sunk to the level of the sea . 
In 1805 he was in that Malher division which took Gunzberg from the Archduke Ferdinand . 
At Weltingen he received into his arms , beneath a storm of bullets , Colonel Maupetit , mortally wounded at the head of the 9th Dragoons . 
He distinguished himself at Austerlitz in that admirable march in echelons effected under the enemy 's fire . 
When the cavalry of the Imperial Russian Guard crushed a battalion of the 4th of the line , Pontmercy was one of those who took their revenge and overthrew the Guard . 
The Emperor gave him the cross . 
Pontmercy saw Wurmser at Mantua , Melas , and Alexandria , Mack at Ulm , made prisoners in succession . 
He formed a part of the eighth corps of the grand army which Mortier commanded , and which captured Hamburg . 
Then he was transferred to the 55th of the line , which was the old regiment of Flanders . 
At Eylau he was in the cemetery where , for the space of two hours , the heroic Captain Louis Hugo , the uncle of the author of this book , sustained alone with his company of eighty-three men every effort of the hostile army . 
Pontmercy was one of the three who emerged alive from that cemetery . 
He was at Friedland . 
Then he saw Moscow . 
Then La Beresina , then Lutzen , Bautzen , Dresden , Wachau , Leipzig , and the defiles of Gelenhausen ; then Montmirail , Chateau-Thierry , Craon , the banks of the Marne , the banks of the Aisne , and the redoubtable position of Laon . 
At Arnay-Le-Duc , being then a captain , he put ten Cossacks to the sword , and saved , not his general , but his corporal . 
He was well slashed up on this occasion , and twenty-seven splinters were extracted from his left arm alone . 
Eight days before the capitulation of Paris he had just exchanged with a comrade and entered the cavalry . 
He had what was called under the old regime , the double hand , that is to say , an equal aptitude for handling the sabre or the musket as a soldier , or a squadron or a battalion as an officer . 
It is from this aptitude , perfected by a military education , which certain special branches of the service arise , the dragoons , for example , who are both cavalry-men and infantry at one and the same time . 
He accompanied Napoleon to the Island of Elba . 
At Waterloo , he was chief of a squadron of cuirassiers , in Dubois ' brigade . 
It was he who captured the standard of the Lunenburg battalion . 
He came and cast the flag at the Emperor 's feet . 
He was covered with blood . 
While tearing down the banner he had received a sword-cut across his face . 
The Emperor , greatly pleased , shouted to him : `` You are a colonel , you are a baron , you are an officer of the Legion of Honor ! '' 
Pontmercy replied : `` Sire , I thank you for my widow . '' 
An hour later , he fell in the ravine of Ohain . 
Now , who was this Georges Pontmercy ? 
He was this same `` brigand of the Loire . '' 
We have already seen something of his history . 
After Waterloo , Pontmercy , who had been pulled out of the hollow road of Ohain , as it will be remembered , had succeeded in joining the army , and had dragged himself from ambulance to ambulance as far as the cantonments of the Loire . 
The Restoration had placed him on half-pay , then had sent him into residence , that is to say , under surveillance , at Vernon . 
King Louis XVIII. , regarding all that which had taken place during the Hundred Days as not having occurred at all , did not recognize his quality as an officer of the Legion of Honor , nor his grade of colonel , nor his title of baron . 
He , on his side , neglected no occasion of signing himself `` Colonel Baron Pontmercy . '' 
He had only an old blue coat , and he never went out without fastening to it his rosette as an officer of the Legion of Honor . 
The Attorney for the Crown had him warned that the authorities would prosecute him for `` illegal '' wearing of this decoration . 
When this notice was conveyed to him through an officious intermediary , Pontmercy retorted with a bitter smile : `` I do not know whether I no longer understand French , or whether you no longer speak it ; but the fact is that I do not understand . '' 
Then he went out for eight successive days with his rosette . 
They dared not interfere with him . 
Two or three times the Minister of War and the general in command of the department wrote to him with the following address : A Monsieur le Commandant Pontmercy . '' 
He sent back the letters with the seals unbroken . 
At the same moment , Napoleon at Saint Helena was treating in the same fashion the missives of Sir Hudson Lowe addressed to General Bonaparte . 
Pontmercy had ended , may we be pardoned the expression , by having in his mouth the same saliva as his Emperor . 
In the same way , there were at Rome Carthaginian prisoners who refused to salute Flaminius , and who had a little of Hannibal 's spirit . 
One day he encountered the district-attorney in one of the streets of Vernon , stepped up to him , and said : `` Mr. Crown Attorney , am I permitted to wear my scar ? '' 
He had nothing save his meagre half-pay as chief of squadron . 
He had hired the smallest house which he could find at Vernon . 
He lived there alone , we have just seen how . 
Under the Empire , between two wars , he had found time to marry Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
The old bourgeois , thoroughly indignant at bottom , had given his consent with a sigh , saying : `` The greatest families are forced into it . '' 
In 1815 , Madame Pontmercy , an admirable woman in every sense , by the way , lofty in sentiment and rare , and worthy of her husband , died , leaving a child . 
This child had been the colonel 's joy in his solitude ; but the grandfather had imperatively claimed his grandson , declaring that if the child were not given to him he would disinherit him . 
The father had yielded in the little one 's interest , and had transferred his love to flowers . 
Moreover , he had renounced everything , and neither stirred up mischief nor conspired . 
He shared his thoughts between the innocent things which he was then doing and the great things which he had done . 
He passed his time in expecting a pink or in recalling Austerlitz . 
M. Gillenormand kept up no relations with his son-in-law . 
The colonel was `` a bandit '' to him . 
M. Gillenormand never mentioned the colonel , except when he occasionally made mocking allusions to `` his Baronship . '' 
It had been expressly agreed that Pontmercy should never attempt to see his son nor to speak to him , under penalty of having the latter handed over to him disowned and disinherited . 
For the Gillenormands , Pontmercy was a man afflicted with the plague . 
