Gavroche immediately began to take observations . 
One of these two pedestrians evidently had a project connected with the other . 
Gavroche was well placed to watch the course of events . 
The bedroom had turned into a hiding-place at a very opportune moment . 
Montparnasse on the hunt at such an hour , in such a place , betokened something threatening . 
Gavroche felt his gamin 's heart moved with compassion for the old man . 
What was he to do ? 
Interfere ? 
One weakness coming to the aid of another ! 
It would be merely a laughing matter for Montparnasse . 
Gavroche did not shut his eyes to the fact that the old man , in the first place , and the child in the second , would make but two mouthfuls for that redoubtable ruffian eighteen years of age . 
While Gavroche was deliberating , the attack took place , abruptly and hideously . 
The attack of the tiger on the wild ass , the attack of the spider on the fly . 
Montparnasse suddenly tossed away his rose , bounded upon the old man , seized him by the collar , grasped and clung to him , and Gavroche with difficulty restrained a scream . 
A moment later one of these men was underneath the other , groaning , struggling , with a knee of marble upon his breast . 
Only , it was not just what Gavroche had expected . 
The one who lay on the earth was Montparnasse ; the one who was on top was the old man . 
All this took place a few paces distant from Gavroche . 
The old man had received the shock , had returned it , and that in such a terrible fashion , that in a twinkling , the assailant and the assailed had exchanged roles . 
`` Here 's a hearty veteran ! '' 
thought Gavroche . 
He could not refrain from clapping his hands . 
But it was applause wasted . 
It did not reach the combatants , absorbed and deafened as they were , each by the other , as their breath mingled in the struggle . 
Silence ensued . 
Montparnasse ceased his struggles . 
Gavroche indulged in this aside : `` Can he be dead ! '' 
The goodman had not uttered a word , nor given vent to a cry . 
He rose to his feet , and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse : -- `` Get up . '' 
Montparnasse rose , but the goodman held him fast . 
Montparnasse 's attitude was the humiliated and furious attitude of the wolf who has been caught by a sheep . 
Gavroche looked on and listened , making an effort to reinforce his eyes with his ears . 
He was enjoying himself immensely . 
He was repaid for his conscientious anxiety in the character of a spectator . 
He was able to catch on the wing a dialogue which borrowed from the darkness an indescribably tragic accent . 
The goodman questioned , Montparnasse replied . 
`` How old are you ? '' 
`` Nineteen . '' 
`` You are strong and healthy . 
Why do you not work ? '' 
`` It bores me . '' 
`` What is your trade ? '' 
`` An idler . '' 
`` Speak seriously . 
Can anything be done for you ? 
What would you like to be ? '' 
`` A thief . '' 
A pause ensued . 
The old man seemed absorbed in profound thought . 
He stood motionless , and did not relax his hold on Montparnasse . 
Every moment the vigorous and agile young ruffian indulged in the twitchings of a wild beast caught in a snare . 
He gave a jerk , tried a crook of the knee , twisted his limbs desperately , and made efforts to escape . 
The old man did not appear to notice it , and held both his arms with one hand , with the sovereign indifference of absolute force . 
The old man 's revery lasted for some time , then , looking steadily at Montparnasse , he addressed to him in a gentle voice , in the midst of the darkness where they stood , a solemn harangue , of which Gavroche did not lose a single syllable : -- `` My child , you are entering , through indolence , on one of the most laborious of lives . 
Ah ! 
You declare yourself to be an idler ! 
prepare to toil . 
There is a certain formidable machine , have you seen it ? 
It is the rolling-mill . 
You must be on your guard against it , it is crafty and ferocious ; if it catches hold of the skirt of your coat , you will be drawn in bodily . 
That machine is laziness . 
Stop while there is yet time , and save yourself ! 
Otherwise , it is all over with you ; in a short time you will be among the gearing . 
Once entangled , hope for nothing more . 
Toil , lazybones ! 
there is no more repose for you ! 
The iron hand of implacable toil has seized you . 
You do not wish to earn your living , to have a task , to fulfil a duty ! 
It bores you to be like other men ? 
Well ! 
You will be different . 
Labor is the law ; he who rejects it will find ennui his torment . 
You do not wish to be a workingman , you will be a slave . 
Toil lets go of you on one side only to grasp you again on the other . 
You do not desire to be its friend , you shall be its negro slave . 
Ah ! 
You would have none of the honest weariness of men , you shall have the sweat of the damned . 
Where others sing , you will rattle in your throat . 
You will see afar off , from below , other men at work ; it will seem to you that they are resting . 
The laborer , the harvester , the sailor , the blacksmith , will appear to you in glory like the blessed spirits in paradise . 
What radiance surrounds the forge ! 
To guide the plough , to bind the sheaves , is joy . 
The bark at liberty in the wind , what delight ! 
Do you , lazy idler , delve , drag on , roll , march ! 
Drag your halter . 
You are a beast of burden in the team of hell ! 
Ah ! 
To do nothing is your object . 
Well , not a week , not a day , not an hour shall you have free from oppression . 
You will be able to lift nothing without anguish . 
Every minute that passes will make your muscles crack . 
What is a feather to others will be a rock to you . 
The simplest things will become steep acclivities . 
Life will become monstrous all about you . 
To go , to come , to breathe , will be just so many terrible labors . 
Your lungs will produce on you the effect of weighing a hundred pounds . 
Whether you shall walk here rather than there , will become a problem that must be solved . 
Any one who wants to go out simply gives his door a push , and there he is in the open air . 
If you wish to go out , you will be obliged to pierce your wall . 
What does every one who wants to step into the street do ? 
