The supreme moment was approaching . 
The Bishop understood this ; time pressed ; it was as a priest that he had come : from extreme coldness he had passed by degrees to extreme emotion ; he gazed at those closed eyes , he took that wrinkled , aged and ice-cold hand in his , and bent over the dying man . 
`` This hour is the hour of God . 
Do you not think that it would be regrettable if we had met in vain ? '' 
The conventionary opened his eyes again . 
A gravity mingled with gloom was imprinted on his countenance . 
`` Bishop , '' said he , with a slowness which probably arose more from his dignity of soul than from the failing of his strength , `` I have passed my life in meditation , study , and contemplation . 
I was sixty years of age when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with its affairs . 
I obeyed . 
Abuses existed , I combated them ; tyrannies existed , I destroyed them ; rights and principles existed , I proclaimed and confessed them . 
Our territory was invaded , I defended it ; France was menaced , I offered my breast . 
I was not rich ; I am poor . 
I have been one of the masters of the state ; the vaults of the treasury were encumbered with specie to such a degree that we were forced to shore up the walls , which were on the point of bursting beneath the weight of gold and silver ; I dined in Dead Tree Street , at twenty-two sous . 
I have succored the oppressed , I have comforted the suffering . 
I tore the cloth from the altar , it is true ; but it was to bind up the wounds of my country . 
I have always upheld the march forward of the human race , forward towards the light , and I have sometimes resisted progress without pity . 
I have , when the occasion offered , protected my own adversaries , men of your profession . 
And there is at Peteghem , in Flanders , at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summer palace , a convent of Urbanists , the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu , which I saved in 1793 . 
I have done my duty according to my powers , and all the good that I was able . 
After which , I was hunted down , pursued , persecuted , blackened , jeered at , scorned , cursed , proscribed . 
For many years past , I with my white hair have been conscious that many people think they have the right to despise me ; to the poor ignorant masses I present the visage of one damned . 
And I accept this isolation of hatred , without hating any one myself . 
Now I am eighty-six years old ; I am on the point of death . 
What is it that you have come to ask of me ? '' 
`` Your blessing , '' said the Bishop . 
And he knelt down . 
When the Bishop raised his head again , the face of the conventionary had become august . 
He had just expired . 
The Bishop returned home , deeply absorbed in thoughts which can not be known to us . 
He passed the whole night in prayer . 
On the following morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about member of the Convention G -- ; he contented himself with pointing heavenward . 
From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling towards all children and sufferers . 
Any allusion to `` that old wretch of a G -- '' caused him to fall into a singular preoccupation . 
No one could say that the passage of that soul before his , and the reflection of that grand conscience upon his , did not count for something in his approach to perfection . 
This `` pastoral visit '' naturally furnished an occasion for a murmur of comment in all the little local coteries . 
`` Was the bedside of such a dying man as that the proper place for a bishop ? 
There was evidently no conversion to be expected . 
All those revolutionists are backsliders . 
Then why go there ? 
What was there to be seen there ? 
He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried off by the devil . '' 
One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herself spiritual , addressed this sally to him , `` Monseigneur , people are inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap ! '' 
-- `` Oh ! 
oh ! 
that 's a coarse color , '' replied the Bishop . 
`` It is lucky that those who despise it in a cap revere it in a hat . '' 
A RESTRICTION We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves , were we to conclude from this that Monseigneur Welcome was `` a philosophical bishop , '' or a `` patriotic cure . '' 
His meeting , which may almost be designated as his union , with conventionary G -- , left behind it in his mind a sort of astonishment , which rendered him still more gentle . 
That is all . 
Although Monseigneur Bienvenu was far from being a politician , this is , perhaps , the place to indicate very briefly what his attitude was in the events of that epoch , supposing that Monseigneur Bienvenu ever dreamed of having an attitude . 
Let us , then , go back a few years . 
Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate , the Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire , in company with many other bishops . 
The arrest of the Pope took place , as every one knows , on the night of the 5th to the 6th of July , 1809 ; on this occasion , M. Myriel was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and Italy convened at Paris . 
This synod was held at Notre-Dame , and assembled for the first time on the 15th of June , 1811 , under the presidency of Cardinal Fesch . 
M. Myriel was one of the ninety-five bishops who attended it . 
But he was present only at one sitting and at three or four private conferences . 
Bishop of a mountain diocese , living so very close to nature , in rusticity and deprivation , it appeared that he imported among these eminent personages , ideas which altered the temperature of the assembly . 
He very soon returned to D -- He was interrogated as to this speedy return , and he replied : `` I embarrassed them . 
The outside air penetrated to them through me . 
I produced on them the effect of an open door . '' 
On another occasion he said , `` What would you have ? 
Those gentlemen are princes . 
I am only a poor peasant bishop . '' 
The fact is that he displeased them . 
Among other strange things , it is said that he chanced to remark one evening , when he found himself at the house of one of his most notable colleagues : `` What beautiful clocks ! 
What beautiful carpets ! 
What beautiful liveries ! 
They must be a great trouble . 
I would not have all those superfluities , crying incessantly in my ears : ` There are people who are hungry ! 
There are people who are cold ! 
There are poor people ! 
There are poor people ! ' '' 
Let us remark , by the way , that the hatred of luxury is not an intelligent hatred . 
This hatred would involve the hatred of the arts . 
Nevertheless , in churchmen , luxury is wrong , except in connection with representations and ceremonies . 
It seems to reveal habits which have very little that is charitable about them . 
An opulent priest is a contradiction . 
The priest must keep close to the poor . 
Now , can one come in contact incessantly night and day with all this distress , all these misfortunes , and this poverty , without having about one 's own person a little of that misery , like the dust of labor ? 
Is it possible to imagine a man near a brazier who is not warm ? 
Can one imagine a workman who is working near a furnace , and who has neither a singed hair , nor blackened nails , nor a drop of sweat , nor a speck of ashes on his face ? 
The first proof of charity in the priest , in the bishop especially , is poverty . 
This is , no doubt , what the Bishop of D -- thought . 
It must not be supposed , however , that he shared what we call the `` ideas of the century '' on certain delicate points . 
He took very little part in the theological quarrels of the moment , and maintained silence on questions in which Church and State were implicated ; but if he had been strongly pressed , it seems that he would have been found to be an ultramontane rather than a gallican . 
Since we are making a portrait , and since we do not wish to conceal anything , we are forced to add that he was glacial towards Napoleon in his decline . 
Beginning with 1813 , he gave in his adherence to or applauded all hostile manifestations . 
He refused to see him , as he passed through on his return from the island of Elba , and he abstained from ordering public prayers for the Emperor in his diocese during the Hundred Days . 
Besides his sister , Mademoiselle Baptistine , he had two brothers , one a general , the other a prefect . 
He wrote to both with tolerable frequency . 
He was harsh for a time towards the former , because , holding a command in Provence at the epoch of the disembarkation at Cannes , the general had put himself at the head of twelve hundred men and had pursued the Emperor as though the latter had been a person whom one is desirous of allowing to escape . 
His correspondence with the other brother , the ex-prefect , a fine , worthy man who lived in retirement at Paris , Rue Cassette , remained more affectionate . 
Thus Monseigneur Bienvenu also had his hour of party spirit , his hour of bitterness , his cloud . 
The shadow of the passions of the moment traversed this grand and gentle spirit occupied with eternal things . 
Certainly , such a man would have done well not to entertain any political opinions . 
Let there be no mistake as to our meaning : we are not confounding what is called `` political opinions '' with the grand aspiration for progress , with the sublime faith , patriotic , democratic , humane , which in our day should be the very foundation of every generous intellect . 
Without going deeply into questions which are only indirectly connected with the subject of this book , we will simply say this : It would have been well if Monseigneur Bienvenu had not been a Royalist , and if his glance had never been , for a single instant , turned away from that serene contemplation in which is distinctly discernible , above the fictions and the hatreds of this world , above the stormy vicissitudes of human things , the beaming of those three pure radiances , truth , justice , and charity . 
While admitting that it was not for a political office that God created Monseigneur Welcome , we should have understood and admired his protest in the name of right and liberty , his proud opposition , his just but perilous resistance to the all-powerful Napoleon . 
But that which pleases us in people who are rising pleases us less in the case of people who are falling . 
We only love the fray so long as there is danger , and in any case , the combatants of the first hour have alone the right to be the exterminators of the last . 
