The army yielded suddenly on all sides at once , -- Hougomont , La Haie-Sainte , Papelotte , Plancenoit . 
The cry `` Treachery ! '' 
was followed by a cry of `` Save yourselves who can ! '' 
An army which is disbanding is like a thaw . 
All yields , splits , cracks , floats , rolls , falls , jostles , hastens , is precipitated . 
The disintegration is unprecedented . 
Ney borrows a horse , leaps upon it , and without hat , cravat , or sword , places himself across the Brussels road , stopping both English and French . 
He strives to detain the army , he recalls it to its duty , he insults it , he clings to the rout . 
He is overwhelmed . 
The soldiers fly from him , shouting , `` Long live Marshal Ney ! '' 
Two of Durutte 's regiments go and come in affright as though tossed back and forth between the swords of the Uhlans and the fusillade of the brigades of Kempt , Best , Pack , and Rylandt ; the worst of hand-to-hand conflicts is the defeat ; friends kill each other in order to escape ; squadrons and battalions break and disperse against each other , like the tremendous foam of battle . 
Lobau at one extremity , and Reille at the other , are drawn into the tide . 
In vain does Napoleon erect walls from what is left to him of his Guard ; in vain does he expend in a last effort his last serviceable squadrons . 
Quiot retreats before Vivian , Kellermann before Vandeleur , Lobau before Bulow , Morand before Pirch , Domon and Subervic before Prince William of Prussia ; Guyot , who led the Emperor 's squadrons to the charge , falls beneath the feet of the English dragoons . 
Napoleon gallops past the line of fugitives , harangues , urges , threatens , entreats them . 
All the mouths which in the morning had shouted , `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
remain gaping ; they hardly recognize him . 
The Prussian cavalry , newly arrived , dashes forwards , flies , hews , slashes , kills , exterminates . 
Horses lash out , the cannons flee ; the soldiers of the artillery-train unharness the caissons and use the horses to make their escape ; transports overturned , with all four wheels in the air , clog the road and occasion massacres . 
Men are crushed , trampled down , others walk over the dead and the living . 
Arms are lost . 
A dizzy multitude fills the roads , the paths , the bridges , the plains , the hills , the valleys , the woods , encumbered by this invasion of forty thousand men . 
Shouts despair , knapsacks and guns flung among the rye , passages forced at the point of the sword , no more comrades , no more officers , no more generals , an inexpressible terror . 
Zieten putting France to the sword at its leisure . 
Lions converted into goats . 
Such was the flight . 
At Genappe , an effort was made to wheel about , to present a battle front , to draw up in line . 
Lobau rallied three hundred men . 
The entrance to the village was barricaded , but at the first volley of Prussian canister , all took to flight again , and Lobau was taken . 
That volley of grape-shot can be seen to-day imprinted on the ancient gable of a brick building on the right of the road at a few minutes ' distance before you enter Genappe . 
The Prussians threw themselves into Genappe , furious , no doubt , that they were not more entirely the conquerors . 
The pursuit was stupendous . 
Blucher ordered extermination . 
Roguet had set the lugubrious example of threatening with death any French grenadier who should bring him a Prussian prisoner . 
Blucher outdid Roguet . 
Duhesme , the general of the Young Guard , hemmed in at the doorway of an inn at Genappe , surrendered his sword to a huzzar of death , who took the sword and slew the prisoner . 
The victory was completed by the assassination of the vanquished . 
Let us inflict punishment , since we are history : old Blucher disgraced himself . 
This ferocity put the finishing touch to the disaster . 
The desperate route traversed Genappe , traversed Quatre-Bras , traversed Gosselies , traversed Frasnes , traversed Charleroi , traversed Thuin , and only halted at the frontier . 
Alas ! 
and who , then , was fleeing in that manner ? 
The Grand Army . 
This vertigo , this terror , this downfall into ruin of the loftiest bravery which ever astounded history , -- is that causeless ? 
No . 
The shadow of an enormous right is projected athwart Waterloo . 
It is the day of destiny . 
The force which is mightier than man produced that day . 
Hence the terrified wrinkle of those brows ; hence all those great souls surrendering their swords . 
Those who had conquered Europe have fallen prone on the earth , with nothing left to say nor to do , feeling the present shadow of a terrible presence . 
Hoc erat in fatis . 
That day the perspective of the human race underwent a change . 
Waterloo is the hinge of the nineteenth century . 
The disappearance of the great man was necessary to the advent of the great century . 
Some one , a person to whom one replies not , took the responsibility on himself . 
The panic of heroes can be explained . 
In the battle of Waterloo there is something more than a cloud , there is something of the meteor . 
God has passed by . 
At nightfall , in a meadow near Genappe , Bernard and Bertrand seized by the skirt of his coat and detained a man , haggard , pensive , sinister , gloomy , who , dragged to that point by the current of the rout , had just dismounted , had passed the bridle of his horse over his arm , and with wild eye was returning alone to Waterloo . 
It was Napoleon , the immense somnambulist of this dream which had crumbled , essaying once more to advance . 
THE LAST SQUARE Several squares of the Guard , motionless amid this stream of the defeat , as rocks in running water , held their own until night . 
Night came , death also ; they awaited that double shadow , and , invincible , allowed themselves to be enveloped therein . 
Each regiment , isolated from the rest , and having no bond with the army , now shattered in every part , died alone . 
They had taken up position for this final action , some on the heights of Rossomme , others on the plain of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
There , abandoned , vanquished , terrible , those gloomy squares endured their death-throes in formidable fashion . 
Ulm , Wagram , Jena , Friedland , died with them . 
At twilight , towards nine o'clock in the evening , one of them was left at the foot of the plateau of Mont-Saint-Jean . 
In that fatal valley , at the foot of that declivity which the cuirassiers had ascended , now inundated by the masses of the English , under the converging fires of the victorious hostile cavalry , under a frightful density of projectiles , this square fought on . 
It was commanded by an obscure officer named Cambronne . 
At each discharge , the square diminished and replied . 
It replied to the grape-shot with a fusillade , continually contracting its four walls . 
The fugitives pausing breathless for a moment in the distance , listened in the darkness to that gloomy and ever-decreasing thunder . 
When this legion had been reduced to a handful , when nothing was left of their flag but a rag , when their guns , the bullets all gone , were no longer anything but clubs , when the heap of corpses was larger than the group of survivors , there reigned among the conquerors , around those men dying so sublimely , a sort of sacred terror , and the English artillery , taking breath , became silent . 
This furnished a sort of respite . 
These combatants had around them something in the nature of a swarm of spectres , silhouettes of men on horseback , the black profiles of cannon , the white sky viewed through wheels and gun-carriages , the colossal death 's - head , which the heroes saw constantly through the smoke , in the depths of the battle , advanced upon them and gazed at them . 
Through the shades of twilight they could hear the pieces being loaded ; the matches all lighted , like the eyes of tigers at night , formed a circle round their heads ; all the lintstocks of the English batteries approached the cannons , and then , with emotion , holding the supreme moment suspended above these men , an English general , Colville according to some , Maitland according to others , shouted to them , `` Surrender , brave Frenchmen ! '' 
Cambronne replied , '' ----- . '' 
-LCB- EDITOR 'S COMMENTARY : Another edition of this book has the word `` Merde ! '' 
in lieu of the ----- above . -RCB- 
CAMBRONNE If any French reader object to having his susceptibilities offended , one would have to refrain from repeating in his presence what is perhaps the finest reply that a Frenchman ever made . 
This would enjoin us from consigning something sublime to History . 
At our own risk and peril , let us violate this injunction . 
Now , then , among those giants there was one Titan , -- Cambronne . 
To make that reply and then perish , what could be grander ? 
For being willing to die is the same as to die ; and it was not this man 's fault if he survived after he was shot . 
The winner of the battle of Waterloo was not Napoleon , who was put to flight ; nor Wellington , giving way at four o'clock , in despair at five ; nor Blucher , who took no part in the engagement . 
The winner of Waterloo was Cambronne . 
To thunder forth such a reply at the lightning-flash that kills you is to conquer ! 
Thus to answer the Catastrophe , thus to speak to Fate , to give this pedestal to the future lion , to hurl such a challenge to the midnight rainstorm , to the treacherous wall of Hougomont , to the sunken road of Ohain , to Grouchy 's delay , to Blucher 's arrival , to be Irony itself in the tomb , to act so as to stand upright though fallen , to drown in two syllables the European coalition , to offer kings privies which the Caesars once knew , to make the lowest of words the most lofty by entwining with it the glory of France , insolently to end Waterloo with Mardigras , to finish Leonidas with Rabellais , to set the crown on this victory by a word impossible to speak , to lose the field and preserve history , to have the laugh on your side after such a carnage , -- this is immense ! 
It was an insult such as a thunder-cloud might hurl ! 
It reaches the grandeur of AEschylus ! 
Cambronne 's reply produces the effect of a violent break . 
'T is like the breaking of a heart under a weight of scorn . 
'T is the overflow of agony bursting forth . 
Who conquered ? 
Wellington ? 
No ! 
Had it not been for Blucher , he was lost . 
Was it Blucher ? 
No ! 
