She was happy ; above all she was stupefied . 
Such magnificent and beautiful things did not appear real . 
The doll frightened her , the gold piece frightened her . 
She trembled vaguely in the presence of this magnificence . 
The stranger alone did not frighten her . 
On the contrary , he reassured her . 
Ever since the preceding evening , amid all her amazement , even in her sleep , she had been thinking in her little childish mind of that man who seemed to be so poor and so sad , and who was so rich and so kind . 
Everything had changed for her since she had met that good man in the forest . 
Cosette , less happy than the most insignificant swallow of heaven , had never known what it was to take refuge under a mother 's shadow and under a wing . 
For the last five years , that is to say , as far back as her memory ran , the poor child had shivered and trembled . 
She had always been exposed completely naked to the sharp wind of adversity ; now it seemed to her she was clothed . 
Formerly her soul had seemed cold , now it was warm . 
Cosette was no longer afraid of the Thenardier . 
She was no longer alone ; there was some one there . 
She hastily set about her regular morning duties . 
That louis , which she had about her , in the very apron pocket whence the fifteen-sou piece had fallen on the night before , distracted her thoughts . 
She dared not touch it , but she spent five minutes in gazing at it , with her tongue hanging out , if the truth must be told . 
As she swept the staircase , she paused , remained standing there motionless , forgetful of her broom and of the entire universe , occupied in gazing at that star which was blazing at the bottom of her pocket . 
It was during one of these periods of contemplation that the Thenardier joined her . 
She had gone in search of Cosette at her husband 's orders . 
What was quite unprecedented , she neither struck her nor said an insulting word to her . 
`` Cosette , '' she said , almost gently , `` come immediately . '' 
An instant later Cosette entered the public room . 
The stranger took up the bundle which he had brought and untied it . 
This bundle contained a little woollen gown , an apron , a fustian bodice , a kerchief , a petticoat , woollen stockings , shoes -- a complete outfit for a girl of seven years . 
All was black . 
`` My child , '' said the man , `` take these , and go and dress yourself quickly . '' 
Daylight was appearing when those of the inhabitants of Montfermeil who had begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man leading a little girl dressed in mourning , and carrying a pink doll in her arms , pass along the road to Paris . 
They were going in the direction of Livry . 
It was our man and Cosette . 
No one knew the man ; as Cosette was no longer in rags , many did not recognize her . 
Cosette was going away . 
With whom ? 
She did not know . 
Whither ? 
She knew not . 
All that she understood was that she was leaving the Thenardier tavern behind her . 
No one had thought of bidding her farewell , nor had she thought of taking leave of any one . 
She was leaving that hated and hating house . 
Poor , gentle creature , whose heart had been repressed up to that hour ! 
Cosette walked along gravely , with her large eyes wide open , and gazing at the sky . 
She had put her louis in the pocket of her new apron . 
From time to time , she bent down and glanced at it ; then she looked at the good man . 
She felt something as though she were beside the good God . 
HE WHO SEEKS TO BETTER HIMSELF MAY RENDER HIS SITUATION WORSE Madame Thenardier had allowed her husband to have his own way , as was her wont . 
She had expected great results . 
When the man and Cosette had taken their departure , Thenardier allowed a full quarter of an hour to elapse ; then he took her aside and showed her the fifteen hundred francs . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
said she . 
It was the first time since they had set up housekeeping that she had dared to criticise one of the master 's acts . 
The blow told . 
`` You are right , in sooth , '' said he ; `` I am a fool . 
Give me my hat . '' 
He folded up the three bank-bills , thrust them into his pocket , and ran out in all haste ; but he made a mistake and turned to the right first . 
Some neighbors , of whom he made inquiries , put him on the track again ; the Lark and the man had been seen going in the direction of Livry . 
He followed these hints , walking with great strides , and talking to himself the while : -- `` That man is evidently a million dressed in yellow , and I am an animal . 
First he gave twenty sous , then five francs , then fifty francs , then fifteen hundred francs , all with equal readiness . 
He would have given fifteen thousand francs . 
But I shall overtake him . '' 
And then , that bundle of clothes prepared beforehand for the child ; all that was singular ; many mysteries lay concealed under it . 
One does not let mysteries out of one 's hand when one has once grasped them . 
The secrets of the wealthy are sponges of gold ; one must know how to subject them to pressure . 
All these thoughts whirled through his brain . 
`` I am an animal , '' said he . 
When one leaves Montfermeil and reaches the turn which the road takes that runs to Livry , it can be seen stretching out before one to a great distance across the plateau . 
On arriving there , he calculated that he ought to be able to see the old man and the child . 
He looked as far as his vision reached , and saw nothing . 
He made fresh inquiries , but he had wasted time . 
Some passers-by informed him that the man and child of whom he was in search had gone towards the forest in the direction of Gagny . 
He hastened in that direction . 
They were far in advance of him ; but a child walks slowly , and he walked fast ; and then , he was well acquainted with the country . 
All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead like a man who has forgotten some essential point and who is ready to retrace his steps . 
`` I ought to have taken my gun , '' said he to himself . 
Thenardier was one of those double natures which sometimes pass through our midst without our being aware of the fact , and who disappear without our finding them out , because destiny has only exhibited one side of them . 
It is the fate of many men to live thus half submerged . 
In a calm and even situation , Thenardier possessed all that is required to make -- we will not say to be -- what people have agreed to call an honest trader , a good bourgeois . 
At the same time certain circumstances being given , certain shocks arriving to bring his under-nature to the surface , he had all the requisites for a blackguard . 
He was a shopkeeper in whom there was some taint of the monster . 
Satan must have occasionally crouched down in some corner of the hovel in which Thenardier dwelt , and have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of this hideous masterpiece . 
After a momentary hesitation : -- `` Bah ! '' 
he thought ; `` they will have time to make their escape . '' 
And he pursued his road , walking rapidly straight ahead , and with almost an air of certainty , with the sagacity of a fox scenting a covey of partridges . 
In truth , when he had passed the ponds and had traversed in an oblique direction the large clearing which lies on the right of the Avenue de Bellevue , and reached that turf alley which nearly makes the circuit of the hill , and covers the arch of the ancient aqueduct of the Abbey of Chelles , he caught sight , over the top of the brushwood , of the hat on which he had already erected so many conjectures ; it was that man 's hat . 
The brushwood was not high . 
Thenardier recognized the fact that the man and Cosette were sitting there . 
The child could not be seen on account of her small size , but the head of her doll was visible . 
Thenardier was not mistaken . 
The man was sitting there , and letting Cosette get somewhat rested . 
The inn-keeper walked round the brushwood and presented himself abruptly to the eyes of those whom he was in search of . 
`` Pardon , excuse me , sir , '' he said , quite breathless , `` but here are your fifteen hundred francs . '' 
So saying , he handed the stranger the three bank-bills . 
The man raised his eyes . 
`` What is the meaning of this ? '' 
Thenardier replied respectfully : -- `` It means , sir , that I shall take back Cosette . '' 
Cosette shuddered , and pressed close to the old man . 
He replied , gazing to the very bottom of Thenardier 's eyes the while , and enunciating every syllable distinctly : -- `` You are go-ing to take back Co-sette ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , I am . 
I will tell you ; I have considered the matter . 
In fact , I have not the right to give her to you . 
I am an honest man , you see ; this child does not belong to me ; she belongs to her mother . 
