He passed the entire day with him , forgetful of food and sleep , praying to God for the soul of the condemned man , and praying the condemned man for his own . 
He told him the best truths , which are also the most simple . 
He was father , brother , friend ; he was bishop only to bless . 
He taught him everything , encouraged and consoled him . 
The man was on the point of dying in despair . 
Death was an abyss to him . 
As he stood trembling on its mournful brink , he recoiled with horror . 
He was not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent . 
His condemnation , which had been a profound shock , had , in a manner , broken through , here and there , that wall which separates us from the mystery of things , and which we call life . 
He gazed incessantly beyond this world through these fatal breaches , and beheld only darkness . 
The Bishop made him see light . 
On the following day , when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch , the Bishop was still there . 
He followed him , and exhibited himself to the eyes of the crowd in his purple camail and with his episcopal cross upon his neck , side by side with the criminal bound with cords . 
He mounted the tumbril with him , he mounted the scaffold with him . 
The sufferer , who had been so gloomy and cast down on the preceding day , was radiant . 
He felt that his soul was reconciled , and he hoped in God . 
The Bishop embraced him , and at the moment when the knife was about to fall , he said to him : `` God raises from the dead him whom man slays ; he whom his brothers have rejected finds his Father once more . 
Pray , believe , enter into life : the Father is there . '' 
When he descended from the scaffold , there was something in his look which made the people draw aside to let him pass . 
They did not know which was most worthy of admiration , his pallor or his serenity . 
On his return to the humble dwelling , which he designated , with a smile , as his palace , he said to his sister , `` I have just officiated pontifically . '' 
Since the most sublime things are often those which are the least understood , there were people in the town who said , when commenting on this conduct of the Bishop , `` It is affectation . '' 
This , however , was a remark which was confined to the drawing-rooms . 
The populace , which perceives no jest in holy deeds , was touched , and admired him . 
As for the Bishop , it was a shock to him to have beheld the guillotine , and it was a long time before he recovered from it . 
In fact , when the scaffold is there , all erected and prepared , it has something about it which produces hallucination . 
One may feel a certain indifference to the death penalty , one may refrain from pronouncing upon it , from saying yes or no , so long as one has not seen a guillotine with one 's own eyes : but if one encounters one of them , the shock is violent ; one is forced to decide , and to take part for or against . 
Some admire it , like de Maistre ; others execrate it , like Beccaria . 
The guillotine is the concretion of the law ; it is called vindicte ; it is not neutral , and it does not permit you to remain neutral . 
He who sees it shivers with the most mysterious of shivers . 
All social problems erect their interrogation point around this chopping-knife . 
The scaffold is a vision . 
The scaffold is not a piece of carpentry ; the scaffold is not a machine ; the scaffold is not an inert bit of mechanism constructed of wood , iron and cords . 
It seems as though it were a being , possessed of I know not what sombre initiative ; one would say that this piece of carpenter 's work saw , that this machine heard , that this mechanism understood , that this wood , this iron , and these cords were possessed of will . 
In the frightful meditation into which its presence casts the soul the scaffold appears in terrible guise , and as though taking part in what is going on . 
The scaffold is the accomplice of the executioner ; it devours , it eats flesh , it drinks blood ; the scaffold is a sort of monster fabricated by the judge and the carpenter , a spectre which seems to live with a horrible vitality composed of all the death which it has inflicted . 
Therefore , the impression was terrible and profound ; on the day following the execution , and on many succeeding days , the Bishop appeared to be crushed . 
The almost violent serenity of the funereal moment had disappeared ; the phantom of social justice tormented him . 
He , who generally returned from all his deeds with a radiant satisfaction , seemed to be reproaching himself . 
At times he talked to himself , and stammered lugubrious monologues in a low voice . 
This is one which his sister overheard one evening and preserved : `` I did not think that it was so monstrous . 
It is wrong to become absorbed in the divine law to such a degree as not to perceive human law . 
Death belongs to God alone . 
By what right do men touch that unknown thing ? '' 
In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished . 
Nevertheless , it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided passing the place of execution . 
M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick and dying . 
He did not ignore the fact that therein lay his greatest duty and his greatest labor . 
Widowed and orphaned families had no need to summon him ; he came of his own accord . 
He understood how to sit down and hold his peace for long hours beside the man who had lost the wife of his love , of the mother who had lost her child . 
As he knew the moment for silence he knew also the moment for speech . 
Oh , admirable consoler ! 
He sought not to efface sorrow by forgetfulness , but to magnify and dignify it by hope . 
He said : -- `` Have a care of the manner in which you turn towards the dead . 
Think not of that which perishes . 
Gaze steadily . 
You will perceive the living light of your well-beloved dead in the depths of heaven . '' 
He knew that faith is wholesome . 
He sought to counsel and calm the despairing man , by pointing out to him the resigned man , and to transform the grief which gazes upon a grave by showing him the grief which fixes its gaze upon a star . 
MONSEIGNEUR BIENVENU MADE HIS CASSOCKS LAST TOO LONG The private life of M. Myriel was filled with the same thoughts as his public life . 
The voluntary poverty in which the Bishop of D -- lived , would have been a solemn and charming sight for any one who could have viewed it close at hand . 
Like all old men , and like the majority of thinkers , he slept little . 
This brief slumber was profound . 
In the morning he meditated for an hour , then he said his mass , either at the cathedral or in his own house . 
His mass said , he broke his fast on rye bread dipped in the milk of his own cows . 
Then he set to work . 
A Bishop is a very busy man : he must every day receive the secretary of the bishopric , who is generally a canon , and nearly every day his vicars-general . 
He has congregations to reprove , privileges to grant , a whole ecclesiastical library to examine , -- prayer-books , diocesan catechisms , books of hours , etc. , -- charges to write , sermons to authorize , cures and mayors to reconcile , a clerical correspondence , an administrative correspondence ; on one side the State , on the other the Holy See ; and a thousand matters of business . 
What time was left to him , after these thousand details of business , and his offices and his breviary , he bestowed first on the necessitous , the sick , and the afflicted ; the time which was left to him from the afflicted , the sick , and the necessitous , he devoted to work . 
Sometimes he dug in his garden ; again , he read or wrote . 
He had but one word for both these kinds of toil ; he called them gardening . 
`` The mind is a garden , '' said he . 
Towards mid-day , when the weather was fine , he went forth and took a stroll in the country or in town , often entering lowly dwellings . 
He was seen walking alone , buried in his own thoughts , his eyes cast down , supporting himself on his long cane , clad in his wadded purple garment of silk , which was very warm , wearing purple stockings inside his coarse shoes , and surmounted by a flat hat which allowed three golden tassels of large bullion to droop from its three points . 
It was a perfect festival wherever he appeared . 
One would have said that his presence had something warming and luminous about it . 
The children and the old people came out to the doorsteps for the Bishop as for the sun . 
He bestowed his blessing , and they blessed him . 
They pointed out his house to any one who was in need of anything . 
Here and there he halted , accosted the little boys and girls , and smiled upon the mothers . 
He visited the poor so long as he had any money ; when he no longer had any , he visited the rich . 
As he made his cassocks last a long while , and did not wish to have it noticed , he never went out in the town without his wadded purple cloak . 
This inconvenienced him somewhat in summer . 
On his return , he dined . 
The dinner resembled his breakfast . 
At half-past eight in the evening he supped with his sister , Madame Magloire standing behind them and serving them at table . 
Nothing could be more frugal than this repast . 
If , however , the Bishop had one of his cures to supper , Madame Magloire took advantage of the opportunity to serve Monseigneur with some excellent fish from the lake , or with some fine game from the mountains . 
Every cure furnished the pretext for a good meal : the Bishop did not interfere . 
With that exception , his ordinary diet consisted only of vegetables boiled in water , and oil soup . 
Thus it was said in the town , when the Bishop does not indulge in the cheer of a cure , he indulges in the cheer of a trappist . 
After supper he conversed for half an hour with Mademoiselle Baptistine and Madame Magloire ; then he retired to his own room and set to writing , sometimes on loose sheets , and again on the margin of some folio . 
He was a man of letters and rather learned . 
He left behind him five or six very curious manuscripts ; among others , a dissertation on this verse in Genesis , In the beginning , the spirit of God floated upon the waters . 
With this verse he compares three texts : the Arabic verse which says , The winds of God blew ; Flavius Josephus who says , A wind from above was precipitated upon the earth ; and finally , the Chaldaic paraphrase of Onkelos , which renders it , A wind coming from God blew upon the face of the waters . 
In another dissertation , he examines the theological works of Hugo , Bishop of Ptolemais , great-grand-uncle to the writer of this book , and establishes the fact , that to this bishop must be attributed the divers little works published during the last century , under the pseudonym of Barleycourt . 
Sometimes , in the midst of his reading , no matter what the book might be which he had in his hand , he would suddenly fall into a profound meditation , whence he only emerged to write a few lines on the pages of the volume itself . 
These lines have often no connection whatever with the book which contains them . 
We now have under our eyes a note written by him on the margin of a quarto entitled Correspondence of Lord Germain with Generals Clinton , Cornwallis , and the Admirals on the American station . 
Versailles , Poincot , book-seller ; and Paris , Pissot , bookseller , Quai des Augustins . 
