A few moments later he was breakfasting at the very table at which Jean Valjean had sat on the previous evening . 
As he ate his breakfast , Monseigneur Welcome remarked gayly to his sister , who said nothing , and to Madame Magloire , who was grumbling under her breath , that one really does not need either fork or spoon , even of wood , in order to dip a bit of bread in a cup of milk . 
`` A pretty idea , truly , '' said Madame Magloire to herself , as she went and came , `` to take in a man like that ! 
and to lodge him close to one 's self ! 
And how fortunate that he did nothing but steal ! 
Ah , mon Dieu ! 
it makes one shudder to think of it ! '' 
As the brother and sister were about to rise from the table , there came a knock at the door . 
`` Come in , '' said the Bishop . 
The door opened . 
A singular and violent group made its appearance on the threshold . 
Three men were holding a fourth man by the collar . 
The three men were gendarmes ; the other was Jean Valjean . 
A brigadier of gendarmes , who seemed to be in command of the group , was standing near the door . 
He entered and advanced to the Bishop , making a military salute . 
`` Monseigneur -- '' said he . 
At this word , Jean Valjean , who was dejected and seemed overwhelmed , raised his head with an air of stupefaction . 
`` Monseigneur ! '' 
he murmured . 
`` So he is not the cure ? '' 
`` Silence ! '' 
said the gendarme . 
`` He is Monseigneur the Bishop . '' 
In the meantime , Monseigneur Bienvenu had advanced as quickly as his great age permitted . 
`` Ah ! 
here you are ! '' 
he exclaimed , looking at Jean Valjean . 
`` I am glad to see you . 
Well , but how is this ? 
I gave you the candlesticks too , which are of silver like the rest , and for which you can certainly get two hundred francs . 
Why did you not carry them away with your forks and spoons ? '' 
Jean Valjean opened his eyes wide , and stared at the venerable Bishop with an expression which no human tongue can render any account of . 
`` Monseigneur , '' said the brigadier of gendarmes , `` so what this man said is true , then ? 
We came across him . 
He was walking like a man who is running away . 
We stopped him to look into the matter . 
He had this silver -- '' `` And he told you , '' interposed the Bishop with a smile , `` that it had been given to him by a kind old fellow of a priest with whom he had passed the night ? 
I see how the matter stands . 
And you have brought him back here ? 
It is a mistake . '' 
`` In that case , '' replied the brigadier , `` we can let him go ? '' 
`` Certainly , '' replied the Bishop . 
The gendarmes released Jean Valjean , who recoiled . 
`` Is it true that I am to be released ? '' 
he said , in an almost inarticulate voice , and as though he were talking in his sleep . 
`` Yes , thou art released ; dost thou not understand ? '' 
said one of the gendarmes . 
`` My friend , '' resumed the Bishop , `` before you go , here are your candlesticks . 
Take them . '' 
He stepped to the chimney-piece , took the two silver candlesticks , and brought them to Jean Valjean . 
The two women looked on without uttering a word , without a gesture , without a look which could disconcert the Bishop . 
Jean Valjean was trembling in every limb . 
He took the two candlesticks mechanically , and with a bewildered air . 
`` Now , '' said the Bishop , `` go in peace . 
By the way , when you return , my friend , it is not necessary to pass through the garden . 
You can always enter and depart through the street door . 
It is never fastened with anything but a latch , either by day or by night . '' 
Then , turning to the gendarmes : -- `` You may retire , gentlemen . '' 
The gendarmes retired . 
Jean Valjean was like a man on the point of fainting . 
The Bishop drew near to him , and said in a low voice : -- `` Do not forget , never forget , that you have promised to use this money in becoming an honest man . '' 
Jean Valjean , who had no recollection of ever having promised anything , remained speechless . 
The Bishop had emphasized the words when he uttered them . 
He resumed with solemnity : -- `` Jean Valjean , my brother , you no longer belong to evil , but to good . 
It is your soul that I buy from you ; I withdraw it from black thoughts and the spirit of perdition , and I give it to God . '' 
LITTLE GERVAIS Jean Valjean left the town as though he were fleeing from it . 
He set out at a very hasty pace through the fields , taking whatever roads and paths presented themselves to him , without perceiving that he was incessantly retracing his steps . 
He wandered thus the whole morning , without having eaten anything and without feeling hungry . 
He was the prey of a throng of novel sensations . 
He was conscious of a sort of rage ; he did not know against whom it was directed . 
He could not have told whether he was touched or humiliated . 
There came over him at moments a strange emotion which he resisted and to which he opposed the hardness acquired during the last twenty years of his life . 
This state of mind fatigued him . 
He perceived with dismay that the sort of frightful calm which the injustice of his misfortune had conferred upon him was giving way within him . 
He asked himself what would replace this . 
At times he would have actually preferred to be in prison with the gendarmes , and that things should not have happened in this way ; it would have agitated him less . 
Although the season was tolerably far advanced , there were still a few late flowers in the hedge-rows here and there , whose odor as he passed through them in his march recalled to him memories of his childhood . 
These memories were almost intolerable to him , it was so long since they had recurred to him . 
Unutterable thoughts assembled within him in this manner all day long . 
As the sun declined to its setting , casting long shadows athwart the soil from every pebble , Jean Valjean sat down behind a bush upon a large ruddy plain , which was absolutely deserted . 
There was nothing on the horizon except the Alps . 
Not even the spire of a distant village . 
Jean Valjean might have been three leagues distant from D -- A path which intersected the plain passed a few paces from the bush . 
In the middle of this meditation , which would have contributed not a little to render his rags terrifying to any one who might have encountered him , a joyous sound became audible . 
He turned his head and saw a little Savoyard , about ten years of age , coming up the path and singing , his hurdy-gurdy on his hip , and his marmot-box on his back , One of those gay and gentle children , who go from land to land affording a view of their knees through the holes in their trousers . 
Without stopping his song , the lad halted in his march from time to time , and played at knuckle-bones with some coins which he had in his hand -- his whole fortune , probably . 
Among this money there was one forty-sou piece . 
The child halted beside the bush , without perceiving Jean Valjean , and tossed up his handful of sous , which , up to that time , he had caught with a good deal of adroitness on the back of his hand . 
This time the forty-sou piece escaped him , and went rolling towards the brushwood until it reached Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean set his foot upon it . 
In the meantime , the child had looked after his coin and had caught sight of him . 
He showed no astonishment , but walked straight up to the man . 
The spot was absolutely solitary . 
As far as the eye could see there was not a person on the plain or on the path . 
The only sound was the tiny , feeble cries of a flock of birds of passage , which was traversing the heavens at an immense height . 
The child was standing with his back to the sun , which cast threads of gold in his hair and empurpled with its blood-red gleam the savage face of Jean Valjean . 
`` Sir , '' said the little Savoyard , with that childish confidence which is composed of ignorance and innocence , `` my money . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Little Gervais , sir . '' 
