`` I know that secret as well as the others , '' said Marius . 
The personage felt the necessity of lowering his price a trifle . 
`` Monsieur le Baron , say ten thousand francs and I will speak . '' 
`` I repeat to you that there is nothing which you can tell me . 
I know what you wish to say to me . '' 
A fresh flash gleamed in the man 's eye . 
He exclaimed : `` But I must dine to-day , nevertheless . 
It is an extraordinary secret , I tell you . 
Monsieur le Baron , I will speak . 
I speak . 
Give me twenty francs . '' 
Marius gazed intently at him : `` I know your extraordinary secret , just as I knew Jean Valjean 's name , just as I know your name . '' 
`` My name ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` That is not difficult , Monsieur le Baron . 
I had the honor to write to you and to tell it to you . 
Thenard . '' '' 
-- Dier . '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
`` Thenardier . '' 
`` Who 's that ? '' 
In danger the porcupine bristles up , the beetle feigns death , the old guard forms in a square ; this man burst into laughter . 
Then he flicked a grain of dust from the sleeve of his coat with a fillip . 
Marius continued : `` You are also Jondrette the workman , Fabantou the comedian , Genflot the poet , Don Alvares the Spaniard , and Mistress Balizard . '' 
`` Mistress what ? '' 
`` And you kept a pot-house at Montfermeil . '' 
`` A pot-house ! 
Never . '' 
`` And I tell you that your name is Thenardier . '' 
`` I deny it . '' 
`` And that you are a rascal . 
Here . '' 
And Marius drew a bank-note from his pocket and flung it in his face . 
`` Thanks ! 
Pardon me ! 
five hundred francs ! 
Monsieur le Baron ! '' 
And the man , overcome , bowed , seized the note and examined it . 
`` Five hundred francs ! '' 
he began again , taken aback . 
And he stammered in a low voice : `` An honest rustler . '' 
-LSB- 69 -RSB- -LSB- 69 -RSB- Un fafiot serieux . 
Fafiot is the slang term for a bank-bill , derived from its rustling noise . 
Then brusquely : `` Well , so be it ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` Let us put ourselves at our ease . '' 
And with the agility of a monkey , flinging back his hair , tearing off his spectacles , and withdrawing from his nose by sleight of hand the two quills of which mention was recently made , and which the reader has also met with on another page of this book , he took off his face as the man takes off his hat . 
His eye lighted up ; his uneven brow , with hollows in some places and bumps in others , hideously wrinkled at the top , was laid bare , his nose had become as sharp as a beak ; the fierce and sagacious profile of the man of prey reappeared . 
`` Monsieur le Baron is infallible , '' he said in a clear voice whence all nasal twang had disappeared , `` I am Thenardier . '' 
And he straightened up his crooked back . 
Thenardier , for it was really he , was strangely surprised ; he would have been troubled , had he been capable of such a thing . 
He had come to bring astonishment , and it was he who had received it . 
This humiliation had been worth five hundred francs to him , and , taking it all in all , he accepted it ; but he was none the less bewildered . 
He beheld this Baron Pontmercy for the first time , and , in spite of his disguise , this Baron Pontmercy recognized him , and recognized him thoroughly . 
And not only was this Baron perfectly informed as to Thenardier , but he seemed well posted as to Jean Valjean . 
Who was this almost beardless young man , who was so glacial and so generous , who knew people 's names , who knew all their names , and who opened his purse to them , who bullied rascals like a judge , and who paid them like a dupe ? 
Thenardier , the reader will remember , although he had been Marius ' neighbor , had never seen him , which is not unusual in Paris ; he had formerly , in a vague way , heard his daughters talk of a very poor young man named Marius who lived in the house . 
He had written to him , without knowing him , the letter with which the reader is acquainted . 
No connection between that Marius and M. le Baron Pontmercy was possible in his mind . 
As for the name Pontmercy , it will be recalled that , on the battlefield of Waterloo , he had only heard the last two syllables , for which he always entertained the legitimate scorn which one owes to what is merely an expression of thanks . 
However , through his daughter Azelma , who had started on the scent of the married pair on the 16th of February , and through his own personal researches , he had succeeded in learning many things , and , from the depths of his own gloom , he had contrived to grasp more than one mysterious clew . 
He had discovered , by dint of industry , or , at least , by dint of induction , he had guessed who the man was whom he had encountered on a certain day in the Grand Sewer . 
From the man he had easily reached the name . 
He knew that Madame la Baronne Pontmercy was Cosette . 
But he meant to be discreet in that quarter . 
Who was Cosette ? 
He did not know exactly himself . 
He did , indeed , catch an inkling of illegitimacy , the history of Fantine had always seemed to him equivocal ; but what was the use of talking about that ? 
in order to cause himself to be paid for his silence ? 
He had , or thought he had , better wares than that for sale . 
And , according to all appearances , if he were to come and make to the Baron Pontmercy this revelation -- and without proof : `` Your wife is a bastard , '' the only result would be to attract the boot of the husband towards the loins of the revealer . 
From Thenardier 's point of view , the conversation with Marius had not yet begun . 
He ought to have drawn back , to have modified his strategy , to have abandoned his position , to have changed his front ; but nothing essential had been compromised as yet , and he had five hundred francs in his pocket . 
Moreover , he had something decisive to say , and , even against this very well-informed and well-armed Baron Pontmercy , he felt himself strong . 
For men of Thenardier 's nature , every dialogue is a combat . 
In the one in which he was about to engage , what was his situation ? 
He did not know to whom he was speaking , but he did know of what he was speaking , he made this rapid review of his inner forces , and after having said : `` I am Thenardier , '' he waited . 
Marius had become thoughtful . 
So he had hold of Thenardier at last . 
That man whom he had so greatly desired to find was before him . 
He could honor Colonel Pontmercy 's recommendation . 
He felt humiliated that that hero should have owned anything to this villain , and that the letter of change drawn from the depths of the tomb by his father upon him , Marius , had been protested up to that day . 
It also seemed to him , in the complex state of his mind towards Thenardier , that there was occasion to avenge the Colonel for the misfortune of having been saved by such a rascal . 
In any case , he was content . 
He was about to deliver the Colonel 's shade from this unworthy creditor at last , and it seemed to him that he was on the point of rescuing his father 's memory from the debtors ' prison . 
By the side of this duty there was another -- to elucidate , if possible , the source of Cosette 's fortune . 
The opportunity appeared to present itself . 
Perhaps Thenardier knew something . 
It might prove useful to see the bottom of this man . 
He commenced with this . 
Thenardier had caused the `` honest rustler '' to disappear in his fob , and was gazing at Marius with a gentleness that was almost tender . 
Marius broke the silence . 
`` Thenardier , I have told you your name . 
Now , would you like to have me tell you your secret -- the one that you came here to reveal to me ? 
I have information of my own , also . 
You shall see that I know more about it than you do . 
Jean Valjean , as you have said , is an assassin and a thief . 
A thief , because he robbed a wealthy manufacturer , whose ruin he brought about . 
An assassin , because he assassinated police-agent Javert . '' 
`` I do n't understand , sir , '' ejaculated Thenardier . 
