The young men were comrades ; the young girls were friends . 
Such loves are always accompanied by such friendships . 
Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things ; the proof of this is that , after making all due allowances for these little irregular households , Favourite , Zephine , and Dahlia were philosophical young women , while Fantine was a good girl . 
Good ! 
some one will exclaim ; and Tholomyes ? 
Solomon would reply that love forms a part of wisdom . 
We will confine ourselves to saying that the love of Fantine was a first love , a sole love , a faithful love . 
She alone , of all the four , was not called `` thou '' by a single one of them . 
Fantine was one of those beings who blossom , so to speak , from the dregs of the people . 
Though she had emerged from the most unfathomable depths of social shadow , she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymous and the unknown . 
She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents ? 
Who can say ? 
She had never known father or mother . 
She was called Fantine . 
Why Fantine ? 
She had never borne any other name . 
At the epoch of her birth the Directory still existed . 
She had no family name ; she had no family ; no baptismal name ; the Church no longer existed . 
She bore the name which pleased the first random passer-by , who had encountered her , when a very small child , running bare-legged in the street . 
She received the name as she received the water from the clouds upon her brow when it rained . 
She was called little Fantine . 
No one knew more than that . 
This human creature had entered life in just this way . 
At the age of ten , Fantine quitted the town and went to service with some farmers in the neighborhood . 
At fifteen she came to Paris `` to seek her fortune . '' 
Fantine was beautiful , and remained pure as long as she could . 
She was a lovely blonde , with fine teeth . 
She had gold and pearls for her dowry ; but her gold was on her head , and her pearls were in her mouth . 
She worked for her living ; then , still for the sake of her living , -- for the heart , also , has its hunger , -- she loved . 
She loved Tholomyes . 
An amour for him ; passion for her . 
The streets of the Latin quarter , filled with throngs of students and grisettes , saw the beginning of their dream . 
Fantine had long evaded Tholomyes in the mazes of the hill of the Pantheon , where so many adventurers twine and untwine , but in such a way as constantly to encounter him again . 
There is a way of avoiding which resembles seeking . 
In short , the eclogue took place . 
Blachevelle , Listolier , and Fameuil formed a sort of group of which Tholomyes was the head . 
It was he who possessed the wit . 
Tholomyes was the antique old student ; he was rich ; he had an income of four thousand francs ; four thousand francs ! 
a splendid scandal on Mount Sainte-Genevieve . 
Tholomyes was a fast man of thirty , and badly preserved . 
He was wrinkled and toothless , and he had the beginning of a bald spot , of which he himself said with sadness , the skull at thirty , the knee at forty . 
His digestion was mediocre , and he had been attacked by a watering in one eye . 
But in proportion as his youth disappeared , gayety was kindled ; he replaced his teeth with buffooneries , his hair with mirth , his health with irony , his weeping eye laughed incessantly . 
He was dilapidated but still in flower . 
His youth , which was packing up for departure long before its time , beat a retreat in good order , bursting with laughter , and no one saw anything but fire . 
He had had a piece rejected at the Vaudeville . 
He made a few verses now and then . 
In addition to this he doubted everything to the last degree , which is a vast force in the eyes of the weak . 
Being thus ironical and bald , he was the leader . 
Iron is an English word . 
Is it possible that irony is derived from it ? 
One day Tholomyes took the three others aside , with the gesture of an oracle , and said to them : -- `` Fantine , Dahlia , Zephine , and Favourite have been teasing us for nearly a year to give them a surprise . 
We have promised them solemnly that we would . 
They are forever talking about it to us , to me in particular , just as the old women in Naples cry to Saint Januarius , ` Faccia gialluta , fa o miracolo , Yellow face , perform thy miracle , ' so our beauties say to me incessantly , ` Tholomyes , when will you bring forth your surprise ? ' 
At the same time our parents keep writing to us . 
Pressure on both sides . 
The moment has arrived , it seems to me ; let us discuss the question . '' 
Thereupon , Tholomyes lowered his voice and articulated something so mirthful , that a vast and enthusiastic grin broke out upon the four mouths simultaneously , and Blachevelle exclaimed , `` That is an idea . '' 
A smoky tap-room presented itself ; they entered , and the remainder of their confidential colloquy was lost in shadow . 
The result of these shades was a dazzling pleasure party which took place on the following Sunday , the four young men inviting the four young girls . 
FOUR AND FOUR It is hard nowadays to picture to one 's self what a pleasure-trip of students and grisettes to the country was like , forty-five years ago . 
The suburbs of Paris are no longer the same ; the physiognomy of what may be called circumparisian life has changed completely in the last half-century ; where there was the cuckoo , there is the railway car ; where there was a tender-boat , there is now the steamboat ; people speak of Fecamp nowadays as they spoke of Saint-Cloud in those days . 
The Paris of 1862 is a city which has France for its outskirts . 
The four couples conscientiously went through with all the country follies possible at that time . 
The vacation was beginning , and it was a warm , bright , summer day . 
On the preceding day , Favourite , the only one who knew how to write , had written the following to Tholomyes in the name of the four : `` It is a good hour to emerge from happiness . '' 
That is why they rose at five o'clock in the morning . 
Then they went to Saint-Cloud by the coach , looked at the dry cascade and exclaimed , `` This must be very beautiful when there is water ! '' 
They breakfasted at the Tete-Noir , where Castaing had not yet been ; they treated themselves to a game of ring-throwing under the quincunx of trees of the grand fountain ; they ascended Diogenes ' lantern , they gambled for macaroons at the roulette establishment of the Pont de Sevres , picked bouquets at Pateaux , bought reed-pipes at Neuilly , ate apple tarts everywhere , and were perfectly happy . 
The young girls rustled and chatted like warblers escaped from their cage . 
It was a perfect delirium . 
From time to time they bestowed little taps on the young men . 
Matutinal intoxication of life ! 
adorable years ! 
the wings of the dragonfly quiver . 
Oh , whoever you may be , do you not remember ? 
Have you rambled through the brushwood , holding aside the branches , on account of the charming head which is coming on behind you ? 
Have you slid , laughing , down a slope all wet with rain , with a beloved woman holding your hand , and crying , `` Ah , my new boots ! 
what a state they are in ! '' 
Let us say at once that that merry obstacle , a shower , was lacking in the case of this good-humored party , although Favourite had said as they set out , with a magisterial and maternal tone , `` The slugs are crawling in the paths , -- a sign of rain , children . '' 
All four were madly pretty . 
A good old classic poet , then famous , a good fellow who had an Eleonore , M. le Chevalier de Labouisse , as he strolled that day beneath the chestnut-trees of Saint-Cloud , saw them pass about ten o'clock in the morning , and exclaimed , `` There is one too many of them , '' as he thought of the Graces . 
Favourite , Blachevelle 's friend , the one aged three and twenty , the old one , ran on in front under the great green boughs , jumped the ditches , stalked distractedly over bushes , and presided over this merry-making with the spirit of a young female faun . 
Zephine and Dahlia , whom chance had made beautiful in such a way that they set each off when they were together , and completed each other , never left each other , more from an instinct of coquetry than from friendship , and clinging to each other , they assumed English poses ; the first keepsakes had just made their appearance , melancholy was dawning for women , as later on , Byronism dawned for men ; and the hair of the tender sex began to droop dolefully . 
Zephine and Dahlia had their hair dressed in rolls . 
Listolier and Fameuil , who were engaged in discussing their professors , explained to Fantine the difference that existed between M. Delvincourt and M. Blondeau . 
Blachevelle seemed to have been created expressly to carry Favourite 's single-bordered , imitation India shawl of Ternaux 's manufacture , on his arm on Sundays . 
Tholomyes followed , dominating the group . 
He was very gay , but one felt the force of government in him ; there was dictation in his joviality ; his principal ornament was a pair of trousers of elephant-leg pattern of nankeen , with straps of braided copper wire ; he carried a stout rattan worth two hundred francs in his hand , and , as he treated himself to everything , a strange thing called a cigar in his mouth . 
Nothing was sacred to him ; he smoked . 
`` That Tholomyes is astounding ! '' 
said the others , with veneration . 
`` What trousers ! 
What energy ! '' 
As for Fantine , she was a joy to behold . 
Her splendid teeth had evidently received an office from God , -- laughter . 
She preferred to carry her little hat of sewed straw , with its long white strings , in her hand rather than on her head . 
Her thick blond hair , which was inclined to wave , and which easily uncoiled , and which it was necessary to fasten up incessantly , seemed made for the flight of Galatea under the willows . 
Her rosy lips babbled enchantingly . 
The corners of her mouth voluptuously turned up , as in the antique masks of Erigone , had an air of encouraging the audacious ; but her long , shadowy lashes drooped discreetly over the jollity of the lower part of the face as though to call a halt . 
