He was on the point of retreating when his eye fell upon the fireplace -- one of those vast tavern chimneys where there is always so little fire when there is any fire at all , and which are so cold to look at . 
There was no fire in this one , there was not even ashes ; but there was something which attracted the stranger 's gaze , nevertheless . 
It was two tiny children 's shoes , coquettish in shape and unequal in size . 
The traveller recalled the graceful and immemorial custom in accordance with which children place their shoes in the chimney on Christmas eve , there to await in the darkness some sparkling gift from their good fairy . 
Eponine and Azelma had taken care not to omit this , and each of them had set one of her shoes on the hearth . 
The traveller bent over them . 
The fairy , that is to say , their mother , had already paid her visit , and in each he saw a brand-new and shining ten-sou piece . 
The man straightened himself up , and was on the point of withdrawing , when far in , in the darkest corner of the hearth , he caught sight of another object . 
He looked at it , and recognized a wooden shoe , a frightful shoe of the coarsest description , half dilapidated and all covered with ashes and dried mud . 
It was Cosette 's sabot . 
Cosette , with that touching trust of childhood , which can always be deceived yet never discouraged , had placed her shoe on the hearth-stone also . 
Hope in a child who has never known anything but despair is a sweet and touching thing . 
There was nothing in this wooden shoe . 
The stranger fumbled in his waistcoat , bent over and placed a louis d'or in Cosette 's shoe . 
Then he regained his own chamber with the stealthy tread of a wolf . 
THENARDIER AND HIS MANOEUVRES On the following morning , two hours at least before day-break , Thenardier , seated beside a candle in the public room of the tavern , pen in hand , was making out the bill for the traveller with the yellow coat . 
His wife , standing beside him , and half bent over him , was following him with her eyes . 
They exchanged not a word . 
On the one hand , there was profound meditation , on the other , the religious admiration with which one watches the birth and development of a marvel of the human mind . 
A noise was audible in the house ; it was the Lark sweeping the stairs . 
After the lapse of a good quarter of an hour , and some erasures , Thenardier produced the following masterpiece : -- BILL OF THE GENTLEMAN IN No. 1 . 
Supper ... 3 francs . 
Chamber ... 10 '' Candle ... 5 '' Fire ... 4 '' Service ... 1 '' ---------- Total ... 23 francs . 
Service was written servisse . 
`` Twenty-three francs ! '' 
cried the woman , with an enthusiasm which was mingled with some hesitation . 
Like all great artists , Thenardier was dissatisfied . 
`` Peuh ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
It was the accent of Castlereagh auditing France 's bill at the Congress of Vienna . 
`` Monsieur Thenardier , you are right ; he certainly owes that , '' murmured the wife , who was thinking of the doll bestowed on Cosette in the presence of her daughters . 
`` It is just , but it is too much . 
He will not pay it . '' 
Thenardier laughed coldly , as usual , and said : -- `` He will pay . '' 
This laugh was the supreme assertion of certainty and authority . 
That which was asserted in this manner must needs be so . 
His wife did not insist . 
She set about arranging the table ; her husband paced the room . 
A moment later he added : -- `` I owe full fifteen hundred francs ! '' 
He went and seated himself in the chimney-corner , meditating , with his feet among the warm ashes . 
`` Ah ! 
by the way , '' resumed his wife , `` you do n't forget that I 'm going to turn Cosette out of doors to-day ? 
The monster ! 
She breaks my heart with that doll of hers ! 
I 'd rather marry Louis XVIII . 
than keep her another day in the house ! '' 
Thenardier lighted his pipe , and replied between two puffs : -- `` You will hand that bill to the man . '' 
Then he went out . 
Hardly had he left the room when the traveller entered . 
Thenardier instantly reappeared behind him and remained motionless in the half-open door , visible only to his wife . 
The yellow man carried his bundle and his cudgel in his hand . 
`` Up so early ? '' 
said Madame Thenardier ; `` is Monsieur leaving us already ? '' 
As she spoke thus , she was twisting the bill about in her hands with an embarrassed air , and making creases in it with her nails . 
Her hard face presented a shade which was not habitual with it , -- timidity and scruples . 
To present such a bill to a man who had so completely the air `` of a poor wretch '' seemed difficult to her . 
The traveller appeared to be preoccupied and absent-minded . 
He replied : -- `` Yes , Madame , I am going . '' 
`` So Monsieur has no business in Montfermeil ? '' 
`` No , I was passing through . 
That is all . 
What do I owe you , Madame , '' he added . 
The Thenardier silently handed him the folded bill . 
The man unfolded the paper and glanced at it ; but his thoughts were evidently elsewhere . 
`` Madame , '' he resumed , `` is business good here in Montfermeil ? '' 
`` So so , Monsieur , '' replied the Thenardier , stupefied at not witnessing another sort of explosion . 
She continued , in a dreary and lamentable tone : -- `` Oh ! 
Monsieur , times are so hard ! 
and then , we have so few bourgeois in the neighborhood ! 
All the people are poor , you see . 
If we had not , now and then , some rich and generous travellers like Monsieur , we should not get along at all . 
We have so many expenses . 
Just see , that child is costing us our very eyes . '' 
`` What child ? '' 
`` Why , the little one , you know ! 
Cosette -- the Lark , as she is called hereabouts ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the man . 
She went on : -- `` How stupid these peasants are with their nicknames ! 
She has more the air of a bat than of a lark . 
You see , sir , we do not ask charity , and we can not bestow it . 
We earn nothing and we have to pay out a great deal . 
The license , the imposts , the door and window tax , the hundredths ! 
Monsieur is aware that the government demands a terrible deal of money . 
And then , I have my daughters . 
I have no need to bring up other people 's children . '' 
The man resumed , in that voice which he strove to render indifferent , and in which there lingered a tremor : -- `` What if one were to rid you of her ? '' 
`` Who ? 
Cosette ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
The landlady 's red and violent face brightened up hideously . 
`` Ah ! 
sir , my dear sir , take her , keep her , lead her off , carry her away , sugar her , stuff her with truffles , drink her , eat her , and the blessings of the good holy Virgin and of all the saints of paradise be upon you ! '' 
`` Agreed . '' 
`` Really ! 
You will take her away ? '' 
`` I will take her away . '' 
`` Immediately ? '' 
`` Immediately . 
Call the child . '' 
