It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men , as we have already pointed out , and which , on occasion , extended even to things . 
He lived without disdain . 
He was indulgent towards God 's creation . 
Every man , even the best , has within him a thoughtless harshness which he reserves for animals . 
The Bishop of D -- had none of that harshness , which is peculiar to many priests , nevertheless . 
He did not go as far as the Brahmin , but he seemed to have weighed this saying of Ecclesiastes : `` Who knoweth whither the soul of the animal goeth ? '' 
Hideousness of aspect , deformity of instinct , troubled him not , and did not arouse his indignation . 
He was touched , almost softened by them . 
It seemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond the bounds of life which is apparent , the cause , the explanation , or the excuse for them . 
He seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties . 
He examined without wrath , and with the eye of a linguist who is deciphering a palimpsest , that portion of chaos which still exists in nature . 
This revery sometimes caused him to utter odd sayings . 
One morning he was in his garden , and thought himself alone , but his sister was walking behind him , unseen by him : suddenly he paused and gazed at something on the ground ; it was a large , black , hairy , frightful spider . 
His sister heard him say : -- `` Poor beast ! 
It is not its fault ! '' 
Why not mention these almost divinely childish sayings of kindness ? 
Puerile they may be ; but these sublime puerilities were peculiar to Saint Francis d'Assisi and of Marcus Aurelius . 
One day he sprained his ankle in his effort to avoid stepping on an ant . 
Thus lived this just man . 
Sometimes he fell asleep in his garden , and then there was nothing more venerable possible . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu had formerly been , if the stories anent his youth , and even in regard to his manhood , were to be believed , a passionate , and , possibly , a violent man . 
His universal suavity was less an instinct of nature than the result of a grand conviction which had filtered into his heart through the medium of life , and had trickled there slowly , thought by thought ; for , in a character , as in a rock , there may exist apertures made by drops of water . 
These hollows are uneffaceable ; these formations are indestructible . 
In 1815 , as we think we have already said , he reached his seventy-fifth birthday , but he did not appear to be more than sixty . 
He was not tall ; he was rather plump ; and , in order to combat this tendency , he was fond of taking long strolls on foot ; his step was firm , and his form was but slightly bent , a detail from which we do not pretend to draw any conclusion . 
Gregory XVI. , at the age of eighty , held himself erect and smiling , which did not prevent him from being a bad bishop . 
Monseigneur Welcome had what the people term a `` fine head , '' but so amiable was he that they forgot that it was fine . 
When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his charms , and of which we have already spoken , people felt at their ease with him , and joy seemed to radiate from his whole person . 
His fresh and ruddy complexion , his very white teeth , all of which he had preserved , and which were displayed by his smile , gave him that open and easy air which cause the remark to be made of a man , `` He 's a good fellow '' ; and of an old man , `` He is a fine man . '' 
That , it will be recalled , was the effect which he produced upon Napoleon . 
On the first encounter , and to one who saw him for the first time , he was nothing , in fact , but a fine man . 
But if one remained near him for a few hours , and beheld him in the least degree pensive , the fine man became gradually transfigured , and took on some imposing quality , I know not what ; his broad and serious brow , rendered august by his white locks , became august also by virtue of meditation ; majesty radiated from his goodness , though his goodness ceased not to be radiant ; one experienced something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smiling angel slowly unfold his wings , without ceasing to smile . 
Respect , an unutterable respect , penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your heart , and one felt that one had before him one of those strong , thoroughly tried , and indulgent souls where thought is so grand that it can no longer be anything but gentle . 
As we have seen , prayer , the celebration of the offices of religion , alms-giving , the consolation of the afflicted , the cultivation of a bit of land , fraternity , frugality , hospitality , renunciation , confidence , study , work , filled every day of his life . 
Filled is exactly the word ; certainly the Bishop 's day was quite full to the brim , of good words and good deeds . 
Nevertheless , it was not complete if cold or rainy weather prevented his passing an hour or two in his garden before going to bed , and after the two women had retired . 
It seemed to be a sort of rite with him , to prepare himself for slumber by meditation in the presence of the grand spectacles of the nocturnal heavens . 
Sometimes , if the two old women were not asleep , they heard him pacing slowly along the walks at a very advanced hour of the night . 
He was there alone , communing with himself , peaceful , adoring , comparing the serenity of his heart with the serenity of the ether , moved amid the darkness by the visible splendor of the constellations and the invisible splendor of God , opening his heart to the thoughts which fall from the Unknown . 
At such moments , while he offered his heart at the hour when nocturnal flowers offer their perfume , illuminated like a lamp amid the starry night , as he poured himself out in ecstasy in the midst of the universal radiance of creation , he could not have told himself , probably , what was passing in his spirit ; he felt something take its flight from him , and something descend into him . 
Mysterious exchange of the abysses of the soul with the abysses of the universe ! 
He thought of the grandeur and presence of God ; of the future eternity , that strange mystery ; of the eternity past , a mystery still more strange ; of all the infinities , which pierced their way into all his senses , beneath his eyes ; and , without seeking to comprehend the incomprehensible , he gazed upon it . 
He did not study God ; he was dazzled by him . 
He considered those magnificent conjunctions of atoms , which communicate aspects to matter , reveal forces by verifying them , create individualities in unity , proportions in extent , the innumerable in the infinite , and , through light , produce beauty . 
These conjunctions are formed and dissolved incessantly ; hence life and death . 
He seated himself on a wooden bench , with his back against a decrepit vine ; he gazed at the stars , past the puny and stunted silhouettes of his fruit-trees . 
This quarter of an acre , so poorly planted , so encumbered with mean buildings and sheds , was dear to him , and satisfied his wants . 
What more was needed by this old man , who divided the leisure of his life , where there was so little leisure , between gardening in the daytime and contemplation at night ? 
Was not this narrow enclosure , with the heavens for a ceiling , sufficient to enable him to adore God in his most divine works , in turn ? 
Does not this comprehend all , in fact ? 
and what is there left to desire beyond it ? 
A little garden in which to walk , and immensity in which to dream . 
At one 's feet that which can be cultivated and plucked ; over head that which one can study and meditate upon : some flowers on earth , and all the stars in the sky . 
WHAT HE THOUGHT One last word . 
Since this sort of details might , particularly at the present moment , and to use an expression now in fashion , give to the Bishop of D -- a certain `` pantheistical '' physiognomy , and induce the belief , either to his credit or discredit , that he entertained one of those personal philosophies which are peculiar to our century , which sometimes spring up in solitary spirits , and there take on a form and grow until they usurp the place of religion , we insist upon it , that not one of those persons who knew Monseigneur Welcome would have thought himself authorized to think anything of the sort . 
That which enlightened this man was his heart . 
His wisdom was made of the light which comes from there . 
No systems ; many works . 
Abstruse speculations contain vertigo ; no , there is nothing to indicate that he risked his mind in apocalypses . 
The apostle may be daring , but the bishop must be timid . 
He would probably have felt a scruple at sounding too far in advance certain problems which are , in a manner , reserved for terrible great minds . 
There is a sacred horror beneath the porches of the enigma ; those gloomy openings stand yawning there , but something tells you , you , a passer-by in life , that you must not enter . 
Woe to him who penetrates thither ! 
Geniuses in the impenetrable depths of abstraction and pure speculation , situated , so to speak , above all dogmas , propose their ideas to God . 
Their prayer audaciously offers discussion . 
Their adoration interrogates . 
This is direct religion , which is full of anxiety and responsibility for him who attempts its steep cliffs . 
Human meditation has no limits . 
At his own risk and peril , it analyzes and digs deep into its own bedazzlement . 
One might almost say , that by a sort of splendid reaction , it with it dazzles nature ; the mysterious world which surrounds us renders back what it has received ; it is probable that the contemplators are contemplated . 
However that may be , there are on earth men who -- are they men ? 
-- perceive distinctly at the verge of the horizons of revery the heights of the absolute , and who have the terrible vision of the infinite mountain . 
Monseigneur Welcome was one of these men ; Monseigneur Welcome was not a genius . 
He would have feared those sublimities whence some very great men even , like Swedenborg and Pascal , have slipped into insanity . 
Certainly , these powerful reveries have their moral utility , and by these arduous paths one approaches to ideal perfection . 
As for him , he took the path which shortens , -- the Gospel 's . 
He did not attempt to impart to his chasuble the folds of Elijah 's mantle ; he projected no ray of future upon the dark groundswell of events ; he did not see to condense in flame the light of things ; he had nothing of the prophet and nothing of the magician about him . 
This humble soul loved , and that was all . 
That he carried prayer to the pitch of a superhuman aspiration is probable : but one can no more pray too much than one can love too much ; and if it is a heresy to pray beyond the texts , Saint Theresa and Saint Jerome would be heretics . 
He inclined towards all that groans and all that expiates . 
The universe appeared to him like an immense malady ; everywhere he felt fever , everywhere he heard the sound of suffering , and , without seeking to solve the enigma , he strove to dress the wound . 
The terrible spectacle of created things developed tenderness in him ; he was occupied only in finding for himself , and in inspiring others with the best way to compassionate and relieve . 
That which exists was for this good and rare priest a permanent subject of sadness which sought consolation . 
There are men who toil at extracting gold ; he toiled at the extraction of pity . 
Universal misery was his mine . 
The sadness which reigned everywhere was but an excuse for unfailing kindness . 
Love each other ; he declared this to be complete , desired nothing further , and that was the whole of his doctrine . 
One day , that man who believed himself to be a `` philosopher , '' the senator who has already been alluded to , said to the Bishop : `` Just survey the spectacle of the world : all war against all ; the strongest has the most wit . 
Your love each other is nonsense . '' 
-- `` Well , '' replied Monseigneur Welcome , without contesting the point , `` if it is nonsense , the soul should shut itself up in it , as the pearl in the oyster . '' 
Thus he shut himself up , he lived there , he was absolutely satisfied with it , leaving on one side the prodigious questions which attract and terrify , the fathomless perspectives of abstraction , the precipices of metaphysics -- all those profundities which converge , for the apostle in God , for the atheist in nothingness ; destiny , good and evil , the way of being against being , the conscience of man , the thoughtful somnambulism of the animal , the transformation in death , the recapitulation of existences which the tomb contains , the incomprehensible grafting of successive loves on the persistent I , the essence , the substance , the Nile , and the Ens , the soul , nature , liberty , necessity ; perpendicular problems , sinister obscurities , where lean the gigantic archangels of the human mind ; formidable abysses , which Lucretius , Manou , Saint Paul , Dante , contemplate with eyes flashing lightning , which seems by its steady gaze on the infinite to cause stars to blaze forth there . 
Monseigneur Bienvenu was simply a man who took note of the exterior of mysterious questions without scrutinizing them , and without troubling his own mind with them , and who cherished in his own soul a grave respect for darkness . 
THE EVENING OF A DAY OF WALKING Early in the month of October , 1815 , about an hour before sunset , a man who was travelling on foot entered the little town of D -- The few inhabitants who were at their windows or on their thresholds at the moment stared at this traveller with a sort of uneasiness . 
It was difficult to encounter a wayfarer of more wretched appearance . 
He was a man of medium stature , thickset and robust , in the prime of life . 
He might have been forty-six or forty-eight years old . 
A cap with a drooping leather visor partly concealed his face , burned and tanned by sun and wind , and dripping with perspiration . 
His shirt of coarse yellow linen , fastened at the neck by a small silver anchor , permitted a view of his hairy breast : he had a cravat twisted into a string ; trousers of blue drilling , worn and threadbare , white on one knee and torn on the other ; an old gray , tattered blouse , patched on one of the elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine ; a tightly packed soldier knapsack , well buckled and perfectly new , on his back ; an enormous , knotty stick in his hand ; iron-shod shoes on his stockingless feet ; a shaved head and a long beard . 
The sweat , the heat , the journey on foot , the dust , added I know not what sordid quality to this dilapidated whole . 
His hair was closely cut , yet bristling , for it had begun to grow a little , and did not seem to have been cut for some time . 
