`` Enjolras said : ` Joly is ill , Grantaire is drunk . ' 
It was to Bossuet that he sent Navet . 
If he had come for me , I would have followed him . 
So much the worse for Enjolras ! 
I wo n't go to his funeral . '' 
This resolution once arrived at , Bossuet , Joly , and Grantaire did not stir from the wine-shop . 
By two o'clock in the afternoon , the table at which they sat was covered with empty bottles . 
Two candles were burning on it , one in a flat copper candlestick which was perfectly green , the other in the neck of a cracked carafe . 
Grantaire had seduced Joly and Bossuet to wine ; Bossuet and Joly had conducted Grantaire back towards cheerfulness . 
As for Grantaire , he had got beyond wine , that merely moderate inspirer of dreams , ever since mid-day . 
Wine enjoys only a conventional popularity with serious drinkers . 
There is , in fact , in the matter of inebriety , white magic and black magic ; wine is only white magic . 
Grantaire was a daring drinker of dreams . 
The blackness of a terrible fit of drunkenness yawning before him , far from arresting him , attracted him . 
He had abandoned the bottle and taken to the beerglass . 
The beer-glass is the abyss . 
Having neither opium nor hashish on hand , and being desirous of filling his brain with twilight , he had had recourse to that fearful mixture of brandy , stout , absinthe , which produces the most terrible of lethargies . 
It is of these three vapors , beer , brandy , and absinthe , that the lead of the soul is composed . 
They are three grooms ; the celestial butterfly is drowned in them ; and there are formed there in a membranous smoke , vaguely condensed into the wing of the bat , three mute furies , Nightmare , Night , and Death , which hover about the slumbering Psyche . 
Grantaire had not yet reached that lamentable phase ; far from it . 
He was tremendously gay , and Bossuet and Joly retorted . 
They clinked glasses . 
Grantaire added to the eccentric accentuation of words and ideas , a peculiarity of gesture ; he rested his left fist on his knee with dignity , his arm forming a right angle , and , with cravat untied , seated astride a stool , his full glass in his right hand , he hurled solemn words at the big maid-servant Matelote : -- `` Let the doors of the palace be thrown open ! 
Let every one be a member of the French Academy and have the right to embrace Madame Hucheloup . 
Let us drink . '' 
And turning to Madame Hucheloup , he added : -- `` Woman ancient and consecrated by use , draw near that I may contemplate thee ! '' 
And Joly exclaimed : -- `` Matelote and Gibelotte , dod ' t gib Grantaire anything more to drink . 
He has already devoured , since this bording , in wild prodigality , two francs and ninety-five centibes . '' 
And Grantaire began again : -- `` Who has been unhooking the stars without my permission , and putting them on the table in the guise of candles ? '' 
Bossuet , though very drunk , preserved his equanimity . 
He was seated on the sill of the open window , wetting his back in the falling rain , and gazing at his two friends . 
All at once , he heard a tumult behind him , hurried footsteps , cries of `` To arms ! '' 
He turned round and saw in the Rue Saint-Denis , at the end of the Rue de la Chanvrerie , Enjolras passing , gun in hand , and Gavroche with his pistol , Feuilly with his sword , Courfeyrac with his sword , and Jean Prouvaire with his blunderbuss , Combeferre with his gun , Bahorel with his gun , and the whole armed and stormy rabble which was following them . 
The Rue de la Chanvrerie was not more than a gunshot long . 
Bossuet improvised a speaking-trumpet from his two hands placed around his mouth , and shouted : -- `` Courfeyrac ! 
Courfeyrac ! 
Hohee ! '' 
Courfeyrac heard the shout , caught sight of Bossuet , and advanced a few paces into the Rue de la Chanvrerie , shouting : `` What do you want ? '' 
which crossed a `` Where are you going ? '' 
`` To make a barricade , '' replied Courfeyrac . 
`` Well , here ! 
This is a good place ! 
Make it here ! '' 
`` That 's true , Aigle , '' said Courfeyrac . 
And at a signal from Courfeyrac , the mob flung themselves into the Rue de la Chanvrerie . 
NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE The spot was , in fact , admirably adapted , the entrance to the street widened out , the other extremity narrowed together into a pocket without exit . 
Corinthe created an obstacle , the Rue Mondetour was easily barricaded on the right and the left , no attack was possible except from the Rue Saint-Denis , that is to say , in front , and in full sight . 
Bossuet had the comprehensive glance of a fasting Hannibal . 
Terror had seized on the whole street at the irruption of the mob . 
There was not a passer-by who did not get out of sight . 
In the space of a flash of lightning , in the rear , to right and left , shops , stables , area-doors , windows , blinds , attic skylights , shutters of every description were closed , from the ground floor to the roof . 
A terrified old woman fixed a mattress in front of her window on two clothes-poles for drying linen , in order to deaden the effect of musketry . 
The wine-shop alone remained open ; and that for a very good reason , that the mob had rushed into it . 
-- `` Ah my God ! 
Ah my God ! '' 
sighed Mame Hucheloup . 
Bossuet had gone down to meet Courfeyrac . 
Joly , who had placed himself at the window , exclaimed : -- `` Courfeyrac , you ought to have brought an umbrella . 
You will gatch gold . '' 
In the meantime , in the space of a few minutes , twenty iron bars had been wrenched from the grated front of the wine-shop , ten fathoms of street had been unpaved ; Gavroche and Bahorel had seized in its passage , and overturned , the dray of a lime-dealer named Anceau ; this dray contained three barrels of lime , which they placed beneath the piles of paving-stones : Enjolras raised the cellar trap , and all the widow Hucheloup 's empty casks were used to flank the barrels of lime ; Feuilly , with his fingers skilled in painting the delicate sticks of fans , had backed up the barrels and the dray with two massive heaps of blocks of rough stone . 
Blocks which were improvised like the rest and procured no one knows where . 
The beams which served as props were torn from the neighboring house-fronts and laid on the casks . 
When Bossuet and Courfeyrac turned round , half the street was already barred with a rampart higher than a man . 
There is nothing like the hand of the populace for building everything that is built by demolishing . 
Matelote and Gibelotte had mingled with the workers . 
Gibelotte went and came loaded with rubbish . 
Her lassitude helped on the barricade . 
She served the barricade as she would have served wine , with a sleepy air . 
An omnibus with two white horses passed the end of the street . 
Bossuet strode over the paving-stones , ran to it , stopped the driver , made the passengers alight , offered his hand to `` the ladies , '' dismissed the conductor , and returned , leading the vehicle and the horses by the bridle . 
`` Omnibuses , '' said he , `` do not pass the Corinthe . 
Non licet omnibus adire Corinthum . '' 
An instant later , the horses were unharnessed and went off at their will , through the Rue Mondetour , and the omnibus lying on its side completed the bar across the street . 
Mame Hucheloup , quite upset , had taken refuge in the first story . 
Her eyes were vague , and stared without seeing anything , and she cried in a low tone . 
Her terrified shrieks did not dare to emerge from her throat . 
`` The end of the world has come , '' she muttered . 
Joly deposited a kiss on Mame Hucheloup 's fat , red , wrinkled neck , and said to Grantaire : `` My dear fellow , I have always regarded a woman 's neck as an infinitely delicate thing . '' 
But Grantaire attained to the highest regions of dithryamb . 
Matelote had mounted to the first floor once more , Grantaire seized her round her waist , and gave vent to long bursts of laughter at the window . 
`` Matelote is homely ! '' 
he cried : `` Matelote is of a dream of ugliness ! 
Matelote is a chimaera . 
This is the secret of her birth : a Gothic Pygmalion , who was making gargoyles for cathedrals , fell in love with one of them , the most horrible , one fine morning . 
He besought Love to give it life , and this produced Matelote . 
Look at her , citizens ! 
She has chromate-of-lead-colored hair , like Titian 's mistress , and she is a good girl . 
I guarantee that she will fight well . 
Every good girl contains a hero . 
As for Mother Hucheloup , she 's an old warrior . 
Look at her moustaches ! 
She inherited them from her husband . 
A hussar indeed ! 
She will fight too . 
These two alone will strike terror to the heart of the banlieue . 
Comrades , we shall overthrow the government as true as there are fifteen intermediary acids between margaric acid and formic acid ; however , that is a matter of perfect indifference to me . 
Gentlemen , my father always detested me because I could not understand mathematics . 
I understand only love and liberty . 
I am Grantaire , the good fellow . 
Having never had any money , I never acquired the habit of it , and the result is that I have never lacked it ; but , if I had been rich , there would have been no more poor people ! 
