Rome sets the example for these things as well as for others . 
Paris follows this example with all the stupidity peculiar to intelligent towns . 
For the requirements of the operation upon the subject of which we have just explained our views , Paris has beneath it another Paris ; a Paris of sewers ; which has its streets , its cross-roads , its squares , its blind-alleys , its arteries , and its circulation , which is of mire and minus the human form . 
For nothing must be flattered , not even a great people ; where there is everything there is also ignominy by the side of sublimity ; and , if Paris contains Athens , the city of light , Tyre , the city of might , Sparta , the city of virtue , Nineveh , the city of marvels , it also contains Lutetia , the city of mud . 
However , the stamp of its power is there also , and the Titanic sink of Paris realizes , among monuments , that strange ideal realized in humanity by some men like Macchiavelli , Bacon and Mirabeau , grandiose vileness . 
The sub-soil of Paris , if the eye could penetrate its surface , would present the aspect of a colossal madrepore . 
A sponge has no more partitions and ducts than the mound of earth for a circuit of six leagues round about , on which rests the great and ancient city . 
Not to mention its catacombs , which are a separate cellar , not to mention the inextricable trellis-work of gas pipes , without reckoning the vast tubular system for the distribution of fresh water which ends in the pillar fountains , the sewers alone form a tremendous , shadowy net-work under the two banks ; a labyrinth which has its slope for its guiding thread . 
There appears , in the humid mist , the rat which seems the product to which Paris has given birth . 
ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE SEWER Let the reader imagine Paris lifted off like a cover , the subterranean net-work of sewers , from a bird 's eye view , will outline on the banks a species of large branch grafted on the river . 
On the right bank , the belt sewer will form the trunk of this branch , the secondary ducts will form the branches , and those without exit the twigs . 
This figure is but a summary one and half exact , the right angle , which is the customary angle of this species of subterranean ramifications , being very rare in vegetation . 
A more accurate image of this strange geometrical plan can be formed by supposing that one is viewing some eccentric oriental alphabet , as intricate as a thicket , against a background of shadows , and the misshapen letters should be welded one to another in apparent confusion , and as at haphazard , now by their angles , again by their extremities . 
Sinks and sewers played a great part in the Middle Ages , in the Lower Empire and in the Orient of old . 
The masses regarded these beds of decomposition , these monstrous cradles of death , with a fear that was almost religious . 
The vermin ditch of Benares is no less conducive to giddiness than the lions ' ditch of Babylon . 
Teglath-Phalasar , according to the rabbinical books , swore by the sink of Nineveh . 
It was from the sewer of Munster that John of Leyden produced his false moon , and it was from the cess-pool of Kekscheb that oriental menalchme , Mokanna , the veiled prophet of Khorassan , caused his false sun to emerge . 
The history of men is reflected in the history of sewers . 
The Germoniae -LSB- 58 -RSB- narrated Rome . 
The sewer of Paris has been an ancient and formidable thing . 
It has been a sepulchre , it has served as an asylum . 
Crime , intelligence , social protest , liberty of conscience , thought , theft , all that human laws persecute or have persecuted , is hidden in that hole ; the maillotins in the fourteenth century , the tire-laine of the fifteenth , the Huguenots in the sixteenth , Morin 's illuminated in the seventeenth , the chauffeurs -LSB- brigands -RSB- in the eighteenth . 
A hundred years ago , the nocturnal blow of the dagger emerged thence , the pickpocket in danger slipped thither ; the forest had its cave , Paris had its sewer . 
Vagrancy , that Gallic picareria , accepted the sewer as the adjunct of the Cour des Miracles , and at evening , it returned thither , fierce and sly , through the Maubuee outlet , as into a bed-chamber . 
-LSB- 58 -RSB- Steps on the Aventine Hill , leading to the Tiber , to which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks to be thrown into the Tiber . 
It was quite natural , that those who had the blind-alley Vide-Gousset , -LSB- Empty-Pocket -RSB- or the Rue Coupe-Gorge -LSB- Cut-Throat -RSB- , for the scene of their daily labor , should have for their domicile by night the culvert of the Chemin-Vert , or the catch basin of Hurepoix . 
Hence a throng of souvenirs . 
All sorts of phantoms haunt these long , solitary corridors ; everywhere is putrescence and miasma ; here and there are breathing-holes , where Villon within converses with Rabelais without . 
The sewer in ancient Paris is the rendezvous of all exhaustions and of all attempts . 
Political economy therein spies a detritus , social philosophy there beholds a residuum . 
The sewer is the conscience of the city . 
Everything there converges and confronts everything else . 
In that livid spot there are shades , but there are no longer any secrets . 
Each thing bears its true form , or at least , its definitive form . 
The mass of filth has this in its favor , that it is not a liar . 
Ingenuousness has taken refuge there . 
The mask of Basil is to be found there , but one beholds its cardboard and its strings and the inside as well as the outside , and it is accentuated by honest mud . 
Scapin 's false nose is its next-door neighbor . 
All the uncleannesses of civilization , once past their use , fall into this trench of truth , where the immense social sliding ends . 
They are there engulfed , but they display themselves there . 
This mixture is a confession . 
There , no more false appearances , no plastering over is possible , filth removes its shirt , absolute denudation puts to the rout all illusions and mirages , there is nothing more except what really exists , presenting the sinister form of that which is coming to an end . 
There , the bottom of a bottle indicates drunkenness , a basket-handle tells a tale of domesticity ; there the core of an apple which has entertained literary opinions becomes an apple-core once more ; the effigy on the big sou becomes frankly covered with verdigris , Caiphas ' spittle meets Falstaff 's puking , the louis-d'or which comes from the gaming-house jostles the nail whence hangs the rope 's end of the suicide . 
a livid foetus rolls along , enveloped in the spangles which danced at the Opera last Shrove-Tuesday , a cap which has pronounced judgment on men wallows beside a mass of rottenness which was formerly Margoton 's petticoat ; it is more than fraternization , it is equivalent to addressing each other as thou . 
All which was formerly rouged , is washed free . 
The last veil is torn away . 
A sewer is a cynic . 
It tells everything . 
The sincerity of foulness pleases us , and rests the soul . 
When one has passed one 's time in enduring upon earth the spectacle of the great airs which reasons of state , the oath , political sagacity , human justice , professional probity , the austerities of situation , incorruptible robes all assume , it solaces one to enter a sewer and to behold the mire which befits it . 
This is instructive at the same time . 
We have just said that history passes through the sewer . 
The Saint-Barthelemys filter through there , drop by drop , between the paving-stones . 
Great public assassinations , political and religious butcheries , traverse this underground passage of civilization , and thrust their corpses there . 
For the eye of the thinker , all historic murderers are to be found there , in that hideous penumbra , on their knees , with a scrap of their winding-sheet for an apron , dismally sponging out their work . 
Louis XI . 
is there with Tristan , Francois I. with Duprat , Charles IX . 
is there with his mother , Richelieu is there with Louis XIII. , Louvois is there , Letellier is there , Hebert and Maillard are there , scratching the stones , and trying to make the traces of their actions disappear . 
Beneath these vaults one hears the brooms of spectres . 
One there breathes the enormous fetidness of social catastrophes . 
One beholds reddish reflections in the corners . 
There flows a terrible stream , in which bloody hands have been washed . 
The social observer should enter these shadows . 
They form a part of his laboratory . 
Philosophy is the microscope of the thought . 
Everything desires to flee from it , but nothing escapes it . 
Tergiversation is useless . 
What side of oneself does one display in evasions ? 
the shameful side . 
Philosophy pursues with its glance , probes the evil , and does not permit it to escape into nothingness . 
In the obliteration of things which disappear , in the watching of things which vanish , it recognizes all . 
It reconstructs the purple from the rag , and the woman from the scrap of her dress . 
From the cess-pool , it re-constitutes the city ; from mud , it reconstructs manners ; from the potsherd it infers the amphora or the jug . 
By the imprint of a finger-nail on a piece of parchment , it recognizes the difference which separates the Jewry of the Judengasse from the Jewry of the Ghetto . 
It re-discovers in what remains that which has been , good , evil , the true , the blood-stain of the palace , the ink-blot of the cavern , the drop of sweat from the brothel , trials undergone , temptations welcomed , orgies cast forth , the turn which characters have taken as they became abased , the trace of prostitution in souls of which their grossness rendered them capable , and on the vesture of the porters of Rome the mark of Messalina 's elbowing . 
BRUNESEAU The sewer of Paris in the Middle Ages was legendary . 
In the sixteenth century , Henri II . 
attempted a bore , which failed . 
Not a hundred years ago , the cess-pool , Mercier attests the fact , was abandoned to itself , and fared as best it might . 
Such was this ancient Paris , delivered over to quarrels , to indecision , and to gropings . 
It was tolerably stupid for a long time . 
Later on , '89 showed how understanding comes to cities . 
But in the good , old times , the capital had not much head . 
It did not know how to manage its own affairs either morally or materially , and could not sweep out filth any better than it could abuses . 
Everything presented an obstacle , everything raised a question . 
The sewer , for example , was refractory to every itinerary . 
One could no more find one 's bearings in the sewer than one could understand one 's position in the city ; above the unintelligible , below the inextricable ; beneath the confusion of tongues there reigned the confusion of caverns ; Daedalus backed up Babel . 
Sometimes the Paris sewer took a notion to overflow , as though this misunderstood Nile were suddenly seized with a fit of rage . 
There occurred , infamous to relate , inundations of the sewer . 
At times , that stomach of civilization digested badly , the cess-pool flowed back into the throat of the city , and Paris got an after-taste of her own filth . 
These resemblances of the sewer to remorse had their good points ; they were warnings ; very badly accepted , however ; the city waxed indignant at the audacity of its mire , and did not admit that the filth should return . 
Drive it out better . 
The inundation of 1802 is one of the actual memories of Parisians of the age of eighty . 
The mud spread in cross-form over the Place des Victoires , where stands the statue of Louis XIV. ; it entered the Rue Saint-Honore by the two mouths to the sewer in the Champs-Elysees , the Rue Saint-Florentin through the Saint-Florentin sewer , the Rue Pierre-a-Poisson through the sewer de la Sonnerie , the Rue Popincourt , through the sewer of the Chemin-Vert , the Rue de la Roquette , through the sewer of the Rue de Lappe ; it covered the drain of the Rue des Champs-Elysees to the height of thirty-five centimetres ; and , to the South , through the vent of the Seine , performing its functions in inverse sense , it penetrated the Rue Mazarine , the Rue de l'Echaude , and the Rue des Marais , where it stopped at a distance of one hundred and nine metres , a few paces distant from the house in which Racine had lived , respecting , in the seventeenth century , the poet more than the King . 
It attained its maximum depth in the Rue Saint-Pierre , where it rose to the height of three feet above the flag-stones of the water-spout , and its maximum length in the Rue Saint-Sabin , where it spread out over a stretch two hundred and thirty-eight metres in length . 
At the beginning of this century , the sewer of Paris was still a mysterious place . 
Mud can never enjoy a good fame ; but in this case its evil renown reached the verge of the terrible . 
Paris knew , in a confused way , that she had under her a terrible cavern . 
People talked of it as of that monstrous bed of Thebes in which swarmed centipedes fifteen long feet in length , and which might have served Behemoth for a bathtub . 
