January 21 . 
The beggars . 
The vagabonds . 
Forward march . 
Robespierre . 
Level . 
Ca Ira . 
The Society of the Rights of Man engendered the Society of Action . 
These were impatient individuals who broke away and hastened ahead . 
Other associations sought to recruit themselves from the great mother societies . 
The members of sections complained that they were torn asunder . 
Thus , the Gallic Society , and the committee of organization of the Municipalities . 
Thus the associations for the liberty of the press , for individual liberty , for the instruction of the people against indirect taxes . 
Then the Society of Equal Workingmen which was divided into three fractions , the levellers , the communists , the reformers . 
Then the Army of the Bastilles , a sort of cohort organized on a military footing , four men commanded by a corporal , ten by a sergeant , twenty by a sub-lieutenant , forty by a lieutenant ; there were never more than five men who knew each other . 
Creation where precaution is combined with audacity and which seemed stamped with the genius of Venice . 
The central committee , which was at the head , had two arms , the Society of Action , and the Army of the Bastilles . 
A legitimist association , the Chevaliers of Fidelity , stirred about among these the republican affiliations . 
It was denounced and repudiated there . 
The Parisian societies had ramifications in the principal cities , Lyons , Nantes , Lille , Marseilles , and each had its Society of the Rights of Man , the Charbonniere , and The Free Men . 
All had a revolutionary society which was called the Cougourde . 
We have already mentioned this word . 
In Paris , the Faubourg Saint-Marceau kept up an equal buzzing with the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , and the schools were no less moved than the faubourgs . 
A cafe in the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe and the wine-shop of the Seven Billiards , Rue des Mathurins-Saint-Jacques , served as rallying points for the students . 
The Society of the Friends of the A B C affiliated to the Mutualists of Angers , and to the Cougourde of Aix , met , as we have seen , in the Cafe Musain . 
These same young men assembled also , as we have stated already , in a restaurant wine-shop of the Rue Mondetour which was called Corinthe . 
These meetings were secret . 
Others were as public as possible , and the reader can judge of their boldness from these fragments of an interrogatory undergone in one of the ulterior prosecutions : `` Where was this meeting held ? '' 
`` In the Rue de la Paix . '' 
`` At whose house ? '' 
`` In the street . '' 
`` What sections were there ? '' 
`` Only one . '' 
`` Which ? '' 
`` The Manuel section . '' 
`` Who was its leader ? '' 
`` I. '' `` You are too young to have decided alone upon the bold course of attacking the government . 
Where did your instructions come from ? '' 
`` From the central committee . '' 
The army was mined at the same time as the population , as was proved subsequently by the operations of Beford , Luneville , and Epinard . 
They counted on the fifty-second regiment , on the fifth , on the eighth , on the thirty-seventh , and on the twentieth light cavalry . 
In Burgundy and in the southern towns they planted the liberty tree ; that is to say , a pole surmounted by a red cap . 
Such was the situation . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine , more than any other group of the population , as we stated in the beginning , accentuated this situation and made it felt . 
That was the sore point . 
This old faubourg , peopled like an ant-hill , laborious , courageous , and angry as a hive of bees , was quivering with expectation and with the desire for a tumult . 
Everything was in a state of agitation there , without any interruption , however , of the regular work . 
It is impossible to convey an idea of this lively yet sombre physiognomy . 
In this faubourg exists poignant distress hidden under attic roofs ; there also exist rare and ardent minds . 
It is particularly in the matter of distress and intelligence that it is dangerous to have extremes meet . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine had also other causes to tremble ; for it received the counter-shock of commercial crises , of failures , strikes , slack seasons , all inherent to great political disturbances . 
In times of revolution misery is both cause and effect . 
The blow which it deals rebounds upon it . 
This population full of proud virtue , capable to the highest degree of latent heat , always ready to fly to arms , prompt to explode , irritated , deep , undermined , seemed to be only awaiting the fall of a spark . 
Whenever certain sparks float on the horizon chased by the wind of events , it is impossible not to think of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and of the formidable chance which has placed at the very gates of Paris that powder-house of suffering and ideas . 
The wine-shops of the Faubourg Antoine , which have been more than once drawn in the sketches which the reader has just perused , possess historical notoriety . 
In troublous times people grow intoxicated there more on words than on wine . 
A sort of prophetic spirit and an afflatus of the future circulates there , swelling hearts and enlarging souls . 
The cabarets of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine resemble those taverns of Mont Aventine erected on the cave of the Sibyl and communicating with the profound and sacred breath ; taverns where the tables were almost tripods , and where was drunk what Ennius calls the sibylline wine . 
The Faubourg Saint-Antoine is a reservoir of people . 
Revolutionary agitations create fissures there , through which trickles the popular sovereignty . 
This sovereignty may do evil ; it can be mistaken like any other ; but , even when led astray , it remains great . 
We may say of it as of the blind cyclops , Ingens . 
In ' 93 , according as the idea which was floating about was good or evil , according as it was the day of fanaticism or of enthusiasm , there leaped forth from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine now savage legions , now heroic bands . 
Savage . 
Let us explain this word . 
When these bristling men , who in the early days of the revolutionary chaos , tattered , howling , wild , with uplifted bludgeon , pike on high , hurled themselves upon ancient Paris in an uproar , what did they want ? 
They wanted an end to oppression , an end to tyranny , an end to the sword , work for men , instruction for the child , social sweetness for the woman , liberty , equality , fraternity , bread for all , the idea for all , the Edenizing of the world . 
Progress ; and that holy , sweet , and good thing , progress , they claimed in terrible wise , driven to extremities as they were , half naked , club in fist , a roar in their mouths . 
They were savages , yes ; but the savages of civilization . 
They proclaimed right furiously ; they were desirous , if only with fear and trembling , to force the human race to paradise . 
They seemed barbarians , and they were saviours . 
They demanded light with the mask of night . 
Facing these men , who were ferocious , we admit , and terrifying , but ferocious and terrifying for good ends , there are other men , smiling , embroidered , gilded , beribboned , starred , in silk stockings , in white plumes , in yellow gloves , in varnished shoes , who , with their elbows on a velvet table , beside a marble chimney-piece , insist gently on demeanor and the preservation of the past , of the Middle Ages , of divine right , of fanaticism , of innocence , of slavery , of the death penalty , of war , glorifying in low tones and with politeness , the sword , the stake , and the scaffold . 
For our part , if we were forced to make a choice between the barbarians of civilization and the civilized men of barbarism , we should choose the barbarians . 
But , thank Heaven , still another choice is possible . 
No perpendicular fall is necessary , in front any more than in the rear . 
Neither despotism nor terrorism . 
We desire progress with a gentle slope . 
God takes care of that . 
God 's whole policy consists in rendering slopes less steep . 
ENJOLRAS AND HIS LIEUTENANTS It was about this epoch that Enjolras , in view of a possible catastrophe , instituted a kind of mysterious census . 
All were present at a secret meeting at the Cafe Musain . 
Enjolras said , mixing his words with a few half-enigmatical but significant metaphors : -- `` It is proper that we should know where we stand and on whom we may count . 
If combatants are required , they must be provided . 
It can do no harm to have something with which to strike . 
Passers-by always have more chance of being gored when there are bulls on the road than when there are none . 
Let us , therefore , reckon a little on the herd . 
How many of us are there ? 
There is no question of postponing this task until to-morrow . 
Revolutionists should always be hurried ; progress has no time to lose . 
Let us mistrust the unexpected . 
Let us not be caught unprepared . 
We must go over all the seams that we have made and see whether they hold fast . 
This business ought to be concluded to-day . 
Courfeyrac , you will see the polytechnic students . 
It is their day to go out . 
To-day is Wednesday . 
Feuilly , you will see those of the Glaciere , will you not ? 
Combeferre has promised me to go to Picpus . 
