my friend , whom , then , will you serve ? 
The times are past when you might have said , ' I belong to M. de Beaufort . ' 
No , nowadays , we all belong to the king , great or small . 
Therefore , if you serve on board my vessels , there can be nothing equivocal about it , my dear vicomte ; it will be the king you will serve . '' 
Athos waited with a kind of impatient joy for the reply about to be made to this embarrassing question by Raoul , the intractable enemy of the king , his rival . 
The father hoped that the obstacle would overcome the desire . 
He was thankful to M. de Beaufort , whose lightness or generous reflection had thrown an impediment in the way of the departure of a son , now his only joy . 
But Raoul , still firm and tranquil , replied : `` Monsieur le duc , the objection you make I have already considered in my mind . 
I will serve on board your vessels , because you do me the honor to take me with you ; but I shall there serve a more powerful master than the king : I shall serve God ! '' 
`` God ! 
how so ? '' 
said the duke and Athos together . 
`` My intention is to make profession , and become a knight of Malta , '' added Bragelonne , letting fall , one by one , words more icy than the drops which fall from the bare trees after the tempests of winter . 
-LRB- 4 -RRB- Under this blow Athos staggered and the prince himself was moved . 
Grimaud uttered a heavy groan , and let fall the bottle , which was broken without anybody paying attention . 
M. de Beaufort looked the young man in the face , and read plainly , though his eyes were cast down , the fire of resolution before which everything must give way . 
As to Athos , he was too well acquainted with that tender , but inflexible soul ; he could not hope to make it deviate from the fatal road it had just chosen . 
He could only press the hand the duke held out to him . 
`` Comte , I shall set off in two days for Toulon , '' said M. de Beaufort . 
`` Will you meet me at Paris , in order that I may know your determination ? '' 
`` I will have the honor of thanking you there , mon prince , for all your kindness , '' replied the comte . 
`` And be sure to bring the vicomte with you , whether he follows me or does not follow me , '' added the duke ; `` he has my word , and I only ask yours . '' 
Having thrown a little balm upon the wound of the paternal heart , he pulled the ear of Grimaud , whose eyes sparkled more than usual , and regained his escort in the parterre . 
The horses , rested and refreshed , set off with spirit through the lovely night , and soon placed a considerable distance between their master and the chateau . 
Athos and Bragelonne were again face to face . 
Eleven o'clock was striking . 
The father and son preserved a profound silence towards each other , where an intelligent observer would have expected cries and tears . 
But these two men were of such a nature that all emotion following their final resolutions plunged itself so deep into their hearts that it was lost forever . 
They passed , then , silently and almost breathlessly , the hour that preceded midnight . 
The clock , by striking , alone pointed out to them how many minutes had lasted the painful journey made by their souls in the immensity of their remembrances of the past and fear of the future . 
Athos rose first , saying , `` it is late , then ... . 
Till to-morrow . '' 
Raoul rose , and in his turn embraced his father . 
The latter held him clasped to his breast , and said , in a tremulous voice , `` In two days , you will have left me , my son - left me forever , Raoul ! '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the young man , `` I had formed a determination , that of piercing my heart with my sword ; but you would have thought that cowardly . 
I have renounced that determination , and therefore we must part . '' 
`` You leave me desolate by going , Raoul . '' 
`` Listen to me again , monsieur , I implore you . 
If I do not go , I shall die here of grief and love . 
I know how long a time I have to live thus . 
Send me away quickly , monsieur , or you will see me basely die before your eyes - in your house - this is stronger than my will - stronger than my strength - you may plainly see that within one month I have lived thirty years , and that I approach the end of my life . '' 
`` Then , '' said Athos , coldly , `` you go with the intention of getting killed in Africa ? 
Oh , tell me ! 
do not lie ! '' 
Raoul grew deadly pale , and remained silent for two seconds , which were to his father two hours of agony . 
Then , all at once : `` Monsieur , '' said he , `` I have promised to devote myself to God . 
In exchange for the sacrifice I make of my youth and liberty , I will only ask of Him one thing , and that is , to preserve me for you , because you are the only tie which attaches me to this world . 
God alone can give me the strength not to forget that I owe you everything , and that nothing ought to stand in my esteem before you . '' 
Athos embraced his son tenderly , and said : `` You have just replied to me on the word of honor of an honest man ; in two days we shall be with M. de Beaufort at Paris , and you will then do what will be proper for you to do . 
You are free , Raoul ; adieu . '' 
And he slowly gained his bedroom . 
Raoul went down into the garden , and passed the night in the alley of limes . 
: Preparations for Departure . 
Athos lost no more time in combating this immutable resolution . 
He gave all his attention to preparing , during the two days the duke had granted him , the proper appointments for Raoul . 
This labor chiefly concerned Grimaud , who immediately applied himself to it with the good-will and intelligence we know he possessed . 
Athos gave this worthy servant orders to take the route to Paris when the equipments should be ready ; and , not to expose himself to the danger of keeping the duke waiting , or delaying Raoul , so that the duke should perceive his absence , he himself , the day after the visit of M. de Beaufort , set off for Paris with his son . 
For the poor young man it was an emotion easily to be understood , thus to return to Paris amongst all the people who had known and loved him . 
Every face recalled a pang to him who had suffered so much ; to him who had loved so much , some circumstance of his unhappy love . 
Raoul , on approaching Paris , felt as if he were dying . 
Once in Paris , he really existed no longer . 
When he reached Guiche 's residence , he was informed that Guiche was with Monsieur . 
Raoul took the road to the Luxembourg , and when arrived , without suspecting that he was going to the place where La Valliere had lived , he heard so much music and respired so many perfumes , he heard so much joyous laughter , and saw so many dancing shadows , that if it had not been for a charitable woman , who perceived him so dejected and pale beneath a doorway , he would have remained there a few minutes , and then would have gone away , never to return . 
But , as we have said , in the first ante-chamber he had stopped , solely for the sake of not mixing himself with all those happy beings he felt were moving around him in the adjacent salons . 
And as one of Monsieur 's servants , recognizing him , had asked him if he wished to see Monsieur or Madame , Raoul had scarcely answered him , but had sunk down upon a bench near the velvet doorway , looking at a clock , which had stopped for nearly an hour . 
The servant had passed on , and another , better acquainted with him , had come up , and interrogated Raoul whether he should inform M. de Guiche of his being there . 
This name did not even arouse the recollections of Raoul . 
The persistent servant went on to relate that De Guiche had just invented a new game of lottery , and was teaching it to the ladies . 
Raoul , opening his large eyes , like the absent man in Theophrastus , made no answer , but his sadness increased two shades . 
With his head hanging down , his limbs relaxed , his mouth half open for the escape of his sighs , Raoul remained , thus forgotten , in the ante-chamber , when all at once a lady 's robe passed , rubbing against the doors of a side salon , which opened on the gallery . 
A lady , young , pretty , and gay , scolding an officer of the household , entered by that way , and expressed herself with much vivacity . 
The officer replied in calm but firm sentences ; it was rather a little love pet than a quarrel of courtiers , and was terminated by a kiss on the fingers of the lady . 
Suddenly , on perceiving Raoul , the lady became silent , and pushing away the officer : `` Make your escape , Malicorne , '' said she ; `` I did not think there was any one here . 
I shall curse you , if they have either heard or seen us ! '' 
Malicorne hastened away . 
The young lady advanced behind Raoul , and stretching her joyous face over him as he lay : `` Monsieur is a gallant man , '' said she , `` and no doubt - '' She here interrupted herself by uttering a cry . 
`` Raoul ! '' 
said she , blushing . 
`` Mademoiselle de Montalais ! '' 
said Raoul , paler than death . 
He rose unsteadily , and tried to make his way across the slippery mosaic of the floor ; but she had comprehended that savage and cruel grief ; she felt that in the flight of Raoul there was an accusation of herself . 
A woman , ever vigilant , she did not think she ought to let the opportunity slip of making good her justification ; but Raoul , though stopped by her in the middle of the gallery , did not seem disposed to surrender without a combat . 
He took it up in a tone so cold and embarrassed , that if they had been thus surprised , the whole court would have no doubt about the proceedings of Mademoiselle de Montalais . 
`` Ah ! 
monsieur , '' said she with disdain , `` what you are doing is very unworthy of a gentleman . 
My heart inclines me to speak to you ; you compromise me by a reception almost uncivil ; you are wrong , monsieur ; and you confound your friends with enemies . 
Farewell ! '' 
Raoul had sworn never to speak of Louise , never even to look at those who might have seen Louise ; he was going into another world , that he might never meet with anything Louise had seen , or even touched . 
But after the first shock of his pride , after having had a glimpse of Montalais , the companion of Louise - Montalais , who reminded him of the turret of Blois and the joys of youth - all his reason faded away . 
`` Pardon me , mademoiselle ; it enters not , it can not enter into my thoughts to be uncivil . '' 
`` Do you wish to speak to me ? '' 
said she , with the smile of former days . 
`` Well ! 
come somewhere else ; for we may be surprised . '' 
`` Oh ! ' 
said he . 
She looked at the clock , doubtingly , then , having reflected : `` In my apartment , '' said she , `` we shall have an hour to ourselves . '' 
And taking her course , lighter than a fairy , she ran up to her chamber , followed by Raoul . 
Shutting the door , and placing in the hands of her cameriste the mantle she had held upon her arm : `` You were seeking M. de Guiche , were you not ? '' 
said she to Raoul . 
