Taken or killed ! 
Ah ! 
Ah ! 
sire ! 
tell me , if the news is true , how much has it cost you in men and money . 
We will then reckon if the game has been worth the stakes . '' 
As he spoke thus , the king went up to him in great anger , and said , `` Monsieur d'Artagnan , your replies are those of a rebel ! 
Tell me , if you please , who is king of France ? 
Do you know any other ? '' 
`` Sire , '' replied the captain of the musketeers , coldly , `` I very well remember that one morning at Vaux you addressed that question to many people who did not answer to it , whilst I , on my part , did answer to it . 
If I recognized my king on that day , when the thing was not easy , I think it would be useless to ask the question of me now , when your majesty and I are alone . '' 
At these words Louis cast down his eyes . 
It appeared to him that the shade of the unfortunate Philippe passed between D'Artagnan and himself , to evoke the remembrance of that terrible adventure . 
Almost at the same moment an officer entered and placed a dispatch in the hands of the king , who , in his turn , changed color , while reading it . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` what I learn here you would know later ; it is better I should tell you , and that you should learn it from the mouth of your king . 
A battle has taken place at Belle-Isle . '' 
`` Is it possible ? '' 
said D'Artagnan , with a calm air , though his heart was beating fast enough to choke him . 
`` Well , sire ? '' 
`` Well , monsieur - and I have lost a hundred and ten men . '' 
A beam of joy and pride shone in the eyes of D'Artagnan . 
`` And the rebels ? '' 
said he . 
`` The rebels have fled , '' said the king . 
D'Artagnan could not restrain a cry of triumph . 
`` Only , '' added the king , `` I have a fleet which closely blockades Belle-Isle , and I am certain not a bark can escape . '' 
`` So that , '' said the musketeer , brought back to his dismal idea , `` if these two gentlemen are taken - '' `` They will be hanged , '' said the king , quietly . 
`` And do they know it ? '' 
replied D'Artagnan , repressing his trembling . 
`` They know it , because you must have told them yourself ; and all the country knows it . '' 
`` Then , sire , they will never be taken alive , I will answer for that . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the king , negligently , and taking up his letter again . 
`` Very well , they will be dead , then , Monsieur d'Artagnan , and that will come to the same thing , since I should only take them to have them hanged . '' 
D'Artagnan wiped the sweat which flowed from his brow . 
`` I have told you , '' pursued Louis XIV. , `` that I would one day be an affectionate , generous , and constant master . 
You are now the only man of former times worthy of my anger or my friendship . 
I will not spare you either sentiment , according to your conduct . 
Could you serve a king , Monsieur d'Artagnan , who should have a hundred kings , his equals , in the kingdom ? 
Could I , tell me , do with such weak instruments the great things I meditate ? 
Did you ever see an artist effect great works with an unworthy tool ? 
Far from us , monsieur , the old leaven of feudal abuse ! 
The Fronde , which threatened to ruin monarchy , has emancipated it . 
I am master at home , Captain d'Artagnan , and I shall have servants who , lacking , perhaps , your genius , will carry devotion and obedience to the verge of heroism . 
Of what consequence , I ask you , of what consequence is it that God has given no sense to arms and legs ? 
It is to the head he has given genius , and the head , you know , the rest obey . 
I am the head . '' 
D'Artagnan started . 
Louis XIV . 
continued as if he had seen nothing , although this emotion had not by any means escaped him . 
`` Now , let us conclude between us two the bargain I promised to make with you one day when you found me in a very strange predicament at Blois . 
Do me justice , monsieur , when you admit I do not make any one pay for the tears of shame that I then shed . 
Look around you ; lofty heads have bowed . 
Bow yours , or choose such exile as will suit you . 
Perhaps , when reflecting upon it , you will find your king has a generous heart , who reckons sufficiently upon your loyalty to allow you to leave him dissatisfied , when you possess a great state secret . 
You are a brave man ; I know you to be so . 
Why have you judged me prematurely ? 
Judge me from this day forward , D'Artagnan , and be as severe as you please . '' 
D'Artagnan remained bewildered , mute , undecided for the first time in his life . 
At last he had found an adversary worthy of him . 
This was no longer trick , it was calculation ; no longer violence , but strength ; no longer passion , but will ; no longer boasting , but council . 
This young man who had brought down a Fouquet , and could do without a D'Artagnan , deranged the somewhat headstrong calculations of the musketeer . 
`` Come , let us see what stops you ? '' 
said the king , kindly . 
`` You have given in your resignation ; shall I refuse to accept it ? 
I admit that it may be hard for such an old captain to recover lost good-humor . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
replied D'Artagnan , in a melancholy tone , `` that is not my most serious care . 
I hesitate to take back my resignation because I am old in comparison with you , and have habits difficult to abandon . 
Henceforward , you must have courtiers who know how to amuse you - madmen who will get themselves killed to carry out what you call your great works . 
Great they will be , I feel - but , if by chance I should not think them so ? 
I have seen war , sire , I have seen peace ; I have served Richelieu and Mazarin ; I have been scorched with your father , at the fire of Rochelle ; riddled with sword-thrusts like a sieve , having grown a new skin ten times , as serpents do . 
After affronts and injustices , I have a command which was formerly something , because it gave the bearer the right of speaking as he liked to his king . 
But your captain of the musketeers will henceforward be an officer guarding the outer doors . 
Truly , sire , if that is to be my employment from this time , seize the opportunity of our being on good terms , to take it from me . 
Do not imagine that I bear malice ; no , you have tamed me , as you say ; but it must be confessed that in taming me you have lowered me ; by bowing me you have convicted me of weakness . 
If you knew how well it suits me to carry my head high , and what a pitiful mien I shall have while scenting the dust of your carpets ! 
Oh ! 
sire , I regret sincerely , and you will regret as I do , the old days when the king of France saw in every vestibule those insolent gentlemen , lean , always swearing - cross-grained mastiffs , who could bite mortally in the hour of danger or of battle . 
These men were the best of courtiers to the hand which fed them - they would lick it ; but for the hand that struck them , oh ! 
the bite that followed ! 
A little gold on the lace of their cloaks , a slender stomach in their hauts-de-chausses , a little sparkling of gray in their dry hair , and you will behold the handsome dukes and peers , the haughty marechaux of France . 
But why should I tell you all this ? 
The king is master ; he wills that I should make verses , he wills that I should polish the mosaics of his ante - chambers with satin shoes . 
Mordioux ! 
that is difficult , but I have got over greater difficulties . 
I will do it . 
Why should I do it ? 
Because I love money ? 
- I have enough . 
Because I am ambitious ? 
- my career is almost at an end . 
Because I love the court ? 
No . 
I will remain here because I have been accustomed for thirty years to go and take the orderly word of the king , and to have said to me ` Good evening , D'Artagnan , ' with a smile I did not beg for . 
That smile I will beg for ! 
Are you content , sire ? '' 
And D'Artagnan bowed his silver head , upon which the smiling king placed his white hand with pride . 
`` Thanks , my old servant , my faithful friend , '' said he . 
`` As , reckoning from this day , I have no longer any enemies in France , it remains with me to send you to a foreign field to gather your marshal 's baton . 
