The king will not refuse me , and I will take you with me . '' 
`` Monsieur d'Artagnan , '' replied Raoul , pressing his hand with emotion , `` thanks for that offer , which would give us more than we wish , either monsieur le comte or I. I , who am young , stand in need of labor of mind and fatigue of body ; monsieur le comte wants the profoundest repose . 
You are his best friend . 
I recommend him to your care . 
In watching over him , you are holding both our souls in your hands . '' 
`` I must go ; my horse is all in a fret , '' said D'Artagnan , with whom the most manifest sign of a lively emotion was the change of ideas in conversation . 
`` Come , comte , how many days longer has Raoul to stay here ? '' 
`` Three days at most . '' 
`` And how long will it take you to reach home ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
a considerable time , '' replied Athos . 
`` I shall not like the idea of being separated too quickly from Raoul . 
Time will travel too fast of itself to require me to aid it by distance . 
I shall only make half - stages . '' 
`` And why so , my friend ? 
Nothing is more dull than traveling slowly ; and hostelry life does not become a man like you . '' 
`` My friend , I came hither on post-horses ; but I wish to purchase two animals of a superior kind . 
Now , to take them home fresh , it would not be prudent to make them travel more than seven or eight leagues a day . '' 
`` Where is Grimaud ? '' 
`` He arrived yesterday morning with Raoul 's appointments ; and I have left him to sleep . '' 
`` That is , never to come back again , '' D'Artagnan suffered to escape him . 
`` Till we meet again , then , dear Athos - and if you are diligent , I shall embrace you the sooner . '' 
So saying , he put his foot in the stirrup , which Raoul held . 
`` Farewell ! '' 
said the young man , embracing him . 
`` Farewell ! '' 
said D'Artagnan , as he got into his saddle . 
His horse made a movement which divided the cavalier from his friends . 
This scene had taken place in front of the house chosen by Athos , near the gates of Antibes , whither D'Artagnan , after his supper , had ordered his horses to be brought . 
The road began to branch off there , white and undulating in the vapors of the night . 
The horse eagerly respired the salt , sharp perfume of the marshes . 
D'Artagnan put him to a trot ; and Athos and Raoul sadly turned towards the house . 
All at once they heard the rapid approach of a horse 's steps , and first believed it to be one of those singular repercussions which deceive the ear at every turn in a road . 
But it was really the return of the horseman . 
They uttered a cry of joyous surprise ; and the captain , springing to the ground like a young man , seized within his arms the two beloved heads of Athos and Raoul . 
He held them long embraced thus , without speaking a word , or suffering the sigh which was bursting his breast to escape him . 
Then , as rapidly as he had come back , he set off again , with a sharp application of his spurs to the sides of his fiery horse . 
`` Alas ! '' 
said the comte , in a low voice , `` alas ! 
alas ! '' 
`` An evil omen ! '' 
on his side , said D'Artagnan to himself , making up for lost time . 
`` I could not smile upon them . 
An evil omen ! '' 
The next day Grimaud was on foot again . 
The service commanded by M. de Beaufort was happily accomplished . 
The flotilla , sent to Toulon by the exertions of Raoul , had set out , dragging after it in little nutshells , almost invisible , the wives and friends of the fishermen and smugglers put in requisition for the service of the fleet . 
The time , so short , which remained for father and son to live together , appeared to go by with double rapidity , like some swift stream that flows towards eternity . 
Athos and Raoul returned to Toulon , which began to be filled with the noise of carriages , with the noise of arms , the noise of neighing horses . 
The trumpeters sounded their spirited marches ; the drummers signalized their strength ; the streets were overflowing with soldiers , servants , and tradespeople . 
The Duc de Beaufort was everywhere , superintending the embarkation with the zeal and interest of a good captain . 
He encouraged the humblest of his companions ; he scolded his lieutenants , even those of the highest rank . 
Artillery , provisions , baggage , he insisted upon seeing all himself . 
He examined the equipment of every soldier ; assured himself of the health and soundness of every horse . 
It was plain that , light , boastful , egotistical , in his hotel , the gentleman became the soldier again - the high noble , a captain - in face of the responsibility he had accepted . 
And yet , it must be admitted that , whatever was the care with which he presided over the preparations for departure , it was easy to perceive careless precipitation , and the absence of all the precaution that make the French solider the first soldier in the world , because , in that world , he is the one most abandoned to his own physical and moral resources . 
All things having satisfied , or appearing to have satisfied , the admiral , he paid his compliments to Raoul , and gave the last orders for sailing , which was ordered the next morning at daybreak . 
He invited the comte had his son to dine with him ; but they , under a pretext of service , kept themselves apart . 
Gaining their hostelry , situated under the trees of the great Place , they took their repast in haste , and Athos led Raoul to the rocks which dominate the city , vast gray mountains , whence the view is infinite and embraces a liquid horizon which appears , so remote is it , on a level with the rocks themselves . 
The night was fine , as it always is in these happy climes . 
The moon , rising behind the rocks , unrolled a silver sheet on the cerulean carpet of the sea . 
In the roadsteads maneuvered silently the vessels which had just taken their rank to facilitate the embarkation . 
The sea , loaded with phosphoric light , opened beneath the hulls of the barks that transported the baggage and munitions ; every dip of the prow plowed up this gulf of white flames ; from every oar dropped liquid diamonds . 
The sailors , rejoicing in the largesses of the admiral , were heard murmuring their slow and artless songs . 
Sometimes the grinding of the chains was mixed with the dull noise of shot falling into the holds . 
Such harmonies , such a spectacle , oppress the heart like fear , and dilate it like hope . 
All this life speaks of death . 
Athos had seated himself with his son , upon the moss , among the brambles of the promontory . 
Around their heads passed and repassed large bats , carried along by the fearful whirl of their blind chase . 
The feet of Raoul were over the edge of the cliff , bathed in that void which is peopled by vertigo , and provokes to self-annihilation . 
When the moon had risen to its fullest height , caressing with light the neighboring peaks , when the watery mirror was illumined in its full extent , and the little red fires had made their openings in the black masses of every ship , Athos , collecting all his ideas and all his courage , said : `` God has made all these things that we see , Raoul ; He has made us also , - poor atoms mixed up with this monstrous universe . 
We shine like those fires and those stars ; we sigh like those waves ; we suffer like those great ships , which are worn out in plowing the waves , in obeying the wind that urges them towards an end , as the breath of God blows us towards a port . 
Everything likes to live , Raoul ; and everything seems beautiful to living things . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said Raoul , `` we have before us a beautiful spectacle ! '' 
`` How good D'Artagnan is ! '' 
interrupted Athos , suddenly , `` and what a rare good fortune it is to be supported during a whole life by such a friend as he is ! 
That is what you have missed , Raoul . '' 
`` A friend ! '' 
cried Raoul , `` I have wanted a friend ! '' 
`` M. de Guiche is an agreeable companion , '' resumed the comte , coldly , `` but I believe , in the times in which you live , men are more engaged in their own interests and their own pleasures than they were in ours . 
You have sought a secluded life ; that is a great happiness , but you have lost your strength thereby . 
We four , more weaned from those delicate abstractions that constitute your joy , furnished much more resistance when misfortune presented itself . '' 
`` I have not interrupted you , monsieur , to tell you that I had a friend , and that that friend is M. de Guiche . 
Certes , he is good and generous , and moreover he loves me . 
But I have lived under the guardianship of another friendship , monsieur , as precious and as strong as that of which you speak , since it is yours . '' 
`` I have not been a friend for you , Raoul , '' said Athos . 
`` Eh ! 
monsieur , and in what respect not ? '' 
`` Because I have given you reason to think that life has but one face , because , sad and severe , alas ! 
I have always cut off for you , without , God knows , wishing to do so , the joyous buds that spring incessantly from the fair tree of youth ; so that at this moment I repent of not having made of you a more expansive , dissipated , animated man . '' 
`` I know why you say that , monsieur . 
No , it is not you who have made me what I am ; it was love , which took me at the time when children only have inclinations ; it is the constancy natural to my character , which with other creatures is but habit . 
I believed that I should always be as I was ; I thought God had cast me in a path quite clear , quite straight , bordered with fruits and flowers . 
I had ever watching over me your vigilance and strength . 
I believed myself to be vigilant and strong . 
Nothing prepared me ; I fell once , and that once deprived me of courage for the whole of my life . 
It is quite true that I wrecked myself . 
Oh , no , monsieur ! 
you are nothing in my past but happiness - in my future but hope ! 
No , I have no reproach to make against life such as you made it for me ; I bless you , and I love you ardently . '' 
