Gourville bit his lips to check his tears , out of respect for the king . 
La Fontaine buried his face in his handkerchief , and the only signs of life he gave were the convulsive motions of his shoulders , raised by his sobs . 
The king preserved his dignity . 
His countenance was impassible . 
He even maintained the frown which appeared when D'Artagnan announced his enemies . 
He made a gesture which signified , `` Speak ; '' and he remained standing , with his eyes fixed searchingly on these desponding men . 
Pelisson bowed to the ground , and La Fontaine knelt as people do in churches . 
This dismal silence , disturbed only by sighs and groans , began to excite in the king , not compassion , but impatience . 
`` Monsieur Pelisson , '' said he , in a sharp , dry tone . 
`` Monsieur Gourville , and you , Monsieur - '' and he did not name La Fontaine , `` I can not , without sensible displeasure , see you come to plead for one of the greatest criminals it is the duty of justice to punish . 
A king does not allow himself to soften save at the tears of the innocent , the remorse of the guilty . 
I have no faith either in the remorse of M. Fouquet or the tears of his friends , because the one is tainted to the very heart , and the others ought to dread offending me in my own palace . 
For these reasons , I beg you , Monsieur Pelisson , Monsieur Gourville , and you , Monsieur - , to say nothing that will not plainly proclaim the respect you have for my will . '' 
`` Sire , '' replied Pelisson , trembling at these words , `` we are come to say nothing to your majesty that is not the most profound expression of the most sincere respect and love that are due to a king from all his subjects . 
Your majesty 's justice is redoubtable ; every one must yield to the sentences it pronounces . 
We respectfully bow before it . 
Far from us the idea of coming to defend him who has had the misfortune to offend your majesty . 
He who has incurred your displeasure may be a friend of ours , but he is an enemy to the state . 
We abandon him , but with tears , to the severity of the king . '' 
`` Besides , '' interrupted the king , calmed by that supplicating voice , and those persuasive words , `` my parliament will decide . 
I do not strike without first having weighed the crime ; my justice does not wield the sword without employing first a pair of scales . '' 
`` Therefore we have every confidence in that impartiality of the king , and hope to make our feeble voices heard , with the consent of your majesty , when the hour for defending an accused friend strikes . '' 
`` In that case , messieurs , what do you ask of me ? '' 
said the king , with his most imposing air . 
`` Sire , '' continued Pelisson , `` the accused has a wife and family . 
The little property he had was scarcely sufficient to pay his debts , and Madame Fouquet , since her husband 's captivity , is abandoned by everybody . 
The hand of your majesty strikes like the hand of God . 
When the Lord sends the curse of leprosy or pestilence into a family , every one flies and shuns the abode of the leprous or plague-stricken . 
Sometimes , but very rarely , a generous physician alone ventures to approach the ill-reputed threshold , passes it with courage , and risks his life to combat death . 
He is the last resource of the dying , the chosen instrument of heavenly mercy . 
Sire , we supplicate you , with clasped hands and bended knees , as a divinity is supplicated ! 
Madame Fouquet has no longer any friends , no longer any means of support ; she weeps in her deserted home , abandoned by all those who besieged its doors in the hour of prosperity ; she has neither credit nor hope left . 
At least , the unhappy wretch upon whom your anger falls receives from you , however culpable he may be , his daily bread though moistened by his tears . 
As much afflicted , more destitute than her husband , Madame Fouquet - the lady who had the honor to receive your majesty at her table - Madame Fouquet , the wife of the ancient superintendent of your majesty 's finances , Madame Fouquet has no longer bread . '' 
Here the mortal silence which had chained the breath of Pelisson 's two friends was broken by an outburst of sobs ; and D'Artagnan , whose chest heaved at hearing this humble prayer , turned round towards the angle of the cabinet to bite his mustache and conceal a groan . 
The king had preserved his eye dry and his countenance severe ; but the blood had mounted to his cheeks , and the firmness of his look was visibly diminished . 
`` What do you wish ? '' 
said he , in an agitated voice . 
`` We come humbly to ask your majesty , '' replied Pelisson , upon whom emotion was fast gaining , `` to permit us , without incurring the displeasure of your majesty , to lend to Madame Fouquet two thousand pistoles collected among the old friends of her husband , in order that the widow may not stand in need of the necessaries of life . '' 
At the word widow , pronounced by Pelisson whilst Fouquet was still alive , the king turned very pale ; - his pride disappeared ; pity rose from his heart to his lips ; he cast a softened look upon the men who knelt sobbing at his feet . 
`` God forbid , '' said he , `` that I should confound the innocent with the guilty . 
They know me but ill who doubt my mercy towards the weak . 
I strike none but the arrogant . 
Do , messieurs , do all that your hearts counsel you to assuage the grief of Madame Fouquet . 
Go , messieurs - go ! '' 
The three now rose in silence with dry eyes . 
The tears had been scorched away by contact with their burning cheeks and eyelids . 
They had not the strength to address their thanks to the king , who himself cut short their solemn reverences by entrenching himself suddenly behind the fauteuil . 
D'Artagnan remained alone with the king . 
`` Well , '' said he , approaching the young prince , who interrogated him with his look . 
`` Well , my master ! 
If you had not the device which belongs to your sun , I would recommend you one which M. Conrart might translate into eclectic Latin , ` Calm with the lowly ; stormy with the strong . ' '' 
The king smiled , and passed into the next apartment , after having said to D'Artagnan , `` I give you the leave of absence you must want to put the affairs of your friend , the late M. du Vallon , in order . '' 
: Porthos 's Will . 
At Pierrefonds everything was in mourning . 
The courts were deserted - the stables closed - the parterres neglected . 
In the basins , the fountains , formerly so jubilantly fresh and noisy , had stopped of themselves . 
Along the roads around the chateau came a few grave personages mounted on mules or country nags . 
These were rural neighbors , cures and bailiffs of adjacent estates . 
All these people entered the chateau silently , handed their horses to a melancholy-looking groom , and directed their steps , conducted by a huntsman in black , to the great dining-room , where Mousqueton received them at the door . 
Mousqueton had become so thin in two days that his clothes moved upon him like an ill - fitting scabbard in which the sword-blade dances at each motion . 
His face , composed of red and white , like that of the Madonna of Vandyke , was furrowed by two silver rivulets which had dug their beds in his cheeks , as full formerly as they had become flabby since his grief began . 
At each fresh arrival , Mousqueton found fresh tears , and it was pitiful to see him press his throat with his fat hand to keep from bursting into sobs and lamentations . 
All these visits were for the purpose of hearing the reading of Porthos 's will , announced for that day , and at which all the covetous friends of the dead man were anxious to be present , as he had left no relations behind him . 
The visitors took their places as they arrived , and the great room had just been closed when the clock struck twelve , the hour fixed for the reading of the important document . 
Porthos 's procureur - and that was naturally the successor of Master Coquenard - commenced by slowly unfolding the vast parchment upon which the powerful hand of Porthos had traced his sovereign will . 
The seal broken - the spectacles put on - the preliminary cough having sounded - every one pricked up his ears . 
Mousqueton had squatted himself in a corner , the better to weep and the better to hear . 
All at once the folding-doors of the great room , which had been shut , were thrown open as if by magic , and a warlike figure appeared upon the threshold , resplendent in the full light of the sun . 
This was D'Artagnan , who had come alone to the gate , and finding nobody to hold his stirrup , had tied his horse to the knocker and announced himself . 
The splendor of daylight invading the room , the murmur of all present , and , more than all , the instinct of the faithful dog , drew Mousqueton from his reverie ; he raised his head , recognized the old friend of his master , and , screaming with grief , he embraced his knees , watering the floor with his tears . 
D'Artagnan raised the poor intendant , embraced him as if he had been a brother , and , having nobly saluted the assembly , who all bowed as they whispered to each other his name , he went and took his seat at the extremity of the great carved oak hall , still holding by the hand poor Mousqueton , who was suffocating with excess of woe , and sank upon the steps . 
Then the procureur , who , like the rest , was considerably agitated , commenced . 
Porthos , after a profession of faith of the most Christian character , asked pardon of his enemies for all the injuries he might have done them . 
At this paragraph , a ray of inexpressible pride beamed from the eyes of D'Artagnan . 
He recalled to his mind the old soldier ; all those enemies of Porthos brought to earth by his valiant hand ; he reckoned up the numbers of them , and said to himself that Porthos had acted wisely , not to enumerate his enemies or the injuries done to them , or the task would have been too much for the reader . 
Then came the following schedule of his extensive lands : `` I possess at this present time , by the grace of God - `` 1 . 
The domain of Pierrefonds , lands , woods , meadows , waters , and forests , surrounded by good walls . 
`` 2 . 
The domain of Bracieux , chateaux , forests , plowed lands , forming three farms . 
`` 3 . 
The little estate Du Vallon , so named because it is in the valley . '' 
-LRB- Brave Porthos ! -RRB- 
`` 4 . 
Fifty farms in Touraine , amounting to five hundred acres . 
`` 5 . 
Three mills upon the Cher , bringing in six hundred livres each . 
`` 6 . 
Three fish-pools in Berry , producing two hundred livres a year . 
`` As to my personal or movable property , so called because it can be moved , as is so well explained by my learned friend the bishop of Vannes - '' -LRB- D'Artagnan shuddered at the dismal remembrance attached to that name -RRB- - the procureur continued imperturbably - `` they consist - '' `` 1 . 
In goods which I can not detail here for want of room , and which furnish all my chateaux or houses , but of which the list is drawn up by my intendant . '' 
Every one turned his eyes towards Mousqueton , who was still lost in grief . 
`` 2 . 
In twenty horses for saddle and draught , which I have particularly at my chateau of Pierrefonds , and which are called - Bayard , Roland , Charlemagne , Pepin , Dunois , La Hire , Ogier , Samson , Milo , Nimrod , Urganda , Armida , Flastrade , Dalilah , Rebecca , Yolande , Finette , Grisette , Lisette , and Musette . 
`` 3 . 
In sixty dogs , forming six packs , divided as follows : the first , for the stag ; the second , for the wolf ; the third , for the wild boar ; the fourth , for the hare ; and the two others , for setters and protection . 
`` 4 . 
In arms for war and the chase contained in my gallery of arms . 
`` 5 . 
My wines of Anjou , selected for Athos , who liked them formerly ; my wines of Burgundy , Champagne , Bordeaux , and Spain , stocking eight cellars and twelve vaults , in my various houses . 
