`` Neither strangle anybody nor smash anything , Porthos ; I will manage it all ; put on one of your thirty-six suits , and come with me to a tailor . '' 
`` Pooh ! 
my agent has seen them all this morning . '' 
`` Even M. Percerin ? '' 
`` Who is M. Percerin ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
only the king 's tailor ! '' 
`` Oh , ah , yes , '' said Porthos , who wished to appear to know the king 's tailor , but now heard his name mentioned for the first time ; `` to M. Percerin 's , by Jove ! 
I was afraid he would be too busy . '' 
`` Doubtless he will be ; but be at ease , Porthos ; he will do for me what he would n't do for another . 
Only you must allow yourself to be measured ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Porthos , with a sigh , '' 't is vexatious , but what would you have me do ? '' 
`` Do ? 
As others do ; as the king does . '' 
`` What ! 
do they measure the king , too ? 
does he put up with it ? '' 
`` The king is a beau , my good friend , and so are you , too , whatever you may say about it . '' 
Porthos smiled triumphantly . 
`` Let us go to the king 's tailor , '' he said ; `` and since he measures the king , I think , by my faith , I may do worse than allow him to measure me ! '' 
: Who Messire Jean Percerin Was . 
The king 's tailor , Messire Jean Percerin , occupied a rather large house in the Rue St. Honore , near the Rue de l'Arbre Sec . 
He was a man of great taste in elegant stuffs , embroideries , and velvets , being hereditary tailor to the king . 
The preferment of his house reached as far back as the time of Charles IX. ; from whose reign dated , as we know , fancy in bravery difficult enough to gratify . 
The Percerin of that period was a Huguenot , like Ambrose Pare , and had been spared by the Queen of Navarre , the beautiful Margot , as they used to write and say , too , in those days ; because , in sooth , he was the only one who could make for her those wonderful riding-habits which she so loved to wear , seeing that they were marvelously well suited to hide certain anatomical defects , which the Queen of Navarre used very studiously to conceal . 
Percerin being saved , made , out of gratitude , some beautiful black bodices , very inexpensively indeed , for Queen Catherine , who ended by being pleased at the preservation of a Huguenot people , on whom she had long looked with detestation . 
But Percerin was a very prudent man ; and having heard it said that there was no more dangerous sign for a Protestant than to be smiled up on by Catherine , and having observed that her smiles were more frequent than usual , he speedily turned Catholic with all his family ; and having thus become irreproachable , attained the lofty position of master tailor to the Crown of France . 
Under Henry III. , gay king as he was , this position was a grand as the height of one of the loftiest peaks of the Cordilleras . 
Now Percerin had been a clever man all his life , and by way of keeping up his reputation beyond the grave , took very good care not to make a bad death of it , and so contrived to die very skillfully ; and that at the very moment he felt his powers of invention declining . 
He left a son and a daughter , both worthy of the name they were called upon to bear ; the son , a cutter as unerring and exact as the square rule ; the daughter , apt at embroidery , and at designing ornaments . 
The marriage of Henry IV . 
and Marie de Medici , and the exquisite court-mourning for the afore-mentioned queen , together with a few words let fall by M. de Bassompiere , king of the beaux of the period , made the fortune of the second generation of Percerins . 
M. Concino Concini , and his wife Galligai , who subsequently shone at the French court , sought to Italianize the fashion , and introduced some Florentine tailors ; but Percerin , touched to the quick in his patriotism and his self-esteem , entirely defeated these foreigners , and that so well that Concino was the first to give up his compatriots , and held the French tailor in such esteem that he would never employ any other , and thus wore a doublet of his on the very day that Vitry blew out his brains with a pistol at the Pont du Louvre . 
And so it was a doublet issuing from M. Percerin 's workshop , which the Parisians rejoiced in hacking into so many pieces with the living human body it contained . 
Notwithstanding the favor Concino Concini had shown Percerin , the king , Louis XIII. , had the generosity to bear no malice to his tailor , and to retain him in his service . 
At the time that Louis the Just afforded this great example of equity , Percerin had brought up two sons , one of whom made his debut at the marriage of Anne of Austria , invented that admirable Spanish costume , in which Richelieu danced a saraband , made the costumes for the tragedy of `` Mirame , '' and stitched on to Buckingham 's mantle those famous pearls which were destined to be scattered about the pavements of the Louvre . 
A man becomes easily notable who has made the dresses of a Duke of Buckingham , a M. de Cinq - Mars , a Mademoiselle Ninon , a M. de Beaufort , and a Marion de Lorme . 
And thus Percerin the third had attained the summit of his glory when his father died . 
This same Percerin III. , old , famous and wealthy , yet further dressed Louis XIV. ; and having no son , which was a great cause of sorrow to him , seeing that with himself his dynasty would end , he had brought up several hopeful pupils . 
He possessed a carriage , a country house , men-servants the tallest in Paris ; and by special authority from Louis XIV. , a pack of hounds . 
He worked for MM . 
de Lyonne and Letellier , under a sort of patronage ; but politic man as he was , and versed in state secrets , he never succeeded in fitting M. Colbert . 
This is beyond explanation ; it is a matter for guessing or for intuition . 
Great geniuses of every kind live on unseen , intangible ideas ; they act without themselves knowing why . 
The great Percerin -LRB- for , contrary to the rule of dynasties , it was , above all , the last of the Percerins who deserved the name of Great -RRB- , the great Percerin was inspired when he cut a robe for the queen , or a coat for the king ; he could mount a mantle for Monsieur , the clock of a stocking for Madame ; but , in spite of his supreme talent , he could never hit off anything approaching a creditable fit for M. Colbert . 
`` That man , '' he used often to say , `` is beyond my art ; my needle can never dot him down . '' 
We need scarcely say that Percerin was M. Fouquet 's tailor , and that the superintendent highly esteemed him . 
M. Percerin was nearly eighty years old , nevertheless still fresh , and at the same time so dry , the courtiers used to say , that he was positively brittle . 
His renown and his fortune were great enough for M. le Prince , that king of fops , to take his arm when talking over the fashions ; and for those least eager to pay never to dare to leave their accounts in arrear with him ; for Master Percerin would for the first time make clothes upon credit , but the second never , unless paid for the former order . 
It is easy to see at once that a tailor of such renown , instead of running after customers , made difficulties about obliging any fresh ones . 
And so Percerin declined to fit bourgeois , or those who had but recently obtained patents of nobility . 
A story used to circulate that even M. de Mazarin , in exchange for Percerin supplying him with a full suit of ceremonial vestments as cardinal , one fine day slipped letters of nobility into his pocket . 
It was to the house of this grand llama of tailors that D'Artagnan took the despairing Porthos ; who , as they were going along , said to his friend , `` Take care , my good D'Artagnan , not to compromise the dignity of a man such as I am with the arrogance of this Percerin , who will , I expect , be very impertinent ; for I give you notice , my friend , that if he is wanting in respect I will infallibly chastise him . '' 
`` Presented by me , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` you have nothing to fear , even though you were what you are not . '' 
`` Ah ! 
't is because - '' `` What ? 
Have you anything against Percerin , Porthos ? '' 
`` I think that I once sent Mouston to a fellow of that name . '' 
`` And then ? '' 
`` The fellow refused to supply me . '' 
`` Oh , a misunderstanding , no doubt , which it will be now exceedingly easy to set right . 
Mouston must have made a mistake . '' 
`` Perhaps . '' 
`` He has confused the names . '' 
`` Possibly . 
That rascal Mouston never can remember names . '' 
`` I will take it all upon myself . '' 
`` Very good . '' 
`` Stop the carriage , Porthos ; here we are . '' 
`` Here ! 
how here ? 
We are at the Halles ; and you told me the house was at the corner of the Rue de l'Arbre Sec . '' '' 
'T is true , but look . '' 
`` Well , I do look , and I see - '' `` What ? '' 
`` Pardieu ! 
that we are at the Halles ! '' 
`` You do not , I suppose , want our horses to clamber up on the roof of the carriage in front of us ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Nor the carriage in front of us to mount on top of the one in front of it . 
Nor that the second should be driven over the roofs of the thirty or forty others which have arrived before us . '' 
`` No , you are right , indeed . 
What a number of people ! 
And what are they all about ? '' '' 
'T is very simple . 
They are waiting their turn . '' 
`` Bah ! 
Have the comedians of the Hotel de Bourgogne shifted their quarters ? '' 
`` No ; their turn to obtain an entrance to M. Percerin 's house . '' 
`` And we are going to wait too ? '' 
`` Oh , we shall show ourselves prompter and not so proud . '' 
`` What are we to do , then ? '' 
`` Get down , pass through the footmen and lackeys , and enter the tailor 's house , which I will answer for our doing , if you go first . '' 
`` Come along , then , '' said Porthos . 
They accordingly alighted and made their way on foot towards the establishment . 
The cause of the confusion was that M. Percerin 's doors were closed , while a servant , standing before them , was explaining to the illustrious customers of the illustrious tailor that just then M. Percerin could not receive anybody . 
It was bruited about outside still , on the authority of what the great lackey had told some great noble whom he favored , in confidence , that M. Percerin was engaged on five costumes for the king , and that , owing to the urgency of the case , he was meditating in his office on the ornaments , colors , and cut of these five suits . 
Some , contented with this reason , went away again , contented to repeat the tale to others , but others , more tenacious , insisted on having the doors opened , and among these last three Blue Ribbons , intended to take parts in a ballet , which would inevitably fail unless the said three had their costumes shaped by the very hand of the great Percerin himself . 
D'Artagnan , pushing on Porthos , who scattered the groups of people right and left , succeeded in gaining the counter , behind which the journeyman tailors were doing their best to answer queries . 
-LRB- We forgot to mention that at the door they wanted to put off Porthos like the rest , but D'Artagnan , showing himself , pronounced merely these words , `` The king 's order , '' and was let in with his friend . -RRB- 
