`` Athos ! 
Athos ! 
my friend ! '' 
cried this voice , agitated even to tears . 
`` Monsieur le Chevalier d'Artagnan , '' faltered out Grimaud . 
`` Where is he ? 
Where is he ? '' 
continued the musketeer . 
Grimaud seized his arm in his bony fingers , and pointed to the bed , upon the sheets of which the livid tints of death already showed . 
A choked respiration , the opposite to a sharp cry , swelled the throat of D'Artagnan . 
He advanced on tip-toe , trembling , frightened at the noise his feet made on the floor , his heart rent by a nameless agony . 
He placed his ear to the breast of Athos , his face to the comte 's mouth . 
Neither noise , nor breath ! 
D'Artagnan drew back . 
Grimaud , who had followed him with his eyes , and for whom each of his movements had been a revelation , came timidly ; seated himself at the foot of the bed , and glued his lips to the sheet which was raised by the stiffened feet of his master . 
Then large drops began to flow from his red eyes . 
This old man in invincible despair , who wept , bent doubled without uttering a word , presented the most touching spectacle that D'Artagnan , in a life so filled with emotion , had ever met with . 
The captain resumed standing in contemplation before that smiling dead man , who seemed to have burnished his last thought , to give his best friend , the man he had loved next to Raoul , a gracious welcome even beyond life . 
And for reply to that exalted flattery of hospitality , D'Artagnan went and kissed Athos fervently on the brow , and with his trembling fingers closed his eyes . 
Then he seated himself by the pillow without dread of that dead man , who had been so kind and affectionate to him for five and thirty years . 
He was feeding his soul with the remembrances the noble visage of the comte brought to his mind in crowds - some blooming and charming as that smile - some dark , dismal , and icy as that visage with its eyes now closed to all eternity . 
All at once the bitter flood which mounted from minute to minute invaded his heart , and swelled his breast almost to bursting . 
Incapable of mastering his emotion , he arose , and tearing himself violently from the chamber where he had just found dead him to whom he came to report the news of the death of Porthos , he uttered sobs so heart-rending that the servants , who seemed only to wait for an explosion of grief , answered to it by their lugubrious clamors , and the dogs of the late comte by their lamentable howlings . 
Grimaud was the only one who did not lift up his voice . 
Even in the paroxysm of his grief he would not have dared to profane the dead , or for the first time disturb the slumber of his master . 
Had not Athos always bidden him be dumb ? 
At daybreak D'Artagnan , who had wandered about the lower hall , biting his fingers to stifle his sighs - D'Artagnan went up once more ; and watching the moments when Grimaud turned his head towards him , he made him a sign to come to him , which the faithful servant obeyed without making more noise than a shadow . 
D'Artagnan went down again , followed by Grimaud ; and when he had gained the vestibule , taking the old man 's hands , `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` I have seen how the father died ; now let me know about the son . '' 
Grimaud drew from his breast a large letter , upon the envelope of which was traced the address of Athos . 
He recognized the writing of M. de Beaufort , broke the seal , and began to read , while walking about in the first steel-chill rays of dawn , in the dark alley of old limes , marked by the still visible footsteps of the comte who had just died . 
: The Bulletin . 
The Duc de Beaufort wrote to Athos . 
The letter destined for the living only reached the dead . 
God had changed the address . 
`` MY DEAR COMTE , '' wrote the prince , in his large , school-boy 's hand , - `` a great misfortune has struck us amidst a great triumph . 
The king loses one of the bravest of soldiers . 
I lose a friend . 
You lose M. de Bragelonne . 
He has died gloriously , so gloriously that I have not the strength to weep as I could wish . 
Receive my sad compliments , my dear comte . 
Heaven distributes trials according to the greatness of our hearts . 
This is an immense one , but not above your courage . 
Your good friend , `` LE DUC DE BEAUFORT . '' 
The letter contained a relation written by one of the prince 's secretaries . 
It was the most touching recital , and the most true , of that dismal episode which unraveled two existences . 
D'Artagnan , accustomed to battle emotions , and with a heart armed against tenderness , could not help starting on reading the name of Raoul , the name of that beloved boy who had become a shade now - like his father . 
`` In the morning , '' said the prince 's secretary , `` monseigneur commanded the attack . 
Normandy and Picardy had taken positions in the rocks dominated by the heights of the mountain , upon the declivity of which were raised the bastions of Gigelli . 
`` The cannon opened the action ; the regiments marched full of resolution ; the pikemen with pikes elevated , the musket-bearers with their weapons ready . 
The prince followed attentively the march and movements of the troops , so as to be able to sustain them with a strong reserve . 
With monseigneur were the oldest captains and his aides-de-camp . 
M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne had received orders not to leave his highness . 
In the meantime the enemy 's cannon , which at first thundered with little success against the masses , began to regulate their fire , and the balls , better directed , killed several men near the prince . 
The regiments formed in column , and , advancing against the ramparts , were rather roughly handled . 
There was a sort of hesitation in our troops , who found themselves ill-seconded by the artillery . 
In fact , the batteries which had been established the evening before had but a weak and uncertain aim , on account of their position . 
The upward direction of the aim lessened the justness of the shots as well as their range . 
`` Monseigneur , comprehending the bad effect of this position on the siege artillery , commanded the frigates moored in the little road to commence a regular fire against the place . 
M. de Bragelonne offered himself at once to carry this order . 
But monseigneur refused to acquiesce in the vicomte 's request . 
Monseigneur was right , for he loved and wished to spare the young nobleman . 
He was quite right , and the event took upon itself to justify his foresight and refusal ; for scarcely had the sergeant charged with the message solicited by M. de Bragelonne gained the seashore , when two shots from long carbines issued from the enemy 's ranks and laid him low . 
The sergeant fell , dyeing the sand with his blood ; observing which , M. de Bragelonne smiled at monseigneur , who said to him , ` You see , vicomte , I have saved your life . 
Report that , some day , to M. le Comte de la Fere , in order that , learning it from you , he may thank me . ' 
The young nobleman smiled sadly , and replied to the duke , ` It is true , monseigneur , that but for your kindness I should have been killed , where the poor sergeant has fallen , and should be at rest . ' 
M. de Bragelonne made this reply in such a tone that monseigneur answered him warmly , ` Vrai Dieu ! 
Young man , one would say that your mouth waters for death ; but , by the soul of Henry IV. , I have promised your father to bring you back alive ; and , please the Lord , I mean to keep my word . ' 
`` Monseigneur de Bragelonne colored , and replied , in a lower voice , ` Monseigneur , pardon me , I beseech you . 
I have always had a desire to meet good opportunities ; and it is so delightful to distinguish ourselves before our general , particularly when that general is M. le Duc de Beaufort . ' 
`` Monseigneur was a little softened by this ; and , turning to the officers who surrounded him , gave different orders . 
The grenadiers of the two regiments got near enough to the ditches and intrenchments to launch their grenades , which had but small effect . 
In the meanwhile , M. d'Estrees , who commanded the fleet , having seen the attempt of the sergeant to approach the vessels , understood that he must act without orders , and opened fire . 
Then the Arabs , finding themselves seriously injured by the balls from the fleet , and beholding the destruction and the ruin of their walls , uttered the most fearful cries . 
Their horsemen descended the mountain at a gallop , bent over their saddles , and rushed full tilt upon the columns of infantry , which , crossing their pikes , stopped this mad assault . 
Repulsed by the firm attitude of the battalion , the Arabs threw themselves with fury towards the etat-major , which was not on its guard at that moment . 
`` The danger was great ; monseigneur drew his sword ; his secretaries and people imitated him ; the officers of the suite engaged in combat with the furious Arabs . 
It was then M. de Bragelonne was able to satisfy the inclination he had so clearly shown from the commencement of the action . 
He fought near the prince with the valor of a Roman , and killed three Arabs with his small sword . 
But it was evident that his bravery did not arise from that sentiment of pride so natural to all who fight . 
It was impetuous , affected , even forced ; he sought to glut , intoxicate himself with strife and carnage . 
He excited himself to such a degree that monseigneur called to him to stop . 
He must have heard the voice of monseigneur , because we who were close to him heard it . 
He did not , however , stop , but continued his course to the intrenchments . 
As M. de Bragelonne was a well-disciplined officer , this disobedience to the orders of monseigneur very much surprised everybody , and M. de Beaufort redoubled his earnestness , crying , ` Stop , Bragelonne ! 
Where are you going ? 
Stop , ' repeated monseigneur , ' I command you ! ' 
`` We all , imitating the gesture of M. le duc , we all raised our hands . 
We expected that the cavalier would turn bridle ; but M. de Bragelonne continued to ride towards the palisades . '' 
` Stop , Bragelonne ! ' 
repeated the prince , in a very loud voice , ` stop ! 
in the name of your father ! ' 
`` At these words M. de Bragelonne turned round ; his countenance expressed a lively grief , but he did not stop ; we then concluded that his horse must have run away with him . 
When M. le duc saw cause to conclude that the vicomte was no longer master of his horse , and had watched him precede the first grenadiers , his highness cried , ` Musketeers , kill his horse ! 
A hundred pistoles for the man who kills his horse ! ' 
But who could expect to hit the beast without at least wounding his rider ? 
No one dared the attempt . 
At length one presented himself ; he was a sharp - shooter of the regiment of Picardy , named Luzerne , who took aim at the animal , fired , and hit him in the quarters , for we saw the blood redden the hair of the horse . 
Instead of falling , the cursed jennet was irritated , and carried him on more furiously than ever . 
Every Picard who saw this unfortunate young man rushing on to meet certain death , shouted in the loudest manner , ` Throw yourself off , monsieur le vicomte ! 
- off ! 
