Athos , forgetful of both the admiral and the fleet , and of his own dignity as a strong man , opened his arms to his son , and pressed him convulsively to his heart . 
`` Accompany us on board , '' said the duke , very much affected ; `` you will gain a good half-hour . '' 
`` No , '' said Athos , `` my farewell has been spoken , I do not wish to voice a second . '' 
`` Then , vicomte , embark - embark quickly ! '' 
added the prince , wishing to spare the tears of these two men , whose hearts were bursting . 
And paternally , tenderly , very much as Porthos might have done , he took Raoul in his arms and placed him in the boat , the oars of which , at a signal , immediately were dipped in the waves . 
He himself , forgetful of ceremony , jumped into his boat , and pushed it off with a vigorous foot . 
`` Adieu ! '' 
cried Raoul . 
Athos replied only by a sign , but he felt something burning on his hand : it was the respectful kiss of Grimaud - the last farewell of the faithful dog . 
This kiss given , Grimaud jumped from the step of the mole upon the stem of a two-oared yawl , which had just been taken in tow by a chaland served by twelve galley-oars . 
Athos seated himself on the mole , stunned , deaf , abandoned . 
Every instant took from him one of the features , one of the shades of the pale face of his son . 
With his arms hanging down , his eyes fixed , his mouth open , he remained confounded with Raoul - in one same look , in one same thought , in one same stupor . 
The sea , by degrees , carried away boats and faces to that distance at which men become nothing but points , - loves , nothing but remembrances . 
Athos saw his son ascend the ladder of the admiral 's ship , he saw him lean upon the rail of the deck , and place himself in such a manner as to be always an object in the eye of his father . 
In vain the cannon thundered , in vain from the ship sounded the long and lordly tumult , responded to by immense acclamations from the shore ; in vain did the noise deafen the ear of the father , the smoke obscured the cherished object of his aspirations . 
Raoul appeared to him to the last moment ; and the imperceptible atom , passing from black to pale , from pale to white , from white to nothing , disappeared for Athos - disappeared very long after , to all the eyes of the spectators , had disappeared both gallant ships and swelling sails . 
Towards midday , when the sun devoured space , and scarcely the tops of the masts dominated the incandescent limit of the sea , Athos perceived a soft aerial shadow rise , and vanish as soon as seen . 
This was the smoke of a cannon , which M. de Beaufort ordered to be fired as a last salute to the coast of France . 
The point was buried in its turn beneath the sky , and Athos returned with slow and painful step to his deserted hostelry . 
: Among Women . 
D'Artagnan had not been able to hide his feelings from his friends so much as he would have wished . 
The stoical soldier , the impassive man-at - arms , overcome by fear and sad presentiments , had yielded , for a few moments , to human weakness . 
When , therefore , he had silenced his heart and calmed the agitation of his nerves , turning towards his lackey , a silent servant , always listening , in order to obey the more promptly : `` Rabaud , '' said he , `` mind , we must travel thirty leagues a day . '' 
`` At your pleasure , captain , '' replied Rabaud . 
And from that moment , D'Artagnan , accommodating his action to the pace of the horse , like a true centaur , gave up his thoughts to nothing - that is to say , to everything . 
He asked himself why the king had sent for him back ; why the Iron Mask had thrown the silver plate at the feet of Raoul . 
As to the first subject , the reply was negative ; he knew right well that the king 's calling him was from necessity . 
He still further knew that Louis XIV . 
must experience an imperious desire for a private conversation with one whom the possession of such a secret placed on a level with the highest powers of the kingdom . 
But as to saying exactly what the king 's wish was , D'Artagnan found himself completely at a loss . 
The musketeer had no doubts , either , upon the reason which had urged the unfortunate Philippe to reveal his character and birth . 
Philippe , buried forever beneath a mask of steel , exiled to a country where the men seemed little more than slaves of the elements ; Philippe , deprived even of the society of D'Artagnan , who had loaded him with honors and delicate attentions , had nothing more to see than odious specters in this world , and , despair beginning to devour him , he poured himself forth in complaints , in the belief that his revelations would raise up some avenger for him . 
The manner in which the musketeer had been near killing his two best friends , the destiny which had so strangely brought Athos to participate in the great state secret , the farewell of Raoul , the obscurity of the future which threatened to end in a melancholy death ; all this threw D'Artagnan incessantly back on lamentable predictions and forebodings , which the rapidity of his pace did not dissipate , as it used formerly to do . 
D'Artagnan passed from these considerations to the remembrance of the proscribed Porthos and Aramis . 
He saw them both , fugitives , tracked , ruined - laborious architects of fortunes they had lost ; and as the king called for his man of execution in hours of vengeance and malice , D'Artagnan trembled at the very idea of receiving some commission that would make his very soul bleed . 
Sometimes , ascending hills , when the winded horse breathed hard from his red nostrils , and heaved his flanks , the captain , left to more freedom of thought , reflected on the prodigious genius of Aramis , a genius of acumen and intrigue , a match to which the Fronde and the civil war had produced but twice . 
Soldier , priest , diplomatist ; gallant , avaricious , cunning ; Aramis had never taken the good things of this life except as stepping - stones to rise to giddier ends . 
Generous in spirit , if not lofty in heart , he never did ill but for the sake of shining even yet more brilliantly . 
Towards the end of his career , at the moment of reaching the goal , like the patrician Fuscus , he had made a false step upon a plank , and had fallen into the sea . 
But Porthos , good , harmless Porthos ! 
To see Porthos hungry , to see Mousqueton without gold lace , imprisoned , perhaps ; to see Pierrefonds , Bracieux , razed to the very stones , dishonored even to the timber , - these were so many poignant griefs for D'Artagnan , and every time that one of these griefs struck him , he bounded like a horse at the sting of a gadfly beneath the vaults of foliage where he has sought shady shelter from the burning sun . 
Never was the man of spirit subjected to ennui , if his body was exposed to fatigue ; never did the man of healthy body fail to find life light , if he had something to engage his mind . 
D'Artagnan , riding fast , thinking as constantly , alighted from his horse in Pairs , fresh and tender in his muscles as the athlete preparing for the gymnasium . 
The king did not expect him so soon , and had just departed for the chase towards Meudon . 
D'Artagnan , instead of riding after the king , as he would formerly have done , took off his boots , had a bath , and waited till his majesty should return dusty and tired . 
He occupied the interval of five hours in taking , as people say , the air of the house , and in arming himself against all ill chances . 
He learned that the king , during the last fortnight , had been gloomy ; that the queen-mother was ill and much depressed ; that Monsieur , the king 's brother , was exhibiting a devotional turn ; that Madame had the vapors ; and that M. de Guiche was gone to one of his estates . 
He learned that M. Colbert was radiant ; that M. Fouquet consulted a fresh physician every day , who still did not cure him , and that his principal complaint was one which physicians do not usually cure , unless they are political physicians . 
The king , D'Artagnan was told , behaved in the kindest manner to M. Fouquet , and did not allow him to be ever out of his sight ; but the surintendant , touched to the heart , like one of those fine trees a worm has punctured , was declining daily , in spite of the royal smile , that sun of court trees . 
D'Artagnan learned that Mademoiselle de la Valliere had become indispensable to the king ; that the king , during his sporting excursions , if he did not take her with him , wrote to her frequently , no longer verses , but , which was much worse , prose , and that whole pages at a time . 
Thus , as the political Pleiad of the day said , the first king in the world was seen descending from his horse with an ardor beyond compare , and on the crown of his hat scrawling bombastic phrases , which M. de Saint-Aignan , aide-de-camp in perpetuity , carried to La Valliere at the risk of foundering his horses . 
During this time , deer and pheasants were left to the free enjoyment of their nature , hunted so lazily that , it was said , the art of venery ran great risk of degenerating at the court of France . 
D'Artagnan then thought of the wishes of poor Raoul , of that desponding letter destined for a woman who passed her life in hoping , and as D'Artagnan loved to philosophize a little occasionally , he resolved to profit by the absence of the king to have a minute 's talk with Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
This was a very easy affair ; while the king was hunting , Louise was walking with some other ladies in one of the galleries of the Palais Royal , exactly where the captain of the musketeers had some guards to inspect . 
D'Artagnan did not doubt that , if he could but open the conversation on Raoul , Louise might give him grounds for writing a consolatory letter to the poor exile ; and hope , or at least consolation for Raoul , in the state of heart in which he had left him , was the sun , was life to two men , who were very dear to our captain . 
He directed his course , therefore , to the spot where he knew he should find Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
D'Artagnan found La Valliere the center of the circle . 
In her apparent solitude , the king 's favorite received , like a queen , more , perhaps , than the queen , a homage of which Madame had been so proud , when all the king 's looks were directed to her and commanded the looks of the courtiers . 
D'Artagnan , although no squire of dames , received , nevertheless , civilities and attentions from the ladies ; he was polite , as a brave man always is , and his terrible reputation had conciliated as much friendship among the men as admiration among the women . 
On seeing him enter , therefore , they immediately accosted him ; and , as is not unfrequently the case with fair ladies , opened the attack by questions . 
`` Where had he been ? 
What had become of him so long ? 
Why had they not seen him as usual make his fine horse curvet in such beautiful style , to the delight and astonishment of the curious from the king 's balcony ? '' 
He replied that he had just come from the land of oranges . 
This set all the ladies laughing . 
Those were times in which everybody traveled , but in which , notwithstanding , a journey of a hundred leagues was a problem often solved by death . 
`` From the land of oranges ? '' 
cried Mademoiselle de Tonnay-Charente . 
`` From Spain ? '' 
`` Eh ! 
eh ! '' 
said the musketeer . 
`` From Malta ? '' 
echoed Montalais . 
`` Ma foi ! 
You are coming very near , ladies . '' 
`` Is it an island ? '' 
asked La Valliere . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' said D'Artagnan ; `` I will not give you the trouble of seeking any further ; I come from the country where M. de Beaufort is , at this moment , embarking for Algiers . '' 
`` Have you seen the army ? '' 
asked several warlike fair ones . 
`` As plainly as I see you , '' replied D'Artagnan . 
`` And the fleet ? '' 
`` Yes , I saw everything . '' 
`` Have we any of us any friends there ? '' 
said Mademoiselle de Tonnay - Charente , coldly , but in a manner to attract attention to a question that was not without its calculated aim . 
`` Why , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` yes ; there were M. de la Guillotiere , M. de Manchy , M. de Bragelonne - '' La Valliere became pale . 
`` M. de Bragelonne ! '' 
cried the perfidious Athenais . 
`` Eh , what ! 
- is he gone to the wars ? 
- he ! '' 
Montalais trod on her toe , but all in vain . 
`` Do you know what my opinion is ? '' 
continued she , addressing D'Artagnan . 
`` No , mademoiselle ; but I should like very much to know it . '' 
`` My opinion is , then , that all the men who go to this war are desperate , desponding men , whom love has treated ill ; and who go to try if they can not find jet-complexioned women more kind than fair ones have been . '' 
Some of the ladies laughed ; La Valliere was evidently confused ; Montalais coughed loud enough to waken the dead . 
