`` At all events , you would not be able to burn the gardens , and that is the finest feature of the place . '' 
`` And yet , '' resumed Fouquet , thoughtfully , `` what was I saying ? 
Great heavens ! 
burn Vaux ! 
destroy my palace ! 
But Vaux is not mine ; these wonderful creations are , it is true , the property , as far as sense of enjoyment goes , of the man who has paid for them ; but as far as duration is concerned , they belong to those who created them . 
Vaux belongs to Lebrun , to Lenotre , to Pelisson , to Levau , to La Fontaine , to Moliere ; Vaux belongs to posterity , in fact . 
You see , Monsieur d'Artagnan , that my very house has ceased to be my own . '' 
`` That is all well and good , '' said D'Artagnan ; `` the idea is agreeable enough , and I recognize M. Fouquet himself in it . 
That idea , indeed , makes me forget that poor fellow Broussel altogether ; and I now fail to recognize in you the whining complaints of that old Frondeur . 
If you are ruined , monsieur , look at the affair manfully , for you too , mordioux ! 
belong to posterity , and have no right to lessen yourself in any way . 
Stay a moment ; look at me , I who seem to exercise in some degree a kind of superiority over you , because I am arresting you ; fate , which distributes their different parts to the comedians of this world , accorded me a less agreeable and less advantageous part to fill than yours has been . 
I am one of those who think that the parts which kings and powerful nobles are called upon to act are infinitely of more worth than the parts of beggars or lackeys . 
It is far better on the stage - on the stage , I mean , of another theater than the theater of this world - it is far better to wear a fine coat and to talk a fine language , than to walk the boards shod with a pair of old shoes , or to get one 's backbone gently polished by a hearty dressing with a stick . 
In one word , you have been a prodigal with money , you have ordered and been obeyed - have been steeped to the lips in enjoyment ; while I have dragged my tether after me , have been commanded and have obeyed , and have drudged my life away . 
Well , although I may seem of such trifling importance beside you , monseigneur , I do declare to you , that the recollection of what I have done serves me as a spur , and prevents me from bowing my old head too soon . 
I shall remain unto the very end a trooper ; and when my turn comes , I shall fall perfectly straight , all in a heap , still alive , after having selected my place beforehand . 
Do as I do , Monsieur Fouquet , you will not find yourself the worse for it ; a fall happens only once in a lifetime to men like yourself , and the chief thing is , to take it gracefully when the chance presents itself . 
There is a Latin proverb - the words have escaped me , but I remember the sense of it very well , for I have thought over it more than once - which says , ` The end crowns the work ! ' '' 
Fouquet rose from his seat , passed his arm round D'Artagnan 's neck , and clasped him in a close embrace , whilst with the other hand he pressed his hand . 
`` An excellent homily , '' he said , after a moment 's pause . 
`` A soldier 's , monseigneur . '' 
`` You have a regard for me , in telling me all that . '' 
`` Perhaps . '' 
Fouquet resumed his pensive attitude once more , and then , a moment after , he said : `` Where can M. d'Herblay be ? 
I dare not ask you to send for him . '' 
`` You would not ask me , because I would not do it , Monsieur Fouquet . 
People would learn it , and Aramis , who is not mixed up with the affair , might possibly be compromised and included in your disgrace . '' 
`` I will wait here till daylight , '' said Fouquet . 
`` Yes ; that is best . '' 
`` What shall we do when daylight comes ? '' 
`` I know nothing at all about it , monseigneur . '' 
`` Monsieur d'Artagnan , will you do me a favor ? '' 
`` Most willingly . '' 
`` You guard me , I remain ; you are acting in the full discharge of your duty , I suppose ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` Very good , then ; remain as close to me as my shadow if you like ; and I infinitely prefer such a shadow to any one else . '' 
D'Artagnan bowed to the compliment . 
`` But , forget that you are Monsieur d'Artagnan , captain of the musketeers ; forget that I am Monsieur Fouquet , surintendant of the finances ; and let us talk about my affairs . '' 
`` That is rather a delicate subject . '' 
`` Indeed ? '' 
`` Yes ; but , for your sake , Monsieur Fouquet , I will do what may almost be regarded as an impossibility . '' 
`` Thank you . 
What did the king say to you ? '' 
`` Nothing . '' 
`` Ah ! 
is that the way you talk ? '' 
`` The deuce ! '' 
`` What do you think of my situation ? '' 
`` I do not know . '' 
`` However , unless you have some ill feeling against me - '' `` Your position is a difficult one . '' 
`` In what respect ? '' 
`` Because you are under your own roof . '' 
`` However difficult it may be , I understand it very well . '' 
`` Do you suppose that , with any one else but yourself , I should have shown so much frankness ? '' 
`` What ! 
so much frankness , do you say ? 
you , who refuse to tell me the slightest thing ? '' 
`` At all events , then , so much ceremony and consideration . '' 
`` Ah ! 
I have nothing to say in that respect . '' 
`` One moment , monseigneur : let me tell you how I should have behaved towards any one but yourself . 
It might be that I happened to arrive at your door just as your guests or your friends had left you - or , if they had not gone yet , I should wait until they were leaving , and should then catch them one after the other , like rabbits ; I should lock them up quietly enough , I should steal softly along the carpet of your corridor , and with one hand upon you , before you suspected the slightest thing amiss , I should keep you safely until my master 's breakfast in the morning . 
In this way , I should just the same have avoided all publicity , all disturbance , all opposition ; but there would also have been no warning for M. Fouquet , no consideration for his feelings , none of those delicate concessions which are shown by persons who are essentially courteous in their natures , whenever the decisive moment may arrive . 
Are you satisfied with the plan ? '' 
`` It makes me shudder . '' 
`` I thought you would not like it . 
It would have been very disagreeable to have made my appearance to-morrow , without any preparation , and to have asked you to deliver up your sword . '' 
`` Oh ! 
monsieur , I should have died of shame and anger . '' 
`` Your gratitude is too eloquently expressed . 
I have not done enough to deserve it , I assure you . '' 
`` Most certainly , monsieur , you will never get me to believe that . '' 
`` Well , then , monseigneur , if you are satisfied with what I have done , and have somewhat recovered from the shock which I prepared you for as much as I possibly could , let us allow the few hours that remain to pass away undisturbed . 
You are harassed , and should arrange your thoughts ; I beg you , therefore , go to sleep , or pretend to go to sleep , either on your bed , or in your bed ; I will sleep in this armchair ; and when I fall asleep , my rest is so sound that a cannon would not wake me . '' 
Fouquet smiled . 
`` I expect , however , '' continued the musketeer , `` the case of a door being opened , whether a secret door , or any other ; or the case of any one going out of , or coming into , the room - for anything like that my ear is as quick and sensitive as the ear of a mouse . 
Creaking noises make me start . 
It arises , I suppose , from a natural antipathy to anything of the kind . 
Move about as much as you like ; walk up and down in any part of the room , write , efface , destroy , burn , - nothing like that will prevent me from going to sleep or even prevent me from snoring , but do not touch either the key or the handle of the door , for I should start up in a moment , and that would shake my nerves and make me ill . '' 
`` Monsieur d'Artagnan , '' said Fouquet , `` you are certainly the most witty and the most courteous man I ever met with ; and you will leave me only one regret , that of having made your acquaintance so late . '' 
D'Artagnan drew a deep sigh , which seemed to say , `` Alas ! 
you have perhaps made it too soon . '' 
He then settled himself in his armchair , while Fouquet , half lying on his bed and leaning on his arm , was meditating on his misadventures . 
In this way , both of them , leaving the candles burning , awaited the first dawn of the day ; and when Fouquet happened to sigh too loudly , D'Artagnan only snored the louder . 
Not a single visit , not even from Aramis , disturbed their quietude : not a sound even was heard throughout the whole vast palace . 
Outside , however , the guards of honor on duty , and the patrol of musketeers , paced up and down ; and the sound of their feet could be heard on the gravel walks . 
It seemed to act as an additional soporific for the sleepers , while the murmuring of the wind through the trees , and the unceasing music of the fountains whose waters tumbled in the basin , still went on uninterruptedly , without being disturbed at the slight noises and items of little moment that constitute the life and death of human nature . 
: The Morning . 
In vivid contrast to the sad and terrible destiny of the king imprisoned in the Bastile , and tearing , in sheer despair , the bolts and bars of his dungeon , the rhetoric of the chroniclers of old would not fail to present , as a complete antithesis , the picture of Philippe lying asleep beneath the royal canopy . 
We do not pretend to say that such rhetoric is always bad , and always scatters , in places where they have no right to grow , the flowers with which it embellishes and enlivens history . 
But we shall , on the present occasion , carefully avoid polishing the antithesis in question , but shall proceed to draw another picture as minutely as possible , to serve as foil and counterfoil to the one in the preceding chapter . 
The young prince alighted from Aramis 's room , in the same way the king had descended from the apartment dedicated to Morpheus . 
The dome gradually and slowly sank down under Aramis 's pressure , and Philippe stood beside the royal bed , which had ascended again after having deposited its prisoner in the secret depths of the subterranean passage . 
Alone , in the presence of all the luxury which surrounded him ; alone , in the presence of his power ; alone , with the part he was about to be forced to act , Philippe for the first time felt his heart , and mind , and soul expand beneath the influence of a thousand mutable emotions , which are the vital throbs of a king 's heart . 
He could not help changing color when he looked upon the empty bed , still tumbled by his brother 's body . 
This mute accomplice had returned , after having completed the work it had been destined to perform ; it returned with the traces of the crime ; it spoke to the guilty author of that crime , with the frank and unreserved language which an accomplice never fears to use in the company of his companion in guilt ; for it spoke the truth . 
Philippe bent over the bed , and perceived a pocket-handkerchief lying on it , which was still damp from the cold sweat which had poured from Louis XIV . 
's face . 
