said Monsieur , in a fright . 
`` I will tell you all about that , brother ; but it is strange that M. d'Herblay is not here ! '' 
He called out : `` Let M. Fouquet be informed that I wish to speak to him - oh ! 
before you , before you ; do not retire ! '' 
M. de Saint-Aignan returned , bringing satisfactory news of the queen , who only kept her bed from precaution , and to have strength to carry out the king 's wishes . 
Whilst everybody was seeking M. Fouquet and Aramis , the new king quietly continued his experiments , and everybody , family , officers , servants , had not the least suspicion of his identity , his air , his voice , and manners were so like the king 's . 
On his side , Philippe , applying to all countenances the accurate descriptions and key-notes of character supplied by his accomplice Aramis , conducted himself so as not to give birth to a doubt in the minds of those who surrounded him . 
Nothing from that time could disturb the usurper . 
With what strange facility had Providence just reversed the loftiest fortune of the world to substitute the lowliest in its stead ! 
Philippe admired the goodness of God with regard to himself , and seconded it with all the resources of his admirable nature . 
But he felt , at times , something like a specter gliding between him and the rays of his new glory . 
Aramis did not appear . 
The conversation had languished in the royal family ; Philippe , preoccupied , forgot to dismiss his brother and Madame Henrietta . 
The latter were astonished , and began , by degrees , to lose all patience . 
Anne of Austria stooped towards her son 's ear and addressed some words to him in Spanish . 
Philippe was completely ignorant of that language , and grew pale at this unexpected obstacle . 
But , as if the spirit of the imperturbable Aramis had covered him with his infallibility , instead of appearing disconcerted , Philippe rose . 
`` Well ! 
what ? '' 
said Anne of Austria . 
`` What is all that noise ? '' 
said Philippe , turning round towards the door of the second staircase . 
And a voice was heard saying , `` This way , this way ! 
A few steps more , sire ! '' 
`` The voice of M. Fouquet , '' said D'Artagnan , who was standing close to the queen-mother . 
`` Then M. d'Herblay can not be far off , '' added Philippe . 
But he then saw what he little thought to have beheld so near to him . 
All eyes were turned towards the door at which M. Fouquet was expected to enter ; but it was not M. Fouquet who entered . 
A terrible cry resounded from all corners of the chamber , a painful cry uttered by the king and all present . 
It is given to but few men , even those whose destiny contains the strangest elements , and accidents the most wonderful , to contemplate such a spectacle similar to that which presented itself in the royal chamber at that moment . 
The half-closed shutters only admitted the entrance of an uncertain light passing through thick violet velvet curtains lined with silk . 
In this soft shade , the eyes were by degrees dilated , and every one present saw others rather with imagination than with actual sight . 
There could not , however , escape , in these circumstances , one of the surrounding details ; and the new object which presented itself appeared as luminous as though it shone out in full sunlight . 
So it happened with Louis XIV. , when he showed himself , pale and frowning , in the doorway of the secret stairs . 
The face of Fouquet appeared behind him , stamped with sorrow and determination . 
The queen - mother , who perceived Louis XIV. , and who held the hand of Philippe , uttered a cry of which we have spoken , as if she beheld a phantom . 
Monsieur was bewildered , and kept turning his head in astonishment from one to the other . 
Madame made a step forward , thinking she was looking at the form of her brother-in-law reflected in a mirror . 
And , in fact , the illusion was possible . 
The two princes , both pale as death - for we renounce the hope of being able to describe the fearful state of Philippe - trembling , clenching their hands convulsively , measured each other with looks , and darted their glances , sharp as poniards , at each other . 
Silent , panting , bending forward , they appeared as if about to spring upon an enemy . 
The unheard-of resemblance of countenance , gesture , shape , height , even to the resemblance of costume , produced by chance -- for Louis XIV . 
had been to the Louvre and put on a violet-colored dress -- the perfect analogy of the two princes , completed the consternation of Anne of Austria . 
And yet she did not at once guess the truth . 
There are misfortunes in life so truly dreadful that no one will at first accept them ; people rather believe in the supernatural and the impossible . 
Louis had not reckoned on these obstacles . 
He expected that he had only to appear to be acknowledged . 
A living sun , he could not endure the suspicion of equality with any one . 
He did not admit that every torch should not become darkness at the instant he shone out with his conquering ray . 
At the aspect of Philippe , then , he was perhaps more terrified than any one round him , and his silence , his immobility were , this time , a concentration and a calm which precede the violent explosions of concentrated passion . 
But Fouquet ! 
who shall paint his emotion and stupor in presence of this living portrait of his master ! 
Fouquet thought Aramis was right , that this newly-arrived was a king as pure in his race as the other , and that , for having repudiated all participation in this coup d'etat , so skillfully got up by the General of the Jesuits , he must be a mad enthusiast , unworthy of ever dipping his hands in political grand strategy work . 
And then it was the blood of Louis XIII . 
which Fouquet was sacrificing to the blood of Louis XIII. ; it was to a selfish ambition he was sacrificing a noble ambition ; to the right of keeping he sacrificed the right of having . 
The whole extent of his fault was revealed to him at simple sight of the pretender . 
All that passed in the mind of Fouquet was lost upon the persons present . 
He had five minutes to focus meditation on this point of conscience ; five minutes , that is to say five ages , during which the two kings and their family scarcely found energy to breathe after so terrible a shock . 
D'Artagnan , leaning against the wall , in front of Fouquet , with his hand to his brow , asked himself the cause of such a wonderful prodigy . 
He could not have said at once why he doubted , but he knew assuredly that he had reason to doubt , and that in this meeting of the two Louis XIV.s lay all the doubt and difficulty that during late days had rendered the conduct of Aramis so suspicious to the musketeer . 
These ideas were , however , enveloped in a haze , a veil of mystery . 
The actors in this assembly seemed to swim in the vapors of a confused waking . 
Suddenly Louis XIV. , more impatient and more accustomed to command , ran to one of the shutters , which he opened , tearing the curtains in his eagerness . 
A flood of living light entered the chamber , and made Philippe draw back to the alcove . 
Louis seized upon this movement with eagerness , and addressing himself to the queen : `` My mother , '' said he , `` do you not acknowledge your son , since every one here has forgotten his king ! '' 
Anne of Austria started , and raised her arms towards Heaven , without being able to articulate a single word . 
`` My mother , '' said Philippe , with a calm voice , `` do you not acknowledge your son ? '' 
And this time , in his turn , Louis drew back . 
As to Anne of Austria , struck suddenly in head and heart with fell remorse , she lost her equilibrium . 
No one aiding her , for all were petrified , she sank back in her fauteuil , breathing a weak , trembling sigh . 
Louis could not endure the spectacle and the affront . 
He bounded towards D'Artagnan , over whose brain a vertigo was stealing and who staggered as he caught at the door for support . 
`` A moi ! 
mousquetaire ! '' 
said he . 
`` Look us in the face and say which is the paler , he or I ! '' 
This cry roused D'Artagnan , and stirred in his heart the fibers of obedience . 
He shook his head , and , without more hesitation , he walked straight up to Philippe , on whose shoulder he laid his hand , saying , `` Monsieur , you are my prisoner ! '' 
Philippe did not raise his eyes towards Heaven , nor stir from the spot , where he seemed nailed to the floor , his eye intently fixed upon the king his brother . 
He reproached him with a sublime silence for all misfortunes past , all tortures to come . 
Against this language of the soul the king felt he had no power ; he cast down his eyes , dragging away precipitately his brother and sister , forgetting his mother , sitting motionless within three paces of the son whom she left a second time to be condemned to death . 
Philippe approached Anne of Austria , and said to her , in a soft and nobly agitated voice : `` If I were not your son , I should curse you , my mother , for having rendered me so unhappy . '' 
D'Artagnan felt a shudder pass through the marrow of his bones . 
He bowed respectfully to the young prince , and said as he bent , `` Excuse me , monseigneur , I am but a soldier , and my oaths are his who has just left the chamber . '' 
`` Thank you , M. d'Artagnan ... . 
What has become of M. d'Herblay ? '' 
`` M. d'Herblay is in safety , monseigneur , '' said a voice behind them ; `` and no one , while I live and am free , shall cause a hair to fall from his head . '' 
`` Monsieur Fouquet ! '' 
said the prince , smiling sadly . 
`` Pardon me , monseigneur , '' said Fouquet , kneeling , `` but he who is just gone out from hence was my guest . '' 
`` Here are , '' murmured Philippe , with a sigh , `` brave friends and good hearts . 
They make me regret the world . 
On , M. d'Artagnan , I follow you . '' 
At the moment the captain of the musketeers was about to leave the room with his prisoner , Colbert appeared , and , after remitting an order from the king to D'Artagnan , retired . 
D'Artagnan read the paper , and then crushed it in his hand with rage . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked the prince . 
`` Read , monseigneur , '' replied the musketeer . 
Philippe read the following words , hastily traced by the hand of the king : `` M. d'Artagnan will conduct the prisoner to the Ile Sainte-Marguerite . 
He will cover his face with an iron vizor , which the prisoner shall never raise except at peril of his life . '' 
