Every tree in the neighborhood which presented a fair appearance of beauty or stature had been taken up by its roots and transplanted to the park . 
Fouquet could well afford to purchase trees to ornament his park , since he had bought up three villages and their appurtenances -LRB- to use a legal word -RRB- to increase its extent . 
M. de Scudery said of this palace , that , for the purpose of keeping the grounds and gardens well watered , M. Fouquet had divided a river into a thousand fountains , and gathered the waters of a thousand fountains into torrents . 
This same Monsieur de Scudery said a great many other things in his `` Clelie , '' about this palace of Valterre , the charms of which he describes most minutely . 
We should be far wiser to send our curious readers to Vaux to judge for themselves , than to refer them to `` Clelie ; '' and yet there are as many leagues from Paris to Vaux , as there are volumes of the `` Clelie . '' 
This magnificent palace had been got ready for the reception of the greatest reigning sovereign of the time . 
M. Fouquet 's friends had transported thither , some their actors and their dresses , others their troops of sculptors and artists ; not forgetting others with their ready - mended pens , - floods of impromptus were contemplated . 
The cascades , somewhat rebellious nymphs though they were , poured forth their waters brighter and clearer than crystal : they scattered over the bronze triton and nereids their waves of foam , which glistened like fire in the rays of the sun . 
An army of servants were hurrying to and fro in squadrons in the courtyard and corridors ; while Fouquet , who had only that morning arrived , walked all through the palace with a calm , observant glance , in order to give his last orders , after his intendants had inspected everything . 
It was , as we have said , the 15th of August . 
The sun poured down its burning rays upon the heathen deities of marble and bronze : it raised the temperature of the water in the conch shells , and ripened , on the walls , those magnificent peaches , of which the king , fifty years later , spoke so regretfully , when , at Marly , on an occasion of a scarcity of the finer sorts of peaches being complained of , in the beautiful gardens there - gardens which had cost France double the amount that had been expended on Vaux - the great king observed to some one : `` You are far too young to have eaten any of M. Fouquet 's peaches . '' 
Oh , fame ! 
Oh , blazon of renown ! 
Oh , glory of this earth ! 
That very man whose judgment was so sound and accurate where merit was concerned - he who had swept into his coffers the inheritance of Nicholas Fouquet , who had robbed him of Lenotre and Lebrun , and had sent him to rot for the remainder of his life in one of the state prisons - merely remembered the peaches of that vanquished , crushed , forgotten enemy ! 
It was to little purpose that Fouquet had squandered thirty millions of francs in the fountains of his gardens , in the crucibles of his sculptors , in the writing-desks of his literary friends , in the portfolios of his painters ; vainly had he fancied that thereby he might be remembered . 
A peach - a blushing , rich-flavored fruit , nestling in the trellis work on the garden - wall , hidden beneath its long , green leaves , - this little vegetable production , that a dormouse would nibble up without a thought , was sufficient to recall to the memory of this great monarch the mournful shade of the last surintendant of France . 
With a perfect reliance that Aramis had made arrangements fairly to distribute the vast number of guests throughout the palace , and that he had not omitted to attend to any of the internal regulations for their comfort , Fouquet devoted his entire attention to the ensemble alone . 
In one direction Gourville showed him the preparations which had been made for the fireworks ; in another , Moliere led him over the theater ; at last , after he had visited the chapel , the salons , and the galleries , and was again going downstairs , exhausted with fatigue , Fouquet saw Aramis on the staircase . 
The prelate beckoned to him . 
The surintendant joined his friend , and , with him , paused before a large picture scarcely finished . 
Applying himself , heart and soul , to his work , the painter Lebrun , covered with perspiration , stained with paint , pale from fatigue and the inspiration of genius , was putting the last finishing touches with his rapid brush . 
It was the portrait of the king , whom they were expecting , dressed in the court suit which Percerin had condescended to show beforehand to the bishop of Vannes . 
Fouquet placed himself before this portrait , which seemed to live , as one might say , in the cool freshness of its flesh , and in its warmth of color . 
He gazed upon it long and fixedly , estimated the prodigious labor that had been bestowed upon it , and , not being able to find any recompense sufficiently great for this Herculean effort , he passed his arm round the painter 's neck and embraced him . 
The surintendant , by this action , had utterly ruined a suit of clothes worth a thousand pistoles , but he had satisfied , more than satisfied , Lebrun . 
It was a happy moment for the artist ; it was an unhappy moment for M. Percerin , who was walking behind Fouquet , and was engaged in admiring , in Lebrun 's painting , the suit that he had made for his majesty , a perfect objet d'art , as he called it , which was not to be matched except in the wardrobe of the surintendant . 
His distress and his exclamations were interrupted by a signal which had been given from the summit of the mansion . 
In the direction of Melun , in the still empty , open plain , the sentinels of Vaux had just perceived the advancing procession of the king and the queens . 
His majesty was entering Melun with his long train of carriages and cavaliers . 
`` In an hour - '' said Aramis to Fouquet . 
`` In an hour ! '' 
replied the latter , sighing . 
`` And the people who ask one another what is the good of these royal fetes ! '' 
continued the bishop of Vannes , laughing , with his false smile . 
`` Alas ! 
I , too , who am not the people , ask myself the same thing . '' 
`` I will answer you in four and twenty hours , monseigneur . 
Assume a cheerful countenance , for it should be a day of true rejoicing . '' 
`` Well , believe me or not , as you like , D'Herblay , '' said the surintendant , with a swelling heart , pointing at the cortege of Louis , visible in the horizon , `` he certainly loves me but very little , and I do not care much more for him ; but I can not tell you how it is , that since he is approaching my house - '' `` Well , what ? '' 
`` Well , since I know he is on his way here , as my guest , he is more sacred than ever for me ; he is my acknowledged sovereign , and as such is very dear to me . '' 
`` Dear ? 
yes , '' said Aramis , playing upon the word , as the Abbe Terray did , at a later period , with Louis XV . 
`` Do not laugh , D'Herblay ; I feel that , if he really seemed to wish it , I could love that young man . '' 
`` You should not say that to me , '' returned Aramis , `` but rather to M. Colbert . '' 
`` To M. Colbert ! '' 
exclaimed Fouquet . 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` Because he would allow you a pension out of the king 's privy purse , as soon as he becomes surintendant , '' said Aramis , preparing to leave as soon as he had dealt this last blow . 
`` Where are you going ? '' 
returned Fouquet , with a gloomy look . 
`` To my own apartment , in order to change my costume , monseigneur . '' 
`` Whereabouts are you lodging , D'Herblay ? '' 
`` In the blue room on the second story . '' 
`` The room immediately over the king 's room ? '' 
`` Precisely . '' 
`` You will be subject to very great restraint there . 
What an idea to condemn yourself to a room where you can not stir or move about ! '' 
`` During the night , monseigneur , I sleep or read in my bed . '' 
`` And your servants ? '' 
`` I have but one attendant with me . 
I find my reader quite sufficient . 
Adieu , monseigneur ; do not overfatigue yourself ; keep yourself fresh for the arrival of the king . '' 
`` We shall see you by and by , I suppose , and shall see your friend Du Vallon also ? '' 
`` He is lodging next to me , and is at this moment dressing . '' 
And Fouquet , bowing , with a smile , passed on like a commander-in-chief who pays the different outposts a visit after the enemy has been signaled in sight . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- : The Wine of Melun . 
The king had , in point of fact , entered Melun with the intention of merely passing through the city . 
The youthful monarch was most eagerly anxious for amusements ; only twice during the journey had he been able to catch a glimpse of La Valliere , and , suspecting that his only opportunity of speaking to her would be after nightfall , in the gardens , and after the ceremonial of reception had been gone through , he had been very desirous to arrive at Vaux as early as possible . 
But he reckoned without his captain of the musketeers , and without M. Colbert . 
Like Calypso , who could not be consoled at the departure of Ulysses , our Gascon could not console himself for not having guessed why Aramis had asked Percerin to show him the king 's new costumes . 
`` There is not a doubt , '' he said to himself , `` that my friend the bishop of Vannes had some motive in that ; '' and then he began to rack his brains most uselessly . 
D'Artagnan , so intimately acquainted with all the court intrigues , who knew the position of Fouquet better than even Fouquet himself did , had conceived the strangest fancies and suspicions at the announcement of the fete , which would have ruined a wealthy man , and which became impossible , utter madness even , for a man so poor as he was . 
And then , the presence of Aramis , who had returned from Belle-Isle , and been nominated by Monsieur Fouquet inspector-general of all the arrangements ; his perseverance in mixing himself up with all the surintendant 's affairs ; his visits to Baisemeaux ; all this suspicious singularity of conduct had excessively troubled and tormented D'Artagnan during the last two weeks . 
`` With men of Aramis 's stamp , '' he said , `` one is never the stronger except sword in hand . 
So long as Aramis continued a soldier , there was hope of getting the better of him ; but since he has covered his cuirass with a stole , we are lost . 
But what can Aramis 's object possibly be ? '' 
And D'Artagnan plunged again into deep thought . 
`` What does it matter to me , after all , '' he continued , `` if his only object is to overthrow M. Colbert ? 
And what else can he be after ? '' 
And D'Artagnan rubbed his forehead - that fertile land , whence the plowshare of his nails had turned up so many and such admirable ideas in his time . 
He , at first , thought of talking the matter over with Colbert , but his friendship for Aramis , the oath of earlier days , bound him too strictly . 
He revolted at the bare idea of such a thing , and , besides , he hated the financier too cordially . 
Then , again , he wished to unburden his mind to the king ; but yet the king would not be able to understand the suspicions which had not even a shadow of reality at their base . 
He resolved to address himself to Aramis , direct , the first time he met him . 
`` I will get him , '' said the musketeer , `` between a couple of candles , suddenly , and when he least expects it , I will place my hand upon his heart , and he will tell me - What will he tell me ? 
Yes , he will tell me something , for mordioux ! 
there is something in it , I know . '' 
Somewhat calmer , D'Artagnan made every preparation for the journey , and took the greatest care that the military household of the king , as yet very inconsiderable in numbers , should be well officered and well disciplined in its meager and limited proportions . 
The result was that , through the captain 's arrangements , the king , on arriving at Melun , saw himself at the head of both the musketeers and Swiss guards , as well as a picket of the French guards . 
It might almost have been called a small army . 
M. Colbert looked at the troops with great delight : he even wished they had been a third more in number . 
`` But why ? '' 
said the king . 
`` In order to show greater honor to M. Fouquet , '' replied Colbert . 
`` In order to ruin him the sooner , '' thought D'Artagnan . 
When this little army appeared before Melun , the chief magistrates came out to meet the king , and to present him with the keys of the city , and invited him to enter the Hotel de Ville , in order to partake of the wine of honor . 
The king , who expected to pass through the city and to proceed to Vaux without delay , became quite red in the face from vexation . 
`` Who was fool enough to occasion this delay ? '' 
muttered the king , between his teeth , as the chief magistrate was in the middle of a long address . 
