His Bretons surrounded him ; Aramis yielded to their kind exertions , and the three sailors , lifting him up , carried him to the canoe . 
Then , having laid him down upon the bench near the rudder , they took to their oars , preferring this to hoisting sail , which might betray them . 
On all that leveled surface of the ancient grotto of Locmaria , one single hillock attracted their eyes . 
Aramis never removed his from it ; and , at a distance out in the sea , in proportion as the shore receded , that menacing proud mass of rock seemed to draw itself up , as formerly Porthos used to draw himself up , raising a smiling , yet invincible head towards heaven , like that of his dear old honest valiant friend , the strongest of the four , yet the first dead . 
Strange destiny of these men of brass ! 
The most simple of heart allied to the most crafty ; strength of body guided by subtlety of mind ; and in the decisive moment , when vigor alone could save mind and body , a stone , a rock , a vile material weight , triumphed over manly strength , and falling upon the body , drove out the mind . 
Worthy Porthos ! 
born to help other men , always ready to sacrifice himself for the safety of the weak , as if God had only given him strength for that purpose ; when dying he only thought he was carrying out the conditions of his compact with Aramis , a compact , however , which Aramis alone had drawn up , and which Porthos had only known to suffer by its terrible solidarity . 
Noble Porthos ! 
of what good now are thy chateaux overflowing with sumptuous furniture , forests overflowing with game , lakes overflowing with fish , cellars overflowing with wealth ! 
Of what service to thee now thy lackeys in brilliant liveries , and in the midst of them Mousqueton , proud of the power delegated by thee ! 
Oh , noble Porthos ! 
careful heaper-up of treasure , was it worth while to labor to sweeten and gild life , to come upon a desert shore , surrounded by the cries of seagulls , and lay thyself , with broken bones , beneath a torpid stone ? 
Was it worth while , in short , noble Porthos , to heap so much gold , and not have even the distich of a poor poet engraven upon thy monument ? 
Valiant Porthos ! 
he still , without doubt , sleeps , lost , forgotten , beneath the rock the shepherds of the heath take for the gigantic abode of a dolmen . 
And so many twining branches , so many mosses , bent by the bitter wind of ocean , so many lichens solder thy sepulcher to earth , that no passers-by will imagine such a block of granite could ever have been supported by the shoulders of one man . 
Aramis , still pale , still icy-cold , his heart upon his lips , looked , even till , with the last ray of daylight , the shore faded on the horizon . 
Not a word escaped him , not a sigh rose from his deep breast . 
The superstitious Bretons looked upon him , trembling . 
Such silence was not that of a man , it was the silence of a statue . 
In the meantime , with the first gray lines that lighted up the heavens , the canoe hoisted its little sail , which , swelling with the kisses of the breeze , and carrying them rapidly from the coast , made bravest way towards Spain , across the dreaded Gulf of Gascony , so rife with storms . 
But scarcely half an hour after the sail had been hoisted , the rowers became inactive , reclining on their benches , and , making an eye-shade with their hands , pointed out to each other a white spot which appeared on the horizon as motionless as a gull rocked by the viewless respiration of the waves . 
But that which might have appeared motionless to ordinary eyes was moving at a quick rate to the experienced eye of the sailor ; that which appeared stationary upon the ocean was cutting a rapid way through it . 
For some time , seeing the profound torpor in which their master was plunged , they did not dare to rouse him , and satisfied themselves with exchanging their conjectures in whispers . 
Aramis , in fact , so vigilant , so active - Aramis , whose eye , like that of the lynx , watched without ceasing , and saw better by night than by day - Aramis seemed to sleep in this despair of soul . 
An hour passed thus , during which daylight gradually disappeared , but during which also the sail in view gained so swiftly on the bark , that Goenne , one of the three sailors , ventured to say aloud : `` Monseigneur , we are being chased ! '' 
Aramis made no reply ; the ship still gained upon them . 
Then , of their own accord , two of the sailors , by the direction of the patron Yves , lowered the sail , in order that that single point upon the surface of the waters should cease to be a guide to the eye of the enemy pursuing them . 
On the part of the ship in sight , on the contrary , two more small sails were run up at the extremities of the masts . 
Unfortunately , it was the time of the finest and longest days of the year , and the moon , in all her brilliancy , succeeded inauspicious daylight . 
The balancelle , which was pursuing the little bark before the wind , had then still half an hour of twilight , and a whole night almost as light as day . 
`` Monseigneur ! 
monseigneur ! 
we are lost ! '' 
said the captain . 
`` Look ! 
they see us plainly , though we have lowered sail . '' 
`` That is not to be wondered at , '' murmured one of the sailors , `` since they say that , by the aid of the devil , the Paris-folk have fabricated instruments with which they see as well at a distance as near , by night as well as by day . '' 
Aramis took a telescope from the bottom of the boat , focussed it silently , and passing it to the sailor , `` Here , '' said he , `` look ! '' 
The sailor hesitated . 
`` Do n't be alarmed , '' said the bishop , `` there is no sin in it ; and if there is any sin , I will take it on myself . '' 
The sailor lifted the glass to his eye , and uttered a cry . 
He believed that the vessel , which appeared to be distant about cannon-shot , had at a single bound cleared the whole distance . 
But , on withdrawing the instrument from his eye , he saw that , except the way which the balancelle had been able to make during that brief instant , it was still at the same distance . 
`` So , '' murmured the sailor , `` they can see us as we see them . '' 
`` They see us , '' said Aramis , and sank again into impassibility . 
`` What ! 
- they see us ! '' 
said Yves . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
`` Well , captain , look yourself , '' said the sailor . 
And he passed him the glass . 
`` Monseigneur assures me that the devil has nothing to do with this ? '' 
asked Yves . 
Aramis shrugged his shoulders . 
The skipper lifted the glass to his eye . 
`` Oh ! 
monseigneur , '' said he , `` it is a miracle - there they are ; it seems as if I were going to touch them . 
Twenty-five men at least ! 
Ah ! 
I see the captain forward . 
He holds a glass like this , and is looking at us . 
Ah ! 
he turns round , and gives an order ; they are rolling a piece of cannon forward - they are loading it - pointing it . 
Misericorde ! 
they are firing at us ! '' 
And by a mechanical movement , the skipper put aside the telescope , and the pursuing ship , relegated to the horizon , appeared again in its true aspect . 
The vessel was still at the distance of nearly a league , but the maneuver sighted thus was not less real . 
A light cloud of smoke appeared beneath the sails , more blue than they , and spreading like a flower opening ; then , at about a mile from the little canoe , they saw the ball take the crown off two or three waves , dig a white furrow in the sea , and disappear at the end of it , as inoffensive as the stone with which , in play , a boy makes ducks and drakes . 
It was at once a menace and a warning . 
`` What is to be done ? '' 
asked the patron . 
`` They will sink us ! '' 
said Goenne , `` give us absolution , monseigneur ! '' 
And the sailors fell on their knees before him . 
`` You forget that they can see you , '' said he . 
`` That is true ! '' 
said the sailors , ashamed of their weakness . 
`` Give us your orders , monseigneur , we are prepared to die for you . '' 
`` Let us wait , '' said Aramis . 
`` How - let us wait ? '' 
`` Yes ; do you not see , as you just now said , that if we endeavor to fly , they will sink us ? '' 
`` But , perhaps , '' the patron ventured to say , `` perhaps under cover of night , we could escape them . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
said Aramis , `` they have , no doubt , Greek fire with which to lighten their own course and ours likewise . '' 
At the same moment , as if the vessel was responsive to the appeal of Aramis , a second cloud of smoke mounted slowly to the heavens , and from the bosom of that cloud sparkled an arrow of flame , which described a parabola like a rainbow , and fell into the sea , where it continued to burn , illuminating a space of a quarter of a league in diameter . 
The Bretons looked at each other in terror . 
`` You see plainly , '' said Aramis , `` it will be better to wait for them . '' 
The oars dropped from the hands of the sailors , and the bark , ceasing to make way , rocked motionless upon the summits of the waves . 
Night came on , but still the ship drew nearer . 
It might be imagined it redoubled its speed with darkness . 
From time to time , as a vulture rears its head out of its nest , the formidable Greek fire darted from its sides , and cast its flame upon the ocean like an incandescent snowfall . 
At last it came within musket-shot . 
All the men were on deck , arms in hand ; the cannoniers were at their guns , the matches burning . 
It might be thought they were about to board a frigate and to fight a crew superior in number to their own , not to attempt the capture of a canoe manned by four people . 
`` Surrender ! '' 
cried the commander of the balancelle , with the aid of his speaking-trumpet . 
The sailors looked at Aramis . 
Aramis made a sign with his head . 
