He commenced the night in this painful persuasion . 
All that a sick man , irritated by suffering , can add of melancholy suppositions to probabilities already gloomy , Athos heaped up during the early hours of this dismal night . 
The fever rose : it invaded the chest , where the fire soon caught , according to the expression of the physician , who had been brought back from Blois by Blaisois at his last journey . 
Soon it gained the head . 
The physician made two successive bleedings , which dislodged it for the time , but left the patient very weak , and without power of action in anything but his brain . 
And yet this redoubtable fever had ceased . 
It besieged with its last palpitations the tense extremities ; it ended by yielding as midnight struck . 
The physician , seeing the incontestable improvement , returned to Blois , after having ordered some prescriptions , and declared that the comte was saved . 
Then commenced for Athos a strange , indefinable state . 
Free to think , his mind turned towards Raoul , that beloved son . 
His imagination penetrated the fields of Africa in the environs of Gigelli , where M. de Beaufort must have landed with his army . 
A waste of gray rocks , rendered green in certain parts by the waters of the sea , when it lashed the shore in storms and tempest . 
Beyond , the shore , strewed over with these rocks like gravestones , ascended , in form of an amphitheater among mastic-trees and cactus , a sort of small town , full of smoke , confused noises , and terrified movements . 
All of a sudden , from the bosom of this smoke arose a flame , which succeeded , creeping along the houses , in covering the entire surface of the town , and increased by degrees , uniting in its red and angry vortices tears , screams , and supplicating arms outstretched to Heaven . 
There was , for a moment , a frightful pele-mele of timbers falling to pieces , of swords broken , of stones calcined , trees burnt and disappearing . 
It was a strange thing that in this chaos , in which Athos distinguished raised arms , in which he heard cries , sobs , and groans , he did not see one human figure . 
The cannon thundered at a distance , musketry madly barked , the sea moaned , flocks made their escape , bounding over the verdant slope . 
But not a soldier to apply the match to the batteries of cannon , not a sailor to assist in maneuvering the fleet , not a shepherd in charge of the flocks . 
After the ruin of the village , the destruction of the forts which dominated it , a ruin and destruction magically wrought without the co-operation of a single human being , the flames were extinguished , the smoke began to subside , then diminished in intensity , paled and disappeared entirely . 
Night then came over the scene ; night dark upon the earth , brilliant in the firmament . 
The large blazing stars which spangled the African sky glittered and gleamed without illuminating anything . 
A long silence ensued , which gave , for a moment , repose to the troubled imagination of Athos ; and as he felt that that which he saw was not terminated , he applied more attentively the eyes of his understanding on the strange spectacle which his imagination had presented . 
This spectacle was soon continued for him . 
A mild pale moon rose behind the declivities of the coast , streaking at first the undulating ripples of the sea , which appeared to have calmed after the roaring it had sent forth during the vision of Athos - the moon , we say , shed its diamonds and opals upon the briers and bushes of the hills . 
The gray rocks , so many silent and attentive phantoms , appeared to raise their heads to examine likewise the field of battle by the light of the moon , and Athos perceived that the field , empty during the combat , was now strewn with fallen bodies . 
An inexpressible shudder of fear and horror seized his soul as he recognized the white and blue uniforms of the soldiers of Picardy , with their long pikes and blue handles , and muskets marked with the fleur-de - lis on the butts . 
When he saw all the gaping wounds , looking up to the bright heavens as if to demand back of them the souls to which they had opened a passage , - when he saw the slaughtered horses , stiff , their tongues hanging out at one side of their mouths , sleeping in the shiny blood congealed around them , staining their furniture and their manes , - when he saw the white horse of M. de Beaufort , with his head beaten to pieces , in the first ranks of the dead , Athos passed a cold hand over his brow , which he was astonished not to find burning . 
He was convinced by this touch that he was present , as a spectator , without delirium 's dreadful aid , the day after the battle fought upon the shores of Gigelli by the army of the expedition , which he had seen leave the coast of France and disappear upon the dim horizon , and of which he had saluted with thought and gesture the last cannon-shot fired by the duke as a signal of farewell to his country . 
Who can paint the mortal agony with which his soul followed , like a vigilant eye , these effigies of clay-cold soldiers , and examined them , one after the other , to see if Raoul slept among them ? 
Who can express the intoxication of joy with which Athos bowed before God , and thanked Him for not having seen him he sought with so much fear among the dead ? 
In fact , fallen in their ranks , stiff , icy , the dead , still recognizable with ease , seemed to turn with complacency towards the Comte de la Fere , to be the better seen by him , during his sad review . 
But yet , he was astonished , while viewing all these bodies , not to perceive the survivors . 
To such a point did the illusion extend , that this vision was for him a real voyage made by the father into Africa , to obtain more exact information respecting his son . 
Fatigued , therefore , with having traversed seas and continents , he sought repose under one of the tents sheltered behind a rock , on the top of which floated the white fleur-de-lised pennon . 
He looked for a soldier to conduct him to the tent of M. de Beaufort . 
Then , while his eye was wandering over the plain , turning on all sides , he saw a white form appear behind the scented myrtles . 
This figure was clothed in the costume of an officer ; it held in its hand a broken sword ; it advanced slowly towards Athos , who , stopping short and fixing his eyes upon it , neither spoke nor moved , but wished to open his arms , because in this silent officer he had already recognized Raoul . 
The comte attempted to utter a cry , but it was stifled in his throat . 
Raoul , with a gesture , directed him to be silent , placing his finger on his lips and drawing back by degrees , without Athos being able to see his legs move . 
The comte , still paler than Raoul , followed his son , painfully traversing briers and bushes , stones and ditches , Raoul not appearing to touch the earth , no obstacle seeming to impede the lightness of his march . 
The comte , whom the inequalities of the path fatigued , soon stopped , exhausted . 
Raoul still continued to beckon him to follow him . 
The tender father , to whom love restored strength , made a last effort , and climbed the mountain after the young man , who attracted him by gesture and by smile . 
At length he gained the crest of the hill , and saw , thrown out in black , upon the horizon whitened by the moon , the aerial form of Raoul . 
Athos reached forth his hand to get closer to his beloved son upon the plateau , and the latter also stretched out his ; but suddenly , as if the young man had been drawn away in his own despite , still retreating , he left the earth , and Athos saw the clear blue sky shine between the feet of his child and the ground of the hill . 
Raoul rose insensibly into the void , smiling , still calling with gesture : - he departed towards heaven . 
Athos uttered a cry of tenderness and terror . 
He looked below again . 
He saw a camp destroyed , and all those white bodies of the royal army , like so many motionless atoms . 
And , then , raising his head , he saw the figure of his son still beckoning him to climb the mystic void . 
: The Angel of Death . 
Athos was at this part of his marvelous vision , when the charm was suddenly broken by a great noise rising from the outer gates . 
A horse was heard galloping over the hard gravel of the great alley , and the sound of noisy and animated conversations ascended to the chamber in which the comte was dreaming . 
Athos did not stir from the place he occupied ; he scarcely turned his head towards the door to ascertain the sooner what these noises could be . 
A heavy step ascended the stairs ; the horse , which had recently galloped , departed slowly towards the stables . 
Great hesitation appeared in the steps , which by degrees approached the chamber . 
A door was opened , and Athos , turning a little towards the part of the room the noise came from , cried , in a weak voice : `` It is a courier from Africa , is it not ? '' 
`` No , monsieur le comte , '' replied a voice which made the father of Raoul start upright in his bed . 
`` Grimaud ! '' 
murmured he . 
And the sweat began to pour down his face . 
Grimaud appeared in the doorway . 
It was no longer the Grimaud we have seen , still young with courage and devotion , when he jumped the first into the boat destined to convey Raoul de Bragelonne to the vessels of the royal fleet . 
'T was now a stern and pale old man , his clothes covered with dust , and hair whitened by old age . 
He trembled whilst leaning against the door-frame , and was near falling on seeing , by the light of the lamps , the countenance of his master . 
These two men who had lived so long together in a community of intelligence , and whose eyes , accustomed to economize expressions , knew how to say so many things silently - these two old friends , one as noble as the other in heart , if they were unequal in fortune and birth , remained tongue-tied whilst looking at each other . 
By the exchange of a single glance they had just read to the bottom of each other 's hearts . 
The old servitor bore upon his countenance the impression of a grief already old , the outward token of a grim familiarity with woe . 
He appeared to have no longer in use more than a single version of his thoughts . 
As formerly he was accustomed not to speak much , he was now accustomed not to smile at all . 
Athos read at a glance all these shades upon the visage of his faithful servant , and in the same tone he would have employed to speak to Raoul in his dream : `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` Raoul is dead . 
Is it not so ? '' 
Behind Grimaud the other servants listened breathlessly , with their eyes fixed upon the bed of their sick master . 
They heard the terrible question , and a heart-breaking silence followed . 
`` Yes , '' replied the old man , heaving the monosyllable from his chest with a hoarse , broken sigh . 
Then arose voices of lamentation , which groaned without measure , and filled with regrets and prayers the chamber where the agonized father sought with his eyes the portrait of his son . 
This was for Athos like the transition which led to his dream . 
Without uttering a cry , without shedding a tear , patient , mild , resigned as a martyr , he raised his eyes towards Heaven , in order there to see again , rising above the mountain of Gigelli , the beloved shade that was leaving him at the moment of Grimaud 's arrival . 
Without doubt , while looking towards the heavens , resuming his marvelous dream , he repassed by the same road by which the vision , at once so terrible and sweet , had led him before ; for after having gently closed his eyes , he reopened them and began to smile : he had just seen Raoul , who had smiled upon him . 
With his hands joined upon his breast , his face turned towards the window , bathed by the fresh air of night , which brought upon its wings the aroma of the flowers and the woods , Athos entered , never again to come out of it , into the contemplation of that paradise which the living never see . 
God willed , no doubt , to open to this elect the treasures of eternal beatitude , at this hour when other men tremble with the idea of being severely received by the Lord , and cling to this life they know , in the dread of the other life of which they get but merest glimpses by the dismal murky torch of death . 
Athos was spirit-guided by the pure serene soul of his son , which aspired to be like the paternal soul . 
Everything for this just man was melody and perfume in the rough road souls take to return to the celestial country . 
After an hour of this ecstasy , Athos softly raised his hands as white as wax ; the smile did not quit his lips , and he murmured low , so low as scarcely to be audible , these three words addressed to God or to Raoul : `` HERE I AM ! '' 
And his hands fell slowly , as though he himself had laid them on the bed . 
Death had been kind and mild to this noble creature . 
It had spared him the tortures of the agony , convulsions of the last departure ; had opened with an indulgent finger the gates of eternity to that noble soul . 
God had no doubt ordered it thus that the pious remembrance of this death should remain in the hearts of those present , and in the memory of other men - a death which caused to be loved the passage from this life to the other by those whose existence upon this earth leads them not to dread the last judgment . 
Athos preserved , even in the eternal sleep , that placid and sincere smile - an ornament which was to accompany him to the tomb . 
The quietude and calm of his fine features made his servants for a long time doubt whether he had really quitted life . 
The comte 's people wished to remove Grimaud , who , from a distance , devoured the face now quickly growing marble-pale , and did not approach , from pious fear of bringing to him the breath of death . 
But Grimaud , fatigued as he was , refused to leave the room . 
He sat himself down upon the threshold , watching his master with the vigilance of a sentinel , jealous to receive either his first waking look or his last dying sigh . 
The noises all were quiet in the house - every one respected the slumber of their lord . 
But Grimaud , by anxiously listening , perceived that the comte no longer breathed . 
He raised himself with his hands leaning on the ground , looked to see if there did not appear some motion in the body of his master . 
Nothing ! 
Fear seized him ; he rose completely up , and , at the very moment , heard some one coming up the stairs . 
A noise of spurs knocking against a sword - a warlike sound familiar to his ears - stopped him as he was going towards the bed of Athos . 
A voice more sonorous than brass or steel resounded within three paces of him . 
