The Invisible Man A Grotesque Romance By H.G. Wells CONTENTS THE STRANGE MAN 'S ARRIVAL The stranger came early in February , one wintry day , through a biting wind and a driving snow , the last snowfall of the year , over the down , walking from Bramblehurst railway station , and carrying a little black portmanteau in his thickly gloved hand . 
He was wrapped up from head to foot , and the brim of his soft felt hat hid every inch of his face but the shiny tip of his nose ; the snow had piled itself against his shoulders and chest , and added a white crest to the burden he carried . 
He staggered into the `` Coach and Horses '' more dead than alive , and flung his portmanteau down . 
`` A fire , '' he cried , `` in the name of human charity ! 
A room and a fire ! '' 
He stamped and shook the snow from off himself in the bar , and followed Mrs. Hall into her guest parlour to strike his bargain . 
And with that much introduction , that and a couple of sovereigns flung upon the table , he took up his quarters in the inn . 
Mrs. Hall lit the fire and left him there while she went to prepare him a meal with her own hands . 
A guest to stop at Iping in the wintertime was an unheard-of piece of luck , let alone a guest who was no `` haggler , '' and she was resolved to show herself worthy of her good fortune . 
As soon as the bacon was well under way , and Millie , her lymphatic aid , had been brisked up a bit by a few deftly chosen expressions of contempt , she carried the cloth , plates , and glasses into the parlour and began to lay them with the utmost eclat . 
Although the fire was burning up briskly , she was surprised to see that her visitor still wore his hat and coat , standing with his back to her and staring out of the window at the falling snow in the yard . 
His gloved hands were clasped behind him , and he seemed to be lost in thought . 
She noticed that the melting snow that still sprinkled his shoulders dripped upon her carpet . 
`` Can I take your hat and coat , sir ? '' 
she said , `` and give them a good dry in the kitchen ? '' 
`` No , '' he said without turning . 
She was not sure she had heard him , and was about to repeat her question . 
He turned his head and looked at her over his shoulder . 
`` I prefer to keep them on , '' he said with emphasis , and she noticed that he wore big blue spectacles with sidelights , and had a bush side-whisker over his coat-collar that completely hid his cheeks and face . 
`` Very well , sir , '' she said . 
`` As you like . 
In a bit the room will be warmer . '' 
He made no answer , and had turned his face away from her again , and Mrs. Hall , feeling that her conversational advances were ill-timed , laid the rest of the table things in a quick staccato and whisked out of the room . 
When she returned he was still standing there , like a man of stone , his back hunched , his collar turned up , his dripping hat-brim turned down , hiding his face and ears completely . 
She put down the eggs and bacon with considerable emphasis , and called rather than said to him , `` Your lunch is served , sir . '' 
`` Thank you , '' he said at the same time , and did not stir until she was closing the door . 
Then he swung round and approached the table with a certain eager quickness . 
As she went behind the bar to the kitchen she heard a sound repeated at regular intervals . 
Chirk , chirk , chirk , it went , the sound of a spoon being rapidly whisked round a basin . 
`` That girl ! '' 
she said . 
`` There ! 
I clean forgot it . 
It 's her being so long ! '' 
And while she herself finished mixing the mustard , she gave Millie a few verbal stabs for her excessive slowness . 
She had cooked the ham and eggs , laid the table , and done everything , while Millie -LRB- help indeed ! -RRB- 
had only succeeded in delaying the mustard . 
And him a new guest and wanting to stay ! 
Then she filled the mustard pot , and , putting it with a certain stateliness upon a gold and black tea-tray , carried it into the parlour . 
She rapped and entered promptly . 
As she did so her visitor moved quickly , so that she got but a glimpse of a white object disappearing behind the table . 
It would seem he was picking something from the floor . 
She rapped down the mustard pot on the table , and then she noticed the overcoat and hat had been taken off and put over a chair in front of the fire , and a pair of wet boots threatened rust to her steel fender . 
She went to these things resolutely . 
`` I suppose I may have them to dry now , '' she said in a voice that brooked no denial . 
`` Leave the hat , '' said her visitor , in a muffled voice , and turning she saw he had raised his head and was sitting and looking at her . 
For a moment she stood gaping at him , too surprised to speak . 
He held a white cloth -- it was a serviette he had brought with him -- over the lower part of his face , so that his mouth and jaws were completely hidden , and that was the reason of his muffled voice . 
But it was not that which startled Mrs. Hall . 
It was the fact that all his forehead above his blue glasses was covered by a white bandage , and that another covered his ears , leaving not a scrap of his face exposed excepting only his pink , peaked nose . 
It was bright , pink , and shiny just as it had been at first . 
He wore a dark-brown velvet jacket with a high , black , linen-lined collar turned up about his neck . 
The thick black hair , escaping as it could below and between the cross bandages , projected in curious tails and horns , giving him the strangest appearance conceivable . 
This muffled and bandaged head was so unlike what she had anticipated , that for a moment she was rigid . 
He did not remove the serviette , but remained holding it , as she saw now , with a brown gloved hand , and regarding her with his inscrutable blue glasses . 
`` Leave the hat , '' he said , speaking very distinctly through the white cloth . 
Her nerves began to recover from the shock they had received . 
She placed the hat on the chair again by the fire . 
`` I did n't know , sir , '' she began , `` that -- '' and she stopped embarrassed . 
`` Thank you , '' he said drily , glancing from her to the door and then at her again . 
`` I 'll have them nicely dried , sir , at once , '' she said , and carried his clothes out of the room . 
She glanced at his white-swathed head and blue goggles again as she was going out of the door ; but his napkin was still in front of his face . 
She shivered a little as she closed the door behind her , and her face was eloquent of her surprise and perplexity . 
`` I never , '' she whispered . 
`` There ! '' 
She went quite softly to the kitchen , and was too preoccupied to ask Millie what she was messing about with now , when she got there . 
The visitor sat and listened to her retreating feet . 
He glanced inquiringly at the window before he removed his serviette , and resumed his meal . 
He took a mouthful , glanced suspiciously at the window , took another mouthful , then rose and , taking the serviette in his hand , walked across the room and pulled the blind down to the top of the white muslin that obscured the lower panes . 
This left the room in a twilight . 
This done , he returned with an easier air to the table and his meal . 
`` The poor soul 's had an accident or an op ` ration or somethin' , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` What a turn them bandages did give me , to be sure ! '' 
She put on some more coal , unfolded the clothes-horse , and extended the traveller 's coat upon this . 
`` And they goggles ! 
Why , he looked more like a divin ' helmet than a human man ! '' 
She hung his muffler on a corner of the horse . 
`` And holding that handkercheif over his mouth all the time . 
Talkin ' through it ! 
... Perhaps his mouth was hurt too -- maybe . '' 
She turned round , as one who suddenly remembers . 
`` Bless my soul alive ! '' 
she said , going off at a tangent ; `` ai n't you done them taters yet , Millie ? '' 
When Mrs. Hall went to clear away the stranger 's lunch , her idea that his mouth must also have been cut or disfigured in the accident she supposed him to have suffered , was confirmed , for he was smoking a pipe , and all the time that she was in the room he never loosened the silk muffler he had wrapped round the lower part of his face to put the mouthpiece to his lips . 
Yet it was not forgetfulness , for she saw he glanced at it as it smouldered out . 
He sat in the corner with his back to the window-blind and spoke now , having eaten and drunk and being comfortably warmed through , with less aggressive brevity than before . 
The reflection of the fire lent a kind of red animation to his big spectacles they had lacked hitherto . 
`` I have some luggage , '' he said , `` at Bramblehurst station , '' and he asked her how he could have it sent . 
He bowed his bandaged head quite politely in acknowledgment of her explanation . 
`` To-morrow ? '' 
he said . 
`` There is no speedier delivery ? '' 
and seemed quite disappointed when she answered , `` No . '' 
Was she quite sure ? 
No man with a trap who would go over ? 
Mrs. Hall , nothing loath , answered his questions and developed a conversation . 
`` It 's a steep road by the down , sir , '' she said in answer to the question about a trap ; and then , snatching at an opening , said , `` It was there a carriage was upsettled , a year ago and more . 
A gentleman killed , besides his coachman . 
Accidents , sir , happen in a moment , do n't they ? '' 
But the visitor was not to be drawn so easily . 
`` They do , '' he said through his muffler , eyeing her quietly through his impenetrable glasses . 
`` But they take long enough to get well , do n't they ? 
... There was my sister 's son , Tom , jest cut his arm with a scythe , tumbled on it in the ` ayfield , and , bless me ! 
he was three months tied up sir . 
You 'd hardly believe it . 
It 's regular given me a dread of a scythe , sir . '' 
`` I can quite understand that , '' said the visitor . 
`` He was afraid , one time , that he 'd have to have an op ` ration -- he was that bad , sir . '' 
The visitor laughed abruptly , a bark of a laugh that he seemed to bite and kill in his mouth . 
`` Was he ? '' 
he said . 
`` He was , sir . 
And no laughing matter to them as had the doing for him , as I had -- my sister being took up with her little ones so much . 
There was bandages to do , sir , and bandages to undo . 
So that if I may make so bold as to say it , sir -- '' `` Will you get me some matches ? '' 
said the visitor , quite abruptly . 
`` My pipe is out . '' 
Mrs. Hall was pulled up suddenly . 
It was certainly rude of him , after telling him all she had done . 
She gasped at him for a moment , and remembered the two sovereigns . 
She went for the matches . 
`` Thanks , '' he said concisely , as she put them down , and turned his shoulder upon her and stared out of the window again . 
It was altogether too discouraging . 
Evidently he was sensitive on the topic of operations and bandages . 
She did not `` make so bold as to say , '' however , after all . 
But his snubbing way had irritated her , and Millie had a hot time of it that afternoon . 
The visitor remained in the parlour until four o'clock , without giving the ghost of an excuse for an intrusion . 
For the most part he was quite still during that time ; it would seem he sat in the growing darkness smoking in the firelight -- perhaps dozing . 
Once or twice a curious listener might have heard him at the coals , and for the space of five minutes he was audible pacing the room . 
He seemed to be talking to himself . 
Then the armchair creaked as he sat down again . 
MR. TEDDY HENFREY 'S FIRST IMPRESSIONS At four o'clock , when it was fairly dark and Mrs. Hall was screwing up her courage to go in and ask her visitor if he would take some tea , Teddy Henfrey , the clock-jobber , came into the bar . 
`` My sakes ! 
Mrs. Hall , '' said he , `` but this is terrible weather for thin boots ! '' 
The snow outside was falling faster . 
Mrs. Hall agreed , and then noticed he had his bag with him . 
`` Now you 're here , Mr. Teddy , '' said she , `` I 'd be glad if you 'd give th ' old clock in the parlour a bit of a look . 
'T is going , and it strikes well and hearty ; but the hour-hand wo n't do nuthin ' but point at six . '' 
And leading the way , she went across to the parlour door and rapped and entered . 
Her visitor , she saw as she opened the door , was seated in the armchair before the fire , dozing it would seem , with his bandaged head drooping on one side . 
The only light in the room was the red glow from the fire -- which lit his eyes like adverse railway signals , but left his downcast face in darkness -- and the scanty vestiges of the day that came in through the open door . 
Everything was ruddy , shadowy , and indistinct to her , the more so since she had just been lighting the bar lamp , and her eyes were dazzled . 
But for a second it seemed to her that the man she looked at had an enormous mouth wide open -- a vast and incredible mouth that swallowed the whole of the lower portion of his face . 
It was the sensation of a moment : the white-bound head , the monstrous goggle eyes , and this huge yawn below it . 
Then he stirred , started up in his chair , put up his hand . 
She opened the door wide , so that the room was lighter , and she saw him more clearly , with the muffler held up to his face just as she had seen him hold the serviette before . 
The shadows , she fancied , had tricked her . 
`` Would you mind , sir , this man a-coming to look at the clock , sir ? '' 
she said , recovering from the momentary shock . 
`` Look at the clock ? '' 
he said , staring round in a drowsy manner , and speaking over his hand , and then , getting more fully awake , `` certainly . '' 
Mrs. Hall went away to get a lamp , and he rose and stretched himself . 
Then came the light , and Mr. Teddy Henfrey , entering , was confronted by this bandaged person . 
He was , he says , `` taken aback . '' 
`` Good afternoon , '' said the stranger , regarding him -- as Mr. Henfrey says , with a vivid sense of the dark spectacles -- `` like a lobster . '' 
`` I hope , '' said Mr. Henfrey , `` that it 's no intrusion . '' 
`` None whatever , '' said the stranger . 
`` Though , I understand , '' he said turning to Mrs. Hall , `` that this room is really to be mine for my own private use . '' 
`` I thought , sir , '' said Mrs. Hall , `` you 'd prefer the clock -- '' `` Certainly , '' said the stranger , `` certainly -- but , as a rule , I like to be alone and undisturbed . 
`` But I 'm really glad to have the clock seen to , '' he said , seeing a certain hesitation in Mr. Henfrey 's manner . 
`` Very glad . '' 
Mr. Henfrey had intended to apologise and withdraw , but this anticipation reassured him . 
The stranger turned round with his back to the fireplace and put his hands behind his back . 
`` And presently , '' he said , `` when the clock-mending is over , I think I should like to have some tea . 
But not till the clock-mending is over . '' 
Mrs. Hall was about to leave the room -- she made no conversational advances this time , because she did not want to be snubbed in front of Mr. Henfrey -- when her visitor asked her if she had made any arrangements about his boxes at Bramblehurst . 
She told him she had mentioned the matter to the postman , and that the carrier could bring them over on the morrow . 
`` You are certain that is the earliest ? '' 
he said . 
She was certain , with a marked coldness . 
`` I should explain , '' he added , `` what I was really too cold and fatigued to do before , that I am an experimental investigator . '' 
`` Indeed , sir , '' said Mrs. Hall , much impressed . 
`` And my baggage contains apparatus and appliances . '' 
`` Very useful things indeed they are , sir , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` And I 'm very naturally anxious to get on with my inquiries . '' 
`` Of course , sir . '' 
`` My reason for coming to Iping , '' he proceeded , with a certain deliberation of manner , `` was ... a desire for solitude . 
I do not wish to be disturbed in my work . 
In addition to my work , an accident -- '' `` I thought as much , '' said Mrs. Hall to herself . '' 
-- necessitates a certain retirement . 
My eyes -- are sometimes so weak and painful that I have to shut myself up in the dark for hours together . 
Lock myself up . 
Sometimes -- now and then . 
Not at present , certainly . 
At such times the slightest disturbance , the entry of a stranger into the room , is a source of excruciating annoyance to me -- it is well these things should be understood . '' 
`` Certainly , sir , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` And if I might make so bold as to ask -- '' `` That I think , is all , '' said the stranger , with that quietly irresistible air of finality he could assume at will . 
Mrs. Hall reserved her question and sympathy for a better occasion . 
After Mrs. Hall had left the room , he remained standing in front of the fire , glaring , so Mr. Henfrey puts it , at the clock-mending . 
Mr. Henfrey not only took off the hands of the clock , and the face , but extracted the works ; and he tried to work in as slow and quiet and unassuming a manner as possible . 
He worked with the lamp close to him , and the green shade threw a brilliant light upon his hands , and upon the frame and wheels , and left the rest of the room shadowy . 
When he looked up , coloured patches swam in his eyes . 
Being constitutionally of a curious nature , he had removed the works -- a quite unnecessary proceeding -- with the idea of delaying his departure and perhaps falling into conversation with the stranger . 
But the stranger stood there , perfectly silent and still . 
So still , it got on Henfrey 's nerves . 
He felt alone in the room and looked up , and there , grey and dim , was the bandaged head and huge blue lenses staring fixedly , with a mist of green spots drifting in front of them . 
It was so uncanny to Henfrey that for a minute they remained staring blankly at one another . 
Then Henfrey looked down again . 
Very uncomfortable position ! 
One would like to say something . 
Should he remark that the weather was very cold for the time of year ? 
He looked up as if to take aim with that introductory shot . 
`` The weather -- '' he began . 
`` Why do n't you finish and go ? '' 
said the rigid figure , evidently in a state of painfully suppressed rage . 
`` All you 've got to do is to fix the hour-hand on its axle . 
You 're simply humbugging -- '' `` Certainly , sir -- one minute more . 
I overlooked -- '' and Mr. Henfrey finished and went . 
But he went feeling excessively annoyed . 
`` Damn it ! '' 
said Mr. Henfrey to himself , trudging down the village through the thawing snow ; `` a man must do a clock at times , sure-ly . '' 
And again `` Ca n't a man look at you ? 
-- Ugly ! '' 
And yet again , `` Seemingly not . 
If the police was wanting you you could n't be more wropped and bandaged . '' 
At Gleeson 's corner he saw Hall , who had recently married the stranger 's hostess at the `` Coach and Horses , '' and who now drove the Iping conveyance , when occasional people required it , to Sidderbridge Junction , coming towards him on his return from that place . 
Hall had evidently been `` stopping a bit '' at Sidderbridge , to judge by his driving . '' 
` Ow do , Teddy ? '' 
he said , passing . 
`` You got a rum un up home ! '' 
said Teddy . 
Hall very sociably pulled up . 
`` What 's that ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Rum-looking customer stopping at the ` Coach and Horses , ' '' said Teddy . 
`` My sakes ! '' 
And he proceeded to give Hall a vivid description of his grotesque guest . 
`` Looks a bit like a disguise , do n't it ? 
I 'd like to see a man 's face if I had him stopping in my place , '' said Henfrey . 
`` But women are that trustful -- where strangers are concerned . 
He 's took your rooms and he ai n't even given a name , Hall . '' 
`` You do n't say so ! '' 
said Hall , who was a man of sluggish apprehension . 
`` Yes , '' said Teddy . 
`` By the week . 
Whatever he is , you ca n't get rid of him under the week . 
And he 's got a lot of luggage coming to-morrow , so he says . 
Let 's hope it wo n't be stones in boxes , Hall . '' 
He told Hall how his aunt at Hastings had been swindled by a stranger with empty portmanteaux . 
Altogether he left Hall vaguely suspicious . 
`` Get up , old girl , '' said Hall . 
`` I s ` pose I must see ` bout this . '' 
Teddy trudged on his way with his mind considerably relieved . 
Instead of `` seeing ` bout it , '' however , Hall on his return was severely rated by his wife on the length of time he had spent in Sidderbridge , and his mild inquiries were answered snappishly and in a manner not to the point . 
But the seed of suspicion Teddy had sown germinated in the mind of Mr. Hall in spite of these discouragements . 
`` You wim ' do n't know everything , '' said Mr. Hall , resolved to ascertain more about the personality of his guest at the earliest possible opportunity . 
And after the stranger had gone to bed , which he did about half-past nine , Mr. Hall went very aggressively into the parlour and looked very hard at his wife 's furniture , just to show that the stranger was n't master there , and scrutinised closely and a little contemptuously a sheet of mathematical computations the stranger had left . 
When retiring for the night he instructed Mrs. Hall to look very closely at the stranger 's luggage when it came next day . 
`` You mind you own business , Hall , '' said Mrs. Hall , `` and I 'll mind mine . '' 
She was all the more inclined to snap at Hall because the stranger was undoubtedly an unusually strange sort of stranger , and she was by no means assured about him in her own mind . 
In the middle of the night she woke up dreaming of huge white heads like turnips , that came trailing after her , at the end of interminable necks , and with vast black eyes . 
But being a sensible woman , she subdued her terrors and turned over and went to sleep again . 
THE THOUSAND AND ONE BOTTLES So it was that on the twenty-ninth day of February , at the beginning of the thaw , this singular person fell out of infinity into Iping village . 
Next day his luggage arrived through the slush -- and very remarkable luggage it was . 
There were a couple of trunks indeed , such as a rational man might need , but in addition there were a box of books -- big , fat books , of which some were just in an incomprehensible handwriting -- and a dozen or more crates , boxes , and cases , containing objects packed in straw , as it seemed to Hall , tugging with a casual curiosity at the straw -- glass bottles . 
The stranger , muffled in hat , coat , gloves , and wrapper , came out impatiently to meet Fearenside 's cart , while Hall was having a word or so of gossip preparatory to helping being them in . 
Out he came , not noticing Fearenside 's dog , who was sniffing in a dilettante spirit at Hall 's legs . 
`` Come along with those boxes , '' he said . 
`` I 've been waiting long enough . '' 
And he came down the steps towards the tail of the cart as if to lay hands on the smaller crate . 
No sooner had Fearenside 's dog caught sight of him , however , than it began to bristle and growl savagely , and when he rushed down the steps it gave an undecided hop , and then sprang straight at his hand . 
`` Whup ! '' 
cried Hall , jumping back , for he was no hero with dogs , and Fearenside howled , `` Lie down ! '' 
and snatched his whip . 
They saw the dog 's teeth had slipped the hand , heard a kick , saw the dog execute a flanking jump and get home on the stranger 's leg , and heard the rip of his trousering . 
Then the finer end of Fearenside 's whip reached his property , and the dog , yelping with dismay , retreated under the wheels of the waggon . 
It was all the business of a swift half-minute . 
No one spoke , everyone shouted . 
The stranger glanced swiftly at his torn glove and at his leg , made as if he would stoop to the latter , then turned and rushed swiftly up the steps into the inn . 
They heard him go headlong across the passage and up the uncarpeted stairs to his bedroom . 
`` You brute , you ! '' 
said Fearenside , climbing off the waggon with his whip in his hand , while the dog watched him through the wheel . 
`` Come here , '' said Fearenside -- `` You 'd better . '' 
Hall had stood gaping . 
`` He wuz bit , '' said Hall . 
`` I 'd better go and see to en , '' and he trotted after the stranger . 
He met Mrs. Hall in the passage . 
`` Carrier 's darg , '' he said `` bit en . '' 
He went straight upstairs , and the stranger 's door being ajar , he pushed it open and was entering without any ceremony , being of a naturally sympathetic turn of mind . 
The blind was down and the room dim . 
He caught a glimpse of a most singular thing , what seemed a handless arm waving towards him , and a face of three huge indeterminate spots on white , very like the face of a pale pansy . 
Then he was struck violently in the chest , hurled back , and the door slammed in his face and locked . 
It was so rapid that it gave him no time to observe . 
A waving of indecipherable shapes , a blow , and a concussion . 
There he stood on the dark little landing , wondering what it might be that he had seen . 
A couple of minutes after , he rejoined the little group that had formed outside the `` Coach and Horses . '' 
There was Fearenside telling about it all over again for the second time ; there was Mrs. Hall saying his dog did n't have no business to bite her guests ; there was Huxter , the general dealer from over the road , interrogative ; and Sandy Wadgers from the forge , judicial ; besides women and children , all of them saying fatuities : `` Would n't let en bite me , I knows '' ; '' ` Tas n't right have such dargs '' ; `` Whad _ ` e _ bite 'n for , than ? '' 
and so forth . 
Mr. Hall , staring at them from the steps and listening , found it incredible that he had seen anything so very remarkable happen upstairs . 
Besides , his vocabulary was altogether too limited to express his impressions . 
`` He do n't want no help , he says , '' he said in answer to his wife 's inquiry . 
`` We 'd better be a-takin ' of his luggage in . '' 
`` He ought to have it cauterised at once , '' said Mr. Huxter ; `` especially if it 's at all inflamed . '' 
`` I 'd shoot en , that 's what I 'd do , '' said a lady in the group . 
Suddenly the dog began growling again . 
`` Come along , '' cried an angry voice in the doorway , and there stood the muffled stranger with his collar turned up , and his hat-brim bent down . 
`` The sooner you get those things in the better I 'll be pleased . '' 
It is stated by an anonymous bystander that his trousers and gloves had been changed . 
`` Was you hurt , sir ? '' 
said Fearenside . 
`` I 'm rare sorry the darg -- '' `` Not a bit , '' said the stranger . 
`` Never broke the skin . 
Hurry up with those things . '' 
He then swore to himself , so Mr. Hall asserts . 
Directly the first crate was , in accordance with his directions , carried into the parlour , the stranger flung himself upon it with extraordinary eagerness , and began to unpack it , scattering the straw with an utter disregard of Mrs. Hall 's carpet . 
And from it he began to produce bottles -- little fat bottles containing powders , small and slender bottles containing coloured and white fluids , fluted blue bottles labeled Poison , bottles with round bodies and slender necks , large green-glass bottles , large white-glass bottles , bottles with glass stoppers and frosted labels , bottles with fine corks , bottles with bungs , bottles with wooden caps , wine bottles , salad-oil bottles -- putting them in rows on the chiffonnier , on the mantel , on the table under the window , round the floor , on the bookshelf -- everywhere . 
The chemist 's shop in Bramblehurst could not boast half so many . 
Quite a sight it was . 
Crate after crate yielded bottles , until all six were empty and the table high with straw ; the only things that came out of these crates besides the bottles were a number of test-tubes and a carefully packed balance . 
And directly the crates were unpacked , the stranger went to the window and set to work , not troubling in the least about the litter of straw , the fire which had gone out , the box of books outside , nor for the trunks and other luggage that had gone upstairs . 
When Mrs. Hall took his dinner in to him , he was already so absorbed in his work , pouring little drops out of the bottles into test-tubes , that he did not hear her until she had swept away the bulk of the straw and put the tray on the table , with some little emphasis perhaps , seeing the state that the floor was in . 
Then he half turned his head and immediately turned it away again . 
But she saw he had removed his glasses ; they were beside him on the table , and it seemed to her that his eye sockets were extraordinarily hollow . 
He put on his spectacles again , and then turned and faced her . 
She was about to complain of the straw on the floor when he anticipated her . 
`` I wish you would n't come in without knocking , '' he said in the tone of abnormal exasperation that seemed so characteristic of him . 
`` I knocked , but seemingly -- '' `` Perhaps you did . 
But in my investigations -- my really very urgent and necessary investigations -- the slightest disturbance , the jar of a door -- I must ask you -- '' `` Certainly , sir . 
You can turn the lock if you 're like that , you know . 
Any time . '' 
`` A very good idea , '' said the stranger . 
`` This stror , sir , if I might make so bold as to remark -- '' `` Do n't . 
If the straw makes trouble put it down in the bill . '' 
And he mumbled at her -- words suspiciously like curses . 
He was so odd , standing there , so aggressive and explosive , bottle in one hand and test-tube in the other , that Mrs. Hall was quite alarmed . 
But she was a resolute woman . 
`` In which case , I should like to know , sir , what you consider -- '' `` A shilling -- put down a shilling . 
Surely a shilling 's enough ? '' 
`` So be it , '' said Mrs. Hall , taking up the table-cloth and beginning to spread it over the table . 
`` If you 're satisfied , of course -- '' He turned and sat down , with his coat-collar toward her . 
All the afternoon he worked with the door locked and , as Mrs. Hall testifies , for the most part in silence . 
But once there was a concussion and a sound of bottles ringing together as though the table had been hit , and the smash of a bottle flung violently down , and then a rapid pacing athwart the room . 
Fearing `` something was the matter , '' she went to the door and listened , not caring to knock . 
`` I ca n't go on , '' he was raving . 
`` I _ ca n't _ go on . 
Three hundred thousand , four hundred thousand ! 
The huge multitude ! 
Cheated ! 
All my life it may take me ! 
... Patience ! 
Patience indeed ! 
... Fool ! 
fool ! '' 
There was a noise of hobnails on the bricks in the bar , and Mrs. Hall had very reluctantly to leave the rest of his soliloquy . 
When she returned the room was silent again , save for the faint crepitation of his chair and the occasional clink of a bottle . 
It was all over ; the stranger had resumed work . 
When she took in his tea she saw broken glass in the corner of the room under the concave mirror , and a golden stain that had been carelessly wiped . 
She called attention to it . 
`` Put it down in the bill , '' snapped her visitor . 
`` For God 's sake do n't worry me . 
If there 's damage done , put it down in the bill , '' and he went on ticking a list in the exercise book before him . 
`` I 'll tell you something , '' said Fearenside , mysteriously . 
It was late in the afternoon , and they were in the little beer-shop of Iping Hanger . 
`` Well ? '' 
said Teddy Henfrey . 
`` This chap you 're speaking of , what my dog bit . 
Well -- he 's black . 
Leastways , his legs are . 
I seed through the tear of his trousers and the tear of his glove . 
You 'd have expected a sort of pinky to show , would n't you ? 
Well -- there was n't none . 
Just blackness . 
I tell you , he 's as black as my hat . '' 
`` My sakes ! '' 
said Henfrey . 
`` It 's a rummy case altogether . 
Why , his nose is as pink as paint ! '' 
`` That 's true , '' said Fearenside . 
`` I knows that . 
And I tell ` ee what I 'm thinking . 
That marn 's a piebald , Teddy . 
Black here and white there -- in patches . 
And he 's ashamed of it . 
He 's a kind of half-breed , and the colour 's come off patchy instead of mixing . 
I 've heard of such things before . 
And it 's the common way with horses , as any one can see . '' 
MR. CUSS INTERVIEWS THE STRANGER I have told the circumstances of the stranger 's arrival in Iping with a certain fulness of detail , in order that the curious impression he created may be understood by the reader . 
But excepting two odd incidents , the circumstances of his stay until the extraordinary day of the club festival may be passed over very cursorily . 
There were a number of skirmishes with Mrs. Hall on matters of domestic discipline , but in every case until late April , when the first signs of penury began , he over-rode her by the easy expedient of an extra payment . 
Hall did not like him , and whenever he dared he talked of the advisability of getting rid of him ; but he showed his dislike chiefly by concealing it ostentatiously , and avoiding his visitor as much as possible . 
`` Wait till the summer , '' said Mrs. Hall sagely , `` when the artisks are beginning to come . 
Then we 'll see . 
He may be a bit overbearing , but bills settled punctual is bills settled punctual , whatever you 'd like to say . '' 
The stranger did not go to church , and indeed made no difference between Sunday and the irreligious days , even in costume . 
He worked , as Mrs. Hall thought , very fitfully . 
Some days he would come down early and be continuously busy . 
On others he would rise late , pace his room , fretting audibly for hours together , smoke , sleep in the armchair by the fire . 
Communication with the world beyond the village he had none . 
His temper continued very uncertain ; for the most part his manner was that of a man suffering under almost unendurable provocation , and once or twice things were snapped , torn , crushed , or broken in spasmodic gusts of violence . 
He seemed under a chronic irritation of the greatest intensity . 
His habit of talking to himself in a low voice grew steadily upon him , but though Mrs. Hall listened conscientiously she could make neither head nor tail of what she heard . 
He rarely went abroad by daylight , but at twilight he would go out muffled up invisibly , whether the weather were cold or not , and he chose the loneliest paths and those most overshadowed by trees and banks . 
His goggling spectacles and ghastly bandaged face under the penthouse of his hat , came with a disagreeable suddenness out of the darkness upon one or two home-going labourers , and Teddy Henfrey , tumbling out of the `` Scarlet Coat '' one night , at half-past nine , was scared shamefully by the stranger 's skull-like head -LRB- he was walking hat in hand -RRB- lit by the sudden light of the opened inn door . 
Such children as saw him at nightfall dreamt of bogies , and it seemed doubtful whether he disliked boys more than they disliked him , or the reverse ; but there was certainly a vivid enough dislike on either side . 
It was inevitable that a person of so remarkable an appearance and bearing should form a frequent topic in such a village as Iping . 
Opinion was greatly divided about his occupation . 
Mrs. Hall was sensitive on the point . 
When questioned , she explained very carefully that he was an `` experimental investigator , '' going gingerly over the syllables as one who dreads pitfalls . 
When asked what an experimental investigator was , she would say with a touch of superiority that most educated people knew such things as that , and would thus explain that he `` discovered things . '' 
Her visitor had had an accident , she said , which temporarily discoloured his face and hands , and being of a sensitive disposition , he was averse to any public notice of the fact . 
Out of her hearing there was a view largely entertained that he was a criminal trying to escape from justice by wrapping himself up so as to conceal himself altogether from the eye of the police . 
This idea sprang from the brain of Mr. Teddy Henfrey . 
No crime of any magnitude dating from the middle or end of February was known to have occurred . 
Elaborated in the imagination of Mr. Gould , the probationary assistant in the National School , this theory took the form that the stranger was an Anarchist in disguise , preparing explosives , and he resolved to undertake such detective operations as his time permitted . 
These consisted for the most part in looking very hard at the stranger whenever they met , or in asking people who had never seen the stranger , leading questions about him . 
But he detected nothing . 
Another school of opinion followed Mr. Fearenside , and either accepted the piebald view or some modification of it ; as , for instance , Silas Durgan , who was heard to assert that `` if he choses to show enself at fairs he 'd make his fortune in no time , '' and being a bit of a theologian , compared the stranger to the man with the one talent . 
Yet another view explained the entire matter by regarding the stranger as a harmless lunatic . 
That had the advantage of accounting for everything straight away . 
Between these main groups there were waverers and compromisers . 
Sussex folk have few superstitions , and it was only after the events of early April that the thought of the supernatural was first whispered in the village . 
Even then it was only credited among the women folk . 
But whatever they thought of him , people in Iping , on the whole , agreed in disliking him . 
His irritability , though it might have been comprehensible to an urban brain-worker , was an amazing thing to these quiet Sussex villagers . 
The frantic gesticulations they surprised now and then , the headlong pace after nightfall that swept him upon them round quiet corners , the inhuman bludgeoning of all tentative advances of curiosity , the taste for twilight that led to the closing of doors , the pulling down of blinds , the extinction of candles and lamps -- who could agree with such goings on ? 
They drew aside as he passed down the village , and when he had gone by , young humourists would up with coat-collars and down with hat-brims , and go pacing nervously after him in imitation of his occult bearing . 
There was a song popular at that time called `` The Bogey Man '' . 
Miss Statchell sang it at the schoolroom concert -LRB- in aid of the church lamps -RRB- , and thereafter whenever one or two of the villagers were gathered together and the stranger appeared , a bar or so of this tune , more or less sharp or flat , was whistled in the midst of them . 
Also belated little children would call `` Bogey Man ! '' 
after him , and make off tremulously elated . 
Cuss , the general practitioner , was devoured by curiosity . 
The bandages excited his professional interest , the report of the thousand and one bottles aroused his jealous regard . 
All through April and May he coveted an opportunity of talking to the stranger , and at last , towards Whitsuntide , he could stand it no longer , but hit upon the subscription-list for a village nurse as an excuse . 
He was surprised to find that Mr. Hall did not know his guest 's name . 
`` He give a name , '' said Mrs. Hall -- an assertion which was quite unfounded -- `` but I did n't rightly hear it . '' 
She thought it seemed so silly not to know the man 's name . 
Cuss rapped at the parlour door and entered . 
There was a fairly audible imprecation from within . 
`` Pardon my intrusion , '' said Cuss , and then the door closed and cut Mrs. Hall off from the rest of the conversation . 
She could hear the murmur of voices for the next ten minutes , then a cry of surprise , a stirring of feet , a chair flung aside , a bark of laughter , quick steps to the door , and Cuss appeared , his face white , his eyes staring over his shoulder . 
He left the door open behind him , and without looking at her strode across the hall and went down the steps , and she heard his feet hurrying along the road . 
He carried his hat in his hand . 
She stood behind the door , looking at the open door of the parlour . 
Then she heard the stranger laughing quietly , and then his footsteps came across the room . 
She could not see his face where she stood . 
The parlour door slammed , and the place was silent again . 
Cuss went straight up the village to Bunting the vicar . 
`` Am I mad ? '' 
Cuss began abruptly , as he entered the shabby little study . 
`` Do I look like an insane person ? '' 
`` What 's happened ? '' 
said the vicar , putting the ammonite on the loose sheets of his forth-coming sermon . 
`` That chap at the inn -- '' `` Well ? '' 
`` Give me something to drink , '' said Cuss , and he sat down . 
When his nerves had been steadied by a glass of cheap sherry -- the only drink the good vicar had available -- he told him of the interview he had just had . 
`` Went in , '' he gasped , `` and began to demand a subscription for that Nurse Fund . 
He 'd stuck his hands in his pockets as I came in , and he sat down lumpily in his chair . 
Sniffed . 
I told him I 'd heard he took an interest in scientific things . 
He said yes . 
Sniffed again . 
Kept on sniffing all the time ; evidently recently caught an infernal cold . 
No wonder , wrapped up like that ! 
I developed the nurse idea , and all the while kept my eyes open . 
Bottles -- chemicals -- everywhere . 
Balance , test-tubes in stands , and a smell of -- evening primrose . 
Would he subscribe ? 
Said he 'd consider it . 
Asked him , point-blank , was he researching . 
Said he was . 
A long research ? 
Got quite cross . ' 
A damnable long research , ' said he , blowing the cork out , so to speak . 
` Oh , ' said I. And out came the grievance . 
The man was just on the boil , and my question boiled him over . 
He had been given a prescription , most valuable prescription -- what for he would n't say . 
Was it medical ? 
` Damn you ! 
What are you fishing after ? ' 
I apologised . 
Dignified sniff and cough . 
He resumed . 
He 'd read it . 
Five ingredients . 
Put it down ; turned his head . 
Draught of air from window lifted the paper . 
Swish , rustle . 
He was working in a room with an open fireplace , he said . 
Saw a flicker , and there was the prescription burning and lifting chimneyward . 
Rushed towards it just as it whisked up the chimney . 
So ! 
Just at that point , to illustrate his story , out came his arm . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` No hand -- just an empty sleeve . 
Lord ! 
I thought , _ that 's _ a deformity ! 
Got a cork arm , I suppose , and has taken it off . 
Then , I thought , there 's something odd in that . 
What the devil keeps that sleeve up and open , if there 's nothing in it ? 
There was nothing in it , I tell you . 
Nothing down it , right down to the joint . 
I could see right down it to the elbow , and there was a glimmer of light shining through a tear of the cloth . 
` Good God ! ' 
I said . 
Then he stopped . 
Stared at me with those black goggles of his , and then at his sleeve . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That 's all . 
He never said a word ; just glared , and put his sleeve back in his pocket quickly . ' 
I was saying , ' said he , ` that there was the prescription burning , was n't I ? ' 
Interrogative cough . 
` How the devil , ' said I , ` can you move an empty sleeve like that ? ' 
'Em pty sleeve ? ' 
` Yes , ' said I , ` an empty sleeve . ' '' 
` It 's an empty sleeve , is it ? 
You saw it was an empty sleeve ? ' 
He stood up right away . 
I stood up too . 
He came towards me in three very slow steps , and stood quite close . 
Sniffed venomously . 
I did n't flinch , though I 'm hanged if that bandaged knob of his , and those blinkers , are n't enough to unnerve any one , coming quietly up to you . '' 
` You said it was an empty sleeve ? ' 
he said . 
` Certainly , ' I said . 
At staring and saying nothing a barefaced man , unspectacled , starts scratch . 
Then very quietly he pulled his sleeve out of his pocket again , and raised his arm towards me as though he would show it to me again . 
He did it very , very slowly . 
I looked at it . 
Seemed an age . 
` Well ? ' 
said I , clearing my throat , ` there 's nothing in it . ' 
`` Had to say something . 
I was beginning to feel frightened . 
I could see right down it . 
He extended it straight towards me , slowly , slowly -- just like that -- until the cuff was six inches from my face . 
Queer thing to see an empty sleeve come at you like that ! 
And then -- '' `` Well ? '' 
`` Something -- exactly like a finger and thumb it felt -- nipped my nose . '' 
Bunting began to laugh . 
`` There was n't anything there ! '' 
said Cuss , his voice running up into a shriek at the `` there . '' 
`` It 's all very well for you to laugh , but I tell you I was so startled , I hit his cuff hard , and turned around , and cut out of the room -- I left him -- '' Cuss stopped . 
There was no mistaking the sincerity of his panic . 
He turned round in a helpless way and took a second glass of the excellent vicar 's very inferior sherry . 
`` When I hit his cuff , '' said Cuss , `` I tell you , it felt exactly like hitting an arm . 
And there was n't an arm ! 
There was n't the ghost of an arm ! '' 
Mr. Bunting thought it over . 
He looked suspiciously at Cuss . 
`` It 's a most remarkable story , '' he said . 
He looked very wise and grave indeed . 
`` It 's really , '' said Mr. Bunting with judicial emphasis , `` a most remarkable story . '' 
THE BURGLARY AT THE VICARAGE The facts of the burglary at the vicarage came to us chiefly through the medium of the vicar and his wife . 
It occurred in the small hours of Whit Monday , the day devoted in Iping to the Club festivities . 
Mrs. Bunting , it seems , woke up suddenly in the stillness that comes before the dawn , with the strong impression that the door of their bedroom had opened and closed . 
She did not arouse her husband at first , but sat up in bed listening . 
She then distinctly heard the pad , pad , pad of bare feet coming out of the adjoining dressing-room and walking along the passage towards the staircase . 
As soon as she felt assured of this , she aroused the Rev. Mr. Bunting as quietly as possible . 
He did not strike a light , but putting on his spectacles , her dressing-gown and his bath slippers , he went out on the landing to listen . 
He heard quite distinctly a fumbling going on at his study desk down-stairs , and then a violent sneeze . 
At that he returned to his bedroom , armed himself with the most obvious weapon , the poker , and descended the staircase as noiselessly as possible . 
Mrs. Bunting came out on the landing . 
The hour was about four , and the ultimate darkness of the night was past . 
There was a faint shimmer of light in the hall , but the study doorway yawned impenetrably black . 
Everything was still except the faint creaking of the stairs under Mr. Bunting 's tread , and the slight movements in the study . 
Then something snapped , the drawer was opened , and there was a rustle of papers . 
Then came an imprecation , and a match was struck and the study was flooded with yellow light . 
Mr. Bunting was now in the hall , and through the crack of the door he could see the desk and the open drawer and a candle burning on the desk . 
But the robber he could not see . 
He stood there in the hall undecided what to do , and Mrs. Bunting , her face white and intent , crept slowly downstairs after him . 
One thing kept Mr. Bunting 's courage ; the persuasion that this burglar was a resident in the village . 
They heard the chink of money , and realised that the robber had found the housekeeping reserve of gold -- two pounds ten in half sovereigns altogether . 
At that sound Mr. Bunting was nerved to abrupt action . 
Gripping the poker firmly , he rushed into the room , closely followed by Mrs. Bunting . 
`` Surrender ! '' 
cried Mr. Bunting , fiercely , and then stooped amazed . 
Apparently the room was perfectly empty . 
Yet their conviction that they had , that very moment , heard somebody moving in the room had amounted to a certainty . 
For half a minute , perhaps , they stood gaping , then Mrs. Bunting went across the room and looked behind the screen , while Mr. Bunting , by a kindred impulse , peered under the desk . 
Then Mrs. Bunting turned back the window-curtains , and Mr. Bunting looked up the chimney and probed it with the poker . 
Then Mrs. Bunting scrutinised the waste-paper basket and Mr. Bunting opened the lid of the coal-scuttle . 
Then they came to a stop and stood with eyes interrogating each other . 
`` I could have sworn -- '' said Mr. Bunting . 
`` The candle ! '' 
said Mr. Bunting . 
`` Who lit the candle ? '' 
`` The drawer ! '' 
said Mrs. Bunting . 
`` And the money 's gone ! '' 
She went hastily to the doorway . 
`` Of all the strange occurrences -- '' There was a violent sneeze in the passage . 
They rushed out , and as they did so the kitchen door slammed . 
`` Bring the candle , '' said Mr. Bunting , and led the way . 
They both heard a sound of bolts being hastily shot back . 
As he opened the kitchen door he saw through the scullery that the back door was just opening , and the faint light of early dawn displayed the dark masses of the garden beyond . 
He is certain that nothing went out of the door . 
It opened , stood open for a moment , and then closed with a slam . 
As it did so , the candle Mrs. Bunting was carrying from the study flickered and flared . 
It was a minute or more before they entered the kitchen . 
The place was empty . 
They refastened the back door , examined the kitchen , pantry , and scullery thoroughly , and at last went down into the cellar . 
There was not a soul to be found in the house , search as they would . 
Daylight found the vicar and his wife , a quaintly-costumed little couple , still marvelling about on their own ground floor by the unnecessary light of a guttering candle . 
THE FURNITURE THAT WENT MAD Now it happened that in the early hours of Whit Monday , before Millie was hunted out for the day , Mr. Hall and Mrs. Hall both rose and went noiselessly down into the cellar . 
Their business there was of a private nature , and had something to do with the specific gravity of their beer . 
They had hardly entered the cellar when Mrs. Hall found she had forgotten to bring down a bottle of sarsaparilla from their joint-room . 
As she was the expert and principal operator in this affair , Hall very properly went upstairs for it . 
On the landing he was surprised to see that the stranger 's door was ajar . 
He went on into his own room and found the bottle as he had been directed . 
But returning with the bottle , he noticed that the bolts of the front door had been shot back , that the door was in fact simply on the latch . 
And with a flash of inspiration he connected this with the stranger 's room upstairs and the suggestions of Mr. Teddy Henfrey . 
He distinctly remembered holding the candle while Mrs. Hall shot these bolts overnight . 
At the sight he stopped , gaping , then with the bottle still in his hand went upstairs again . 
He rapped at the stranger 's door . 
There was no answer . 
He rapped again ; then pushed the door wide open and entered . 
It was as he expected . 
The bed , the room also , was empty . 
And what was stranger , even to his heavy intelligence , on the bedroom chair and along the rail of the bed were scattered the garments , the only garments so far as he knew , and the bandages of their guest . 
His big slouch hat even was cocked jauntily over the bed-post . 
As Hall stood there he heard his wife 's voice coming out of the depth of the cellar , with that rapid telescoping of the syllables and interrogative cocking up of the final words to a high note , by which the West Sussex villager is wont to indicate a brisk impatience . 
`` George ! 
You gart whad a wand ? '' 
At that he turned and hurried down to her . 
`` Janny , '' he said , over the rail of the cellar steps , '' ` tas the truth what Henfrey sez . 
` E 's not in uz room , ' e e n't . 
And the front door 's onbolted . '' 
At first Mrs. Hall did not understand , and as soon as she did she resolved to see the empty room for herself . 
Hall , still holding the bottle , went first . 
`` If ' e e n't there , '' he said , '' ` is close are . 
And what 's ' e doin ' ` ithout ` is close , then ? 
` Tas a most curious business . '' 
As they came up the cellar steps they both , it was afterwards ascertained , fancied they heard the front door open and shut , but seeing it closed and nothing there , neither said a word to the other about it at the time . 
Mrs. Hall passed her husband in the passage and ran on first upstairs . 
Someone sneezed on the staircase . 
Hall , following six steps behind , thought that he heard her sneeze . 
She , going on first , was under the impression that Hall was sneezing . 
She flung open the door and stood regarding the room . 
`` Of all the curious ! '' 
she said . 
She heard a sniff close behind her head as it seemed , and turning , was surprised to see Hall a dozen feet off on the topmost stair . 
But in another moment he was beside her . 
She bent forward and put her hand on the pillow and then under the clothes . 
`` Cold , '' she said . 
`` He 's been up this hour or more . '' 
As she did so , a most extraordinary thing happened . 
The bed-clothes gathered themselves together , leapt up suddenly into a sort of peak , and then jumped headlong over the bottom rail . 
It was exactly as if a hand had clutched them in the centre and flung them aside . 
Immediately after , the stranger 's hat hopped off the bed-post , described a whirling flight in the air through the better part of a circle , and then dashed straight at Mrs. Hall 's face . 
Then as swiftly came the sponge from the washstand ; and then the chair , flinging the stranger 's coat and trousers carelessly aside , and laughing drily in a voice singularly like the stranger 's , turned itself up with its four legs at Mrs. Hall , seemed to take aim at her for a moment , and charged at her . 
She screamed and turned , and then the chair legs came gently but firmly against her back and impelled her and Hall out of the room . 
The door slammed violently and was locked . 
The chair and bed seemed to be executing a dance of triumph for a moment , and then abruptly everything was still . 
Mrs. Hall was left almost in a fainting condition in Mr. Hall 's arms on the landing . 
It was with the greatest difficulty that Mr. Hall and Millie , who had been roused by her scream of alarm , succeeded in getting her downstairs , and applying the restoratives customary in such cases . '' 
` Tas sperits , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` I know ` tas sperits . 
I 've read in papers of en . 
Tables and chairs leaping and dancing ... '' `` Take a drop more , Janny , '' said Hall . '' 
` Twill steady ye . '' 
`` Lock him out , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` Do n't let him come in again . 
I half guessed -- I might ha ' known . 
With them goggling eyes and bandaged head , and never going to church of a Sunday . 
And all they bottles -- more 'n it 's right for any one to have . 
He 's put the sperits into the furniture ... . 
My good old furniture ! 
'T was in that very chair my poor dear mother used to sit when I was a little girl . 
To think it should rise up against me now ! '' 
`` Just a drop more , Janny , '' said Hall . 
`` Your nerves is all upset . '' 
They sent Millie across the street through the golden five o'clock sunshine to rouse up Mr. Sandy Wadgers , the blacksmith . 
Mr. Hall 's compliments and the furniture upstairs was behaving most extraordinary . 
Would Mr. Wadgers come round ? 
He was a knowing man , was Mr. Wadgers , and very resourceful . 
He took quite a grave view of the case . 
`` Arm darmed if thet ent witchcraft , '' was the view of Mr. Sandy Wadgers . 
`` You warnt horseshoes for such gentry as he . '' 
He came round greatly concerned . 
They wanted him to lead the way upstairs to the room , but he did n't seem to be in any hurry . 
He preferred to talk in the passage . 
Over the way Huxter 's apprentice came out and began taking down the shutters of the tobacco window . 
He was called over to join the discussion . 
Mr. Huxter naturally followed over in the course of a few minutes . 
The Anglo-Saxon genius for parliamentary government asserted itself ; there was a great deal of talk and no decisive action . 
`` Let 's have the facts first , '' insisted Mr. Sandy Wadgers . 
`` Let 's be sure we 'd be acting perfectly right in bustin ' that there door open . 
A door onbust is always open to bustin ' , but ye ca n't onbust a door once you 've busted en . '' 
And suddenly and most wonderfully the door of the room upstairs opened of its own accord , and as they looked up in amazement , they saw descending the stairs the muffled figure of the stranger staring more blackly and blankly than ever with those unreasonably large blue glass eyes of his . 
He came down stiffly and slowly , staring all the time ; he walked across the passage staring , then stopped . 
`` Look there ! '' 
he said , and their eyes followed the direction of his gloved finger and saw a bottle of sarsaparilla hard by the cellar door . 
Then he entered the parlour , and suddenly , swiftly , viciously , slammed the door in their faces . 
Not a word was spoken until the last echoes of the slam had died away . 
They stared at one another . 
`` Well , if that do n't lick everything ! '' 
said Mr. Wadgers , and left the alternative unsaid . 
`` I 'd go in and ask 'n ` bout it , '' said Wadgers , to Mr. Hall . 
`` I 'd d'mand an explanation . '' 
It took some time to bring the landlady 's husband up to that pitch . 
At last he rapped , opened the door , and got as far as , `` Excuse me -- '' `` Go to the devil ! '' 
said the stranger in a tremendous voice , and `` Shut that door after you . '' 
So that brief interview terminated . 
THE UNVEILING OF THE STRANGER The stranger went into the little parlour of the `` Coach and Horses '' about half-past five in the morning , and there he remained until near midday , the blinds down , the door shut , and none , after Hall 's repulse , venturing near him . 
All that time he must have fasted . 
Thrice he rang his bell , the third time furiously and continuously , but no one answered him . 
`` Him and his ` go to the devil ' indeed ! '' 
said Mrs. Hall . 
Presently came an imperfect rumour of the burglary at the vicarage , and two and two were put together . 
Hall , assisted by Wadgers , went off to find Mr. Shuckleforth , the magistrate , and take his advice . 
No one ventured upstairs . 
How the stranger occupied himself is unknown . 
Now and then he would stride violently up and down , and twice came an outburst of curses , a tearing of paper , and a violent smashing of bottles . 
The little group of scared but curious people increased . 
Mrs. Huxter came over ; some gay young fellows resplendent in black ready-made jackets and pique paper ties -- for it was Whit Monday -- joined the group with confused interrogations . 
Young Archie Harker distinguished himself by going up the yard and trying to peep under the window-blinds . 
He could see nothing , but gave reason for supposing that he did , and others of the Iping youth presently joined him . 
It was the finest of all possible Whit Mondays , and down the village street stood a row of nearly a dozen booths , a shooting gallery , and on the grass by the forge were three yellow and chocolate waggons and some picturesque strangers of both sexes putting up a cocoanut shy . 
The gentlemen wore blue jerseys , the ladies white aprons and quite fashionable hats with heavy plumes . 
Woodyer , of the `` Purple Fawn , '' and Mr. Jaggers , the cobbler , who also sold old second-hand ordinary bicycles , were stretching a string of union-jacks and royal ensigns -LRB- which had originally celebrated the first Victorian Jubilee -RRB- across the road . 
And inside , in the artificial darkness of the parlour , into which only one thin jet of sunlight penetrated , the stranger , hungry we must suppose , and fearful , hidden in his uncomfortable hot wrappings , pored through his dark glasses upon his paper or chinked his dirty little bottles , and occasionally swore savagely at the boys , audible if invisible , outside the windows . 
In the corner by the fireplace lay the fragments of half a dozen smashed bottles , and a pungent twang of chlorine tainted the air . 
So much we know from what was heard at the time and from what was subsequently seen in the room . 
About noon he suddenly opened his parlour door and stood glaring fixedly at the three or four people in the bar . 
`` Mrs. Hall , '' he said . 
Somebody went sheepishly and called for Mrs. Hall . 
Mrs. Hall appeared after an interval , a little short of breath , but all the fiercer for that . 
Hall was still out . 
She had deliberated over this scene , and she came holding a little tray with an unsettled bill upon it . 
`` Is it your bill you 're wanting , sir ? '' 
she said . 
`` Why was n't my breakfast laid ? 
Why have n't you prepared my meals and answered my bell ? 
Do you think I live without eating ? '' 
`` Why is n't my bill paid ? '' 
said Mrs. Hall . 
`` That 's what I want to know . '' 
`` I told you three days ago I was awaiting a remittance -- '' `` I told you two days ago I was n't going to await no remittances . 
You ca n't grumble if your breakfast waits a bit , if my bill 's been waiting these five days , can you ? '' 
The stranger swore briefly but vividly . 
`` Nar , nar ! '' 
from the bar . 
`` And I 'd thank you kindly , sir , if you 'd keep your swearing to yourself , sir , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
The stranger stood looking more like an angry diving-helmet than ever . 
It was universally felt in the bar that Mrs. Hall had the better of him . 
His next words showed as much . 
`` Look here , my good woman -- '' he began . 
`` Do n't ` good woman ' me , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` I 've told you my remittance has n't come . '' 
`` Remittance indeed ! '' 
said Mrs. Hall . 
`` Still , I daresay in my pocket -- '' `` You told me three days ago that you had n't anything but a sovereign 's worth of silver upon you . '' 
`` Well , I 've found some more -- '' '' ` Ul-lo ! '' 
from the bar . 
`` I wonder where you found it , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
That seemed to annoy the stranger very much . 
He stamped his foot . 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
he said . 
`` That I wonder where you found it , '' said Mrs. Hall . 
`` And before I take any bills or get any breakfasts , or do any such things whatsoever , you got to tell me one or two things I do n't understand , and what nobody do n't understand , and what everybody is very anxious to understand . 
I want to know what you been doing t ` my chair upstairs , and I want to know how 't is your room was empty , and how you got in again . 
Them as stops in this house comes in by the doors -- that 's the rule of the house , and that you _ did n't _ do , and what I want to know is how you did come in . 
And I want to know -- '' Suddenly the stranger raised his gloved hands clenched , stamped his foot , and said , `` Stop ! '' 
with such extraordinary violence that he silenced her instantly . 
`` You do n't understand , '' he said , `` who I am or what I am . 
I 'll show you . 
By Heaven ! 
I 'll show you . '' 
Then he put his open palm over his face and withdrew it . 
The centre of his face became a black cavity . 
`` Here , '' he said . 
He stepped forward and handed Mrs. Hall something which she , staring at his metamorphosed face , accepted automatically . 
Then , when she saw what it was , she screamed loudly , dropped it , and staggered back . 
The nose -- it was the stranger 's nose ! 
pink and shining -- rolled on the floor . 
Then he removed his spectacles , and everyone in the bar gasped . 
He took off his hat , and with a violent gesture tore at his whiskers and bandages . 
For a moment they resisted him . 
A flash of horrible anticipation passed through the bar . 
`` Oh , my Gard ! '' 
said some one . 
Then off they came . 
It was worse than anything . 
Mrs. Hall , standing open-mouthed and horror-struck , shrieked at what she saw , and made for the door of the house . 
Everyone began to move . 
They were prepared for scars , disfigurements , tangible horrors , but nothing ! 
The bandages and false hair flew across the passage into the bar , making a hobbledehoy jump to avoid them . 
Everyone tumbled on everyone else down the steps . 
For the man who stood there shouting some incoherent explanation , was a solid gesticulating figure up to the coat-collar of him , and then -- nothingness , no visible thing at all ! 
People down the village heard shouts and shrieks , and looking up the street saw the `` Coach and Horses '' violently firing out its humanity . 
They saw Mrs. Hall fall down and Mr. Teddy Henfrey jump to avoid tumbling over her , and then they heard the frightful screams of Millie , who , emerging suddenly from the kitchen at the noise of the tumult , had come upon the headless stranger from behind . 
These increased suddenly . 
Forthwith everyone all down the street , the sweetstuff seller , cocoanut shy proprietor and his assistant , the swing man , little boys and girls , rustic dandies , smart wenches , smocked elders and aproned gipsies -- began running towards the inn , and in a miraculously short space of time a crowd of perhaps forty people , and rapidly increasing , swayed and hooted and inquired and exclaimed and suggested , in front of Mrs. Hall 's establishment . 
Everyone seemed eager to talk at once , and the result was Babel . 
A small group supported Mrs. Hall , who was picked up in a state of collapse . 
There was a conference , and the incredible evidence of a vociferous eye-witness . 
`` O Bogey ! '' 
`` What 's he been doin ' , then ? '' 
`` Ai n't hurt the girl , ` as ` e ? '' 
`` Run at en with a knife , I believe . '' 
`` No ` ed , I tell ye . 
I do n't mean no manner of speaking . 
I mean marn ` ithout a ` ed ! '' 
`` Narnsense ! 
't is some conjuring trick . '' 
`` Fetched off ` is wrapping , ' e did -- '' In its struggles to see in through the open door , the crowd formed itself into a straggling wedge , with the more adventurous apex nearest the inn . 
`` He stood for a moment , I heerd the gal scream , and he turned . 
I saw her skirts whisk , and he went after her . 
Did n't take ten seconds . 
Back he comes with a knife in uz hand and a loaf ; stood just as if he was staring . 
Not a moment ago . 
Went in that there door . 
I tell ` e , ' e ai n't gart no ` ed at all . 
You just missed en -- '' There was a disturbance behind , and the speaker stopped to step aside for a little procession that was marching very resolutely towards the house ; first Mr. Hall , very red and determined , th , I heerd the gal scream , and he turned . 
I saw her skirts whisk , and he went after her . 
Did n't take ten seconds . 
Back he comes with a knife in uz hand and a loaf ; stood just as if he was staring . 
Not a moment ago . 
Went in that there door . 
I tell ` e , ' e ai n't gart no ` ed at all . 
You just missed en -- '' There was a disturbance behind , and the speaker stopped to step aside for a little procession that was marching very resolutely towards the house ; first Mr. Hall , very red and determined , then Mr. Bobby Jaffers , the village constable , and then the wary Mr. Wadgers . 
They had come now armed with a warrant . 
People shouted conflicting information of the recent circumstances . '' 
` Ed or no ` ed , '' said Jaffers , `` I got to ` rest en , and ` rest en I will . '' 
Mr. Hall marched up the steps , marched straight to the door of the parlour and flung it open . 
`` Constable , '' he said , `` do your duty . '' 
Jaffers marched in . 
Hall next , Wadgers last . 
They saw in the dim light the headless figure facing them , with a gnawed crust of bread in one gloved hand and a chunk of cheese in the other . 
`` That 's him ! '' 
said Hall . 
`` What the devil 's this ? '' 
came in a tone of angry expostulation from above the collar of the figure . 
`` You 're a damned rum customer , mister , '' said Mr. Jaffers . 
`` But ` ed or no ` ed , the warrant says ` body , ' and duty 's duty -- '' `` Keep off ! '' 
said the figure , starting back . 
Abruptly he whipped down the bread and cheese , and Mr. Hall just grasped the knife on the table in time to save it . 
Off came the stranger 's left glove and was slapped in Jaffers ' face . 
In another moment Jaffers , cutting short some statement concerning a warrant , had gripped him by the handless wrist and caught his invisible throat . 
He got a sounding kick on the shin that made him shout , but he kept his grip . 
Hall sent the knife sliding along the table to Wadgers , who acted as goal-keeper for the offensive , so to speak , and then stepped forward as Jaffers and the stranger swayed and staggered towards him , clutching and hitting in . 
A chair stood in the way , and went aside with a crash as they came down together . 
`` Get the feet , '' said Jaffers between his teeth . 
Mr. Hall , endeavouring to act on instructions , received a sounding kick in the ribs that disposed of him for a moment , and Mr. Wadgers , seeing the decapitated stranger had rolled over and got the upper side of Jaffers , retreated towards the door , knife in hand , and so collided with Mr. Huxter and the Sidderbridge carter coming to the rescue of law and order . 
At the same moment down came three or four bottles from the chiffonnier and shot a web of pungency into the air of the room . 
`` I 'll surrender , '' cried the stranger , though he had Jaffers down , and in another moment he stood up panting , a strange figure , headless and handless -- for he had pulled off his right glove now as well as his left . 
`` It 's no good , '' he said , as if sobbing for breath . 
It was the strangest thing in the world to hear that voice coming as if out of empty space , but the Sussex peasants are perhaps the most matter-of-fact people under the sun . 
Jaffers got up also and produced a pair of handcuffs . 
Then he stared . 
`` I say ! '' 
said Jaffers , brought up short by a dim realization of the incongruity of the whole business , `` Darn it ! 
Ca n't use 'em as I can see . '' 
The stranger ran his arm down his waistcoat , and as if by a miracle the buttons to which his empty sleeve pointed became undone . 
Then he said something about his shin , and stooped down . 
He seemed to be fumbling with his shoes and socks . 
`` Why ! '' 
said Huxter , suddenly , `` that 's not a man at all . 
It 's just empty clothes . 
Look ! 
You can see down his collar and the linings of his clothes . 
I could put my arm -- '' He extended his hand ; it seemed to meet something in mid-air , and he drew it back with a sharp exclamation . 
`` I wish you 'd keep your fingers out of my eye , '' said the aerial voice , in a tone of savage expostulation . 
`` The fact is , I 'm all here -- head , hands , legs , and all the rest of it , but it happens I 'm invisible . 
It 's a confounded nuisance , but I am . 
That 's no reason why I should be poked to pieces by every stupid bumpkin in Iping , is it ? '' 
The suit of clothes , now all unbuttoned and hanging loosely upon its unseen supports , stood up , arms akimbo . 
Several other of the men folks had now entered the room , so that it was closely crowded . 
`` Invisible , eh ? '' 
said Huxter , ignoring the stranger 's abuse . 
`` Who ever heard the likes of that ? '' 
`` It 's strange , perhaps , but it 's not a crime . 
Why am I assaulted by a policeman in this fashion ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
that 's a different matter , '' said Jaffers . 
`` No doubt you are a bit difficult to see in this light , but I got a warrant and it 's all correct . 
What I 'm after ai n't no invisibility , -- it 's burglary . 
There 's a house been broke into and money took . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` And circumstances certainly point -- '' `` Stuff and nonsense ! '' 
said the Invisible Man . 
`` I hope so , sir ; but I 've got my instructions . '' 
`` Well , '' said the stranger , `` I 'll come . 
I 'll come . 
But no handcuffs . '' 
`` It 's the regular thing , '' said Jaffers . 
`` No handcuffs , '' stipulated the stranger . 
`` Pardon me , '' said Jaffers . 
Abruptly the figure sat down , and before any one could realise was was being done , the slippers , socks , and trousers had been kicked off under the table . 
Then he sprang up again and flung off his coat . 
`` Here , stop that , '' said Jaffers , suddenly realising what was happening . 
He gripped at the waistcoat ; it struggled , and the shirt slipped out of it and left it limply and empty in his hand . 
`` Hold him ! '' 
said Jaffers , loudly . 
`` Once he gets the things off -- '' `` Hold him ! '' 
cried everyone , and there was a rush at the fluttering white shirt which was now all that was visible of the stranger . 
The shirt-sleeve planted a shrewd blow in Hall 's face that stopped his open-armed advance , and sent him backward into old Toothsome the sexton , and in another moment the garment was lifted up and became convulsed and vacantly flapping about the arms , even as a shirt that is being thrust over a man 's head . 
Jaffers clutched at it , and only helped to pull it off ; he was struck in the mouth out of the air , and incontinently threw his truncheon and smote Teddy Henfrey savagely upon the crown of his head . 
`` Look out ! '' 
said everybody , fencing at random and hitting at nothing . 
`` Hold him ! 
Shut the door ! 
Do n't let him loose ! 
I got something ! 
Here he is ! '' 
A perfect Babel of noises they made . 
Everybody , it seemed , was being hit all at once , and Sandy Wadgers , knowing as ever and his wits sharpened by a frightful blow in the nose , reopened the door and led the rout . 
The others , following incontinently , were jammed for a moment in the corner by the doorway . 
The hitting continued . 
Phipps , the Unitarian , had a front tooth broken , and Henfrey was injured in the cartilage of his ear . 
Jaffers was struck under the jaw , and , turning , caught at something that intervened between him and Huxter in the melee , and prevented their coming together . 
He felt a muscular chest , and in another moment the whole mass of struggling , excited men shot out into the crowded hall . 
`` I got him ! '' 
shouted Jaffers , choking and reeling through them all , and wrestling with purple face and swelling veins against his unseen enemy . 
Men staggered right and left as the extraordinary conflict swayed swiftly towards the house door , and went spinning down the half-dozen steps of the inn . 
Jaffers cried in a strangled voice -- holding tight , nevertheless , and making play with his knee -- spun around , and fell heavily undermost with his head on the gravel . 
Only then did his fingers relax . 
There were excited cries of `` Hold him ! '' 
`` Invisible ! '' 
and so forth , and a young fellow , a stranger in the place whose name did not come to light , rushed in at once , caught something , missed his hold , and fell over the constable 's prostrate body . 
Half-way across the road a woman screamed as something pushed by her ; a dog , kicked apparently , yelped and ran howling into Huxter 's yard , and with that the transit of the Invisible Man was accomplished . 
For a space people stood amazed and gesticulating , and then came panic , and scattered them abroad through the village as a gust scatters dead leaves . 
But Jaffers lay quite still , face upward and knees bent , at the foot of the steps of the inn . 
IN TRANSIT The eighth chapter is exceedingly brief , and relates that Gibbons , the amateur naturalist of the district , while lying out on the spacious open downs without a soul within a couple of miles of him , as he thought , and almost dozing , heard close to him the sound as of a man coughing , sneezing , and then swearing savagely to himself ; and looking , beheld nothing . 
Yet the voice was indisputable . 
It continued to swear with that breadth and variety that distinguishes the swearing of a cultivated man . 
It grew to a climax , diminished again , and died away in the distance , going as it seemed to him in the direction of Adderdean . 
It lifted to a spasmodic sneeze and ended . 
Gibbons had heard nothing of the morning 's occurrences , but the phenomenon was so striking and disturbing that his philosophical tranquillity vanished ; he got up hastily , and hurried down the steepness of the hill towards the village , as fast as he could go . 
MR. THOMAS MARVEL You must picture Mr. Thomas Marvel as a person of copious , flexible visage , a nose of cylindrical protrusion , a liquorish , ample , fluctuating mouth , and a beard of bristling eccentricity . 
His figure inclined to embonpoint ; his short limbs accentuated this inclination . 
He wore a furry silk hat , and the frequent substitution of twine and shoe-laces for buttons , apparent at critical points of his costume , marked a man essentially bachelor . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel was sitting with his feet in a ditch by the roadside over the down towards Adderdean , about a mile and a half out of Iping . 
His feet , save for socks of irregular open-work , were bare , his big toes were broad , and pricked like the ears of a watchful dog . 
In a leisurely manner -- he did everything in a leisurely manner -- he was contemplating trying on a pair of boots . 
They were the soundest boots he had come across for a long time , but too large for him ; whereas the ones he had were , in dry weather , a very comfortable fit , but too thin-soled for damp . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel hated roomy shoes , but then he hated damp . 
He had never properly thought out which he hated most , and it was a pleasant day , and there was nothing better to do . 
So he put the four shoes in a graceful group on the turf and looked at them . 
And seeing them there among the grass and springing agrimony , it suddenly occurred to him that both pairs were exceedingly ugly to see . 
He was not at all startled by a voice behind him . 
`` They 're boots , anyhow , '' said the Voice . 
`` They are -- charity boots , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , with his head on one side regarding them distastefully ; `` and which is the ugliest pair in the whole blessed universe , I 'm darned if I know ! '' 
`` H 'm , '' said the Voice . 
`` I 've worn worse -- in fact , I 've worn none . 
But none so owdacious ugly -- if you 'll allow the expression . 
I 've been cadging boots -- in particular -- for days . 
Because I was sick of them . 
They 're sound enough , of course . 
But a gentleman on tramp sees such a thundering lot of his boots . 
And if you 'll believe me , I 've raised nothing in the whole blessed country , try as I would , but them . 
Look at 'em ! 
And a good country for boots , too , in a general way . 
But it 's just my promiscuous luck . 
I 've got my boots in this country ten years or more . 
And then they treat you like this . '' 
`` It 's a beast of a country , '' said the Voice . 
`` And pigs for people . '' 
`` Ai n't it ? '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel . 
`` Lord ! 
But them boots ! 
It beats it . '' 
He turned his head over his shoulder to the right , to look at the boots of his interlocutor with a view to comparisons , and lo ! 
where the boots of his interlocutor should have been were neither legs nor boots . 
He was irradiated by the dawn of a great amazement . 
`` Where are yer ? '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel over his shoulder and coming on all fours . 
He saw a stretch of empty downs with the wind swaying the remote green-pointed furze bushes . 
`` Am I drunk ? '' 
said Mr. Marvel . 
`` Have I had visions ? 
Was I talking to myself ? 
What the -- '' `` Do n't be alarmed , '' said a Voice . 
`` None of your ventriloquising me , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , rising sharply to his feet . 
`` Where are yer ? 
Alarmed , indeed ! '' 
`` Do n't be alarmed , '' repeated the Voice . '' 
_ You 'll _ be alarmed in a minute , you silly fool , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel . 
`` Where are yer ? 
Lem me get my mark on yer ... `` Are yer _ buried _ ? '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel , after an interval . 
There was no answer . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel stood bootless and amazed , his jacket nearly thrown off . 
`` Peewit , '' said a peewit , very remote . 
`` Peewit , indeed ! '' 
said Mr. Thomas Marvel . 
`` This ai n't no time for foolery . '' 
The down was desolate , east and west , north and south ; the road with its shallow ditches and white bordering stakes , ran smooth and empty north and south , and , save for that peewit , the blue sky was empty too . 
`` So help me , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , shuffling his coat on to his shoulders again . 
`` It 's the drink ! 
I might ha ' known . '' 
`` It 's not the drink , '' said the Voice . 
`` You keep your nerves steady . '' 
`` Ow ! '' 
said Mr. Marvel , and his face grew white amidst its patches . 
`` It 's the drink ! '' 
his lips repeated noiselessly . 
He remained staring about him , rotating slowly backwards . 
`` I could have swore I heard a voice , '' he whispered . 
`` Of course you did . '' 
`` It 's there again , '' said Mr. Marvel , closing his eyes and clasping his hand on his brow with a tragic gesture . 
He was suddenly taken by the collar and shaken violently , and left more dazed than ever . 
`` Do n't be a fool , '' said the Voice . 
`` I 'm -- off -- my -- blooming -- chump , '' said Mr. Marvel . 
`` It 's no good . 
It 's fretting about them blarsted boots . 
I 'm off my blessed blooming chump . 
Or it 's spirits . '' 
