Father Ferapont had succeeded in getting himself installed in this same solitary cell seven years previously . 
It was simply a peasant 's hut , though it looked like a chapel , for it contained an extraordinary number of ikons with lamps perpetually burning before them - which men brought to the monastery as offerings to God . 
Father Ferapont had been appointed to look after them and keep the lamps burning . 
It was said -LRB- and indeed it was true -RRB- that he ate only two pounds of bread in three days . 
The beekeeper , who lived close by the apiary , used to bring him the bread every three days , and even to this man who waited upon him , Father Ferapont rarely uttered a word . 
The four pounds of bread , together with the sacrament bread , regularly sent him on Sundays after the late mass by the Father Superior , made up his weekly rations . 
The water in his jug was changed every day . 
He rarely appeared at mass . 
Visitors who came to do him homage saw him sometimes kneeling all day long at prayer without looking round . 
If he addressed them , he was brief , abrupt , strange , and almost always rude . 
On very rare occasions , however , he would talk to visitors , but for the most part he would utter some one strange saying which was a complete riddle , and no entreaties would induce him to pronounce a word in explanation . 
He was not a priest , but a simple monk . 
There was a strange belief , chiefly , however , among the most ignorant , that Father Ferapont had communication with heavenly spirits and would only converse with them , and so was silent with men . 
The monk from Obdorsk , having been directed to the apiary by the beekeeper , who was also a very silent and surly monk , went to the corner where Father Ferapont 's cell stood . 
`` Maybe he will speak as you are a stranger and maybe you 'll get nothing out of him , '' the beekeeper had warned him . 
The monk , as he related afterwards , approached in the utmost apprehension . 
It was rather late in the evening . 
Father Ferapont was sitting at the door of his cell on a low bench . 
A huge old elm was lightly rustling overhead . 
There was an evening freshness in the air . 
The monk from Obdorsk bowed down before the saint and asked his blessing . 
`` Do you want me to bow down to you , monk ? '' 
said Father Ferapont . 
`` Get up ! '' 
The monk got up . 
`` Blessing , be blessed ! 
Sit beside me . 
Where have you come from ? '' 
What most struck the poor monk was the fact that in spite of his strict fasting and great age , Father Ferapont still looked a vigorous old man . 
He was tall , held himself erect , and had a thin , but fresh and healthy face . 
There was no doubt he still had considerable strength . 
He was of athletic build . 
In spite of his great age he was not even quite grey , and still had very thick hair and a full beard , both of which had once been black . 
His eyes were grey , large and luminous , but strikingly prominent . 
He spoke with a broad accent . 
He was dressed in a peasant 's long reddish coat of coarse convict cloth -LRB- as it used to be called -RRB- and had a stout rope round his waist . 
His throat and chest were bare . 
Beneath his coat , his shirt of the coarsest linen showed almost black with dirt , not having been changed for months . 
They said that he wore irons weighing thirty pounds under his coat . 
His stockingless feet were thrust in old slippers almost dropping to pieces . 
`` From the little Obdorsk monastery , from St. Sylvester , '' the monk answered humbly , whilst his keen and inquisitive , but rather frightened little eyes kept watch on the hermit . 
`` I have been at your Sylvester 's . 
I used to stay there . 
Is Sylvester well ? '' 
The monk hesitated . 
`` You are a senseless lot ! 
How do you keep the fasts ? '' 
`` Our dietary is according to the ancient conventual rules . 
During Lent there are no meals provided for Monday , Wednesday , and Friday . 
For Tuesday and Thursday we have white bread , stewed fruit with honey , wild berries , or salt cabbage and whole meal stirabout . 
On Saturday white cabbage soup , noodles with peas , kasha , all with hemp oil . 
On weekdays we have dried fish and kasha with the cabbage soup . 
From Monday till Saturday evening , six whole days in Holy Week , nothing is cooked , and we have only bread and water , and that sparingly ; if possible not taking food every day , just the same as is ordered for first week in Lent . 
On Good Friday nothing is eaten . 
In the same way on the Saturday we have to fast till three o'clock , and then take a little bread and water and drink a single cup of wine . 
On Holy Thursday we drink wine and have something cooked without oil or not cooked at all , inasmuch as the Laodicean council lays down for Holy Thursday : `` It is unseemly by remitting the fast on the Holy Thursday to dishonour the whole of Lent ! '' 
This is how we keep the fast . 
But what is that compared with you , holy Father , '' added the monk , growing more confident , `` for all the year round , even at Easter , you take nothing but bread and water , and what we should eat in two days lasts you full seven . 
It 's truly marvellous - your great abstinence . '' 
`` And mushrooms ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , suddenly . 
`` Mushrooms ? '' 
repeated the surprised monk . 
`` Yes . 
I can give up their bread , not needing it at all , and go away into the forest and live there on the mushrooms or the berries , but they ca n't give up their bread here , wherefore they are in bondage to the devil . 
Nowadays the unclean deny that there is need of such fasting . 
Haughty and unclean is their judgment . '' 
`` Och , true , '' sighed the monk . 
`` And have you seen devils among them ? '' 
asked Ferapont . 
`` Among them ? 
Among whom ? '' 
asked the monk , timidly . 
`` I went to the Father Superior on Trinity Sunday last year , I have n't been since . 
I saw a devil sitting on one man 's chest hiding under his cassock , only his horns poked out ; another had one peeping out of his pocket with such sharp eyes , he was afraid of me ; another settled in the unclean belly of one , another was hanging round a man 's neck , and so he was carrying him about without seeing him . '' 
`` You - can see spirits ? '' 
the monk inquired . 
`` I tell you I can see , I can see through them . 
When I was coming out from the Superior 's I saw one hiding from me behind the door , and a big one , a yard and a half or more high , with a thick long grey tail , and the tip of his tail was in the crack of the door and I was quick and slammed the door , pinching his tail in it . 
He squealed and began to struggle , and I made the sign of the cross over him three times . 
And he died on the spot like a crushed spider . 
He must have rotted there in the corner and be stinking , but they do n't see , they do n't smell it . 
It 's a year since I have been there . 
I reveal it to you , as you are a stranger . '' 
`` Your words are terrible ! 
But , holy and blessed father , '' said the monk , growing bolder and bolder , `` is it true , as they noise abroad even to distant lands about you , that you are in continual communication with the Holy Ghost ? '' 
`` He does fly down at times . '' 
`` How does he fly down ? 
In what form ? '' 
`` As a bird . '' 
`` The Holy Ghost in the form of a dove ? '' 
`` There 's the Holy Ghost and there 's the Holy Spirit . 
The Holy Spirit can appear as other birds - sometimes as a swallow , sometimes a goldfinch and sometimes as a blue-tit . '' 
`` How do you know him from an ordinary tit ? '' 
`` He speaks . '' 
`` How does he speak , in what language ? '' 
`` Human language . '' 
`` And what does he tell you ? '' 
`` Why , to-day he told me that a fool would visit me and would ask me unseemly questions . 
You want to know too much , monk . '' 
`` Terrible are your words , most holy and blessed Father , '' the monk shook his head . 
But there was a doubtful look in his frightened little eyes . 
`` Do you see this tree ? '' 
asked Father Ferapont , after a pause . 
`` I do , blessed Father . '' 
`` You think it 's an elm , but for me it has another shape . '' 
`` What sort of shape ? '' 
inquired the monk , after a pause of vain expectation . 
`` It happens at night . 
You see those two branches ? 
In the night it is Christ holding out His arms to me and seeking me with those arms , I see it clearly and tremble . 
It 's terrible , terrible ! '' 
`` What is there terrible if it 's Christ Himself ? '' 
`` Why , He 'll snatch me up and carry me away . '' 
`` Alive ? '' 
`` In the spirit and glory of Elijah , have n't you heard ? 
He will take me in His arms and bear me away . '' 
Though the monk returned to the cell he was sharing with one of the brothers , in considerable perplexity of mind , he still cherished at heart a greater reverence for Father Ferapont than for Father Zossima . 
He was strongly in favour of fasting , and it was not strange that one who kept so rigid a fast as Father Ferapont should `` see marvels . '' 
His words seemed certainly queer , but God only could tell what was hidden in those words , and were not worse words and acts commonly seen in those who have sacrificed their intellects for the glory of God ? 
The pinching of the devil 's tail he was ready and eager to believe , and not only in the figurative sense . 
Besides he had , before visiting the monastery , a strong prejudice against the institution of `` elders , '' which he only knew of by hearsay and believed to be a pernicious innovation . 
Before he had been long at the monastery , he had detected the secret murmurings of some shallow brothers who disliked the institution . 
He was , besides , a meddlesome , inquisitive man , who poked his nose into everything . 
This was why the news of the fresh `` miracle '' performed by Father Zossima reduced him to extreme perplexity . 
Alyosha remembered afterwards how their inquisitive guest from Obdorsk had been continually flitting to and fro from one group to another , listening and asking questions among the monks that were crowding within and without the elder 's cell . 
But he did not pay much attention to him at the time , and only recollected it afterwards . 
He had no thought to spare for it indeed , for when Father Zossima , feeling tired again , had gone back to bed , he thought of Alyosha as he was closing his eyes , and sent for him . 
Alyosha ran at once . 
There was no one else in the cell but Father Paissy , Father Iosif , and the novice Porfiry . 
The elder , opening his weary eyes and looking intently at Alyosha , asked him suddenly : `` Are your people expecting you , my son ? '' 
Alyosha hesitated . 
`` Have n't they need of you ? 
Did n't you promise someone yesterday to see them to-day ? '' 
`` I did promise - to my father - my brothers - others too . '' 
`` You see , you must go . 
Do n't grieve . 
Be sure I shall not die without your being by to hear my last word . 
To you I will say that word , my son , it will be my last gift to you . 
To you , dear son , because you love me . 
But now go to keep your promise . '' 
Alyosha immediately obeyed , though it was hard to go . 
But the promise that he should hear his last word on earth , that it should be the last gift to him , Alyosha , sent a thrill of rapture through his soul . 
He made haste that he might finish what he had to do in the town and return quickly . 
Father Paissy , too , uttered some words of exhortation which moved and surprised him greatly . 
He spoke as they left the cell together . 
`` Remember , young man , unceasingly , '' Father Paissy began , without preface , `` that the science of this world , which has become a great power , has , especially in the last century , analysed everything divine handed down to us in the holy books . 
After this cruel analysis the learned of this world have nothing left of all that was sacred of old . 
But they have only analysed the parts and overlooked the whole , and indeed their blindness is marvellous . 
Yet the whole still stands steadfast before their eyes , and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it . 
Has it not lasted nineteen centuries , is it not still a living , a moving power in the individual soul and in the masses of people ? 
It is still as strong and living even in the souls of atheists , who have destroyed everything ! 
For even those who have renounced Christianity and attack it , in their inmost being still follow the Christian ideal , for hitherto neither their subtlety nor the ardour of their hearts has been able to create a higher ideal of man and of virtue than the ideal given by Christ of old . 
When it has been attempted , the result has been only grotesque . 
Remember this especially , young man , since you are being sent into the world by your departing elder . 
Maybe , remembering this great day , you will not forget my words , uttered from the heart for your guidance , seeing you are young , and the temptations of the world are great and beyond your strength to endure . 
Well , now go , my orphan . '' 
With these words Father Paissy blessed him . 
As Alyosha left the monastery and thought them over , he suddenly realised that he had met a new and unexpected friend , a warmly loving teacher , in this austere monk who had hitherto treated him sternly . 
It was as though Father Zossima had bequeathed him to him at his death , and `` perhaps that 's just what had passed between them , '' Alyosha thought suddenly . 
The philosophic reflections he had just heard so unexpectedly testified to the warmth of Father Paissy 's heart . 
He was in haste to arm the boy 's mind for conflict with temptation and to guard the young soul left in his charge with the strongest defence he could imagine . 
At His Father 's FIRST of all , Alyosha went to his father . 
On the way he remembered that his father had insisted the day before that he should come without his brother Ivan seeing him . 
`` Why so ? '' 
Alyosha wondered suddenly . 
`` Even if my father has something to say to me alone , why should I go in unseen ? 
Most likely in his excitement yesterday he meant to say something different , '' he decided . 
Yet he was very glad when Marfa Ignatyevna , who opened the garden gate to him -LRB- Grigory , it appeared , was ill in bed in the lodge -RRB- , told him in answer to his question that Ivan Fyodorovitch had gone out two hours ago . 
`` And my father ? '' 
`` He is up , taking his coffee , '' Marfa answered somewhat drily . 
Alyosha went in . 
The old man was sitting alone at the table wearing slippers and a little old overcoat . 
He was amusing himself by looking through some accounts , rather inattentively however . 
He was quite alone in the house , for Smerdyakov too had gone out marketing . 
Though he had got up early and was trying to put a bold face on it , he looked tired and weak . 
His forehead , upon which huge purple bruises had come out during the night , was bandaged with a red handkerchief ; his nose too was swollen terribly in the night , and some smaller bruises covered it in patches , giving his whole face a peculiarly spiteful and irritable look . 
The old man was aware of this , and turned a hostile glance on Alyosha as he came in . 
`` The coffee is cold , '' he cried harshly ; `` I wo n't offer you any . 
I 've ordered nothing but a Lenten fish soup to-day , and I do n't invite anyone to share it . 
Why have you come ? '' 
`` To find out how you are , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Yes . 
Besides , I told you to come yesterday . 
It 's all of no consequence . 
You need not have troubled . 
But I knew you 'd come poking in directly . '' 
He said this with almost hostile feeling . 
At the same time he got up and looked anxiously in the looking-glass -LRB- perhaps for the fortieth time that morning -RRB- at his nose . 
He began , too , binding his red handkerchief more becomingly on his forehead . 
`` Red 's better . 
It 's just like the hospital in a white one , '' he observed sententiously . 
`` Well , how are things over there ? 
How is your elder ? '' 
`` He is very bad ; he may die to-day , '' answered Alyosha . 
But his father had not listened , and had forgotten his own question at once . 
`` Ivan 's gone out , '' he said suddenly . 
`` He is doing his utmost to carry off Mitya 's betrothed . 
That 's what he is staying here for , '' he added maliciously , and , twisting his mouth , looked at Alyosha . 
`` Surely he did not tell you so ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , he did , long ago . 
Would you believe it , he told me three weeks ago ? 
You do n't suppose he too came to murder me , do you ? 
He must have had some object in coming . '' 
`` What do you mean ? 
Why do you say such things ? '' 
said Alyosha , troubled . 
`` He does n't ask for money , it 's true , but yet he wo n't get a farthing from me . 
I intend living as long as possible , you may as well know , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , and so I need every farthing , and the longer I live , the more I shall need it , '' he continued , pacing from one corner of the room to the other , keeping his hands in the pockets of his loose greasy overcoat made of yellow cotton material . 
`` I can still pass for a man at five and fifty , but I want to pass for one for another twenty years . 
As I get older , you know , I sha n't be a pretty object . 
The wenches wo n't come to me of their own accord , so I shall want my money . 
So I am saving up more and more , simply for myself , my dear son Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
You may as well know . 
For I mean to go on in my sins to the end , let me tell you . 
For sin is sweet ; all abuse it , but all men live in it , only others do it on the sly , and I openly . 
And so all the other sinners fall upon me for being so simple . 
And your paradise , Alexey Fyodorovitch , is not to my taste , let me tell you that ; and it 's not the proper place for a gentleman , your paradise , even if it exists . 
I believe that I fall asleep and do n't wake up again , and that 's all . 
You can pray for my soul if you like . 
And if you do n't want to , do n't , damn you ! 
That 's my philosophy . 
Ivan talked well here yesterday , though we were all drunk . 
Ivan is a conceited coxcomb , but he has no particular learning ... nor education either . 
He sits silent and smiles at one without speaking - that 's what pulls him through . '' 
Alyosha listened to him in silence . 
`` Why wo n't he talk to me ? 
If he does speak , he gives himself airs . 
Your Ivan is a scoundrel ! 
And I 'll marry Grushenka in a minute if I want to . 
For if you 've money , Alexey Fyodorovitch , you have only to want a thing and you can have it . 
That 's what Ivan is afraid of , he is on the watch to prevent me getting married and that 's why he is egging on Mitya to marry Grushenka himself . 
He hopes to keep me from Grushenka by that -LRB- as though I should leave him my money if I do n't marry her ! -RRB- . 
Besides if Mitya marries Grushenka , Ivan will carry off his rich betrothed , that 's what he 's reckoning on ! 
He is a scoundrel , your Ivan ! '' 
`` How cross you are ! 
It 's because of yesterday ; you had better lie down , '' said Alyosha . 
`` There ! 
you say that , '' the old man observed suddenly , as though it had struck him for the first time , `` and I am not angry with you . 
But if Ivan said it , I should be angry with him . 
It is only with you I have good moments , else you know I am an ill-natured man . '' 
`` You are not ill-natured , but distorted , '' said Alyosha with a smile . 
`` Listen . 
I meant this morning to get that ruffian Mitya locked up and I do n't know now what I shall decide about it . 
Of course in these fashionable days fathers and mothers are looked upon as a prejudice , but even now the law does not allow you to drag your old father about by the hair , to kick him in the face in his own house , and brag of murdering him outright - all in the presence of witnesses . 
If I liked , I could crush him and could have him locked up at once for what he did yesterday . '' 
`` Then you do n't mean to take proceedings ? '' 
`` Ivan has dissuaded me . 
I should n't care about Ivan , but there 's another thing . '' 
And bending down to Alyosha , he went on in a confidential half-whisper . 
`` If I send the ruffian to prison , she 'll hear of it and run to see him at once . 
But if she hears that he has beaten me , a weak old man , within an inch of my life , she may give him up and come to me ... For that 's her way , everything by contraries . 
I know her through and through ! 
Wo n't you have a drop of brandy ? 
Take some cold coffee and I 'll pour a quarter of a glass of brandy into it , it 's delicious , my boy . '' 
`` No , thank you . 
I 'll take that roll with me if I may , '' said Alyosha , and taking a halfpenny French roll he put it in the pocket of his cassock . 
`` And you 'd better not have brandy , either , '' he suggested apprehensively , looking into the old man 's face . 
`` You are quite right , it irritates my nerves instead of soothing them . 
Only one little glass . 
I 'll get it out of the cupboard . '' 
He unlocked the cupboard , poured out a glass , drank it , then locked the cupboard and put the key back in his pocket . 
`` That 's enough . 
One glass wo n't kill me . '' 
`` You see you are in a better humour now , '' said Alyosha , smiling . 
`` Um ! 
I love you even without the brandy , but with scoundrels I am a scoundrel . 
Ivan is not going to Tchermashnya - why is that ? 
He wants to spy how much I give Grushenka if she comes . 
They are all scoundrels ! 
But I do n't recognise Ivan , I do n't know him at all . 
Where does he come from ? 
He is not one of us in soul . 
As though I 'd leave him anything ! 
I sha n't leave a will at all , you may as well know . 
And I 'll crush Mitya like a beetle . 
I squash black-beetles at night with my slipper ; they squelch when you tread on them . 
And your Mitya will squelch too . 
Your Mitya , for you love him . 
Yes you love him and I am not afraid of your loving him . 
But if Ivan loved him I should be afraid for myself at his loving him . 
But Ivan loves nobody . 
Ivan is not one of us . 
People like Ivan are not our sort , my boy . 
They are like a cloud of dust . 
When the wind blows , the dust will be gone ... . 
I had a silly idea in my head when I told you to come to-day ; I wanted to find out from you about Mitya . 
If I were to hand him over a thousand or maybe two now , would the beggarly wretch agree to take himself off altogether for five years or , better still , thirty-five , and without Grushenka , and give her up once for all , eh ? '' 
`` I - I 'll ask him , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` If you would give him three thousand , perhaps he - '' `` That 's nonsense ! 
You need n't ask him now , no need ! 
I 've changed my mind . 
It was a nonsensical idea of mine . 
I wo n't give him anything , not a penny , I want my money myself , '' cried the old man , waving his hand . 
`` I 'll crush him like a beetle without it . 
Do n't say anything to him or else he will begin hoping . 
There 's nothing for you to do here , you need n't stay . 
Is that betrothed of his , Katerina Ivanovna , whom he has kept so carefully hidden from me all this time , going to marry him or not ? 
You went to see her yesterday , I believe ? '' 
`` Nothing will induce her to abandon him . '' 
`` There you see how dearly these fine young ladies love a rake and a scoundrel . 
They are poor creatures I tell you , those pale young ladies , very different from - Ah , if I had his youth and the looks I had then -LRB- for I was better-looking than he at eight and twenty -RRB- I 'd have been a conquering hero just as he is . 
He is a low cad ! 
But he sha n't have Grushenka , anyway , he sha n't ! 
I 'll crush him ! '' 
His anger had returned with the last words . 
`` You can go . 
There 's nothing for you to do here to-day , '' he snapped harshly . 
Alyosha went up to say good-bye to him , and kissed him on the shoulder . 
`` What 's that for ? '' 
The old man was a little surprised . 
`` We shall see each other again , or do you think we sha n't ? '' 
`` Not at all , I did n't mean anything . '' 
`` Nor did I , I did not mean anything , '' said the old man , looking at him . 
`` Listen , listen , '' he shouted after him , `` make haste and come again and I 'll have a fish soup for you , a fine one , not like to-day . 
Be sure to come ! 
Come to-morrow , do you hear , to-morrow ! '' 
And as soon as Alyosha had gone out of the door , he went to the cupboard again and poured out another half-glass . 
`` I wo n't have more ! '' 
he muttered , clearing his throat , and again he locked the cupboard and put the key in his pocket . 
Then he went into his bedroom , lay down on the bed , exhausted , and in one minute he was asleep . 
A Meeting with the Schoolboys `` THANK goodness he did not ask me about Grushenka , '' thought Alyosha , as he left his father 's house and turned towards Madame Hohlakov 's , `` or I might have had to tell him of my meeting with Grushenka yesterday . '' 
Alyosha felt painfully that since yesterday both combatants had renewed their energies , and that their hearts had grown hard again . 
`` Father is spiteful and angry , he 's made some plan and will stick to it . 
And what of Dmitri ? 
He too will be harder than yesterday , he too must be spiteful and angry , and he too , no doubt , has made some plan . 
Oh , I must succeed in finding him to-day , whatever happens . '' 
But Alyosha had not long to meditate . 
An incident occurred on the road , which , though apparently of little consequence , made a great impression on him . 
just after he had crossed the square and turned the corner coming out into Mihailovsky Street , which is divided by a small ditch from the High Street -LRB- our whole town is intersected by ditches -RRB- , he saw a group of schoolboys between the ages of nine and twelve , at the bridge . 
They were going home from school , some with their bags on their shoulders , others with leather satchels slung across them , some in short jackets , others in little overcoats . 
Some even had those high boots with creases round the ankles , such as little boys spoilt by rich fathers love to wear . 
The whole group was talking eagerly about something , apparently holding a council . 
Alyosha had never from his Moscow days been able to pass children without taking notice of them , and although he was particularly fond of children of three or thereabout , he liked schoolboys of ten and eleven too . 
And so , anxious as he was to-day , he wanted at once to turn aside to talk to them . 
He looked into their excited rosy faces , and noticed at once that all the boys had stones in their hands . 
Behind the ditch some thirty paces away , there was another schoolboy standing by a fence . 
He too had a satchel at his side . 
He was about ten years old , pale , delicate-looking and with sparkling black eyes . 
He kept an attentive and anxious watch on the other six , obviously his schoolfellows with whom he had just come out of school , but with whom he had evidently had a feud . 
Alyosha went up and , addressing a fair , curly-headed , rosy boy in a black jacket , observed : `` When I used to wear a satchel like yours , I always used to carry it on my left side , so as to have my right hand free , but you 've got yours on your right side . 
So it will be awkward for you to get at it . '' 
Alyosha had no art or premeditation in beginning with this practical remark . 
But it is the only way for a grown-up person to get at once into confidential relations with a child , or still more with a group of children . 
One must begin in a serious , businesslike way so as to be on a perfectly equal footing . 
Alyosha understood it by instinct . 
`` But he is left-handed , '' another , a fine healthy-looking boy of eleven , answered promptly . 
All the others stared at Alyosha . 
`` He even throws stones with his left hand , '' observed a third . 
At that instant a stone flew into the group , but only just grazed the left-handed boy , though it was well and vigorously thrown by the boy standing on the other side of the ditch . 
`` Give it him , hit him back , Smurov , '' they all shouted . 
But Smurov , the left-handed boy , needed no telling , and at once revenged himself ; he threw a stone , but it missed the boy and hit the ground . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch , the pocket of whose coat was visibly bulging with stones , flung another stone at the group ; this time it flew straight at Alyosha and hit him painfully on the shoulder . 
`` He aimed it at you , he meant it for you . 
You are Karamazov , Karamazov ! '' 
the boys shouted laughing , `` Come , all throw at him at once ! '' 
and six stones flew at the boy . 
One struck the boy on the head and he fell down , but at once leapt up and began ferociously returning their fire . 
Both sides threw stones incessantly . 
Many of the group had their pockets full too . 
`` What are you about ! 
Are n't you ashamed ? 
Six against one ! 
Why , you 'll kill him , '' cried Alyosha . 
He ran forward and met the flying stones to screen the solitary boy . 
Three or four ceased throwing for a minute . 
`` He began first ! '' 
cried a boy in a red shirt in an angry childish voice . 
`` He is a beast , he stabbed Krassotkin in class the other day with a penknife . 
It bled . 
Krassotkin would n't tell tales , but he must be thrashed . '' 
`` But what for ? 
I suppose you tease him . '' 
`` There , he sent a stone in your back again , he knows you , '' cried the children . 
`` It 's you he is throwing at now , not us . 
Come , all of you , at him again , do n't miss , Smurov ! '' 
and again a fire of stones , and a very vicious one , began . 
The boy on the other side of the ditch was hit in the chest ; he screamed , began to cry and ran away uphill towards Mihailovsky Street . 
They all shouted : `` Aha , he is funking , he is running away . 
Wisp of tow ! '' 
`` You do n't know what a beast he is , Karamazov , killing is too good for him , '' said the boy in the jacket , with flashing eyes . 
He seemed to be the eldest . 
`` What 's wrong with him ? '' 
asked Alyosha , `` Is he a tell-tale or what ? '' 
The boys looked at one another as though derisively . 
`` Are you going that way , to Mihailovsky ? '' 
the same boy went on . 
`` Catch him up ... . 
You see he 's stopped again , he is waiting and looking at you . '' 
`` He is looking at you , '' the other boys chimed in . 
`` You ask him , does he like a dishevelled wisp of tow . 
Do you hear , ask him that ! '' 
There was a general burst of laughter . 
Alyosha looked at them , and they at him . 
`` Do n't go near him , he 'll hurt you , '' cried Smurov in a warning voice . 
`` I sha n't ask him about the wisp of tow , for I expect you tease him with that question somehow . 
But I 'll find out from him why you hate him so . '' 
`` Find out then , find out , '' cried the boys laughing . 
Alyosha crossed the bridge and walked uphill by the fence , straight towards the boy . 
`` You 'd better look out , '' the boys called after him ; `` he wo n't be afraid of you . 
He will stab you in a minute , on the sly , as he did Krassotkin . '' 
The boy waited for him without budging . 
Coming up to him , Alyosha saw facing him a child of about nine years old . 
He was an undersized weakly boy with a thin pale face , with large dark eyes that gazed at him vindictively . 
He was dressed in a rather shabby old overcoat , which he had monstrously outgrown . 
His bare arms stuck out beyond his sleeves . 
There was a large patch on the right knee of his trousers , and in his right boot just at the toe there was a big hole in the leather , carefully blackened with ink . 
Both the pockets of his greatcoat were weighed down with stones . 
Alyosha stopped two steps in front of him , looking inquiringly at him , The boy , seeing at once from Alyosha 's eyes that he would n't beat him , became less defiant , and addressed him first . 
`` I am alone , and there are six of them . 
I 'll beat them all , alone ! '' 
he said suddenly , with flashing eyes . 
`` I think one of the stones must have hurt you badly , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` But I hit Smurov on the head ! '' 
cried the boy . 
`` They told me that you know me , and that you threw a stone at me on purpose , '' said Alyosha . 
The boy looked darkly at him . 
`` I do n't know you . 
Do you know me ? '' 
Alyosha continued . 
`` Let me alone ! '' 
the boy cried irritably ; but he did not move , as though he were expecting something , and again there was a vindictive light in his eyes . 
`` Very well , I am going , '' said Alyosha ; `` only I do n't know you and I do n't tease you . 
They told me how they tease you , but I do n't want to tease you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
`` Monk in silk trousers ! '' 
cried the boy , following Alyosha with the same vindictive and defiant expression , and he threw himself into an attitude of defence , feeling sure that now Alyosha would fall upon him ; but Alyosha turned , looked at him , and walked away . 
He had not gone three steps before the biggest stone the boy had in his pocket hit him a painful blow in the back . 
`` So you 'll hit a man from behind ! 
They tell the truth , then , when they say that you attack on the sly , '' said Alyosha , turning round again . 
This time the boy threw a stone savagely right into Alyosha 's face ; but Alyosha just had time to guard himself , and the stone struck him on the elbow . 
`` Are n't you ashamed ? 
What have I done to you ? '' 
he cried . 
The boy waited in silent defiance , certain that now Alyosha would attack him . 
Seeing that even now he would not , his rage was like a little wild beast 's ; he flew at Alyosha himself , and before Alyosha had time to move , the spiteful child had seized his left hand with both of his and bit his middle finger . 
He fixed his teeth in it and it was ten seconds before he let go . 
Alyosha cried out with pain and pulled his finger away with all his might . 
The child let go at last and retreated to his former distance . 
Alyosha 's finger had been badly bitten to the bone , close to the nail ; it began to bleed . 
Alyosha took out his handkerchief and bound it tightly round his injured hand . 
He was a full minute bandaging it . 
The boy stood waiting all the time . 
At last Alyosha raised his gentle eyes and looked at him . 
`` Very well , '' he said , `` You see how badly you 've bitten me . 
That 's enough , is n't it ? 
Now tell me , what have I done to you ? '' 
The boy stared in amazement . 
`` Though I do n't know you and it 's the first time I 've seen you , '' Alyosha went on with the same serenity , `` yet I must have done something to you - you would n't have hurt me like this for nothing . 
So what have I done ? 
How have I wronged you , tell me ? '' 
Instead of answering , the boy broke into a loud tearful wail and ran away . 
Alyosha walked slowly after him towards Mihailovsky Street , and for a long time he saw the child running in the distance as fast as ever , not turning his head and no doubt still keeping up his tearful wail . 
He made up his mind to find him out as soon as he had time , and to solve this mystery . 
just now he had not the time . 
At the Hohlakovs ' ALYOSHA soon reached Madame Hohlakov 's house , a handsome stone house of two stories , one of the finest in our town . 
Though Madame Hohlakov spent most of her time in another province where she had an estate , or in Moscow , where she had a house of her own , yet she had a house in our town too , inherited from her forefathers . 
The estate in our district was the largest of her three estates , yet she had been very little in our province before this time . 
She ran out to Alyosha in the hall . 
`` Did you get my letter about the new miracle ? '' 
She spoke rapidly and nervously . 
`` Yes '' `` Did you show it to everyone ? 
He restored the son to his mother ! '' 
`` He is dying to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` I have heard , I know , oh , how I long to talk to you , to you or someone , about all this . 
No , to you , to you ! 
And how sorry I am I ca n't see him ! 
The whole town is in excitement , they are all suspense . 
But now - do you know Katerina Ivanovna is here now ? '' 
`` Ah , that 's lucky , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Then I shall see her here . 
She told me yesterday to be sure to come and see her to-day . '' 
`` I know , I know all . 
I 've heard exactly what happened yesterday - and the atrocious behaviour of that - creature . 
C'est tragique , and if I 'd been in her place I do n't know what I should have done . 
And your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , what do you think of him ? 
- my goodness ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am forgetting , only fancy ; your brother is in there with her , not that dreadful brother who was so shocking yesterday , but the other , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he is sitting with her talking ; they are having a serious conversation . 
If you could only imagine what 's passing between them now - it 's awful , I tell you it 's lacerating , it 's like some incredible tale of horror . 
They are ruining their lives for no reason anyone can see . 
They both recognise it and revel in it . 
I 've been watching for you ! 
I 've been thirsting for you ! 
It 's too much for me . 
that 's the worst of it . 
I 'll tell you all about it presently , but now I must speak of something else , the most important thing - I had quite forgotten what 's most important . 
Tell me , why has Lise been in hysterics ? 
As soon as she heard you were here , she began to be hysterical ! '' 
`` Maman , it 's you who are hysterical now , not I , '' Lise 's voice carolled through a tiny crack of the door at the side . 
Her voice sounded as though she wanted to laugh , but was doing her utmost to control it . 
Alyosha at once noticed the crack , and no doubt Lise was peeping through it , but that he could not see . 
`` And no wonder , Lise , no wonder ... your caprices will make me hysterical too . 
But she is so ill , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she has been so ill all night , feverish and moaning ! 
I could hardly wait for the morning and for Herzenstube to come . 
He says that he can make nothing of it , that we must wait . 
Herzenstube always comes and says that he can make nothing of it . 
As soon as you approached the house , she screamed , fell into hysterics , and insisted on being wheeled back into this room here . '' 
`` Mamma , I did n't know he had come . 
It was n't on his account I wanted to be wheeled into this room . '' 
`` That 's not true , Lise , Yulia ran to tell you that Alexey Fyodorovitch was coming . 
She was on the lookout for you . '' 
`` My darling mamma , it 's not at all clever of you . 
But if you want to make up for it and say something very clever , dear mamma , you 'd better tell our honoured visitor , Alexey Fyodorovitch , that he has shown his want of wit by venturing to us after what happened yesterday and although everyone is laughing at him . '' 
`` Lise , you go too far . 
I declare I shall have to be severe . 
Who laughs at him ? 
I am so glad he has come , I need him , I ca n't do without him . 
Oh , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I am exceedingly unhappy ! '' 
`` But what 's the matter with you , mamma , darling ? '' 
`` Ah , your caprices , Lise , your fidgetiness , your illness , that awful night of fever , that awful everlasting Herzenstube , everlasting , everlasting , that 's the worst of it ! 
Everything , in fact , everything ... . 
Even that miracle , too ! 
Oh , how it has upset me , how it has shattered me , that miracle , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
And that tragedy in the drawing-room , it 's more than I can bear , I warn you . 
I ca n't bear it . 
A comedy , perhaps , not a tragedy . 
Tell me , will Father Zossima live till to-morrow , will he ? 
Oh , my God ! 
What is happening to me ? 
Every minute I close my eyes and see that it 's all nonsense , all nonsense . '' 
`` I should be very grateful , '' Alyosha interrupted suddenly , `` if you could give me a clean rag to bind up my finger with . 
I have hurt it , and it 's very painful . '' 
Alyosha unbound his bitten finger . 
The handkerchief was soaked with blood . 
Madame Hohlakov screamed and shut her eyes . 
`` Good heavens , what a wound , how awful ! 
But as soon as Lise saw Alyosha 's finger through the crack , she flung the door wide open . 
`` Come , come here , '' she cried , imperiously . 
`` No nonsense now ! 
Good heavens , why did you stand there saying nothing about it all this time ? 
He might have bled to death , mamma ! 
How did you do it ? 
Water , water ! 
You must wash it first of all , simply hold it in cold water to stop the pain , and keep it there , keep it there ... . 
Make haste , mamma , some water in a slop-basin . 
But do make haste , '' she finished nervously . 
She was quite frightened at the sight of Alyosha 's wound . 
`` Should n't we send for Herzenstube ? '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Mamma , you 'll be the death of me . 
Your Herzenstube will come and say that he can make nothing of it ! 
Water , water ! 
Mamma , for goodness ' sake go yourself and hurry Yulia , she is such a slowcoach and never can come quickly ! 
Make haste , mamma , or I shall die . '' 
`` Why , it 's nothing much , '' cried Alyosha , frightened at this alarm . 
Yulia ran in with water and Alyosha put his finger in it . 
`` Some lint , mamma , for mercy 's sake , bring some lint and that muddy caustic lotion for wounds , what 's it called ? 
We 've got some . 
You know where the bottle is , mamma ; it 's in your bedroom in the right-hand cupboard , there 's a big bottle of it there with the lint . '' 
`` I 'll bring everything in a minute , Lise , only do n't scream and do n't fuss . 
You see how bravely Alexey Fyodorovitch bears it . 
Where did you get such a dreadful wound , Alexey Fyodorovitch ? '' 
Madame Hohlakov hastened away . 
This was all Lise was waiting for . 
`` First of all , answer the question , where did you get hurt like this ? '' 
she asked Alyosha , quickly . 
`` And then I 'll talk to you about something quite different . 
Well ? '' 
Instinctively feeling that the time of her mother 's absence was precious for her , Alyosha hastened to tell her of his enigmatic meeting with the school boys in the fewest words possible . 
Lise clasped her hands at his story . 
`` How can you , and in that dress too , associate with schoolboys ? '' 
she cried angrily , as though she had a right to control him . 
`` You are nothing but a boy yourself if you can do that , a perfect boy ! 
But you must find out for me about that horrid boy and tell me all about it , for there 's some mystery in it . 
Now for the second thing , but first a question : does the pain prevent you talking about utterly unimportant things , but talking sensibly ? '' 
`` Of course not , and I do n't feel much pain now . '' 
`` That 's because your finger is in the water . 
It must be changed directly , for it will get warm in a minute . 
Yulia , bring some ice from the cellar and another basin of water . 
Now she is gone , I can speak ; will you give me the letter I sent you yesterday , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch - be quick , for mamma will be back in a minute and I do n't want - '' `` I have n't got the letter . '' 
`` That 's not true , you have . 
I knew you would say that . 
You 've got it in that pocket . 
I 've been regretting that joke all night . 
Give me back the letter at once , give it me . '' 
`` I 've left it at home . '' 
`` But you ca n't consider me as a child , a little girl , after that silly joke ! 
I beg your pardon for that silliness , but you must bring me the letter , if you really have n't got it - bring to-day , you must , you must . '' 
`` To-day I ca n't possibly , for I am going back to the monastery and I sha n't come and see you for the next two days - three or four perhaps - for Father Zossima - '' `` Four days , what nonsense ! 
Listen . 
Did you laugh at me very much ? '' 
`` I did n't laugh at all . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` Because I believed all you said . '' 
`` You are insulting me ! '' 
`` Not at all . 
As soon as I read it , I thought that all that would come to pass , for as soon as Father Zossima dies , I am to leave the monastery . 
Then I shall go back and finish my studies , and when you reach the legal age we will be married . 
I shall love you . 
Though I have n't had time to think about it , I believe I could n't find a better wife than you , and Father Zossima tells me I must marry . '' 
`` But I am a cripple , wheeled about in a chair , '' laughed Lise , flushing crimson . 
`` I 'll wheel you about myself , but I 'm sure you 'll get well by then . '' 
`` But you are mad , '' said Lise , nervously , `` to make all this nonsense out of a joke ! 
Here 's mamma , very a propos , perhaps . 
Mamma , how slow you always are , how can you be so long ! 
And here 's Yulia with the ice ! 
`` Oh , Lise , do n't scream , above all things do n't scream . 
That scream drives me ... How can I help it when you put the lint in another place ? 
I 've been hunting and hunting - I do believe you did it on purpose . '' 
`` But I could n't tell that he would come with a bad finger , or else perhaps I might have done it on purpose . 
My darling mamma , you begin to say really witty things . '' 
`` Never mind my being witty , but I must say you show nice feeling for Alexey Fyodorovitch 's sufferings ! 
Oh , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , what 's killing me is no one thing in particular , not Herzenstube , but everything together , that 's what is too much for me . '' 
`` That 's enough , mamma , enough about Herzenstube , '' Lise laughed gaily . 
`` Make haste with the lint and the lotion , mamma . 
That 's simply Goulard 's water , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I remember the name now , but it 's a splendid lotion . 
Would you believe it , Mamma , on the way here he had a fight with the boys in the street , and it was a boy bit his finger , is n't he a child , a child himself ? 
Is he fit to be married after that ? 
For only fancy , he wants to be married , mamma . 
Just think of him married , would n't it be funny , would n't it be awful ? '' 
And Lise kept laughing her thin hysterical giggle , looking slyly at Alyosha . 
`` But why married , Lise ? 
What makes you talk of such a thing ? 
It 's quite out of place and perhaps the boy was rabid . '' 
`` Why , mamma ! 
As though there were rabid boys ! '' 
`` Why not , Lise , as though I had said something stupid ! 
Your boy might have been bitten by a mad dog and he would become mad and bite anyone near him . 
How well she has bandaged it , Alexey Fyodorovitch ! 
I could n't have done it . 
Do you still feel the pain ? '' 
`` It 's nothing much now . '' 
`` You do n't feel afraid of water ? '' 
asked Lise . 
`` Come , that 's enough , Lise , perhaps I really was rather too quick talking of the boy being rabid , and you pounced upon it at once . 
Katerina Ivanovna has only just heard that you are here , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she simply rushed at me , she 's dying to see you , dying ! '' 
`` Ach , mamma , go to them yourself . 
He ca n't go just now , he is in too much pain . '' 
`` Not at all , I can go quite well , '' said Alyosha . 
`` What ! 
You are going away ? 
Is that what you say ? '' 
`` Well , when I 've seen them , I 'll come back here and we can talk as much as you like . 
But I should like to see Katerina Ivanovna at once , for I am very anxious to be back at the monastery as soon as I can . '' 
`` Mamma , take him away quickly . 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , do n't trouble to come and see me afterwards , but go straight back to your monastery and a good riddance . 
I want to sleep , I did n't sleep all night . '' 
`` Ah , Lise , you are only making fun , but how I wish you would sleep ! '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` I do n't know what I 've done ... . 
I 'll stay another three minutes , five if you like , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Even five ! 
Do take him away quickly , mamma , he is a monster . '' 
`` Lise , you are crazy . 
Let us go , Alexey Fyodorovitch , she is too capricious to-day . 
I am afraid to cross her . 
Oh , the trouble one has with nervous girls ! 
Perhaps she really will be able to sleep after seeing you . 
How quickly you have made her sleepy , and how fortunate it is ! '' 
`` Ah , mamma , how sweetly you talk ! 
I must kiss you for it , mamma . '' 
`` And I kiss you too , Lise . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' Madame Hohlakov began mysteriously and importantly , speaking in a rapid whisper . 
`` I do n't want to suggest anything , I do n't want to lift the veil , you will see for yourself what 's going on . 
It 's appalling . 
It 's the most fantastic farce . 
She loves your brother , Ivan , and she is doing her utmost to persuade herself she loves your brother , Dmitri . 
It 's appalling ! 
I 'll go in with you , and if they do n't turn me out , I 'll stay to the end . '' 
A Laceration in the Drawing-Room BUT in the drawing-room the conversation was already over . 
Katerina Ivanovna was greatly excited , though she looked resolute . 
At the moment Alyosha and Madame Hohlakov entered , Ivan Fyodorovitch stood up to take leave . 
His face was rather pale , and Alyosha looked at him anxiously . 
For this moment was to solve a doubt , a harassing enigma which had for some time haunted Alyosha . 
During the preceding month it had been several times suggested to him that his brother Ivan was in love with Katerina Ivanovna , and , what was more , that he meant `` to carry her off from Dmitri . 
Until quite lately the idea seemed to Alyosha monstrous , though it worried him extremely . 
He loved both his brothers , and dreaded such rivalry between them . 
Meantime , Dmitri had said outright on the previous day that he was glad that Ivan was his rival , and that it was a great assistance to him , Dmitri . 
In what way did it assist him ? 
To marry Grushenka ? 
But that Alyosha considered the worst thing possible . 
Besides all this , Alyosha had till the evening before implicitly believed that Katerina Ivanovna had a steadfast and passionate love for Dmitri ; but he had only believed it till the evening before . 
He had fancied , too , that she was incapable of loving a man like Ivan , and that she did love Dmitri , and loved him just as he was , in spite of all the strangeness of such a passion . 
But during yesterday 's scene with Grushenka another idea had struck him . 
The word `` lacerating , '' which Madame Hohlakov had just uttered , almost made him start , because half waking up towards daybreak that night he had cried out `` Laceration , laceration , '' probably applying it to his dream . 
He had been dreaming all night of the previous day 's scene at Katerina Ivanovna 's . 
Now Alyosha was impressed by Madame Hohlakov 's blunt and persistent assertion that Katerina Ivanovna was in love with Ivan , and only deceived herself through some sort of pose , from `` self-laceration , '' and tortured herself by her pretended love for Dmitri from some fancied duty of gratitude . 
`` Yes , '' he thought , `` perhaps the whole truth lies in those words . '' 
But in that case what was Ivan 's position ? 
Alyosha felt instinctively that a character like Katerina Ivanovna 's must dominate , and she could only dominate someone like Dmitri , and never a man like Ivan . 
For Dmitri might - at last submit to her domination `` to his own happiness '' -LRB- which was what Alyosha would have desired -RRB- , but Ivan - no , Ivan could not submit to her , and such submission would not give him happiness . 
Alyosha could not help believing that of Ivan . 
And now all these doubts and reflections flitted through his mind as he entered the drawing-room . 
Another idea , too , forced itself upon him : `` What if she loved neither of them - neither Ivan nor Dmitri ? '' 
It must be noted that Alyosha felt as it were ashamed of his own thoughts and blamed himself when they kept recurring to him during the last month . 
`` What do I know about love and women and how can I decide such questions ? '' 
he thought reproachfully , after such doubts and surmises . 
And yet it was impossible not to think about it . 
He felt instinctively that this rivalry was of immense importance in his brothers ' lives and that a great deal depended upon it . 
`` One reptile will devour the other , '' Ivan had pronounced the day before , speaking in anger of his father and Dmitri . 
So Ivan looked upon Dmitri as a reptile , and perhaps long done so . 
Was it perhaps since he had known Katerina Ivanovna ? 
That phrase had , of course , escaped Ivan unawares yesterday , but that only made it more important . 
If he felt like that , what chance was there of peace ? 
Were there not , on the contrary , new grounds for hatred and hostility in their family ? 
And with which of them was Alyosha to sympathise ? 
And what was he to wish for each of them ? 
He loved them both , but what could he desire for each in the midst of these conflicting interests ? 
He might go quite astray in this maze , and Alyosha 's heart could not endure uncertainty , because his love was always of an active character . 
He was incapable of passive love . 
If he loved anyone , he set to work at once to help him . 
And to do so he must know what he was aiming at ; he must know for certain what was best for each , and having ascertained this it was natural for him to help them both . 
But instead of a definite aim , he found nothing but uncertainty and perplexity on all sides . 
`` It was lacerating , '' as was said just now . 
But what could he understand even in this `` laceration '' ? 
He did not understand the first word in this perplexing maze . 
Seeing Alyosha , Katerina Ivanovna said quickly and joyfully to Ivan , who had already got up to go , `` A minute ! 
Stay another minute ! 
I want to hear the opinion of this person here whom I trust absolutely . 
Do n't go away , '' she added , addressing Madame Hohlakov . 
She made Alyosha sit down beside her , and Madame Hohlakov sat opposite , by Ivan . 
`` You are all my friends here , all I have in the world , dear friends , '' she warmly , in a voice which quivered with genuine tears of suffering , and Alyosha 's heart warmed to her at once . 
`` You , Alexey Fyodorovitch , were witness yesterday of that abominable scene , and saw what I did . 
You did not see it , Ivan Fyodorovitch , he did . 
What he thought of me yesterday I do n't know . 
I only know one thing , that if it were repeated to-day , this minute , I should express the same feelings again as yesterday - the same feelings , the same words , the same actions . 
You remember my actions , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; you checked me in one of them '' ... -LRB- as she said that , she flushed and her eyes shone -RRB- . 
`` I must tell you that I ca n't get over it . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't even know whether I still love him . 
I feel pity for him , and that is a poor sign of love . 
If I loved him , if I still loved him , perhaps I should n't be sorry for him now , but should hate him '' . 
Her voice quivered and tears glittered on her eyelashes . 
Alyosha shuddered inwardly . 
`` That girl is truthful and sincere , '' he thought , `` and she does not love Dmitri any more . '' 
`` That 's true , that 's true , '' cried Madame Hohlakov . 
`` Wait , dear . 
I have n't told you the chief , the final decision I came to during the night . 
I feel that perhaps my decision is a terrible one - for me , but I foresee that nothing will induce me to change it - nothing . 
It will be so all my life . 
My dear , kind , ever-faithful and generous adviser , the one friend I have in the world , Ivan Fyodorovitch , with his deep insight into the heart , approves and commends my decision . 
He knows it . '' 
`` Yes , I approve of it , '' Ivan assented , in a subdued but firm voice . 
`` But I should like Alyosha , too -LRB- Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , forgive my calling you simply Alyosha -RRB- , I should like Alexey Fyodorovitch , too , to tell me before my two friends whether I am right . 
I feel instinctively that you , Alyosha , my dear brother -LRB- for are a dear brother to me -RRB- , '' she said again ecstatically , taking his cold hand in her hot one , `` I foresee that your decision , your approval , will bring me peace , in spite of all my sufferings , for , after your words , I shall be calm and submit - I feel that . '' 
`` I do n't know what you are asking me , '' said Alyosha , flushing . 
`` I only know that I love you and at this moment wish for your happiness more than my own ! 
... But I know nothing about such affairs , '' something impelled him to add hurriedly . 
`` In such affairs , Alexey Fyodorovitch , in such affairs , the chief thing is honour and duty and something higher - I do n't know what but higher perhaps even than duty . 
I am conscious of this irresistible feeling in my heart , and it compels me irresistibly . 
But it may all be put in two words . 
I 've already decided , even if he marries that - creature , '' she began solemnly , `` whom I never , never can forgive , even then I will not abandon him . 
Henceforward I will never , never abandon him ! '' 
she cried , breaking into a sort of pale , hysterical ecstasy . 
`` Not that I would run after him continually , get in his way and worry him . 
Oh , no ! 
I will go away to another town - where you like - but I will watch over him all my life - I will watch over him all my life unceasingly . 
When he becomes unhappy with that woman , and that is bound to happen quite soon , let him come to me and he will find a friend , a sister ... Only a sister , of course , and so for ever ; but he will learn at least that that sister is really his sister , who loves him and has sacrificed all her life to him . 
I will gain my point . 
I will insist on his knowing me confiding entirely in me , without reserve , '' she cried , in a sort of frenzy . 
`` I will be a god to whom he can pray - and that , at least , he owes me for his treachery and for what I suffered yesterday through him . 
And let him see that all my life I will be true to him and the promise I gave him , in spite of his being untrue and betraying me . 
I will - I will become nothing but a means for his happiness , or - how shall I say ? 
- an instrument , a machine for his happiness , and that for my whole life , my whole life , and that he may see that all his life ! 
That 's my decision . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch fully approves me . '' 
She was breathless . 
She had perhaps intended to express her idea with more dignity , art and naturalness , but her speech was too hurried and crude . 
It was full of youthful impulsiveness , it betrayed that she was still smarting from yesterday 's insult , and that her pride craved satisfaction . 
She felt this herself . 
Her face suddenly darkened , an unpleasant look came into her eyes . 
Alyosha at once saw it and felt a pang of sympathy . 
His brother Ivan made it worse by adding : `` I 've only expressed my own view , '' he said . 
`` From anyone else , this would have been affected and over-strained , but from you - no . 
Any other woman would have been wrong , but you are right . 
I do n't know how to explain it , but I see that you are absolutely genuine and , therefore , you are right . '' 
`` But that 's only for the moment . 
And what does this moment stand for ? 
Nothing but yesterday 's insult . '' 
Madame Hohlakov obviously had not intended to interfere , but she could not refrain from this very just comment . 
`` Quite so , quite so , '' cried Ivan , with peculiar eagerness , obviously annoyed at being interrupted , `` in anyone else this moment would be only due to yesterday 's impression and would be only a moment . 
But with Katerina Ivanovna 's character , that moment will last all her life . 
What for anyone else would be only a promise is for her an everlasting burdensome , grim perhaps , but unflagging duty . 
And she will be sustained by the feeling of this duty being fulfilled . 
Your life , Katerina Ivanovna , will henceforth be spent in painful brooding over your own feelings , your own heroism , and your own suffering ; but in the end that suffering will be softened and will pass into sweet contemplation of the fulfilment of a bold and proud design . 
Yes , proud it certainly is , and desperate in any case , but a triumph for you . 
And the consciousness of it will at last be a source of complete satisfaction and will make you resigned to everything else . '' 
This was unmistakably said with some malice and obviously with intention ; even perhaps with no desire to conceal that he spoke ironically and with intention . 
`` Oh , dear , how mistaken it all is ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov cried again . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , you speak . 
I want dreadfully to know what you will say ! '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , and burst into tears . 
Alyosha got up from the sofa . 
`` It 's nothing , nothing ! '' 
she went on through her tears . 
`` I 'm upset , I did n't sleep last night . 
But by the side of two such friends as you and your brother I still feel strong - for I know you two will never desert me . '' 
`` Unluckily I am obliged to return to Moscow - perhaps to-morrow - and to leave you for a long time - and , unluckily , it 's unavoidable , '' Ivan said suddenly . 
`` To-morrow - to Moscow ! '' 
her face was suddenly contorted ; `` but - but , dear me , how fortunate ! '' 
she cried in a voice suddenly changed . 
In one instant there was no trace left of her tears . 
She underwent an instantaneous transformation , which amazed Alyosha . 
Instead of a poor , insulted girl , weeping in a sort of `` laceration , '' he saw a woman completely self-possessed and even exceedingly pleased , as though something agreeable had just happened . 
`` Oh , not fortunate that I am losing you , of course not , '' she collected herself suddenly , with a charming society smile . 
`` Such a friend as you are could not suppose that . 
I am only too unhappy at losing you . '' 
She rushed impulsively at Ivan , and seizing both his hands , pressed them warmly . 
`` But what is fortunate is that you will be able in Moscow to see auntie and Agafya and to tell them all the horror of my present position . 
You can speak with complete openness to Agafya , but spare dear auntie . 
You will know how to do that . 
You ca n't think how wretched I was yesterday and this morning , wondering how I could write them that dreadful letter - for one can never tell such things in a letter ... Now it will be easy for me to write , for you will see them and explain everything . 
Oh , how glad I am ! 
But I am only glad of that , believe me . 
Of course , no one can take your place ... . 
I will run at once to write the letter , '' she finished suddenly , and took a step as though to go out of the room . 
`` And what about Alyosha and his opinion , which you were so desperately anxious to hear ? '' 
cried Madame Hohlakov . 
There was a sarcastic , angry note in her voice . 
`` I had not forgotten that , '' cried Katerina Ivanovna , coming to a sudden standstill , `` and why are you so antagonistic at such a moment ? '' 
she added , with warm and bitter reproachfulness . 
`` What I said , I repeat . 
I must have his opinion . 
More than that , I must have his decision ! 
As he says , so it shall be . 
You see how anxious I am for your words , Alexey Fyodorovitch ... But what 's the matter ? '' 
`` I could n't have believed it . 
I ca n't understand it ! '' 
Alyosha cried suddenly in distress . 
`` He is going to Moscow , and you cry out that you are glad . 
You said that on purpose ! 
And you begin explaining that you are not glad of that but sorry to be - losing a friend . 
But that was acting , too - you were playing a part as in a theatre ! '' 
`` In a theatre ? 
What ? 
What do you mean ? '' 
exclaimed Katerina Ivanovna , profoundly astonished , flushing crimson , and frowning . 
`` Though you assure him you are sorry to lose a friend in him , you persist in telling him to his face that it 's fortunate he is going , '' said Alyosha breathlessly . 
He was standing at the table and did not sit down . 
`` What are you talking about ? 
I do n't understand . '' 
`` I do n't understand myself ... . 
I seemed to see in a flash ... I know I am not saying it properly , but I 'll say it all the same , '' Alyosha went on in the same shaking and broken voice . 
`` What I see is that perhaps you do n't love Dmitri at all ... and never have , from the beginning ... . 
And Dmitri , too , has never loved you ... and only esteems you ... . 
I really do n't know how I dare to say all this , but somebody must tell the truth ... for nobody here will tell the truth . '' 
`` What truth ? '' 
cried Katerina Ivanovna , and there was an hysterical ring in her voice . 
`` I 'll tell you , '' Alyosha went on with desperate haste , as though he were jumping from the top of a house . 
`` Call Dmitri ; I will fetch him and let him come here and take your hand and take Ivan 's and join your hands . 
For you 're torturing Ivan , simply because you love him - and torturing him , because you love Dmitri through ` self-laceration ' - with an unreal love - because you 've persuaded yourself . '' 
Alyosha broke off and was silent . 
`` You ... you ... you are a little religious idiot - that 's what you are ! '' 
Katerina Ivanovna snapped . 
Her face was white and her lips were moving with anger . 
Ivan suddenly laughed and got up . 
His hat was in his hand . 
`` You are mistaken , my good Alyosha , '' he said , with an expression Alyosha had never seen in his face before - an expression of youthful sincerity and strong , irresistibly frank feeling . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna has never cared for me ! 
She has known all the time that I cared for her - though I never said a word of my love to her - she knew , but she did n't care for me . 
I have never been her friend either , not for one moment ; she is too proud to need my friendship . 
She kept me at her side as a means of revenge . 
She revenged with me and on me all the insults which she has been continually receiving from Dmitri ever since their first meeting . 
For even that first meeting has rankled in her heart as an insult - that 's what her heart is like ! 
She has talked to me of nothing but her love for him . 
I am going now ; but , believe me , Katerina Ivanovna , you really love him . 
And the more he insults you , the more you love him - that 's your ` laceration . ' 
You love him just as he is ; you love him for insulting you . 
If he reformed , you 'd give him up at once and cease to love him . 
But you need him so as to contemplate continually your heroic fidelity and to reproach him for infidelity . 
And it all comes from your pride . 
Oh , there 's a great deal of humiliation and self-abasement about it , but it all comes from pride ... . 
I am too young and I 've loved you too much . 
I know that I ought not to say this , that it would be more dignified on my part simply to leave you , and it would be less offensive for you . 
But I am going far away , and shall never come back ... . 
It is for ever . 
I do n't want to sit beside a ` laceration . ' 
... But I do n't know how to speak now . 
I 've said everything ... . 
Good-bye , Katerina Ivanovna ; you ca n't be angry with me , for I am a hundred times more severely punished than you , if only by the fact that I shall never see you again . 
Good-bye ! 
I do n't want your hand . 
You have tortured me too deliberately for me to be able to forgive you at this moment . 
I shall forgive you later , but now I do n't want your hand . 
Den Dank , Dame , begehr ich nicht , '' * he added , with a forced smile , showing , however , that he could read Schiller , and read him till he knew him by heart - which Alyosha would never have believed . 
He went out of the room without saying good-bye even to his hostess , Madame Hohlakov . 
Alyosha clasped his hands . 
* Thank you , madam , I want nothing . 
`` Ivan ! '' 
he cried desperately after him . 
`` Come back , Ivan ! 
No , nothing will induce him to come back now ! '' 
he cried again , regretfully realising it ; `` but it 's my fault , my fault . 
I began it ! 
Ivan spoke angrily , wrongly . 
Unjustly and angrily . 
He must come back here , come back , '' Alyosha kept exclaiming frantically . 
Katerina Ivanovna went suddenly into the next room . 
`` You have done no harm . 
You behaved beautifully , like an angel , '' Madame Hohlakov whispered rapidly and ecstatically to Alyosha . 
`` I will do my utmost to prevent Ivan Fyodorovitch from going . '' 
Her face beamed with delight , to the great distress of Alyosha , but Katerina Ivanovna suddenly returned . 
She had two hundred-rouble notes in her hand . 
`` I have a great favour to ask of you , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' she began , addressing Alyosha with an apparently calm and even voice , as though nothing had happened . 
`` A week - yes , I think it was a week ago - Dmitri Fyodorovitch was guilty of a hasty and unjust action - a very ugly action . 
There is a low tavern here , and in it he met that discharged officer , that captain , whom your father used to employ in some business . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch somehow lost his temper with this captain , seized him by the beard and dragged him out into the street and for some distance along it , in that insulting fashion . 
And I am told that his son , a boy , quite a child , who is at the school here , saw it and ran beside them crying and begging for his father , appealing to everyone to defend him , while everyone laughed . 
You must forgive me , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I can not think without indignation of that disgraceful action of his ... one of those actions of which only Dmitri Fyodorovitch would be capable in his anger ... and in his passions ! 
I ca n't describe it even ... . 
I ca n't find my words . 
I 've made inquiries about his victim , and find he is quite a poor man . 
His name is Snegiryov . 
He did something wrong in the army and was discharged . 
I ca n't tell you what . 
And now he has sunk into terrible destitution , with his family - an unhappy family of sick children , and , I believe , an insane wife . 
He has been living here a long time ; he used to work as a copying clerk , but now he is getting nothing . 
I thought if you ... that is I thought ... I do n't know . 
I am so confused . 
You see , I wanted to ask you , my dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , to go to him , to find some excuse to go to them - I mean to that captain - oh , goodness , how badly I explain it ! 
- and delicately , carefully , as only you know how to '' -LRB- Alyosha blushed -RRB- , `` manage to give him this assistance , these two hundred roubles . 
He will be sure to take it ... . 
I mean , persuade him to take it ... . 
Or , rather , what do I mean ? 
You see it 's not by way of compensation to prevent him from taking proceedings -LRB- for I believe he meant to -RRB- , but simply a token of sympathy , of a desire to assist him from me , Dmitri Fyodorovitch 's betrothed , not from himself ... . 
But you know ... . 
I would go myself , but you 'll know how to do it ever so much better . 
He lives in Lake Street in the house of a woman called Kalmikov ... . 
For God 's sake , Alexey Fyodorovitch , do it for me , and now ... now I am rather ... tired ... Good-bye ! '' 
She turned and disappeared behind the portiere so quickly that Alyosha had not time to utter a word , though he wanted to speak . 
He longed to beg her pardon , to blame himself , to say something , for his heart was full and he could not bear to go out of the room without it . 
But Madame Hohlakov took him by the hand and drew him along with her . 
In the hall she stopped him again as before . 
`` She is proud , she is struggling with herself ; but kind , charming , generous , `` she exclaimed , in a half-whisper . 
`` Oh , how I love her , especially sometimes , and how glad I am again of everything ! 
Dear Alexey Fyodorovitch , you did n't know , but I must tell you , that we all , all - both her aunts , I and all of us , Lise , even - have been hoping and praying for nothing for the last month but that she may give up your favourite Dmitri , who takes no notice of her and does not care for her , and may marry Ivan Fyodorovitch - such an excellent and cultivated young man , who loves her more than anything in the world . 
We are in a regular plot to bring it about , and I am even staying on here perhaps on that account . '' 
`` But she has been crying - she has been wounded again , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` Never trust a woman 's tears , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I am never for the women in such cases . 
I am always on the side of the men . '' 
`` Mamma , you are spoiling him , '' Lise 's little voice cried from behind the door . 
`` No , it was all my fault . 
I am horribly to blame , '' Alyosha repeated unconsoled , hiding his face in his hands in an agony of remorse for his indiscretion . 
`` Quite the contrary ; you behaved like an angel , like an angel . 
I am ready to say so a thousand times over . '' 
`` Mamma , how has he behaved like an angel ? '' 
Lise 's voice was heard again . 
`` I somehow fancied all at once , '' Alyosha went on as though he had not heard Lise , `` that she loved Ivan , and so I said that stupid thing ... . 
What will happen now ? '' 
`` To whom , to whom ? '' 
cried Lise . 
`` Mamma , you really want to be the death of me . 
I ask you and you do n't answer . '' 
At the moment the maid ran in . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna is ill ... . 
She is crying , struggling ... hysterics . '' 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
cried Lise , in a tone of real anxiety . 
`` Mamma , I shall be having hysterics , and not she ! '' 
`` Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream , do n't persecute me . 
At your age one ca n't know everything that grown-up people know . 
I 'll come and tell you everything you ought to know . 
Oh , mercy on us ! 
I am coming , I am coming ... . 
Hysterics is a good sign , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; it 's an excellent thing that she is hysterical . 
That 's just as it ought to be . 
In such cases I am always against the woman , against all these feminine tears and hysterics . 
Run and say , Yulia , that I 'll fly to her . 
As for Ivan Fyodorovitch 's going away like that , it 's her own fault . 
But he wo n't go away . 
Lise , for mercy 's sake , do n't scream ! 
Oh , yes ; you are not screaming . 
It 's I am screaming . 
Forgive your mamma ; but I am delighted , delighted , delighted ! 
Did you notice , Alexey Fyodorovitch , how young , how young Ivan Fyodorovitch was just now when he went out , when he said all that and went out ? 
I thought he was so learned , such a savant , and all of a sudden he behaved so warmly , openly , and youthfully , with such youthful inexperience , and it was all so fine , like you ... . 
And the way he repeated that German verse , it was just like you ! 
But I must fly , I must fly ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , make haste to carry out her commission , and then make haste back . 
Lise , do you want anything now ? 
For mercy 's sake , do n't keep Alexey Fyodorovitch a minute . 
He will come back to you at once . '' 
Madame Hohlakov at last ran off . 
Before leaving , Alyosha would have opened the door to see Lise . 
`` On no account , '' cried Lise . 
`` On no account now . 
Speak through the door . 
How have you come to be an angel ? 
That 's the only thing I want to know . '' 
`` For an awful piece of stupidity , Lise ! 
Goodbye ! '' 
`` Do n't dare to go away like that ! '' 
Lise was beginning . 
`` Lise , I have a real sorrow ! 
I 'll be back directly , but I have a great , great sorrow ! 
And he ran out of the room . 
A Laceration in the Cottage HE certainly was really grieved in a way he had seldom been before . 
He had rushed in like a fool , and meddled in what ? 
In a love-affair . 
`` But what do I know about it ? 
What can I tell about such things ? '' 
he repeated to himself for the hundredth time , flushing crimson . 
`` Oh , being ashamed would be nothing ; shame is only the punishment I deserve . 
The trouble is I shall certainly have caused more unhappiness ... . 
And Father Zossima sent me to reconcile and bring them together . 
Is this the way to bring them together ? '' 
Then he suddenly remembered how he had tried to join their hands , and he felt fearfully ashamed again . 
`` Though I acted quite sincerely , I must be more sensible in the future , '' he concluded suddenly , and did not even smile at his conclusion . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's commission took him to Lake Street , and his brother Dmitri lived close by , in a turning out of Lake Street . 
Alyosha decided to go to him in any case before going to the captain , though he had a presentiment that he would not find his brother . 
He suspected that he would intentionally keep out of his way now , but he must find him anyhow . 
Time was passing : the thought of his dying elder had not left Alyosha for one minute from the time he set off from the monastery . 
There was one point which interested him particularly about Katerina Ivanovna 's commission ; when she had mentioned the captain 's son , the little schoolboy who had run beside his father crying , the idea had at once struck Alyosha that this must be the schoolboy who had bitten his finger when he , Alyosha , asked him what he had done to hurt him . 
Now Alyosha felt practically certain of this , though he could not have said why . 
Thinking of another subject was a relief , and he resolved to think no more about the `` mischief '' he had done , and not to torture himself with remorse , but to do what he had to do , let come what would . 
At that thought he was completely comforted . 
Turning to the street where Dmitri lodged , he felt hungry , and taking out of his pocket the roll he had brought from his father 's , he ate it . 
It made him feel stronger . 
Dmitri was not at home . 
The people of the house , an old cabinet-maker , his son , and his old wife , looked with positive suspicion at Alyosha . 
`` He has n't slept here for the last three nights . 
Maybe he has gone away , '' the old man said in answer to Alyosha 's persistent inquiries . 
Alyosha saw that he was answering in accordance with instructions . 
When he asked whether he were not at Grushenka 's or in hiding at Foma 's -LRB- Alyosha spoke so freely on purpose -RRB- , all three looked at him in alarm . 
`` They are fond of him , they are doing their best for him , '' thought Alyosha . 
`` That 's good . '' 
At last he found the house in Lake Street . 
It was a decrepit little house , sunk on one side , with three windows looking into the street , and with a muddy yard , in the middle of which stood a solitary cow . 
He crossed the yard and found the door opening into the passage . 
On the left of the passage lived the old woman of the house with her old daughter . 
Both seemed to be deaf . 
In answer to his repeated inquiry for the captain , one of them at last understood that he was asking for their lodgers , and pointed to a door across the passage . 
The captain 's lodging turned out to be a simple cottage room . 
Alyosha had his hand on the iron latch to open the door , when he was struck by the strange hush within . 
Yet he knew from Katerina Ivanovna 's words that the man had a family . 
`` Either they are all asleep or perhaps they have heard me coming and are waiting for me to open the door . 
I 'd better knock first , '' and he knocked . 
An answer came , but not at once , after an interval of perhaps ten seconds . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
shouted someone in a loud and very angry voice . 
Then Alyosha opened the door and crossed the threshold . 
He found himself in a regular peasant 's room . 
Though it was large , it was cumbered up with domestic belongings of all sorts , and there were several people in it . 
On the left was a large Russian stove . 
From the stove to the window on the left was a string running across the room , and on it there were rags hanging . 
There was a bedstead against the wall on each side , right and left , covered with knitted quilts . 
On the one on the left was a pyramid of four print-covered pillows , each smaller than the one beneath . 
On the other there was only one very small pillow . 
The opposite corner was screened off by a curtain or a sheet hung on a string . 
Behind this curtain could be seen a bed made up on a bench and a chair . 
The rough square table of plain wood had been moved into the middle window . 
The three windows , which consisted each of four tiny greenish mildewy panes , gave little light , and were close shut , so that the room was not very light and rather stuffy . 
On the table was a frying pan with the remains of some fried eggs , a half-eaten piece of bread , and a small bottle with a few drops of vodka . 
A woman of genteel appearance , wearing a cotton gown , was sitting on a chair by the bed on the left . 
Her face was thin and yellow , and her sunken cheeks betrayed at the first glance that she was ill . 
But what struck Alyosha most was the expression in the poor woman 's eyes - a look of surprised inquiry and yet of haughty pride . 
And while he was talking to her husband , her big brown eyes moved from one speaker to the other with the same haughty and questioning expression . 
Beside her at the window stood a young girl , rather plain , with scanty reddish hair , poorly but very neatly dressed . 
She looked disdainfully at Alyosha as he came in . 
Beside the other bed was sitting another female figure . 
She was a very sad sight , a young girl of about twenty , but hunchback and crippled `` with withered legs , '' as Alyosha was told afterwards . 
Her crutches stood in the corner close by . 
The strikingly beautiful and gentle eyes of this poor girl looked with mild serenity at Alyosha . 
A man of forty-five was sitting at the table , finishing the fried eggs . 
He was spare , small , and weakly built . 
He had reddish hair and a scanty light-coloured beard , very much like a wisp of tow -LRB- this comparison and the phrase `` a wisp of tow '' flashed at once into Alyosha 's mind for some reason , he remembered it afterwards -RRB- . 
It was obviously this gentleman who had shouted to him , as there was no other man in the room . 
But when Alyosha went in , he leapt up from the bench on which he was sitting , and , hastily wiping his mouth with a ragged napkin , darted up to Alyosha . 
`` It 's a monk come to beg for the monastery . 
A nice place to come to ! '' 
the girl standing in the left corner said aloud . 
The man spun round instantly towards her and answered her in an excited and breaking voice : `` No , Varvara , you are wrong . 
Allow me to ask , '' he turned again to Alyosha , `` what has brought you to our retreat ? '' 
Alyosha looked attentively at him . 
It was the first time he had seen him . 
There was something angular , flurried and irritable about him . 
Though he had obviously just been drinking , he was not drunk . 
There was extraordinary impudence in his expression , and yet , strange to say , at the same time there was fear . 
He looked like a man who had long been kept in subjection and had submitted to it , and now had suddenly turned and was trying to assert himself . 
Or , better still , like a man who wants dreadfully to hit you but is horribly afraid you will hit him . 
In his words and in the intonation of his shrill voice there was a sort of crazy humour , at times spiteful and at times cringing , and continually shifting from one tone to another . 
The question about `` our retreat '' he had asked , as it were , quivering all over , rolling his eyes , and skipping up so close to Alyosha that he instinctively drew back a step . 
He was dressed in a very shabby dark cotton coat , patched and spotted . 
He wore checked trousers of an extremely light colour , long out of fashion , and of very thin material . 
They were so crumpled and so short that he looked as though he had grown out of them like a boy . 
`` I am Alexey Karamazov , '' Alyosha began in reply . 
`` I quite understand that , sir , '' the gentleman snapped out at once to assure him that he knew who he was already . 
`` I am Captain Snegiryov , sir , but I am still desirous to know precisely what has led you - '' `` Oh , I 've come for nothing special . 
I wanted to have a word with you - if only you allow me . '' 
`` In that case , here is a chair , sir ; kindly be seated . 
That 's what they used to say in the old comedies , ` kindly be seated , ' '' and with a rapid gesture he seized an empty chair -LRB- it was a rough wooden chair , not upholstered -RRB- and set it for him almost in the middle of the room ; then , taking another similar chair for himself , he sat down facing Alyosha , so close to him that their knees almost touched . 
`` Nikolay Ilyitch Snegiryov , sir , formerly a captain in the Russian infantry , put to shame for his vices , but still a captain . 
Though I might not be one now for the way I talk ; for the last half of my life I 've learnt to say ` sir . ' 
It 's a word you use when you 've come down in the world . '' 
`` That 's very true , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` But is it used involuntarily or on purpose ? '' 
`` As God 's above , it 's involuntary , and I use n't to use it ! 
I did n't use the word ` sir ' all my life , but as soon as I sank into low water I began to say ` sir . ' 
It 's the work of a higher power . 
I see you are interested in contemporary questions , but how can I have excited your curiosity , living as I do in surroundings impossible for the exercise of hospitality ? '' 
`` I 've come - about that business . '' 
`` About what business ? '' 
the captain interrupted impatiently . 
`` About your meeting with my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch , '' Alyosha blurted out awkwardly . 
`` What meeting , sir ? 
You do n't mean that meeting ? 
About my ` wisp of tow , ' then ? '' 
He moved closer so that his knees positively knocked against Alyosha . 
His lips were strangely compressed like a thread . 
`` What wisp of tow ? '' 
muttered Alyosha . 
`` He is come to complain of me , father ! '' 
cried a voice familiar to Alyosha - the voice of the schoolboy - from behind the curtain . 
`` I bit his finger just now . '' 
The curtain was pulled , and Alyosha saw his assailant lying on a little bed made up on the bench and the chair in the corner under the ikons . 
The boy lay covered by his coat and an old wadded quilt . 
He was evidently unwell , and , judging by his glittering eyes , he was in a fever . 
He looked at Alyosha without fear , as though he felt he was at home and could not be touched . 
`` What ! 
Did he bite your finger ? '' 
The captain jumped up from his chair . 
`` Was it your finger he bit ? '' 
`` Yes . 
He was throwing stones with other schoolboys . 
There were six of them against him alone . 
I went up to him , and he threw a stone at me and then another at my head . 
I asked him what I had done to him . 
And then he rushed at me and bit my finger badly , I do n't know why . '' 
`` I 'll thrash him , sir , at once - this minute ! '' 
The captain jumped up from his seat . 
`` But I am not complaining at all , I am simply telling you ... . 
I do n't want him to be thrashed . 
Besides , he seems to be ill . '' 
`` And do you suppose I 'd thrash him ? 
That I 'd take my Ilusha and thrash him before you for your satisfaction ? 
Would you like it done at once , sir ? '' 
said the captain , suddenly turning to Alyosha , as though he were going to attack him . 
`` I am sorry about your finger , sir ; but instead of thrashing Ilusha , would you like me to chop off my four fingers with this knife here before your eyes to satisfy your just wrath ? 
I should think four fingers would be enough to satisfy your thirst for vengeance . 
You wo n't ask for the fifth one too ? '' 
He stopped short with a catch in his throat . 
Every feature in his face was twitching and working ; he looked extremely defiant . 
He was in a sort of frenzy . 
`` I think I understand it all now , '' said Alyosha gently and sorrowfully , still keeping his seat . 
`` So your boy is a good boy , he loves his father , and he attacked me as the brother of your assailant ... . 
Now I understand it , '' he repeated thoughtfully . 
`` But my brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch regrets his action , I know that , and if only it is possible for him to come to you , or better still , to meet you in that same place , he will ask your forgiveness before everyone - if you wish it . '' 
`` After pulling out my beard , you mean , he will ask my forgiveness ? 
And he thinks that will be a satisfactory finish , does n't he ? '' 
`` Oh , no ! 
On the contrary , he will do anything you like and in any way you like . '' 
`` So if I were to ask his highness to go down on his knees before me in that very tavern - ` The Metropolis ' it 's called - or in the marketplace , he would do it ? '' 
`` Yes , he would even go down on his knees . '' 
`` You 've pierced me to the heart , sir . 
Touched me to tears and pierced me to the heart ! 
I am only too sensible of your brother 's generosity . 
Allow me to introduce my family , my two daughters and my son - my litter . 
If I die , who will care for them , and while I live who but they will care for a wretch like me ? 
That 's a great thing the Lord has ordained for every man of my sort , sir . 
For there must be someone able to love even a man like me . '' 
`` Ah , that 's perfectly true ! '' 
exclaimed Alyosha . 
`` Oh , do leave off playing the fool ! 
Some idiot comes in , and you put us to shame ! '' 
cried the girl by the window , suddenly turning to her father with a disdainful and contemptuous air . 
`` Wait a little , Varvara ! '' 
cried her father , speaking peremptorily but looking at them quite approvingly . 
`` That 's her character , '' he said , addressing Alyosha again . 
`` And in all nature there was naught That could find favour in his eyes - or rather in the feminine - that could find favour in her eyes - . 
But now let me present you to my wife , Arina Petrovna . 
She is crippled , she is forty-three ; she can move , but very little . 
She is of humble origin . 
Arina Petrovna , compose your countenance . 
This is Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
Get up , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
He took him by the hand and with unexpected force pulled him up . 
`` You must stand up to be introduced to a lady . 
It 's not the Karamazov , mamma , who ... h 'm ... etcetera , but his brother , radiant with modest virtues . 
Come , Arina Petrovna , come , mamma , first your hand to be kissed . '' 
And he kissed his wife 's hand respectfully and even tenderly . 
The girl at the window turned her back indignantly on the scene ; an expression of extraordinary cordiality came over the haughtily inquiring face of the woman . 
`` Good morning ! 
Sit down , Mr. Tchernomazov , '' she said . 
`` Karamazov , mamma , Karamazov . 
We are of humble origin , '' he whispered again . 
`` Well , Karamazov , or whatever it is , but I always think of Tchermomazov ... . 
Sit down . 
Why has he pulled you up ? 
He calls me crippled , but I am not , only my legs are swollen like barrels , and I am shrivelled up myself . 
Once I used to be so fat , but now it 's as though I had swallowed a needle . '' 
`` We are of humble origin , '' the captain muttered again . 
`` Oh , father , father ! '' 
the hunchback girl , who had till then been silent on her chair , said suddenly , and she hid her eyes in her handkerchief . 
`` Buffoon ! '' 
blurted out the girl at the window . 
`` Have you heard our news ? '' 
said the mother , pointing at her daughters . 
`` It 's like clouds coming over ; the clouds pass and we have music again . 
When we were with the army , we used to have many such guests . 
I do n't mean to make any comparisons ; everyone to their taste . 
The deacon 's wife used to come then and say , ` Alexandr Alexandrovitch is a man of the noblest heart , but Nastasya Petrovna , ' she would say , ` is of the brood of hell . ' 
` Well , ' I said , ` that 's a matter of taste ; but you are a little spitfire . ' 
` And you want keeping in your place ; ' says she . 
` You black sword , ' said I , ` who asked you to teach me ? ' 
` But my breath , ' says she , ` is clean , and yours is unclean . ' 
` You ask all the officers whether my breath is unclean . ' 
And ever since then I had it in my mind . 
Not long ago I was sitting here as I am now , when I saw that very general come in who came here for Easter , and I asked him : ` Your Excellency , ' said I , ` can a lady 's breath be unpleasant ? ' 
` Yes , ' he answered ; ` you ought to open a window-pane or open the door , for the air is not fresh here . ' 
And they all go on like that ! 
And what is my breath to them ? 
The dead smell worse still ! . ' 
I wo n't spoil the air , ' said I , ` I 'll order some slippers and go away . ' 
My darlings , do n't blame your own mother ! 
Nikolay Ilyitch , how is it I ca n't please you ? 
There 's only Ilusha who comes home from school and loves me . 
Yesterday he brought me an apple . 
Forgive your own mother - forgive a poor lonely creature ! 
Why has my breath become unpleasant to you ? '' 
And the poor mad woman broke into sobs , and tears streamed down her cheeks . 
The captain rushed up to her . 
`` Mamma , mamma , my dear , give over ! 
You are not lonely . 
Everyone loves you , everyone adores you . '' 
He began kissing both her hands again and tenderly stroking her face ; taking the dinner-napkin , he began wiping away her tears . 
Alyosha fancied that he too had tears in his eyes . 
`` There , you see , you hear ? '' 
he turned with a sort of fury to Alyosha , pointing to the poor imbecile . 
`` I see and hear , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` Father , father , how can you - with him ! 
Let him alone ! '' 
cried the boy , sitting up in his bed and gazing at his father with glowing eyes . 
`` Do give over fooling , showing off your silly antics which never lead to anything ! 
shouted Varvara , stamping her foot with passion . 
`` Your anger is quite just this time , Varvara , and I 'll make haste to satisfy you . 
Come , put on your cap , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and I 'll put on mine . 
We will go out . 
I have a word to say to you in earnest , but not within these walls . 
This girl sitting here is my daughter Nina ; I forgot to introduce her to you . 
She is a heavenly angel incarnate ... who has flown down to us mortals , ... if you can understand . '' 
`` There he is shaking all over , as though he is in convulsions ! '' 
Varvara went on indignantly . 
`` And she there stamping her foot at me and calling me a fool just now , she is a heavenly angel incarnate too , and she has good reason to call me so . 
Come along , Alexey Fyodorovitch , we must make an end . '' 
And , snatching Alyosha 's hand , he drew him out of the room into the street . 
And in the Open Air `` THE air is fresh , but in my apartment it is not so in any sense of the word . 
Let us walk slowly , sir . 
I should be glad of your kind interest . '' 
`` I too have something important to say to you , '' observed Alyosha , `` only I do n't know how to begin . '' 
`` To be sure you must have business with me . 
You would never have looked in upon me without some object . 
Unless you come simply to complain of the boy , and that 's hardly likely . 
And , by the way , about the boy : I could not explain to you in there , but here I will describe that scene to you . 
My tow was thicker a week ago - I mean my beard . 
That 's the nickname they give to my beard , the schoolboys most of all . 
Well , your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch was pulling me by my beard , I 'd done nothing , he was in a towering rage and happened to come upon me . 
He dragged me out of the tavern into the market place ; at that moment the boys were coming out of school , and with them Ilusha . 
As soon as he saw me in such a state he rushed up to me . 
` Father , ' he cried , ` father ! ' 
He caught hold of me , hugged me , tried to pull me away , crying to my assailant , ` Let go , let go , it 's my father , forgive him ! ' 
- yes , he actually cried ` forgive him . ' 
He clutched at that hand , that very hand , in his little hands and kissed it ... . 
I remember his little face at that moment , I have n't forgotten it and I never shall ! '' 
`` I swear , '' cried Alyosha , `` that my brother will express his most deep and sincere regret , even if he has to go down on his knees in that same market-place ... . 
I 'll make him or he is no brother of mine ! 
`` Aha , then it 's only a suggestion ! 
And it does not come from him but simply from the generosity of your own warm heart . 
You should have said so . 
No , in that case allow me to tell you of your brother 's highly chivalrous soldierly generosity , for he did give expression to it at the time . 
He left off dragging me by my beard and released me : ` You are an officer , ' he said , ` and I am an officer , if you can find a decent man to be your second send me your challenge . 
I will give satisfaction , though you are a scoundrel . ' 
That 's what he said . 
A chivalrous spirit indeed ! 
I retired with Ilusha , and that scene is a family record imprinted forever on Ilusha 's soul . 
No , it 's not for us to claim the privileges of noblemen . 
Judge for yourself . 
You 've just been in our mansion , what did you see there ? 
Three ladies , one a cripple and weak-minded , another a cripple and hunchback and the third not crippled but far too clever . 
She is a student , dying to get back to Petersburg , to work for the emancipation of the Russian woman on the banks of the Neva . 
I wo n't speak of Ilusha , he is only nine . 
I am alone in the world , and if I die , what will become of all of them ? 
I simply ask you that . 
And if I challenge him and he kills me on the spot , what then ? 
What will become of them ? 
And worse still , if he does n't kill me but only cripples me : I could n't work , but I should still be a mouth to feed . 
Who would feed it and who would feed them all ? 
Must I take Ilusha from school and send him to beg in the streets ? 
That 's what it means for me to challenge him to a duel . 
It 's silly talk and nothing else . '' 
`` He will beg your forgiveness , he will bow down at your feet in the middle of the marketplace , '' cried Alyosha again , with glowing eyes . 
`` I did think of prosecuting him , '' the captain went on , `` but look in our code , could I get much compensation for a personal injury ? 
And then Agrafena Alexandrovna * sent for me and shouted at me : ` Do n't dare to dream of it ! 
If you proceed against him , I 'll publish it to all the world that he beat you for your dishonesty , and then you will be prosecuted . ' 
I call God to witness whose was the dishonesty and by whose commands I acted , was n't it by her own and Fyodor Pavlovitch 's ? 
And what 's more , ' she went on , ` I 'll dismiss you for good and you 'll never earn another penny from me . 
I 'll speak to my merchant too ' -LRB- that 's what she calls her old man -RRB- ` and he will dismiss you ! ' 
And if he dismisses me , what can I earn then from anyone ? 
Those two are all I have to look to , for your Fyodor Pavlovitch has not only given over employing me , for another reason , but he means to make use of papers I 've signed to go to law against me . 
And so I kept quiet , and you have seen our retreat . 
But now let me ask you : did Ilusha hurt your finger much ? 
I did n't like to go into it in our mansion before him . '' 
* Grushenka . 
`` Yes , very much , and he was in a great fury . 
He was avenging you on me as a Karamazov , I see that now . 
But if only you had seen how he was throwing stones at his schoolfellows ! 
It 's very dangerous . 
They might kill him . 
They are children and stupid . 
A stone may be thrown and break somebody 's head . '' 
`` That 's just what has happened . 
He has been bruised by a stone to-day . 
Not on the head but on the chest , just above the heart . 
He came home crying and groaning and now he is ill . '' 
`` And you know he attacks them first . 
He is bitter against them on your account . 
They say he stabbed a boy called Krassotkin with a penknife not long ago . '' 
`` I 've heard about that too , it 's dangerous . 
Krassotkin is an official here , we may hear more about it . '' 
`` I would advise you , '' Alyosha went on warmly , `` not to send him to school at all for a time till he is calmer . 
and his anger is passed . '' 
`` Anger ! '' 
the captain repeated , `` that 's just what it is . 
He is a little creature , but it 's a mighty anger . 
You do n't know all , sir . 
Let me tell you more . 
Since that incident all the boys have been teasing him about the ` wisp of tow . ' 
Schoolboys are a merciless race , individually they are angels , but together , especially in schools , they are often merciless . 
Their teasing has stiffed up a gallant spirit in Ilusha . 
An ordinary boy , a weak son , would have submitted , have felt ashamed of his father , sir , but he stood up for his father against them all . 
For his father and for truth and justice . 
For what he suffered when he kissed your brother 's hand and cried to him ` Forgive father , forgive him , ' - that only God knows - and I , his father . 
For our children - not your children , but ours - the children of the poor gentlemen looked down upon by everyone - know what justice means , sir , even at nine years old . 
How should the rich know ? 
They do n't explore such depths once in their lives . 
But at that moment in the square when he kissed his hand , at that moment my Ilusha had grasped all that justice means . 
That truth entered into him and crushed him for ever , sir , '' the captain said hotly again with a sort of frenzy , and he struck his right fist against his left palm as though he wanted to show how `` the truth '' crushed Ilusha . 
`` That very day , sir , he fell ill with fever and was delirious all night . 
All that day he hardly said a word to me , but I noticed he kept watching me from the corner , though he turned to the window and pretended to be learning his lessons . 
But I could see his mind was not on his lessons . 
Next day I got drunk to forget my troubles , sinful man as I am , and I do n't remember much . 
Mamma began crying , too - I am very fond of mamma - well , I spent my last penny drowning my troubles . 
Do n't despise me for that , sir , in Russia men who drink are the best . 
The best men amongst us are the greatest drunkards . 
I lay down and I do n't remember about Ilusha , though all that day the boys had been jeering at him at school . 
` Wisp of tow , ' they shouted , ` your father was pulled out of the tavern by his wisp of tow , you ran by and begged forgiveness . ' 
`` On the third day when he came back from school , I saw he looked pale and wretched . 
` What is it ? ' 
I asked . 
He would n't answer . 
Well , there 's no talking in our mansion without mamma and the girls taking part in it . 
What 's more , the girls had heard about it the very first day . 
Varvara had begun snarling . 
` You fools and buffoons , can you ever do anything rational ? ' 
` Quite so , ' I said , ` can we ever do anything rational ? ' 
For the time I turned it off like that . 
So in the evening I took the boy out for a walk , for you must know we go for a walk every evening , always the same way , along which we are going now - from our gate to that great stone which lies alone in the road under the hurdle , which marks the beginning of the town pasture . 
A beautiful and lonely spot , sir . 
Ilusha and I walked along hand in hand as usual . 
He has a little hand , his fingers are thin and cold - he suffers with his chest , you know . 
` Father , ' said he , ` father ! ' 
` Well ? ' 
said I. I saw his eyes flashing . 
` Father , how he treated you then ! ' 
` It ca n't be helped , Ilusha , ' I said . 
` Do n't forgive him , father , do n't forgive him ! 
At school they say that he has paid you ten roubles for it . ' 
` No Ilusha , ' said I , ' I would not take money from him for anything . ' 
he began trembling all over , took my hand in both his and kissed it again . 
` Father , ' he said , ` father , challenge him to a duel , at school they say you are a coward and wo n't challenge him , and that you 'll accept ten roubles from him . ' ' 
I ca n't challenge him to a duel , Ilusha , ' I answered . 
And I told briefly what I 've just told you . 
He listened . 
` Father , ' he said , anyway do n't forgive it . 
When I grow up I 'll call him out myself and kill him . ' 
His eyes shone and glowed . 
And of course I am his father , and I had to put in a word : ` It 's a sin to kill , ' I said , ` even in a duel . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ` when I grow up , I 'll knock him down , knock the sword out of his hand , I 'll fall on him , wave my sword over him and say : `` I could kill you , but I forgive you , so there ! '' ' 
You see what the workings of his little mind have been during these two days ; he must have been planning that vengeance all day , and raving about it at night . 
`` But he began to come home from school badly beaten , I found out about it the day before yesterday , and you are right , I wo n't send him to that school any more . 
I heard that he was standing up against all the class alone and defying them all , that his heart was full of resentment , of bitterness - I was alarmed about him . 
We went for another walk . 
` Father , ' he asked , ` are the rich people stronger than anyone else on earth ? ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` there are no people on earth stronger than the rich . ' 
` Father , ' he said , ' I will get rich , I will become an officer and conquer everybody . 
The Tsar will reward me , I will come back here and then no one will dare - ' Then he was silent and his lips still kept trembling . 
` Father , ' he said , ` what a horrid town this is . ' 
` Yes , Ilusha , ' I said , ` it is n't a very nice town . ' 
` Father , let us move into another town , a nice one , ' he said , ` where people do n't know about us . ' 
` We will move , we will , Ilusha , ' said I , ` only I must save up for it . ' 
I was glad to be able to turn his mind from painful thoughts , and we began to dream of how we would move to another town , how we would buy a horse and cart . 
` We will put mamma and your sisters inside , we will cover them up and we 'll walk , you shall have a lift now and then , and I 'll walk beside , for we must take care of our horse , we ca n't all ride . 
That 's how we 'll go . ' 
He was enchanted at that , most of all at the thought of having a horse and driving him . 
For of course a Russian boy is born among horses . 
We chattered a long while . 
Thank God , I thought , I have diverted his mind and comforted him . 
`` That was the day before yesterday , in the evening , but last night everything was changed . 
He had gone to school in the morning , he came back depressed , terribly depressed . 
In the evening I took him by the hand and we went for a walk ; he would not talk . 
There was a wind blowing and no sun , and a feeling of autumn ; twilight was coming on . 
We walked along , both of us depressed . 
` Well , my boy , ' said I , ` how about our setting off on our travels ? ' 
I thought I might bring him back to our talk of the day before . 
He did n't answer , but I felt his fingers trembling in my hand . 
Ah , I thought , it 's a bad job ; there 's something fresh . 
We had reached the stone where we are now . 
I sat down on the stone . 
And in the air there were lots of kites flapping and whirling . 
There were as many as thirty in sight . 
Of course , it 's just the season for the kites . 
` Look , Ilusha , ' said I , ` it 's time we got out our last year 's kite again . 
I 'll mend it ; where have you put it away ? ' 
My boy made no answer . 
He looked away and turned sideways to me . 
And then a gust of wind blew up the sand . 
He suddenly fell on me , threw both his little arms round my neck and held me tight . 
You know , when children are silent and proud , and try to keep back their tears when they are in great trouble and suddenly break down , their tears fall in streams . 
With those warm streams of tears , he suddenly wetted my face . 
He sobbed and shook as though he were in convulsions , and squeezed up against me as I sat on the stone . 
` Father , ' he kept crying , ` dear father , how he insulted you ! ' 
And I sobbed too . 
We sat shaking in each other 's arms . 
` Ilusha , ' I said to him , ` Ilusha , darling . ' 
No one saw us then . 
God alone saw us ; I hope He will record it to my credit . 
You must thank your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
No , sir , I wo n't thrash my boy for your satisfaction . '' 
He had gone back to his original tone of resentful buffoonery . 
Alyosha felt , though , that he trusted him , and that if there had been someone else in his , Alyosha 's place , the man would not have spoken so openly and would not have told what he had just told . 
This encouraged Alyosha , whose heart was trembling on the verge of tears . 
`` Ah , how I would like to make friends with your boy ! '' 
he cried . 
`` If you could arrange it - '' `` Certainly , sir , '' muttered the captain . 
`` But now listen to something quite different ! '' 
Alyosha went on . 
`` I have a message for you . 
That same brother of mine , Dmitri , has insulted his betrothed , too , a noble-hearted girl of whom you have probably heard . 
I have a right to tell you of her wrong ; I ought to do so , in fact , for , hearing of the insult done to you and learning all about your unfortunate position , she commissioned me at once - just now - to bring you this help from her - but only from her alone , not from Dmitri , who has abandoned her . 
Nor from me , his brother , nor from anyone else , but from her , only from her ! 
She entreats you to accept her help ... You have both been insulted by the same man . 
She thought of you only when she had just received a similar insult from him - similar in its cruelty , I mean . 
She comes like a sister to help a brother in misfortune ... . 
She told me to persuade you to take these two hundred roubles from her , as from a sister , knowing that you are in such need . 
No one will know of it , it can give rise to no unjust slander . 
There are the two hundred roubles , and I swear you must take them unless - unless all men are to be enemies on earth ! 
But there are brothers even on earth ... . 
You have a generous heart ... you must see that , you must , '' and Alyosha held out two new rainbow-coloured hundred-rouble notes . 
They were both standing at the time by the great stone close to the fence , and there was no one near . 
The notes seemed to produce a tremendous impression on the captain . 
He started , but at first only from astonishment . 
Such an outcome of their conversation was the last thing he expected . 
Nothing could have been farther from his dreams than help from anyone - and such a sum ! 
He took the notes , and for a minute he was almost unable to answer , quite a new expression came into his face . 
`` That for me ? 
So much money - two hundred roubles ! 
Good heavens ! 
Why , I have n't seen so much money for the last four years ! 
Mercy on us ! 
And she says she is a sister ... . 
And is that the truth ? '' 
`` I swear that all I told you is the truth , `` cried Alyosha . 
The captain flushed red . 
`` Listen , my dear , listen . 
If I take it , I sha n't be behaving like a scoundrel ? 
In your eyes , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I sha n't be a scoundrel ? 
No , Alexey Fyodorovitch , listen , listen , '' he hurried , touching Alyosha with both his hands . 
`` You are persuading me to take it , saying that it 's a sister sends it , but inwardly , in your heart wo n't you feel contempt for me if I take it , eh ? '' 
`` No , no , on my salvation I swear I sha n't ! 
And no one will ever know but me - I , you and she , and one other lady , her great friend . '' 
`` Never mind the lady ! 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , at a moment like this you must listen , for you ca n't understand what these two hundred roubles mean to me now . '' 
The poor fellow went on rising gradually into a sort of incoherent , almost wild enthusiasm . 
He was thrown off his balance and talked extremely fast , as though afraid he would not be allowed to say all he had to say . 
`` Besides its being honestly acquired from a ` sister , ' so highly respected and revered , do you know that now I can look after mamma and Nina , my hunchback angel daughter ? 
Doctor Herzenstube came to me in the kindness of his heart and was examining them both for a whole hour . ' 
I can make nothing of it , ' said he , but he prescribed a mineral water which is kept at a chemist 's here . 
He said it would be sure to do her good , and he ordered baths , too , with some medicine in them . 
The mineral water costs thirty copecks , and she 'd need to drink forty bottles perhaps : so I took the prescription and laid it on the shelf under the ikons , and there it lies . 
And he ordered hot baths for Nina with something dissolved in them , morning and evening . 
But how can we carry out such a cure in our mansion , without servants , without help , without a bath , and without water ? 
Nina is rheumatic all over , I do n't think I told you that . 
All her right side aches at night , she is in agony , and , would you believe it , the angel bears it without groaning for fear of waking us . 
We eat what we can get , and she 'll only take the leavings , what you 'd scarcely give to a dog . ' 
I am not worth it , I am taking it from you , I am a burden on you , ' that 's what her angel eyes try to express . 
We wait on her , but she does n't like it . ' 
I am a useless cripple , no good to anyone . ' 
As though she were not worth it , when she is the saving of all of us with her angelic sweetness . 
Without her , without her gentle word it would be hell among us ! 
She softens even Varvara . 
And do n't judge Varvara harshly either , she is an angel too , she , too , has suffered wrong . 
She came to us for the summer , and she brought sixteen roubles she had earned by lessons and saved up , to go back with to Petersburg in September , that is now . 
But we took her money and lived on it , so now she has nothing to go back with . 
Though indeed she could n't go back , for she has to work for us like a slave . 
She is like an overdriven horse with all of us on her back . 
She waits on us all , mends and washes , sweeps the floor , puts mamma to bed . 
And mamma is capricious and tearful and insane ! 
And now I can get a servant with this money , you understand , Alexey Fyodorovitch , I can get medicines for the dear creatures , I can send my student to Petersburg , I can buy beef , I can feed them properly . 
Good Lord , but it 's a dream ! '' 
Alyosha was delighted that he had brought him such happiness and that the poor fellow had consented to be made happy . 
`` Stay , Alexey Fyodorovitch , stay , '' the captain began to talk with frenzied rapidity , carried away by a new day-dream . 
`` Do you know that Ilusha and I will perhaps really carry out our dream . 
We will buy a horse and cart , a black horse , he insists on its being black , and we will set off as we pretended the other day . 
I have an old friend , a lawyer in K. province , and I heard through a trustworthy man that if I were to go he 'd give me a place as clerk in his office , so , who knows , maybe he would . 
So I 'd just put mamma and Nina in the cart , and Ilusha could drive , and I 'd walk , I 'd walk ... . 
Why , if I only succeed in getting one debt paid that 's owing me , I should have perhaps enough for that too ! '' 
`` There would be enough ! '' 
cried Alyosha . 
`` Katerina Ivanovna will send you as much more as you need , and you know , I have money too , take what you want , as you would from a brother , from a friend , you can give it back later ... -LRB- You 'll get rich . 
you 'll get rich ! -RRB- 
And you know you could n't have a better idea than to move to another province ! 
It would be the saving of you , especially of your boy and you ought to go quickly , before the winter , before the cold . 
You must write to us when you are there , and we will always be brothers ... No , it 's not a dream ! '' 
Alyosha could have hugged him , he was so pleased . 
But glancing at him he stopped short . 
The man was standing with his neck outstretched and his lips protruding , with a pale and frenzied face . 
His lips were moving as though trying to articulate something ; no sound came , but still his lips moved . 
It was uncanny . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Alyosha , startled . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch ... I. . . 
you , '' muttered the captain , faltering , looking at him with a strange , wild , fixed stare , and an air of desperate resolution . 
At the same time there was a sort of grin on his lips . 
`` I. . . 
you , sir ... would n't you like me to show you a little trick I know ? '' 
he murmured , suddenly , in a firm rapid whisper , his voice no longer faltering . 
`` What trick ? '' 
`` A pretty trick , '' whispered the captain . 
His mouth was twisted on the left side , his left eye was screwed up . 
He still stared at Alyosha . 
`` What is the matter ? 
What trick ? '' 
Alyosha cried , now thoroughly alarmed . 
`` Why , look , '' squealed the captain suddenly , and showing him the two notes which he had been holding by one corner between his thumb and forefinger during the conversation , he crumpled them up savagely and squeezed them tight in his right hand . 
`` Do you see , do you see ? '' 
he shrieked , pale and infuriated . 
And suddenly flinging up his hand , he threw the crumpled notes on the sand . 
`` Do you see ? '' 
he shrieked again , pointing to them . 
`` Look there ! '' 
And with wild fury he began trampling them under his heel , gasping and exclaiming as he did so : `` So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! 
So much for your money ! '' 
Suddenly he darted back and drew himself up before Alyosha , and his whole figure expressed unutterable pride . 
`` Tell those who sent you that the wisp of tow does not sell his honour , '' he cried , raising his arm in the air . 
Then he turned quickly and began to run ; but he had not run five steps before he turned completely round and kissed his hand to Alyosha . 
He ran another five paces and then turned round for the last time . 
This time his face was not contorted with laughter , but quivering all over with tears . 
In a tearful , faltering , sobbing voice he cried : `` What should I say to my boy if I took money from you for our shame ? '' 
And then he ran on without turning . 
Alyosha looked after him , inexpressibly grieved . 
Oh , he saw that till the very last moment the man had not known he would crumple up and fling away the notes . 
He did not turn back . 
Alyosha knew he would not . 
He would not follow him and call him back , he knew why . 
When he was out of sight , Alyosha picked up the two notes . 
They were very much crushed and crumpled , and had been pressed into the sand , but were uninjured and even rustled like new ones when Alyosha unfolded them and smoothed them out . 
After smoothing them out , he folded them up , put them in his pocket and went to Katerina Ivanovna to report on the success of her commission . 
Pro and Contra The Engagement MADAME HOHLAKOV was again the first to meet Alyosha . 
She was flustered ; something important had happened . 
Katerina Ivanovna 's hysterics had ended in a fainting fit , and then `` a terrible , awful weakness had followed , she lay with her eyes turned up and was delirious . 
Now she was in a fever . 
They had sent for Herzenstube ; they had sent for the aunts . 
The aunts were already here , but Herzenstube had not yet come . 
They were all sitting in her room , waiting . 
She was unconscious now , and what if it turned to brain fever ! '' 
Madame Hohlakov looked gravely alarmed . 
`` This is serious , serious , '' she added at every word , as though nothing that had happened to her before had been serious . 
Alyosha listened with distress , and was beginning to describe his adventures , but she interrupted him at the first words . 
She had not time to listen . 
She begged him to sit with Lise and wait for her there . 
`` Lise , '' she whispered almost in his ear , `` Lise has greatly surprised me just now , dear Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
She touched me , too , and so my heart forgives her everything . 
Only fancy , as soon as you had gone , she began to be truly remorseful for having laughed at you to-day and yesterday , though she was not laughing at you , but only joking . 
But she was seriously sorry for it , almost ready to cry , so that I was quite surprised . 
She has never been really sorry for laughing at me , but has only made a joke of it . 
And you know she is laughing at me every minute . 
But this time she was in earnest She thinks a great deal of your opinion , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and do n't take offence or be wounded by her if you can help it . 
I am never hard upon her , for she 's such a clever little thing . 
Would you believe it ? 
She said just now that you were a friend of her childhood , ` the greatest friend of her childhood ' - just think of that - ` greatest friend ' - and what about me ? 
She has very strong feelings and memories , and , what 's more , she uses these phrases , most unexpected words , which come out all of a sudden when you least expect them . 
She spoke lately about a pine-tree , for instance : there used to be a pine-tree standing in our garden in her early childhood . 
Very likely it 's standing there still ; so there 's no need to speak in the past tense . 
Pine-trees are not like people , Alexey Fyodorovitch , they do n't change quickly . 
` Mamma , ' she said , ' I remember this pine tree as in a dream , ' only she said something so original about it that I ca n't repeat it . 
Besides , I 've forgotten it . 
Well , good-bye ! 
I am so worried I feel I shall go out of my mind . 
Ah ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , I 've been out of my mind twice in my life . 
Go to Lise , cheer her up , as you always can so charmingly . 
Lise , '' she cried , going to her door , `` here I 've brought you Alexey Fyodorovitch , whom you insulted so . 
He is not at all angry , I assure you ; on the contrary , he is surprised that you could suppose so . '' 
`` Merci , maman . 
Come in , Alexey Fyodorovitch . '' 
Alyosha went in . 
Lise looked rather embarrassed , and at once flushed crimson . 
She was evidently ashamed of something , and , as people always do in such cases , she began immediately talking of other things , as though they were of absorbing interest to her at the moment . 
`` Mamma has just told me all about the two hundred roubles , Alexey Fyodorovitch , and your taking them to that poor officer ... and she told me all the awful story of how he had been insulted ... and you know , although mamma muddles things ... she always rushes from one thing to another ... I cried when I heard . 
Well , did you give him the money and how is that poor man getting on ? '' 
`` The fact is I did n't give it to him , and it 's a long story , '' answered Alyosha , as though he , too , could think of nothing but his regret at having failed , yet Lise saw perfectly well that he , too , looked away , and that he , too , was trying to talk of other things . 
Alyosha sat down to the table and began to tell his story , but at the first words he lost his embarrassment and gained the whole of Lise 's attention as well . 
He spoke with deep feeling , under the influence of the strong impression he had just received , and he succeeded in telling his story well and circumstantially . 
In old days in Moscow he had been fond of coming to Lise and describing to her what had just happened to him , what he had read , or what he remembered of his childhood . 
Sometimes they had made day-dreams and woven whole romances together - generally cheerful and amusing ones . 
Now they both felt suddenly transported to the old days in Moscow , two years before . 
Lise was extremely touched by his story . 
Alyosha described Ilusha with warm feeling . 
When he finished describing how the luckless man trampled on the money , Lise could not help clasping her hands and crying out : `` So you did n't give him the money ! 
So you let him run away ! 
Oh , dear , you ought to have run after him ! '' 
`` No , Lise ; it 's better I did n't run after him , '' said Alyosha , getting up from his chair and walking thoughtfully across the room . 
`` How so ? 
How is it better ? 
Now they are without food and their case is hopeless . '' 
`` Not hopeless , for the two hundred roubles will still come to them . 
He 'll take the money to-morrow . 
To-morrow he will be sure to take it , '' said Alyosha , pacing up and down , pondering . 
`` You see , Lise , '' he went on , stopping suddenly before her , `` I made one blunder , but that , even that , is all for the best . '' 
`` What blunder , and why is it for the best ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
He is a man of weak and timorous character ; he has suffered so much and is very good-natured . 
I keep wondering why he took offence so suddenly , for I assure you , up to the last minute , he did not know that he was going to trample on the notes . 
And I think now that there was a great deal to offend him ... and it could not have been otherwise in his position ... . 
To begin with , he was sore at having been so glad of the money in my presence and not having concealed it from me . 
If he had been pleased , but not so much ; if he had not shown it ; if he had begun affecting scruples and difficulties , as other people do when they take money , he might still endure - to take it . 
But he was too genuinely delighted , and that was mortifying . 
Ah , Lise , he is a good and truthful man - that 's the worst of the whole business . 
All the while he talked , his voice was so weak , so broken , he talked so fast , so fast , he kept laughing such a laugh , or perhaps he was crying - yes , I am sure he was crying , he was so delighted - and he talked about his daughters - and about the situation he could get in another town ... . 
And when he had poured out his heart , he felt ashamed at having shown me his inmost soul like that . 
So he began to hate me at once . 
He is one of those awfully sensitive poor people . 
What had made him feel most ashamed was that he had given in too soon and accepted me as a friend , you see . 
At first he almost flew at me and tried to intimidate me , but as soon as he saw the money he had begun embracing me ; he kept touching me with his hands . 
This must have been how he came to feel it all so humiliating , and then I made that blunder , a very important one . 
I suddenly said to him that if he had not money enough to move to another town , we would give it to him , and , indeed , I myself would give him as much as he wanted out of my own money . 
That struck him all at once . 
Why , he thought , did I put myself forward to help him ? 
You know , Lise , it 's awfully hard for a man who has been injured , when other people look at him as though they were his benefactors ... . 
I 've heard that ; Father Zossima told me so . 
I do n't know how to put it , but I have often seen it myself . 
And I feel like that myself , too . 
And the worst of it was that though he did not know , to the very last minute , that he would trample on the notes , he had a kind of presentiment of it , I am sure of that . 
That 's just what made him so ecstatic , that he had that presentiment ... . 
And though it 's so dreadful , it 's all for the best . 
In fact , I believe nothing better could have happened . '' 
`` Why , why could nothing better have happened ? '' 
cried Lise , looking with great surprise at Alyosha . 
`` Because if he had taken the money , in an hour after getting home , he would be crying with mortification , that 's just what would have happened . 
And most likely he would have come to me early to-morrow , and perhaps have flung the notes at me and trampled upon them as he did just now . 
But now he has gone home awfully proud and triumphant , though he knows he has ` ruined himself . ' 
So now nothing could be easier than to make him accept the two hundred roubles by to-morrow , for he has already vindicated his honour , tossed away the money , and trampled it under foot ... . 
He could n't know when he did it that I should bring it to him again to-morrow , and yet he is in terrible need of that money . 
Though he is proud of himself now , yet even to-day he 'll be thinking what a help he has lost . 
He will think of it more than ever at night , will dream of it , and by to-morrow morning he may be ready to run to me to ask forgiveness . 
It 's just then that I 'll appear . 
` Here , you are a proud man , ' I shall say : ` you have shown it ; but now take the money and forgive us ! ' 
And then he will take it ! 
Alyosha was carried away with joy as he uttered his last words , `` And then he will take it ! '' 
Lise clapped her hands . 
`` Ah , that 's true ! 
I understand that perfectly now . 
Ah , Alyosha , how do you know all this ? 
So young and yet he knows what 's in the heart ... . 
I should never have worked it out . '' 
`` The great thing now is to persuade him that he is on an equal footing with us , in spite of his taking money from us , '' Alyosha went on in his excitement , `` and not only on an equal , but even on a higher footing . '' '' 
` On a higher footing ' is charming , Alexey Fyodorovitch ; but go on , go on ! '' 
`` You mean there is n't such an expression as ` on a higher footing ' ; but that does n't matter because - '' `` Oh , no , of course it does n't matter . 
Forgive me , Alyosha , dear ... . 
You know , I scarcely respected you till now - that is I respected you but on an equal footing ; but now I shall begin to respect you on a higher footing . 
Do n't be angry , dear , at my joking , '' she put in at once , with strong feeling . 
`` I am absurd and small , but you , you ! 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
Is n't there in all our analysis - I mean your analysis ... no , better call it ours - are n't we showing contempt for him , for that poor man - in analysing his soul like this , as it were , from above , eh ? 
In deciding so certainly that he will take the money ? '' 
`` No , Lise , it 's not contempt , '' Alyosha answered , as though he had prepared himself for the question . 
`` I was thinking of that on the way here . 
How can it be contempt when we are all like him , when we are all just the same as he is ? 
For you know we are just the same , no better . 
If we are better , we should have been just the same in his place ... . 
I do n't know about you , Lise , but I consider that I have a sordid soul in many ways , and his soul is not sordid ; on the contrary , full of fine feeling ... . 
No , Lise , I have no contempt for him . 
Do you know , Lise , my elder told me once to care for most people exactly as one would for children , and for some of them as one would for the sick in hospitals . '' 
`` Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
dear , let us care for people as we would for the sick ! '' 
`` Let us , Lise ; I am ready . 
Though I am not altogether ready in myself . 
I am sometimes very impatient and at other times I do n't see things . 
It 's different with you . '' 
`` Ah , I do n't believe it ! 
Alexey Fyodorovitch , how happy I am ! '' 
`` I am so glad you say so , Lise . '' 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , you are wonderfully good , but you are sometimes sort of formal ... . 
And yet you are not a bit formal really . 
Go to the door , open it gently , and see whether mamma is listening , '' said Lise , in a nervous , hurried whisper . 
Alyosha went , opened the door , and reported that no one was listening . 
`` Come here , Alexey Fyodorovitch , '' Lise went on , flushing redder and redder . 
`` Give me your hand - that 's right . 
I have to make a great confession . 
I did n't write to you yesterday in joke , but in earnest , '' and she hid her eyes with her hand . 
It was evident that she was greatly ashamed of the confession . 
Suddenly she snatched his hand and impulsively kissed it three times . 
`` Ah , Lise , what a good thing ! '' 
cried Alyosha joyfully . 
`` You know , I was perfectly sure you were in earnest . '' 
`` Sure ? 
Upon my word ! 
She put aside his hand , but did not leave go of it , blushing hotly , and laughing a little happy laugh . 
`` I kiss his hand and he says , ` What a good thing ! ' '' 
But her reproach was undeserved . 
Alyosha , too , was greatly overcome . 
`` I should like to please you always , Lise , but do n't know how to do it . '' 
he muttered , blushing too . 
`` Alyosha , dear , you are cold and rude . 
Do you see ? 
He has chosen me as his wife and is quite settled about it . 
He is sure I was in earnest . 
What a thing to say ! 
Why , that 's impertinence - that 's what it is . '' 
`` Why , was it wrong of me to feel sure ? '' 
Alyosha asked , laughing suddenly . 
`` Ah , Alyosha , on the contrary , it was delightfully right , '' cried Lise , looking tenderly and happily at him . 
Alyosha stood still , holding her hand in his . 
Suddenly he stooped down and kissed her on her lips . 
`` Oh , what are you doing ? '' 
cried Lise . 
Alyosha was terribly abashed . 
`` Oh , forgive me if I should n't ... . 
Perhaps I 'm awfully stupid ... . 
You said I was cold , so I kissed you ... . 
But I see it was stupid . '' 
Lise laughed , and hid her face in her hands . 
`` And in that dress ! '' 
she ejaculated in the midst of her mirth . 
But she suddenly ceased laughing and became serious , almost stern . 
`` Alyosha , we must put off kissing . 
We are not ready for that yet , and we shall have a long time to wait , '' she ended suddenly . 
`` Tell me rather why you who are so clever , so intellectual , so observant , choose a little idiot , an invalid like me ? 
Ah , Alyosha , I am awfully happy , for I do n't deserve you a bit . '' 
`` You do , Lise . 
I shall be leaving the monastery altogether in a few days . 
If I go into the world , I must marry . 
I know that . 
He told me to marry , too . 
Whom could I marry better than you - and who would have me except you ? 
I have been thinking it over . 
In the first place , you 've known me from a child and you 've a great many qualities I have n't . 
You are more light-hearted than I am ; above all , you are more innocent than I am . 
I have been brought into contact with many , many things already ... . 
Ah , you do n't know , but I , too , am a Karamazov . 
What does it matter if you do laugh and make jokes , and at me , too ? 
Go on laughing . 
I am so glad you do . 
You laugh like a little child , but you think like a martyr . '' 
`` Like a martyr ? 
How ? '' 
`` Yes , Lise , your question just now : whether we were n't showing contempt for that poor man by dissecting his soul - that was the question of a sufferer ... . 
You see , I do n't know how to express it , but anyone who thinks of such questions is capable of suffering . 
Sitting in your invalid chair you must have thought over many things already . '' 
`` Alyosha , give me your hand . 
Why are you taking it away ? '' 
murmured Lise in a failing voice , weak with happiness . 
`` Listen , Alyosha . 
What will you wear when you come out of the monastery ? 
What sort of suit ? 
Do n't laugh , do n't be angry , it 's very , very important to me . '' 
`` I have n't thought about the suit , Lise ; But I 'll wear whatever you like . '' 
`` I should like you to have a dark blue velvet coat , a white pique waistcoat , and a soft grey felt hat ... . 
Tell me , did you believe that I did n't care for you when I said I did n't mean what I wrote ? '' 
`` No , I did n't believe it . '' 
`` Oh , you insupportable person , you are incorrigible . '' 
`` You see , I knew that you seemed to care for me , but I pretended to believe that you did n't care for me to make it easier for you . '' 
`` That makes it worse ! 
Worse and better than all ! 
Alyosha , I am awfully fond of you . 
Just before you came this morning , I tried my fortune . 
I decided I would ask you for my letter , and if you brought it out calmly and gave it to me -LRB- as might have been expected from you -RRB- it would mean that you did not love me at all , that you felt nothing , and were simply a stupid boy , good for nothing , and that I am ruined . 
But you left the letter at home and that cheered me . 
You left it behind on purpose , so as not to give it back , because you knew I would ask for it ? 
That was it , was n't it ? '' 
`` Ah , Lise , it was not so a bit . 
The letter is with me now , and it was this morning , in this pocket . 
Here it is . '' 
Alyosha pulled the letter out laughing , and showed it her at a distance . 
`` But I am not going to give it to you . 
Look at it from here . '' 
`` Why , then you told a lie ? 
You , a monk , told a lie ! '' 
`` I told a lie if you like , '' Alyosha laughed , too . 
`` I told a lie so as not to give you back the letter . 
It 's very precious to me , '' he added suddenly , with strong feeling , and again he flushed . 
`` It always will be , and I wo n't give it up to anyone ! '' 
Lise looked at him joyfully . 
`` Alyosha , '' she murmured again , `` look at the door . 
Is n't mamma listening ? '' 
`` Very well , Lise , I 'll look ; but would n't it be better not to look ? 
Why suspect your mother of such meanness ? '' 
`` What meanness ? 
As for her spying on her daughter , it 's her right , it 's not meanness ! '' 
cried Lise , firing up . 
`` You may be sure , Alexey Fyodorovitch , that when I am a mother , if I have a daughter like myself I shall certainly spy on her ! '' 
`` Really , Lise ? 
That 's not right . '' 
`` Oh , my goodness ! 
What has meanness to do with it ? 
If she were listening to some ordinary worldly conversation , it would be meanness , but when her own daughter is shut up with a young man ... Listen , Alyosha , do you know I shall spy upon you as soon as we are married , and let me tell you I shall open all your letters and read them , so you may as well be prepared . '' 
`` Yes , of course , if so - '' muttered Alyosha , `` only it 's not right . '' 
`` Ah , how contemptuous ! 
Alyosha , dear , we wo n't quarrel the very first day . 
I 'd better tell you the whole truth . 
Of course , it 's very wrong to spy on people , and , of course , I am not right and you are , only I shall spy on you all the same . '' 
`` Do , then ; you wo n't find out anything , '' laughed Alyosha . 
`` And Alyosha , will you give in to me ? 
We must decide that too . '' 
`` I shall be delighted to , Lise , and certain to , only not in the most important things . 
Even if you do n't agree with me , I shall do my duty in the most important things . '' 
`` That 's right ; but let me tell you I am ready to give in to you not only in the most important matters , but in everything . 
And I am ready to vow to do so now - in everything , and for all my life ! '' 
cried Lise fervently , `` and I 'll do it gladly , gladly ! 
What 's more , I 'll swear never to spy on you , never once , never to read one of your letters . 
For you are right and I am not . 
And though I shall be awfully tempted to spy , I know that I wo n't do it since you consider it dishonourable . 
You are my conscience now ... . 
Listen , Alexey Fyodorovitch , why have you been so sad lately - both yesterday and to-day ? 
I know you have a lot of anxiety and trouble , but I see you have some special grief besides , some secret one , perhaps ? '' 
`` Yes , Lise , I have a secret one , too , '' answered Alyosha mournfully . 
`` I see you love me , since you guessed that . '' 
`` What grief ? 
What about ? 
Can you tell me ? '' 
asked Lise with timid entreaty . 
`` I 'll tell you later , Lise - afterwards , '' said Alyosha , confused . 
`` Now you would n't understand it perhaps - and perhaps I could n't explain it . '' 
`` I know your brothers and your father are worrying you , too . '' 
`` Yes , my brothers too , '' murmured Alyosha , pondering . 
`` I do n't like your brother Ivan , Alyosha , '' said Lise suddenly . 
He noticed this remark with some surprise , but did not answer it . 
`` My brothers are destroying themselves , '' he went on , `` my father , too . 
And they are destroying others with them . 
It 's ` the primitive force of the Karamazovs , ' as father Paissy said the other day , a crude , unbridled , earthly force . 
Does the spirit of God move above that force ? 
Even that I do n't know . 
I only know that I , too , am a Karamazov ... . 
Me a monk , a monk ! 
Am I a monk , Lise ? 
You said just now that I was . '' 
`` Yes , I did . '' 
`` And perhaps I do n't even believe in God . '' 
`` You do n't believe ? 
What is the matter ? '' 
said Lise quietly and gently . 
But Alyosha did not answer . 
There was something too mysterious , too subjective in these last words of his , perhaps obscure to himself , but yet torturing him . 
`` And now on the top of it all , my friend , the best man in the world is going , is leaving the earth ! 
If you knew , Lise , how bound up in soul I am with him ! 
And then I shall be left alone ... . 
I shall come to you , Lise ... . 
For the future we will be together . '' 
`` Yes , together , together ! 
Henceforward we shall be always together , all our lives ! 
Listen , kiss me , I allow you . '' 
Alyosha kissed her . 
`` Come , now go . 
Christ be with you ! '' 
and she made the sign of the cross over him . 
`` Make haste back to him while he is alive . 
I see I 've kept you cruelly . 
I 'll pray to-day for him and you . 
Alyosha , we shall be happy ! 
Shall we be happy , shall we ? '' 
`` I believe we shall , Lise . '' 
Alyosha thought it better not to go in to Madame Hohlakov and was going out of the house without saying good-bye to her . 
But no sooner had he opened the door than he found Madame Hohlakov standing before him . 
From the first word Alyosha guessed that she had been waiting on purpose to meet him . 
`` Alexey Fyodorovitch , this is awful . 
This is all childish nonsense and ridiculous . 
I trust you wo n't dream - It 's foolishness , nothing but foolishness ! '' 
she said , attacking him at once . 
`` Only do n't tell her that , '' said Alyosha , `` or she will be upset , and that 's bad for her now . '' 
`` Sensible advice from a sensible young man . 
Am I to understand that you only agreed with her from compassion for her invalid state , because you did n't want to irritate her by contradiction ? '' 
`` Oh no , not at all . 
I was quite serious in what I said , '' Alyosha declared stoutly . 
`` To be serious about it is impossible , unthinkable , and in the first place I shall never be at home to you again , and I shall take her away , you may be sure of that . '' 
`` But why ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` It 's all so far off . 
We may have to wait another year and a half . '' 
`` Ah , Alexey Fyodorovitch , that 's true , of course , and you 'll have time to quarrel and separate a thousand times in a year and a half . 
But I am so unhappy ! 
Though it 's such nonsense , it 's a great blow to me . 
I feel like Famusov in the last scene of Sorrow from Wit . 
You are Tchatsky and she is Sofya , and , only fancy , I 've run down to meet you on the stairs , and in the play the fatal scene takes place on the staircase . 
I heard it all ; I almost dropped . 
So this is the explanation of her dreadful night and her hysterics of late ! 
It means love to the daughter but death to the mother . 
I might as well be in my grave at once . 
And a more serious matter still , what is this letter she has written ? 
Show it me at once , at once ! '' 
`` No , there 's no need . 
Tell me , how is Katerina Ivanovna now ? 
I must know . '' 
`` She still lies in delirium ; she has not regained consciousness . 
Her aunts are here ; but they do nothing but sigh and give themselves airs . 
Herzenstube came , and he was so alarmed that I did n't know what to do for him . 
I nearly sent for a doctor to look after him . 
He was driven home in my carriage . 
And on the top of it all , you and this letter ! 
It 's true nothing can happen for a year and a half . 
In the name of all that 's holy , in the name of your dying elder , show me that letter , Alexey Fyodorovitch . 
I 'm her mother . 
Hold it in your hand , if you like , and I will read it so . '' 
`` No , I wo n't show it to you . 
Even if she sanctioned it , I would n't . 
I am coming to-morrow , and if you like , we can talk over many things , but now good-bye ! '' 
And Alyosha ran downstairs and into the street . 
Smerdyakov with a Guitar HE had no time to lose indeed . 
Even while he was saying good-bye to Lise , the thought had struck him that he must attempt some stratagem to find his brother Dmitri , who was evidently keeping out of his way . 
It was getting late , nearly three o'clock . 
Alyosha 's whole soul turned to the monastery , to his dying saint , but the necessity of seeing Dmitri outweighed everything . 
The conviction that a great inevitable catastrophe was about to happen grew stronger in Alyosha 's mind with every hour . 
What that catastrophe was , and what he would say at that moment to his brother , he could perhaps not have said definitely . 
`` Even if my benefactor must die without me , anyway I wo n't have to reproach myself all my life with the thought that I might have saved something and did not , but passed by and hastened home . 
If I do as I intend , I shall be following his great precept . '' 
His plan was to catch his brother Dmitri unawares , to climb over the fence , as he had the day before , get into the garden and sit in the summer-house . 
If Dmitri were not there , thought Alyosha , he would not announce himself to Foma or the women of the house , but would remain hidden in the summer-house , even if he had to wait there till evening . 
If , as before , Dmitri were lying in wait for Grushenka to come , he would be very likely to come to the summer-house . 
Alyosha did not , however , give much thought to the details of his plan , but resolved to act upon it , even if it meant not getting back to the monastery that day . 
Everything happened without hindrance , he climbed over the hurdle almost in the same spot as the day before , and stole into the summer-house unseen . 
He did not want to be noticed . 
The woman of the house and Foma too , if he were here , might be loyal to his brother and obey his instructions , and so refuse to let Alyosha come into the garden , or might warn Dmitri that he was being sought and inquired for . 
There was no one in the summer-house . 
Alyosha sat down and began to wait . 
He looked round the summer-house , which somehow struck him as a great deal more ancient than before . 
Though the day was just as fine as yesterday , it seemed a wretched little place this time . 
There was a circle on the table , left no doubt from the glass of brandy having been spilt the day before . 
Foolish and irrelevant ideas strayed about his mind , as they always do in a time of tedious waiting . 
He wondered , for instance , why he had sat down precisely in the same place as before , why not in the other seat . 
At last he felt very depressed - depressed by suspense and uncertainty . 
But he had not sat there more than a quarter of an hour , when he suddenly heard the thrum of a guitar somewhere quite close . 
People were sitting , or had only just sat down , somewhere in the bushes not more than twenty paces away . 
Alyosha suddenly recollected that on coming out of the summer-house the day before , he had caught a glimpse of an old green low garden-seat among the bushes on the left , by the fence . 
The people must be sitting on it now . 
Who were they ? 
A man 's voice suddenly began singing in a sugary falsetto , accompanying himself on the guitar : With invincible force I am bound to my dear . 
O Lord , have mercy On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
The voice ceased . 
It was a lackey 's tenor and a lackey 's song . 
Another voice , a woman 's , suddenly asked insinuatingly and bashfully , though with mincing affectation : `` Why have n't you been to see us for so long , Pavel Fyodorovitch ? 
Why do you always look down upon us ? '' 
`` Not at all answered a man 's voice politely , but with emphatic dignity . 
It was clear that the man had the best of the position , and that the woman was making advances . 
`` I believe the man must be Smerdyakov , '' thought Alyosha , `` from his voice . 
And the lady must be the daughter of the house here , who has come from Moscow , the one who wears the dress with a tail and goes to Marfa for soup . '' 
`` I am awfully fond of verses of all kinds , if they rhyme , '' the woman 's voice continued . 
`` Why do n't you go on ? '' 
The man sang again : What do I care for royal wealth If but my dear one be in health ? 
Lord have mercy On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
On her and on me ! 
`` It was even better last time , '' observed the woman 's voice . 
`` You sang ` If my darling be in health ' ; it sounded more tender . 
I suppose you 've forgotten to-day . '' 
`` Poetry is rubbish ! '' 
said Smerdyakov curtly . 
`` Oh , no ! 
I am very fond of poetry . '' 
`` So far as it 's poetry , it 's essential rubbish . 
Consider yourself , who ever talks in rhyme ? 
And if we were all to talk in rhyme , even though it were decreed by government , we should n't say much , should we ? 
Poetry is no good , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` How clever you are ! 
How is it you 've gone so deep into everything ? '' 
The woman 's voice was more and more insinuating . 
`` I could have done better than that . 
I could have known more than that , if it had not been for my destiny from my childhood up . 
I would have shot a man in a duel if he called me names because I am descended from a filthy beggar and have no father . 
And they used to throw it in my teeth in Moscow . 
It had reached them from here , thanks to Grigory Vassilyevitch . 
Grigory Vassilyevitch blames me for rebelling against my birth , but I would have sanctioned their killing me before I was born that I might not have come into the world at all . 
They used to say in the market , and your mamma too , with great lack of delicacy , set off telling me that her hair was like a mat on her head , and that she was short of five foot by a wee bit . 
Why talk of a wee bit while she might have said ' a little bit , ' like everyone else ? 
She wanted to make it touching , a regular peasant 's feeling . 
Can a Russian peasant be said to feel , in comparison with an educated man ? 
He ca n't be said to have feeling at all , in his ignorance . 
From my childhood up when I hear ' a wee bit , ' I am ready to burst with rage . 
I hate all Russia , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` If you 'd been a cadet in the army , or a young hussar , you would n't have talked like that , but would have drawn your sabre to defend all Russia . '' 
`` I do n't want to be a hussar , Marya Kondratyevna , and , what 's more , I should like to abolish all soldiers . '' 
`` And when an enemy comes , who is going to defend us ? '' 
`` There 's no need of defence . 
In 1812 there was a great invasion of Russia by Napoleon , first Emperor of the French , father of the present one , and it would have been a good thing if they had conquered us . 
A clever nation would have conquered a very stupid one and annexed it . 
We should have had quite different institutions . '' 
`` Are they so much better in their own country than we are ? 
I would n't change a dandy I know of for three young englishmen , '' observed Marya Kondratyevna tenderly , doubtless accompanying her words with a most languishing glance . 
`` That 's as one prefers . '' 
`` But you are just like a foreigner - just like a most gentlemanly foreigner . 
I tell you that , though it makes me bashful . '' 
`` If you care to know , the folks there and ours here are just alike in their vice . 
They are swindlers , only there the scoundrel wears polished boots and here he grovels in filth and sees no harm in it . 
The Russian people want thrashing , as Fyodor Pavlovitch said very truly yesterday , though he is mad , and all his children . '' 
`` You said yourself you had such a respect for Ivan Fyodorovitch . '' 
`` But he said I was a stinking lackey . 
He thinks that I might be unruly . 
He is mistaken there . 
If I had a certain sum in my pocket , I would have left here long ago . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is lower than any lackey in his behaviour , in his mind , and in his poverty . 
He does n't know how to do anything , and yet he is respected by everyone . 
I may be only a soup-maker , but with luck I could open a cafe restaurant in Petrovka , in Moscow , for my cookery is something special , and there 's no one in Moscow , except the foreigners , whose cookery is anything special . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch is a beggar , but if he were to challenge the son of the first count in the country , he 'd fight him . 
Though in what way is he better than I am ? 
For he is ever so much stupider than I am . 
Look at the money he has wasted without any need ! '' 
`` It must be lovely , a duel , '' Marya Kondratyevna observed suddenly . 
`` How so ? '' 
`` It must be so dreadful and so brave , especially when young officers with pistols in their hands pop at one another for the sake of some lady . 
A perfect picture ! 
Ah , if only girls were allowed to look on , I 'd give anything to see one ! '' 
`` It 's all very well when you are firing at someone , but when he is firing straight in your mug , you must feel pretty silly . 
You 'd be glad to run away , Marya Kondratyevna . '' 
`` You do n't mean you would run away ? '' 
But Smerdyakov did not deign to reply . 
After a moment 's silence the guitar tinkled again , and he sang again in the same falsetto : Whatever you may say , I shall go far away . 
Life will be bright and gay In the city far away . 
I shall not grieve , I shall not grieve at all , I do n't intend to grieve at all . 
Then something unexpected happened . 
Alyosha suddenly sneezed . 
They were silent . 
Alyosha got up and walked towards them . 
He found Smerdyakov dressed up and wearing polished boots , his hair pomaded , and perhaps curled . 
The guitar lay on the garden-seat . 
His companion was the daughter of the house , wearing a light-blue dress with a train two yards long . 
She was young and would not have been bad-looking , but that her face was so round and terribly freckled . 
`` Will my brother Dmitri soon be back ? 
asked Alyosha with as much composure as he could . 
Smerdyakov got up slowly ; Marya Kondratyevna rose too . 
`` How am I to know about Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? 
It 's not as if I were his keeper , '' answered Smerdyakov quietly , distinctly , and superciliously . 
`` But I simply asked whether you do know ? '' 
Alyosha explained . 
`` I know nothing of his whereabouts and do n't want to . '' 
`` But my brother told me that you let him know all that goes on in the house , and promised to let him know when Agrafena Alexandrovna comes . '' 
Smerdyakov turned a deliberate , unmoved glance upon him . 
`` And how did you get in this time , since the gate was bolted an hour ago ? '' 
he asked , looking at Alyosha . 
`` I came in from the back-alley , over the fence , and went straight to the summer-house . 
I hope you 'll forgive me , he added addressing Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` I was in a hurry to find my brother . '' 
`` Ach , as though we could take it amiss in you ! '' 
drawled Marya Kondratyevna , flattered by Alyosha 's apology . 
`` For Dmitri Fyodorovitch often goes to the summer-house in that way . 
We do n't know he is here and he is sitting in the summer-house . '' 
`` I am very anxious to find him , or to learn from you where he is now . 
Believe me , it 's on business of great importance to him . '' 
`` He never tells us , '' lisped Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` Though I used to come here as a friend , '' Smerdyakov began again , `` Dmitri Fyodorovitch has pestered me in a merciless way even here by his incessant questions about the master . 
` What news ? ' 
he 'll ask . 
` What 's going on in there now ? 
Who 's coming and going ? ' 
and ca n't I tell him something more . 
Twice already he 's threatened me with death `` With death ? '' 
Alyosha exclaimed in surprise . 
`` Do you suppose he 'd think much of that , with his temper , which you had a chance of observing yourself yesterday ? 
He says if I let Agrafena Alexandrovna in and she passes the night there , I 'll be the first to suffer for it . 
I am terribly afraid of him , and if I were not even more afraid of doing so , I ought to let the police know . 
God only knows what he might not do ! '' 
`` His honour said to him the other day , ` I 'll pound you in a mortar ! ' '' 
added Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` Oh , if it 's pounding in a mortar , it may be only talk , '' observed Alyosha . 
`` If I could meet him , I might speak to him about that too . '' 
`` Well , the only thing I can tell you is this , '' said Smerdyakov , as though thinking better of it ; `` I am here as an old friend and neighbour , and it would be odd if I did n't come . 
On the other hand , Ivan Fyodorovitch sent me first thing this morning to your brother 's lodging in Lake Street , without a letter , but with a message to Dmitri Fyodorovitch to go to dine with him at the restaurant here , in the marketplace . 
I went , but did n't find Dmitri Fyodorovitch at home , though it was eight o'clock . 
` He 's been here , but he is quite gone , ' those were the very words of his landlady . 
It 's as though there was an understanding between them . 
Perhaps at this moment he is in the restaurant with Ivan Fyodorovitch , for Ivan Fyodorovitch has not been home to dinner and Fyodor Pavlovitch dined alone an hour ago , and is gone to lie down . 
But I beg you most particularly not to speak of me and of what I have told you , for he 'd kill me for nothing at all . '' 
`` Brother Ivan invited Dmitri to the restaurant to-day ? '' 
repeated Alyosha quickly . 
`` That 's so . '' 
`` The Metropolis tavern in the marketplace ? '' 
`` The very same . '' 
`` That 's quite likely , '' cried Alyosha , much excited . 
`` Thank you , Smerdyakov ; that 's important . 
I 'll go there at once . '' 
`` Do n't betray me , '' Smerdyakov called after him . 
`` Oh , no , I 'll go to the tavern as though by chance . 
Do n't be anxious . '' 
`` But wait a minute , I 'll open the gate to you , '' cried Marya Kondratyevna . 
`` No ; it 's a short cut , I 'll get over the fence again . '' 
What he had heard threw Alyosha into great agitation . 
He ran to the tavern . 
It was impossible for him to go into the tavern in his monastic dress , but he could inquire at the entrance for his brothers and call them down . 
But just as he reached the tavern , a window was flung open , and his brother Ivan called down to him from it . 
`` Alyosha , ca n't you come up here to me ? 
I shall be awfully grateful . '' 
`` To be sure I can , only I do n't quite know whether in this dress - '' `` But I am in a room apart . 
Come up the steps ; I 'll run down to meet you . '' 
A minute later Alyosha was sitting beside his brother . 
Ivan was alone dining . 
The Brothers Make Friends IVAN was not , however , in a separate room , but only in a place shut off by a screen , so that it was unseen by other people in the room . 
It was the first room from the entrance with a buffet along the wall . 
Waiters were continually darting to and fro in it . 
The only customer in the room was an old retired military man drinking tea in a corner . 
But there was the usual bustle going on in the other rooms of the tavern ; there were shouts for the waiters , the sound of popping corks , the click of billiard balls , the drone of the organ . 
Alyosha knew that Ivan did not usually visit this tavern and disliked taverns in general . 
So he must have come here , he reflected , simply to meet Dmitri by arrangement . 
Yet Dmitri was not there . 
`` Shall I order you fish , soup , or anything . 
You do n't live on tea alone , I suppose , '' cried Ivan , apparently delighted at having got hold of Alyosha . 
He had finished dinner and was drinking tea . 
`` Let me have soup , and tea afterwards , I am hungry , '' said Alyosha gaily . 
`` And cherry jam ? 
They have it here . 
You remember how you used to love cherry jam when you were little ? '' 
`` You remember that ? 
Let me have jam too , I like it still . '' 
Ivan rang for the waiter and ordered soup , jam , and tea . 
`` I remember everything , Alyosha , I remember you till you were eleven , I was nearly fifteen . 
There 's such a difference between fifteen and eleven that brothers are never companions at those ages . 
I do n't know whether I was fond of you even . 
When I went away to Moscow for the first few years I never thought of you at all . 
Then , when you came to Moscow yourself , we only met once somewhere , I believe . 
And now I 've been here more than three months , and so far we have scarcely said a word to each other . 
To-morrow I am going away , and I was just thinking as I sat here how I could see you to say good-bye and just then you passed . '' 
`` Were you very anxious to see me , then ? '' 
`` Very . 
I want to get to know you once for all , and I want you to know me . 
And then to say good-bye . 
I believe it 's always best to get to know people just before leaving them . 
I 've noticed how you 've been looking at me these three months . 
There has been a continual look of expectation in your eyes , and I ca n't endure that . 
That 's how it is I 've kept away from you . 
But in the end I have learned to respect you . 
The little man stands firm , I thought . 
Though I am laughing , I am serious . 
You do stand firm , do n't you ? 
I like people who are firm like that whatever it is they stand by , even if they are such little fellows as you . 
Your expectant eyes ceased to annoy me , I grew fond of them in the end , those expectant eyes . 
You seem to love me for some reason , Alyosha ? '' 
`` I do love you , Ivan . 
Dmitri says of you - Ivan is a tomb ! 
I say of you , Ivan is a riddle . 
You are a riddle to me even now . 
But I understand something in you , and I did not understand it till this morning . '' 
`` What 's that ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` You wo n't be angry ? '' 
Alyosha laughed too . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` That you are just as young as other young men of three and twenty , that you are just a young and fresh and nice boy , green in fact ! 
Now , have I insulted you dreadfully ? '' 
`` On the contrary , I am struck by a coincidence , '' cried Ivan , warmly and good-humouredly . 
`` Would you believe it that ever since that scene with her , I have thought of nothing else but my youthful greenness , and just as though you guessed that , you begin about it . 
Do you know I 've been sitting here thinking to myself : that if I did n't believe in life , if I lost faith in the woman I love , lost faith in the order of things , were convinced , in fact , that everything is a disorderly , damnable , and perhaps devil-ridden chaos , if I were struck by every horror of man 's disillusionment - still I should want to live and , having once tasted of the cup , I would not turn away from it till I had drained it ! 
At thirty , though , I shall be sure to leave the cup , even if I 've not emptied it , and turn away - where I do n't know . 
But till I am thirty , I know that my youth will triumph over everything - every disillusionment , every disgust with life . 
I 've asked myself many times whether there is in the world any despair that would overcome this frantic and perhaps unseemly thirst for life in me , and I 've come to the conclusion that there is n't , that is till I am thirty , and then I shall lose it of myself , I fancy . 
Some drivelling consumptive moralists - and poets especially - often call that thirst for life base . 
It 's a feature of the Karamazovs , it 's true , that thirst for life regardless of everything ; you have it no doubt too , but why is it base ? 
The centripetal force on our planet is still fearfully strong , Alyosha . 
I have a longing for life , and I go on living in spite of logic . 
Though I may not believe in the order of the universe , yet I love the sticky little leaves as they open in spring . 
I love the blue sky , I love some people , whom one loves you know sometimes without knowing why . 
I love some great deeds done by men , though I 've long ceased perhaps to have faith in them , yet from old habit one 's heart prizes them . 
Here they have brought the soup for you , eat it , it will do you good . 
It 's first-rate soup , they know how to make it here . 
I want to travel in Europe , Alyosha , I shall set off from here . 
And yet I know that I am only going to a graveyard , but it 's a most precious graveyard , that 's what it is ! 
Precious are the dead that lie there , every stone over them speaks of such burning life in the past , of such passionate faith in their work , their truth , their struggle and their science , that I know I shall fall on the ground and kiss those stones and weep over them ; though I 'm convinced in my heart that it 's long been nothing but a graveyard . 
And I shall not weep from despair , but simply because I shall be happy in my tears , I shall steep my soul in emotion . 
I love the sticky leaves in spring , the blue sky - that 's all it is . 
It 's not a matter of intellect or logic , it 's loving with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
One loves the first strength of one 's youth . 
Do you understand anything of my tirade , Alyosha ? '' 
Ivan laughed suddenly . 
`` I understand too well , Ivan . 
One longs to love with one 's inside , with one 's stomach . 
You said that so well and I am awfully glad that you have such a longing for life , '' cried Alyosha . 
`` I think everyone should love life above everything in the world . '' 
`` Love life more than the meaning of it ? '' 
`` Certainly , love it , regardless of logic as you say , it must be regardless of logic , and it 's only then one will understand the meaning of it . 
I have thought so a long time . 
Half your work is done , Ivan , you love life , now you 've only to try to do the second half and you are saved . '' 
`` You are trying to save me , but perhaps I am not lost ! 
And what does your second half mean ? '' 
`` Why , one has to raise up your dead , who perhaps have not died after all . 
Come , let me have tea . 
I am so glad of our talk , Ivan . '' 
`` I see you are feeling inspired . 
I am awfully fond of such professions de foi * from such - novices . 
You are a steadfast person , Alexey . 
Is it true that you mean to leave the monastery ? '' 
* Professions of faith . 
`` Yes , my elder sends me out into the world . '' 
`` We shall see each other then in the world . 
We shall meet before I am thirty , when I shall begin to turn aside from the cup . 
Father does n't want to turn aside from his cup till he is seventy , he dreams of hanging on to eighty in fact , so he says . 
He means it only too seriously , though he is a buffoon . 
He stands on a firm rock , too , he stands on his sensuality though after we are thirty , indeed , there may be nothing else to stand on ... . 
But to hang on to seventy is nasty , better only to thirty ; one might retain ' a shadow of nobility ' by deceiving oneself . 
Have you seen Dmitri to-day ? '' 
`` No , but I saw Smerdyakov , '' and Alyosha rapidly , though minutely , described his meeting with Smerdyakov . 
Ivan began listening anxiously and questioned him . 
`` But he begged me not to tell Dmitri that he had told me about him , '' added Alyosha . 
Ivan frowned and pondered . 
`` Are you frowning on Smerdyakov 's account ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Yes , on his account . 
Damn him , I certainly did want to see Dmitri , but now there 's no need , '' said Ivan reluctantly . 
`` But are you really going so soon , brother ? '' 
`` What of Dmitri and father ? 
how will it end ? '' 
asked Alyosha anxiously . 
`` You are always harping upon it ! 
What have I to do with it ? 
Am I my brother Dmitri 's keeper ? '' 
Ivan snapped irritably , but then he suddenly smiled bitterly . 
`` Cain 's answer about his murdered brother , was n't it ? 
Perhaps that 's what you 're thinking at this moment ? 
Well damn it all , I ca n't stay here to be their keeper , can I ? 
I 've finished what I had to do , and I am going . 
Do you imagine I am jealous of Dmitri , that I 've been trying to steal his beautiful Katerina Ivanovna for the last three months ? 
Nonsense , I had business of my own . 
I finished it . 
I am going . 
I finished it just now , you were witness . '' 
`` At Katerina Ivanovna 's ? '' 
`` Yes , and I 've released myself once for all . 
And after all , what have I to do with Dmitri ? 
Dmitri does n't come in . 
I had my own business to settle with Katerina Ivanovna . 
You know , on the contrary , that Dmitri behaved as though there was an understanding between us . 
I did n't ask to do it , but he solemnly handed her over to me and gave us his blessing . 
It 's all too funny . 
Ah , Alyosha , if you only knew how light my heart is now ! 
Would you believe it , I sat here eating my dinner and was nearly ordering champagne to celebrate my first hour of freedom . 
Tfoo ! 
It 's been going on nearly six months , and all at once I 've thrown it off . 
I could never have guessed even yesterday , how easy it would be to put an end to it if I wanted . '' 
`` You are speaking of your love , Ivan ? '' 
`` Of my love , if you like . 
I fell in love with the young lady , I worried myself over her and she worried me . 
I sat watching over her ... and all at once it 's collapsed ! 
I spoke this morning with inspiration , but I went away and roared with laughter . 
Would you believe it ? 
Yes , it 's the literal truth . '' 
`` You seem very merry about it now , '' observed Alyosha , looking into his face , which had suddenly grown brighter . 
`` But how could I tell that I did n't care for her a bit ! 
Ha ha ! 
It appears after all I did n't . 
And yet how she attracted me ! 
How attractive she was just now when I made my speech ! 
And do you know she attracts me awfully even now , yet how easy it is to leave her . 
Do you think I am boasting ? '' 
`` No , only perhaps it was n't love . '' 
`` Alyosha , '' laughed Ivan , `` do n't make reflections about love , it 's unseemly for you . 
How you rushed into the discussion this morning ! 
I 've forgotten to kiss you for it ... . 
But how she tormented me ! 
It certainly was sitting by a ` laceration . ' 
Ah , she knew how I loved her ! 
She loved me and not Dmitri , '' Ivan insisted gaily . 
`` Her feeling for Dmitri was simply a self-laceration . 
All I told her just now was perfectly true , but the worst of it is , it may take her fifteen or twenty years to find out that she does n't care for Dmitri , and loves me whom she torments , and perhaps she may never find it out at all , in spite of her lesson to-day . 
Well , it 's better so ; I can simply go away for good . 
By the way , how is she now ? 
What happened after I departed ? '' 
Alyosha told him she had been hysterical , and that she was now , he heard , unconscious and delirious . 
`` Is n't Madame Hohlakov laying it on ? '' 
`` I think not . '' 
`` I must find out . 
Nobody dies of hysterics , though . 
They do n't matter . 
God gave woman hysterics as a relief . 
I wo n't go to her at all . 
Why push myself forward again ? '' 
`` But you told her that she had never cared for you . '' 
`` I did that on purpose . 
Alyosha , shall I call for some champagne ? 
Let us drink to my freedom . 
Ah , if only you knew how glad I am ! '' 
`` No , brother , we had better not drink , '' said Alyosha suddenly . 
`` Besides I feel somehow depressed . '' 
`` Yes , you 've been depressed a long time , I 've noticed it . '' 
`` Have you settled to go to-morrow morning , then ? '' 
`` Morning ? 
I did n't say I should go in the morning ... . 
But perhaps it may be the morning . 
Would you believe it , I dined here to-day only to avoid dining with the old man , I loathe him so . 
I should have left long ago , so far as he is concerned . 
But why are you so worried about my going away ? 
We 've plenty of time before I go , an eternity ! '' 
`` If you are going away to-morrow , what do you mean by an eternity ? '' 
`` But what does it matter to us ? '' 
laughed Ivan . 
`` We 've time enough for our talk , for what brought us here . 
Why do you look so surprised ? 
Answer : why have we met here ? 
To talk of my love for Katerina Ivanovna , of the old man and Dmitri ? 
of foreign travel ? 
of the fatal position of Russia ? 
of the Emperor Napoleon ? 
Is that it ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Then you know what for . 
It 's different for other people ; but we in our green youth have to settle the eternal questions first of all . 
That 's what we care about . 
Young Russia is talking about nothing but the eternal questions now . 
just when the old folks are all taken up with practical questions . 
Why have you been looking at me in expectation for the last three months ? 
To ask me , ` What do you believe , or do n't you believe at all ? ' 
That 's what your eyes have been meaning for these three months , have n't they ? '' 
`` Perhaps so , '' smiled Alyosha . 
`` You are not laughing at me , now , Ivan ? 
`` Me laughing ! 
I do n't want to wound my little brother who has been watching me with such expectation for three months . 
Alyosha , look straight at me ! 
Of course , I am just such a little boy as you are , only not a novice . 
And what have Russian boys been doing up till now , some of them , I mean ? 
In this stinking tavern , for instance , here , they meet and sit down in a corner . 
They 've never met in their lives before and , when they go out of the tavern , they wo n't meet again for forty years . 
And what do they talk about in that momentary halt in the tavern ? 
Of the eternal questions , of the existence of God and immortality . 
And those who do not believe in God talk of socialism or anarchism , of the transformation of all humanity on a new pattern , so that it all comes to the same , they 're the same questions turned inside out . 
And masses , masses of the most original Russian boys do nothing but talk of the eternal questions ! 
Is n't it so ? '' 
`` Yes , for real Russians the questions of God 's existence and of immortality , or , as you say , the same questions turned inside out , come first and foremost , of course , and so they should , '' said Alyosha , still watching his brother with the same gentle and inquiring smile . 
`` Well , Alyosha , it 's sometimes very unwise to be a Russian at all , but anything stupider than the way Russian boys spend their time one can hardly imagine . 
But there 's one Russian boy called Alyosha I am awfully fond of . '' 
`` How nicely you put that in ! '' 
Alyosha laughed suddenly . 
`` Well , tell me where to begin , give your orders . 
The existence of God , eh ? '' 
`` Begin where you like . 
You declared yesterday at father 's that there was no God . '' 
Alyosha looked searchingly at his brother . 
`` I said that yesterday at dinner on purpose to tease you and I saw your eyes glow . 
But now I 've no objection to discussing with you , and I say so very seriously . 
I want to be friends with you , Alyosha , for I have no friends and want to try it . 
Well , only fancy , perhaps I too accept God , '' laughed Ivan ; `` that 's a surprise for you , is n't it ? '' 
`` Yes of course , if you are not joking now . '' 
`` Joking ? 
I was told at the elder 's yesterday that I was joking . 
You know , dear boy , there was an old sinner in the eighteenth century who declared that , if there were no God , he would have to be invented . 
S'il n'existait pas Dieu , il faudrait l'inventer . 
And man has actually invented God . 
And what 's strange , what would be marvellous , is not that God should really exist ; the marvel is that such an idea , the idea of the necessity of God , could enter the head of such a savage , vicious beast as man . 
So holy it is , so touching , so wise and so great a credit it does to man . 
As for me , I 've long resolved not to think whether man created God or God man . 
And I wo n't go through all the axioms laid down by Russian boys on that subject , all derived from European hypotheses ; for what 's a hypothesis there is an axiom with the Russian boy , and not only with the boys but with their teachers too , for our Russian professors are often just the same boys themselves . 
And so I omit all the hypotheses . 
For what are we aiming at now ? 
I am trying to explain as quickly as possible my essential nature , that is what manner of man I am , what I believe in , and for what I hope , that 's it , is n't it ? 
And therefore I tell you that I accept God simply . 
But you must note this : if God exists and if He really did create the world , then , as we all know , He created it according to the geometry of Euclid and the human mind with the conception of only three dimensions in space . 
Yet there have been and still are geometricians and philosophers , and even some of the most distinguished , who doubt whether the whole universe , or to speak more widely , the whole of being , was only created in Euclid 's geometry ; they even dare to dream that two parallel lines , which according to Euclid can never meet on earth , may meet somewhere in infinity . 
I have come to the conclusion that , since I ca n't understand even that , I ca n't expect to understand about God . 
I acknowledge humbly that I have no faculty for settling such questions , I have a Euclidian earthly mind , and how could I solve problems that are not of this world ? 
And I advise you never to think about it either , my dear Alyosha , especially about God , whether He exists or not . 
All such questions are utterly inappropriate for a mind created with an idea of only three dimensions . 
And so I accept God and am glad to , and what 's more , I accept His wisdom , His purpose which are utterly beyond our ken ; I believe in the underlying order and the meaning of life ; I believe in the eternal harmony in which they say we shall one day be blended . 
I believe in the Word to Which the universe is striving , and Which Itself was ` with God , ' and Which Itself is God and so on , and so on , to infinity . 
There are all sorts of phrases for it . 
I seem to be on the right path , do n't I ' ? 
Yet would you believe it , in the final result I do n't accept this world of God 's , and , although I know it exists , I do n't accept it at all . 
It 's not that I do n't accept God , you must understand , it 's the world created by Him I do n't and can not accept . 
Let me make it plain . 
I believe like a child that suffering will be healed and made up for , that all the humiliating absurdity of human contradictions will vanish like a pitiful mirage , like the despicable fabrication of the impotent and infinitely small Euclidian mind of man , that in the world 's finale , at the moment of eternal harmony , something so precious will come to pass that it will suffice for all hearts , for the comforting of all resentments , for the atonement of all the crimes of humanity , of all the blood they 've shed ; that it will make it not only possible to forgive but to justify all that has happened with men - but thought all that may come to pass , I do n't accept it . 
I wo n't accept it . 
Even if parallel lines do meet and I see it myself , I shall see it and say that they 've met , but still I wo n't accept it . 
That 's what 's at the root of me , Alyosha ; that 's my creed . 
I am in earnest in what I say . 
I began our talk as stupidly as I could on purpose , but I 've led up to my confession , for that 's all you want . 
You did n't want to hear about God , but only to know what the brother you love lives by . 
And so I 've told you . '' 
Ivan concluded his long tirade with marked and unexpected feeling . 
`` And why did you begin ` as stupidly as you could ' ? '' 
asked Alyosha , looking dreamily at him . 
`` To begin with , for the sake of being Russian . 
Russian conversations on such subjects are always carried on inconceivably stupidly . 
And secondly , the stupider one is , the closer one is to reality . 
The stupider one is , the clearer one is . 
Stupidity is brief and artless , while intelligence wriggles and hides itself . 
Intelligence is a knave , but stupidity is honest and straight forward . 
I 've led the conversation to my despair , and the more stupidly I have presented it , the better for me . '' 
`` You will explain why you do n't accept the world ? '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` To be sure I will , it 's not a secret , that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
Dear little brother , I do n't want to corrupt you or to turn you from your stronghold , perhaps I want to be healed by you . '' 
Ivan smiled suddenly quite like a little gentle child . 
Alyosha had never seen such a smile on his face before . 
Rebellion `` I MUST make one confession '' Ivan began . 
`` I could never understand how one can love one 's neighbours . 
It 's just one 's neighbours , to my mind , that one ca n't love , though one might love those at a distance . 
I once read somewhere of John the Merciful , a saint , that when a hungry , frozen beggar came to him , he took him into his bed , held him in his arms , and began breathing into his mouth , which was putrid and loathsome from some awful disease . 
I am convinced that he did that from ` self-laceration , ' from the self-laceration of falsity , for the sake of the charity imposed by duty , as a penance laid on him . 
For anyone to love a man , he must be hidden , for as soon as he shows his face , love is gone . '' 
`` Father Zossima has talked of that more than once , '' observed Alyosha ; `` he , too , said that the face of a man often hinders many people not practised in love , from loving him . 
But yet there 's a great deal of love in mankind , and almost Christ-like love . 
I know that myself , Ivan . '' 
`` Well , I know nothing of it so far , and ca n't understand it , and the innumerable mass of mankind are with me there . 
The question is , whether that 's due to men 's bad qualities or whether it 's inherent in their nature . 
To my thinking , Christ-like love for men is a miracle impossible on earth . 
He was God . 
But we are not gods . 
Suppose I , for instance , suffer intensely . 
Another can never know how much I suffer , because he is another and not I. And what 's more , a man is rarely ready to admit another 's suffering -LRB- as though it were a distinction -RRB- . 
Why wo n't he admit it , do you think ? 
Because I smell unpleasant , because I have a stupid face , because I once trod on his foot . 
Besides , there is suffering and suffering ; degrading , humiliating suffering such as humbles me - hunger , for instance - my benefactor will perhaps allow me ; but when you come to higher suffering - for an idea , for instance - he will very rarely admit that , perhaps because my face strikes him as not at all what he fancies a man should have who suffers for an idea . 
And so he deprives me instantly of his favour , and not at all from badness of heart . 
Beggars , especially genteel beggars , ought never to show themselves , but to ask for charity through the newspapers . 
One can love one 's neighbours in the abstract , or even at a distance , but at close quarters it 's almost impossible . 
If it were as on the stage , in the ballet , where if beggars come in , they wear silken rags and tattered lace and beg for alms dancing gracefully , then one might like looking at them . 
But even then we should not love them . 
But enough of that . 
I simply wanted to show you my point of view . 
I meant to speak of the suffering of mankind generally , but we had better confine ourselves to the sufferings of the children . 
That reduces the scope of my argument to a tenth of what it would be . 
Still we 'd better keep to the children , though it does weaken my case . 
But , in the first place , children can be loved even at close quarters , even when they are dirty , even when they are ugly -LRB- I fancy , though , children never are ugly -RRB- . 
The second reason why I wo n't speak of grown-up people is that , besides being disgusting and unworthy of love , they have a compensation - they 've eaten the apple and know good and evil , and they have become ` like gods . ' 
They go on eating it still . 
But the children have n't eaten anything , and are so far innocent . 
Are you fond of children , Alyosha ? 
I know you are , and you will understand why I prefer to speak of them . 
If they , too , suffer horribly on earth , they must suffer for their fathers ' sins , they must be punished for their fathers , who have eaten the apple ; but that reasoning is of the other world and is incomprehensible for the heart of man here on earth . 
The innocent must not suffer for another 's sins , and especially such innocents ! 
You may be surprised at me , Alyosha , but I am awfully fond of children , too . 
And observe , cruel people , the violent , the rapacious , the Karamazovs are sometimes very fond of children . 
Children while they are quite little - up to seven , for instance - are so remote from grown-up people they are different creatures , as it were , of a different species . 
I knew a criminal in prison who had , in the course of his career as a burglar , murdered whole families , including several children . 
But when he was in prison , he had a strange affection for them . 
He spent all his time at his window , watching the children playing in the prison yard . 
He trained one little boy to come up to his window and made great friends with him ... . 
You do n't know why I am telling you all this , Alyosha ? 
My head aches and I am sad . '' 
`` You speak with a strange air , '' observed Alyosha uneasily , `` as though you were not quite yourself . '' 
`` By the way , a Bulgarian I met lately in Moscow , '' Ivan went on , seeming not to hear his brother 's words , `` told me about the crimes committed by Turks and Circassians in all parts of Bulgaria through fear of a general rising of the Slavs . 
They burn villages , murder , outrage women and children , they nail their prisoners by the ears to the fences , leave them so till morning , and in the morning they hang them - all sorts of things you ca n't imagine . 
People talk sometimes of bestial cruelty , but that 's a great injustice and insult to the beasts ; a beast can never be so cruel as a man , so artistically cruel . 
The tiger only tears and gnaws , that 's all he can do . 
He would never think of nailing people by the ears , even if he were able to do it . 
These Turks took a pleasure in torturing children , - too ; cutting the unborn child from the mothers womb , and tossing babies up in the air and catching them on the points of their bayonets before their mothers ' eyes . 
Doing it before the mothers ' eyes was what gave zest to the amusement . 
Here is another scene that I thought very interesting . 
Imagine a trembling mother with her baby in her arms , a circle of invading Turks around her . 
They 've planned a diversion : they pet the baby , laugh to make it laugh . 
They succeed , the baby laughs . 
At that moment a Turk points a pistol four inches from the baby 's face . 
The baby laughs with glee , holds out its little hands to the pistol , and he pulls the trigger in the baby 's face and blows out its brains . 
Artistic , was n't it ? 
By the way , Turks are particularly fond of sweet things , they say . '' 
`` Brother , what are you driving at ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` I think if the devil does n't exist , but man has created him , he has created him in his own image and likeness . '' 
`` Just as he did God , then ? '' 
observed Alyosha . '' 
` It 's wonderful how you can turn words , ' as Polonius says in Hamlet , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` You turn my words against me . 
Well , I am glad . 
Yours must be a fine God , if man created Him in his image and likeness . 
You asked just now what I was driving at . 
You see , I am fond of collecting certain facts , and , would you believe , I even copy anecdotes of a certain sort from newspapers and books , and I 've already got a fine collection . 
The Turks , of course , have gone into it , but they are foreigners . 
I have specimens from home that are even better than the Turks . 
You know we prefer beating - rods and scourges - that 's our national institution . 
Nailing ears is unthinkable for us , for we are , after all , Europeans . 
But the rod and the scourge we have always with us and they can not be taken from us . 
Abroad now they scarcely do any beating . 
Manners are more humane , or laws have been passed , so that they do n't dare to flog men now . 
But they make up for it in another way just as national as ours . 
And so national that it would be practically impossible among us , though I believe we are being inoculated with it , since the religious movement began in our aristocracy . 
I have a charming pamphlet , translated from the French , describing how , quite recently , five years ago , a murderer , Richard , was executed - a young man , I believe , of three and twenty , who repented and was converted to the Christian faith at the very scaffold . 
This Richard was an illegitimate child who was given as a child of six by his parents to some shepherds on the Swiss mountains . 
They brought him up to work for them . 
He grew up like a little wild beast among them . 
The shepherds taught him nothing , and scarcely fed or clothed him , but sent him out at seven to herd the flock in cold and wet , and no one hesitated or scrupled to treat him so . 
Quite the contrary , they thought they had every right , for Richard had been given to them as a chattel , and they did not even see the necessity of feeding him . 
Richard himself describes how in those years , like the Prodigal Son in the Gospel , he longed to eat of the mash given to the pigs , which were fattened for sale . 
But they would n't even give that , and beat him when he stole from the pigs . 
And that was how he spent all his childhood and his youth , till he grew up and was strong enough to go away and be a thief . 
The savage began to earn his living as a day labourer in Geneva . 
He drank what he earned , he lived like a brute , and finished by killing and robbing an old man . 
He was caught , tried , and condemned to death . 
They are not sentimentalists there . 
And in prison he was immediately surrounded by pastors , members of Christian brotherhoods , philanthropic ladies , and the like . 
They taught him to read and write in prison , and expounded the Gospel to him . 
They exhorted him , worked upon him , drummed at him incessantly , till at last he solemnly confessed his crime . 
He was converted . 
He wrote to the court himself that he was a monster , but that in the end God had vouchsafed him light and shown grace . 
All Geneva was in excitement about him - all philanthropic and religious Geneva . 
All the aristocratic and well-bred society of the town rushed to the prison , kissed Richard and embraced him ; ` You are our brother , you have found grace . ' 
And Richard does nothing but weep with emotion , ` Yes , I 've found grace ! 
All my youth and childhood I was glad of pigs ' food , but now even I have found grace . 
I am dying in the Lord . ' 
` Yes , Richard , die in the Lord ; you have shed blood and must die . 
Though it 's not your fault that you knew not the Lord , when you coveted the pigs ' food and were beaten for stealing it -LRB- which was very wrong of you , for stealing is forbidden -RRB- ; but you 've shed blood and you must die . 
` And on the last day , Richard , perfectly limp , did nothing but cry and repeat every minute : ` This is my happiest day . 
I am going to the Lord . ' 
` Yes , ' cry the pastors and the judges and philanthropic ladies . 
` This is the happiest day of your life , for you are going to the Lord ! ' 
They all walk or drive to the scaffold in procession behind the prison van . 
At the scaffold they call to Richard : ` Die , brother , die in the Lord , for even thou hast found grace ! ' 
And so , covered with his brothers ' kisses , Richard is dragged on to the scaffold , and led to the guillotine . 
And they chopped off his head in brotherly fashion , because he had found grace . 
Yes , that 's characteristic . 
That pamphlet is translated into Russian by some Russian philanthropists of aristocratic rank and evangelical aspirations , and has been distributed gratis for the enlightenment of the people . 
The case of Richard is interesting because it 's national . 
Though to us it 's absurd to cut off a man 's head , because he has become our brother and has found grace , yet we have our own speciality , which is all but worse . 
Our historical pastime is the direct satisfaction of inflicting pain . 
There are lines in Nekrassov describing how a peasant lashes a horse on the eyes , ` on its meek eyes , ' everyone must have seen it . 
It 's peculiarly Russian . 
He describes how a feeble little nag has foundered under too heavy a load and can not move . 
The peasant beats it , beats it savagely , beats it at last not knowing what he is doing in the intoxication of cruelty , thrashes it mercilessly over and over again . 
` However weak you are , you must pull , if you die for it . ' 
The nag strains , and then he begins lashing the poor defenceless creature on its weeping , on its ` meek eyes . ' 
The frantic beast tugs and draws the load , trembling all over , gasping for breath , moving sideways , with a sort of unnatural spasmodic action - it 's awful in Nekrassov . 
But that only a horse , and God has horses to be beaten . 
So the Tatars have taught us , and they left us the knout as a remembrance of it . 
But men , too , can be beaten . 
A well-educated , cultured gentleman and his wife beat their own child with a birch-rod , a girl of seven . 
I have an exact account of it . 
The papa was glad that the birch was covered with twigs . 
` It stings more , ' said he , and so be began stinging his daughter . 
I know for a fact there are people who at every blow are worked up to sensuality , to literal sensuality , which increases progressively at every blow they inflict . 
They beat for a minute , for five minutes , for ten minutes , more often and more savagely . 
The child screams . 
At last the child can not scream , it gasps , ` Daddy daddy ! ' 
By some diabolical unseemly chance the case was brought into court . 
A counsel is engaged . 
The Russian people have long called a barrister ' a conscience for hire . ' 
The counsel protests in his client 's defence . 
` It 's such a simple thing , ' he says , ` an everyday domestic event . 
A father corrects his child . 
To our shame be it said , it is brought into court . ' 
The jury , convinced by him , give a favourable verdict . 
The public roars with delight that the torturer is acquitted . 
Ah , pity I was n't there ! 
I would have proposed to raise a subscription in his honour ! 
Charming pictures . 
`` But I 've still better things about children . 
I 've collected a great , great deal about Russian children , Alyosha . 
There was a little girl of five who was hated by her father and mother , ` most worthy and respectable people , of good education and breeding . ' 
You see , I must repeat again , it is a peculiar characteristic of many people , this love of torturing children , and children only . 
To all other types of humanity these torturers behave mildly and benevolently , like cultivated and humane Europeans ; but they are very fond of tormenting children , even fond of children themselves in that sense . 
it 's just their defencelessness that tempts the tormentor , just the angelic confidence of the child who has no refuge and no appeal , that sets his vile blood on fire . 
In every man , of course , a demon lies hidden - the demon of rage , the demon of lustful heat at the screams of the tortured victim , the demon of lawlessness let off the chain , the demon of diseases that follow on vice , gout , kidney disease , and so on . 
`` This poor child of five was subjected to every possible torture by those cultivated parents . 
They beat her , thrashed her , kicked her for no reason till her body was one bruise . 
Then , they went to greater refinements of cruelty - shut her up all night in the cold and frost in a privy , and because she did n't ask to be taken up at night -LRB- as though a child of five sleeping its angelic , sound sleep could be trained to wake and ask -RRB- , they smeared her face and filled her mouth with excrement , and it was her mother , her mother did this . 
And that mother could sleep , hearing the poor child 's groans ! 
Can you understand why a little creature , who ca n't even understand what 's done to her , should beat her little aching heart with her tiny fist in the dark and the cold , and weep her meek unresentful tears to dear , kind God to protect her ? 
Do you understand that , friend and brother , you pious and humble novice ? 
Do you understand why this infamy must be and is permitted ? 
Without it , I am told , man could not have existed on earth , for he could not have known good and evil . 
Why should he know that diabolical good and evil when it costs so much ? 
Why , the whole world of knowledge is not worth that child 's prayer to dear , kind God ' ! 
I say nothing of the sufferings of grown-up people , they have eaten the apple , damn them , and the devil take them all ! 
But these little ones ! 
I am making you suffer , Alyosha , you are not yourself . 
I 'll leave off if you like . '' 
`` Nevermind . 
I want to suffer too , '' muttered Alyosha . 
`` One picture , only one more , because it 's so curious , so characteristic , and I have only just read it in some collection of Russian antiquities . 
I 've forgotten the name . 
I must look it up . 
It was in the darkest days of serfdom at the beginning of the century , and long live the Liberator of the People ! 
There was in those days a general of aristocratic connections , the owner of great estates , one of those men - somewhat exceptional , I believe , even then - who , retiring from the service into a life of leisure , are convinced that they 've earned absolute power over the lives of their subjects . 
There were such men then . 
So our general , settled on his property of two thousand souls , lives in pomp , and domineers over his poor neighbours as though they were dependents and buffoons . 
He has kennels of hundreds of hounds and nearly a hundred dog-boys - all mounted , and in uniform . 
One day a serf-boy , a little child of eight , threw a stone in play and hurt the paw of the general 's favourite hound . 
` Why is my favourite dog lame ? ' 
He is told that the boy threw a stone that hurt the dog 's paw . 
` So you did it . ' 
The general looked the child up and down . 
` Take him . ' 
He was taken - taken from his mother and kept shut up all night . 
Early that morning the general comes out on horseback , with the hounds , his dependents , dog-boys , and huntsmen , all mounted around him in full hunting parade . 
The servants are summoned for their edification , and in front of them all stands the mother of the child . 
The child is brought from the lock-up . 
It 's a gloomy , cold , foggy , autumn day , a capital day for hunting . 
The general orders the child to be undressed ; the child is stripped naked . 
He shivers , numb with terror , not daring to cry ... ` Make him run , ' commands the general . 
` Run ! 
run ! ' 
shout the dog-boys . 
The boy runs ... ` At him ! ' 
yells the general , and he sets the whole pack of hounds on the child . 
The hounds catch him , and tear him to pieces before his mother 's eyes ! 
... I believe the general was afterwards declared incapable of administering his estates . 
Well - what did he deserve ? 
To be shot ? 
To be shot for the satisfaction of our moral feelings ? 
Speak , Alyosha ! 
`` To be shot , '' murmured Alyosha , lifting his eyes to Ivan with a pale , twisted smile . 
`` Bravo ! '' 
cried Ivan delighted . 
`` If even you say so ... You 're a pretty monk ! 
So there is a little devil sitting in your heart , Alyosha Karamazov ! '' 
`` What I said was absurd , but - '' `` That 's just the point , that ` but ' ! '' 
cried Ivan . 
`` Let me tell you , novice , that the absurd is only too necessary on earth . 
The world stands on absurdities , and perhaps nothing would have come to pass in it without them . 
We know what we know ! '' 
`` What do you know ? '' 
`` I understand nothing , '' Ivan went on , as though in delirium . 
`` I do n't want to understand anything now . 
I want to stick to the fact . 
I made up my mind long ago not to understand . 
If I try to understand anything , I shall be false to the fact , and I have determined to stick to the fact . '' 
`` Why are you trying me ? '' 
Alyosha cried , with sudden distress . 
`` Will you say what you mean at last ? '' 
`` Of course , I will ; that 's what I 've been leading up to . 
You are dear to me , I do n't want to let you go , and I wo n't give you up to your Zossima . '' 
Ivan for a minute was silent , his face became all at once very sad . 
`` Listen ! 
I took the case of children only to make my case clearer . 
Of the other tears of humanity with which the earth is soaked from its crust to its centre , I will say nothing . 
I have narrowed my subject on purpose . 
I am a bug , and I recognise in all humility that I can not understand why the world is arranged as it is . 
Men are themselves to blame , I suppose ; they were given paradise , they wanted freedom , and stole fire from heaven , though they knew they would become unhappy , so there is no need to pity them . 
With my pitiful , earthly , Euclidian understanding , all I know is that there is suffering and that there are none guilty ; that cause follows effect , simply and directly ; that everything flows and finds its level - but that 's only Euclidian nonsense , I know that , and I ca n't consent to live by it ! 
What comfort is it to me that there are none guilty and that cause follows effect simply and directly , and that I know it ? 
- I must have justice , or I will destroy myself . 
And not justice in some remote infinite time and space , but here on earth , and that I could see myself . 
I have believed in it . 
I want to see it , and if I am dead by then , let me rise again , for if it all happens without me , it will be too unfair . 
Surely I have n't suffered simply that I , my crimes and my sufferings , may manure the soil of the future harmony for somebody else . 
I want to see with my own eyes the hind lie down with the lion and the victim rise up and embrace his murderer . 
I want to be there when everyone suddenly understands what it has all been for . 
All the religions of the world are built on this longing , and I am a believer . 
But then there are the children , and what am I to do about them ? 
That 's a question I ca n't answer . 
For the hundredth time I repeat , there are numbers of questions , but I 've only taken the children , because in their case what I mean is so unanswerably clear . 
Listen ! 
If all must suffer to pay for the eternal harmony , what have children to do with it , tell me , please ? 
It 's beyond all comprehension why they should suffer , and why they should pay for the harmony . 
Why should they , too , furnish material to enrich the soil for the harmony of the future ? 
I understand solidarity in sin among men . 
I understand solidarity in retribution , too ; but there can be no such solidarity with children . 
And if it is really true that they must share responsibility for all their fathers ' crimes , such a truth is not of this world and is beyond my comprehension . 
Some jester will say , perhaps , that the child would have grown up and have sinned , but you see he did n't grow up , he was torn to pieces by the dogs , at eight years old . 
Oh , Alyosha , I am not blaspheming ! 
I understand , of course , what an upheaval of the universe it will be when everything in heaven and earth blends in one hymn of praise and everything that lives and has lived cries aloud : ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed . ' 
When the mother embraces the fiend who threw her child to the dogs , and all three cry aloud with tears , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
then , of course , the crown of knowledge will be reached and all will be made clear . 
But what pulls me up here is that I ca n't accept that harmony . 
And while I am on earth , I make haste to take my own measures . 
You see , Alyosha , perhaps it really may happen that if I live to that moment , or rise again to see it , I , too , perhaps , may cry aloud with the rest , looking at the mother embracing the child 's torturer , ` Thou art just , O Lord ! ' 
but I do n't want to cry aloud then . 
While there is still time , I hasten to protect myself , and so I renounce the higher harmony altogether . 
It 's not worth the tears of that one tortured child who beat itself on the breast with its little fist and prayed in its stinking outhouse , with its unexpiated tears to ` dear , kind God ' ! 
It 's not worth it , because those tears are unatoned for . 
They must be atoned for , or there can be no harmony . 
But how ? 
How are you going to atone for them ? 
Is it possible ? 
By their being avenged ? 
But what do I care for avenging them ? 
What do I care for a hell for oppressors ? 
What good can hell do , since those children have already been tortured ? 
And what becomes of harmony , if there is hell ? 
I want to forgive . 
I want to embrace . 
I do n't want more suffering . 
And if the sufferings of children go to swell the sum of sufferings which was necessary to pay for truth , then I protest that the truth is not worth such a price . 
I do n't want the mother to embrace the oppressor who threw her son to the dogs ! 
She dare not forgive him ! 
Let her forgive him for herself , if she will , let her forgive the torturer for the immeasurable suffering of her mother 's heart . 
But the sufferings of her tortured child she has no right to forgive ; she dare not forgive the torturer , even if the child were to forgive him ! 
And if that is so , if they dare not forgive , what becomes of harmony ? 
Is there in the whole world a being who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
I do n't want harmony . 
From love for humanity I do n't want it . 
I would rather be left with the unavenged suffering . 
I would rather remain with my unavenged suffering and unsatisfied indignation , even if I were wrong . 
Besides , too high a price is asked for harmony ; it 's beyond our means to pay so much to enter on it . 
And so I hasten to give back my entrance ticket , and if I am an honest man I am bound to give it back as soon as possible . 
And that I am doing . 
It 's not God that I do n't accept , Alyosha , only I most respectfully return him the ticket . '' 
`` That 's rebellion , '' murmered Alyosha , looking down . 
`` Rebellion ? 
I am sorry you call it that , '' said Ivan earnestly . 
`` One can hardly live in rebellion , and I want to live . 
Tell me yourself , I challenge your answer . 
Imagine that you are creating a fabric of human destiny with the object of making men happy in the end , giving them peace and rest at last , but that it was essential and inevitable to torture to death only one tiny creature - that baby beating its breast with its fist , for instance - and to found that edifice on its unavenged tears , would you consent to be the architect on those conditions ? 
Tell me , and tell the truth . '' 
`` No , I would n't consent , '' said Alyosha softly . 
`` And can you admit the idea that men for whom you are building it would agree to accept their happiness on the foundation of the unexpiated blood of a little victim ? 
And accepting it would remain happy for ever ? '' 
`` No , I ca n't admit it . 
Brother , '' said Alyosha suddenly , with flashing eyes , `` you said just now , is there a being in the whole world who would have the right to forgive and could forgive ? 
But there is a Being and He can forgive everything , all and for all , because He gave His innocent blood for all and everything . 
You have forgotten Him , and on Him is built the edifice , and it is to Him they cry aloud , ` Thou art just , O Lord , for Thy ways are revealed ! ' 
`` Ah ! 
the One without sin and His blood ! 
No , I have not forgotten Him ; on the contrary I 've been wondering all the time how it was you did not bring Him in before , for usually all arguments on your side put Him in the foreground . 
Do you know , Alyosha - do n't laugh I made a poem about a year ago . 
If you can waste another ten minutes on me , I 'll tell it to you . '' 
`` You wrote a poem ? '' 
`` Oh , no , I did n't write it , '' laughed Ivan , and I 've never written two lines of poetry in my life . 
But I made up this poem in prose and I remembered it . 
I was carried away when I made it up . 
You will be my first reader - that is listener . 
Why should an author forego even one listener ? '' 
smiled Ivan . 
`` Shall I tell it to you ? '' 
`` I am all attention . '' 
said Alyosha . 
`` My poem is called The Grand Inquisitor ; it 's a ridiculous thing , but I want to tell it to you . 
The Grand Inquisitor `` EVEN this must have a preface - that is , a literary preface , '' laughed Ivan , `` and I am a poor hand at making one . 
You see , my action takes place in the sixteenth century , and at that time , as you probably learnt at school , it was customary in poetry to bring down heavenly powers on earth . 
Not to speak of Dante , in France , clerks , as well as the monks in the monasteries , used to give regular performances in which the Madonna , the saints , the angels , Christ , and God Himself were brought on the stage . 
In those days it was done in all simplicity . 
In Victor Hugo 's Notre Dame de Paris an edifying and gratuitous spectacle was provided for the people in the Hotel de Ville of Paris in the reign of Louis XI in honour of the birth of the dauphin . 
It was called Le bon jugement de la tres sainte et gracieuse Vierge Marie , and she appears herself on the stage and pronounces her bon jugement . 
Similar plays , chiefly from the Old Testament , were occasionally performed in Moscow too , up to the times of Peter the Great . 
But besides plays there were all sorts of legends and ballads scattered about the world , in which the saints and angels and all the powers of Heaven took part when required . 
In our monasteries the monks busied themselves in translating , copying , and even composing such poems - and even under the Tatars . 
There is , for instance , one such poem -LRB- of course , from the Greek -RRB- , The Wanderings of Our Lady through Hell , with descriptions as bold as Dante 's . 
Our Lady visits hell , and the Archangel Michael leads her through the torments . 
She sees the sinners and their punishment . 
There she sees among others one noteworthy set of sinners in a burning lake ; some of them sink to the bottom of the lake so that they ca n't swim out , and ` these God forgets ' - an expression of extraordinary depth and force . 
And so Our Lady , shocked and weeping , falls before the throne of God and begs for mercy for all in hell - for all she has seen there , indiscriminately . 
Her conversation with God is immensely interesting . 
She beseeches Him , she will not desist , and when God points to the hands and feet of her Son , nailed to the Cross , and asks , ` How can I forgive His tormentors ? ' 
she bids all the saints , all the martyrs , all the angels and archangels to fall down with her and pray for mercy on all without distinction . 
It ends by her winning from God a respite of suffering every year from Good Friday till Trinity Day , and the sinners at once raise a cry of thankfulness from hell , chanting , ` Thou art just , O Lord , in this judgment . ' 
Well , my poem would have been of that kind if it had appeared at that time . 
He comes on the scene in my poem , but He says nothing , only appears and passes on . 
Fifteen centuries have passed since He promised to come in His glory , fifteen centuries since His prophet wrote , ` Behold , I come quickly ' ; ` Of that day and that hour knoweth no man , neither the Son , but the Father , ' as He Himself predicted on earth . 
But humanity awaits him with the same faith and with the same love . 
Oh , with greater faith , for it is fifteen centuries since man has ceased to see signs from heaven . 
No signs from heaven come to-day To add to what the heart doth say . 
There was nothing left but faith in what the heart doth say . 
It is true there were many miracles in those days . 
There were saints who performed miraculous cures ; some holy people , according to their biographies , were visited by the Queen of Heaven herself . 
But the devil did not slumber , and doubts were already arising among men of the truth of these miracles . 
And just then there appeared in the north of Germany a terrible new heresy . ' 
A huge star like to a torch ' -LRB- that is , to a church -RRB- ` fell on the sources of the waters and they became bitter . ' 
These heretics began blasphemously denying miracles . 
But those who remained faithful were all the more ardent in their faith . 
The tears of humanity rose up to Him as before , awaited His coming , loved Him , hoped for Him , yearned to suffer and die for Him as before . 
And so many ages mankind had prayed with faith and fervour , ' O Lord our God , hasten Thy coming ' ; so many ages called upon Him , that in His infinite mercy He deigned to come down to His servants . 
Before that day He had come down , He had visited some holy men , martyrs , and hermits , as is written in their lives . 
Among us , Tyutchev , with absolute faith in the truth of his words , bore witness that Bearing the Cross , in slavish dress , Weary and worn , the Heavenly King Our mother , Russia , came to bless , And through our land went wandering . 
And that certainly was so , I assure you . 
`` And behold , He deigned to appear for a moment to the people , to the tortured , suffering people , sunk in iniquity , but loving Him like children . 
My story is laid in Spain , in Seville , in the most terrible time of the Inquisition , when fires were lighted every day to the glory of God , and ` in the splendid auto da fe the wicked heretics were burnt . ' 
Oh , of course , this was not the coming in which He will appear , according to His promise , at the end of time in all His heavenly glory , and which will be sudden ` as lightning flashing from east to west . ' 
No , He visited His children only for a moment , and there where the flames were crackling round the heretics . 
In His infinite mercy He came once more among men in that human shape in which He walked among men for thirty-three years fifteen centuries ago . 
He came down to the ` hot pavements ' of the southern town in which on the day before almost a hundred heretics had , ad majorem gloriam Dei , been burnt by the cardinal , the Grand Inquisitor , in a magnificent auto da fe , in the presence of the king , the court , the knights , the cardinals , the most charming ladies of the court , and the whole population of Seville . 
`` He came softly , unobserved , and yet , strange to say , everyone recognised Him . 
That might be one of the best passages in the poem . 
I mean , why they recognised Him . 
The people are irresistibly drawn to Him , they surround Him , they flock about Him , follow Him . 
He moves silently in their midst with a gentle smile of infinite compassion . 
The sun of love burns in His heart , and power shine from His eyes , and their radiance , shed on the people , stirs their hearts with responsive love . 
He holds out His hands to them , blesses them , and a healing virtue comes from contact with Him , even with His garments . 
An old man in the crowd , blind from childhood , cries out , ' O Lord , heal me and I shall see Thee ! ' 
and , as it were , scales fall from his eyes and the blind man sees Him . 
The crowd weeps and kisses the earth under His feet . 
Children throw flowers before Him , sing , and cry hosannah . 
` It is He - it is He ! ' 
repeat . 
` It must be He , it can be no one but Him ! ' 
He stops at the steps of the Seville cathedral at the moment when the weeping mourners are bringing in a little open white coffin . 
In it lies a child of seven , the only daughter of a prominent citizen . 
The dead child lies hidden in flowers . 
` He will raise your child , ' the crowd shouts to the weeping mother . 
The priest , coming to meet the coffin , looks perplexed , and frowns , but the mother of the dead child throws herself at His feet with a wail . 
` If it is Thou , raise my child ! ' 
she cries , holding out her hands to Him . 
The procession halts , the coffin is laid on the steps at His feet . 
He looks with compassion , and His lips once more softly pronounce , ` Maiden , arise ! ' 
and the maiden arises . 
The little girl sits up in the coffin and looks round , smiling with wide-open wondering eyes , holding a bunch of white roses they had put in her hand . 
`` There are cries , sobs , confusion among the people , and at that moment the cardinal himself , the Grand Inquisitor , passes by the cathedral . 
He is an old man , almost ninety , tall and erect , with a withered face and sunken eyes , in which there is still a gleam of light . 
He is not dressed in his gorgeous cardinal 's robes , as he was the day before , when he was burning the enemies of the Roman Church - at this moment he is wearing his coarse , old , monk 's cassock . 
At a distance behind him come his gloomy assistants and slaves and the ` holy guard . ' 
He stops at the sight of the crowd and watches it from a distance . 
He sees everything ; he sees them set the coffin down at His feet , sees the child rise up , and his face darkens . 
He knits his thick grey brows and his eyes gleam with a sinister fire . 
He holds out his finger and bids the guards take Him . 
And such is his power , so completely are the people cowed into submission and trembling obedience to him , that the crowd immediately makes way for the guards , and in the midst of deathlike silence they lay hands on Him and lead him away . 
The crowd instantly bows down to the earth , like one man , before the old Inquisitor . 
He blesses the people in silence and passes on ' The guards lead their prisoner to the close , gloomy vaulted prison - in the ancient palace of the Holy , inquisition and shut him in it . 
The day passes and is followed by the dark , burning , ` breathless ' night of Seville . 
The air is ` fragrant with laurel and lemon . ' 
In the pitch darkness the iron door of the prison is suddenly opened and the Grand Inquisitor himself comes in with a light in his hand . 
He is alone ; the door is closed at once behind him . 
He stands in the doorway and for a minute or two gazes into His face . 
At last he goes up slowly , sets the light on the table and speaks . '' 
` Is it Thou ? 
Thou ? ' 
but receiving no answer , he adds at once . 
` Do n't answer , be silent . 
What canst Thou say , indeed ? 
I know too well what Thou wouldst say . 
And Thou hast no right to add anything to what Thou hadst said of old . 
Why , then , art Thou come to hinder us ? 
For Thou hast come to hinder us , and Thou knowest that . 
But dost thou know what will be to-morrow ? 
I know not who Thou art and care not to know whether it is Thou or only a semblance of Him , but to-morrow I shall condemn Thee and burn Thee at the stake as the worst of heretics . 
And the very people who have to-day kissed Thy feet , to-morrow at the faintest sign from me will rush to heap up the embers of Thy fire . 
Knowest Thou that ? 
Yes , maybe Thou knowest it , ' he added with thoughtful penetration , never for a moment taking his eyes off the Prisoner . '' 
`` I do n't quite understand , Ivan . 
What does it mean ? '' 
Alyosha , who had been listening in silence , said with a smile . 
`` Is it simply a wild fantasy , or a mistake on the part of the old man - some impossible quid pro quo ? '' 
`` Take it as the last , '' said Ivan , laughing , `` if you are so corrupted by modern realism and ca n't stand anything fantastic . 
If you like it to be a case of mistaken identity , let it be so . 
It is true , '' he went on , laughing , `` the old man was ninety , and he might well be crazy over his set idea . 
He might have been struck by the appearance of the Prisoner . 
It might , in fact , be simply his ravings , the delusion of an old man of ninety , over-excited by the auto da fe of a hundred heretics the day before . 
But does it matter to us after all whether it was a mistake of identity or a wild fantasy ? 
All that matters is that the old man should speak out , that he should speak openly of what he has thought in silence for ninety years . '' 
`` And the Prisoner too is silent ? 
Does He look at him and not say a word ? '' 
`` That 's inevitable in any case , '' Ivan laughed again . 
`` The old man has told Him He has n't the right to add anything to what He has said of old . 
One may say it is the most fundamental feature of Roman Catholicism , in my opinion at least . 
` All has been given by Thee to the Pope , ' they say , ` and all , therefore , is still in the Pope 's hands , and there is no need for Thee to come now at all . 
Thou must not meddle for the time , at least . ' 
That 's how they speak and write too - the Jesuits , at any rate . 
I have read it myself in the works of their theologians . 
` Hast Thou the right to reveal to us one of the mysteries of that world from which Thou hast come ? ' 
my old man asks Him , and answers the question for Him . 
` No , Thou hast not ; that Thou mayest not add to what has been said of old , and mayest not take from men the freedom which Thou didst exalt when Thou wast on earth . 
Whatsoever Thou revealest anew will encroach on men 's freedom of faith ; for it will be manifest as a miracle , and the freedom of their faith was dearer to Thee than anything in those days fifteen hundred years ago . 
Didst Thou not often say then , `` I will make you free '' ? 
But now Thou hast seen these `` free '' men , ' the old man adds suddenly , with a pensive smile . 
` Yes , we 've paid dearly for it , ' he goes on , looking sternly at Him , ` but at last we have completed that work in Thy name . 
For fifteen centuries we have been wrestling with Thy freedom , but now it is ended and over for good . 
Dost Thou not believe that it 's over for good ? 
Thou lookest meekly at me and deignest not even to be wroth with me . 
But let me tell Thee that now , to-day , people are more persuaded than ever that they have perfect freedom , yet they have brought their freedom to us and laid it humbly at our feet . 
But that has been our doing . 
Was this what Thou didst ? 
Was this Thy freedom ? ' '' 
`` I do n't understand again . '' 
Alyosha broke in . 
`` Is he ironical , is he jesting ? '' 
`` Not a bit of it ! 
He claims it as a merit for himself and his Church that at last they have vanquished freedom and have done so to make men happy . 
` For now ' -LRB- he is speaking of the Inquisition , of course -RRB- ` for the first time it has become possible to think of the happiness of men . 
Man was created a rebel ; and how can rebels be happy ? 
Thou wast warned , ' he says to Him . 
` Thou hast had no lack of admonitions and warnings , but Thou didst not listen to those warnings ; Thou didst reject the only way by which men might be made happy . 
But , fortunately , departing Thou didst hand on the work to us . 
Thou hast promised , Thou hast established by Thy word , Thou hast given to us the right to bind and to unbind , and now , of course , Thou canst not think of taking it away . 
Why , then , hast Thou come to hinder us ? ' '' 
`` And what 's the meaning of ` no lack of admonitions and warnings ' ? '' 
asked Alyosha . 
`` Why , that 's the chief part of what the old man must say . '' 
` The wise and dread spirit , the spirit of self-destruction and non-existence , ' the old man goes on , great spirit talked with Thee in the wilderness , and we are told in the books that he `` tempted '' Thee . 
Is that so ? 
And could anything truer be said than what he revealed to Thee in three questions and what Thou didst reject , and what in the books is called `` the temptation '' ? 
And yet if there has ever been on earth a real stupendous miracle , it took place on that day , on the day of the three temptations . 
The statement of those three questions was itself the miracle . 
If it were possible to imagine simply for the sake of argument that those three questions of the dread spirit had perished utterly from the books , and that we had to restore them and to invent them anew , and to do so had gathered together all the wise men of the earth - rulers , chief priests , learned men , philosophers , poets - and had set them the task to invent three questions , such as would not only fit the occasion , but express in three words , three human phrases , the whole future history of the world and of humanity - dost Thou believe that all the wisdom of the earth united could have invented anything in depth and force equal to the three questions which were actually put to Thee then by the wise and mighty spirit in the wilderness ? 
From those questions alone , from the miracle of their statement , we can see that we have here to do not with the fleeting human intelligence , but with the absolute and eternal . 
For in those three questions the whole subsequent history of mankind is , as it were , brought together into one whole , and foretold , and in them are united all the unsolved historical contradictions of human nature . 
At the time it could not be so clear , since the future was unknown ; but now that fifteen hundred years have passed , we see that everything in those three questions was so justly divined and foretold , and has been so truly fulfilled , that nothing can be added to them or taken from them . 
`` Judge Thyself who was right - Thou or he who questioned Thee then ? 
Remember the first question ; its meaning , in other words , was this : `` Thou wouldst go into the world , and art going with empty hands , with some promise of freedom which men in their simplicity and their natural unruliness can not even understand , which they fear and dread - for nothing has ever been more insupportable for a man and a human society than freedom . 
But seest Thou these stones in this parched and barren wilderness ? 
Turn them into bread , and mankind will run after Thee like a flock of sheep , grateful and obedient , though for ever trembling , lest Thou withdraw Thy hand and deny them Thy bread . '' 
But Thou wouldst not deprive man of freedom and didst reject the offer , thinking , what is that freedom worth if obedience is bought with bread ? 
Thou didst reply that man lives not by bread alone . 
But dost Thou know that for the sake of that earthly bread the spirit of the earth will rise up against Thee and will strive with Thee and overcome Thee , and all will follow him , crying , `` Who can compare with this beast ? 
He has given us fire from heaven ! '' 
Dost Thou know that the ages will pass , and humanity will proclaim by the lips of their sages that there is no crime , and therefore no sin ; there is only hunger ? 
`` Feed men , and then ask of them virtue ! '' 
that 's what they 'll write on the banner , which they will raise against Thee , and with which they will destroy Thy temple . 
Where Thy temple stood will rise a new building ; the terrible tower of Babel will be built again , and though , like the one of old , it will not be finished , yet Thou mightest have prevented that new tower and have cut short the sufferings of men for a thousand years ; for they will come back to us after a thousand years of agony with their tower . 
They will seek us again , hidden underground in the catacombs , for we shall be again persecuted and tortured . 
They will find us and cry to us , `` Feed us , for those who have promised us fire from heaven have n't given it ! '' 
And then we shall finish building their tower , for he finishes the building who feeds them . 
And we alone shall feed them in Thy name , declaring falsely that it is in Thy name . 
Oh , never , never can they feed themselves without us ! 
No science will give them bread so long as they remain free . 
In the end they will lay their freedom at our feet , and say to us , `` Make us your slaves , but feed us . '' 
They will understand themselves , at last , that freedom and bread enough for all are inconceivable together , for never , never will they be able to share between them ! 
They will be convinced , too , that they can never be free , for they are weak , vicious , worthless , and rebellious . 
Thou didst promise them the bread of Heaven , but , I repeat again , can it compare with earthly bread in the eyes of the weak , ever sinful and ignoble race of man ? 
And if for the sake of the bread of Heaven thousands shall follow Thee , what is to become of the millions and tens of thousands of millions of creatures who will not have the strength to forego the earthly bread for the sake of the heavenly ? 
Or dost Thou care only for the tens of thousands of the great and strong , while the millions , numerous as the sands of the sea , who are weak but love Thee , must exist only for the sake of the great and strong ? 
No , we care for the weak too . 
They are sinful and rebellious , but in the end they too will become obedient . 
They will marvel at us and look on us as gods , because we are ready to endure the freedom which they have found so dreadful and to rule over them - so awful it will seem to them to be free . 
But we shall tell them that we are Thy servants and rule them in Thy name . 
We shall deceive them again , for we will not let Thee come to us again . 
That deception will be our suffering , for we shall be forced to lie . '' 
` This is the significance of the first question in the wilderness , and this is what Thou hast rejected for the sake of that freedom which Thou hast exalted above everything . 
Yet in this question lies hid the great secret of this world . 
Choosing `` bread , '' Thou wouldst have satisfied the universal and everlasting craving of humanity - to find someone to worship . 
So long as man remains free he strives for nothing so incessantly and so painfully as to find someone to worship . 
But man seeks to worship what is established beyond dispute , so that all men would agree at once to worship it . 
For these pitiful creatures are concerned not only to find what one or the other can worship , but to find community of worship is the chief misery of every man individually and of all humanity from the beginning of time . 
For the sake of common worship they 've slain each other with the sword . 
They have set up gods and challenged one another , `` Put away your gods and come and worship ours , or we will kill you and your gods ! '' 
And so it will be to the end of the world , even when gods disappear from the earth ; they will fall down before idols just the same . 
Thou didst know , Thou couldst not but have known , this fundamental secret of human nature , but Thou didst reject the one infallible banner which was offered Thee to make all men bow down to Thee alone - the banner of earthly bread ; and Thou hast rejected it for the sake of freedom and the bread of Heaven . 
Behold what Thou didst further . 
And all again in the name of freedom ! 
I tell Thee that man is tormented by no greater anxiety than to find someone quickly to whom he can hand over that gift of freedom with which the ill-fated creature is born . 
But only one who can appease their conscience can take over their freedom . 
In bread there was offered Thee an invincible banner ; give bread , and man will worship thee , for nothing is more certain than bread . 
But if someone else gains possession of his conscience - Oh ! 
then he will cast away Thy bread and follow after him who has ensnared his conscience . 
In that Thou wast right . 
For the secret of man 's being is not only to live but to have something to live for . 
Without a stable conception of the object of life , man would not consent to go on living , and would rather destroy himself than remain on earth , though he had bread in abundance . 
That is true . 
But what happened ? 
Instead of taking men 's freedom from them , Thou didst make it greater than ever ! 
Didst Thou forget that man prefers peace , and even death , to freedom of choice in the knowledge of good and evil ? 
Nothing is more seductive for man than his freedom of conscience , but nothing is a greater cause of suffering . 
And behold , instead of giving a firm foundation for setting the conscience of man at rest for ever , Thou didst choose all that is exceptional , vague and enigmatic ; Thou didst choose what was utterly beyond the strength of men , acting as though Thou didst not love them at all - Thou who didst come to give Thy life for them ! 
Instead of taking possession of men 's freedom , Thou didst increase it , and burdened the spiritual kingdom of mankind with its sufferings for ever . 
Thou didst desire man 's free love , that he should follow Thee freely , enticed and taken captive by Thee . 
In place of the rigid ancient law , man must hereafter with free heart decide for himself what is good and what is evil , having only Thy image before him as his guide . 
But didst Thou not know that he would at last reject even Thy image and Thy truth , if he is weighed down with the fearful burden of free choice ? 
They will cry aloud at last that the truth is not in Thee , for they could not have been left in greater confusion and suffering than Thou hast caused , laying upon them so many cares and unanswerable problems . '' 
` So that , in truth , Thou didst Thyself lay the foundation for the destruction of Thy kingdom , and no one is more to blame for it . 
Yet what was offered Thee ? 
There are three powers , three powers alone , able to conquer and to hold captive for ever the conscience of these impotent rebels for their happiness those forces are miracle , mystery and authority . 
Thou hast rejected all three and hast set the example for doing so . 
When the wise and dread spirit set Thee on the pinnacle of the temple and said to Thee , `` If Thou wouldst know whether Thou art the Son of God then cast Thyself down , for it is written : the angels shall hold him up lest he fall and bruise himself , and Thou shalt know then whether Thou art the Son of God and shalt prove then how great is Thy faith in Thy Father . '' 
But Thou didst refuse and wouldst not cast Thyself down . 
Oh , of course , Thou didst proudly and well , like God ; but the weak , unruly race of men , are they gods ? 
Oh , Thou didst know then that in taking one step , in making one movement to cast Thyself down , Thou wouldst be tempting God and have lost all Thy faith in Him , and wouldst have been dashed to pieces against that earth which Thou didst come to save . 
And the wise spirit that tempted Thee would have rejoiced . 
But I ask again , are there many like Thee ? 
And couldst Thou believe for one moment that men , too , could face such a temptation ? 
Is the nature of men such , that they can reject miracle , and at the great moments of their life , the moments of their deepest , most agonising spiritual difficulties , cling only to the free verdict of the heart ? 
Oh , Thou didst know that Thy deed would be recorded in books , would be handed down to remote times and the utmost ends of the earth , and Thou didst hope that man , following Thee , would cling to God and not ask for a miracle . 
But Thou didst not know that when man rejects miracle he rejects God too ; for man seeks not so much God as the miraculous . 
And as man can not bear to be without the miraculous , he will create new miracles of his own for himself , and will worship deeds of sorcery and witchcraft , though he might be a hundred times over a rebel , heretic and infidel . 
Thou didst not come down from the Cross when they shouted to Thee , mocking and reviling Thee , `` Come down from the cross and we will believe that Thou art He . '' 
Thou didst not come down , for again Thou wouldst not enslave man by a miracle , and didst crave faith given freely , not based on miracle . 
Thou didst crave for free love and not the base raptures of the slave before the might that has overawed him for ever . 
But Thou didst think too highly of men therein , for they are slaves , of course , though rebellious by nature . 
Look round and judge ; fifteen centuries have passed , look upon them . 
Whom hast Thou raised up to Thyself ? 
I swear , man is weaker and baser by nature than Thou hast believed him ! 
Can he , can he do what Thou didst ? 
By showing him so much respect , Thou didst , as it were , cease to feel for him , for Thou didst ask far too much from him - Thou who hast loved him more than Thyself ! 
Respecting him less , Thou wouldst have asked less of him . 
That would have been more like love , for his burden would have been lighter . 
He is weak and vile . 
What though he is everywhere now rebelling against our power , and proud of his rebellion ? 
It is the pride of a child and a schoolboy . 
They are little children rioting and barring out the teacher at school . 
But their childish delight will end ; it will cost them dear . 
Mankind as a whole has always striven to organise a universal state . 
There have been many great nations with great histories , but the more highly they were developed the more unhappy they were , for they felt more acutely than other people the craving for world-wide union . 
The great conquerors , Timours and Ghenghis-Khans , whirled like hurricanes over the face of the earth striving to subdue its people , and they too were but the unconscious expression of the same craving for universal unity . 
Hadst Thou taken the world and Caesar 's purple , Thou wouldst have founded the universal state and have given universal peace . 
For who can rule men if not he who holds their conscience and their bread in his hands ? 
We have taken the sword of Caesar , and in taking it , of course , have rejected Thee and followed him . 
Oh , ages are yet to come of the confusion of free thought , of their science and cannibalism . 
For having begun to build their tower of Babel without us , they will end , of course , with cannibalism . 
But then the beast will crawl to us and lick our feet and spatter them with tears of blood . 
And we shall sit upon the beast and raise the cup , and on it will be written , `` Mystery . '' 
But then , and only then , the reign of peace and happiness will come for men . 
Thou art proud of Thine elect , but Thou hast only the elect , while we give rest to all . 
And besides , how many of those elect , those mighty ones who could become elect , have grown weary waiting for Thee , and have transferred and will transfer the powers of their spirit and the warmth of their heart to the other camp , and end by raising their free banner against Thee . 
Thou didst Thyself lift up that banner . 
But with us all will be happy and will no more rebel nor destroy one another as under Thy freedom . 
Oh , we shall persuade them that they will only become free when they renounce their freedom to us and submit to us . 
And shall we be right or shall we be lying ? 
They will be convinced that we are right , for they will remember the horrors of slavery and confusion to which Thy freedom brought them . 
Freedom , free thought , and science will lead them into such straits and will bring them face to face with such marvels and insoluble mysteries , that some of them , the fierce and rebellious , will destroy themselves , others , rebellious but weak , will destroy one another , while the rest , weak and unhappy , will crawl fawning to our feet and whine to us : `` Yes , you were right , you alone possess His mystery , and we come back to you , save us from ourselves ! '' '' 
` Receiving bread from us , they will see clearly that we take the bread made by their hands from them , to give it to them , without any miracle . 
They will see that we do not change the stones to bread , but in truth they will be more thankful for taking it from our hands than for the bread itself ! 
For they will remember only too well that in old days , without our help , even the bread they made turned to stones in their hands , while since they have come back to us , the very stones have turned to bread in their hands . 
Too , too well will they know the value of complete submission ! 
And until men know that , they will be unhappy . 
Who is most to blame for their not knowing it ? 
- speak ! 
Who scattered the flock and sent it astray on unknown paths ? 
But the flock will come together again and will submit once more , and then it will be once for all . 
Then we shall give them the quiet humble happiness of weak creatures such as they are by nature . 
Oh , we shall persuade them at last not to be proud , for Thou didst lift them up and thereby taught them to be proud . 
We shall show them that they are weak , that they are only pitiful children , but that childlike happiness is the sweetest of all . 
They will become timid and will look to us and huddle close to us in fear , as chicks to the hen . 
They will marvel at us and will be awe-stricken before us , and will be proud at our being so powerful and clever that we have been able to subdue such a turbulent flock of thousands of millions . 
They will tremble impotently before our wrath , their minds will grow fearful , they will be quick to shed tears like women and children , but they will be just as ready at a sign from us to pass to laughter and rejoicing , to happy mirth and childish song . 
Yes , we shall set them to work , but in their leisure hours we shall make their life like a child 's game , with children 's songs and innocent dance . 
Oh , we shall allow them even sin , they are weak and helpless , and they will love us like children because we allow them to sin . 
We shall tell them that every sin will be expiated , if it is done with our permission , that we allow them to sin because we love them , and the punishment for these sins we take upon ourselves . 
And we shall take it upon ourselves , and they will adore us as their saviours who have taken on themselves their sins before God . 
And they will have no secrets from us . 
We shall allow or forbid them to live with their wives and mistresses , to have or not to have children according to whether they have been obedient or disobedient - and they will submit to us gladly and cheerfully . 
The most painful secrets of their conscience , all , all they will bring to us , and we shall have an answer for all . 
And they will be glad to believe our answer , for it will save them from the great anxiety and terrible agony they endure at present in making a free decision for themselves . 
And all will be happy , all the millions of creatures except the hundred thousand who rule over them . 
For only we , we who guard the mystery , shall be unhappy . 
There will be thousands of millions of happy babes , and a hundred thousand sufferers who have taken upon themselves the curse of the knowledge of good and evil . 
Peacefully they will die , peacefully they will expire in Thy name , and beyond the grave they will find nothing but death . 
But we shall keep the secret , and for their happiness we shall allure them with the reward of heaven and eternity . 
Though if there were anything in the other world , it certainly would not be for such as they . 
It is prophesied that Thou wilt come again in victory , Thou wilt come with Thy chosen , the proud and strong , but we will say that they have only saved themselves , but we have saved all . 
We are told that the harlot who sits upon the beast , and holds in her hands the mystery , shall be put to shame , that the weak will rise up again , and will rend her royal purple and will strip naked her loathsome body . 
But then I will stand up and point out to Thee the thousand millions of happy children who have known no sin . 
And we who have taken their sins upon us for their happiness will stand up before Thee and say : `` Judge us if Thou canst and darest . '' 
Know that I fear Thee not . 
Know that I too have been in the wilderness , I too have lived on roots and locusts , I too prized the freedom with which Thou hast blessed men , and I too was striving to stand among Thy elect , among the strong and powerful , thirsting `` to make up the number . '' 
But I awakened and would not serve madness . 
I turned back and joined the ranks of those who have corrected Thy work . 
I left the proud and went back to the humble , for the happiness of the humble . 
What I say to Thee will come to pass , and our dominion will be built up . 
I repeat , to-morrow Thou shalt see that obedient flock who at a sign from me will hasten to heap up the hot cinders about the pile on which I shall burn Thee for coming to hinder us . 
For if anyone has ever deserved our fires , it is Thou . 
To-morrow I shall burn Thee . 
Dixi . ' '' 
* * I have spoken . 
Ivan stopped . 
He was carried away as he talked , and spoke with excitement ; when he had finished , he suddenly smiled . 
Alyosha had listened in silence ; towards the end he was greatly moved and seemed several times on the point of interrupting , but restrained himself . 
Now his words came with a rush . 
`` But ... that 's absurd ! '' 
he cried , flushing . 
`` Your poem is in praise of Jesus , not in blame of Him - as you meant it to be . 
And who will believe you about freedom ? 
Is that the way to understand it ? 
That 's not the idea of it in the Orthodox Church ... . 
That 's Rome , and not even the whole of Rome , it 's false-those are the worst of the Catholics the Inquisitors , the Jesuits ! 
... And there could not be such a fantastic creature as your Inquisitor . 
What are these sins of mankind they take on themselves ? 
Who are these keepers of the mystery who have taken some curse upon themselves for the happiness of mankind ? 
When have they been seen ? 
We know the Jesuits , they are spoken ill of , but surely they are not what you describe ? 
They are not that at all , not at all ... . 
They are simply the Romish army for the earthly sovereignty of the world in the future , with the Pontiff of Rome for Emperor ... that 's their ideal , but there 's no sort of mystery or lofty melancholy about it ... . 
It 's simple lust of power , of filthy earthly gain , of domination-something like a universal serfdom with them as masters-that 's all they stand for . 
They do n't even believe in God perhaps . 
Your suffering Inquisitor is a mere fantasy . '' 
`` Stay , stay , '' laughed Ivan . 
`` how hot you are ! 
A fantasy you say , let it be so ! 
Of course it 's a fantasy . 
But allow me to say : do you really think that the Roman Catholic movement of the last centuries is actually nothing but the lust of power , of filthy earthly gain ? 
Is that Father Paissy 's teaching ? '' 
`` No , no , on the contrary , Father Paissy did once say something rather the same as you ... but of course it 's not the same , not a bit the same , '' Alyosha hastily corrected himself . 
`` A precious admission , in spite of your ` not a bit the same . ' 
I ask you why your Jesuits and Inquisitors have united simply for vile material gain ? 
Why can there not be among them one martyr oppressed by great sorrow and loving humanity ? 
You see , only suppose that there was one such man among all those who desire nothing but filthy material gain-if there 's only one like my old Inquisitor , who had himself eaten roots in the desert and made frenzied efforts to subdue his flesh to make himself free and perfect . 
But yet all his life he loved humanity , and suddenly his eyes were opened , and he saw that it is no great moral blessedness to attain perfection and freedom , if at the same time one gains the conviction that millions of God 's creatures have been created as a mockery , that they will never be capable of using their freedom , that these poor rebels can never turn into giants to complete the tower , that it was not for such geese that the great idealist dreamt his dream of harmony . 
Seeing all that he turned back and joined - the clever people . 
Surely that could have happened ? '' 
`` Joined whom , what clever people ? '' 
cried Alyosha , completely carried away . 
`` They have no such great cleverness and no mysteries and secrets ... . 
Perhaps nothing but Atheism , that 's all their secret . 
Your Inquisitor does not believe in God , that 's his secret ! '' 
`` What if it is so ! 
At last you have guessed it . 
It 's perfectly true , it 's true that that 's the whole secret , but is n't that suffering , at least for a man like that , who has wasted his whole life in the desert and yet could not shake off his incurable love of humanity ? 
In his old age he reached the clear conviction that nothing but the advice of the great dread spirit could build up any tolerable sort of life for the feeble , unruly , ` incomplete , empirical creatures created in jest . ' 
And so , convinced of this , he sees that he must follow the counsel of the wise spirit , the dread spirit of death and destruction , and therefore accept lying and deception , and lead men consciously to death and destruction , and yet deceive them all the way so that they may not notice where they are being led , that the poor blind creatures may at least on the way think themselves happy . 
And note , the deception is in the name of Him in Whose ideal the old man had so fervently believed all his life long . 
Is not that tragic ? 
And if only one such stood at the head of the whole army ` filled with the lust of power only for the sake of filthy gain ' - would not one such be enough to make a tragedy ? 
More than that , one such standing at the head is enough to create the actual leading idea of the Roman Church with all its armies and Jesuits , its highest idea . 
I tell you frankly that I firmly believe that there has always been such a man among those who stood at the head of the movement . 
Who knows , there may have been some such even among the Roman Popes . 
Who knows , perhaps the spirit of that accursed old man who loves mankind so obstinately in his own way , is to be found even now in a whole multitude of such old men , existing not by chance but by agreement , as a secret league formed long ago for the guarding of the mystery , to guard it from the weak and the unhappy , so as to make them happy . 
No doubt it is so , and so it must be indeed . 
I fancy that even among the Masons there 's something of the same mystery at the bottom , and that that 's why the Catholics so detest the Masons as their rivals breaking up the unity of the idea , while it is so essential that there should be one flock and one shepherd ... . 
But from the way I defend my idea I might be an author impatient of your criticism . 
Enough of it . '' 
`` You are perhaps a Mason yourself ! '' 
broke suddenly from Alyosha . 
`` You do n't believe in God , '' he added , speaking this time very sorrowfully . 
He fancied besides that his brother was looking at him ironically . 
`` How does your poem end ? '' 
he asked , suddenly looking down . 
`` Or was it the end ? '' 
`` I meant to end it like this . 
When the Inquisitor ceased speaking he waited some time for his Prisoner to answer him . 
His silence weighed down upon him . 
He saw that the Prisoner had listened intently all the time , looking gently in his face and evidently not wishing to reply . 
The old man longed for him to say something , however bitter and terrible . 
But He suddenly approached the old man in silence and softly kissed him on his bloodless aged lips . 
That was all his answer . 
The old man shuddered . 
His lips moved . 
He went to the door , opened it , and said to Him : ` Go , and come no more ... come not at all , never , never ! ' 
And he let Him out into the dark alleys of the town . 
The Prisoner went away . '' 
`` And the old man ? '' 
`` The kiss glows in his heart , but the old man adheres to his idea . '' 
`` And you with him , you too ? '' 
cried Alyosha , mournfully . 
Ivan laughed . 
`` Why , it 's all nonsense , Alyosha . 
It 's only a senseless poem of a senseless student , who could never write two lines of verse . 
Why do you take it so seriously ? 
Surely you do n't suppose I am going straight off to the Jesuits , to join the men who are correcting His work ? 
Good Lord , it 's no business of mine . 
I told you , all I want is to live on to thirty , and then ... dash the cup to the ground ! '' 
`` But the little sticky leaves , and the precious tombs , and the blue sky , and the woman you love ! 
How will you live , how will you love them ? '' 
Alyosha cried sorrowfully . 
`` With such a hell in your heart and your head , how can you ? 
No , that 's just what you are going away for , to join them ... if not , you will kill yourself , you ca n't endure it ! '' 
`` There is a strength to endure everything , '' Ivan said with a cold smile . 
`` The strength of the Karamazovs - the strength of the Karamazov baseness . '' 
`` To sink into debauchery , to stifle your soul with corruption , yes ? '' 
`` Possibly even that ... only perhaps till I am thirty I shall escape it , and then - '' `` How will you escape it ? 
By what will you escape it ? 
That 's impossible with your ideas . '' 
`` In the Karamazov way , again . '' '' 
` Everything is lawful , ' you mean ? 
Everything is lawful , is that it ? '' 
Ivan scowled , and all at once turned strangely pale . 
`` Ah , you 've caught up yesterday 's phrase , which so offended Muisov - and which Dmitri pounced upon so naively and paraphrased ! '' 
he smiled queerly . 
`` Yes , if you like , ` everything is lawful ' since the word has been said , I wo n't deny it . 
And Mitya 's version is n't bad . '' 
Alyosha looked at him in silence . 
`` I thought that going away from here I have you at least , '' Ivan said suddenly , with unexpected feeling ; `` but now I see that there is no place for me even in your heart , my dear hermit . 
The formula , ` all is lawful , ' I wo n't renounce - will you renounce me for that , yes ? '' 
Alyosha got up , went to him and softly kissed him on the lips . 
`` That 's plagiarism , '' cried Ivan , highly delighted . 
`` You stole that from my poem . 
Thank you though . 
Get up , Alyosha , it 's time we were going , both of us . '' 
They went out , but stopped when they reached the entrance of the restaurant . 
`` Listen , Alyosha , '' Ivan began in a resolute voice , `` if I am really able to care for the sticky little leaves I shall only love them , remembering you . 
It 's enough for me that you are somewhere here , and I sha n't lose my desire for life yet . 
Is that enough for you ? 
Take it as a declaration of love if you like . 
And now you go to the right and I to the left . 
And it 's enough , do you hear , enough . 
I mean even if I do n't go away to-morrow -LRB- I think I certainly shall go -RRB- and we meet again , do n't say a word more on these subjects . 
I beg that particularly . 
And about Dmitri too , I ask you specially , never speak to me again , '' he added , with sudden irritation ; `` it 's all exhausted , it has all been said over and over again , has n't it ? 
And I 'll make you one promise in return for it . 
When at thirty , I want to ` dash the cup to the ground , ' wherever I may be I 'll come to have one more talk with you , even though it were from America , you may be sure of that . 
I 'll come on purpose . 
It will be very interesting to have a look at you , to see what you 'll be by that time . 
It 's rather a solemn promise , you see . 
And we really may be parting for seven years or ten . 
Come , go now to your Pater Seraphicus , he is dying . 
If he dies without you , you will be angry with me for having kept you . 
Good-bye , kiss me once more ; that 's right , now go . '' 
Ivan turned suddenly and went his way without looking back . 
It was just as Dmitri had left Alyosha the day before , though the parting had been very different . 
The strange resemblance flashed like an arrow through Alyosha 's mind in the distress and dejection of that moment . 
He waited a little , looking after his brother . 
He suddenly noticed that Ivan swayed as he walked and that his right shoulder looked lower than his left . 
He had never noticed it before . 
But all at once he turned too , and almost ran to the monastery . 
It was nearly dark , and he felt almost frightened ; something new was growing up in him for which he could not account . 
The wind had risen again as on the previous evening , and the ancient pines murmured gloomily about him when he entered the hermitage copse . 
He almost ran . 
`` Pater Seraphicus - he got that name from somewhere - where from ? '' 
Alyosha wondered . 
`` Ivan , poor Ivan , and when shall I see you again ? 
... Here is the hermitage . 
Yes , yes , that he is , Pater Seraphicus , he will save me - from him and for ever ! '' 
Several times afterwards he wondered how he could , on leaving Ivan , so completely forget his brother Dmitri , though he had that morning , only a few hours before , so firmly resolved to find him and not to give up doing so , even should he be unable to return to the monastery that night . 
For Awhile a Very Obscure One AND Ivan , on parting from Alyosha , went home to Fyodor Pavlovitch 's house . 
But , strange to say , he was overcome by insufferable depression , which grew greater at every step he took towards the house . 
There was nothing strange in his being depressed ; what was strange was that Ivan could not have said what was the cause of it . 
He had often been depressed before , and there was nothing surprising at his feeling so at such a moment , when he had broken off with everything had brought him here , and was preparing that day to make a new start and enter upon a new , unknown future . 
He would again be as solitary as ever , and though he had great hopes , and great - too great - expectations from life , he could not have given any definite account of his hopes , his expectations , or even his desires . 
Yet at that moment , though the apprehension of the new and unknown certainly found place in his heart , what was worrying him was something quite different . 
`` Is it loathing for my father 's house ? '' 
he wondered . 
`` Quite likely ; I am so sick of it ; and though it 's the last time I shall cross its hateful threshold , still I loathe it ... . 
No , it 's not that either . 
Is it the parting with Alyosha and the conversation I had with him ? 
For so many years I 've been silent with the whole world and not deigned to speak , and all of a sudden I reel off a rigmarole like that . '' 
certainly might have been the youthful vexation of youthful inexperience and vanity - vexation at having failed to express himself , especially with such a being as Alyosha , on whom his heart had certainly been reckoning . 
No doubt that came in , that vexation , it must have done indeed ; but yet that was not it , that was not it either . 
`` I feel sick with depression and yet I ca n't tell what I want . 
Better not think , perhaps . '' 
Ivan tried `` not to think , '' but that , too , was no use . 
What made his depression so vexatious and irritating was that it had a kind of casual , external character - he felt that . 
Some person or thing seemed to be standing out somewhere , just as something will sometimes obtrude itself upon the eye , and though one may be so busy with work or conversation that for a long time one does not notice it , yet it irritates and almost torments one till at last one realises , and removes the offending object , often quite a trifling and ridiculous one - some article left about in the wrong place , a handkerchief on the floor , a book not replaced on the shelf , and so on . 
At last , feeling very cross and ill-humoured , Ivan arrived home , and suddenly , about fifteen paces from the garden gate , he guessed what was fretting and worrying him . 
On a bench in the gateway the valet Smerdyakov was sitting enjoying the coolness of the evening , and at the first glance at him Ivan knew that the valet Smerdyakov was on his mind , and that it was this man that his soul loathed . 
It all dawned upon him suddenly and became clear . 
just before , when Alyosha had been telling him of his meeting with Smerdyakov , he had felt a sudden twinge of gloom and loathing , which had immediately stirred responsive anger in his heart . 
Afterwards , as he talked , Smerdyakov had been forgotten for the time ; but still he had been in his mind , and as soon as Ivan parted with Alyosha and was walking home , the forgotten sensation began to obtrude itself again . 
`` Is it possible that a miserable , contemptible creature like that can worry me so much ? '' 
he wondered , with insufferable irritation . 
It was true that Ivan had come of late to feel an intense dislike for the man , especially during the last few days . 
He had even begun to notice in himself a growing feeling that was almost of hatred for the creature . 
Perhaps this hatred was accentuated by the fact that when Ivan first came to the neighbourhood he had felt quite differently . 
Then he had taken a marked interest in Smerdyakov , and had even thought him very original . 
He had encouraged him to talk to him , although he had always wondered at a certain incoherence , or rather restlessness , in his mind , and could not understand what it was that so continually and insistently worked upon the brain of `` the contemplative . '' 
They discussed philosophical questions and even how there could have been light on the first day when the sun , moon , and stars were only created on the fourth day , and how that was to be understood . 
But Ivan soon saw that , though the sun , moon , and stars might be an interesting subject , yet that it was quite secondary to Smerdyakov , and that he was looking for something altogether different . 
In one way and another , he began to betray a boundless vanity , and a wounded vanity , too , and that Ivan disliked . 
It had first given rise to his aversion . 
Later on , there had been trouble in the house . 
Grushenka had come on the scene , and there had been the scandals with his brother Dmitri - they discussed that , too . 
But though Smerdyakov always talked of that with great excitement , it was impossible to discover what he desired to come of it . 
There was , in fact , something surprising in the illogicality and incoherence of some of his desires , accidentally betrayed and always vaguely expressed . 
Smerdyakov was always inquiring , putting certain indirect but obviously premeditated questions , but what his object was he did not explain , and usually at the most important moment he would break off and relapse into silence or pass to another subject . 
But what finally irritated Ivan most and confirmed his dislike for him was the peculiar , revolting familiarity which Smerdyakov began to show more and more markedly . 
Not that he forgot himself and was rude ; on the contrary , he always spoke very respectfully , yet he had obviously begun to consider - goodness knows why ! 
- that there was some sort of understanding between him and Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
He always spoke in a tone that suggested that those two had some kind of compact , some secret between them , that had at some time been expressed on both sides , only known to them and beyond the comprehension of those around them . 
But for a long while Ivan did not recognise the real cause of his growing dislike and he had only lately realised what was at the root of it . 
With a feeling of disgust and irritation he tried to pass in at the gate without speaking or looking at Smerdyakov . 
But Smerdyakov rose from the bench , and from that action alone , Ivan knew instantly that he wanted particularly to talk to him . 
Ivan looked at him and stopped , and the fact that he did stop , instead of passing by , as he meant to the minute before , drove him to fury . 
With anger and repulsion he looked at Smerdyakov 's emasculate , sickly face , with the little curls combed forward on his forehead . 
His left eye winked and he grinned as if to say , `` Where are you going ? 
You wo n't pass by ; you see that we two clever people have something to say to each other . '' 
Ivan shook . 
`` Get away , miserable idiot . 
What have I to do with you ? '' 
was on the tip of his tongue , but to his profound astonishment he heard himself say , `` Is my father still asleep , or has he waked ? '' 
He asked the question softly and meekly , to his own surprise , and at once , again to his own surprise , sat down on the bench . 
For an instant he felt almost frightened ; he remembered it afterwards . 
Smerdyakov stood facing him , his hands behind his back , looking at him with assurance and almost severity . 
`` His honour is still asleep , '' he articulated deliberately -LRB- `` You were the first to speak , not I , '' he seemed to say -RRB- . 
`` I am surprised at you , sir , '' he added , after a pause , dropping his eyes affectedly , setting his right foot forward , and playing with the tip of his polished boot . 
`` Why are you surprised at me ? '' 
Ivan asked abruptly and sullenly , doing his utmost to restrain himself , and suddenly realising , with disgust , that he was feeling intense curiosity and would not , on any account , have gone away without satisfying it . 
`` Why do n't you go to Tchermashnya , sir ? '' 
Smerdyakov suddenly raised his eyes and smiled familiarly . 
`` Why I smile you must understand of yourself , if you are a clever man , '' his screwed-up left eye seemed to say . 
`` Why should I go to Tchermashnya ? '' 
Ivan asked in surprise . 
Smerdyakov was silent again . 
`` Fyodor Pavlovitch himself has so begged you to , '' he said at last , slowly and apparently attaching no significance to his answer . 
`` I put you off with a secondary reason , '' he seemed to suggest , `` simply to say something . '' 
`` Damn you ! 
Speak out what you want ! '' 
Ivan cried angrily at last , passing from meekness to violence . 
Smerdyakov drew his right foot up to his left , pulled himself up , but still looked at him with the same serenity and the same little smile . 
`` Substantially nothing - but just by way of conversation . '' 
Another silence followed . 
They did not speak for nearly a minute . 
Ivan knew that he ought to get up and show anger , and Smerdyakov stood before him and seemed to be waiting as though to see whether he would be angry or not . 
So at least it seemed to Ivan . 
At last he moved to get up . 
Smerdyakov seemed to seize the moment . 
`` I 'm in an awful position , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
I do n't know how to help myself , '' he said resolutely and distinctly , and at his last word he sighed . 
Ivan Fyodorovitch sat down again . 
`` They are both utterly crazy , they are no better than little children , '' Smerdyakov went on . 
`` I am speaking of your parent and your brother Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
Here Fyodor Pavlovitch will get up directly and begin worrying me every minute , ` Has she come ? 
Why has n't she come ? ' 
and so on up till midnight and even after midnight . 
And if Agrafena Alexandrovna does n't come -LRB- for very likely she does not mean to come at all -RRB- then he will be at me again to-morrow morning , ` Why has n't she come ? 
When will she come ? ' 
- as though I were to blame for it . 
On the other side it 's no better . 
As soon as it gets dark , or even before , your brother will appear with his gun in his hands : ` Look out , you rogue , you soup-maker . 
If you miss her and do n't let me know she 's been - I 'll kill you before anyone . ' 
When the night 's over , in the morning , he , too , like Fyodor Pavlovitch , begins worrying me to death . 
` Why has n't she come ? 
Will she come soon ? ' 
And he , too , thinks me to blame because his lady has n't come . 
And every day and every hour they get angrier and angrier , so that I sometimes think I shall kill myself in a fright . 
I ca n't depend them , sir . '' 
`` And why have you meddled ? 
Why did you begin to spy for Dmitri Fyodorovitch ? '' 
said Ivan irritably . 
`` How could I help meddling ? 
Though , indeed , I have n't meddled at all , if you want to know the truth of the matter . 
I kept quiet from the very beginning , not daring to answer ; but he pitched on me to be his servant . 
He has had only one thing to say since : ` I 'll kill you , you scoundrel , if you miss her . ' 
I feel certain , sir , that I shall have a long fit to-morrow . '' 
`` What do you mean by ' a long fit ' ? '' 
`` A long fit , lasting a long time - several hours , or perhaps a day or two . 
Once it went on for three days . 
I fell from the garret that time . 
The struggling ceased and then began again , and for three days I could n't come back to my senses . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Herzenstube , the doctor here , and he put ice on my head and tried another remedy , too ... . 
I might have died . '' 
`` But they say one ca n't tell with epilepsy when a fit is coming . 
What makes you say you will have one to-morrow ? '' 
Ivan inquired , with a peculiar , irritable curiosity . 
`` That 's just so . 
You ca n't tell beforehand . '' 
`` Besides , you fell from the garret then . '' 
`` I climb up to the garret every day . 
I might fall from the garret again to-morrow . 
And , if not , I might fall down the cellar steps . 
I have to go into the cellar every day , too . '' 
Ivan took a long look at him . 
`` You are talking nonsense , I see , and I do n't quite understand you , '' he said softly , but with a sort of menace . 
`` Do you mean to pretend to be ill to-morrow for three days , eh ? '' 
Smerdyakov , who was looking at the ground again , and playing with the toe of his right foot , set the foot down , moved the left one forward , and , grinning , articulated : `` If I were able to play such a trick , that is , pretend to have a fit - and it would not be difficult for a man accustomed to them - I should have a perfect right to use such a means to save myself from death . 
For even if Agrafena Alexandrovna comes to see his father while I am ill , his honour ca n't blame a sick man for not telling him . 
He 'd be ashamed to . '' 
`` Hang it all ! '' 
Ivan cried , his face working with anger , `` Why are you always in such a funk for your life ? 
All my brother Dmitri 's threats are only hasty words and mean nothing . 
He wo n't kill you ; it 's not you he 'll kill ! '' 
`` He 'd kill me first of all , like a fly . 
But even more than that , I am afraid I shall be taken for an accomplice of his when he does something crazy to his father . '' 
`` Why should you be taken for an accomplice ? '' 
`` They 'll think I am an accomplice , because I let him know the signals as a great secret . '' 
`` What signals ? 
Whom did you tell ? 
Confound you , speak more plainly . '' 
`` I 'm bound to admit the fact , '' Smerdyakov drawled with pedantic composure , `` that I have a secret with Fyodor Pavlovitch in this business . 
As you know yourself -LRB- if only you do know it -RRB- he has for several days past locked himself in as soon as night or even evening comes on . 
Of late you 've been going upstairs to your room early every evening , and yesterday you did not come down at all , and so perhaps you do n't know how carefully he has begun to lock himself in at night , and even if Grigory Vassilyevitch comes to the door he wo n't open to him till he hears his voice . 
But Grigory Vassilyevitch does not come , because I wait upon him alone in his room now . 
That 's the arrangement he made himself ever since this to-do with Agrafena Alexandrovna began . 
But at night , by his orders , I go away to the lodge so that I do n't get to sleep till midnight , but am on the watch , getting up and walking about the yard , waiting for Agrafena Alexandrovna to come . 
For the last few days he 's been perfectly frantic expecting her . 
What he argues is , she is afraid of him , Dmitri Fyodorovitch -LRB- Mitya , as he calls him -RRB- , ` and so , ' says he , ` she 'll come the back-way , late at night , to me . 
You look out for her , ' says he , 'till midnight and later ; and if she does come , you run up and knock at my door or at the window from the garden . 
Knock at first twice , rather gently , and then three times more quickly , then , ' says he , ' I shall understand at once that she has come , and will open the door to you quietly . ' 
Another signal he gave me in case anything unexpected happens . 
At first , two knocks , and then , after an interval , another much louder . 
Then he will understand that something has happened suddenly and that I must see him , and he will open to me so that I can go and speak to him . 
That 's all in case Agrafena Alexandrovna ca n't come herself , but sends a message . 
Besides , Dmitri Fyodorovitch might come , too , so I must let him know he is near . 
His honour is awfully afraid of Dmitri Fyodorovitch , so that even if Agrafena Alexandrovna had come and were locked in with him , and Dmitri Fyodorovitch were to turn up anywhere near at the time , I should be bound to let him know at once , knocking three times . 
So that the first signal of five knocks means Agrafena Alexandrovna has come , while the second signal of three knocks means ` something important to tell you . ' 
His honour has shown me them several times and explained them . 
And as in the whole universe no one knows of these signals but myself and his honour , so he 'd open the door without the slightest hesitation and without calling out -LRB- he is awfully afraid of calling out aloud -RRB- . 
Well , those signals are known to Dmitri Fyodorovitch too , now . '' 
`` How are they known ? 
Did you tell him ? 
How dared you tell him ? '' 
`` It was through fright I did it . 
How could I dare to keep it back from him ? 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch kept persisting every day , ` You are deceiving me , you are hiding something from me ! 
I 'll break both your legs for you . ' 
So I told him those secret signals that he might see my slavish devotion , and might be satisfied that I was not deceiving him , but was telling him all I could . '' 
`` If you think that he 'll make use of those signals and try to get in , do n't let him in . '' 
`` But if I should be laid up with a fit , how can I prevent him coming in then , even if I dared prevent him , knowing how desperate he is ? '' 
`` Hang it ! 
How can you be so sure you are going to have a fit , confound you ? 
Are you laughing at me ? '' 
`` How could I dare laugh at you ? 
I am in no laughing humour with this fear on me . 
I feel I am going to have a fit . 
I have a presentiment . 
Fright alone will bring it on . '' 
`` Confound it ! 
If you are laid up , Grigory will be on the watch . 
Let Grigory know beforehand ; he will be sure not to let him in . '' 
`` I should never dare to tell Grigory Vassilyevitch about the signals without orders from my master . 
And as for Grigory Vassilyevitch hearing him and not admitting him , he has been ill ever since yesterday , and Marfa Ignatyevna intends to give him medicine to-morrow . 
They 've just arranged it . 
It 's a very strange remedy of hers . 
Marfa Ignatyevna knows of a preparation and always keeps it . 
It 's a strong thing made from some herb . 
She has the secret of it , and she always gives it to Grigory Vassilyevitch three times a year when his lumbago 's so bad he is almost paralysed by it . 
Then she takes a towel , wets it with the stuff , and rubs his whole back for half an hour till it 's quite red and swollen , and what 's left in the bottle she gives him to drink with a special prayer ; but not quite all , for on such occasions she leaves some for herself , and drinks it herself . 
And as they never take strong drink , I assure you they both drop asleep at once and sleep sound a very long time . 
And when Grigory Vassilyevitch wakes up he is perfectly well after it , but Marfa Ignatyevna always has a headache from it . 
So , if Marfa Ignatyevna carries out her intention to-morrow , they wo n't hear anything and hinder Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
They 'll be asleep . '' 
`` What a rigmarole ! 
And it all seems to happen at once , as though it were planned . 
You 'll have a fit and they 'll both be unconscious , '' cried Ivan . 
`` But are n't you trying to arrange it so ? '' 
broke from him suddenly , and he frowned threateningly . 
`` How could I ? 
... And why should I , when it all depends on Dmitri Fyodorovitch and his plans ? 
... If he means to do anything , he 'll do it ; but if not , I sha n't be thrusting him upon his father . '' 
`` And why should he go to father , especially on the sly , if , as you say yourself , Agrafena Alexandrovna wo n't come at all ? '' 
Ivan went on , turning white with anger . 
`` You say that yourself , and all the while I 've been here , I 've felt sure it was all the old man 's fancy , and the creature wo n't come to him . 
Why should Dmitri break in on him if she does n't come ? 
Speak , I want to know what you are thinking ! '' 
`` You know yourself why he 'll come . 
What 's the use of what I think ? 
His honour will come simply because he is in a rage or suspicious on account of my illness perhaps , and he 'll dash in , as he did yesterday through impatience to search the rooms , to see whether she has n't escaped him on the sly . 
He is perfectly well aware , too , that Fyodor Pavlovitch has a big envelope with three thousand roubles in it , tied up with ribbon and sealed with three seals . 
On it is written in his own hand ` To my angel Grushenka , if she will come , ' to which he added three days later , ` for my little chicken . ' 
There 's no knowing what that might do . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
cried Ivan , almost beside himself . 
`` Dmitri wo n't come to steal money and kill my father to do it . 
He might have killed him yesterday on account of Grushenka , like the frantic , savage fool he is , but he wo n't steal . '' 
`` He is in very great need of money now - the greatest need , Ivan Fyodorovitch . 
You do n't know in what need he is , '' Smerdyakov explained , with perfect composure and remarkable distinctness . 
`` He looks on that three thousand as his own , too . 
He said so to me himself . 
` My father still owes me just three thousand , ' he said . 
And besides that , consider , Ivan Fyodorovitch , there is something else perfectly true . 
It 's as good as certain , so to say , that Agrafena Alexandrovna will force him , if only she cares to , to marry her - the master himself , I mean , Fyodor Pavlovitch - if only she cares to , and of course she may care to . 
All I 've said is that she wo n't come , but maybe she 's looking for more than that - I mean to be mistress here . 
I know myself that Samsonov , her merchant , was laughing with her about it , telling her quite openly that it would not be at all a stupid thing to do . 
And she 's got plenty of sense . 
She would n't marry a beggar like Dmitri Fyodorovitch . 
So , taking that into consideration , Ivan Fyodorovitch , reflect that then neither Dmitri Fyodorovitch nor yourself and your brother , Alexey Fyodorovitch , would have anything after the master 's death , not a rouble , for Agrafena Alexandrovna would marry him simply to get hold of the whole , all the money there is . 
But if your father were to die now , there 'd be some forty thousand for sure , even for Dmitri Fyodorovitch whom he hates so , for he 's made no will ... . 
Dmitri Fyodorovitch knows all that very well . '' 
A sort of shudder passed over Ivan 's face . 
He suddenly flushed . 
`` Then why on earth , '' he suddenly interrupted Smerdyakov , `` do you advise me to go to Tchermashnya ? 
What did you mean by that ? 
If I go away , you see what will happen here . '' 
Ivan drew his breath with difficulty . 
`` Precisely so , '' said Smerdyakov , softly and reasonably , watching Ivan intently , however . 
`` What do you mean by ` precisely so ' ? '' 
Ivan questioned him , with a menacing light in his eyes , restraining himself with difficulty . 
`` I spoke because I felt sorry for you . 
If I were in your place I should simply throw it all up ... rather than stay on in such a position , '' answered Smerdyakov , with the most candid air looking at Ivan 's flashing eyes . 
They were both silent . 
`` You seem to be a perfect idiot , and what 's more ... an awful scoundrel , too . '' 
Ivan rose suddenly from the bench . 
He was about to pass straight through the gate , but he stopped short and turned to Smerdyakov . 
Something strange followed . 
Ivan , in a sudden paroxysm , bit his lip , clenched his fists , and , in another minute , would have flung himself on Smerdyakov . 
The latter , anyway , noticed it at the same moment , started , and shrank back . 
But the moment passed without mischief to Smerdyakov , and Ivan turned in silence , as it seemed in perplexity , to the gate . 
`` I am going away to Moscow to-morrow , if you care to know - early to-morrow morning . 
That 's all ! '' 
he suddenly said aloud angrily , and wondered himself afterwards what need there was to say this then to Smerdyakov . 
`` That 's the best thing you can do , '' he responded , as though he had expected to hear it ; `` except that you can always be telegraphed for from Moscow , if anything should happen here . '' 
Ivan stopped again , and again turned quickly to Smerdyakov . 
But a change had passed over him , too . 
All his familiarity and carelessnes had completely disappeared . 
His face expressed attention and expectation , intent but timid and cringing . 
`` Have n't you something more to say - something to add ? '' 
could be read in the intent gaze he fixed on Ivan . 
`` And could n't I be sent for from Tchermashnya , too - in case anything happened ? '' 
Ivan shouted suddenly , for some unknown reason raising his voice . 
`` From Tchermashnya , too ... you could be sent for , '' Smerdyakov muttered , almost in a whisper , looking disconcerted , but gazing intently into Ivan 's eyes . 
`` Only Moscow is farther and Tchermashnya is nearer . 
Is it to save my spending money on the fare , or to save my going so far out of my way , that you insist on Tchermashnya ? '' 
`` Precisely so ... '' muttered Smerdyakov , with a breaking voice . 
He looked at Ivan with a revolting smile , and again made ready to draw back . 
But to his astonishment Ivan broke into a laugh , and went through the gate still laughing . 
Anyone who had seen his face at that moment would have known that he was not laughing from lightness of heart , and he could not have explained himself what he was feeling at that instant . 
He moved and walked as though in a nervous frenzy . 
`` It 's Always Worth While Speaking to a Clever Man '' AND in the same nervous frenzy , too , he spoke . 
Meeting Fyodor Pavlovitch in the drawing-room directly he went in , he shouted to him , waving his hands , `` I am going upstairs to my room , not in to you . 
Good-bye ! '' 
and passed by , trying not even to look at his father . 
Very possibly the old man was too hateful to him at that moment ; but such an unceremonious display of hostility was a surprise even to Fyodor Pavlovitch . 
And the old man evidently wanted to tell him something at once and had come to meet him in the drawing-room on purpose . 
Receiving this amiable greeting , he stood still in silence and with an ironical air watched his son going upstairs , till he passed out of sight . 
`` What 's the matter with him ? '' 
he promptly asked Smerdyakov , who had followed Ivan . 
`` Angry about something . 
Who can tell ? '' 
the valet muttered evasively . 
`` Confound him ! 
Let him be angry then . 
Bring in the samovar , and get along with you . 
Look sharp ! 
No news ? '' 
Then followed a series of questions such as Smerdyakov had just complained of to Ivan , all relating to his expected visitor , and these questions we will omit . 
Half an hour later the house was locked , and the crazy old man was wandering along through the rooms in excited expectation of hearing every minute the five knocks agreed upon . 
Now and then he peered out into the darkness , seeing nothing . 
It was very late , but Ivan was still awake and reflecting . 
He sat up late that night , till two o'clock . 
But we will not give an account of his thoughts , and this is not the place to look into that soul - its turn will come . 
And even if one tried , it would be very hard to give an account of them , for there were no thoughts in his brain , but something very vague , and , above all , intense excitement . 
He felt himself that he had lost his bearings . 
He was fretted , too , by all sorts of strange and almost surprising desires ; for instance , after midnight he suddenly had an intense irresistible inclination to go down , open the door , go to the lodge and beat Smerdyakov . 
But if he had been asked why , he could not have given any exact reason , except perhaps that he loathed the valet as one who had insulted him more gravely than anyone in the world . 
On the other hand , he was more than once that night overcome by a sort of inexplicable humiliating terror , which he felt positively paralysed his physical powers . 
His head ached and he was giddy . 
A feeling of hatred was rankling in his heart , as though he meant to avenge himself on someone . 
He even hated Alyosha , recalling the conversation he had just had with him . 
At moments he hated himself intensely . 
Of Katerina Ivanovna he almost forgot to think , and wondered greatly at this afterwards , especially as he remembered perfectly that when he had protested so valiantly to Katerina Ivanovna that he would go away next day to Moscow , something had whispered in his heart , `` That 's nonsense , you are not going , and it wo n't be so easy to tear yourself away as you are boasting now . '' 
Remembering that night long afterwards , Ivan recalled with peculiar repulsion how he had suddenly got up from the sofa and had stealthily , as though he were afraid of being watched , opened the door , gone out on the staircase and listened to Fyodor Pavlovitch stirring down below , had listened a long while - some five minutes - with a sort of strange curiosity , holding his breath while his heart throbbed . 
And why he had done all this , why he was listening , he could not have said . 
That `` action '' all his life afterwards he called `` infamous , '' and at the bottom of his heart , he thought of it as the basest action of his life . 
For Fyodor Pavlovitch himself he felt no hatred at that moment , but was simply intensely curious to know how he was walking down there below and what he must be doing now . 
He wondered and imagined how he must be peeping out of the dark windows and stopping in the middle of the room , listening , listening - for someone to knock . 
Ivan went out on the stairs twice to listen like this . 
About two o'clock when everything was quiet , and even Fyodor Pavlovitch had gone to bed , Ivan had got into bed , firmly resolved to fall asleep at once , as he felt fearfully exhausted . 
And he did fall asleep at once , and slept soundly without dreams , but waked early , at seven o'clock , when it was broad daylight . 
Opening his eyes , he was surprised to feel himself extraordinarily vigorous . 
He jumped up at once and dressed quickly ; then dragged out his trunk and began packing immediately . 
His linen had come back from the laundress the previous morning . 
Ivan positively smiled at the thought that everything was helping his sudden departure . 
And his departure certainly was sudden . 
Though Ivan had said the day before -LRB- to Katerina Ivanovna , Alyosha , and Smerdyakov -RRB- that he was leaving next day , yet he remembered that he had no thought of departure when he went to bed , or , at least , had not dreamed that his first act in the morning would be to pack his trunk . 
At last his trunk and bag were ready . 
It was about nine o'clock when Marfa Ignatyevna came in with her usual inquiry , `` Where will your honour take your tea , in your own room or downstairs ? '' 
He looked almost cheerful , but there was about him , about his words and gestures , something hurried and scattered . 
Greeting his father affably , and even inquiring specially after his health , though he did not wait to hear his answer to the end , he announced that he was starting off in an hour to return to Moscow for good , and begged him to send for the horses . 
His father heard this announcement with no sign of surprise , and forgot in an unmannerly way to show regret at losing him . 
Instead of doing so , he flew into a great flutter at the recollection of some important business of his own . 
`` What a fellow you are ! 
Not to tell me yesterday ! 
Never mind ; we 'll manage it all the same . 
Do me a great service , my dear boy . 
Go to Tchermashnya on the way . 
It 's only to turn to the left from the station at Volovya , only another twelve versts and you come to Tchermashnya . '' 
`` I 'm sorry , I ca n't . 
It 's eighty versts to the railway and the train starts for Moscow at seven o'clock to-night . 
I can only just catch it . '' 
`` You 'll catch it to-morrow or the day after , but to-day turn off to Tchermashnya . 
It wo n't put you out much to humour your father ! 
If I had n't had something to keep me here , I would have run over myself long ago , for I 've some business there in a hurry . 
But here I. . . 
it 's not the time for me to go now ... . 
You see , I 've two pieces of copse land there . 
The Maslovs , an old merchant and his son , will give eight thousand for the timber . 
But last year I just missed a purchaser who would have given twelve . 
There 's no getting anyone about here to buy it . 
The Maslovs have it all their own way . 
One has to take what they 'll give , for no one here dare bid against them . 
The priest at Ilyinskoe wrote to me last Thursday that a merchant called Gorstkin , a man I know , had turned up . 
What makes him valuable is that he is not from these parts , so he is not afraid of the Maslovs . 
He says he will give me eleven thousand for the copse . 
Do you hear ? 
But he 'll only be here , the priest writes , for a week altogether , so you must go at once and make a bargain with him . '' 
`` Well , you write to the priest ; he 'll make the bargain . '' 
`` He ca n't do it . 
He has no eye for business . 
He is a perfect treasure , I 'd give him twenty thousand to take care of for me without a receipt ; but he has no eye for business , he is a perfect child , a crow could deceive him . 
And yet he is a learned man , would you believe it ? 
This Gorstkin looks like a peasant , he wears a blue kaftan , but he is a regular rogue . 
That 's the common complaint . 
He is a liar . 
Sometimes he tells such lies that you wonder why he is doing it . 
He told me the year before last that his wife was dead and that he had married another , and would you believe it , there was not a word of truth in it ? 
His wife has never died at all , she is alive to this day and gives him a beating twice a week . 
So what you have to find out is whether he is lying or speaking the truth when he says he wants to buy it and would give eleven thousand . '' 
`` I shall be no use in such a business . 
I have no eye either . '' 
`` Stay , wait a bit ! 
You will be of use , for I will tell you the signs by which you can judge about Gorstkin . 
I 've done business with him a long time . 
You see , you must watch his beard ; he has a nasty , thin , red beard . 
If his beard shakes when he talks and he gets cross , it 's all right , he is saying what he means , he wants to do business . 
But if he strokes his beard with his left hand and grins - he is trying to cheat you . 
Do n't watch his eyes , you wo n't find out anything from his eyes , he is a deep one , a rogue but watch his beard ! 
I 'll give you a note and you show it to him . 
He 's called Gorstkin , though his real name is Lyagavy ; * but do n't call him so , he will be offended . 
If you come to an understanding with him , and see it 's all right , write here at once . 
You need only write : ` He 's not lying . ' 
Stand out for eleven thousand ; one thousand you can knock off , but not more . 
just think ! 
there 's a difference between eight thousand and eleven thousand . 
It 's as good as picking up three thousand ; it 's not so easy to find a purchaser , and I 'm in desperate need of money . 
Only let me know it 's serious , and I 'll run over and fix it up . 
I 'll snatch the time somehow . 
But what 's the good of my galloping over , if it 's all a notion of the priest 's ? 
Come , will you go ? '' 
* i.e. setter dog . 
`` Oh , I ca n't spare the time . 
You must excuse me . '' 
`` Come , you might oblige your father . 
I sha n't forget it . 
You 've no heart , any of you that 's what it is ! 
What 's a day or two to you ? 
Where are you going now - to Venice ? 
Your Venice will keep another two days . 
I would have sent Alyosha , but what use is Alyosha in a thing like that ? 
I send you just because you are a clever fellow . 
Do you suppose I do n't see that ? 
You know nothing about timber , but you 've got an eye . 
All that is wanted is to see whether the man is in earnest . 
I tell you , watch his beard - if his beard shakes you know he is in earnest . '' 
`` You force me to go to that damned Tchermashnya yourself , then ? '' 
cried Ivan , with a malignant smile . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch did not catch , or would not catch , the malignancy , but he caught the smile . 
`` Then you 'll go , you 'll go ? 
I 'll scribble the note for you at once . '' 
`` I do n't know whether I shall go . 
I do n't know . 
I 'll decide on the way . '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
Decide at once . 
My dear fellow , decide ! 
If you settle the matter , write me a line ; give it to the priest and he 'll send it on to me at once . 
And I wo n't delay you more than that . 
You can go to Venice . 
The priest will give you horses back to Volovya station . '' 
The old man was quite delighted . 
He wrote the note , and sent for the horses . 
A light lunch was brought in , with brandy . 
When Fyodor Pavlovitch was pleased , he usually became expansive , but to-day he seemed to restrain himself . 
Of Dmitri , for instance , he did not say a word . 
He was quite unmoved by the parting , and seemed , in fact , at a loss for something to say . 
Ivan noticed this particularly . 
`` He must be bored with me , '' he thought . 
Only when accompanying his son out on to the steps , the old man began to fuss about . 
He would have kissed him , but Ivan made haste to hold out his hand , obviously avoiding the kiss . 
His father saw it at once , and instantly pulled himself up . 
`` Well , good luck to you , good luck to you ! '' 
he repeated from the steps . 
`` You 'll come again some time or other ? 
Mind you do come . 
I shall always be glad to see you . 
Well , Christ be with you ! '' 
Ivan got into the carriage . 
`` Good-bye , Ivan ! 
Do n't be too hard on me ! '' 
the father called for the last time . 
The whole household came out to take leave - Smerdyakov , Marfa and Grigory . 
Ivan gave them ten roubles each . 
When he had seated himself in the carriage , Smerdyakov jumped up to arrange the rug . 
`` You see ... I am going to Tchermashnya , '' broke suddenly from Ivan . 
Again , as the day before , the words seemed to drop of themselves , and he laughed , too , a peculiar , nervous laugh . 
He remembered it long after . 
`` It 's a true saying then , that ` it 's always worth while speaking to a clever man , ' '' answered Smerdyakov firmly , looking significantly at Ivan . 
The carriage rolled away . 
Nothing was clear in Ivan 's soul , but he looked eagerly around him at the fields , at the hills , at the trees , at a flock of geese flying high overhead in the bright sky . 
And all of a sudden he felt very happy . 
He tried to talk to the driver , and he felt intensely interested in an answer the peasant made him ; but a minute later he realised that he was not catching anything , and that he had not really even taken in the peasant 's answer . 
He was silent , and it was pleasant even so . 
The air was pure and cool , sky bright . 
The images of Alyosha and Katerina Ivanovna floated into his mind . 
But he softly smiled , blew softly on the friendly phantoms , and they flew away . 
`` There 's plenty of time for them , '' he thought . 
They reached the station quickly , changed horses , and galloped to Volovya `` Why is it worth while speaking to a clever man ? 
What did he mean by that ? '' 
The thought seemed suddenly to clutch at his breathing . 
`` And why did I tell him I was going to Tchermashnya ? '' 
They reached Volovya station . 
Ivan got out of the carriage , and the drivers stood round him bargaining over the journey of twelve versts to Tchermashnya . 
He told them to harness the horses . 
He went into the station house , looked round , glanced at the overseer 's wife , and suddenly went back to the entrance . 
`` I wo n't go to Tchermashnya . 
Am I too late to reach the railway by seven , brothers ? '' 
`` We shall just do it . 
Shall we get the carriage out ? '' 
`` At once . 
Will any one of you be going to the town to-morrow ? '' 
`` To be sure . 
Mitri here will . '' 
`` Can you do me a service , Mitri ? 
Go to my father 's , to Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , and tell him I have n't gone to Tchermashnya . 
Can you ? '' 
`` Of course I can . 
I 've known Fyodor Pavlovitch a long time . '' 
`` And here 's something for you , for I dare say he wo n't give you anything , '' said Ivan , laughing gaily . 
`` You may depend on it he wo n't . '' 
Mitri laughed too . 
`` Thank you , sir . 
I 'll be sure to do it . '' 
At seven o'clock Ivan got into the train and set off to Moscow . 
`` Away with the past . 
I 've done with the old world for ever , and may I have no news , no echo , from it . 
To a new life , new places , and no looking back ! '' 
But instead of delight his soul was filled with such gloom , and his heart ached with such anguish , as he had never known in his life before . 
He was thinking all the night . 
The train flew on , and only at daybreak , when he was approaching Moscow , he suddenly roused himself from his meditation . 
`` I am a scoundrel , '' he whispered to himself . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch remained well satisfied at having seen his son off . 
For two hours afterwards he felt almost happy , and sat drinking brandy . 
But suddenly something happened which was very annoying and unpleasant for everyone in the house , and completely upset Fyodor Pavlovitch 's equanimity at once . 
Smerdyakov went to the cellar for something and fell down from the top of the steps . 
Fortunately , Marfa Ignatyevna was in the yard and heard him in time . 
She did not see the fall , but heard his scream - the strange , peculiar scream , long familiar to her - the scream of the epileptic falling in a fit . 
They could not tell whether the fit had come on him at the moment he was decending the steps , so that he must have fallen unconscious , or whether it was the fall and the shock that had caused the fit in Smerdyakov , who was known to be liable to them . 
They found him at the bottom of the cellar steps , writhing in convulsions and foaming at the mouth . 
It was thought at first that he must have broken something - an arm or a leg - and hurt himself , but `` God had preserved him , '' as Marfa Ignatyevna expressed it - nothing of the kind had happened . 
But it was difficult to get him out of the cellar . 
They asked the neighbours to help and managed it somehow . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch himself was present at the whole ceremony . 
He helped , evidently alarmed and upset . 
The sick man did not regain consciousness ; the convulsions ceased for a time , but then began again , and everyone concluded that the same thing would happen , as had happened a year before , when he accidently fell from the garret . 
They remembered that ice been put on his head then . 
There was still ice in the cellar , and Marfa Ignatyevna had some brought up . 
In the evening , Fyodor Pavlovitch sent for Doctor Herzenstube , who arrived at once . 
He was a most estimable old man , and the most careful and conscientious doctor in the province . 
After careful examination , he concluded that the fit was a very violent one and might have serious consequences ; that meanwhile he , Herzenstube , did not fully understand it , but that by to-morrow morning , if the present remedies were unavailing , he would venture to try something else . 
The invalid was taken to the lodge , to a room next to Grigory 's and Marfa Ignatyevna 's . 
Then Fyodor Pavlovitch had one misfortune after another to put up with that day . 
Marfa Ignatyevna cooked the dinner , and the soup , compared with Smerdyakov 's , was `` no better than dish-water , '' and the fowl was so dried up that it was impossible to masticate it . 
To her master 's bitter , though deserved , reproaches , Marfa Ignatyevna replied that the fowl was a very old one to begin with , and that she had never been trained as a cook . 
In the evening there was another trouble in store for Fyodor Pavlovitch ; he was informed that Grigory , who had not been well for the last three days , was completely laid up by his lumbago . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch finished his tea as early as possible and locked himself up alone in the house . 
He was in terrible excitement and suspense . 
That evening he reckoned on Grushenka 's coming almost as a certainty . 
He had received from Smerdyakov that morning an assurance `` that she had promised to come without fail . '' 
The incorrigible old man 's heart throbbed with excitement ; he paced up and down his empty rooms listening . 
He had to be on the alert . 
Dmitri might be on the watch for her somewhere , and when she knocked on the window -LRB- Smerdyakov had informed him two days before that he had told her where and how to knock -RRB- the door must be opened at once . 
She must not be a second in the passage , for fear which God forbid ! 
- that she should be frightened and run away . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch had much to think of , but never had his heart been steeped in such voluptuous hopes . 
This time he could say almost certainly that she would come ! 
The Russian Monk . 
Father Zossima and His Visitors WHEN with an anxious and aching heart Alyosha went into his elder 's cell , he stood still almost astonished . 
Instead of a sick man at his last gasp , perhaps unconscious , as he had feared to find him , he saw him sitting up in his chair and , though weak and exhausted , his face was bright and cheerful , he was surrounded by visitors and engaged in a quiet and joyful conversation . 
But he had only got up from his bed a quarter of an hour before Alyosha 's arrival ; his visitors had gathered together in his cell earlier , waiting for him to wake , having received a most confident assurance from Father Paissy that `` the teacher would get up , and as he had himself promised in the morning , converse once more with those dear to his heart . '' 
This promise and indeed every word of the dying elder Father Paissy put implicit trust in . 
If he had seen him unconscious , if he had seen him breathe his last , and yet had his promise that he would rise up and say good-bye to him , he would not have believed perhaps even in death , but would still have expected the dead man to recover and fulfil his promise . 
In the morning as he lay down to sleep , Father Zossima had told him positively : `` I shall not die without the delight of another conversation with you , beloved of my heart . 
I shall look once more on your dear face and pour out my heart to you once again . '' 
The monks , who had gathered for this probably last conversation with Father Zossima , had all been his devoted friends for many years . 
There were four of them : Father Iosif and Father Paissy , Father Mihail the warden of the hermitage , a man not very old and far from being learned . 
He was of humble origin , of strong will and steadfast faith , of austere appearance , but of deep tenderness , though he obviously concealed it as though he were almost ashamed of it . 
The fourth , Father Anfim , was a very old and humble little monk of the poorest peasant class . 
He was almost illiterate , and very quiet , scarcely speaking to anyone . 
He was the humblest of the humble , and looked as though he had been frightened by something great and awful beyond the scope of his intelligence . 
Father Zossima had a great affection for this timorous man , and always treated him with marked respect , though perhaps there was no one he had known to whom he had said less , in spite of the fact that he had spent years wandering about holy Russia with him . 
That was very long ago , forty years before , when Father Zossima first began his life as a monk in a poor and little monastery at Kostroma , and when , shortly after , he had accompanied Father Anfim on his pilgrimage to collect alms for their poor monastery . 
The whole party were in the bedroom which , as we mentioned before , was very small , so that there was scarcely room for the four of them -LRB- in addition to Porfiry , the novice , who stood -RRB- to sit round Father Zossima on chairs brought from the sitting room . 
It was already beginning to get dark , the room was lighted up by the lamps and the candles before the ikons . 
Seeing Alyosha standing embarrassed in the doorway , Father Zossima smiled at him joyfully and held out his hand . 
`` Welcome , my quiet one , welcome , my dear , here you are too . 
I knew you would come . '' 
Alyosha went up to him , bowed down before him to the ground and wept . 
Something surged up from his heart , his soul was quivering , he wanted to sob . 
`` Come , do n't weep over me yet , '' Father Zossima smiled , laying his right hand on his head . 
`` You see I am sitting up talking ; maybe I shall live another twenty years yet , as that dear good woman from Vishegorye , with her little Lizaveta in her arms , wished me yesterday . 
God bless the mother and the little girl Lizaveta , '' he crossed himself . 
`` Porfiry , did you take her offering where I told you ? '' 
He meant the sixty copecks brought him the day before by the good-humoured woman to be given `` to someone poorer than me . '' 
Such offerings , always of money gained by personal toil , are made by way of penance voluntarily undertaken . 
The elder had sent Porfiry the evening before to a widow , whose house had been burnt down lately , and who after the fire had gone with her children begging alms . 
Porfiry hastened to reply that he had given the money , as he had been instructed , `` from an unknown benefactress . '' 
`` Get up , my dear boy , '' the elder went on to Alyosha . 
`` Let me look at you . 
Have you been home and seen your brother ? '' 
It seemed strange to Alyosha that he asked so confidently and precisely , about one of his brothers only - but which one ? 
Then perhaps he had sent him out both yesterday and to-day for the sake of that brother . 
`` I have seen one of my brothers , '' answered Alyosha . 
`` I mean the elder one , to whom I bowed down . '' 
`` I only saw him yesterday and could not find him to-day , '' said Alyosha . 
`` Make haste to find him , go again to-morrow and make haste , leave everything and make haste . 
Perhaps you may still have time to prevent something terrible . 
I bowed down yesterday to the great suffering in store for him . '' 
He was suddenly silent and seemed to be pondering . 
The words were strange . 
Father Iosif , who had witnessed the scene yesterday , exchanged glances with Father Paissy . 
Alyosha could not resist asking : `` Father and teacher , '' he began with extreme emotion , `` your words are too obscure ... . 
What is this suffering in store for him ? '' 
`` Do n't inquire . 
I seemed to see something terrible yesterday ... as though his whole future were expressed in his eyes . 
A look came into his eyes - so that I was instantly horror-stricken at what that man is preparing for himself . 
Once or twice in my life I 've seen such a look in a man 's face ... reflecting as it were his future fate , and that fate , alas , came to pass . 
I sent you to him , Alexey , for I thought your brotherly face would help him . 
But everything and all our fates are from the Lord . 
` Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die , it abideth alone ; but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit . ' 
Remember that . 
You , Alexey , I 've many times silently blessed for your face , know that , '' added the elder with a gentle smile . 
`` This is what I think of you , you will go forth from these walls , but will live like a monk in the world . 
You will have many enemies , but even your foes will love you . 
Life will bring you many misfortunes , but you will find your happiness in them , and will bless life and will make others bless it - which is what matters most . 
Well , that is your character . 
Fathers and teachers , '' he addressed his friends with a tender smile , `` I have never till to-day told even him why the face of this youth is so dear to me . 
Now I will tell you . 
His face has been as it were a remembrance and a prophecy for me . 
At the dawn of my life when I was a child I had an elder brother who died before my eyes at seventeen . 
And later on in the course of my life I gradually became convinced that that brother had been for a guidance and a sign from on high for me . 
For had he not come into my life , I should never perhaps , so I fancy at least , have become a monk and entered on this precious path . 
He appeared first to me in my childhood , and here , at the end of my pilgrimage , he seems to have come to me over again . 
It is marvellous , fathers and teachers , that Alexey , who has some , though not a great , resemblance in face , seems to me so like him spiritually , that many times I have taken him for that young man , my brother , mysteriously come back to me at the end of my pilgrimage , as a reminder and an inspiration . 
So that I positively wondered at so strange a dream in myself . 
Do you hear this , Porfiry ? '' 
he turned to the novice who waited on him . 
`` Many times I 've seen in your face as it were a look of mortification that I love Alexey more than you . 
Now you know why that was so , but I love you too , know that , and many times I grieved at your mortification . 
I should like to tell you , dear friends , of that youth , my brother , for there has been no presence in my life more precious , more significant and touching . 
My heart is full of tenderness , and I look at my whole life at this moment as though living through it again . '' 
Here I must observe that this last conversation of Father Zossima with the friends who visited him on the last day of his life has been partly preserved in writing . 
Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov wrote it down from memory , some time after his elder 's death . 
But whether this was only the conversation that took place then , or whether he added to it his notes of parts of former conversations with his teacher , I can not determine . 
In his account , Father Zossima 's talk goes on without interruption , as though he told his life to his friends in the form of a story , though there is no doubt , from other accounts of it , that the conversation that evening was general . 
Though the guests did not interrupt Father Zossima much , yet they too talked , perhaps even told something themselves . 
Besides , Father Zossima could not have carried on an uninterrupted narrative , for he was sometimes gasping for breath , his voice failed him , and he even lay down to rest on his bed , though he did not fall asleep and his visitors did not leave their seats . 
Once or twice the conversation was interrupted by Father Paissy 's reading the Gospel . 
It is worthy of note , too , that no one of them supposed that he would die that night , for on that evening of his life after his deep sleep in the day he seemed suddenly to have found new strength , which kept him up through this long conversation . 
It was like a last effort of love which gave him marvellous energy ; only for a little time , however , for his life was cut short immediately . . 
But of that later . 
I will only add now that I have preferred to confine myself to the account given by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
It will be shorter and not so fatiguing , though , of course , as I must repeat , Alyosha took a great deal from previous conversations and added them to it . 
Notes of the Life of the deceased Priest and Monk , the Elder Zossima , taken from his own words by Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov . 
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES -LRB- a -RRB- Father Zossima 's Brother . 
Beloved fathers and teachers , I was born in a distant province in the north , in the town of V. My father was a gentleman by birth , but of no great consequence or position . 
He died when I was only two years old , and I do n't remember him at all . 
He left my mother a small house built of wood , and a fortune , not large , but sufficient to keep her and her children in comfort . 
There were two of us , my elder brother Markel and I . 
He was eight years older than I was , of hasty , irritable temperament , but kind-hearted and never ironical . 
He was remarkably silent , especially at home with me , his mother , and the servants . 
He did well at school , but did not get on with his school-fellows , though he never quarrelled , at least so my mother has told me . 
Six months before his death , when he was seventeen , he made friends with a political exile who had been banished from Moscow to our town for freethinking , and led a solitary existence there . 
He was a good scholar who had gained distinction in philosophy in the university . 
Something made him take a fancy to Markel , and he used to ask him to see him . 
The young man would spend whole evenings with him during that winter , till the exile was summoned to Petersburg to take up his post again at his own request , as he had powerful friends . 
It was the beginning of Lent , and Markel would not fast , he was rude and laughed at it . 
`` That 's all silly twaddle , and there is no God , '' he said , horrifying my mother , the servants , and me too . 
For though I was only nine , I too was aghast at hearing such words . 
We had four servants , all serfs . 
I remember my mother selling one of the four , the cook Afimya , who was lame and elderly , for sixty paper roubles , and hiring a free servant to take her place . 
In the sixth week in Lent , my brother , who was never strong and had a tendency to consumption , was taken ill . 
He was tall but thin and delicate-looking , and of very pleasing countenance . 
I suppose he caught cold , anyway the doctor , who came , soon whispered to my mother that it was galloping consumption , that he would not live through the spring . 
My mother began weeping , and , careful not to alarm my brother , she entreated him to go to church , to confess and take the sacrament , as he was still able to move about . 
This made him angry , and he said something profane about the church . 
He grew thoughtful , however ; he guessed at once that he was seriously ill , and that that was why his mother was begging him to confess and take the sacrament . 
He had been aware , indeed , for a long time past , that he was far from well , and had a year before coolly observed at dinner to your mother and me , `` My life wo n't be long among you , I may not live another year , '' which seemed now like a prophecy . 
Three days passed and Holy Week had come . 
And on Tuesday morning my brother began going to church . 
`` I am doing this simply for your sake , mother , to please and comfort you , '' he said . 
My mother wept with joy and grief . 
`` His end must be near , '' she thought , `` if there 's such a change in him . '' 
But he was not able to go to church long , he took to his bed , so he had to confess and take the sacrament at home . 
It was a late Easter , and the days were bright , fine , and full of fragrance . 
I remember he used to cough all night and sleep badly , but in the morning he dressed and tried to sit up in an arm-chair . 
That 's how I remember him sitting , sweet and gentle , smiling , his face bright and joyous , in spite of his illness . 
A marvellous change passed over him , his spirit seemed transformed . 
The old nurse would come in and say , `` Let me light the lamp before the holy image , my dear . '' 
And once he would not have allowed it and would have blown it out . 
`` Light it , light it , dear , I was a wretch to have prevented you doing it . 
You are praying when you light the lamp , and I am praying when I rejoice seeing you . 
So we are praying to the same God . '' 
Those words seemed strange to us , and mother would go to her room and weep , but when she went in to him she wiped her eyes and looked cheerful . 
`` Mother , do n't weep , darling , '' he would say , `` I 've long to live yet , long to rejoice with you , and life is glad and joyful . '' 
`` Ah , dear boy , how can you talk of joy when you lie feverish at night , coughing as though you would tear yourself to pieces . '' 
`` Do n't cry , mother , '' he would answer , `` life is paradise , and we are all in paradise , but we wo n't see it ; if we would , we should have heaven on earth the next day . '' 
Everyone wondered at his words , he spoke so strangely and positively ; we were all touched and wept . 
Friends came to see us . 
`` Dear ones , '' he would say to them , `` what have I done that you should love me so , how can you love anyone like me , and how was it I did not know , I did not appreciate it before ? '' 
When the servants came in to him he would say continually , `` Dear , kind people , why are you doing so much for me , do I deserve to be waited on ? 
If it were God 's will for me to live , I would wait on you , for all men should wait on one another . '' 
Mother shook her head as she listened . 
`` My darling , it 's your illness makes you talk like that . '' 
`` Mother darling , '' he would say , `` there must be servants and masters , but if so I will be the servant of my servants , the same as they are to me . 
And another thing , mother , every one of us has sinned against all men , and I more than any . '' 
Mother positively smiled at that , smiled through her tears . 
`` Why , how could you have sinned against all men , more than all ? 
Robbers and murderers have done that , but what sin have you committed yet , that you hold yourself more guilty than all ? '' 
`` Mother , little heart of mine , '' he said -LRB- he had begun using such strange caressing words at that time -RRB- , `` little heart of mine , my joy , believe me , everyone is really responsible to all men for all men and for everything . 
I do n't know how to explain it to you , but I feel it is so , painfully even . 
And how is it we went on then living , getting angry and not knowing ? '' 
So he would get up every day , more and more sweet and joyous and full of love . 
When the doctor , an old German called Eisenschmidt , came : `` Well , doctor , have I another day in this world ? '' 
he would ask , joking . 
`` You 'll live many days yet , '' the doctor would answer , `` and months and years too . '' 
`` Months and years ! '' 
he would exclaim . 
`` Why reckon the days ? 
One day is enough for a man to know all happiness . 
My dear ones , why do we quarrel , try to outshine each other and keep grudges against each other ? 
Let 's go straight into the garden , walk and play there , love , appreciate , and kiss each other , and glorify life . '' 
`` Your son can not last long , '' the doctor told my mother , as she accompanied him the door . 
`` The disease is affecting his brain . '' 
The windows of his room looked out into the garden , and our garden was a shady one , with old trees in it which were coming into bud . 
The first birds of spring were flitting in the branches , chirruping and singing at the windows . 
And looking at them and admiring them , he began suddenly begging their forgiveness too : `` Birds of heaven , happy birds , forgive me , for I have sinned against you too . '' 
None of us could understand that at the time , but he shed tears of joy . 
`` Yes , '' he said , `` there was such a glory of God all about me : birds , trees , meadows , sky ; only I lived in shame and dishonoured it all and did not notice the beauty and glory . '' 
`` You take too many sins on yourself , '' mother used to say , weeping . 
`` Mother , darling , it 's for joy , not for grief I am crying . 
Though I ca n't explain it to you , I like to humble myself before them , for I do n't know how to love them enough . 
If I have sinned against everyone , yet all forgive me , too , and that 's heaven . 
Am I not in heaven now ? '' 
And there was a great deal more I do n't remember . 
I remember I went once into his room when there was no one else there . 
It was a bright evening , the sun was setting , and the whole room was lighted up . 
He beckoned me , and I went up to him . 
He put his hands on my shoulders and looked into my face tenderly , lovingly ; he said nothing for a minute , only looked at me like that . 
`` Well , '' he said , `` run and play now , enjoy life for me too . '' 
I went out then and ran to play . 
And many times in my life afterwards I remembered even with tears how he told me to enjoy life for him too . 
There were many other marvellous and beautiful sayings of his , though we did not understand them at the time . 
He died the third week after Easter . 
He was fully conscious though he could not talk ; up to his last hour he did not change . 
He looked happy , his eyes beamed and sought us , he smiled at us , beckoned us . 
There was a great deal of talk even in the town about his death . 
I was impressed by all this at the time , but not too much so , though I cried a good deal at his funeral . 
I was young then , a child , but a lasting impression , a hidden feeling of it all , remained in my heart , ready to rise up and respond when the time came . 
So indeed it happened . 
-LRB- b -RRB- Of the Holy Scriptures in the Life of Father Zossima . 
I was left alone with my mother . 
Her friends began advising her to send me to Petersburg as other parents did . 
`` You have only one son now , '' they said , `` and have a fair income , and you will be depriving him perhaps of a brilliant career if you keep him here . '' 
They suggested I should be sent to Petersburg to the Cadet Corps , that I might afterwards enter the Imperial Guard . 
My mother hesitated for a long time , it was awful to part with her only child , but she made up her mind to it at last , though not without many tears , believing she was acting for my happiness . 
She brought me to Petersburg and put me into the Cadet Corps , and I never saw her again . 
For she too died three years afterwards . 
She spent those three years mourning and grieving for both of us . 
From the house of my childhood I have brought nothing but precious memories , for there are no memories more precious than those of early childhood in one 's first home . 
And that is almost always so if there is any love and harmony in the family at all . 
Indeed , precious memories may remain even of a bad home , if only the heart knows how to find what is precious . 
With my memories of home I count , too , my memories of the Bible , which , child as I was , I was very eager to read at home . 
I had a book of Scripture history then with excellent pictures , called A Hundred and Four Stories from the Old and New Testament , and I learned to read from it . 
I have it lying on my shelf now ; I keep it as a precious relic of the past . 
But even before I learned to read , I remember first being moved to devotional feeling at eight years old . 
My mother took me alone to mass -LRB- I do n't remember where my brother was at the time -RRB- on the Monday before Easter . 
It was a fine day , and I remember to-day , as though I saw it now , how the incense rose from the censer and softly floated upwards and , overhead in the cupola , mingled in rising waves with the sunlight that streamed in at the little window . 
I was stirred by the sight , and for the first time in my life I consciously received the seed of God 's word in my heart . 
A youth came out into the middle of the church carrying a big book , so large that at the time I fancied he could scarcely carry it . 
He laid it on the reading desk , opened it , and began reading , and suddenly for the first time I understood something read in the church of God . 
In the land of Uz , there lived a man , righteous and God-fearing , and he had great wealth , so many camels , so many sheep and asses , and his children feasted , and he loved them very much and prayed for them . 
`` It may be that my sons have sinned in their feasting . '' 
Now the devil came before the Lord together with the sons of God , and said to the Lord that he had gone up and down the earth and under the earth . 
`` And hast thou considered my servant Job ? '' 
God asked of him . 
And God boasted to the devil , pointing to His great and holy servant . 
And the devil laughed at God 's words . 
`` Give him over to me and Thou wilt see that Thy servant will murmur against Thee and curse Thy name . '' 
And God gave up the just man He loved so , to the devil . 
And the devil smote his children and his cattle and scattered his wealth , all of a sudden like a thunderbolt from heaven . 
And Job rent his mantle and fell down upon the ground and cried aloud , `` Naked came I out of my mother 's womb , and naked shall I return into the earth ; the Lord gave and the Lord has taken away . 
Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever and ever . '' 
Fathers and teachers , forgive my tears now , for all my childhood rises up again before me , and I breathe now as I breathed then , with the breast of a little child of eight , and I feel as I did then , awe and wonder and gladness . 
The camels at that time caught my imagination , and Satan , who talked like that with God , and God who gave His servant up to destruction , and His servant crying out : `` Blessed be Thy name although Thou dost punish me , '' and then the soft and sweet singing in the church : `` Let my prayer rise up before Thee , '' and again incense from the priest 's censer and the kneeling and the prayer . 
Ever since then - only yesterday I took it up - I 've never been able to read that sacred tale without tears . 
And how much that is great , mysterious and unfathomable there is in it ! 
Afterwards I heard the words of mockery and blame , proud words , `` How could God give up the most loved of His saints for the diversion of the devil , take from him his children , smite him with sore boils so that he cleansed the corruption from his sores with a potsherd - and for no object except to boast to the devil ` See what My saint can suffer for My sake . ' 
`` But the greatness of it lies just in the fact that it is a mystery - that the passing earthly show and the eternal verity are brought together in it . 
In the face of the earthly truth , the eternal truth is accomplished . 
The Creator , just as on the first days of creation He ended each day with praise : `` That is good that I have created , '' looks upon Job and again praises His creation . 
And Job , praising the Lord , serves not only Him but all His creation for generations and generations , and for ever and ever , since for that he was ordained . 
Good heavens , what a book it is , and what lessons there are in it ! 
What a book the Bible is , what a miracle , what strength is given with it to man ! 
It is like a mould cast of the world and man and human nature , everything is there , and a law for everything for all the ages . 
And what mysteries are solved and revealed ! 
God raises Job again , gives him wealth again . 
Many years pass by , and he has other children and loves them . 
But how could he love those new ones when those first children are no more , when he has lost them ? 
Remembering them , how could he be fully happy with those new ones , however dear the new ones might be ? 
But he could , he could . 
It 's the great mystery of human life that old grief passes gradually into quiet , tender joy . 
The mild serenity of age takes the place of the riotous blood of youth . 
I bless the rising sun each day , and , as before , my heart sings to meet it , but now I love even more its setting , its long slanting rays and the soft , tender , gentle memories that come with them , the dear images from the whole of my long , happy life - and over all the Divine Truth , softening , reconciling , forgiving ! 
My life is ending , I know that well , but every day that is left me I feel how earthly life is in touch with a new infinite , unknown , but approaching life , the nearness of which sets my soul quivering with rapture , my mind glowing and my heart weeping with joy . 
Friends and teachers , I have heard more than once , and of late one may hear it more often , that the priests , and above all the village priests , are complaining on all sides of their miserable income and their humiliating lot . 
They plainly state , even in print - I 've read it myself - that they are unable to teach the Scriptures to the people because of the smallness of their means , and if Lutherans and heretics come and lead the flock astray , they let them lead them astray because they have so little to live upon . 
May the Lord increase the sustenance that is so precious to them , for their complaint is just , too . 
But of a truth I say , if anyone is to blame in the matter , half the fault is ours . 
For he may be short of time , he may say truly that he is overwhelmed all the while with work and services , but still it 's not all the time , even he has an hour a week to remember God . 
And he does not work the whole year round . 
Let him gather round him once a week , some hour in the evening , if only the children at first - the fathers will hear of it and they too will begin to come . 
There 's no need to build halls for this , let him take them into his own cottage . 
They wo n't spoil his cottage , they would only be there one hour . 
Let him open that book and begin reading it without grand words or superciliousness , without condescension to them , but gently and kindly , being glad that he is reading to them and that they are listening with attention , loving the words himself , only stopping from time to time to explain words that are not understood by the peasants . 
Do n't be anxious , they will understand everything , the orthodox heart will understand all ! 
Let him read them about Abraham and Sarah , about Isaac and Rebecca , of how Jacob went to Laban and wrestled with the Lord in his dream and said , `` This place is holy '' - and he will impress the devout mind of the peasant . 
Let him read , especially to the children , how the brothers sold Joseph , the tender boy , the dreamer and prophet , into bondage , and told their father that a wild beast had devoured him , and showed him his blood-stained clothes . 
Let him read them how the brothers afterwards journeyed into Egypt for corn , and Joseph , already a great ruler , unrecognised by them , tormented them , accused them , kept his brother Benjamin , and all through love : `` I love you , and loving you I torment you . '' 
For he remembered all his life how they had sold him to the merchants in the burning desert by the well , and how , wringing his hands , he had wept and besought his brothers not to sell him as a slave in a strange land . 
And how , seeing them again after many years , he loved them beyond measure , but he harassed and tormented them in love . 
He left them at last not able to bear the suffering of his heart , flung himself on his bed and wept . 
Then , wiping his tears away , he went out to them joyful and told them , `` Brothers , I am your brother Joseph '' Let him read them further how happy old Jacob was on learning that his darling boy was still alive , and how he went to Egypt leaving his own country , and died in a foreign land , bequeathing his great prophecy that had lain mysteriously hidden in his meek and timid heart all his life , that from his offspring , from Judah , will come the great hope of the world , the Messiah and Saviour . 
Fathers and teachers , forgive me and do n't be angry , that like a little child I 've been babbling of what you know long ago , and can teach me a hundred times more skilfully . 
I only speak from rapture , and forgive my tears , for I love the Bible . 
Let him too weep , the priest of God , and be sure that the hearts of his listeners will throb in response . 
Only a little tiny seed is needed - drop it into the heart of the peasant and it wo n't die , it will live in his soul all his life , it will be hidden in the midst of his darkness and sin , like a bright spot , like a great reminder . 
And there 's no need of much teaching or explanation , he will understand it all simply . 
Do you suppose that the peasants do n't understand ? 
Try reading them the touching story of the fair Esther and the haughty Vashti ; or the miraculous story of Jonah in the whale . 
Do n't forget either the parables of Our Lord , choose especially from the Gospel of St. Luke -LRB- that is what I did -RRB- , and then from the Acts of the Apostles the conversion of St. Paul -LRB- that you must n't leave out on any account -RRB- , and from the Lives of the Saints , for instance , the life of Alexey , the man of God and , greatest of all , the happy martyr and the seer of God , Mary of Egypt - and you will penetrate their hearts with these simple tales . 
Give one hour a week to it in spite of your poverty , only one little hour . 
And you will see for yourselves that our people is gracious and grateful , and will repay you a hundred foId . 
Mindful of the kindness of their priest and the moving words they have heard from him , they will of their own accord help him in his fields and in his house and will treat him with more respect than before - so that it will even increase his worldly well-being too . 
The thing is so simple that sometimes one is even afraid to put it into words , for fear of being laughed at , and yet how true it is ! 
One who does not believe in God will not believe in God 's people . 
He who believes in God 's people will see His Holiness too , even though he had not believed in it till then . 
Only the people and their future spiritual power will convert our atheists , who have torn themselves away from their native soil . 
And what is the use of Christ 's words , unless we set an example ? 
The people is lost without the Word of God , for its soul is athirst for the Word and for all that is good . 
In my youth , long ago , nearly forty years ago , I travelled all over Russia with Father Anfim , collecting funds for our monastery , and we stayed one night on the bank of a great navigable river with some fishermen . 
A good looking peasant lad , about eighteen , joined us ; he had to hurry back next morning to pull a merchant 's barge along the bank . 
I noticed him looking straight before him with clear and tender eyes . 
It was a bright , warm , still , July night , a cool mist rose from the broad river , we could hear the plash of a fish , the birds were still , all was hushed and beautiful , everything praying to God . 
Only we two were not sleeping , the lad and I , and we talked of the beauty of this world of God 's and of the great mystery of it . 
Every blade of grass , every insect , ant , and golden bee , all so marvellously know their path , though they have not intelligence , they bear witness to the mystery of God and continually accomplish it themselves . 
I saw the dear lad 's heart was moved . 
He told me that he loved the forest and the forest birds . 
He was a bird-catcher , knew the note of each of them , could call each bird . 
`` I know nothing better than to be in the forest , '' said he , `` though all things are good . '' 
`` Truly , '' I answered him , `` all things are good and fair , because all is truth . 
Look , '' said I , `` at the horse , that great beast that is so near to man ; or the lowly , pensive ox , which feeds him and works for him ; look at their faces , what meekness , what devotion to man , who often beats them mercilessly . 
What gentleness , what confidence and what beauty ! 
It 's touching to know that there 's no sin in them , for all , all except man , is sinless , and Christ has been with them before us . '' 
`` Why , '' asked the boy , `` is Christ with them too ? '' 
`` It can not but be so , '' said I , `` since the Word is for all . 
All creation and all creatures , every leaf is striving to the Word , singing glory to God , weeping to Christ , unconsciously accomplishing this by the mystery of their sinless life . 
Yonder , '' said I , `` in the forest wanders the dreadful bear , fierce and menacing , and yet innocent in it . '' 
And I told him how once a bear came to a great saint who had taken refuge in a tiny cell in the wood . 
And the great saint pitied him , went up to him without fear and gave him a piece of bread . 
`` Go along , '' said he , `` Christ be with you , '' and the savage beast walked away meekly and obediently , doing no harm . 
And the lad was delighted that the bear had walked away without hurting the saint , and that Christ was with him too . 
`` Ah , '' said he , `` how good that is , how good and beautiful is all God 's work ! '' 
He sat musing softly and sweetly . 
I saw he understood . 
And he slept beside me a light and sinless sleep . 
May God bless youth ! 
And I prayed for him as I went to sleep . 
Lord , send peace and light to Thy people ! 
-LRB- c -RRB- Recollections of Father Zossima 's Youth before he became a Monk . 
The Duel I SPENT a long time , almost eight years , in the military cadet school at Petersburg , and in the novelty of my surroundings there , many of my childish impressions grew dimmer , though I forgot nothing . 
I picked up so many new habits and opinions that I was transformed into a cruel , absurd , almost savage creature . 
A surface polish of courtesy and society manners I did acquire together with the French language . 
But we all , myself included , looked upon the soldiers in our service as cattle . 
I was perhaps worse than the rest in that respect , for I was so much more impressionable than my companions . 
By the time we left the school as officers , we were ready to lay down our lives for the honour of the regiment , but no one of us had any knowledge of the real meaning of honour , and if anyone had known it , he would have been the first to ridicule it . 
Drunkenness , debauchery and devilry were what we almost prided ourselves on . 
I do n't say that we were bad by nature , all these young men were good fellows , but they behaved badly , and I worst of all . 
What made it worse for me was that I had come into my own money , and so I flung myself into a life of pleasure , and plunged headlong into all the recklessness of youth . 
I was fond of reading , yet strange to say , the Bible was the one book I never opened at that time , though I always carried it about with me , and I was never separated from it ; in very truth I was keeping that book `` for the day and the hour , for the month and the year , '' though I knew it not . 
After four years of this life , I chanced to be in the town of K. where our regiment was stationed at the time . 
We found the people of the town hospitable , rich , and fond of entertainments . 
I met with a cordial reception everywhere , as I was of a lively temperament and was known to be well off , which always goes a long way in the world . 
And then a circumstance happened which was the beginning of it all . 
I formed an attachment to a beautiful and intelligent young girl of noble and lofty character , the daughter of people much respected . 
They were well-to-do people of influence and position . 
They always gave me a cordial and friendly reception . 
I fancied that the young lady looked on me with favour and my heart was aflame at such an idea . 
Later on I saw and fully realised that I perhaps was not so passionately in love with her at all , but only recognised the elevation of her mind and character , which I could not indeed have helped doing . 
I was prevented , however , from making her an offer at the time by my selfishness ; I was loath to part with the allurements of my free and licentious bachelor life in the heyday of my youth , and with my pockets full of money . 
I did drop some hint as to my feelings however , though I put off taking any decisive step for a time . 
Then , all of a sudden , we were ordered off for two months to another district . 
On my return two months later , I found the young lady already married to a rich neighbouring landowner , a very amiable man , still young though older than I was , connected with the best Petersburg society , which I was not , and of excellent education , which I also was not . 
I was so overwhelmed at this unexpected circumstance that my mind was positively clouded . 
The worst of it all was that , as I learned then , the young landowner had been a long while betrothed to her , and I had met him indeed many times in her house , but blinded by my conceit I had noticed nothing . 
And this particularly mortified me ; almost everybody had known all about it , while I knew nothing . 
I was filled with sudden irrepressible fury . 
With flushed face I began recalling how often I had been on the point of declaring my love to her , and as she had not attempted to stop me or to warn me , she must , I concluded , have been laughing at me all the time . 
Later on , of course , I reflected and remembered that she had been very far from laughing at me ; on the contrary , she used to turn off any love-making on my part with a jest and begin talking of other subjects ; but at that moment I was incapable of reflecting and was all eagerness for revenge . 
I am surprised to remember that my wrath and revengeful feelings were extremely repugnant to my own nature , for being of an easy temper , I found it difficult to be angry with anyone for long , and so I had to work myself up artificially and became at last revolting and absurd . 
I waited for an opportunity and succeeded in insulting my `` rival '' in the presence of a large company . 
I insulted him on a perfectly extraneous pretext , jeering at his opinion upon an important public event - it was in the year 1826 - my jeer was , so people said , clever and effective . 
Then I forced him to ask for an explanation , and behaved so rudely that he accepted my challenge in spite of the vast inequality between us , as I was younger , a person of no consequence , and of inferior rank . 
I learned afterwards for a fact that it was from a jealous feeling on his side also that my challenge was accepted ; he had been rather jealous of me on his wife 's account before their marriage ; he fancied now that if he submitted to be insulted by me and refused to accept my challenge , and if she heard of it , she might begin to despise him and waver in her love for him . 
I soon found a second in a comrade , an ensign of our regiment . 
In those days though duels were severely punished , yet duelling was a kind of fashion among the officers - so strong and deeply rooted will a brutal prejudice sometimes be . 
It was the end of June , and our meeting was to take place at seven o'clock the next day on the outskirts of the town - and then something happened that in very truth was the turning point of my life . 
In the evening , returning home in a savage and brutal humour , I flew into a rage with my orderly Afanasy , and gave him two blows in the face with all my might , so that it was covered with blood . 
He had not long been in my service and I had struck him before , but never with such ferocious cruelty . 
And , believe me , though it 's forty years ago , I recall it now with shame and pain . 
I went to bed and slept for about three hours ; when I waked up the day was breaking . 
I got up - I did not want to sleep any more - I went to the window - opened it , it looked out upon the garden ; I saw the sun rising ; it was warm and beautiful , the birds were singing . 
`` What 's the meaning of it ? '' 
I thought . 
`` I feel in my heart as it were something vile and shameful . 
Is it because I am going to shed blood ? 
No , '' I thought , `` I feel it 's not that . 
Can it be that I am afraid of death , afraid of being killed ? 
No , that 's not it , that 's not it at all . '' 
... And all at once I knew what it was : it was because I had beaten Afanasy the evening before ! 
It all rose before my mind , it all was , as it were , repeated over again ; he stood before me and I was beating him straight on the face and he was holding his arms stiffly down , his head erect , his eyes fixed upon me as though on parade . 
He staggered at every blow and did not even dare to raise his hands to protect himself . 
That is what a man has been brought to , and that was a man beating a fellow creature ! 
What a crime ! 
It was as though a sharp dagger had pierced me right through . 
I stood as if I were struck dumb , while the sun was shining , the leaves were rejoicing and the birds were trilling the praise of God ... . 
I hid my face in my hands , fell on my bed and broke into a storm of tears . 
And then I remembered by brother Markel and what he said on his death-bed to his servants : `` My dear ones , why do you wait on me , why do you love me , am I worth your waiting on me ? '' 
`` Yes , am I worth it ? '' 
flashed through my mind . 
`` After all what am I worth , that another man , a fellow creature , made in the likeness and image of God , should serve me ? '' 
For the first time in my life this question forced itself upon me . 
He had said , `` Mother , my little heart , in truth we are each responsible to all for all , it 's only that men do n't know this . 
If they knew it , the world would be a paradise at once . '' 
`` God , can that too be false ? '' 
I thought as I wept . 
`` In truth , perhaps , I am more than all others responsible for all , a greater sinner than all men in the world . '' 
And all at once the whole truth in its full light appeared to me : what was I going to do ? 
I was going to kill a good , clever , noble man , who had done me no wrong , and by depriving his wife of happiness for the rest of her life , I should be torturing and killing her too . 
I lay thus in my bed with my face in the pillow , heedless how the time was passing . 
Suddenly my second , the ensign , came in with the pistols to fetch me . 
`` Ah , '' said he , `` it 's a good thing you are up already , it 's time we were off , come along ! '' 
I did not know what to do and hurried to and fro undecided ; we went out to the carriage , however . 
`` Wait here a minute , '' I said to him . 
`` I 'll be back directly , I have forgotten my purse . '' 
And I ran back alone , to Afanasy 's little room . 
`` Afanasy , '' I said , `` I gave you two blows on the face yesterday , forgive me , '' I said . 
He started as though he were frightened , and looked at me ; and I saw that it was not enough , and on the spot , in my full officer 's uniform , I dropped at his feet and bowed my head to the ground . 
`` Forgive me , '' I said . 
Then he was completely aghast . 
`` Your honour ... sir , what are you doing ? 
Am I worth it ? '' 
And he burst out crying as I had done before , hid his face in his hands , turned to the window and shook all over with his sobs . 
I flew out to my comrade and jumped into the carriage . 
`` Ready , '' I cried . 
`` Have you ever seen a conqueror ? '' 
I asked him . 
`` Here is one before you . '' 
I was in ecstasy , laughing and talking all the way , I do n't remember what about . 
He looked at me . 
`` Well , brother , you are a plucky fellow , you 'll keep up the honour of the uniform , I can see . '' 
So we reached the place and found them there , waiting us . 
We were placed twelve paces apart ; he had the first shot . 
I stood gaily , looking him full in the face ; I did not twitch an eyelash , I looked lovingly at him , for I knew what I would do . 
His shot just grazed my cheek and ear . 
`` Thank God , '' I cried , `` no man has been killed , '' and I seized my pistol , turned back and flung it far away into the wood . 
`` That 's the place for you , '' I cried . 
I turned to my adversary . 
`` Forgive me , young fool that I am , sir , '' I said , `` for my unprovoked insult to you and for forcing you to fire at me . 
I am ten times worse than you and more , maybe . 
Tell that to the person whom you hold dearest in the world . '' 
I had no sooner said this than they all three shouted at me . 
`` Upon my word , '' cried my adversary , annoyed , `` if you did not want to fight , why did not you let me alone ? '' 
`` Yesterday I was a fool , to-day I know better , '' I answered him gaily . 
`` As to yesterday , I believe you , but as for to-day , it is difficult to agree with your opinion , '' said he . 
`` Bravo , '' I cried , clapping my hands . 
`` I agree with you there too , I have deserved it ! '' 
`` Will you shoot , sir , or not ? '' 
`` No , I wo n't , '' I said ; `` if you like , fire at me again , but it would be better for you not to fire . '' 
The seconds , especially mine , were shouting too : `` Can you disgrace the regiment like this , facing your antagonist and begging his forgiveness ! 
If I 'd only known this ! '' 
I stood facing them all , not laughing now . 
`` Gentlemen , '' I said , `` is it really so wonderful in these days to find a man who can repent of his stupidity and publicly confess his wrongdoing ? '' 
`` But not in a duel , '' cried my second again . 
`` That 's what 's so strange , '' I said . 
`` For I ought to have owned my fault as soon as I got here , before he had fired a shot , before leading him into a great and deadly sin ; but we have made our life so grotesque , that to act in that way would have been almost impossible , for only after I had faced his shot at the distance of twelve paces could my words have any significance for him , and if I had spoken before , he would have said , ` He is a coward , the sight of the pistols has frightened him , no use to listen to him . ' 
Gentlemen , '' I cried suddenly , speaking straight from my heart , `` look around you at the gifts of God , the clear sky , the pure air , the tender grass , the birds ; nature is beautiful and sinless , and we , only we , are sinful and foolish , and we do n't understand that life is heaven , for we have only to understand that and it will at once be fulfilled in all its beauty , we shall embrace each other and weep . '' 
I would have said more but I could not ; my voice broke with the sweetness and youthful gladness of it , and there was such bliss in my heart as I had never known before in my life . 
`` All this is rational and edifying , '' said my antagonist , `` and in any case you are an original person . '' 
`` You may laugh , '' I said to him , laughing too , `` but afterwards you will approve of me . '' 
`` Oh , I am ready to approve of you now , '' said he ; `` will you shake hands ? 
for I believe you are genuinely sincere . '' 
`` No , '' I said , `` not now , later on when I have grown worthier and deserve your esteem , then shake hands and you will do well . '' 
We went home , my second upbraiding me all the way , while I kissed him . 
All my comrades heard of the affair at once and gathered together to pass judgment on me the same day . 
`` He has disgraced the uniform , '' they said ; `` Let him resign his commission . '' 
Some stood up for me : `` He faced the shot , '' they said . 
`` Yes , but he was afraid of his other shot and begged for forgiveness . '' 
`` If he had been afraid of being shot , he would have shot his own pistol first before asking forgiveness , while he flung it loaded into the forest . 
No , there 's something else in this , something original . '' 
I enjoyed listening and looking at them . 
`` My dear friends and comrades , '' said I , `` do n't worry about my resigning my commission , for I have done so already . 
I have sent in my papers this morning and as soon as I get my discharge I shall go into a monastery - it 's with that object I am leaving the regiment . '' 
When I had said this every one of them burst out laughing . 
`` You should have told us of that first , that explains everything , we ca n't judge a monk . '' 
They laughed and could not stop themselves , and not scornfully , but kindly and merrily . 
They all felt friendly to me at once , even those who had been sternest in their censure , and all the following month , before my discharge came , they could not make enough of me . 
`` Ah , you monk , '' they would say . 
And everyone said something kind to me , they began trying to dissuade me , even to pity me : `` What are you doing to yourself ? '' 
`` No , '' they would say , `` he is a brave fellow , he faced fire and could have fired his own pistol too , but he had a dream the night before that he should become a monk , that 's why he did it . '' 
It was the same thing with the society of the town . 
Till then I had been kindly received , but had not been the object of special attention , and now all came to know me at once and invited me ; they laughed at me , but they loved me . 
I may mention that although everybody talked openly of our duel , the authorities took no notice of it , because my antagonist was a near relation of our general , and as there had been no bloodshed and no serious consequences , and as I resigned my commission , they took it as a joke . 
And I began then to speak aloud and fearlessly , regardless of their laughter , for it was always kindly and not spiteful laughter . 
These conversations mostly took place in the evenings , in the company of ladies ; women particularly liked listening to me then and they made the men listen . 
`` But how can I possibly be responsible for all ? '' 
everyone would laugh in my face . 
`` Can I , for instance , be responsible for you ? '' 
`` You may well not know it , '' I would answer , `` since the whole world has long been going on a different line , since we consider the veriest lies as truth and demand the same lies from others . 
Here I have for once in my life acted sincerely and , well , you all look upon me as a madman . 
Though you are friendly to me , yet , you see , you all laugh at me . '' 
`` But how can we help being friendly to you ? '' 
said my hostess , laughing . 
The room was full of people . 
All of a sudden the young lady rose , on whose account the duel had been fought and whom only lately I had intended to be my future wife . 
I had not noticed her coming into the room . 
She got up , came to me and held out her hand . 
`` Let me tell you , '' she said , `` that I am the first not to laugh at you , but on the contrary I thank you with tears and express my respect for you for your action then . '' 
Her husband , too , came up and then they all approached me and almost kissed me . 
My heart was filled with joy , but my attention was especially caught by a middle-aged man who came up to me with the others . 
I knew him by name already , but had never made his acquaintance nor exchanged a word with him till that evening . 
-LRB- d -RRB- The Mysterious Visitor . 
He had long been an official in the town ; he was in a prominent position , respected by all , rich and had a reputation for benevolence . 
He subscribed considerable sums to the almshouse and the orphan asylum ; he was very charitable , too , in secret , a fact which only became known after his death . 
He was a man of about fifty , almost stern in appearance and not much given to conversation . 
He had been married about ten years and his wife , who was still young , had borne him three children . 
Well , I was sitting alone in my room the following evening , when my door suddenly opened and this gentleman walked in . 
I must mention , by the way , that I was no longer living in my former quarters . 
As soon as I resigned my commission , I took rooms with an old lady , the widow of a government clerk . 
My landlady 's servant waited upon me , for I had moved into her rooms simply because on my return from the duel I had sent Afanasy back to the regiment , as I felt ashamed to look him in the face after my last interview with him . 
So prone is the man of the world to be ashamed of any righteous action . 
`` I have , '' said my visitor , `` with great interest listened to you speaking in different houses the last few days and I wanted at last to make your personal acquaintance , so as to talk to you more intimately . 
Can you , dear sir , grant me this favour ? '' 
`` I can , with the greatest pleasure , and I shall look upon it as an honour . '' 
I said this , though I felt almost dismayed , so greatly was I impressed from the first moment by the appearance of this man . 
For though other people had listened to me with interest and attention , no one had come to me before with such a serious , stern , and concentrated expression . 
And now he had come to see me in my own rooms . 
He sat down . 
`` You are , I see , a man of great strength of character '' he said ; `` as you have dared to serve the truth , even when by doing so you risked incurring the contempt of all . '' 
`` Your praise is , perhaps , excessive , '' I replied . 
`` No , it 's not excessive , '' he answered ; `` believe me , such a course of action is far more difficult than you think . 
It is that which has impressed me , and it is only on that account that I have come to you , '' he continued . 
`` Tell me , please , that is if you are not annoyed by my perhaps unseemly curiosity , what were your exact sensations , if you can recall them , at the moment when you made up your mind to ask forgiveness at the duel . 
Do not think my question frivolous ; on the contrary , I have in asking the question a secret motive of my own , which I will perhaps explain to you later on , if it is God 's will that we should become more intimately acquainted . '' 
All the while he was speaking , I was looking at him straight into the face and I felt all at once a complete trust in him and great curiosity on my side also , for I felt that there was some strange secret in his soul . 
`` You ask what were my exact sensations at the moment when I asked my opponent 's forgiveness , '' I answered ; `` but I had better tell you from the beginning what I have not yet told anyone else . '' 
And I described all that had passed between Afanasy and me , and how I had bowed down to the ground at his feet . 
`` From that you can see for yourself , '' I concluded , `` that at the time of the duel it was easier for me , for I had made a beginning already at home , and when once I had started on that road , to go farther along it was far from being difficult , but became a source of joy and happiness . '' 
I liked the way he looked at me as he listened . 
`` All that , '' he said , `` is exceedingly interesting . 
I will come to see you again and again . '' 
And from that time forth he came to see me nearly every evening . 
And we should have become greater friends , if only he had ever talked of himself . 
But about himself he scarcely ever said a word , yet continually asked me about myself . 
In spite of that I became very fond of him and spoke with perfect frankness to him about all my feelings ; `` for , '' thought I , `` what need have I to know his secrets , since I can see without that that is a good man ? 
Moreover , though he is such a serious man and my senior , he comes to see a youngster like me and treats me as his equal . '' 
And I learned a great deal that was profitable from him , for he was a man of lofty mind . 
`` That life is heaven , '' he said to me suddenly , `` that I have long been thinking about '' ; and all at once he added , `` I think of nothing else indeed . '' 
He looked at me and smiled . 
`` I am more convinced of it than you are , I will tell you later why . '' 
I listened to him and thought that he evidently wanted to tell me something . 
`` Heaven , '' he went on , `` lies hidden within all of us - here it lies hidden in me now , and if I will it , it will be revealed to me to-morrow and for all time . '' 
I looked at him ; he was speaking with great emotion and gazing mysteriously at me , as if he were questioning me . 
`` And that we are all responsible to all for all , apart from our own sins , you were quite right in thinking that , and it is wonderful how you could comprehend it in all its significance at once . 
And in very truth , so soon as men understand that , the Kingdom of Heaven will be for them not a dream , but a living reality . '' 
`` And when , '' I cried out to him bitterly , `` when will that come to pass ? 
and will it ever come to pass ? 
Is not it simply a dream of ours ? '' 
`` What then , you do n't believe it , '' he said . 
`` You preach it and do n't believe it yourself . 
Believe me , this dream , as you call it , will come to pass without doubt ; it will come , but not now , for every process has its law . 
It 's a spiritual , psychological process . 
To transform the world , to recreate it afresh , men must turn into another path psychologically . 
Until you have become really , in actual fact , a brother to everyone , brotherhood will not come to pass . 
No sort of scientific teaching , no kind of common interest , will ever teach men to share property and privileges with equal consideration for all . 
Everyone will think his share too small and they will be always envying , complaining and attacking one another . 
You ask when it will come to pass ; it will come to pass , but first we have to go though the period of isolation . '' 
`` What do you mean by isolation ? '' 
I asked him . 
`` Why , the isolation that prevails everywhere , above all in our age - it has not fully developed , it has not reached its limit yet . 
For everyone strives to keep his individuality as apart as possible , wishes to secure the greatest possible fullness of life for himself ; but meantime all his efforts result not in attaining fullness of life but self-destruction , for instead of self-realisation he ends by arriving at complete solitude . 
All mankind in our age have split up into units , they all keep apart , each in his own groove ; each one holds aloof , hides himself and hides what he has , from the rest , and he ends by being repelled by others and repelling them . 
He heaps up riches by himself and thinks , ` How strong I am now and how secure , ' and in his madness he does not understand that the more he heaps up , the more he sinks into self-destructive impotence . 
For he is accustomed to rely upon himself alone and to cut himself off from the whole ; he has trained himself not to believe in the help of others , in men and in humanity , and only trembles for fear he should lose his money and the privileges that he has won for himself . 
Everywhere in these days men have , in their mockery , ceased to understand that the true security is to be found in social solidarity rather than in isolated individual effort . 
But this terrible individualism must inevitably have an end , and all will suddenly understand how unnaturally they are separated from one another . 
It will be the spirit of the time , and people will marvel that they have sat so long in darkness without seeing the light . 
And then the sign of the Son of Man will be seen in the heavens ... . 
But , until then , we must keep the banner flying . 
Sometimes even if he has to do it alone , and his conduct seems to be crazy , a man must set an example , and so draw men 's souls out of their solitude , and spur them to some act of brotherly love , that the great idea may not die . '' 
Our evenings , one after another , were spent in such stirring and fervent talk . 
I gave up society and visited my neighbours much less frequently . 
Besides , my vogue was somewhat over . 
I say this , not as blame , for they still loved me and treated me good-humouredly , but there 's no denying that fashion is a great power in society . 
I began to regard my mysterious visitor with admiration , for besides enjoying his intelligence , I began to perceive that he was brooding over some plan in his heart , and was preparing himself perhaps for a great deed . 
Perhaps he liked my not showing curiosity about his secret , not seeking to discover it by direct question nor by insinuation . 
But I noticed at last , that he seemed to show signs of wanting to tell me something . 
This had become quite evident , indeed , about a month after he first began to visit me . 
`` Do you know , '' he said to me once , `` that people are very inquisitive about us in the town and wonder why I come to see you so often . 
But let them wonder , for soon all will be explained . '' 
Sometimes an extraordinary agitation would come over him , and almost always on such occasions he would get up and go away . 
Sometimes he would fix a long piercing look upon me , and I thought , `` He will say something directly now . '' 
But he would suddenly begin talking of something ordinary and familiar . 
He often complained of headache too . 
One day , quite unexpectedly indeed , after he had been talking with great fervour a long time , I saw him suddenly turn pale , and his face worked convulsively , while he stared persistently at me . 
`` What 's the matter ? '' 
I said ; `` do you feel ill ? '' 
- he had just been complaining of headache . 
`` I. . . 
do you know ... I murdered someone . '' 
He said this and smiled with a face as white as chalk . 
`` Why is it he is smiling ? '' 
The thought flashed through my mind before I realised anything else . 
I too turned pale . 
`` What are you saying ? '' 
I cried . 
`` You see , '' he said , with a pale smile , `` how much it has cost me to say the first word . 
Now I have said it , I feel I 've taken the first step and shall go on . '' 
For a long while I could not believe him , and I did not believe him at that time , but only after he had been to see me three days running and told me all about it . 
I thought he was mad , but ended by being convinced , to my great grief and amazement . 
His crime was a great and terrible one . 
Fourteen years before , he had murdered the widow of a landowner , a wealthy and handsome young woman who had a house in our town . 
He fell passionately in love with her , declared his feeling and tried to persuade her to marry him . 
But she had already given her heart to another man , an officer of noble birth and high rank in the service , who was at that time away at the front , though she was expecting him soon to return . 
She refused his offer and begged him not to come and see her . 
After he had ceased to visit her , he took advantage of his knowledge of the house to enter at night through the garden by the roof , at great risk of discovery . 
But , as often happens , a crime committed with extraordinary audacity is more successful than others . 
Entering the garret through the skylight , he went down the ladder , knowing that the door at the bottom of it was sometimes , through the negligence of the servants , left unlocked . 
He hoped to find it so , and so it was . 
He made his way in the dark to her bedroom , where a light was burning . 
As though on purpose , both her maids had gone off to a birthday party in the same street , without asking leave . 
The other servants slept in the servants ' quarters or in the kitchen on the ground floor . 
His passion flamed up at the sight of her asleep , and then vindictive , jealous anger took possession of his heart , and like a drunken man , beside himself , he thrust a knife into her heart , so that she did not even cry out . 
Then with devilish and criminal cunning he contrived that suspicion should fall on the servants . 
He was so base as to take her purse , to open her chest with keys from under her pillow , and to take some things from it , doing it all as it might have been done by an ignorant servant , leaving valuable papers and taking only money . 
He took some of the larger gold things , but left smaller articles that were ten times as valuable . 
He took with him , too , some things for himself as remembrances , but of that later . 
Having done this awful deed . 
he returned by the way he had come . 
Neither the next day , when the alarm was raised , nor at any time after in his life , did anyone dream of suspecting that he was the criminal . 
No one indeed knew of his love for her , for he was always reserved and silent and had no friend to whom he would have opened his heart . 
He was looked upon simply as an acquaintance , and not a very intimate one , of the murdered woman , as for the previous fortnight he had not even visited her . 
A serf of hers called Pyotr was at once suspected , and every circumstance confirmed the suspicion . 
The man knew - indeed his mistress did not conceal the fact - that having to send one of her serfs as a recruit she had decided to send him , as he had no relations and his conduct was unsatisfactory . 
People had heard him angrily threatening to murder her when he was drunk in a tavern . 
Two days before her death , he had run away , staying no one knew where in the town . 
The day after the murder , he was found on the road leading out of the town , dead drunk , with a knife in his pocket , and his right hand happened to be stained with blood . 
He declared that his nose had been bleeding , but no one believed him . 
The maids confessed that they had gone to a party and that the street door had been left open till they returned . 
And a number of similar details came to light , throwing suspicion on the innocent servant . 
They arrested him , and he was tried for the murder ; but a week after the arrest , the prisoner fell sick of a fever and died unconscious in the hospital . 
There the matter ended and the judges and the authorities and everyone in the town remained convinced that the crime had been committed by no one but the servant who had died in the hospital . 
And after that the punishment began . 
My mysterious visitor , now my friend , told me that at first he was not in the least troubled by pangs of conscience . 
He was miserable a long time , but not for that reason ; only from regret that he had killed the woman he loved , that she was no more , that in killing her he had killed his love , while the fire of passion was still in his veins . 
But of the innocent blood he had shed , of the murder of a fellow creature , he scarcely thought . 
The thought that his victim might have become the wife of another man was insupportable to him , and so , for a long time , he was convinced in his conscience that he could not have acted otherwise . 
At first he was worried at the arrest of the servant , but his illness and death soon set his mind at rest , for the man 's death was apparently -LRB- so he reflected at the time -RRB- not owing to his arrest or his fright , but a chill he had taken on the day he ran away , when he had lain all night dead drunk on the damp ground . 
The theft of the money and other things troubled him little , for he argued that the theft had not been committed for gain but to avert suspicion . 
The sum stolen was small , and he shortly afterwards subscribed the whole of it , and much more , towards the funds for maintaining an almshouse in the town . 
He did this on purpose to set his conscience at rest about the theft , and it 's a remarkable fact that for a long time he really was at peace - he told me this himself . 
He entered then upon a career of great activity in the service , volunteered for a difficult and laborious duty , which occupied him two years , and being a man of strong will almost forgot the past . 
Whenever he recalled it , he tried not to think of it at all . 
He became active in philanthropy too , founded and helped to maintain many institutions in the town , did a good deal in the two capitals , and in both Moscow and Petersburg was elected a member of philanthropic societies . 
At last , however , he began brooding over the past , and the strain of it was too much for him . 
Then he was attracted by a fine and intelligent girl and soon after married her , hoping that marriage would dispel his lonely depression , and that by entering on a new life and scrupulously doing his duty to his wife and children , he would escape from old memories altogether . 
But the very opposite of what he expected happened . 
He began , even in the first month of his marriage , to be continually fretted by the thought , `` My wife loves me - but what if she knew ? '' 
When she first told him that she would soon bear him a child , he was troubled . 
`` I am giving life , but I have taken life . '' 
Children came . 
`` How dare I love them , teach and educate them , how can I talk to them of virtue ? 
I have shed blood . '' 
They were splendid children , he longed to caress them ; `` and I ca n't look at their innocent candid faces , I am unworthy . '' 
At last he began to be bitterly and ominously haunted by the blood of his murdered victim , by the young life he had destroyed , by the blood that cried out for vengeance . 
He had begun to have awful dreams . 
But , being a man of fortitude , he bore his suffering a long time , thinking : `` I shall expiate everything by this secret agony . '' 
But that hope , too , was vain ; the longer it went on , the more intense was his suffering . 
He was respected in society for his active benevolence , though everyone was overawed by his stern and gloomy character . 
But the more he was respected , the more intolerable it was for him . 
He confessed to me that he had thoughts of killing himself . 
But he began to be haunted by another idea - an idea which he had at first regarded as impossible and unthinkable , though at last it got such a hold on his heart that he could not shake it off . 
He dreamed of rising up , going out and confessing in the face of all men that he had committed murder . 
For three years this dream had pursued him , haunting him in different forms . 
At last he believed with his whole heart that if he confessed his crime , he would heal his soul and would be at peace for ever . 
But this belief filled his heart with terror , for how could he carry it out ? 
And then came what happened at my duel . 
`` Looking at you , I have made up my mind . '' 
I looked at him . 
`` Is it possible , '' I cried , clasping my hands , `` that such a trivial incident could give rise to a resolution in you ? '' 
`` My resolution has been growing for the last three years , '' he answered , `` and your story only gave the last touch to it . 
Looking at you , I reproached myself and envied you . '' 
He said this to me almost sullenly . 
`` But you wo n't be believed , '' I observed ; `` it 's fourteen years ago . '' 
`` I have proofs , great proofs . 
I shall show them . '' 
Then I cried and kissed him . 
`` Tell me one thing , one thing , '' he said -LRB- as though it all depended upon me -RRB- , `` my wife , my children ! 
My wife may die of grief , and though my children wo n't lose their rank and property , they 'll be a convict 's children and for ever ! 
And what a memory , what a memory of me I shall leave in their hearts ! '' 
I said nothing . 
`` And to part from them , to leave them for ever ? 
It 's for ever , you know , for ever ! '' 
I sat still and repeated a silent prayer . 
I got up at last , I felt afraid . 
`` Well ? '' 
He looked at me . 
`` Go ! '' 
said I , `` confess . 
Everything passes , only the truth remains . 
Your children will understand , when they grow up , the nobility of your resolution . '' 
He left me that time as though he had made up his mind . 
Yet for more than a fortnight afterwards , he came to me every evening , still preparing himself , still unable to bring himself to the point . 
He made my heart ache . 
One day he would come determined and say fervently : `` I know it will be heaven for me , heaven , the moment I confess . 
Fourteen years I 've been in hell . 
I want to suffer . 
I will take my punishment and begin to live . 
You can pass through the world doing wrong , but there 's no turning back . 
Now I dare not love my neighbour nor even my own children . 
Good God , my children will understand , perhaps , what my punishment has cost me and will not condemn me ! 
God is not in strength but in truth . '' 
`` All will understand your sacrifice , '' I said to him , `` if not at once , they will understand later ; for you have served truth , the higher truth , not of the earth . '' 
And he would go away seeming comforted , but next day he would come again , bitter , pale , sarcastic . 
`` Every time I come to you , you look at me so inquisitively as though to say , ` He has still not confessed ! ' 
Wait a bit , do n't despise me too much . 
It 's not such an easy thing to do as you would think . 
Perhaps I shall not do it at all . 
You wo n't go and inform against me then , will you ? '' 
And far from looking at him with indiscreet curiosity , I was afraid to look at him at all . 
I was quite ill from anxiety , and my heart was full of tears . 
I could not sleep at night . 
`` I have just come from my wife , '' he went on . 
`` Do you understand what the word ` wife ' means ? 
When I went out , the children called to me , ` Good-bye , father , make haste back to read The Children 's Magazine with us . ' 
No , you do n't understand that ! 
No one is wise from another man 's woe . '' 
His eyes were glittering , his lips were twitching . 
Suddenly he struck the table with his fist so that everything on it danced - it was the first time he had done such a thing , he was such a mild man . 
`` But need I ? '' 
he exclaimed , `` must I ? 
No one has been condemned , no one has been sent to Siberia in my place , the man died of fever . 
And I 've been punished by my sufferings for the blood I shed . 
And I sha n't be believed , they wo n't believe my proofs . 
Need I confess , need I ? 
I am ready to go on suffering all my life for the blood I have shed , if only my wife and children may be spared . 
Will it be just to ruin them with me ? 
Are n't we making a mistake ? 
What is right in this case ? 
And will people recognise it , will they appreciate it , will they respect it ? '' 
`` Good Lord ! '' 
I thought to myself , `` he is thinking of other people 's respect at such a moment ! '' 
And I felt so sorry for him then , that I believe I would have shared his fate if it could have comforted him . 
I saw he was beside himself . 
I was aghast , realising with my heart as well as my mind what such a resolution meant . 
`` Decide my fate ! '' 
he exclaimed again . 
`` Go and confess , '' I whispered to him . 
My voice failed me , but I whispered it firmly . 
I took up the New Testament from the table , the Russian translation , and showed him the Gospel of St. John , chapter 12 , verse 24 : `` Verily , verily , I say unto you , except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die , it abideth alone : but if it die , it bringeth forth much fruit . '' 
I had just been reading that verse when he came in . 
He read it . 
`` That 's true , '' he said , he smiled bitterly . 
`` It 's terrible the things you find in those books , '' he said , after a pause . 
`` It 's easy enough to thrust them upon one . 
And who wrote them ? 
Can they have been written by men ? '' 
`` The Holy Spirit wrote them , '' said I. `` It 's easy for you to prate , '' he smiled again , this time almost with hatred . 
I took the book again , opened it in another place and showed him the Epistle to the Hebrews , chapter 10 , verse 31 . 
He read : `` It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God . '' 
He read it and simply flung down the book . 
He was trembling all over . 
`` An awful text , '' he said . 
`` There 's no denying you 've picked out fitting ones . '' 
He rose from the chair . 
`` Well ! '' 
he said , `` good-bye , perhaps I sha n't come again ... we shall meet in heaven . 
So I have been for fourteen years ` in the hands of the living God , ' that 's how one must think of those fourteen years . 
To-morrow I will beseech those hands to let me go . '' 
I wanted to take him in my arms and kiss him , but I did not dare - his face was contorted add sombre . 
He went away . 
`` Good God , '' I thought , `` what has he gone to face ! '' 
I fell on my knees before the ikon and wept for him before the Holy Mother of God , our swift defender and helper . 
I was half an hour praying in tears , and it was late , about midnight . 
Suddenly I saw the door open and he came in again . 
I was surprised . 
Where have you been ? '' 
I asked him . 
`` I think , '' he said , `` I 've forgotten something ... my handkerchief , I think ... . 
Well , even if I 've not forgotten anything , let me stay a little . '' 
He sat down . 
I stood over him . 
`` You sit down , too , '' said he . 
I sat down . 
We sat still for two minutes ; he looked intently at me and suddenly smiled . 
I remembered that - then he got up , embraced me warmly and kissed me . 
`` Remember , '' he said , `` how I came to you a second time . 
Do you hear , remember it ! '' 
And he went out . 
`` To-morrow , '' I thought . 
And so it was . 
I did not know that evening that the next day was his birthday . 
I had not been out for the last few days , so I had no chance of hearing it from anyone . 
On that day he always had a great gathering , everyone in the town went to it . 
It was the same this time . 
After dinner he walked into the middle of the room , with a paper in his hand - a formal declaration to the chief of his department who was present . 
This declaration he read aloud to the whole assembly . 
It contained a full account of the crime , in every detail . 
`` I cut myself off from men as a monster . 
God has visited me , '' he said in conclusion . 
`` I want to suffer for my sin ! '' 
Then he brought out and laid on the table all the things he had been keeping for fourteen years , that he thought would prove his crime , the jewels belonging to the murdered woman which he had stolen to divert suspicion , a cross and a locket taken from her neck with a portrait of her betrothed in the locket , her notebook and two letters ; one from her betrothed , telling her that he would soon be with her , and her unfinished answer left on the table to be sent off next day . 
He carried off these two letters - what for ? 
Why had he kept them for fourteen years afterwards instead of destroying them as evidence against him ? 
And this is what happened : everyone was amazed and horrified , everyone refused to believe it and thought that he was deranged , though all listened with intense curiosity . 
A few days later it was fully decided and agreed in every house that the unhappy man was mad . 
The legal authorities could not refuse to take the case up , but they too dropped it . 
Though the trinkets and letters made them ponder , they decided that even if they did turn out to be authentic , no charge could be based on those alone . 
Besides , she might have given him those things as a friend , or asked him to take care of them for her . 
I heard afterwards , however , that the genuineness of the things was proved by the friends and relations of the murdered woman , and that there was no doubt about them . 
Yet nothing was destined to come of it , after all . 
Five days later , all had heard that he was ill and that his life was in danger . 
The nature of his illness I ca n't explain ; they said it was an affection of the heart . 
But it became known that the doctors had been induced by his wife to investigate his mental condition also , and had come to the conclusion that it was a case of insanity . 
I betrayed nothing , though people ran to question me . 
But when I wanted to visit him , I was for a long while forbidden to do so , above all by his wife . 
`` It 's you who have caused his illness , '' she said to me ; `` he was always gloomy , but for the last year people noticed that he was peculiarly excited and did strange things , and now you have been the ruin of him . 
Your preaching has brought him to this ; for the last month he was always with you . '' 
Indeed , not only his wife but the whole town were down upon me and blamed me . 
`` It 's all your doing , '' they said . 
I was silent and indeed rejoiced at heart , for I saw plainly God 's mercy to the man who had turned against himself and punished himself . 
I could not believe in his insanity . 
They let me see him at last . 
he insisted upon saying good-bye to me . 
I went in to him and saw at once , that not only his days , but his hours were numbered . 
He was weak , yellow , his hands trembled , he gasped for breath , but his face was full of tender and happy feeling . 
`` It is done ! '' 
he said . 
`` I 've long been yearning to see you . 
Why did n't you come ? '' 
I did not tell him that they would not let me see him . 
`` God has had pity on me and is calling me to Himself . 
I know I am dying , but I feel joy and peace for the first time after so many years . 
There was heaven in my heart from the moment I had done what I had to do . 
Now I dare to love my children and to kiss them . 
Neither my wife nor the judges , nor anyone has believed it . 
My children will never believe it either . 
I see in that God 's mercy to them . 
I shall die , and my name will be without a stain for them . 
And now I feel God near , my heart rejoices as in Heaven ... I have done my duty . '' 
He could not speak , he gasped for breath , he pressed my hand warmly , looking fervently at me . 
We did not talk for long , his wife kept peeping in at us . 
But he had time to whisper to me : `` Do you remember how I came back to you that second time , at midnight ? 
I told you to remember it . 
You know what I came back for ? 
I came to kill you ! '' 
I started . 
`` I went out from you then into the darkness , I wandered about the streets , struggling with myself . 
And suddenly I hated you so that I could hardly bear it . 
Now , I thought , he is all that binds me , and he is my judge . 
I ca n't refuse to face my punishment to-morrow , for he knows all . 
It was not that I was afraid you would betray me -LRB- I never even thought of that -RRB- , but I thought , ` How can I look him in the face if I do n't confess ? ' 
And if you had been at the other end of the earth , but alive , it would have been all the same , the thought was unendurable that you were alive knowing everything and condemning me . 
I hated you as though you were the cause , as though you were to blame for everything . 
I came back to you then , remembering that you had a dagger lying on your table . 
I sat down and asked you to sit down , and for a whole minute I pondered . 
If I had killed you , I should have been ruined by that murder even if I had not confessed the other . 
But I did n't think about that at all , and I did n't want to think of it at that moment . 
I only hated you and longed to revenge myself on you for everything . 
The Lord vanquished the devil in my heart . 
But let me tell you , you were never nearer death . '' 
A week later he died . 
The whole town followed him to the grave . 
The chief priest made a speech full of feeling . 
All lamented the terrible illness that had cut short his days . 
But all the town was up in arms against me after the funeral , and people even refused to see me . 
Some , at first a few and afterwards more , began indeed to believe in the truth of his story , and they visited me and questioned me with great interest and eagerness , for man loves to see the downfall and disgrace of the righteous . 
But I held my tongue , and very shortly after , I left the town , and five months later by God 's grace I entered the safe and blessed path , praising the unseen finger which had guided me so clearly to it . 
But I remember in my prayer to this day , the servant of God , Mihail , who suffered so greatly . 
Conversations and Exhortations of Father Zossima -LRB- e -RRB- The Russian Monk and his possible Significance . 
FATHERS and teachers , what is the monk ? 
In the cultivated world the word is nowadays pronounced by some people with a jeer , and by others it is used as a term of abuse , and this contempt for the monk is growing . 
It is true , alas , it is true , that there are many sluggards , gluttons , profligates , and insolent beggars among monks . 
Educated people point to these : `` You are idlers , useless members of society , you live on the labour of others , you are shameless beggars . '' 
And yet how many meek and humble monks there are , yearning for solitude and fervent prayer in peace ! 
These are less noticed , or passed over in silence . 
And how suprised men would be if I were to say that from these meek monks , who yearn for solitary prayer , the salvation of Russia will come perhaps once more ! 
For they are in truth made ready in peace and quiet `` for the day and the hour , the month and the year . '' 
Meanwhile , in their solitude , they keep the image of Christ fair and undefiled , in the purity of God 's truth , from the times of the Fathers of old , the Apostles and the martyrs . 
And when the time comes they will show it to the tottering creeds of the world . 
That is a great thought . 
That star will rise out of the East . 
That is my view of the monk , and is it false ? 
Is it too proud ? 
Look at the worldly and all who set themselves up above the people of God ; has not God 's image and His truth been distorted in them ? 
They have science ; but in science there is nothing but what is the object of sense . 
The spiritual world , the higher part of man 's being is rejected altogether , dismissed with a sort of triumph , even with hatred . 
The world has proclaimed the reign of freedom , especially of late , but what do we see in this freedom of theirs ? 
Nothing but slavery and self-destruction ! 
For the world says : `` You have desires and so satisfy them , for you have the same rights as the most rich and powerful . 
Do n't be afraid of satisfying them and even multiply your desires . '' 
That is the modern doctrine of the world . 
In that they see freedom . 
And what follows from this right of multiplication of desires ? 
In the rich , isolation and spiritual suicide ; in the poor , envy and murder ; for they have been given rights , but have not been shown the means of satisfying their wants . 
They maintain that the world is getting more and more united , more and more bound together in brotherly community , as it overcomes distance and sets thoughts flying through the air . 
Alas , put no faith in such a bond of union . 
Interpreting freedom as the multiplication and rapid satisfaction of desires , men distort their own nature , for many senseless and foolish desires and habits and ridiculous fancies are fostered in them . 
They live only for mutual envy , for luxury and ostentation . 
To have dinners visits , carriages , rank , and slaves to wait on one is looked upon as a necessity , for which life , honour and human feeling are sacrificed , and men even commit suicide if they are unable to satisfy it . 
We see the same thing among those who are not rich , while the poor drown their unsatisfied need and their envy in drunkenness . 
But soon they will drink blood instead of wine , they are being led on to it . 
I ask you is such a man free ? 
I knew one `` champion of freedom '' who told me himself that , when he was deprived of tobacco in prison , he was so wretched at the privation that he almost went and betrayed his cause for the sake of getting tobacco again ! 
And such a man says , `` I am fighting for the cause of humanity . '' 
How can such a one fight ? 
What is he fit for ? 
He is capable perhaps of some action quickly over , but he can not hold out long . 
And it 's no wonder that instead of gaining freedom they have sunk into slavery , and instead of serving , the cause of brotherly love and the union of humanity have fallen , on the contrary , into dissension and isolation , as my mysterious visitor and teacher said to me in my youth . 
And therefore the idea of the service of humanity , of brotherly love and the solidarity of mankind , is more and more dying out in the world , and indeed this idea is sometimes treated with derision . 
For how can a man shake off his habits ? 
What can become of him if he is in such bondage to the habit of satisfying the innumerable desires he has created for himself ? 
He is isolated , and what concern has he with the rest of humanity ? 
They have succeeded in accumulating a greater mass of objects , but the joy in the world has grown less . 
The monastic way is very different . 
Obedience , fasting , and prayer are laughed at , yet only through them lies the way to real , true freedom . 
I cut off my superfluous and unnecessary desires , I subdue my proud and wanton will and chastise it with obedience , and with God 's help I attain freedom of spirit and with it spiritual joy . 
Which is most capable of conceiving a great idea and serving it - the rich in his isolation or the man who has freed himself from the tyranny of material things and habits ? 
The monk is reproached for his solitude , `` You have secluded yourself within the walls of the monastery for your own salvation , and have forgotten the brotherly service of humanity ! '' 
But we shall see which will be most zealous in the cause of brotherly love . 
For it is not we , but they , who are in isolation , though they do n't see that . 
Of old , leaders of the people came from among us , and why should they not again ? 
The same meek and humble ascetics will rise up and go out to work for the great cause . 
The salvation of Russia comes from the people . 
And the Russian monk has always been on the side of the people . 
We are isolated only if the people are isolated . 
The people believe as we do , and an unbelieving reformer will never do anything in Russia , even if he is sincere in heart and a genius . 
Remember that ! 
The people will meet the atheist and overcome him , and Russia will be one and orthodox . 
Take care of the peasant and guard his heart . 
Go on educating him quietly . 
That 's your duty as monks , for the peasant has God in his heart . 
-LRB- f -RRB- Of Masters and Servants , and of whether it is possible for them to be Brothers in the Spirit . 
Of course , I do n't deny that there is sin in the peasants too . 
And the fire of corruption is spreading visibly , hourly , working from above downwards . 
The spirit of isolation is coming upon the people too . 
Money-lenders and devourers of the commune are rising up . 
Already the merchant grows more and more eager for rank , and strives to show himself cultured though he has not a trace of culture , and to this end meanly despises his old traditions , and is even ashamed of the faith of his fathers . 
He visits princes , though he is only a peasant corrupted . 
The peasants are rotting in drunkenness and can not shake off the habit . 
And what cruelty to their wives , to their children even ! 
All from drunkenness ! 
I 've seen in the factories children of nine years old , frail , rickety , bent and already depraved . 
The stuffy workshop , the din of machinery , work all day long , the vile language and the drink , the drink - is that what a little child 's heart needs ? 
He needs sunshine , childish play , good examples all about him , and at least a little love . 
There must be no more of this , monks , no more torturing of children , rise up and preach that , make haste , make haste ! 
But God will save Russia , for though the peasants are corrupted and can not renounce their filthy sin , yet they know it is cursed by God and that they do wrong in sinning . 
So that our people still believe in righteousness , have faith in God and weep tears of devotion . 
It is different with the upper classes . 
They , following science , want to base justice on reason alone , but not with Christ , as before , and they have already proclaimed that there is no crime , that there is no sin . 
And that 's consistent , for if you have no God what is the meaning of crime ? 
In Europe the people are already rising up against the rich with violence , and the leaders of the people are everywhere leading them to bloodshed , and teaching them that their wrath is righteous . 
But their `` wrath is accursed , for it is cruel . '' 
But God will save Russia as He has saved her many times . 
Salvation will come from the people , from their faith and their meekness . 
Fathers and teachers , watch over the people 's faith and this will not be a dream . 
I 've been struck all my life in our great people by their dignity , their true and seemly dignity . 
I 've seen it myself , I can testify to it , I 've seen it and marvelled at it , I 've seen it in spite of the degraded sins and poverty-stricken appearance of our peasantry . 
They are not servile , and even after two centuries of serfdom they are free in manner and bearing , yet without insolence , and not revengeful and not envious . 
`` You are rich and noble , you are clever and talented , well , be so , God bless you . 
I respect you , but I know that I too am a man . 
By the very fact that I respect you without envy I prove my dignity as a man . '' 
In truth if they do n't say this -LRB- for they do n't know how to say this yet -RRB- , that is how they act . 
I have seen it myself , I have known it myself , and , would you believe it , the poorer our Russian peasant is , the more noticeable is that serene goodness , for the rich among them are for the most part corrupted already , and much of that is due to our carelessness and indifference . 
But God will save His people , for Russia is great in her humility . 
I dream of seeing , and seem to see clearly already , our future . 
It will come to pass that even the most corrupt of our rich will end by being ashamed of his riches before the poor , and the poor , seeing his humility , will understand and give way before him , will respond joyfully and kindly to his honourable shame . 
Believe me that it will end in that ; things are moving to that . 
Equality is to be found only in the spiritual dignity of man , and that will only be understood among us . 
If we were brothers , there would be fraternity , but before that they will never agree about the division of wealth . 
We preserve the image of Christ , and it will shine forth like a precious diamond to the whole world . 
So may it be , so may it be ! 
Fathers and teachers , a touching incident befell me once . 
In my wanderings I met in the town of K. my old orderly , Afanasy . 
It was eight years since I had parted from him . 
He chanced to see me in the market-place , recognised me , ran up to me , and how delighted he was ! 
He simply pounced on me : `` Master dear , is it you ? 
Is it really you I see ? '' 
He took me home with him . 
He was no longer in the army , he was married and already had two little children . 
He and his wife earned their living as costermongers in the market-place . 
His room was poor , but bright and clean . 
He made me sit down , set the samovar , sent for his wife , as though my appearance were a festival for them . 
He brought me his children : `` Bless them , Father . '' 
`` Is it for me to bless them ? 
I am only a humble monk . 
I will pray for them . 
And for you , Afanasy Pavlovitch , I have prayed every day since that day , for it all came from you , '' said I. And I explained that to him as well as I could . 
And what do you think ? 
The man kept gazing at me and could not believe that I , his former master , an officer , was now before him in such a guise and position ; it made him shed tears . 
`` Why are you weeping ? '' 
said I , `` better rejoice over me , dear friend , whom I can never forget , for my path is a glad and joyful one . '' 
He did not say much , but kept sighing and shaking his head over me tenderly . 
`` What has become of your fortune ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I gave it to the monastery , '' I answered ; `` we live in common . '' 
After tea I began saying good-bye , and suddenly he brought out half a rouble as an offering to the monastery , and another half-rouble I saw him thrusting hurriedly into my hand : `` That 's for you in your wanderings , it may be of use to you , Father . '' 
I took his half-rouble , bowed to him and his wife , and went out rejoicing . 
And on my way I thought : `` Here we are both now , he at home and I on the road , sighing and shaking our heads , no doubt , and yet smiling joyfully in the gladness of our hearts , remembering how God brought about our meeting . '' 
I have never seen him again since then . 
I had been his master and he my servant , but now when we exchanged a loving kiss with softened hearts , there was a great human bond between us . 
I have thought a great deal about that , and now what I think is this : Is it so inconceivable that that grand and simple-hearted unity might in due time become universal among the Russian people ? 
I believe that it will come to pass and that the time is at hand . 
And of servants I will add this : In old days when I was young I was often angry with servants ; `` the cook had served something too hot , the orderly had not brushed my clothes . '' 
But what taught me better then was a thought of my dear brother 's , which I had heard from him in childhood : `` Am I worth it , that another should serve me and be ordered about by me in his poverty and ignorance ? '' 
And I wondered at the time that such simple and self-evident ideas should be so slow to occur to our minds . 
It is impossible that there should be no servants in the world , but act so that your servant may be freer in spirit than if he were not a servant . 
And why can not I be a servant to my servant and even let him see it , and that without any pride on my part or any mistrust on his ? 
Why should not my servant be like my own kindred , so that I may take him into my family and rejoice in doing so ? 
Even now this can be done , but it will lead to the grand unity of men in the future , when a man will not seek servants for himself , or desire to turn his fellow creatures into servants as he does now , but on the contrary , will long with his whole heart to be the servant of all , as the Gospel teaches . 
And can it be a dream , that in the end man will find his joy only in deeds of light and mercy , and not in cruel pleasures as now , in gluttony , fornication , ostentation , boasting and envious rivalry of one with the other ? 
I firmly believe that it is not and that the time is at hand . 
People laugh and ask : `` When will that time come and does it look like coming ? '' 
I believe that with Christ 's help we shall accomplish this great thing . 
And how many ideas there have been on earth in the history of man which were unthinkable ten years before they appeared ! 
Yet when their destined hour had come , they came forth and spread over the whole earth . 
So it will be with us , and our people will shine forth in the world , and all men will say : `` The stone which the builders rejected has become the cornerstone of the building . '' 
And we may ask the scornful themselves : If our hope is a dream , when will you build up your edifice and order things justly by your intellect alone , without Christ ? 
If they declare that it is they who are advancing towards unity , only the most simple-hearted among them believe it , so that one may positively marvel at such simplicity . 
Of a truth , they have more fantastic dreams than we . 
They aim at justice , but , denying Christ , they will end by flooding the earth with blood , for blood cries out for blood , and he that taketh up the sword shall perish by the sword . 
And if it were not for Christ 's covenant , they would slaughter one another down to the last two men on earth . 
And those two last men would not be able to restrain each other in their pride , and the one would slay the other and then himself . 
And that would come to pass , were it not for the promise of Christ that for the sake of the humble and meek the days shall be shortened . 
While I was still wearing an officer 's uniform after my duel , I talked about servants in general society , and I remember everyone was amazed at me . 
`` What ! '' 
they asked , `` are we to make our servants sit down on the sofa and offer them tea ? '' 
And I answered them : `` Why not , sometimes at least ? '' 
Everyone laughed . 
Their question was frivolous and my answer was not clear ; but the thought in it was to some extent right . 
-LRB- g -RRB- Of Prayer , of Love , and of Contact with other Worlds . 
Young man , be not forgetful of prayer . 
Every time you pray , if your prayer is sincere , there will be new feeling and new meaning in it , which will give you fresh courage , and you will understand that prayer is an education . 
Remember , too , every day , and whenever you can , repeat to yourself , `` Lord , have mercy on all who appear before Thee to-day . '' 
For every hour and every moment thousands of men leave life on this earth , and their souls appear before God . 
And how many of them depart in solitude , unknown , sad , dejected that no one mourns for them or even knows whether they have lived or not ! 
And behold , from the other end of the earth perhaps , your prayer for their rest will rise up to God though you knew them not nor they you . 
How touching it must be to a soul standing in dread before the Lord to feel at that instant that , for him too , there is one to pray , that there is a fellow creature left on earth to love him too ! 
And God will look on you both more graciously , for if you have had so much pity on him , how much will He have pity Who is infinitely more loving and merciful than you ! 
And He will forgive him for your sake . 
Brothers , have no fear of men 's sin . 
Love a man even in his sin , for that is the semblance of Divine Love and is the highest love on earth . 
Love all God 's creation , the whole and every grain of sand in it . 
Love every leaf , every ray of God 's light . 
Love the animals , love the plants , love everything . 
If you love everything , you will perceive the divine mystery in things . 
Once you perceive it , you will begin to comprehend it better every day . 
And you will come at last to love the whole world with an all-embracing love . 
Love the animals : God has given them the rudiments of thought and joy untroubled . 
Do not trouble it , do n't harass them , do n't deprive them of their happiness , do n't work against God 's intent . 
Man , do not pride yourself on superiority to the animals ; they are without sin , and you , with your greatness , defile the earth by your appearance on it , and leave the traces of your foulness after you - alas , it is true of almost every one of us ! 
Love children especially , for they too are sinless like the angels ; they live to soften and purify our hearts and , as it were , to guide us . 
Woe to him who offends a child ! 
Father Anfim taught me to love children . 
The kind , silent man used often on our wanderings to spend the farthings given us on sweets and cakes for the children . 
He could not pass by a child without emotion . 
That 's the nature of the man . 
At some thoughts one stands perplexed , especially at the sight of men 's sin , and wonders whether one should use force or humble love . 
Always decide to use humble love . 
If you resolve on that once for all , you may subdue the whole world . 
Loving humility is marvellously strong , the strongest of all things , and there is nothing else like it . 
Every day and every hour , every minute , walk round yourself and watch yourself , and see that your image is a seemly one . 
You pass by a little child , you pass by , spiteful , with ugly words , with wrathful heart ; you may not have noticed the child , but he has seen you , and your image , unseemly and ignoble , may remain in his defenceless heart . 
You do n't know it , but you may have sown an evil seed in him and it may grow , and all because you were not careful before the child , because you did not foster in yourself a careful , actively benevolent love . 
Brothers , love is a teacher ; but one must know how to acquire it , for it is hard to acquire , it is dearly bought , it is won slowly by long labour . 
For we must love not only occasionally , for a moment , but for ever . 
Everyone can love occasionally , even the wicked can . 
My brother asked the birds to forgive him ; that sounds senseless , but it is right ; for all is like an ocean , all is flowing and blending ; a touch in one place sets up movement at the other end of the earth . 
It may be senseless to beg forgiveness of the birds , but birds would be happier at your side - a little happier , anyway - and children and all animals , if you were nobler than you are now . 
It 's all like an ocean , I tell you . 
Then you would pray to the birds too , consumed by an all-embracing love , in a sort of transport , and pray that they too will forgive you your sin . 
Treasure this ecstasy , however senseless it may seem to men . 
My friends , pray to God for gladness . 
Be glad as children , as the birds of heaven . 
And let not the sin of men confound you in your doings . 
Fear not that it will wear away your work and hinder its being accomplished . 
Do not say , `` Sin is mighty , wickedness is mighty , evil environment is mighty , and we are lonely and helpless , and evil environment is wearing us away and hindering our good work from being done . '' 
Fly from that dejection , children ! 
There is only one means of salvation , then take yourself and make yourself responsible for all men 's sins , that is the truth , you know , friends , for as soon as you sincerely make yourself responsible for everything and for all men , you will see at once that it is really so , and that you are to blame for everyone and for all things . 
But throwing your own indolence and impotence on others you will end by sharing the pride of Satan and murmuring against God . 
Of the pride of Satan what I think is this : it is hard for us on earth to comprehend it , and therefore it is so easy to fall into error and to share it , even imagining that we are doing something grand and fine . 
Indeed , many of the strongest feelings and movements of our nature we can not comprehend on earth . 
Let not that be a stumbling-block , and think not that it may serve as a justification to you for anything . 
For the Eternal judge asks of you what you can comprehend and not what you can not . 
You will know that yourself hereafter , for you will behold all things truly then and will not dispute them . 
On earth , indeed , we are , as it were , astray , and if it were not for the precious image of Christ before us , we should be undone and altogether lost , as was the human race before the flood . 
Much on earth is hidden from us , but to make up for that we have been given a precious mystic sense of our living bond with the other world , with the higher heavenly world , and the roots of our thoughts and feelings are not here but in other worlds . 
That is why the philosophers say that we can not apprehend the reality of things on earth . 
God took seeds from different worlds and sowed them on this earth , and His garden grew up and everything came up that could come up , but what grows lives and is alive only through the feeling of its contact with other mysterious worlds . 
If that feeling grows weak or is destroyed in you , the heavenly growth will die away in you . 
Then you will be indifferent to life and even grow to hate it . 
That 's what I think . 
-LRB- h -RRB- Can a Man judge his Fellow Creatures ? 
Faith to the End . 
Remember particularly that you can not be a judge of anyone . 
For no one can judge a criminal until he recognises that he is just such a criminal as the man standing before him , and that he perhaps is more than all men to blame for that crime . 
When he understands that , he will be able to be a judge . 
Though that sounds absurd , it is true . 
If I had been righteous myself , perhaps there would have been no criminal standing before me . 
If you can take upon yourself the crime of the criminal your heart is judging , take it at once , suffer for him yourself , and let him go without reproach . 
And even if the law itself makes you his judge , act in the same spirit so far as possible , for he will go away and condemn himself more bitterly than you have done . 
If , after your kiss , he goes away untouched , mocking at you , do not let that be a stumbling-block to you . 
It shows his time has not yet come , but it will come in due course . 
And if it come not , no Matter ; if not he , then another in his place will understand and suffer , and judge and condemn himself , and the truth will be fulfilled . 
Believe that , believe it without doubt ; for in that lies all the hope and faith of the saints . 
Work without ceasing . 
If you remember in the night as you go to sleep , `` I have not done what I ought to have done , '' rise up at once and do it . 
If the people around you are spiteful and callous and will not hear you , fall down before them and beg their forgiveness ; for in truth you are to blame for their not wanting to hear you . 
And if you can not speak to them in their bitterness , serve them in silence and in humility , never losing hope . 
If all men abandon you and even drive you away by force , then when you are left alone fall on the earth and kiss it , water it with your tears and it will bring forth fruit even though no one has seen or heard you in your solitude . 
Believe to the end , even if all men went astray and you were left the only one faithful ; bring your offering even then and praise God in your loneliness . 
And if two of you are gathered together - then there is a whole world , a world of living love . 
Embrace each other tenderly and praise God , for if only in you two His truth has been fulfilled . 
If you sin yourself and grieve even unto death for your sins or for your sudden sin , then rejoice for others , rejoice for the righteous man , rejoice that if you have sinned , he is righteous and has not sinned . 
If the evil-doing of men moves you to indignation and overwhelming distress , even to a desire for vengeance on the evil-doers , shun above all things that feeling . 
Go at once and seek suffering for yourself , as though you were yourself guilty of that wrong . 
Accept that suffering and bear it and your heart will find comfort , and you will understand that you too are guilty , for you might have been a light to the evil-doers , even as the one man sinless , and you were not a light to them . 
If you had been a light , you would have lightened the path for others too , and the evil-doer might perhaps have been saved by your light from his sin . 
And even though your light was shining , yet you see men were not saved by it , hold firm and doubt not the power of the heavenly light . 
Believe that if they were not saved , they will be saved hereafter . 
And if they are not saved hereafter , then their sons will be saved , for your light will not die even when you are dead . 
The righteous man departs , but his light remains . 
Men are always saved after the death of the deliverer . 
Men reject their prophets and slay them , but they love their martyrs and honour those whom they have slain . 
You are working for the whole , are acting for the future . 
Seek no reward , for great is your reward on this earth : the spiritual joy which is only vouchsafed to the righteous man . 
Fear not the great nor the mighty , but be wise and ever serene . 
Know the measure , know the times , study that . 
When you are left alone , pray . 
Love to throw yourself on the earth and kiss it . 
Kiss the earth and love it with an unceasing , consuming love . 
Love all men , love everything . 
Seek that rapture and ecstasy . 
Water the earth with the tears of your joy and love those tears . 
Do n't be ashamed of that ecstasy , prize it , for it is a gift of God and a great one ; it is not given to many but only to the elect . 
-LRB- i -RRB- Of Hell and Hell Fire , a Mystic Reflection . 
Fathers and teachers , I ponder , `` What is hell ? '' 
I maintain that it is the suffering of being unable to love . 
Once in infinite existence , immeasurable in time and space , a spiritual creature was given on his coming to earth the power of saying , `` I am and I love . '' 
Once , only once , there was given him a moment of active lifting love , and for that was earthly life given him , and with it times and seasons . 
And that happy creature rejected the priceless gift , prized it and loved it not , scorned it and remained callous . 
Such a one , having left the earth , sees Abraham 's bosom and talks with Abraham as we are told in the parable of the rich man and Lazarus , and beholds heaven and can go up to the Lord . 
But that is just his torment , to rise up to the Lord without ever having loved , to be brought close to those who have loved when he has despised their love . 
For he sees clearly and says to himself , `` Now I have understanding , and though I now thirst to love , there will be nothing great , no sacrifice in my love , for my earthly life is over , and Abraham will not come even with a drop of living water -LRB- that is the gift of earthly active life -RRB- to cool the fiery thirst of spiritual love which burns in me now , though I despised it on earth ; there is no more life for me and will be no more time ! 
Even though I would gladly give my life for others , it can never be , for that life is passed which can be sacrificed for love , and now there is a gulf fixed between that life and this existence . '' 
They talk of hell fire in the material sense . 
I do n't go into that mystery and I shun it . 
But I think if there were fire in material sense , they would be glad of it , for I imagine that in material agony , their still greater spiritual agony would be forgotten for a moment . 
Moreover , that spiritual agony can not be taken from them , for that suffering is not external but within them . 
And if it could be taken from them , I think it would be bitterer still for the unhappy creatures . 
For even if the righteous in Paradise forgave them , beholding their torments , and called them up to heaven in their infinite love , they would only multiply their torments , for they would arouse in them still more keenly a flaming thirst for responsive , active and grateful love which is now impossible . 
In the timidity of my heart I imagine , however , that the very recognition of this impossibility would serve at last to console them . 
For accepting the love of the righteous together with the impossibility of repaying it , by this submissiveness and the effect of this humility , they will attain at last , as it were , to a certain semblance of that active love which they scorned in life , to something like its outward expression ... I am sorry , friends and brothers , that I can not express this clearly . 
But woe to those who have slain themselves on earth , woe to the suicides ! 
I believe that there can be none more miserable than they . 
They tell us that it is a sin to pray for them and outwardly the Church , as it were , renounces them , but in my secret heart I believe that we may pray even for them . 
Love can never be an offence to Christ . 
For such as those I have prayed inwardly all my life , I confess it , fathers and teachers , and even now I pray for them every day . 
Oh , there are some who remain proud and fierce even in hell , in spite of their certain knowledge and contemplation of the absolute truth ; there are some fearful ones who have given themselves over to Satan and his proud spirit entirely . 
For such , hell is voluntary and ever consuming ; they are tortured by their own choice . 
For they have cursed themselves , cursing God and life . 
They live upon their vindictive pride like a starving man in the desert sucking blood out of his own body . 
But they are never satisfied , and they refuse forgiveness , they curse God Who calls them . 
They can not behold the living God without hatred , and they cry out that the God of life should be annihilated , that God should destroy Himself and His own creation . 
And they will burn in the fire of their own wrath for ever and yearn for death and annihilation . 
But they will not attain to death ... . 
Here Alexey Fyodorovitch Karamazov 's manuscript ends . 
I repeat , it is incomplete and fragmentary . 
Biographical details , for instance , cover only Father Zossima 's earliest youth . 
Of his teaching and opinions we find brought together sayings evidently uttered on very different occasions . 
His utterances during the last few hours have not been kept separate from the rest , but their general character can be gathered from what we have in Alexey Fyodorovitch 's manuscript . 
The elder 's death came in the end quite unexpectedly . 
For although those who were gathered about him that last evening realised that his death was approaching , yet it was difficult to imagine that it would come so suddenly . 
On the contrary , his friends , as I observed already , seeing him that night apparently so cheerful and talkative , were convinced that there was at least a temporary change for the better in his condition . 
Even five minutes before his death , they said afterwards wonderingly , it was impossible to foresee it . 
He seemed suddenly to feel an acute pain in his chest , he turned pale and pressed his hands to his heart . 
All rose from their seats and hastened to him . 
But though suffering , he still looked at them with a smile , sank slowly from his chair on to his knees , then bowed his face to the ground , stretched out his arms and as though in joyful ecstasy , praying and kissing the ground , quietly and joyfully gave up his soul to God . 
The news of his death spread at once through the hermitage and reached the monastery . 
The nearest friends of the deceased and those whose duty it was from their position began to lay out the corpse according to the ancient ritual , and all the monks gathered together in the church . 
And before dawn the news of the death reached the town . 
By the morning all the town was talking of the event , and crowds were flocking from the town to the monastery . 
But this subject will be treated in the next book ; I will only add here that before a day had passed something happened so unexpected , so strange , upsetting , and bewildering in its effect on the monks and the townspeople , that after all these years , that day of general suspense is still vividly remembered in the town . 
The Breath of Corruption THE body of Father Zossima was prepared for burial according to the established Ritual . 
As is well known , the bodies of dead monks and hermits are not washed . 
In the words of the Church Ritual : `` If any one of the monks depart in the Lord , the monk designated -LRB- that is , whose office it is -RRB- shall wipe the body with warm water , making first the sign of the cross with a sponge on the forehead of the deceased , on the breast , on the hands and feet and on the knees , and that is enough . '' 
All this was done by Father Paissy , who then clothed the deceased in his monastic garb and wrapped him in his cloak , which was , according to custom , somewhat slit to allow of its being folded about him in the form of a cross . 
On his head he put a hood with an eight-cornered cross . 
The hood was left open and the dead man 's face was covered with black gauze . 
In his hands was put an ikon of the Saviour . 
Towards morning he was put in the coffin which had been made ready long before . 
It was decided to leave the coffin all day in the cell , in the larger room in which the elder used to receive his visitors and fellow monks . 
As the deceased was a priest and monk of the strictest rule , the Gospel , not the Psalter , had to be read over his body by monks in holy orders . 
The reading was begun by Father Iosif immediately after the requiem service . 
Father Paissy desired later on to read the Gospel all day and night over his dead friend , but for the present he , as well as the Father Superintendent of the Hermitage , was very busy and occupied , for something extraordinary , an unheard-of , even `` unseemly '' excitement and impatient expectation began to be apparent in the monks , and the visitors from the monastery hostels , and the crowds of people flocking from the town . 
And as time went on , this grew more and more marked . 
Both the Superintendent and Father Paissy did their utmost to calm the general bustle and agitation . 
When it was fully daylight , some people began bringing their sick , in most cases children , with them from the town - as though they had been waiting expressly for this moment to do so , evidently persuaded that the dead elder 's remains had a power of healing , which would be immediately made manifest in accordance with their faith . 
It was only then apparent how unquestionably everyone in our town had accepted Father Zossima during his lifetime as a great saint . 
And those who came were far from being all of the humbler classes . 
This intense expectation on the part of believers displayed with such haste , such openness , even with impatience and almost insistence , impressed Father Paissy as unseemly . 
Though he had long foreseen something of the sort , the actual manifestation of the feeling was beyond anything he had looked for . 
When he came across any of the monks who displayed this excitement , Father Paissy began to reprove them . 
`` Such immediate expectation of something extraordinary , '' he said , `` shows a levity , possible to worldly people but unseemly in us . '' 
But little attention was paid him and Father Paissy noticed it uneasily . 
Yet he himself -LRB- if the whole truth must be told -RRB- , secretly at the bottom of his heart , cherished almost the same hopes and could not but be aware of it , though he was indignant at the too impatient expectation around him , and saw in it light-mindedness and vanity . 
Nevertheless , it was particularly unpleasant to him to meet certain persons , whose presence aroused in him great misgivings . 
In the crowd in the dead man 's cell he noticed with inward aversion -LRB- for which he immediately reproached himself -RRB- the presence of Rakitin and of the monk from Obdorsk , who was still staying in the monastery . 
Of both of them Father Paissy felt for some reason suddenly suspicious - though , indeed , he might well have felt the same about others . 
The monk from Obdorsk was conspicuous as the most fussy in the excited crowd . 
He was to be seen everywhere ; everywhere he was asking questions , everywhere he was listening , on all sides he was whispering with a peculiar , mysterious air . 
His expression showed the greatest impatience and even a sort of irritation . 
As for Rakitin , he , as appeared later , had come so early to the hermitage at the special request of Madame Hohlakov . 
As soon as that good-hearted but weak-minded woman , who could not herself have been admitted to the hermitage , waked and heard of the death of Father Zossima , she was overtaken with such intense curiosity that she promptly despatched Rakitin to the hermitage , to keep a careful look out and report to her by letter ever half hour or so `` everything that takes place . '' 
She regarded Rakitin as a most religious and devout young man . 
He was particularly clever in getting round people and assuming whatever part he thought most to their taste , if he detected the slightest advantage to himself from doing so . 
It was a bright , clear day , and many of the visitors were thronging about the tombs , which were particularly numerous round the church and scattered here and there about the hermitage . 
As he walked round the hermitage , Father Paissy remembered Alyosha and that he had not seen him for some time , not since the night . 
And he had no sooner thought of him than he at once noticed him in the farthest corner of the hermitage garden , sitting on the tombstone of a monk who had been famous long ago for his saintliness . 
He sat with his back to the hermitage and his face to the wall , and seemed to be hiding behind the tombstone . 
Going up to him , Father Paissy saw that he was weeping quietly but bitterly , with his face hidden in his hands , and that his whole frame was shaking with sobs . 
Father Paissy stood over him for a little . 
`` Enough , dear son , enough , dear , '' he pronounced with feeling at last . 
`` Why do you weep ? 
Rejoice and weep not . 
Do n't you know that this is the greatest of his days ? 
Think only where he is now , at this moment ! '' 
Alyosha glanced at him , uncovering his face , which was swollen with crying like a child 's , but turned away at once without uttering a word and hid his face in his hands again . 
`` Maybe it is well , '' said Father Paissy thoughtfully ; `` weep if you must ; Christ has sent you those tears . '' 
`` Your touching tears are but a relief to your spirit and will serve to gladden your dear heart , '' he added to himself , walking away from Alyosha , and thinking lovingly of him . 
He moved away quickly , however , for he felt that he too might weep looking at him . 
Meanwhile the time was passing ; the monastery services and the requiems for the dead followed in their due course . 
Father Paissy again took Father Iosif 's place by the coffin and began reading the Gospel . 
But before three o'clock in the afternoon that something took place to which I alluded at the end of the last book , something so unexpected by all of us and so contrary to the general hope , that , I repeat , this trivial incident has been minutely remembered to this day in our town and all the surrounding neighbourhood . 
I may add here , for myself personally , that I feel it almost repulsive that event which caused such frivolous agitation and was such a stumbling-block to many , though in reality it was the most natural and trivial matter . 
I should , of course , have omitted all mention of it in my story , if it had not exerted a very strong influence on the heart and soul of the chief , though future , hero of my story , Alyosha , forming a crisis and turning-point in his spiritual development , giving a shock to his intellect , which finally strengthened it for the rest of his life and gave it a definite aim . 
And so , to return to our story . 
When before dawn they laid Father Zossima 's body in the coffin and brought it into the front room , the question of opening the windows was raised among those who were around the coffin . 
But this suggestion made casually by someone was unanswered and almost unnoticed . 
Some of those present may perhaps have inwardly noticed it , only to reflect that the anticipation of decay and corruption from the body of such a saint was an actual absurdity , calling for compassion -LRB- if not a smile -RRB- for the lack of faith and the frivolity it implied . 
For they expected something quite different . 
And , behold , soon after midday there were signs of something , at first only observed in silence by those who came in and out and were evidently each afraid to communicate the thought in his mind . 
But by three o'clock those signs had become so clear and unmistakable , that the news swiftly reached all the monks and visitors in the hermitage , promptly penetrated to the monastery , throwing all the monks into amazement , and finally , in the shortest possible time , spread to the town , exciting everyone in it , believers and unbelievers alike . 
The unbelievers rejoiced , and as for the believers some of them rejoiced even more than the unbelievers , for `` men love the downfall and disgrace of the righteous , '' as the deceased elder had said in one of his exhortations . 
The fact is that a smell of decomposition began to come from the coffin , growing gradually more marked , and by three o'clock it was quite unmistakable . 
In all the past history of our monastery , no such scandal could be recalled , and in no other circumstances could such a scandal have been possible , as showed itself in unseemly disorder immediately after this discovery among the very monks themselves . 
Afterwards , even many years afterwards , some sensible monks were amazed and horrified , when they recalled that day , that the scandal could have reached such proportions . 
For in the past , monks of very holy life had died , God-fearing old men , whose saintliness was acknowledged by all , yet from their humble coffins , too , the breath of corruption had come , naturally , as from all dead bodies , but that had caused no scandal nor even the slightest excitement . 
Of course , there had been , in former times , saints in the monastery whose memory was carefully preserved and whose relics , according to tradition , showed no signs of corruption . 
This fact was regarded by the monks as touching and mysterious , and the tradition of it was cherished as something blessed and miraculous , and as a promise , by God 's grace , of still greater glory from their tombs in the future . 
One such , whose memory was particularly cherished , was an old monk , Job , who had died seventy years before at the age of a hundred and five . 
He had been a celebrated ascetic , rigid in fasting and silence , and his tomb was pointed out to all visitors on their arrival with peculiar respect and mysterious hints of great hopes connected with it . 
-LRB- That was the very tomb on which Father Paissy had found Alyosha sitting in the morning . -RRB- 
Another memory cherished in the monastery was that of the famous Father Varsonofy , who was only recently dead and had preceded Father Zossima in the eldership . 
He was reverenced during his lifetime as a crazy saint by all the pilgrims to the monastery . 
There was a tradition that both of these had lain in their coffins as though alive , that they had shown no signs of decomposition when they were buried and that there had been a holy light in their faces . 
And some people even insisted that a sweet fragrance came from their bodies . 
Yet , in spite of these edifying memories , it would be difficult to explain the frivolity , absurdity and malice that were manifested beside the coffin of Father Zossima . 
It is my private opinion that several different causes were simultaneously at work , one of which was the deeply rooted hostility to the institution of elders as a pernicious innovation , an antipathy hidden deep in the hearts of many of the monks . 
Even more powerful was jealousy of the dead man 's saintliness , so firmly established during lifetime that it was almost a forbidden thing to question it . 
For though the late elder had won over many hearts , more by love than by miracles , and had gathered round him a mass of loving adherents , none the less , in fact , rather the more on that account he had awakened jealousy and so had come to have bitter enemies , secret and open , not only in the monastery but in the world outside it . 
He did no one any harm , but `` Why do they think him so saintly ? '' 
And that question alone , gradually repeated , gave rise at last to an intense , insatiable hatred of him . 
That , I believe , was why many people were extremely delighted at the smell of decomposition which came so quickly , for not a day had passed since his death . 
At the same time there were some among those who had been hitherto reverently devoted to the elder , who were almost mortified and personally affronted by this incident . 
This was how the thing happened . 
As soon as signs of decomposition had begun to appear , the whole aspect of the monks betrayed their secret motives in entering the cell . 
They went in , stayed a little while and hastened out to confirm the news to the crowd of other monks waiting outside . 
Some of the latter shook their heads mournfully , but others did not even care to conceal the delight which gleamed unmistakably in their malignant eyes . 
And now no one reproached them for it , no one raised his voice in protest , which was strange , for the majority of the monks had been devoted to the dead elder . 
But it seemed as though God had in this case let the minority get the upper hand for a time . 
Visitors from outside , particularly of the educated class , soon went into the cell , too , with the same spying intent . 
Of the peasantry few went into the cell , though there were crowds of them at the gates of the hermitage . 
After three o'clock the rush of worldly visitors was greatly increased and this was no doubt owing to the shocking news . 
People were attracted who would not otherwise have come on that day and had not intended to come , and among them were some personages of high standing . 
But external decorum was still preserved and Father Paissy , with a stern face , continued firmly and distinctly reading aloud the Gospel , apparently not noticing what was taking place around him , though he had , in fact , observed something unusual long before . 
But at last the murmurs , first subdued but gradually louder and more confident , reached even him . 
`` It shows God 's judgment is not as man 's , '' Father Paissy heard suddenly . 
The first to give utterance to this sentiment was a layman , an elderly official from the town , known to be a man of great piety . 
But he only repeated aloud what the monks had long been whispering . 
They had long before formulated this damning conclusion , and the worst of it was that a sort of triumphant satisfaction at that conclusion became more and more apparent every moment . 
Soon they began to lay aside even external decorum and almost seemed to feel they had a sort of right to discard it . 
`` And for what reason can this have happened , '' some of the monks said , at first with a show of regret ; `` he had a small frame and his flesh was dried up on his bones , what was there to decay ? '' 
`` It must be a sign from heaven , '' others hastened to add , and their opinion was adopted at once without protest . 
For it was pointed out , too , that if the decomposition had been natural , as in the case of every dead sinner , it would have been apparent later , after a lapse of at least twenty-four hours , but this premature corruption `` was in excess of nature , '' and so the finger of God was evident . 
It was meant for a sign . 
This conclusion seemed irresistible . 
Gentle Father Iosif , the librarian , a great favourite of the dead man 's , tried to reply to some of the evil speakers that `` this is not held everywhere alike , '' and that the incorruptibility of the bodies of the just was not a dogma of the Orthodox Church , but only an opinion , and that even in the most Orthodox regions , at Athos for instance , they were not greatly confounded by the smell of corruption , and there the chief sign of the glorification of the saved was not bodily incorruptibility , but the colour of the bones when the bodies have lain many years in the earth and have decayed in it . 
`` And if the bones are yellow as wax , that is the great sign that the Lord has glorified the dead saint , if they are not yellow but black , it shows that God has not deemed him worthy of such glory - that is the belief in Athos , a great place , which the Orthodox doctrine has been preserved from of old , unbroken and in its greatest purity , '' said Father Iosif in conclusion . 
But the meek Father 's words had little effect and even provoked a mocking retort . 
`` That 's all pedantry and innovation , no use listening to it , '' the monks decided . 
`` We stick to the old doctrine ; there are all sorts of innovations nowadays , are we to follow them all ? '' 
added others . 
`` We have had as many holy fathers as they had . 
There they are among the Turks , they have forgotten everything . 
Their doctrine has long been impure and they have no bells even , the most sneering added . 
Father Iosif walked away , grieving the more since he had put forward his own opinion with little confidence as though scarcely believing in it himself . 
He foresaw with distress that something very unseemly was beginning and that there were positive signs of disobedience . 
Little by little , all the sensible monks were reduced to silence like Father Iosif . 
And so it came to pass that all who loved the elder and had accepted with devout obedience the institution of the eldership were all at once terribly cast down and glanced timidly in one another 's faces , when they met . 
Those who were hostile to the institution of elders , as a novelty , held up their heads proudly . 
`` There was no smell of corruption from the late elder Varsonofy , but a sweet fragrance , '' they recalled malignantly . 
`` But he gained that glory not because he was an elder , but because he was a holy man . '' 
And this was followed by a shower of criticism and even blame of Father Zossima . 
`` His teaching was false ; he taught that life is a great joy and not a vale of tears , '' said some of the more unreasonable . 
`` He followed the fashionable belief , he did not recognise material fire in hell , '' others , still more unreasonable , added . 
`` He was not strict in fasting , allowed himself sweet things , ate cherry jam with his tea , ladies used to send it to him . 
Is it for a monk of strict rule to drink tea ? '' 
could be heard among some of the envious . 
`` He sat in pride , '' the most malignant declared vindictively ; `` he considered himself a saint and he took it as his due when people knelt before him . '' 
`` He abused the sacrament of confession , '' the fiercest opponents of the institution of elders added in a malicious whisper . 
And among these were some of the oldest monks , strictest in their devotion , genuine ascetics , who had kept silent during the life of the deceased elder , but now suddenly unsealed their lips . 
And this was terrible , for their words had great influence on young monks who were not yet firm in their convictions . 
The monk from Obdorsk heard all this attentively , heaving deep sighs and nodding his head . 
`` Yes , clearly Father Ferapont was right in his judgment yesterday , '' and at that moment Father Ferapont himself made his appearance , as though on purpose to increase the confusion . 
I have mentioned already that he rarely left his wooden cell by the apiary . 
He was seldom even seen at church and they overlooked this neglect on the ground of his craziness , and did not keep him to the rules binding on all the rest . 
But if the whole truth is to be told , they hardly had a choice about it . 
For it would have been discreditable to insist on burdening with the common regulations so great an ascetic , who prayed day and night -LRB- he even dropped asleep on his knees -RRB- . 
If they had insisted , the monks would have said , `` He is holier than all of us and he follows a rule harder than ours . 
And if he does not go to church , it 's because he knows when he ought to ; he has his own rule . '' 
It was to avoid the chance of these sinful murmurs that Father Ferapont was left in peace . 
As everyone was aware , Father Ferapont particularly disliked Father Zossima . 
And now the news had reached him in his hut that `` God 's judgment is not the same as man 's , '' and that something had happened which was `` in excess of nature . '' 
It may well be supposed that among the first to run to him with the news was the monk from Obdorsk , who had visited him the evening before and left his cell terror-stricken . 
I have mentioned above , that though Father Paissy standing firm and immovable reading the Gospel over the coffin , could not hear nor see what was passing outside the cell , he gauged most of it correctly in his heart , for he knew the men surrounding him well . 
He was not shaken by it , but awaited what would come next without fear , watching with penetration and insight for the outcome of the general excitement . 
Suddenly an extraordinary uproar in the passage in open defiance of decorum burst on his ears . 
The door was flung open and Father Ferapont appeared in the doorway . 
Behind him there could be seen accompanying him a crowd of monks , together with many people from the town . 
They did not , however , enter the cell , but stood at the bottom of the steps , waiting to see what Father Ferapont would say or do . 
For they felt with a certain awe , in spite of their audacity , that he had not come for nothing . 
Standing in the doorway , Father Ferapont raised his arms , and under his right arm the keen inquisitive little eyes of the monk from Obdorsk peeped in . 
He alone , in his intense curiosity , could not resist running up the steps after Father Ferapont . 
The others , on the contrary , pressed farther back in sudden alarm when the door was noisily flung open . 
Holding his hands aloft , Father Ferapont suddenly roared : `` Casting out I cast out ! '' 
and , turning in all directions , he began at once making the sign of the cross at each of the four walls and four corners of the cell in succession . 
All who accompanied Father Ferapont immediately understood his action . 
For they knew he always did this wherever he went , and that he would not sit down or say a word , till he had driven out the evil spirits . 
`` Satan , go hence ! 
Satan , go hence ! '' 
he repeated at each sign of the cross . 
`` Casting out I cast out , '' he roared again . 
He was wearing his coarse gown girt with a rope . 
His bare chest , covered with grey hair , could be seen under his hempen shirt . 
His feet were bare . 
As soon as he began waving his arms , the cruel irons he wore under his gown could be heard clanking . 
Father Paissy paused in his reading , stepped forward and stood before him waiting `` What have you come for , worthy Father ? 
Why do you offend against good order ? 
Why do you disturb the peace of the flock ? '' 
he said at last , looking sternly at him . 
`` What have I come for ? 
You ask why ? 
What is your faith ? '' 
