So saying , Ehrenthal opened the door , and called , `` Wife , Bernhard , Rosalie , come here . '' 
Mrs. Ehrenthal was a portly lady in black silk , with strongly-marked eyebrows and black ringlets , who laid herself out to please , and was extremely successful , report averred . 
As for her daughter , she was , indeed , a perfect beauty , with magnificent eyes and complexion , and a very slightly aquiline nose . 
But how came Bernhard to be one of the family ? 
Short , slight , with a pale , deeply-lined face , and bent figure , it was only his mouth and his clear eye that bespoke him young , and he was more negligently attired , too , than might have been expected . 
They all looked at Veitel in silence , while Ehrenthal proceeded to say that he had taken him into his service ; and Veitel himself mentally resolved to be very subservient to the mother , to fall in love with the daughter , to clean carelessly Bernhard 's boots , and carefully to search his pocket in brushing his coat . 
On the whole , he was well pleased with the arrangement made , and smiled to himself as he went along to Löbel Pinkus . 
This Löbel Pinkus was a householder who kept a spirit-shop on the ground floor ; but one thing was certain , no mere spirit-shop could have enriched him as this did . 
However , he bore a good character . 
The police willingly took a glass at his counter , for which he always declined payment . 
He paid his taxes regularly , and passed , indeed , for a friend of the executive . 
On the first floor he kept a lodging-house for bearded and beardless Jews . 
These gentlemen generally slipped in late and out early . 
Besides such regular guests , others of every age , sex , and creed arrived at irregular intervals . 
These had strictly private dealings with the host , and showed a great objection to having a lucifer match struck near their faces . 
The other lodgers took their own views of these peculiarities , but judged it best to keep them to themselves . 
In this house it was that Itzig went up a dark stair , and , groping along a dirty wall , came to a heavy oaken door , with a massive bolt , and , after a good push , entered a waste-looking room that ran the whole length of the house . 
In the middle stood an old table with a wretched oil lamp , and opposite the door a great partition , with several smaller doors , some of which were open , and showed that the whole consisted of narrow subdivisions , with hooks for hanging clothes . 
The small windows had faded blinds , but on the opposite side of the room the twilight entered through an open door that led to a wooden gallery running along the outside of the house . 
Itzig threw down his bundle and went out on this gallery , which he viewed with much interest . 
Below him rolled a rapid stream of dirty water , hemmed in on either side by dilapidated wooden houses , most of which had similar galleries to every story . 
In olden times , the worthy guild of dyers had inhabited this street , but now they had changed their quarters , and instead of sheep and goat skins , there hung over the worm-eaten railings only the clothes of the poor put out to dry . 
Their colors contrasted strangely with the black woodwork ; the light fell in a remarkable way upon the rude carvings , and the dark posts that started here and there out of the water . 
In short , it was a wretched place , save for cats , painters , or poor devils . 
Young Itzig had already been here more than once , but never alone . 
Now he observed that a long , covered staircase led down from the gallery to the water 's edge , and that a similar one ran up to the next house , whence he concluded that it would be possible to go from one house to another without doing more than wetting the feet ; also , that when the water was low , one could walk along at the base of the houses , and he wondered whether there were men who availed themselves of these possibilities . 
His fancy was so much excited by this train of thought , that he ran back , crept into the partition , and found out that the wall at the back of it was also of wood . 
As this was the wall dividing the neighboring house from the one in which he was , he considered it a pleasant discovery , and was just going to see whether some chink in the main wall might not afford a further prospect , when he was disturbed by a hollow murmur , which showed him that he was not alone . 
So he settled himself upon a bag of straw opposite his companion , who was too sleepy to talk much . 
By-and-by Pinkus came in , placed a jug of water on the table , and locked the door outside . 
Itzig ate in the dark the dry bread he had in his pocket , and at length fell asleep to the snoring of his companion . 
At the same hour his fellow-traveler wrapped himself round in his comfortable bed , looked about him more asleep than awake , and fancied that he saw the stucco cat rise on his feet , stretch out his paws , and proceed to wash his face . 
Before he had time to marvel at this , he fell asleep . 
Both the youths had their dreams . 
Anton 's was of sitting on a gigantic bale , and flying on it through the air , while a certain lovely young lady stretched her arms out toward him ; and Itzig 's was of having become a baron , and being teased into flinging an alms to old Ehrenthal . 
The following morning each set to work . 
Anton sat at the desk and copied letters , while Itzig , having brushed the collective boots and shoes of the Ehrenthal family , stationed himself as a spy at the door of the principal hotel , to watch a certain gentleman who was discontented with his master , and suspected of applying to other moneyed men . 
The first idle hour he had , Anton drew from memory the castle , the balcony , and the turrets , on the best paper the town could afford ; the next , he put the drawing in a gilt frame , and hung it over his sofa . 
Just at first Anton found some difficulty in adapting himself to the new world in which he was placed . 
The business was one of a kind becoming rare nowadays , when rail-roads and telegraphs unite remotest districts , and every merchant sends from the heart of the country to bid his agents purchase goods almost before they reach the shore . 
Yet there was a something about this old-fashioned house of a dignified , almost a princely character ; and what was still better , it was well calculated to inspire confidence . 
At the time of which we speak , the sea was far off , facilities of communication were rare , so that the merchants ' speculations were necessarily more independent , and involved greater hazard . 
The importance of such a mercantile house as this depended upon the quantity of stores it bought with its own money and at its own risk . 
Of these , a great part lay in long rows of warehouses along the river , some in the vaults of the old house itself , and some in the warehouses and stores of those around . 
Most of the tradesmen of the province provided themselves with colonial produce from the warehouses of the firm , whose agents were spread to east and south , and carried on , even as far as the Turkish frontier , a business which , if less regular and secure than the home trade , was often more lucrative than any other . 
Thus it happened that the every-day routine afforded to the new apprentice a wide diversity of impressions and experiences . 
A varied procession poured through the counting-house from morning to evening ; men of different costumes , all offering samples of different articles for sale -- Polish Jews , beggars , men of business , carriers , porters , servants , etc. . 
Anton found it difficult to concentrate his thoughts amid this endless going and coming , and to get through his work , simple as it was . 
For instance , Mr. Braun , the agent of a friendly house in Hamburgh , had just come in and taken a sample of coffee out of his pocket . 
While it was being submitted to the principal , the agent went on gesticulating with his gold-headed cane , and talking about a recent storm , and the damage it had done . 
The door creaked , and a poorly-dressed woman entered . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
asked Mr. Specht . 
Then came lamentable sounds , like the peeping of a sick hen , which changed , as soon as the merchant had put his hand into his pocket , into a joyful chuckle . 
`` Waves mountain-high , '' cried the agent . 
`` God reward you a thousand-fold , '' chuckled the woman . 
`` Comes to 550 merks , 10 shillings , '' said Baumann to the principal . 
And now the door was vehemently pushed open , and a stoutly-built man entered , with a bag of money under his arm , which he triumphantly deposited on the marble table , exclaiming , with the air of one doing a good action , `` Here am I ; and here is money ! '' 
Mr. Jordan rose immediately , and said , in a friendly voice , `` Good-morning , Mr. Stephen ; how goes the world in Wolfsburg ? '' 
`` A dreadful hole ! '' 
groaned Mr. Braun . 
`` Where ? '' 
inquired Fink . 
`` Not such a bad place either , '' said Mr. Stephen ; `` but little business doing . '' 
`` Sixty-five sacks of Cuba , '' returned the principal to a question of one of the clerks . 
Meanwhile , the door opened again , and this time admitted a man-servant and a Jew from Brody . 
The servant gave the merchant a note of invitation to a dinner-party -- the Jew crept to the corner where Fink sat . 
`` What brings you again , Schmeie Tinkeles ? '' 
coldly asked Fink ; `` I have already told you that we would have no dealings with you . '' 
`` No dealings ! '' 
croaked the unlucky Tinkeles , in such execrable German that Anton had difficulty in understanding him . 
`` Such wool as I bring has never been seen before in this country . '' 
`` How much a hundred weight ? '' 
asked Fink , writing , without looking at the Jew . 
`` What I have already said . '' 
`` You are a fool , '' said Fink ; `` off with you ! '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
screamed he of the caftan , `` what language is that ? 
` Off with you ! ' 
-- there 's no dealing so . '' 
`` What do you want for your wool ? 
`` 41-2/3 , '' said Tinkeles . 
`` Get out ! '' 
suggested Fink . 
`` Do n't go on forever saying ` Get out ! ' '' 
implored the Jew , in despair ; `` say what you will give . '' 
`` If you ask such unreasonable prices , nothing at all , '' replied Fink , beginning another sheet . 
`` Only say what you will give . '' 
`` Come , then , if you speak like a rational man , '' answered Fink , looking at the Jew . 
`` I am rational , '' was the low reply ; `` what will you give ? '' 
`` Thirty-nine , '' said Fink . 
At that Schmeie Tinkeles went distracted , shook his black greasy hair , and swore by all he held holy that he could not take it under 41 , whereupon Fink signified that he should be put out by one of the servants if he made so much noise . 
The Jew , therefore , went off in high dudgeon ; soon , however , putting his head in again , and asking , `` Well , then , what will you give ? '' 
`` Thirty-nine , '' said Fink , watching the excitement he thus raised much as an anatomist might the galvanic convulsions of a frog . 
The words `` thirty-nine '' occasioned a fresh explosion in the mind of the Jew ; he came forward , solemnly committed his soul to the deepest abyss , and declared himself the most unworthy wretch alive if he took less than 41 . 
As he could not profit by Fink 's repeated exhortations to quit , a servant was called . 
His appearance was so far composing , that Mr. Tinkeles now declared he could go alone , and would go alone ; whereupon he stood still , and said 40-1/2 . 
The agent , the provincials , and the whole counting-house watched the progress of the bargain with some curiosity ; while Fink , with a certain degree of cordiality , proceeded to counsel the poor Jew to retire without further discussion , seeing that he was an utter fool , and there really was no dealing with him . 
Once more the Jew went out , and Fink said to the principal , who was reading a letter the while , `` He 'll let us have the wool if I let him have another half dollar . '' 
`` How much is there of it ? '' 
asked the merchant . 
`` Six tons , '' said Fink . 
`` Take it , '' said Mr. Schröter , reading on . 
Again the door opened and shut , the chattering went on , and Anton kept wondering how they could speak of a purchase when the seller had been so decided in his refusal of their terms . 
Once more the door was gently pushed open , and Tinkeles , creeping behind Fink , laid his hand on his shoulder , and said , in a melancholy but confidential voice , `` What will you give , then ? '' 
Fink turned round , and replied with a good-natured smile , `` If you please to take it , Tinkeles , 39-1/3 ; but only on the condition that you do not speak another word , otherwise I retract the offer . '' 
`` I am not speaking , '' answered the Jew . 
`` Say 40 . '' 
Fink made a movement of impatience , and silently pointed to the door . 
The wool-dealer went out once more . 
`` Now for it ! '' 
said Fink . 
In a moment or two Tinkeles returned , and , with more composure of manner , brought out `` 39-1/2 , if you will take it at that . '' 
After some appearance of uncertainty , Fink carelessly replied , `` So be it , then ; '' at which Schmeie Tinkeles underwent an utter transformation , behaving like an amiable friend of the firm , and politely inquiring after the health of the principal . 
And so it went on ; the door creaking , buyers and sellers coming and going , men talking , pens scratching , and money pouring ceaselessly in . 
The household of which Anton now formed part appeared to him to be most impressive and singular . 
The house itself was an irregular and ancient building , with wings , court-yards , out-houses , short stairs , mysterious passages , and deep recesses . 
In the front part of it were handsome apartments , occupied by the merchant 's family . 
Mr. Schröter had only been married for a very short time , his wife and child had died within the year , and his sister was now his only near relation . 
The merchant adhered rigidly to the old customs of the firm . 
All the unmarried clerks formed part of the household , and dined with him punctually at one o'clock . 
On the day after Anton 's arrival , a few minutes before that hour , he was taken to be introduced to the lady of the house , and gazed with wonder at the elegance and magnificence of the rooms through which he passed on his way to her presence . 
Sabine Schröter 's pale , delicate face , crowned with hair of raven black , shone out very fair above her graceful summer attire . 
She seemed about Anton 's own age , but she had the dignity of a matron . 
`` My sister governs us all , '' said the merchant , looking fondly at her . 
`` If you have any wish , make it known to her ; she is the good fairy who keeps the house in order . '' 
Anton looked at the fairy , and modestly replied , `` Hitherto I have found every thing exceed my wishes . '' 
`` Your life will , in time , appear a monotonous one , '' continued the merchant . 
`` Ours is a rigidly regular house , where you have much work to look forward to , and little recreation . 
My time is much engrossed ; but , if you should ever need advice or assistance , I hope you will apply directly to myself . '' 
This short audience over , he rose and led Anton to the dining-room , where all his colleagues were assembled ; next , Sabine entered , accompanied by an elderly lady , a distant relation , who looked very good-natured . 
The clerks made their obeisance , and Anton took the seat appointed to him at the end of a long table , among the younger of his brethren . 
Opposite him sat Sabine , beside her brother , then the elderly relative , and next to her , Fink . 
On the whole , it was a silent dinner . 
Anton 's neighbors said little , and that under their breath ; but Fink rattled away with thorough unconcern , told droll stories , mimicked voices and manners , and was exaggerated in his attentions to the good-natured relative . 
Anton was positively horrified at this freedom , and fancied that the principal did not like it much better . 
The black-coated domestics waited with the utmost propriety ; and Anton rose with the impression that this repast had been the most solemn and stately of which he had ever partaken , and that he should get on with all the household with the exception of `` that Von Fink . '' 
One day that they accidentally met on the staircase , Fink , who had not for some time appeared conscious of his existence , stopped and asked him , `` Well , Master Wohlfart , how does this house suit you ? '' 
To which Anton replied , `` Exceedingly well , indeed . 
I see and hear so much that is new to me that I have hardly thought of myself as yet . '' 
`` You 'll soon get accustomed to it , '' said Fink , laughing ; `` one day is the same as the other all the year long . 
On Sunday , an extra good dinner , a glass of wine , and your best coat -- that 's all . 
You are one of the wheels in the machine , and will be expected to grind regularly . '' 
`` I am aware that I must be industrious in order to merit Mr. Schröter 's confidence , '' was the rather indignant reply . 
`` Truly a virtuous remark ; but you 'll soon see , my poor lad , what a gulf is fixed between the head of the firm and those who write his letters . 
No prince on earth stands so far removed above his vassals as this same coffee-lord above his clerks . 
But do not lay much stress on what I say , '' added he , more good-naturedly ; `` the whole house will tell you that I am not quite compos . 
However , I 'll give you a piece of good advice . 
Get an English master , and make some progress before you got rusty . 
All they teach you here will never make a clever man of you , if you happen to want to be one . 
Good-night . '' 
And , turning upon his heel , he left our Anton somewhat disconcerted . 
Indeed , he too , in course of time , began to be conscious of the monotony of a business life , but he did not fret about it , having been taught by his parents habits of industry and order . 
Mr. Jordan took much pains to initiate him into the mysteries of divers wares ; and the hours that he first spent in the warehouses , amid the varied produce of different lands , were fraught with a certain poetry of their own , as good , perhaps , as any other . 
There was a large , gloomy , vaulted room on the ground floor , in which lay stores for the traffic of the day . 
Tuns , bales , chests , were piled on each other , which every land , every race , had contributed to fill . 
The floating palace of the East India Company , the swift American brig , the patriarchal ark of the Dutchman , the stout-ribbed whaler , the smoky steamer , the gay Chinese junk , the light canoe of the Malay -- all these had battled with winds and waves to furnish this vaulted room . 
A Hindoo woman had woven that matting ; a Chinese had painted that chest ; a Congo negro , in the service of a Virginian planter , had looped those canes over the cotton bales ; that square block of zebra-wood had grown in the primeval forests of the Brazils , and monkeys and bright-hued parrots had chattered among its branches . 
Anton would stand long in this ancient hall , after Mr. Jordan 's lessons were over , absorbed in wonder and interest , till roof and pillars seemed transferred to broad-leaved palm-trees , and the noise of the streets to the roar of the sea -- a sound he only knew in his dreams ; and this delight in what was foreign and unfamiliar never wore off , but led him to become , by reading , intimately acquainted with the countries whence all these stores came , and with the men by whom they were collected . 
Thus the first months of his life in the capital fled rapidly away ; and it was well for him that he took so much interest in his studies , for Fink proved right in one respect . 
In spite of the daily meal in the stately dining-room , Anton remained as great a stranger as ever to the principal and his family . 
He was too rational , indeed , to murmur at this , but he could not avoid feeling depressed by it ; for , with the enthusiasm of youth , he was ready to revere his chief as the ideal of mercantile greatness . 
He admired his sagacity , decision , energy , and inflexible uprightness , and would have been devoted to him heart and soul , but that he so seldom saw him . 
When the merchant was not engaged by business , he lived for his sister , whom he most tenderly loved . 
For her he kept a carriage and horses which he himself never used , and gave evening parties to which Anton and his colleagues were not invited . 
Gay equipages rolled in one after the other , liveried servants ran up and down stairs , and graceful shadows flitted across the windows , while Anton sat in his little upper chamber , and yearned eagerly after the brilliant gayeties in which he had no part . 
True , his reason told him that they did not belong to men of his class , but at nineteen reason is not always supreme ; and many a time he went back with a sigh from his window to his books , and tried to forget the alluring strains of the quadrille and waltz in the descriptions of the lion 's roar and the bull-frog 's croak in the far-off tropics . 
The Baron of Rothsattel had moved to his town residence . 
It was not indeed large , but its furniture , the arabesques on its walls , the arrangement of its hangings were so graceful , that it ranked as a model of comfort and elegance . 
The baron had made all his preparations in silence . 
At length the day came when the new carriage stopped at the door , and , lifting down his wife , he led her through the suite of apartments to her own little boudoir , all fitted up with white silk . 
Enchanted beyond measure , she flew into his arms , and he felt as proud and happy as a king . 
They were soon perfectly settled , and able to begin their course of visiting . 
It was the custom of a large portion of the nobility to spend the winter in town , and accordingly the Rothsattels met many friends , and several of their acquaintance . 
Every one was pleased to welcome them , and after a few weeks they found themselves immersed in gayety . 
The baroness soon became a leader of the feminine world , and her husband , after at first missing his walks through his farm and his woods , began to take equal pleasure in reviving his youthful acquaintance . 
He became member of a nobleman 's club , indulged his virtuoso tendencies , played whist , and filled his idle hours with a little politics and a little art . 
And so the winter passed pleasantly on , and the baron and his wife often wondered why they had not earlier indulged in this agreeable variety . 
Lenore was the only one dissatisfied with the change . 
She continued to justify her mother 's fear lest she should become an original . 
She found it difficult to pay proper respect to the numberless elderly cousins of the family , and still more difficult to refrain from accosting first any pleasant gentleman she had known in the country , and now chanced to meet in the streets . 
Likewise , the Young Lady 's Institution , which she had to attend , was in many ways objectionable to her . 
She had certain maps and tiresome lesson-books to take to and fro , and her mother did not approve of the servants ' time being occupied in carrying them after her . 
One day , when walking like an angry Juno -- the tokens of her slavery upon her arm , and her little parasol in her hand -- she beheld the young gentleman to whom she had shown her flower-garden coming to meet her , and she rejoiced at it , for he was pleasantly associated in her mind with home , the pony , and the family of swans . 
He was still some way off when her hawk 's eye discerned him , but he did not see her even when he came nearer . 
As her mother had forbidden her ever to accost a gentleman in the street , there was nothing for it but to stand still and to strike her parasol on the flags . 
Anton looked up and saw to his pleasant surprise the lovely lady of the lake . 
Blushing , he took off his hat , and Lenore observed with satisfaction that , in spite of the satchel on her arm , she impressed him as much us ever . 
`` How are you , sir ? '' 
she inquired , in a dignified way . 
`` Very well , '' replied Anton ; `` how delighted I am to see you in town ! '' 
`` We are living here at present , '' said the young lady , with less stateliness , `` at No. 20 Bear Street . '' 
`` May I inquire for the pony ? '' 
said Anton , respectfully . 
`` Only think , he had to be left behind ! '' 
was the sorrowful reply ; `` and what are you doing here ? '' 
`` I am in the house of T. O. Schröter , '' said Anton , bowing . 
`` Oh ! 
a merchant ; and what do you deal in ? '' 
`` In colonial produce . 
It is the largest firm in that department in the whole town , '' replied Anton , complacently . 
`` And have you met with kind people who take care of you ? '' 
`` My principal is very kind , but I must take care of myself . '' 
`` Have you any friends here with whom you can amuse yourself ? '' 
`` A few acquaintances . 
But I have much to do , and I must improve myself in my leisure hours . '' 
`` You look rather pale , '' said the young lady , with motherly interest ; `` you should move more about , and take long walks . 
I am glad to have met you , and shall be pleased to hear of your well-doing , '' added she , majestically ; and , with an inclination of her pretty little head , she vanished in the crowd , while Anton remained gazing after her , hat in hand . 
Lenore did not consider it necessary to mention this meeting . 
But a few days later , when the baroness happened to inquire where they should get some necessary stores , she looked up from her book and said , `` The largest firm here is that of T. O. Schröter , dealer in colonial produce . '' 
`` How do you know that ? '' 
inquired her father , laughing ; `` you speak like an experienced merchant . '' 
`` All the result of the Young Lady 's Institution , '' answered Lenore , pertly . 
Meanwhile , in the midst of his social pleasures , the baron did not forget the chief end of his town life . 
He made close inquiries as to the speculations of other landed proprietors , visited the factories in the town , became acquainted with educated manufacturers , and acquired some knowledge of machinery . 
But the information thus gained was so contradictory , that he thought it best not to precipitate matters , but to wait till some specially advantageous and safe undertaking should offer . 
We must not omit to mention that about this time the family property was increased by a small , handsome , brass-inlaid casket , with a lock that defied any thief 's power of opening , so that , if minded to steal , he would have nothing for it but to carry off the casket itself . 
In it were laid forty-five thousand dollars in the form of new promissory notes . 
The baron contemplated these with much tenderness . 
At first he would sit for hours opposite the open casket , never weary of arranging the parchment leaves according to their numbers , delighting in their glossy whiteness , and forming plans for paying off the capital ; and even when , for safety 's sake , the casket had been made over to the keeping of the Joint-stock Company , the thought of it was a continual pleasure . 
Nay , the spirit of the casket began to peep out even in household arrangements . 
The baroness was surprised at her husband counseling certain economies , or telling with a degree of pleasure of ten louis d'or won last evening at cards . 
She was at first a little afraid that he had become in some way embarrassed ; but , as he assured her , with a complacent smile , that this was far from being the case , she soon learned to treat these little attempts at saving as an innocent whim , especially as they only extended to trifling details , the baron insisting as much as ever upon keeping up a dignified and imposing social appearance . 
Indeed , it was impossible for him to retrench just now . 
The town life , the furnishing of the house , and the necessary claims of society , of course increased the outgoings . 
And so it came to pass that the baron , after having paid a visit to his property to settle the yearly accounts , returned to town much out of tune . 
He had become aware that the expenditure of the last year had exceeded the income , and that the income of the next year gave no promise of balancing the existing deficit of two thousand dollars . 
The thought occurred that the sum must be taken from the white parchments ; and the man who would have stood calm beneath a shower of bullets , broke out into a cold perspiration at the idea of the debts thus to be incurred . 
It was plain that there had been an error in his calculations . 
He who wishes to raise a sum by small yearly savings must not increase , but lessen his expenditure . 
True , the increase in his case had been unavoidable ; but still , a most unlucky coincidence . 
The baron had not felt such anxiety since his lieutenant-days . 
There were a thousand good reasons , however , against giving up the town house ; it was rented for a term of years ; and then , what would his acquaintance say ? 
So he kept his troubles to himself ; quieted the baroness by talking of a cold caught on his journey ; but all day long the same thought kept gnawing at his heart . 
Sometimes in the evening he was able to drive it away a while , but it was sure to return in the morning . 
It was one of these weary mornings that Mr. Ehrenthal , who had to pay for some grain , was announced . 
The very name was at that moment unpleasant to the baron , and his greeting was colder than usual ; but the man of business did not mind little ups and downs of temper , paid his money , and was profuse in expressions of devoted respect , which all fell coldly , till , just before going away , he inquired , `` Did the promissory notes duly arrive ? '' 
`` Yes , '' was the ungracious reply . 
`` It is sad , '' cried Ehrenthal , `` to think of forty-five thousand dollars lying dead . 
To you , baron , a couple of thousands or so is a mere trifle , but not to one of my sort . 
At this moment I might speculate boldly , and safely too ; but all my money being locked up , I must lose a clear four thousand . '' 
The baron listened attentively ; the trader went on : `` You have known me , baron , for years past , to be a man of honor , and of some substance too ; and now I will make a proposition to you . 
Lend me for three months ten thousand dollars ' worth of promissory notes , and I will give you a bill of exchange , which is as good as money . 
The speculation should bring in four thousand dollars , and that I will divide with you in lieu of interest . 
You will run no risk ; if I fail , I will bear the loss myself , and pay back the principal in three months . '' 
However uninteresting these words may appear to the reader , they threw the baron into such a state of joyous excitement that he could scarce command himself sufficiently to say , `` First of all , I must know what sort of a bargain it is that you wish to drive with my money . '' 
Ehrenthal explained . 
The offer of purchasing a quantity of wood had been made to him , which wood lay on a raft in an upper part of the province . 
He would take all the expense of transport on himself ; and he proceeded to demonstrate the certain profit of the transaction . 
`` But , '' said the baron , `` how comes it that the present proprietor does not carry out this profitable scheme himself ? '' 
Ehrenthal shrugged his shoulders . 
`` He who means to speculate must not always inquire the reason of bargains . 
An embarrassed man can not wait two or three months ; the river is at present frozen , and he wants the money in two or three days . '' 
`` Are you sure that his right to sell is incontestable ? '' 
`` I know the man to be safe , '' was the reply ; `` and that , if I pay him this evening , the wood is mine . '' 
Now it was painful to the baron , much as he wanted money , to turn the embarrassment of another to his own profit ; and he said , `` I consider it unfair to reckon upon what is certain loss to the seller . '' 
`` Why should it be certain loss ? '' 
cried Ehrenthal . 
`` He is a speculator -- he wants money ; perhaps he has a greater bargain still in his eye . 
He has offered me the whole quantity of wood for ten thousand dollars , and I have no business to inquire whether he can or can not make more of my money than I of his wood . '' 
And so far Ehrenthal was right ; but this was not all . 
The seller was an unlucky speculator , pressed by his creditors , threatened with an execution , and determined to frustrate their hopes by driving an immediate bargain with a stranger , and then making off with the money . 
Perhaps Ehrenthal knew this ; perhaps the baron too surmised that there must be a mystery , for he shook his head . 
And yet he ran no risk , incurred no responsibility ; he but lent his money to a safe man , whom he had known for years , and in a short time he should get rid of the evil genius that tormented him ceaselessly . 
Too much excited to reflect whether this was not a casting out of devils by Beelzebub , their chief , he rang the bell for his carriage , and said , in a lordly tone , `` You shall have the money in an hour . '' 
From that day the baron led a life of anxious suspense . 
He was always going over this interview , always thinking of the piles of wood ; and , whenever he rode out , his horse 's head was turned to the river , that he might watch the progress of the thaw . 
He had not seen Ehrenthal for some time . 
At length he came one morning with his endless bows , and , taking out a large packet , said triumphantly , `` Well , baron , the affair is settled . 
Here are your notes , and here the two thousand dollars , your share of the profit . '' 
The baron snatched the packet . 
Yes ; they were the very same parchments he had taken out of the casket with so heavy a heart , and a bundle of bank-notes besides . 
A weight fell from him . 
The parchments were safe , the deficit made up . 
Ehrenthal was courteously dismissed . 
That very day the baron bought a turquoise ornament for his wife , which she had long silently wished for , and sunshine prevailed in the family circle . 
But a dark shadow from the recent past had yet to fall athwart it . 
The baron , reading the paper one day in his wife 's room , observed an advertisement concerning a bankrupt dealer in wood , who had made his escape after swindling his creditors . 
He laid down the paper , and the drops stood on his brow . 
`` If it should be the same man ! '' 
Ehrenthal had given no name . 
Had he , a man of honor , been the means of defrauding just claims ; had he taken part in a swindling transaction , ay , and gained by it too ! 
The thought was too fearful . 
He hurried to his desk that he might pack up and send off the accursed profits -- whither he knew not , but any where , away . 
He saw with horror that only a small portion of them remained . 
In extreme agitation , he rang the bell , and sent for Ehrenthal . 
As chance would have it , Ehrenthal was gone on a journey . 
Meanwhile arose those soothing inward voices which know so well how to place things doubtful in a favorable light . 
`` How foolish this anxiety ! 
There were hundreds of dealers in wood in that part of the country ; and was it likely that this very man should be Ehrenthal 's client ? 
Or , even if he were , in a business point of view , how could they help the use he might make of their money ? 
Nothing could be fairer than the transaction itself . '' 
Thus the voices within ; and oh ! 
how attentively the baron listened . 
But still , when Ehrenthal at length appeared , the baron met him with an expression that positively appalled him . 
`` What was the name of the man from whom you bought the wood ? '' 
cried he . 
Ehrenthal had read the newspaper too , and the truth now flashed upon him . 
He gave a name at once . 
`` And the place where the wood lay ? '' 
Ehrenthal named that too . 
`` Are you telling me the truth ? '' 
asked the baron , drawing a third deep breath . 
Ehrenthal saw that he had a sick conscience to deal with , and treated the case with the utmost gentleness . 
`` What is the baron uneasy about ? '' 
said he , shaking his head ; `` I believe that the man with whom I dealt has made a good profit out of the affair . 
Nothing could be more fair than the whole transaction . 
But , even had it not been so , why , my good sir , should you be troubled ? 
There was no reason why I should not tell you the names , both of the man and place , before ; but I did not do so , because the bargain was mine , not yours . 
I became your debtor , and I have repaid you with a bonus -- a large one , it is true ; but I have dealt with you for years , and why should I keep back from you the share of profit which I should have had to give any one else ? '' 
`` That is all right , Ehrenthal , '' said the baron , more graciously ; `` and I am glad that the case stands thus . 
But , had this man been the bankrupt in question , I should have broken off our connection , and should never have forgiven you for involving me in a fraudulent transaction . '' 
Ehrenthal bowed himself out , muttering , as he went down stairs , `` He 's a good man , this baron ; a good , good man . '' 
We now return to Anton , who had been placed under the joint command of Messrs. Jordan and Pix , and who found himself the small vassal of a great body corporate , containing a variety of grades and functions little dreamed of by the uninitiated . 
First in the counting-house was the book-keeper Liebold , who , as minister of the home department , reigned supreme and solitary in a window of his own , forever recording figures in a colossal book , and seldom looking off their columns . 
In the opposite part of the room ruled the second dignitary in the state , the cashier Purzel , surrounded by iron safes , heavy bags , and with a large stone table before him , on which dollars rung , or gray paper money fell noiselessly the whole day through . 
Jordan was the principal person in the office . 
He was the head clerk , and his opinion was sometimes asked by the principal himself . 
In him Anton found , from the day of his arrival , a good adviser , and an example of activity and healthy common sense . 
Of all the clerks under Jordan 's superintendence , the most interesting to Anton was Baumann , the future missionary . 
Not only was he a truly religious man , he was an admirable and infallible accountant . 
But , besides all these , the firm had some officials who did not live in the house . 
One was Birnbaum , the custom-house clerk , who was seldom visible in the office , and only dined with the principal on Sundays . 
Then there was the head of the warehouse department , Mr. Balbus , who , though by no means a cultivated man , was always treated by the chief with great respect ; and , as Anton heard it said , had a mother and sick sister entirely dependent upon him . 
But of all these men , the most aggressively active , the most despotic in his measures , was Pix , the manager of the provincial traffic department . 
His domain began in the office , and extended throughout the house , and far into the street . 
He was the divinity of all the country shopkeepers , who looked upon him as the real head of the business . 
He arranged the whole exports of the house , knew every thing , was always to be found , and could do half a dozen things at once . 
Like all dignitaries , he was impatient of contradiction , and fought for his opinions against the merchant himself with a stiff-neckedness that often horrified Anton . 
One of his peculiarities was that of abhorring a vacuum as much as nature herself . 
Wherever there was an empty corner , a closet , a cellar , a recess to be discovered , there Pix would intrude with tuns , ladders , ropes , and all imaginable commodities ; and wherever he and his giant band of porters had once got a footing , no earthly power could dislodge them -- not even the principal himself . 
`` Where is Wohlfart ? '' 
called Mr. Schröter from the door of his office . 
`` Up stairs , '' calmly replied Pix . 
`` What is he doing there ? '' 
was the amazed inquiry . 
At that moment loud voices were heard , and Anton came thundering down the steps , followed by a servant , and both laden with cigar-boxes , while behind them appeared the female relative in much excitement . 
`` They will not tolerate us up stairs , '' said Anton , hurriedly , to Pix . 
`` Now they have actually come to the laundry , '' said the lady , just as hurriedly , to the principal . 
`` The cigars can not stand down here , '' declared Pix to both . 
`` And I will not have cigars in the laundry , '' cried the distant cousin . 
`` I declare there is not a place in the house safe from Mr. Pix . 
He has filled the maid-servants ' rooms with cigars , and they complain that the smell is intolerable . '' 
`` It is dry up there , '' explained Mr. Pix to the merchant . 
`` Could you not , perhaps , place them elsewhere ? '' 
inquired the latter , respectfully . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
was the decided reply . 
`` Do you really require the whole laundry , my dear cousin ? '' 
said the principal , turning to the lady . 
`` The half of it were ample , '' interpolated Pix . 
`` I hope , Pix , you will content yourself with a corner , '' said the head of the firm , by way of decision . 
`` Tell the carpenter to run up a partition at once . '' 
`` If Mr. Pix once gets admittance , he will take the whole of our laundry , '' expostulated the too experienced cousin . 
`` It is the last concession we will make , '' was the reply . 
Mr. Pix laughed silently -- or grinned rebelliously , as the lady phrased it ; and , as soon as the authorities were out of sight , sent Anton up again with the cigar-boxes . 
But what chiefly constituted the importance of Pix in the eyes of the community were the Herculean porters under his command . 
When these men rolled mighty casks about , and lifted hundred weights like pounds , they seemed to the new apprentice like the giants of fairy lore . 
Some of them belonged to this firm exclusively , others to a corporation of porters who worked for different houses , but T. O. Schröter 's was the house they liked best . 
For more than one generation the head of this particular firm had enjoyed their highest consideration , and stood godfather to all their large-headed babies . 
Among these men , the strongest and tallest was Sturm , their chief -- a man who could hardly get through narrow streets , and was frequently called to move a weight found impracticable by his comrades . 
Wonderful stories were told of his exploits ; and Specht affirmed that there was nothing on earth beyond his powers . 
His relations with the firm were very intimate indeed ; and having an only child , upon whom he doted , and who had early lost his mother , he placed him , at the age of fifteen , in T. O. Schröter 's house , in a nondescript capacity . 
The boy was a universal favorite , knew every hole and corner , collected all the nails and pieces of packthread , folded all the packing-paper , fed Pluto the watch-dog , and did sundry other odd jobs . 
Up to every thing , invariably good-humored and ready-witted , the porters fondly called him `` our Karl ; '' and his father often glanced aside from his work to look at him with delight . 
But in one point Karl did disappoint him : he gave no promise of ever attaining to his father 's stature . 
He was a handsome , fair-haired , rosy-cheeked youth ; but all the giants agreed that he would never be more than a middle-sized man ; and so his father fell into the habit of treating him like a sort of delicate dwarf , with the utmost consideration , and a certain touch of compassion . 
`` I do n't care , '' said the indulgent parent to Mr. Pix , when introducing the boy into the business , `` what the little fellow learns besides , so that he does learn to be honorable and practical . '' 
This was a speech after Mr. Pix 's own heart ; and this system of education was at once begun by Sturm taking his son into the great vaulted room , and saying , `` Here are the almonds and the raisins -- taste them . '' 
`` Oh , they are good , father , '' cried the boy . 
`` I believe you , Liliputian , '' nodded Sturm . 
`` Now , see , you may eat as many of them as you like ; neither Mr. Schröter , Mr. Pix , nor I shall interfere . 
But , my little lad , you had better see how long you can hold out without beginning . 
The longer the better for yourself , and the more honor in it ; and when you can stand it no longer , come to me and say ` Enough ; ' '' upon which he left him , having laid his great turnip of a watch on a chest standing by . 
The boy proudly placed his hands in his pockets , and walked up and down among the goods . 
After more than two hours , he came , watch in hand , to his father , exclaiming `` Enough . '' 
`` Two hours and a half , '' said old Sturm , nodding at Mr. Pix . 
`` Very well , child ; come and nail up this chest ; here is a new hammer for you ; it cost tenpence . '' 
`` It 's not worth it , '' was the reply . 
`` You always pay too much . '' 
Such was Karl 's education . 
The day after Anton 's arrival , Pix had introduced him to Sturm , and Anton had said , in a tone of respect , `` this is my first experience of business ; pray give me a hint whenever you can . '' 
`` Every thing is to be learned in time , '' replied the giant ; `` yonder is my little boy , who has got on capitally in a year . 
So your father was not a merchant ? '' 
`` My father was an accountant ; he is dead , '' was the reply . 
`` I am sorry to hear it , '' said Sturm ; `` but you have still the comfort of a mother ? '' 
`` My mother , too , is dead . '' 
`` Alas ! 
alas ! '' 
cried the porter , compassionately . 
He went on shaking his head for a long time , and at length added , in a low voice , to his Karl , `` He has no mother . '' 
`` And no father either , '' rejoined Karl . 
`` Be kind to him , little one , '' said old Sturm ; `` you are a sort of orphan yourself . '' 
`` Not I , '' cried Karl ; `` any one with such a great father as mine to look after has his hands full . '' 
`` Why , you are a perfect little monster ! '' 
said his father , cheerfully hammering away at a cask . 
From that hour Karl showed all manner of small attentions to Anton , and a species of affectionate intimacy sprang up between the two youths . 
Indeed , Anton was on excellent terms with all the officials . 
He listened attentively to Jordan 's sensible remarks , was prompt and unconditional in his obedience to Mr. Pix , entered into political discussions with Specht , read with interest Baumann 's missionary reports , never asked Mr. Purzel for money in advance , and often encouraged Mr. Liebold to utter some palpable truth without retracting the statement . 
There was only one with whom he could not get on well , and that was the volunteer clerk , Fink . 
