I know that he is a charlatan ! 
There are no prophets or wizards ! 
Yet , well I remember , though a stranger to me , in Paris , how truthfully he brought before me my past life ; with what marvellous exactness he revealed to me secrets known only to my Maker and myself . 
Cagliostro must be a wizard , then , or a prophet ; he has wonderful power over me also , and reads my most secret thoughts . 
He will assist me to rise from my shame and degradation to an honored position . 
I shall become a rich and influential woman ! 
I will confide in him , never doubting him -- for he is my master and savior ! 
Away with fear ! 
He has said that the house should be guarded , and it will be ! 
Onward then , Wilhelmine , without fear ! '' 
She hastened to the large drawing-room , in order to see the effect of the numerous wax-lights in the superb chandeliers of rock crystal . 
The great folding-doors resisted all her efforts to open them . 
`` Who is there ? '' 
cried a loud , threatening voice . 
Trembling and with beating heart Wilhelmine leaned against the door , giddy with fear , when a second demand , `` Who is there ? 
The watchword ! 
No one can pass without the countersign ! '' 
roused her , and she stole back on tiptoe to her room . 
`` He has kept his word , the doors are guarded ! '' 
she whispered . 
`` I will go and await him in my sitting-room . '' 
She stepped quickly forward , when suddenly she thought she heard footsteps stealing behind her ; turning , she beheld two men wrapped in black cloaks , with black masks , stealthily creeping after her . 
Wilhelmine shrieked with terror , tore open the door , rushed across the next room into her own boudoir . 
As she entered a glance revealed to her that the two masks approached nearer and nearer . 
She bolted the door quickly , sinking to the floor with fright and exhaustion . 
`` What are they going to do ? 
Will they force open the door and murder me ? 
How foolish , how fearfully foolish to have sent away all my servants . 
Now I understand it : Cagliostro is not only an impostor -- a charlatan , but he is a thief and an assassin . 
I have been caught in the trap set for me , like a credulous fool ! 
He and his associates will rob me and plunder my beautiful villa , but just given to me , and , when they have secured all , murder me to escape betrayal . '' 
With deep contrition , weeping and trembling , Wilhelmine accused herself of her credulity and folly . 
For the first time in her life she was dismayed and cowardly , for it was the first time that she had had to tremble for her possessions . 
It was something so new , so unaccustomed to her to possess any thing , that it made her anxious , and she feared , as in the fairy tale , that it would dissolve into nothing . 
By degrees her presence of mind and equanimity were restored . 
The stillness was unbroken -- and no one forced the door , to murder the mistress of this costly possession . 
Gathering courage , she rose softly and stole to the window . 
The moon shone brightly and clearly . 
The house stood sideways to the street , and separated from it , first by thick shrubbery , and then a trellised lawn . 
Whoever would enter , directly turned into a path leading from the street into the shrubbery . 
Just upon this walk , Wilhelmine perceived masked men approaching , one by one , as in a procession -- slowly , silently moving on , until they neared the gate of the trellised square , where two tall , dark forms were stationed to demand the countersign , which being given , they passed over the lawn into the house . 
`` I will take courage ; he has told me the truth , the house is well guarded , '' murmured Wilhelmine . 
`` None but the summoned can enter ; I belong to the number , and when it is time Cagliostro will come and fetch me . 
Until then , let me await quietly the result , '' said she , as she stretched herself comfortably upon the sofa , laughing at her former cowardice and terror . 
`` No one can enter this room unless I open the door , and fortunately there is but one exit . 
The wizard himself could not gain admittance unless the walls should open or the bolt drive hack for him . 
Hark ! 
it strikes eleven , one tedious hour longer to wait . 
I must try to rest a little . '' 
She laid her head upon the cushion , closing her eyes . 
The calm and the quiet were refreshing after the excitement of the day . 
Gradually her thoughts became confused -- dim pictures floated past her mental vision , her breathing became shorter , and she slept . 
The stillness was unbroken , save the clock striking the quarters of every hour . 
Scarcely had the last quarter to midnight sounded , when the window was softly opened , and a dark form descended into the room . 
He listened a moment , looking at the sleeping one , who moved not ; then extinguished the light , creeping toward the door . 
Wilhelmine slept on . 
Suddenly it seemed to her as if sunbeams blinded her , and she started up from a profound sleep . 
It was indeed no dream . 
A white form stood before her of dazzling brilliancy , as if formed of sun-rays . 
`` Rise and follow me ! '' 
cried a commanding voice . 
`` The Great Kophta commands you . 
Mask yourself , and , as your life is dear to you , do not raise it for one instant ! '' 
Wilhelmine took the mask , upon which flickered a little blue flame , and held it close to her face . 
`` Pray in spirit , then follow me . '' 
Wilhelmine followed without opposition the bright form which moved before her through the dark rooms . 
She felt as if under the influence of a charm ; her heart beat violently , her feet trembled , but still she felt no more wavering or fear ; a joyous confidence filled her whole being . 
With her eyes bent upon the moving form of light , she went onward in the obscurity , and entered the great drawing-room , where profound darkness and silence reigned . 
A slight murmur , as of those in prayer , fell on her car , and it seemed as if numberless black shadows were moving about . 
`` Kneel and pray , '' whispered a voice near her . 
Her conductor had disappeared , and the gloom of night surrounded her . 
Wilhelmine knelt as she was bidden , but she could not pray ; breathless expectation and eager curiosity banished all devotion and composure . 
Occasionally was heard , amid the silence and darkness , a deep sigh , a suppressed groan , or a shriek , which died away in the murmuring of prayer . 
Suddenly a strange music broke the stillness -- sharp , piercing tones , resonant as bells , and increasing in power , sometimes as rich and full as the peals of an organ , then gentle and soft as the murmuring wind , or a sorrow-laden sigh . 
Then , human voices joined the music , swelling it to a wonderful and harmonious choir -- to an inspired song of aspiration , Of fervent expectation , and imploring the coming of him who would bring glory and peace , filling the hearts of believers with godliness . 
The chorus of the Invisibles had not ceased , when a strange blue light began to glimmer at the farther end of the room ; then it shot like a flash through the dark space . 
As their dazzled eyes were again raised , they saw in a kind of halo , in the midst of golden clouds , a tall , dazzling figure , in a long , flowing robe , sparkling with silver . 
The lovely bust , the beautiful arms and shoulders , were covered with a transparent golden tissue , over which fell the long , curly hair to the waist . 
A glittering band , sparkling like stars , was wound through the hair , which surrounded a feminine face of surpassing beauty . 
Perpetual youth glowed upon her full , rosy cheeks ; bright intelligence beamed from the clear , lofty brow ; peace , joy , and happiness , were revealed in the smile of the red lips ; love and passion flashed from the large , brilliant eyes . 
The choir of the Invisibles now sang in jubilant tones : `` The eternal Virgin , the everlasting , holy , and pure being , greets the erring , blesses those that seek , causing them to find , and partake with joy . '' 
The heavenly woman raised her lovely arms , extending them as if for a tender embrace . 
A captivating smile lighted up her features ; a fiery glance from her beautiful eyes seemed to greet every one , separately , to announce to them joy and hope . 
While they regarded her entranced with delight , the golden cloud grew denser , and covered the virgin with her luminous veil . 
It then gradually disappeared , with the golden splendor . 
The chorus of the Invisibles ceased , and the music died away in gentle murmurs . 
Upon the spot where the beaming apparition was visible , there now stood a tall priest , in a long , flowing black robe ; a pale-blue light surrounded him , and rendered the dark outline distinctly visible by the clear background . 
Snow-white hair and a black mask made him unrecognizable to every one . 
Extending his arms , as if blessing them , the masked one cried : `` My beloved , the unknown fathers of our Holy Order of Rosicrucians send me to you , and command me to salute you with the greeting of life . 
I am to announce to you that the time of revelation approaches , and that the sublime mysteries of earth and Nature will soon be revealed to you . 
As the rose is unfolded in her glowing red , which has so long slept in her lap of green leaves , you represent the green leaves , and Nature is the rose . 
She will disclose herself to you with all her secrets . 
In her calyx you will find the elixir of life and the secret of gold , if you walk in the path of duty ; if you exercise unconditional obedience to the Invisible Fathers ; if you submit yourselves in blind confidence to their wisdom ; if you swear to abstain from every self-inquiry , and to distrust your own understanding . '' 
-LSB- Footnote : So run the very words in the laws of the Rosicrucians . 
-- See `` New General German Library , '' vol . 
lvi. , p. 10 . -RSB- 
`` We swear it ! '' 
cried solemn voices on all sides . 
`` Swear , blindly , silent obedience to all that the Invisible Fathers shall announce to you through their directors , or shall order you under the holy sign of the Rosicrucians by word or writing . '' 
`` We swear it ! '' 
again resounded in solemn chorus . 
`` Shame , disgrace , perdition , and destruction , be your curse , '' thundered the priest , `` if you deviate in thought even from your oath ; if you seek to ponder and reflect ; if you measure by your own limited reason the dispositions and operations of the sublime fathers , to whom Nature has revealed herself , and to whom all the secrets of heaven and earth are disclosed . 
Eternal destruction , and all the tortures of hell and purgatory , be the portion of the doubting ! 
Damned and proscribed be the traitor to the holy order ! 
Listen , ye spirits of the deep , and ye spirits of darkness , withdraw from here in terror , ere the anger of the Invisible Fathers fall upon you like destroying lightning ! 
Open , ye doors , that the wicked may flee , and only the good remain ! '' 
With a wave of the hand the great folding-doors now opened , and a flood of light from the adjoining apartment revealed the drawingroom to be filled with the dark forms of men enveloped in black cloaks , hoods drawn over the heads , and black masks covering the faces -- all kneeling close together and exactly resembling one another . 
No one moved , the doors closed again , darkness reigning . 
The priest was no longer visible , though continuing to speak : `` Only the good and obedient are now assembled here , and to them I announce that life is to us , and death awaits beyond the door to seize the traitor who would disclose the holy secrets of the order . 
Be faithful , my brothers , and never forget that there is no place on the earth where the traitor is secure from the avenging sword of the Invisible Fathers . 
None but the good and obedient being here assembled , I now announce to you that the time of revelation approaches , and that it will come when you are all zealously endeavoring to extend the holy order , and augment the number of brothers . 
For the extension of the order is nothing less than universal happiness . 
It emanates alone from the Invisible Fathers , who link heaven to earth and who will open again the lost way to Paradise . 
The supreme chiefs of our holy order are the rulers of all Nature , reposing in God the Father . 
-LSB- Footnote : The wording of the laws of the Order of the Rosicrucians . 
-- See `` New General German Library , '' vol . 
M. , p. 10 . -RSB- 
They are the favorites of God , whom the Trinity thinks worthy of his highest confidence and revelation . 
If you will take part in the revelations of God , and witness the disclosing of the hidden treasures of Nature , swear that you will be obedient to the holy order , and that you will strive to gain new members . 
`` We swear it , '' resounded in an inspired chorus through the room . 
`` We swear unconditional obedience to the Invisible Fathers . 
We swear to strive with all our means for the extension of the holy order . 
`` Unbelief , free-thinking , and self-knowledge are of the devil , who steals abroad , to turn men from God . 
The pride of reason seeks to misguide men , and lead them away from God and the secrets of Nature . 
The devil has chosen his disciples , who teach sinful knowledge and arrogant free-thinking , and who are united in Berlin in the Order of the Illuminati . 
The Invisible Fathers command you to fight this shameful order in word , deed , and writing . 
If any of you are acquainted with one of the members , you shall regard him as your most deadly enemy , and shall hate and pursue him as you hate sin and as you pursue crime . 
You shall flee his intercourse as you would that of the devil , otherwise you will be damned , and the Invisible Fathers never will forgive you , and the secrets of Nature will be withheld from you . 
Swear therefore hate , persecution , and eternal enmity , to the Order of the Illuminati . 
This I command you in the name of the Invisible Fathers . '' 
`` We swear it ! 
We swear hate , persecution , and eternal enmity , to the Order of the Illuminati ! '' 
`` Every one who belongs to the order is damned and cursed ; and if it were your brother or your father , so shall you curse and damn him ! '' 
`` We swear it ! '' 
`` Then I bring you the blessing of the Invisible rulers and fathers , who announce to you , through me , that every lost one which you gain for the Order of the Rosicrucians , and consequently lead back to God and Nature , is a step toward entering the holy sanctuary of revelation , where the elixir of life and the tincture of gold awaits you . 
Every cursed member of the Illuminati becomes one of the blessed when you lead him from the path of vice in penitence and contrition , and gain him to the Order of the Rosicrucians ; and he who can prove that he has gained twelve new members for our holy order mounts a round higher in the ladder of knowledge , and rises to a new degree . 
At the sixth grade he passes from the Inner to the Middle Temple , where all the secrets of the universe and of Nature are disclosed . 
Be mindful of this , and recruit . 
Until we meet again , let the watchword be , ` Curses and persecution for the devil 's offspring , the Illuminati ! ' '' 
`` Curses and persecution for the devil 's offspring , the Illuminati , we swear ! '' 
`` Now depart ! 
Pay your tribute at the door , which you owe , and receive in return the new sign of the order , which will serve to make the brothers known to each other . 
Only the directors and the members of the sixth grade shall knock again at this door after paying tribute , and , receiving the new word of life , the guard will let them enter . 
Depart ! 
I dismiss you in the name of the Holy Father and the Trinity ! '' 
`` Take this cloak , and cover yourself , that no one can recognize you , '' whispered a person near Wilhelmine , and threw a soft covering over her . 
`` Will you now depart , or seek further in the way of knowledge ? '' 
`` I will seek further , '' answered Wilhelmine , firmly . 
`` You wish to enter the sixth grade , and learn the secrets of Nature ? '' 
`` I do ! '' 
`` Then I will give you the watchword of the order . 
But woe unto you if you reveal it ! 
Swear that you will never betray it ! '' 
`` I swear it ! '' 
`` Then , listen ! '' 
Wilhelmine felt a hot breath upon her cheek , and a voice whispered in her ear the significant words : `` Now depart ; pay your tribute , you can not tarry here . 
Go , and return with the chosen ! '' 
A hand seized her arm and conducted her to the door . 
Almost blinded by the bright light , she entered the adjoining apartment , where it seemed as if she saw through a veil muffled figures go forward to the centre , and deposit money in a marble basin which stood upon a kind of altar ; naphtha burned in silver basins upon each end of it , and a muffled figure stood near . 
Wilhelmine advanced to the altar , and with quick decision drew a diamond ring from her finger , and begged permission to deposit it instead of money . 
The muffled figure bowed , and handed to her the new watchword -- a picture of a Madonna , with the sign of the Rosicrucians underneath . 
Then she returned , and awaited at the door , with a little gathering , which must consequently belong to the sixth grade . 
Gradually the others had withdrawn ; the naphtha-flames upon the altar were extinguished , and the wax-lights of the centre lustres had grown dim , and gradually extinguished themselves . 
Soon the doors were opened , and a bright light , as of the sun 's rays , filled the hall . 
Three blasts of trumpets sounded , and a choir of immortal voices sang , `` Enter , ye blessed ones ! 
Enter , ye elect ! '' 
They entered , whispering the sign to the guards , who stood with drawn swords , and passed on to the throne upon which stood a couch , surrounded with blooming flowers and covered with a cloud of silvery gauze . 
They soon discovered a secret something was hidden under the cloud , though they knew not whether it were child , woman , or man . 
They knelt upon the lower step of the throne , with folded hands and bowed heads , praying in a low voice . 
A solemn stillness reigned , the prayers died away on the lips , and the hearts scarcely beat for anxiety and expectation . 
Suddenly a voice , which seemed to come from the silver cloud , so distant and lofty , and rolling like majestic thunder , cried , `` He comes , the chosen one ! 
The Great Kophta comes ! '' 
The folding-doors flew open , and the Great Kophta entered . 
Wilhelmine recognized in the majestic figure , enveloped in a flowing , silver-embroidered satin robe , with a band of brilliants around his brow , the handsome face of Cagliostro , beaming as if in an ecstasy . 
He saluted the brothers with a gentle voice , and bade them approach and touch his hand . 
As Wilhelmine did so , a thrill ran through her whole being , and she sank overpowered at his feet . 
He bowed and breathed upon her . 
`` You are chosen , ye heavenly brothers , '' he said , in a sweet , melodious voice ; `` the secrets of heaven and earth are disclosed to you . 
I receive you in the Holy Order of the Favorites of God , which I founded with Enoch and Elias when we dwelt in the promised land . 
From them I received the Word of Life , and they sent me to the ancient sages of Egypt , who revealed to me in the pyramids the secret sciences which subject the earth and all her treasures to our command . 
He who devotes himself to me with fidelity will receive eternal life and the secret of immortality . '' 
`` We believe in thee , blessed one of God , '' murmured the kneeling ones ; `` we know that we receive life and salvation from thee . 
Bend to us , and give us of the breath of immortality ! '' 
He bowed and breathed upon them , and they broke forth in words of thankfulness and delight . 
Only Wilhelmine kept silent ; she only failed to feel the magical influence , and he bowed again to her , fixing his great fiery eyes upon her . 
`` Thou art called , thou art chosen , '' he said . 
`` Mount to the tabernacle , and lift the veil . '' 
She did as commanded , and beheld the figure of a wonderful woman stretched upon the couch as in deep sleep , clothed in transparent robes . 
`` Lay your hand upon her brow , and direct in your thoughts a question to the prophetess of the order , and she will answer you ! '' 
Upon the lofty , white brow of the sleeping one , she laid her hand ; immediately a smile flitted over her beautiful face , and she nodded . 
`` Yes , '' said she , `` you must believe . 
You dare not doubt . 
He is the elect , the holy Magus ! '' 
Wilhelmine trembled , for the answer was suited to the question . 
`` Demand a second question of the prophetess , '' commanded Cagliostro . 
Again she laid her hand upon the brow of the sleeping one , and again she smiled and nodded with her beautiful head . 
`` Fear not , '' she replied ; `` he will always love you , and will never reject you , only you must not lead him astray from the right course -- but guide him to the temple of faith and knowledge . 
When you cease to do it , you are lost . 
Shame upon earth and damnation will be your portion . '' 
The answer was exact -- for Wilhelmine had prayed to know if the prince would always love and never reject her . 
`` Still a third question , '' cried Cagliostro . 
In silence Wilhelmine asked , and the prophetess answered aloud : `` You will be countess , you will become a princess , you will possess millions , you will have the whole world at your feet , if you call to your aid the Invisible Fathers , and implore the power and miraculous blessing of the Great Kophta . '' 
Wilhelmine , deeply moved , sank overpowered upon her knees , and cried aloud : `` I call upon the Invisible Fathers for aid and assistance ; I implore the power and miraculous blessing of the Great Kophta . '' 
Suddenly , amid the rolling of thunder and intense darkness , Wilhelmine felt herself lifted up -- borne away , as loud prayers were uttered around her . 
Then she felt herself lowered again and with the freedom of motion . 
`` Fly ! 
fly from the revenge of the immortals , if you still doubt , still mistrust ! '' 
cried a fearful voice above her . 
`` Behold how the immortals revenge themselves . '' 
Immediately a light began to dawn before her , a form rose from the darkness like her own . 
She beheld herself kneeling , imploring , her face deluged with tears , and before her a tall , erect , muffled figure , with a glittering sword in his uplifted arm , which sank gradually lower and lower until it pierced her bosom and the blood gushed forth . 
Wilhelmine shrieked and fainted . 
She witnessed no more miracles , beard no more prophecies and revelations which the magi made to the elect . 
She beheld not the appearance of the blessed spirits , which at the importunity of the brothers flitted through the apartment . 
She heard not Cagliostro take leave of Baron von Bischofswerder , when all had withdrawn , saying , `` I have now exalted you to be chief director of the holy order . 
You will at once receive orders from the Invisible Fathers , announced to you in writing , and you will follow them faithfully . '' 
`` I will follow them faithfully , '' humbly answered Bischofswerder . 
`` You will be rewarded by the knowledge of life and of money ; you shall discover the philosopher 's stone , and the secret of gold shall be revealed to you , when you perform what the Invisible Fathers demand . '' 
`` I will do every thing , '' cried Bischofswerder , fervently ; `` only make known to me their commands . '' 
`` They desire , at the present , that you seek to be the confidant of the Prince of Prussia . 
Gain his affection , then govern him , making yourself indispensable to him . 
Surround him with servants and confidants that you can rely upon . 
Inspire him with devotion to the holy order . 
Become , now , the friend of the prince , that you may , one day , rule the king . 
You are the chief of the order in Prussia ; the more members you gain the more secrets will be revealed to you . 
The holy fathers send me afar , but I shall return : if you have been active and faithful , I will make known to you a great secret and bring you the elixir of life . '' 
`` When will you return , master ? '' 
asked Bisehofswerder , enthusiastically . 
Cagliostro smiled . 
`` Before the crown prince of Prussia becomes king . 
Ask no further . 
Be faithful ! '' 
No one remained in the drawing-room but Cagliostro and the beautiful woman who still lay quietly on the couch , upon the throne . 
Cagliostro approached her , and , raising the veil , regarded her a moment , with an expression of the most passionate tenderness : `` We are alone , Lorenza , '' said he . 
She opened her great eyes , and looked around the dimly-lighted room ; then , fixing them upon Cagliostro , who stood before her in his brilliant costume of magician , she burst into a merry laugh , so loud and so irresistible , that Cagliostro was seized involuntarily , and joined her . 
`` Oh ! 
was it not heavenly , was it not a glorious comedy , and did I not play divinely , Joseph ? 
Was I not bewitching as the goddess of Nature ? '' 
`` You looked truly like a goddess , Lorenza , and there is nothing more beautiful than you , in heaven or upon earth . 
But come , my enchantress , it is time to break up , as we are to set off early to-morrow morning . '' 
`` Have we now much money ? 
Was the tribute richly paid ? '' 
`` Yes , we have a hundred louis d'ors and a diamond ring from the mistress of this house . '' 
`` Give it to me , '' cried Lorenza . 
`` Not the ring , Lorenza , but the diamond , so soon as I have a false stone set in the ring -- which I must keep as a ring in the chain which will bind this woman to our cause . '' 
`` Was I not astonishingly like her ? 
Was it not almost unmistakable ? '' 
`` Yes , wonderfully deceptive . 
I shuddered myself as I saw the dagger pointed at your bosom . '' 
`` And the blood , how it gushed forth , Joseph ! '' 
Lorenza burst into a merry laugh again , and Cagliostro joined her , but suddenly stopped , and , listening , turned toward the door , which he had closed after Bischofswerder departed . 
It seemed as if he heard a noise -- a peculiar knocking . 
Four times it was repeated , and Cagliostro waved his hand to Lorenza not to speak . 
Again were heard the four peculiar rhythmical sounds . 
`` Be quiet , for Heaven 's sake be quiet , Lorenza ! 
Let me cover you with the veil ; it is a messenger from the Invisibles . '' 
Cagliostro flew to the door , unbolted it , and stood humbly near the entrance . 
A masked figure , enveloped in a cloak , opened it , and entered , rebolting it . 
Slowly turning toward Cagliostro , he harshly demanded , `` Whose servant are you ? '' 
`` The servant of the Invisible Rulers and Fathers , '' he humbly answered . 
`` Who are the Invisible Fathers ? '' 
`` The four ambassadors of the great general of the exiles . '' 
`` Call him by that name which he bore before a heretic pope in Rome , a weak empress , a free-thinking emperor in Germany , a lost-in-sin French emperor , and a heretic Spanish minister , condemned him to banishment and destruction . '' 
`` General of the Jesuits , '' he answered respectfully , bowing lower . 
`` Do you know the sign by which he may be recognized ? '' 
`` Yes , by a ring with the likeness of the founder of the order , the holy Ignatius Loyola . '' 
`` Then look , and recognize me , '' cried the mask , extending his hand to Cagliostro . 
`` The General , '' he murmured , frightened , gazing at the ring upon the small , white hand of the other . 
`` The holy founder of the order himself ! '' 
He seized his hand and pressed it to his lips , sinking upon his knees . 
The mask remained standing before the magician , as lowly as he might bow himself , who was still arrayed in his brilliant costume with the band upon his brow sparkling like diamonds . 
With a cold , reserved manner he answered , `` I am he , and am come here to give you my commands by word of mouth . '' 
`` Command me ; I am thy humble servant , and but a weak tool in thy hands . '' 
`` It is my will that you should become a powerful tool in my hands . 
Rise , for I will speak to the man who must stand erect in the storm . 
Rise ! '' 
The proud commander was now an humble , obedient servant . 
He rose slowly , standing with bowed head . 
`` When and where did we last meet ? '' 
demanded the mask . 
`` In 1773 , at Rome . '' 
`` In the year of curse and blasphemy , '' said the mask , in a harsh voice . 
`` The year in which the infamous Pope Clement XVI . 
condemned the holy order , and hurled his famous bull , Dominus redemptor noster . 
The holy order , condemned and disbanded by his infamous mouth , were changed into holy martyrs , without country , without possessions or rights , as persecuted fugitives , wandering around the world , to the wicked a scorn , to the pious a lamentable example of virtue and constancy . 
Exiled and persecuted , you fled to a house of one of our order , and there we for the first time met . 
The daughter of this man was your beloved . 
Tell me why did you conceal yourself after flying from Palermo ? 
I will see if the elevated one ungratefully forgets the days of his degradation . '' 
`` They accused me in Palermo of falsifying documents by which rightful owners were deprived of their lawful possessions . 
They threw me into subterranean dungeons , and I was near dying , when the Invisible Protectors rescued me . '' 
`` Was the accusation well founded ? 
Had you committed the crime you were accused of ? '' 
`` Yes , '' answered Cagliostro , in a low voice , `` I was guilty . '' 
`` For whom , by whose authority ? '' 
`` For the pious fathers , who commanded me , and whose pretensions to the possessions of the Duc Costa Rica were clearly proved by those documents . '' 
`` You then learned the power and the gratitude of our order . 
From underground prisons they freed you , and procured a way of escape to Rome , to find a safe asylum in the house of a believer . 
But just at that time condemnation burst upon us , and from a powerful order we were changed into a persecuted one . 
The forger Joseph Balsamo sought the brazier Feliciano , who gave him money , letters of recommendation , and instructed him how to serve the order , and procure an agreeable life for himself . 
Is it not so ? '' 
`` It is so , '' answered Cagliostro , softly . 
`` It was the order of the General which united you in marriage to your beloved Lorenza Feliciana , who initiated you in the secret sciences and the secrets of Nature , that you might employ them for the well-being of humanity . '' 
`` It is so , master . '' 
`` You implored also , as you were about to separate , to see the face of your benefactor , to engrave it upon your heart . 
Would you now be able to recognize it ? '' 
`` I could in an instant , among thousands . '' 
The General slowly raised the mask ; a pale , emaciated face was visible , with great black eyes in sunken sockets , thin bloodless lips , and a high , bony brow . 
`` Do you recognize me ? '' 
`` No ! '' 
sadly answered Cagliostro , `` it is not the same face . '' 
`` You see , my son , man changes , but knowledge not . 
I am another , and yet the same , for the outward human form is only the vessel of the eternal band into which everlasting truth and the holy doctrines are poured . 
If the vessel breaks , it is replaced by another , and an inexhaustible spring . 
Thought and holy knowledge flow into the renewed vessel . 
I am a new vessel , but the same spirit which formerly spoke to you . 
I know your past life , and for what purpose you are in the world . 
As the General then spoke to you , so speak I now . 
The unholy have put the holy under a ban -- they have persecuted and condemned us . 
The Holy Order of the Fathers of Jesus is lifeless before the world , but not before God . 
Jesuits do not die , for they bear eternal life in them , and there will a day come when they will burst forth from darkness into light . 
Go , my son , and help prepare the day , help smooth the way , that we may walk therein . 
Have you obeyed ? '' 
`` I have consecrated my whole life to it , your eminence . 
I have wandered around the world , and everywhere striven to disseminate the doctrine of the Invisible Fathers , and win disciples and adherents to the order . 
The Brothers of the Egyptian Masons , the Brothers of the Rosicrucians , are the disciples which I have won , and you know well there are many mighty and illustrious men among them . '' 
`` I know it , and I am satisfied you are an active and useful tool . 
This I came to tell you , that I might stimulate and advise you . 
Great deeds you shall perform , great achievements the holy Ignatius Loyola announces by my mouth . 
The world lies in sin , and the devil strides victorious over it , since the holy order has been proscribed and persecuted by the wicked . 
The devil is arrogant progress and boasting reason . 
They who listen to him think themselves wise when they are fools , and speak of their enlightenment while they still wander in the dark . 
To combat this reason , to oppose this intelligence , is the task of our order , which will never die . 
For God Sent it forth to the world to fight the devil of progress , who is the ruler of darkness . 
I have observed you , I have followed you , and I am satisfied . 
But I await still greater things from you . '' 
`` What shall it be ? 
Speak , O master ; command , and I obey ! '' 
`` You shall strive throughout Europe for the restitution of the holy order . 
You shall subject to it all minds ; make the rich , the powerful , the eminent and great , serviceable to it . 
Into the Orders of the Rosicrucians and Egyptian Masons you shall gather all the stray and isolated sheep into a flock , to await with longing the coming of the shepherd , and prepare a place for him . 
To the holy Church you shall consecrate the band of brothers , the only blessed Church , which is the lofty abode of the father of our order . 
To us belongs the world ; you shall assist to reconquer it . 
Unbelievers shall be fought with every weapon . 
Every deception , slander , persecution , and murder , are holy if used for the benefit of the holy order . 
You shall shrink from nothing which is useful and beneficial for the sublime goal . 
The murder of a prince is no sin , but a just punishment , when it is necessary to remove a mighty enemy . 
If you create revolutions , cause nations to tear each other to pieces in grim civil war , these revolutions will be sanctified , the civil wars blessed , if they serve to strengthen the power of our order , and gain victory at last against the opponents . 
Only through our order can happiness reenter the world , and mankind be rescued . 
If the Holy Fathers do not sit in the council of princes , if they are not the conscience of the powerful , and steer the machine of state , the world goes to destruction , and mankind is lost . 
You shall help , my son , to turn aside the evil , and prepare happiness for earth . 
You have already done much , but much more is required . 
Go and work miracles ; belief in them sanctifies the mind . 
Our fathers will sustain you everywhere , for you well know they are always present , though it is imagined they are not . 
The infamous Ganganelli has stripped them of their uniform , but not annihilated them , as we are , and ever shall be . 
I have sent out nine thousand brothers in Europe for the benefit of the order , and you will recognize them by the watchword . 
They will serve you as you will serve them . 
If danger menaces you , our brothers will know it , and rescue you . 
You will be unassailable , so long as you work for the order , and win disciples for it . 
Prussia is our important station as you rightly judged , and I extol you for your foresight . 
You prepare the future , for here it will be ! 
When the royal mocker of religion dies , then comes a new kingdom , and the Rosicrucians will rise to power . 
Vices as well as virtues must serve us ; therefore Dischofswerder and Wilhelmine Enke are useful means for holy purposes . 
That you have recognized it I praise you . 
Continue , my son , as you have begun , and you shall become powerful upon the earth . 
Not a hair of your head shall be touched so long as you are faithful to the Invisible Fathers . 
But so soon as you turn traitor to the holy cause you are lost , and our anger will crush you ! '' 
`` Never will I turn traitor , '' cried Cagliostro , holding up his hands as if taking an oath . 
`` I hope not . 
Our enemies shall be your enemies , and our friends your friends . 
If one of the brothers orders you in my name , ` Kill this man or that woman , ' so kill them ! 
Swear it ! '' 
Shuddering , Cagliostro repeated , `` I swear it ! '' 
`` As soon as one of the brothers orders you , in my name , ` Rescue this man or that woman , ' so do every thing ; even risk and sacrifice your life to rescue him . '' 
`` I swear it . '' 
`` You stand in the holy temple of the order , but also under its avenging sword . 
Be mindful of it in all your acts . 
The world is open to you , and our influence will be with you everywhere . 
You shall win the hearts of the great and the mighty to us , and place the Order of the Rosicrucians on the steps of the throne . 
The Great Kophta shall lead believers to us . '' 
`` The Great Kophta will perform all that you command , as he is only the humble servant of his general , '' said Cagliostro , kissing the hand extended to him . 
`` Do not kiss the hand , it is only that of an inferior mortal : kiss the ring , for it is the imperishable sign of our immortal saint . '' 
`` I kiss the ring of the immortal Ignatius Loyola , and swear eternal fidelity , constant obedience , and firm love , until death . '' 
`` Rise ! 
for the time has come for us to separate . 
I have provided for the journeys the necessary means . 
Here are letters of recommendation to Warsaw and Mittau , others to Paris and London ; but , the most important of all , letters of credit upon well-known bankers to the value of five hundred thousand dollars -- all valid , though delivered years hence . '' 
`` A half million ! '' 
cried Cagliostro , almost terrified . 
`` Does a half million astonish you ? '' 
repeated the General , and his gray , fleshless face was distorted into a smile . 
`` The Great Kophta must travel and live like a prince , that he may dazzle the eyes of the brothers , and subjugate the minds of the powerful . 
We give you the money , but remember you are always under the watchful eye of the order , and there is no spot on earth where you can hide yourself from our vengeance with the trust confided in you . 
You shall spend it to buy souls and win thrones , for hearts and consciences are sold ; money will buy every thing . 
Take your letters of credit ; you shall live as a great lord , and the Great Kophta shall be equal with princes . '' 
He handed Cagliostro five sealed letters , saying : `` They are made out for five years ; only one for each year , as the number indicates . 
Number one is for this year , and number five is only valid at the expiration of five years . 
The order is mindful of your security , and thus five years of your life are freed from earthly care . 
You shall work in spirit , and you shall enchant the world , that it may be saved through the only saving Church , and the Holy Order . '' 
He bowed a farewell , making the sign of the cross upon Cagliostro , and bent his steps to the throne , raising the veil which enveloped Lorenza . 
