My life , from my fourth to my sixteenth year , was spent at a lonely farm-house , on the banks of the river Saale , near the Cistertian Monastery of Kreuzberg . 
The house , though not large , had once been the residence of a baronial family , that was now extinct , and of whose representatives strange stories were narrated . 
Of course , therefore , their castle was gloomy ; of course , also , said to be haunted , and its immediate environs were in keeping with the character of the principal mansion . 
There was , for example , a garden in the old style , with steps and terrace walks , now ruined and neglected ; thick hedges of yew and cypress , with trees cut into fantastic shapes , which the present owner had not found leisure , or perhaps had not permission , to destroy . 
The surrounding country , however , at some distance , was very beautiful , presenting a fine diversity of hill and dale , rock , wood , and water . 
The situation of the Cistertian Convent , too , is particularly admired ; but in the recollections which I am thus commencing , rapid , simple narrative must be my leading object ; I have no time for diffuse and verbose description . 
Being an only child , I was left much alone , and it is therefore not to be wondered at , that even at this early age , I should have exemplified an undue developement of the faculty of imagination , and betrayed singularities of thought and conduct , with proportionate defects in the more useful qualities of prudence and judgment . 
It is requisite to observe , however , that I was not born in this neighbourhood , but at the convent of the Holy Lime-Tree in Prussia , of which place , even at this day , I seem to retain the most accurate reminiscence . 
That I should be able to describe scenes and events which happened in my earliest infancy , need not be considered inexplicable , as I have heard so much of them from the narratives of others , that an impression was of course very powerfully made on my imagination , or rather , the impressions once made , have never been suffered to decay , like cyphers carved on a tree , which some fond lover fails not at frequent intervals to revisit and to renovate . 
Of my father 's rank or station in the world , I know little or nothing . 
From all that I have heard , he must have been a person of considerable experience and knowledge of life ; yet , by various anecdotes which have only of late become intelligible , it appears that my parents , from the enjoyment of affluence and prosperity , had sunk , all at once , into a state of the bitterest poverty and comparative degradation . 
I learn , moreover , that my father , having been once enticed by stratagems of the Arch Enemy into the commission of a mortal sin , wished , when , in his latter years , the grace of God had brought him to repentance , to expiate his guilt by a penitential pilgrimage from Italy to the convent of the Holy Lime-Tree , in the distant and cold climate of Prussia . 
On their laborious journey thither , his faithful partner in affliction perceived , for the first time after several years of a married life , that she was about to become a mother ; and notwithstanding his extreme poverty , my father was by this occurrence greatly rejoiced , as it tended to the fulfilment of a mysterious vision , in which the blessed St Bernard had appeared , and promised to him forgiveness and consolation through the birth of a son . 
In the convent of the Lime-Tree , my father was attacked by severe illness , and as , notwithstanding his debility , he would on no account forego any of the prescribed devotional exercises , his disease rapidly gained ground , till at last , in mysterious conformity to the words of St Bernard , he died consoled and absolved , almost at the same moment in which I came into the world . 
With my first consciousness of existence dawned on my perceptions the beautiful imagery of the cloister and celebrated church of the Lime-Tree . 
Even at this moment , methinks the dark oak wood yet rustles around me ; I breathe once more the fragrance of the luxuriant grass and variegated flowers which were my cradle . 
No noxious insect , no poisonous reptile , is found within the limits of that sanctuary . 
Scarce even the buzzing of a fly , or chirping of a grasshopper , interrupts the solemn stillness , diversified only by the pious songs of the monks , who walk about in long solemn processions , accompanied by pilgrims of all nations , waving their censers of consecrated perfume . 
Even now , I seem yet vividly to behold in the middle of the church , the stem of the lime-tree cased in silver , that far-famed tree , on which supernatural visitants had placed the miraculous and wonder-working image of the Virgin , while from the walls and lofty dome , the well-known features of Saints and Angels are once more smiling upon me . 
In like manner , it appears to me also , as if I had once beheld in the same place the mysterious figure of a tall , grave , and austere-looking man , of whom I was given to understand , that he could be no other but the far-famed Italian painter , who had , in times long past , been here professionally employed . 
No one understood his language , nor was his real history known to any one of the monks . 
This much only was certain , that he had , in a space of time incredibly short , filled the church with its richest ornaments , and then , as soon as his work was finished , immediately disappeared , no one could tell how or whither . 
Not less vividly could I paint the portrait of a venerable pilgrim , who carried me about in his arms , and assisted me in my childish plays of searching for all sorts of variegated moss and pebbles in the forest . 
Yet , though the apparition of the painter was certainly real , that of the pilgrim , were it not for its influence on my after life , would seem to me but a dream . 
One day this personage brought with him a boy of uncommon beauty , and about my equal in years , with whom I seated myself on the grass , sharing with him my treasured store of moss and pebbles , which he already knew how to form into various regular figures , and above all , into the holy sign of the cross . 
My mother , meanwhile , sat near us on a stone bench , and the old pilgrim stood behind her , contemplating with mild gravity our infantine employments . 
Suddenly , while we were thus occupied , a troop of young people emerged from the thicket , of whom , judging by their dress and whole demeanour , it was easy to decide , that curiosity and idleness , not devotion , had led them to the Lime-Tree . 
On perceiving us , one of them began to laugh aloud , and exclaiming to his companions , `` See there ! 
-- See there ! 
-- A holy family ! 
-- Here at last is something for my portfolio ; '' with these words he drew out paper and pencils , and set himself as if to sketch our portraits . 
Hereupon the old pilgrim was violently incensed , `` Miserable scoffer ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` thou forsooth wouldst be an artist , while to thy heart , the inspiration of faith and divine love is yet utterly unknown ! 
But thy works will , like thyself , remain cold , senseless , and inanimate , and in the poverty of thine own soul , like an outcast in the desert , shalt thou perish ! '' 
Terrified by this reproof , the young people hastened away . 
The old pilgrim also soon afterwards prepared for departure . 
`` For this one day , '' said he to my mother , `` I have been permitted to bring to you this miraculous child , in order that , by sympathy , he might kindle the flames of divine love in your son 's heart ; but I must now take him from you , nor shall you ever behold either of us in this world again . 
Your son will prove by nature admirably endowed with many valuable gifts ; nor will the lessons which have now been impressed on his mind be from thence ever wholly effaced . 
Though the passions of his sinful father should boil and ferment in his veins , yet by proper education their influence might be repressed , and he might even raise himself up to be a valiant champion of our holy faith . 
Let him therefore be a monk ! '' 
With these words he disappeared ; and my mother could never sufficiently express how deep was the impression that his warning had left on her mind . 
She resolved , however , by no means to place any restraint on my natural inclinations , but quietly to acquiesce in whatever destination Providence , and the limited education she was able to bestow , might seem to point out for me . 
The interval between this period and the time when my mother , on her homeward journey , stopped at the convent of Kreuzberg , remains a mere blank ; not a trace of any event is left to me . 
The Abbess of the Cistertians -LRB- by birth a princess -RRB- had been formerly acquainted with my father , and on that account received us very kindly . 
I recover myself for the first time , when one morning my mother bestowed extraordinary care upon my dress ; she also cut and arranged my wildly-grown hair , adorned it with ribbons which she had bought in the town , and instructed me as well as she could how I was to behave when presented at the convent . 
At length , holding by my mother 's hand , I had ascended the broad marble staircase , and entered a high vaulted apartment , adorned with devotional pictures , in which we found the Lady Abbess . 
She was a tall , majestic , and still handsome woman , to whom the dress of her order gave extraordinary dignity . 
`` Is this your son ? '' 
said she to my mother , fixing on me at the same time her dark and penetrating eyes . 
Her voice , her dress , her tout ensemble , -- even , the high vaulted room and strange objects by which I was surrounded , altogether had such an effect on my imagination , that , seized with a kind of horror , I began to weep bitterly . 
`` How is this ? '' 
said the Abbess ; `` are you afraid of me ? 
What is your name , child ? '' 
-- `` Francis , '' answered my mother . 
-- `` Franciscus ! '' 
repeated the Abbess , in a tone of deep melancholy , at the same time lifting me up in her arms , and pressing me to her bosom . 
But here a new misfortune awaited us ; I suddenly felt real and violent pain , and screamed aloud . 
The Abbess ; terrified , let me go ; and my mother , utterly confounded by my behaviour would have directly snatched me up and retired . 
This , however , our new friend would by no means permit . 
It was now perceived that a diamond cross , worn by the Princess , had , at the moment when she pressed me in her arms , wounded my neck in such manner , that the impression , in the form of a cross , was already quite visible , and even suffused with blood . 
`` Poor Francis ! '' 
said the Abbess , `` I have indeed been very cruel to you ; but we shall yet , notwithstanding all this , be good friends . '' 
-- An attendant nun now entered with wine and refreshments , at the sight of which I soon recovered my courage ; and at last , seated on the Abbess 's lap , began to eat boldly of the sweetmeats , which she with her own hand kindly held to my lips . 
Afterwards , when I had , for the first time in my life , also tasted a few drops of good wine , that liveliness of humour , which , according to my mother 's account , had been natural to me from infancy , was completely restored . 
I laughed and talked , to the great delight of the Princess and the nun , who remained in the room . 
To this moment , I know not how it occurred to my mother , or how she succeeded in leading me on to talk freely to the Abbess about all the wonders of my native monastery , or how , as if supernaturally inspired , I was able to describe the works of the unknown painter as correctly and livelily as if I had comprehended their whole import and excellence . 
Not contented with this , I went on into all the legends of the saints , as if I had already become intimately acquainted with the records of the church . 
The Princess , and even my mother , looked at me with astonishment . 
At last , `` Tell me , child , '' said the Abbess , `` how is it possible that you can have learned all this ? '' 
-- Without a moment 's hesitation , I answered that a miraculous boy , who had been brought to us by the old pilgrim , had explained to me all the paintings in the church -- nay , that he himself was able to make beautiful pictures , with moss and pebbles , on the ground ; and had not only explained to me their import , but told me many legends of the saints . 
The bell now rung for vespers . 
The nun had packed up and given to me a quantity of sweetmeats in a paper bag , which I grasped and pocketed with great satisfaction . 
The Abbess then rose from her seat : `` Henceforward , '' said she , turning to my mother , `` I shall look upon your son as my chosen eléve , and shall provide for him accordingly . '' 
-- My mother was so much affected by this unexpected generosity , that she could only reply with tears , grasping in silence the hand of the Abbess . 
We had reached the door on our retreat , when the Princess came after us , took me up once more in her arms , first carefully putting aside the diamond cross , and weeping so that her tears dropped on my forehead , `` Franciscus , '' said she , `` be good and pious ! '' 
I was moved also , and wept without knowing wherefore . 
By the assistance of the Abbess we were not long afterwards established at the farm-house already mentioned , and , through her generosity , the small household of my mother soon assumed a more prosperous appearance . 
I was also well clothed and cared for , enjoying the freedom and tranquillity of a country life , so congenial to childhood ; but , above all , I profited in due time by the instructions of the neighbouring village priest , whom , while yet very young , I attended as sacristan at the altar . 
How like a fairy dream the remembrance of those happy days yet hovers around me ! 
Alas ! 
like a far distant land , the realm of peace and joy , home now lies far far behind me ; and when I would look back , a gulf yawns to meet me , by which I am separated from these blissful regions for ever . 
One lovely form I yet seem to recognize , wandering amid the roseate light of the morning -- one that haunted my early dreams , even before I was conscious that such beauty could ever on earth be realized . 
I beheld her amid the fresh verdure -- beneath the fragrant , beaming sun-showers of May -- and not less amid the desolate wildness of autumn , when even the beech-trees lost their leaves ; and her voice in sweet music rose on me through the moaning sighs of the departing year . 
With ardent longing , I strive once more to catch the soothing chords of that angelic voice , to behold the contour of that form , and to meet once more the radiance of her smile -- in vain ! 
Alas ! 
are there then barriers over which the strong wings of Love can not bear him across ? 
Lies not his kingdom in thought , and must thought , too , be subject to slavish limitations ? 
But dark spectral forms rise up around me ; -- always denser and denser draws together their hideous circle ; -- they close out every prospect , they oppress my senses with the horrors of reality , -- till even that longing , which had been a source of nameless pleasureable pain , is converted into deadly and insupportable torment . 
* * * * * The priest was goodness itself . 
He knew how to fetter my too lively spirit , and to attract my attention in such manner , that I was delighted by his instructions , and made rapid progress in my studies . 
Even at this moment I can yet recal his calm , contented , and somewhat weather-beaten features . 
He was in manners simple as a child , perplexed often about trifles , of which the contemptible characters around him were completely au fait ; yet clear and decisive in judgment on matters of which ordinary characters could have no comprehension . 
At this moment , how vividly do I recal , not only his own appearance , but that of his dwelling-house in the village of Heidebach , which town , though small and insignificant , is yet in situation very romantic . 
The walls of his house were covered up to the roof with vines , which he carefully trained . 
The interior of his humble habitation was also arranged with the utmost neatness ; and behind was a large garden , in which he sedulously worked for recreation at intervals , when not engaged in teaching his scholars , or in his clerical functions . 
In all my studies I was also very much assisted and encouraged by that unbounded respect and admiration which I cherished towards the Lady Abbess . 
Every time that I was to appear in her presence , I proposed to myself that I would shine before her , with my newly acquired knowledge ; and as soon as she came into the room , I could only look at her , and listen to her alone . 
Every word that she uttered remained deeply graven on my remembrance ; and through the whole day after I had thus met with her , her image accompanied me wherever I went , and I felt exalted to an extraordinary solemn and devotional mood of mind . 
By what nameless feelings have I been agitated , when , during my office of Sacristan , I stood swinging my censer on the steps of the high altar , when the deep full tones of the organ streamed down from the choir , and bore my soul with them as on the waves of a stormy sea ! 
Then in the anthem , above all others , I recognised her voice , which came down like a seraphic warning from Heaven , penetrating my heart , and filling my mind with the highest and holiest aspirations . 
But the most impressive of all days , to which for weeks preceding I could not help looking forward with rapture , was that of the Festival of St Bernard , which -LRB- he being the tutelary Saint of the Cistertians -RRB- was celebrated at the convent with extraordinary grandeur . 
Even on the day preceding , multitudes of people streamed out of the town , and from the surrounding country . 
Encamping themselves on the beautiful level meadows by which Kreuzberg is surrounded , day and night the lively assemblage were in commotion . 
In the motley crowd were to be found all varieties of people -- devout pilgrims in foreign habits singing anthems -- peasant lads flirting with their well-dressed mistresses -- monks , who , with folded arms , in abstract contemplation , gazed up to Heaven -- and whole families of citizens , who comfortably unpacked and enjoyed their well-stored baskets of provisions on the grass . 
Mirthful catches , pious hymns , groans of the penitent , and laughter of the merry , rejoicing , lamentation , jesting , and prayer , sounded at once in a strange stupifying concert through the atmosphere . 
If , however , the convent bell rung , then , far as the eye could reach , the multitude were at once fallen on their knees . 
Confusion was at an end , and only the hollow murmurs of prayer interrupted the solemn stillness . 
When the last sounds of the bell had died away , then the merry crowds , as before , streamed about on their varied occupations , and of new the rejoicing , which for a few minutes had been interrupted , was eagerly resumed . 
On St Bernard 's day , the Bishop himself , who resided in the neighbouring town , officiated in divine service at the church of the convent . 
He was attended by all the inferior clergy of his diocese ; his capelle , or choir , performed the music on a kind of temporary tribune , erected on one side of the high altar , and adorned with rich and costly hangings . 
Even now , the feelings which then vibrated through my bosom are not decayed . 
When I think of that happy period , which only too soon past away , they revive in all their youthful freshness . 
With especial liveliness I can still remember the notes of a certain Gloria ; which composition being a great favourite with the Princess , was frequently performed . 
When the Bishop had intoned the first notes of this anthem , and the powerful voices of the choir thundered after him , '' Gloria in excelsis Deo , '' did it not seem as if the painted clouds over the high altar were rolled asunder , and as if by a divine miracle the cherubim and seraphim came forward into life , moved , and spread abroad their powerful wings , hovering up and down , and praising God with song and supernatural music ? 
I sank thereafter into the most mysterious mood of inspired devotion . 
I was borne through resplendent clouds into the far distant regions of home . 
Through the fragrant woods of the Lime-Tree Monastery , I once more heard the music of angelic voices . 
From thickets of roses and lilies , the miraculous boy stepped forward to meet me , and said , with a smile , `` Where have you been so long , Franciscus ? 
See , I have a world of beautiful flowers , and will give them all to you , if you will but stay with me and love me ! '' 
After divine service , the nuns , with the Abbess at their head , held a solemn procession through the aisles of the church and convent . 
She was in the full dress of her order , wearing the Insul , and carrying the silver shepherd 's - staff in her hand . 
What sanctity , what dignity , what supernatural grandeur , beamed from every look , and animated every gesture , of this admirable woman ! 
She herself impersonized the triumphant church , affording to pious believers the assurance of blessing and protection . 
If by chance her looks fell on me , I could have thrown myself prostrate before her in the dust . 
When the ceremonies of the day were completely brought to an end , the attendant clergy , including the choir of the Bishop , were hospitably entertained in the refectory . 
Several friends of the convent , civil officers , merchants from the town , etc. , had their share in this entertainment ; and by means of the Bishop 's choir-master , who had conceived a favourable opinion of me , and willingly had me beside him , I also was allowed to take my place at the table . 
If before I had been excited by mysterious feelings of devotion , no less now did convivial life , with its varied imagery , gain its full influence over my senses . 
The guests enjoyed themselves with great freedom , telling stories , and laughing at their own wit , during which the bottles of old wine were zealously drained , until , at a stated hour in the evening , the carriages of the dignitaries were at the gate , and all , in the most orderly manner , took their departure . 
I was now in my sixteenth year , when the priest declared that I was qualified to begin the study of the higher branches of theology , at the college of the neighbouring town . 
I had fully determined on the clerical life , by which resolution my mother was greatly delighted , as she perceived that the mysterious hints of the pilgrim were intimately connected with my father 's vision of St Bernard ; and by this resolution of mine , she for the first time believed , that his soul was fully absolved , and saved from the risk of eternal destruction . 
The Princess , too , approved my intentions , and repeated her generous promises of support and assistance . 
Though the town of Königswald was so near , that we beheld its towers in the back ground of the landscape , and though bold walkers frequently came from thence on foot to our convent , yet to me this first separation from the Abbess , whom I regarded with such veneration , -- from my kind mother , whom I tenderly loved , -- and the good old priest , was very painful . 
So true it is , that even the shortest step out of the immediate circle of one 's best friends , is equal , in effect , to the remotest separation . 
Even the Princess was on this occasion agitated to an extraordinary degree , and her voice faltered while she pronounced over me some energetic words of admonishment . 
She presented me with an ornamental rosary , and a small prayer-book , with fine illuminations . 
She then gave me a letter of recommendation to the Prior of the Capuchin Convent in Königswald , whom she advised me directly to visit , as he would be prepared to afford me whatever advice or aid I could require . 
There are certainly few situations so beautiful as that of the Capuchin Monastery , right before the eastern gates of Königswald . 
The flourishing and extensive gardens , with their fine prospect towards the mountains , seemed to me at every visit more and more attractive . 
Here it became afterwards my delight to wander in deep meditation , reposing now at this , now at that group of finely grown trees ; and in this garden , when I went to deliver my letter of recommendation from the Abbess , I met , for the first time , the Prior Leonardus . 
The natural politeness of the Superior was obviously increased when he had read through the letter , and he said so much in praise of the Princess , whom he had formerly known at Rome , that by this means alone he directly won my affections . 
He was then surrounded by his brethren , and it was easy to perceive at once the beneficial effects of his arrangements and mode of discipline in the monastery . 
The same cheerfulness , amenity , and composure of spirit , which were so striking in the Prior , spread their influence also through the brethren . 
There was nowhere visible the slightest trace of ill humour , or of that inwardly-corroding reserve , which is elsewhere to be found in the countenances of Monks . 
Notwithstanding the severe rules of his order , devotional exercises were to the Prior Leonardus more like a necessary indulgence of a divine soul aspiring to Heaven , than penitential inflictions to efface the stains of mortal frailty . 
And he knew so well how to instil the same principles among his brethren , that in their performance of every duty , to which they were by their vows subjected , there prevailed a liveliness and good humour , which even in this terrestrial sphere gave rise to a new and higher mood of existence . 
The Prior even allowed and approved a certain degree of intercourse with the world , which could not but be advantageous for the monks . 
The rich gifts which from all quarters were presented to the monastery , rendered it possible to entertain , on certain days , the friends and patrons of the institution , in the refectory . 
Then , in the middle of the banquet-hall was spread a large table , at which were seated the Prior Leonardus and his guests . 
The brethren , meanwhile , remained at a small narrow board , stretching along the walls , contenting themselves with the humblest fare , and coarsest utensils , while , at the Prior 's table , all was elegantly served on silver , glass , and porcelain ; and even on fast-days the cook of the convent could prepare meagre dishes in such a manner , that they seemed to the guests highly luxurious . 
They themselves provided wine ; and thus the dinners at the Capuchin Convent presented a friendly intercourse of spiritual with profane characters , which could not fail to be beneficial to both parties . 
Those who were too eagerly occupied in worldly pursuits , were obliged to confess , that here , by a new mode of life , in direct opposition to their own , quiet and composure were to be obtained ; nay , they might conclude , that the more the soul is in this world elevated above terrestrial considerations , the more it becomes capable of enjoyment . 
On the other hand , the monks gained a knowledge of life , which otherwise would have remained from them wholly veiled , and which supplied important materiel for contemplation , enabling them many times more clearly to perceive , that , without the aid of some divine principle to support the mind , all in this world becomes `` weary , flat , stale , and unprofitable . '' 
Over all the brethren , highly exalted , both in regard to sacred and profane accomplishments , stood the Prior Leonardus . 
Besides that he was looked on as a great theologian , and consulted on the most difficult questions , he was , much more than could have been expected from a monk , also a man of the world . 
He spoke the French and Italian languages with fluency and elegance , and on account of his extraordinary versatility , he had formerly been employed on weighty diplomacies . 
At the time when I knew him first , he was already advanced in years ; but though his hair was white , his eyes yet gleamed with youthful fire -- and the agreeable smile which hovered on his lips was the surest evidence of his inward serenity and activity of mind . 
The same grace which prevailed in his discourse , regulated every gesture , and his figure , even in the unbecoming dress of his order , appeared to extraordinary advantage . 
There was not a single individual among the inhabitants of the convent , who had not come into it from his own free choice . 
But had it been otherwise , as , for example , in the case of unfortunate criminals , who came thither as to a place of refuge from persecution , the penitence prescribed by Leonardus was but the short passage to recovered repose ; and reconciled with himself , without heeding the world or its follies , the convert would , while yet living on earth , have become elevated in mind over all that is terrestrial . 
This unusual tendency of monachism , had been learned by Leonardus in Italy , where the mode of education , and all the views of a religious life , are much more cheerful than among the Catholics of Germany . 
Leonardus conceived a very favourable opinion of my talents ; he instructed me in Italian and French ; but it was especially the great variety of books which he lent to me , and his agreeable conversation , which contributed most to my improvement . 
Almost the whole time which could be spared from my studies in the College , was spent in the Capuchin Convent ; and my inclination towards a monastic life became always more and more determined . 
I disclosed to the Prior my wishes in this respect ; but , without directly dissuading me , he advised me at any rate to wait for a few years , during which time I might look around me in the world . 
As to society , since I came into the town , I had , by means of the Bishop 's choir-master , found myself on that score by no means deficient , but in every party , especially if women were present , I had uniformly found myself so disagreeably embarrassed , that even this alone , independent of my disposition to solitude and contemplation , seemed to decide , that I was by nature destined for a monk . 
One day , the Prior spoke with me at great length on the danger of risking too early a decision on a mode of life , which involves so many requisites . 
`` Is it possible , '' said he , `` that at so early an age , you are prepared to renounce all the delusive pleasures of this world ? 
If so , but not otherwise , you may then embrace the duties of monachism . 
Are you thoroughly convinced , that you have formed no attachment , -- that you wish for no enjoyments , but those which the mysterious influences of an existence devoted to voluntary suffering can bestow ? '' 
He fixed on me his dark penetrating eyes , and I was obliged to cast mine on the ground , and remain without answering a word ; for at that moment a form , which had been long banished from my recollection , stepped forward to the mind 's eye in colours more than ever lively and distracting . 
The choir-master had a sister , who , without being an absolute beauty , was yet in the highest bloom of youth , and especially on account of her figure , was what is called a very charming girl . 
One morning , having formed some other engagements , I had gone at an earlier hour than usual to receive my lesson in music at the choir-master 's house , stepped without hesitation into his lodgings , expecting to find him alone , and wholly unconscious that the apartment was used as a dressing-room -LRB- or , as it happened on this occasion , as an un dressing-room -RRB- by Mademoiselle Therese , whom , instead of her brother , I now discovered . 
So utterly was I confounded , that I stood motionless for a few seconds , without retiring or advancing . 
My heart beat , my limbs tottered -- I could hardly breathe -- But when Therese , with her usual naiveté and nonchalance , had recourse to a large shawl , then came forward without the least confusion , even offered me her hand , and asked what was the matter , and why I looked so pale -- this increased my embarrassment tenfold , so that I had almost fainted . 
It was a fortunate relief when the door of the adjoining room opened , and the choir-master made his appearance . 
But never had I struck such false chords , or sung so completely out of tune , as on that day . 
Afterwards I was pious enough to believe that the whole was a temptation of the devil , and thought myself very fortunate in having , by ascetic exercises , driven him out of the field . 
Now , however , these questions of the Prior , though his intentions were very praiseworthy , revived the lost image in tenfold strength . 
I blushed deeply , and said not a word . 
`` I see , my dear son , '' resumed the Prior , `` that you have understood me ; you are yet free from the vices of artifice and concealment , nor do you cherish an undue confidence in yourself . 
Heaven protect you from the temptations of this life ! 
Its enjoyments are but of short duration , and one may well say , that there rests on them a curse . 
In possession they expire ; and what is worse , leave behind them a disgust , a disappointment , a bluntness of the faculties for all that is truly praiseworthy and exalted , so that the better and spiritual attributes of our nature are at last utterly destroyed ! '' 
* * * * * Notwithstanding my endeavours to forget both the questions of the Prior , and the image to which they had given rise , yet I could in this by no means succeed ; and though formerly I had been tolerably composed , even in the presence of Therese , yet now I was obliged with the utmost care to avoid every meeting . 
Even the very thoughts of her distracted my attention completely ; and this appeared to me so much the more sinful , as I could not disguise from myself that such thoughts were attended with pleasure . 
The adventure of one evening , however , was soon to determine all this . 
The choir-master invited me , as he had often done before , to a music party at his house . 
On entering the room , I perceived that there were many other young ladies besides Mamselle Therese , and that she was on this occasion dressed more becomingly and elegantly than I had ever seen her . 
I would willingly have excused myself and fled , but it was now too late . 
An irresistible longing drew me towards her . 
I was as if spell-bound , and through the evening stationed myself near her , happy if by accident I came into momentary contact with this enchantress , though it were but to touch the hem of her garment . 
Of all this she appeared by no means inobservant , nor did it seem to displease her . 
The adventures of the night , however , were drawing to a close . 
She had sat long at the harpsichord , but at length rose , and went towards the window . 
One of her gloves was left on the chair . 
This , believing myself unobserved , I directly took possession of , first pressing it to my lips , and then placing it in my bosom . 
One young lady , however , -LRB- who , by the by , was my utter aversion , -RRB- had not failed to notice this etourderie . 
She rose directly from her station at the tea-table , and went to Therese , who was standing with another demoiselle at the window . 
She whispered something to Therese , who immediately began to smile . 
The looks of all three were directed towards me . 
They tittered and laughed all together . 
I believed it was in scorn and mockery , which to my feelings was insupportable . 
I was as if annihilated . 
The blood flowed ice-cold through my veins . 
Losing all self-possession I left the room -- rushed away into the college , and locked myself up in my cell . 
I threw myself in despair and rage upon the floor . 
Tears of anguish and disappointment gushed from my eyes . 
I renounced -- I cursed the girl and myself ; then prayed and laughed alternately like a madman . 
Tittering voices of scorn and mockery rose , and sounded gibbering all around me . 
I was in the very act of throwing myself out of the window , but by good luck the iron bars hindered me . 
It was not till the morning broke that I was more tranquil ; but I was firmly resolved never to see her any more , and , in a word , to renounce the world . 
My vocation to the monastic life was thus , according to my own opinion , rendered clear and unalterable . 
On that very day after the fatal music party , I hastened , as soon as I could escape from my usual studies in the school , to the Capuchin Prior , and informed him that it was my fixed intention directly to begin my noviciate , and that I had already , by letters , announced my design to my mother , and to the Abbess . 
Leonardus seemed surprised at my sudden zeal , and without being impolitely urgent , he yet endeavoured , by one means or another , to find out what could have led me all at once to this resolve , to which he rightly concluded that some extraordinary event must have given rise . 
A painful emotion of shame , which I could not overcome , prevented me from telling the truth . 
On the other hand , I dwelt , with all the fervour of excitement , on the visions , warnings , and strange adventures of my youth , which all seemed decidedly to point to a monastic retirement . 
Without in the least disputing the authenticity of the events which I had described , he suggested that I might , nevertheless , have drawn from them false conclusions , as there was no certainty that I had interpreted correctly the warnings , whatever they might be , which I had received . 
Indeed , the Prior did not at any time speak willingly of supernatural agency -- not even of those instances recorded by inspired writers , so that there were moments in which I had almost set him down for an infidel and a sceptic . 
Once I emboldened myself so far , as to force from him some decided expressions as to the adversaries of our Catholic faith , who stigmatize all belief of that which can not be interpreted according to the laws of our corporeal senses , with the name of Superstition . 
`` My son , '' said Leonardus , `` infidelity itself is indeed the worst species of that mental weakness , which , under the name of Superstition , such people ascribe to believers . '' 
Thereafter he directly changed the subject to lighter and more ordinary topics of discourse . 
Not till long afterwards was I able to enter into his admirable views of the mysteries of our religion , which involves the supernatural communing of our spirits with beings of a celestial order , and was then obliged to confess , that Leonardus , with great propriety , reserved these ideas for students who were sufficiently advanced in years and experience . 
I now received a letter from my mother , describing new visions and warnings , such as those to which I had attached so much importance in my conversation with the Prior . 
She had by this means long since anticipated that the situation of a lay brother would not satisfy my wishes , but that I would make choice of the conventual life . 
On St Medardus ' day , the old Pilgrim from the Holy Lime-Tree had appeared to her , and had led me by the hand , in the habit of a Capuchin monk . 
The Princess also completely approved of my resolution ; which accordingly was carried as rapidly as possible into effect . 
I saw both of them once more before my investiture , which -LRB- as , according to my earnest request , the half of my noviciate was dispensed with -RRB- very soon followed . 
In conformity with my mother 's last letter , I assumed the conventual name of Medardus . 
* * * * * The reciprocal confidence and friendship of the brethren with regard to each other -- the internal arrangements of the convent -- and , in short , the whole mode of life among the Capuchins , appeared to me for a long time exactly as it had done at first . 
That composure of spirit , which was universally apparent , failed not by sympathy to pour the balm of peace into my soul ; and I was visited often by delightful inspirations , especially by faëry dreams , derived from the period of my earliest years in the Convent of the Holy Lime-Tree . 
I must not omit to mention , that , during the solemn act of my investiture , I beheld the choir-master 's sister . 
She looked quite sunk in melancholy , and her eyes evidently shone in tears . 
But the time of temptation was now past and gone ; and , perhaps , out of a sinful pride over a triumph too easily won , I could not help smiling , which did not fail to be remarked by a certain monk , named Cyrillus , who at that moment stood near me . 
`` What makes you so merry , brother ? '' 
said he . 
-- `` When I am renouncing this contemptible world , '' said I , `` and its vanities , ought I not to rejoice ? '' 
It was not to be denied , however , that , at the moment when I pronounced these words , an involuntary feeling of regret vibrated through my inmost heart , and was at direct variance with what I had said . 
Yet this was the last attack of earthly passion , after which composure of spirit gradually gained complete ascendancy . 
Oh , had it never departed ! 
But who may trust to the strength of his armour ? 
Who may rely on his own courage , if the supernatural and unseen powers of darkness are combined against him , and for ever on the watch ? 
* * * * * I had now been five years in the convent , when , according to arrangements made by the Prior , the care of the reliquiary chamber was transferred to me from Brother Cyrillus , who was now become old and infirm . 
In this room -LRB- it was an old grotesque Gothic chamber -RRB- there were all sorts of devotional treasures : -- bones of the saints , and remnants of their dress -- fragments of the cross , & c. etc. -- which were preserved in costly glass cases , set in silver , and exposed to view only on certain days , for the edification of the people . 
When the transfer of duties took place , Brother Cyrillus fully acquainted me with the character of each article , and with the documents proving the miracles which the relics had severally performed . 
In regard to talents and literary acquirements , this monk stood next in rank to the Prior Leonardus , for which reason I had the less hesitation in imparting to him freely whatever doubts or difficulties came into my mind . 
`` Must we , then , '' said I , `` absolutely and truly , look upon every article in this collection as that for which it is given out ? 
or , rather , may not avarice and deceit have here foisted in many things as relics of this or that saint , which in reality are base impostures ? 
As , for example , what shall we say if one convent , according to its archives , possesses the whole cross , and yet there are so many fragments in circulation , that -LRB- as a brother of our own once irreverently observed -RRB- they might , if collected together , supply our house for a whole twelvemonth with fuel ? '' 
`` Truly , '' said Cyrillus , `` it does not become us to subject matters of this kind to profane inquiry ; but , to speak unreservedly , my opinion is , that very few of the things which are here preserved really are that which they are given out to be . 
But in this there seems to be no real or important objection whatever . 
If you will take notice , Brother Medardus , of the doctrine which the Prior and I have always held on these mysteries , you will , on the contrary , perceive that our religion only beams forth more and more in renovated lustre . 
`` Is it not worthy of admiration , dear Brother , that our Church endeavours in such manner to catch hold of those mysterious links , which in this world connect together sensual and spiritual existences -- in other words , so to influence our corporeal frame , that our higher origin and dependance on the Divinity may be more clearly perceived -- that we may enjoy , too , the anticipation of that spiritual life , of which we bear the germs within us , and of which a fore-feeling hovers around us , as if like the fanning of seraph 's wings ? 
`` What is this or that morsel of wood -- that crumbling bone , or fragment of cloth ? 
In themselves they are , of course , worthless ; but it is said , that the one was cut from the real cross , and that the others are from the body or garment of a saint . 
Hence , to the believer , who , without scrutinizing , takes the relic for what it is said to be , is directly supplied a source of supernatural excitement , and the most enviable associations . 
Hence , too , is awoke the spiritual influence of that saint from whom the relic is derived ; and he draws consolation and support from that glorified being , whom , with full confidence and faith , he had invoked . 
By this kind of excitement , also , there is no doubt that many bodily diseases may be overcome , and in this manner , for the most part , are effected the miracles , which , as they often take place before the eyes of the assembled people , it is impossible to dispute or deny . '' 
I recollected immediately many expressions of the Prior which corresponded exactly with those now used by Cyrillus , and began to look on these things which I had formerly regarded as mere toys and baubles , with a degree of respect and devotional veneration . 
The old monk did not fail to perceive this effect of his own discourse , and went on , with increased zeal and energy , to explain , one by one , the remaining relics . 
At last , Brother Cyrillus had recourse to an old and strangely carved wooden press , which he carefully unlocked , and out of which he took a small square box . 
`` Herein , Brother Medardus , '' said he , `` is contained the most wonderful and mysterious relic of which our convent is possessed . 
As long as I have been resident here , no one but the Prior and myself has had this box in his hands . 
Even the other brethren -LRB- not to speak of strangers -RRB- are unaware of its existence . 
For my own part , I can not even touch this casket without an inward shuddering ; for it seems to me as if there were some malignant spell , or rather , some living demon , locked up within it , which , were the bonds broken by which this evil principle is now confined , would bring destruction on all who came within its accursed range . 
`` That which is therein contained is known to have been derived immediately from the Arch-Fiend , at the time when he was still allowed visibly , and in personal shape , to contend against the weal of mankind . '' 
I looked at Brother Cyrillus with the greatest astonishment ; but without leaving me time to answer , he went on . 
`` I shall abstain , Brother Medardus , from offering you any opinion of my own on this mysterious affair , but merely relate to you faithfully what our documents say upon the subject . 
You will find the papers in that press , and can read them afterwards at your leisure . 
`` The life of St Anthony is already well known to you . 
You are aware , that in order to be completely withdrawn from the distractions of the world , he went out into the desert , and there devoted himself to the severest penitential exercises . 
The Devil , of course , followed him , and came often in his way , in order to disturb him in his pious contemplations . 
`` One evening it happened accordingly , that St Anthony was returning home , and had arrived near his cell , when he perceived a dark figure approaching him rapidly along the heath . 
As his visitant came nearer , he observed with surprise , through the holes in a torn mantle worn by the stranger , the long necks of oddly-shaped bottles , which of course produced an effect the most extraordinary and grotesque . 
It was the Devil , who , in this absurd masquerade , smiled on him ironically , and inquired if he would not choose to taste of the Elixir which he carried in these bottles ? 
At this insolence , St Anthony was not even incensed , but remained perfectly calm ; for the Enemy , having now become powerless and contemptible , was no longer in a condition to venture a real combat , but must confine himself to scornful words . 
`` The Saint , however , inquired for what reason he carried about so many bottles in that unheard-of manner . '' 
` For this very reason , ' said the Devil , ` that people may be induced to ask me the question ; for as soon as any mortal meets with me , he looks on me with astonishment , makes the same inquiry that you have done , and , in the next place , can not forbear desiring to taste , and try what sort of elixirs I am possessed of . 
Among so many bottles , if he finds one which suits his taste , and drinks it out , and becomes drunk , he is then irrecoverably mine , and belongs to me and my kingdom for ever . ' 
`` So far the story is the same in all legends , though some of them add , that , according to the Devil 's confession , if two individuals should drink out of the same flask , they would henceforth become addicted to the same crimes , possessing a wonderful reciprocity of thoughts and feelings , yet mutually and unconsciously acting for the destruction of each other . 
By our own manuscripts , it is narrated farther , that when the Devil went from thence , he left some of his flasks on the ground , which St Anthony directly took with him into his cave , fearing that they might fall into the way of accidental travellers , or even deceive some of his own pupils , who came to visit him in that retirement . 
By chance , so we are also told , St Anthony once opened one of these bottles , out of which there arose directly a strange and stupifying vapour , whereupon all sorts of hideous apparitions and spectral phantoms from hell had environed the Saint , in order to terrify and delude him . 
Above all , too , there were forms of women , who sought to entice him into shameless indecencies . 
These altogether tormented him , until , by constant prayer , and severe penitential exercises , he had driven them again out of the field . 
`` In this very box there is now deposited a bottle of that kind , saved from the relics of St Anthony ; and the documents thereto relating , are so precise and complete , that the fact of its having been derived from the Saint is hardly to be doubted . 
Besides , I can assure you , Brother Medardus , that so often as I have chanced to touch this bottle , or even the box in which it is contained , I have been struck with a mysterious horror . 
It seems to me also , as if I smelt a peculiar , odoriferous vapour , which stuns the senses , and the effects of which do not stop there , but utterly rob me of composure of spirit afterwards , and distract my attention from devotional exercises . 
`` Whether I do or not believe in this immediate intercourse with the devil in visible shape , yet , that such distraction proceeds from the direct influence of some hostile power , there can be no doubt . 
However , I overcame this gradually by zealous and unceasing prayer . 
As for you , Brother Medardus , whose fervent imagination will colour all things with a strength beyond that of reality , and who , in consequence of youth , also will be apt to trust too much to your own power of resistance , I would earnestly impress on you this advice , -- ` Never , or at least , for many years , to open the box ; and in order that it may not tempt and entice you , to put it as much as possible out of your reach and sight . ' '' 
Hereupon Brother Cyrillus shut up the mysterious Box in the press from which it had come , and consigned over to me a large bunch of keys , among which that of the formidable press had its place . 
The whole story had made on me a deep impression , and the more that I felt an inward longing to contemplate the wonderful relic , the more I was resolved to render this to myself difficult , or even impossible . 
When Cyrillus left me , I looked over once more , one by one , the treasures thus committed to my charge ; I then returned to my cell , and untied the key of the Devil 's press from the bunch to which it belonged , and hid it deeply among the papers in my writing-desk . 
One temptation , said I to myself , I have already overcome . 
I have emancipated myself from the thraldom of Therese . 
Never more shall the Devil , by his insidious artifices , gain ascendancy over me ! 
* * * * * Among the professors in the College , there was one , distinguished as an extraordinary orator . 
Every time that he preached , the church was filled to overflowing . 
His words , like a stream of lava fire , bore with him the hearts and souls of his hearers , and kindled in every one the most fervid and unaffected devotion . 
The inspiration of his discourses animated me , among others , in a pre-eminent degree ; and although I certainly looked on this extraordinary man as an especial favourite of Heaven , and gifted with no every-day talents , yet it seemed as if some mighty warning voice spoke within me , commanding me to rouse from my slumbers , -- to go and do likewise ! 
After I had returned from hearing him , I used to preach with great energy in my own cell , giving myself up to the inspiration of the moment , till I had succeeded in arresting and embodying my thoughts in proper words , which I then committed to paper . 
The brother who used to preach in the convent now became obviously weaker . 
Wholly destitute of energy , like a half-dried rivulet in summer , his discourses dragged laboriously and feebly along ; and an intolerable diffuseness of language , resulting from the want of thought , rendered his discourses so long and tedious , that most of his hearers , as if lulled by the unceasing clapper of a mill , long before he concluded , fell asleep , and were only roused after he had pronounced `` amen , '' by the sound of the anthem and the organ . 
The Prior Leonardus was indeed an admirable orator ; but he was at this time afraid to preach , as , on account of his advanced age , the exertion fatigued him too much : and except the Prior , there was no one in the convent who could supply the place of the superannuated brother . 
The Prior one day happened to converse with me on this state of affairs , which he deplored , as it deprived the monastery of many pious visitors . 
I took courage , and told him that I had many times felt an inward call to the pulpit , and had even written several discourses . 
Accordingly , he desired to see some specimens from my manuscripts , and was with them so highly pleased , that he earnestly exhorted me , on the next holiday , to make a trial in public , in which attempt I ran the less risk of failure , being by nature gifted with an expressive cast of features , and a deep , sonorous tone of voice . 
As to the subsidiary acquirements , of action and of delivery , the Prior promised himself to instruct me . 
The eventful holiday soon arrived . 
The church was unusually crowded , and it was not without considerable trepidation that I mounted the pulpit . 
At the commencement , I remained timidly faithful to my manuscript ; and Leonardus told me that I had spoken with a faltering voice , which , however , exactly corresponded with certain plaintive and pathetic considerations with which I had begun my discourse , and which , therefore , was interpreted by most of my auditors into a very skilful example of rhetorical tact . 
Soon afterwards , however , it seemed as if my inward mind were gradually lighted up by the glowing fire of supernatural inspiration . 
I thought no more of the manuscript , but gave myself up to the influence of the moment . 
I felt how every nerve and fibre was attuned and energized . 
I heard my own voice thunder through the vaulted roof . 
I beheld , as if by miracle , the halo of divine light shed around my own elevated head and outstretched arms . 
By what means I was enabled to preserve connection in my periods , or to deliver my conceptions with any degree of logical precision , I know not , for I was carried out of myself . 
I could not afterwards have declared whether my discourse had been short or long -- the time past like a dream ! 
With a grand euphonical sentence , in which I concentrated , as if into one focus , all the blessed doctrines that I had been announcing , I concluded my sermon ; of which the effect was such as had been in the convent wholly unexampled . 
Long after I had ceased to speak , there were heard through the church the sounds of passionate weeping , exclamations of heartfelt rapture , and audible prayers . 
The brethren paid me their tribute of the highest approbation . 
Leonardus embraced me , and named me the pride of their institution ! 
* * * * * With unexampled rapidity my renown was spread abroad ; and henceforward , on every Sunday or holiday , crowds of the most respectable inhabitants of the town used to be assembled , even before the doors were opened , while the church , after all , was found insufficient to hold them . 
By this homage , my zeal was proportionably increased . 
I endeavoured more and more to give to my periods the proper rounding , and to adorn my discourses throughout , with all the flowers of eloquence . 
I succeeded always more and more in fettering the attention of my audience , until my fame became such , that the attention paid to me was more like the homage and veneration due to a saint , than approbation bestowed on any ordinary mortal . 
A kind of religious delirium now prevailed through the town . 
Even on ordinary week days , and on half-holidays , the inhabitants came in crowds , merely to see Brother Medardus , and to hear him speak , though but a few words . 
Thus vanity gradually , by imperceptible , but sure approaches , took possession of my heart . 
Almost unconsciously , I began to look upon myself as the one elect , -- the pre-eminently chosen of Heaven . 
Then the miraculous circumstances attending my birth at the Lime-Tree ; my father 's forgiveness of a mortal crime ; the visionary adventures of my childhood ; -- all seemed to indicate that my lofty spirit , in immediate commerce with supernatural beings , belonged not properly to earth , but to Heaven , and was but suffered , for a space , to wander here , for the benefit and consolation of mortals ! 
It became , according to my own judgment , quite certain , that the venerable old Pilgrim , together with the wonderful boy that he had brought with him , had been supernatural visitants , -- that they had descended on earth , for the express purpose of greeting me as the chosen saint , who was destined for the instruction of mankind , to sojourn transiently among them . 
But the more vividly all these ideas came before me , the more did my present situation become oppressive and disagreeable . 
That unaffected cheerfulness and inward serenity which had formerly brightened my existence , was completely banished from my soul . 
Even all the good-hearted expressions of the Prior , and friendly behaviour of the monks , awoke within me only discontent and resentment . 
By their mode of conduct , my vanity was bitterly mortified . 
In me they ought clearly to have recognised the chosen saint who was above them so highly elevated . 
Nay , they should even have prostrated themselves in the dust , and implored my intercession before the throne of Heaven ! 
I considered them , therefore , as beings influenced by the most deplorable obduracy and refractoriness of spirit . 
Even in my discourses I contrived to interweave certain mysterious allusions . 
I ventured to assert , that now a wholly new and mighty revolution had begun , as with the roseate light of morning , to dawn upon the earth , announcing to pious believers , that one of the specially elect of Heaven had been sent for a space to wander in sublunary regions . 
My supposed mission I continued to clothe in mysterious and obscure imagery , which , indeed , the less it was understood , seemed the more to work like a charm among the people . 
Leonardus now became visibly colder in his manner , avoiding to speak with me , unless before witnesses . 
At last , one day , when we were left alone in the great allée of the convent garden , he broke out -- `` Brother Medardus , I can no longer conceal from you , that for some time past your whole behaviour has been such as to excite in me the greatest displeasure . 
There has arisen in your mind some adverse and hostile principle , by which you have become wholly alienated from a life of pious simplicity . 
In your discourses , there prevails a dangerous obscurity ; and from this darkness many things appear ready , if you dared utter them , to start forward , which if plainly spoken , would effectually separate you and me for ever . 
To be candid -- at this moment you bear about with you , and betray that unalterable curse of our sinful origin , by which even every powerful struggle of our spiritual energies is rendered a means of opening to us the realms of destruction , whereinto we thoughtless mortals are , alas ! 
too apt to go astray ! 
`` The approbation , nay , the idolatrous admiration , which has been paid to you by the capricious multitude , who are always in search of novelty , has dazzled you , and you behold yourself in an artificial character , which is not your own , but a deceitful phantom , which will entice you rapidly into the gulf of perdition . 
Return , then , into yourself , Medardus -- renounce the delusion which thus besets and overpowers you ! 
I believe that I thoroughly understand this delusion , -- at least , I am well aware of its effects . 
Already have you lost utterly that calmness and complacence of spirit , without which there is , on this earth , no hope of real improvement . 
Take warning , then , in time ! 
Resist the fiend who besets you ! 
Be once more that good-humoured and open-hearted youth whom with my whole soul I loved ! '' 
Tears involuntarily flowed from the eyes of the good Prior while he spoke thus . 
He had taken my hand , but now letting it fall , he departed quickly without waiting for any answer . 
His words had indeed penetrated my heart ; but , alas ! 
the impressions that they had left were only those of anger , distrust , and resentment . 
He had spoken of the approbation , nay , the admiration and respect , which I had obtained by my wonderful talents ; and it became but too obvious that only pitiful envy had been the real source of that displeasure , which he so candidly expressed towards me . 
Silent , and wrapt up within myself , I remained at the next meeting of the brethren , a prey to devouring indignation . 
Still buoyed up and excited by the wild inspirations which had risen up within me , I continued through whole days and long sleepless nights my laborious contrivances how I might best commit to paper -LRB- without a too candid avowal of my self-idolatry -RRB- the glorious ideas that crowded on my mind . 
Meanwhile , the more that I became estranged from Leonardus and the monks , the better I succeeded in attracting the homage of the people ; and my discourses never failed to rivet their attention . 
On St Anthony 's day this year , it happened that the church was more than ever thronged -- in such manner , that the vestry-men were obliged to keep the doors open , in order that those who could not get in might at least hear me from without . 
Never had I spoken more ardently , more impressively , -- in a word , with more onction . 
I had related , as usual , many wonderful anecdotes from the lives of the saints , and had demonstrated in what degree their examples , though not imitable in their fullest extent , might yet be advantageously applied in real life . 
I spoke , too , of the manifold arts of the Devil , to whom the fall of our first parents had given the power of seducing mankind ; and involuntarily , before I was aware , the stream of eloquence led me away into the legend of the Elixir , which I wished to represent as an ingenious allegory . 
Then suddenly , my looks , in wandering through the church , fell upon a tall haggard figure , who had mounted upon a bench , and stood in a direction nearly opposite to me , leaning against a pillar . 
He was in a strange foreign garb , with a dark violet-coloured mantle , of which the folds were twined round his crossed arms . 
His countenance was deadly pale ; but there was an unearthly glare in his large black staring eyes , which struck into my very heart . 
I trembled involuntarily -- a mysterious horror pervaded my whole frame . 
I turned away my looks , however , and , summoning up my utmost courage , forced myself to continue my discourse . 
But , as if constrained by some inexplicable spell of an enchanter -- as if fascinated by the basilisk 's eyes -- I was always obliged to look back again , where the man stood as before , changeless and motionless , with his large spectral eyes glaring upon me . 
On his high wrinkled forehead , and in the lineaments of his down-drawn mouth , there was an expression of bitter scorn , of disdain mixed almost with hatred . 
His whole figure presented something indescribably and supernaturally horrid , such as belonged not to this life . 
The whole truth now came on my remembrance . 
It was , it could be no other , than the unknown miraculous painter from the Lime-Tree , whose form , beheld in infancy , had never wholly vanished from my mind , and who now haunted me like the visible impersonification of that hereditary guilt by which my life was overshadowed . 
I felt as if seized on and grappled with by ice-cold talons : My periods faltered ; -- my whole discourse became always more and more confused . 
There arose a whispering and murmuring in the church ; -- but the stranger remained utterly unmoved ; and the fixed regard of his eyes never for a moment relented . 
At last , in the full paroxysm -- the climax of terror and despair -- I screamed aloud -- `` Thou revenant ! 
-- Thou accursed sorcerer ! 
-- Away with thee from hence ! 
-- Begone ! 
for I myself am he ! 
-- I am the blessed St Anthony ! '' 
From that moment , I remember nothing more , until , on recovering from the state of utter unconsciousness into which I fell with these words , I found myself in my cell , on my couch , and carefully watched by Cyrillus . 
The frightful vision of the unknown stood yet vividly before mine eyes . 
Cyrillus , however , laboured to convince me , that this had been but an illusory phantom of my own brain -- heated by the zeal and ardour of my discourse . 
But the more that he exerted himself for this purpose , the more deeply did I feel shame and repentance at my own behaviour in the pulpit -- As to the audience , they , as I afterwards understood , concluded that a sudden madness had seized upon me ; for which notion , my last exclamation had , no doubt , afforded them abundant reason . 
I was in spirit utterly crushed and annihilated . 
Shut up like a prisoner in my cell , I subjected myself to the severest penitential inflictions ; and strengthened myself by zealous prayer for contention with the adversary , who had appeared to me , even on consecrated ground , and only in malice and mockery had put on the features and garb of the miraculous painter of the Lime-Tree . 
No one but myself would acknowledge that he had seen the man in the violet-coloured mantle ; and , with his usual kindness , the Prior Leonardus , very zealously spread a report , that my conduct had arisen merely from the first attack of a severe nervous fever , by which I had been so frightfully borne away in my discourse , and confused in my ideas . 
Indeed , without any pretence , I was , for a long time , extremely ill , and this too for several weeks after I had again resumed the ordinary conventual mode of life . 
However , I at last undertook once more to mount the pulpit ; -- but , tormented by my own inward agitation , and still haunted by the restless remembrance of that horrid pale spectre , I was scarcely able to speak connectedly , much less to give myself up as before to the spontaneous fire of eloquence . 
My sermons , on the contrary , were now stiff , constrained , and laboriously patched up from disjointed fragments . 
The audience bewailed the loss of my rhetorical powers , -- gradually gave up their attendance , -- and the superannuated brother who had formerly preached , and who was now much superior to me , again took his place ; so that I was utterly superseded . 
* * * * * After some time lost in this manner , it happened , that a certain young Count , then on his travels , -LRB- under a feigned name , -RRB- with his tutor , came to the monastery , and desired to see whatever we had to boast of that was rare and curious . 
I was accordingly obliged to open the reliquary chamber , -- the gleam of a fine sunset shone upon the strange furniture of this ghastly old room , and the visitors , with an ironical smile on their features , marched in . 
To my vexation , I was left with them alone ; for the Prior , who had till now been with us , was called away to attend a sick person in the town of Königswald . 
* * * * * Gradually I had got through all that I intended to shew , and had minutely described every article , when , by chance , the Count 's eye fell upon the curious old cabinet , adorned with grotesque carvings , in which was deposited the box with the Devil 's Elixir . 
Though for some time I dexterously evaded their questions , yet , at last , the Count and his tutor , joining together , urged me so far , that I could not avoid telling them , at once , the legends relating to the contents of this cabinet . 
In short , I repeated to them the whole story of St Anthony and the devil , nor -LRB- unluckily -RRB- did I leave out the warning which brother Cyrillus had given me , as to the danger of opening the box , or even the cabinet . 
