Bertha praised the song of Walther the birdfeeder , as being consolatory in separation . 
Marie agreed with her . 
`` I have one more verse , '' she added , smiling : `` Though she wander 'd in Swabia , far and wide , Through castles and walls her course he espied . 
O'er the Alb unto Lichtenstein had she gone , His eyes would have follow 'd through rock and stone . '' 
Marie was going on with her singing , when the garden door opened . 
Footsteps were heard in the walk , and the girls rose to receive their expected visitants . 
`` Albert von Sturmfeder , '' began Marie , after the usual salutations were over , `` you will pardon me for having ventured to invite you into my father 's garden ; but , as my cousin , Bertha wishes to give you some commissions , for her friend , I have taken the liberty . '' 
She then turned to Dieterich von Kraft , and said , `` We will not interrupt their conversation ; so , come and talk over the ball of last evening . '' 
Upon which she took the hand of her cousin , and led him away down the yew-tree walk . 
Albert seated himself beside Bertha , who laid her head on his breast , and wept bitterly . 
His most soothing words were unable to calm her grief . 
`` Bertha , '' he said , `` you were always so stout-hearted ; how can you thus give up all hope of a happier destiny ? '' 
`` Hope ? '' 
she replied , sorrowfully : `` to our hope , to our happiness , there is an eternal end . '' 
`` But hearken , dearest , '' replied Albert , who , to cheer up her drooping spirit , endeavoured to inspire her with courage ; `` let not this slight interruption to our hopes throw its chilling influence over the purity of our love , as if it were to extinguish altogether its bright flame . 
All will be well yet . 
Rather let us put our trust in God , and wait his almighty will ; for I never can believe that He who knows the secret of our hearts , and has joined them together by the indissoluble tie of faithful attachment , will not , in his own way , make all things to work for our good . '' 
These consoling words produced a smile upon her countenance ; but it pourtrayed the character of despondency rather than of hope . 
She replied , after a short silence , `` Listen to me with attention , Albert . 
I must acquaint you with a profound secret , upon which hangs my father 's life . 
He is as bitter an enemy to the League , as he is the firm friend of the Duke . 
He is not come here solely for the purpose of fetching his daughter home ; no , he is using his utmost endeavour to find out the plans of the enemy , and with money and address to spread distrust and confusion among them . 
Do you suppose , then , that such a determined adversary to the League , would ever consent to give his daughter to a man who seeks to raise himself by our destruction ? 
to one who has attached himself to a party , whose object is not justice , but plunder ? '' 
`` Your zeal , Bertha , for the Duke 's cause , carries you too far , '' the young man interrupted her ; `` you ought to know that many an honourable man serves in our army . '' 
`` And even if this were the case , '' she replied , with animation , `` still they are deceived and led away , as you yourself also are . '' 
`` How are you so certain of that ? '' 
answered Albert , who , though he suspected she was somewhat right , blushed to find the party he had espoused should be so vilified by his beloved : `` might not your father be also equally blinded and deceived ? 
How can he serve with such zeal the cause of that proud ambitious Duke , who murders his nobility , treads his citizens in the dust , squanders the industry of the land in riotous living , and allows his peasantry to starve with hunger ? '' 
`` Yes , his enemies represent him in this light , '' she replied ; `` this army speaks of him in the same terms ; but ask those below , on the banks of the Neckar , if they do not love their hereditary Prince , though his hand may lay heavy on them at times ? 
Ask those faithful men who have rallied around him , whether they are not willing and ready , to shed their blood for the grand-child of Eberhard , rather than allow that proud Duke of Bavaria , that rapacious nobility , those needy townsfolk to tread their land ? '' 
Albert was thoughtfully silent for a time . 
`` But , '' he asked , `` how can his warmest supporters exculpate him from the murder of Hutten ? '' 
`` You are very ready to talk of your honour , '' Bertha answered , `` and will not suffer the Duke to defend his own . 
Hutten did not fall by treachery , as his partisans have given out to the world , but in honourable fight , in which the Duke 's life was equally exposed . 
I do not wish to excuse him for all his actions , but it is but just to remember , that a young man , like him , surrounded by evil advisers , has not the power always to act wisely . 
But he is really good , and if you knew how mild and humane he can be ! '' 
Albert was piqued that Bertha should speak in such glowing terms of the Duke 's virtues , and jealousy for a moment took possession of his soul and ruffled his temper . 
He replied with a sarcastic and malignant smile , `` A little more , and you would call him the handsome Duke ; who , for aught I know , if he were aware what an advocate he had in you , might think it worth his trouble to ingratiate himself in your heart , and supplant poor Albert . '' 
`` I really did not think you capable of such petty jealousy , '' Bertha answered , and turned away , with a tear of indignation starting into her eye , from a feeling of wounded dignity . 
`` Can not you believe it possible for the heart of a young girl to beat warm in the cause of her country ? '' 
`` Do not be angry with me , '' Albert implored , and felt ashamed at the injustice of his remark ; `` really , I meant it in joke . '' 
`` Can you indulge in a joke at this moment , when our life 's happiness is at stake ! 
My father leaves Ulm to-morrow , war being declared . 
It will be long , perhaps very long , before we see each other again -- and can you joke now ? 
Ah ! 
could you have witnessed the many nights I have prayed God , with burning tears , to incline your heart to our side , to defend us from the misery and pain of being separated for ever , you certainly would not have trifled so cruelly with my feelings . '' 
`` He has not inclined it to happiness , '' said Albert , looking about him , agitated . 
`` And is it still impossible , '' said Bertha , as she took his hand , with the most expressive tenderness , `` is it still impossible ? 
Come along with us , Albert ; think how happy my father would be to present a young warrior to his Duke ? 
He has often said that one gallant sword is of great price in such times ; you will be highly esteemed by him , you will fight by his side , my heart will not then be torn or divided between the conflicting parties , my prayers for prosperity and victory , will not wander in doubtful agitation between the two armies . '' 
`` Stop , for heaven 's sake , stop ! '' 
cried the young man , and covered his eyes with his hands ; for the conquest of conviction beamed from her looks , the power of truth was encamped on her sweet lips . 
`` Do you wish to persuade me to become a deserter ? 
I entered but yesterday with the army , war is this day declared , and shall I ride over to the Duke to-morrow ? 
Is my honour so indifferent to you ? '' 
`` Honour ! '' 
Bertha said , `` is such honour dearer to you than your love ? 
How different were his words , when Albert swore eternal fidelity ! 
Well , then , go and be happier with them than with me ! 
But when the Duke of Bavaria creates you a knight on the field of battle , for carrying desolation through our fields , when he decorates the neck of Albert von Sturmfeder with the chain of honour , for having been the foremost in crushing Würtemberg 's citizens , may the joy of your thoughts not be troubled then , by having broken the heart of one so true to you -- of one who loved you so tenderly ! '' 
`` Dearest , '' answered Albert , whose breast was torn by conflicting feelings , `` grief does not permit you , to perceive how unjust you are . 
But be it so ; you conceive that I prefer the glory , which is leading me onwards , to making a sacrifice of it to love . 
But hear me . 
I dare not come over to your side . 
I will give in my resignation to the League . 
Let those fight and conquer who will ; my dream of glory is thus at an end . '' 
Bertha sent a look of gratitude to heaven for this avowal , and rewarded the words of the young man by a sweet acknowledgment . 
`` Oh ! 
believe me , '' she said , `` I know how much this sacrifice must cost you . 
But do not let me see you look so sad , when you cast your eyes at your sword . 
The sun will still shine upon our happiness one of these days . 
I can now bid you farewell with consolation in my heart , for , whichever way the war may end , you can appear unconstrained before my father , who will rejoice to hear of your having made the heavy sacrifice for my sake . '' 
Marie now gave her friends the signal that she was unable to retain the clerk of the council any longer , which roused them from their absorbing conversation . 
Bertha quickly composed herself , and with Albert quitted the arbour . 
`` Cousin Kraft wishes to depart , '' said Marie , `` and requires his friend to accompany him . '' 
`` I must indeed go with you , if I wish to find my way home , '' replied the young man , who was too well acquainted with the received customs of his day , not to be aware that he , a stranger , could not remain with the young ladies , without their cousin being of the party , precious as the last moments , before a long separation from his love , might be to him . 
They proceeded down the garden , the silence only broken by Dieterick , who expressed his sorrow , in very courteous terms , at the prospect of his cousin leaving Ulm so soon as the morrow . 
But Marie , thinking she discovered something in the look of Albert 's eye , which expressed a wish not yet satisfied , and to the accomplishment of which witnesses might be unwelcome , drew cousin Kraft on one side , and questioned him so closely upon a plant , whose leaves were just bursting , that he had not time to observe what was going on behind his back . 
Albert took immediate advantage of the happy moment , and pressed Bertha once more to his heart . 
The noise occasioned by her heavy silken dress , and the clattering of his sword , drew the scribe 's attention from his botanical observations ; he looked around , and oh , wonder ! 
he saw his very reserved cousin in the arms of his guest . 
`` That was a salute for the dear cousin in Franconia , I suppose ? '' 
he remarked , after he had recovered from his surprise . 
`` No , Mr. Secretary , '' answered Albert , with firmness , `` it was a salute for me alone , and from her whom I hope one day to call my own . 
Have you anything to say against it , my friend ? '' 
`` God forbid ! 
I congratulate you with all my heart , '' answered Dieterick , somewhat subdued by the determined look of the young man . 
`` But , by the powers , I call that an entire case of veni , vidi , vici . 
I have been trying my luck with the beauty for more than a quarter of a year , and I can scarcely boast of one kind look from her during the whole time . '' 
`` Forgive the joke , cousin , which we have played upon you , '' said Marie ; `` be reasonable , and let me explain the matter . '' 
She then gave him to understand , why Albert and he had been invited into the garden , and begged him to be silent upon the subject before Bertha 's father . 
He was softened into compliance by the kind look of Marie , upon condition , that she would submit also to the same ordeal her cousin had just undergone . 
Marie gently repelled his unmannerly request , and , by way of teazing him , asked him again at the garden door the natural history of a violet , the first of the season . 
He was kind enough to give her a long and learned dissertation upon the subject , without allowing himself to be interrupted by the noise of a rustling silk dress or clattering sword . 
A grateful look from Bertha , a friendly shake of the hand from Marie , rewarded him at parting ; and long floated the veils of the pretty cousins over the garden hedge , as their eyes followed the path of the young men . 
`` In the still cloister 's solitary grove , A maiden walk 'd , and thought upon her love ; The virgin moon , as if in mockery , Shed forth her splendour on her misery , And the bright lustre of the beams that fell Lit up the tears that coursed her cheek so pale . '' 
L. UHLAND . 
During the following days , Ulm resembled a large camp . 
Instead of the peaceable peasant , the busy citizens , passing , as in ordinary times , through the streets with sober tranquil step to their several avocations , were now to be seen strange figures , with helmets and caps of iron , carrying lances , cross bows and fire-arms . 
In lieu of statesmen in their plain black dresses , proud knights clad in steel , and wearing helmets adorned with waving plumes , strode about the squares and market places , accompanied by numerous bands of followers . 
Still more animated was this warlike scene without the gates of the town . 
In an open space on the banks of the Danube , Sickingen was exercising his cavalry , whilst , in a large flax-field towards the village of Soeflingen , Fronsberg was occupied in man -LSB- oe -RSB- uvring his infantry . 
One fine morning , about three or four days after Bertha von Lichtenstein had left Ulm with her father , an immense concourse of people were assembled in the above field , to witness Fronsberg 's infantry going through their evolutions . 
They looked upon this man , whose military reputation had long preceded him , with not less interest than we should , perhaps , were we to see the imperial or royal son of Mars performing the part of a field marshal . 
The state of an army depends in great measure on the character and experience of its leader ; and we are more or less interested in the accounts given in history , or the public papers , of battles , according to the renown of the general who fought them . 
Such might have been the motive , which induced the inhabitants of Ulm on that morning to quit their narrow streets , to see the celebrated man of the day , employed in his military occupations . 
The dexterity with which he kept his men in solid masses , who before were accustomed to fight in scattered bodies ; the celerity with which they moved on all sides at his word , or closed together , producing a formidable array of pikes and fire-arms ; his powerful voice , which even rose above the noise of the drums , and his noble warlike figure , formed a sight so novel and attractive , that even the citizen most fond of his ease , was tempted to pass a long forenoon on foot , to enjoy the spectacle . 
The general appeared , on this morning , more cheerful and friendly than usual . 
The warm interest which the good people of Ulm took in him , and which was visibly depicted on every countenance , perhaps produced this feeling ; or perhaps he felt himself happier when engaged in military exercises , than confined to the cold narrow streets . 
Whatever might have been the cause , the crowd took his gay mood in such good part , that each individual thought himself specially noticed and saluted by him as he passed , and the cheer , `` A gallant man , a brave knight ! '' 
followed his path . 
But there was a certain spot , to which his attention appeared to be more particularly drawn ; for , every time he rode by it , he was observed to salute some one , either with his sword or hand , and to nod familiarly . 
Those in the rear of the spectators stood upon tiptoes to find out the object of his friendly nod , those in front looked inquisitively at each other , wondering who the favoured one could be , as none of the assembled citizens thought themselves worthy of the honor . 
When Fronsberg passed the same spot again , and repeated his salutation , an hundred heads were on the stretch to satisfy their curiosity , and they discovered that it was directed to a tall slim young man , who stood in the front rank of the spectators . 
His jacket of fine cloth , slashed with silk , the high feather in his cap playing in the morning breeze , his long sword and his scarf or sash , distinguished him as a man of quality from among his surrounding neighbours , who were less adorned than he was , and whose diminutive stature and broad faces did not set them off to the best advantage beside him . 
The good townsfolk felt hurt that the young man did not appear flattered by the high favour conferred on him in their very presence . 
His attitude , also , standing there as he did , with sunken head , and his arms folded across his breast , they thought did not betoken good breeding , so especially noticed as he was by an old warrior . 
Besides which , the salutation of the general seemed to spread confusion over his countenance , for he returned it by a slight inclination of the head only , and followed it with a gloomy though friendly look . 
`` That gentleman must be a strange fellow , '' said the chief of the Ulm weavers to his neighbour , a sturdy armourer ; `` I would give my Sunday jacket for such a salute from Fronsberg ; but he scarcely notices it . 
Would it not be the inquiry of the whole town , what has Fronsberg done to Master Köhler , that he did not return his salute , for they were lately like two brothers ? 
` Oh ! 
they are long acquainted , ' would be the answer , ` they knew each other from their youth up . ' 
But it vexes me much , that so sensible and superior a man should salute such an apparent coxcomb . '' 
The armourer , a little old fellow , nodded assent to his friend 's remark . 
`` May God punish me , but you are right , Master Köhler . 
There are many other people here , whom he might have noticed . 
The burgomaster is on the ground , and my godfather Hans von Besserer , who lives in the corner house , stands among the crowd also , -- both as good as that youngster ! 
If I were his master , I would soon teach him to bend his head , though he looks to me , as if it would require an emperor to make him do so . 
He must be a man of some consequence , for the secretary to the council , my neighbour in town , who is otherwise an enemy to receiving guests , has given him a lodging in his own house . '' 
`` Kraft ? '' 
asked the weaver , astonished ; `` but stop , there may be something in it . 
He must be a young nobleman , or , likely enough , the son of the burgomaster of Cologne , who intends to join the army also . 
Is that not old John , Kraft 's servant , standing there ? '' 
`` Yes , that 's him , '' said the armourer , whose curiosity was excited by the weaver 's inquiry : `` it is him ; and I will stand confessor to him , in spite of the provost of Elchingen . '' 
But though the space between the two citizens and Kraft 's servant was small , the smith could not accost him , on account of the density of the crowd . 
The important bearing , however , of the chief of the weavers among his brother tradesmen , for he was rich , and respected in the town , enabled him to force his way , and he succeeded in getting possession of John , and forthwith conducted him to the armourer . 
Old John , when questioned , could not give them much information on the subject of their inquiry ; all he could say was , that his master 's guest was a Herr von Sturmfeder , and that he could not have come from any great distance , as he had only one horse , and no servant . 
`` But my master will get the worst of it , '' he said , `` for our old Sabina is as furious as a dragon , because he has destroyed the economy of the house by inviting a stranger , booted and spurred , without consulting her . '' 
`` No offence , '' interrupted the chief of the weavers , `` but your master , John , is a fool ! 
I would have thrown that old witch -- God forgive me ! 
-- long ago out of the window . 
The gentleman has already arrived at years of discretion , and why does he allow himself to be treated as if he were still in swaddling clothes ? '' 
`` You have spoken well , Master Köhler , '' answered the old servant , `` but you do n't understand matters properly . 
Throw her into the street , indeed ! 
who would take care of the house , then , I should like to know ? '' 
`` Who , '' cried the inflamed weaver , `` who ? 
he should take a wife , a housekeeper , as other Christians and citizens do . 
Why does he remain a bachelor , and run after all the young girls in the town ? 
Did I not catch him , not long ago , saying pretty things to our Katharine ? 
I should like to have thrown my looms , beams and all , at his worship 's head ; but when I recollected , that his good mother had many a good piece of linen wove by me , I was obliged to take off my cap , and say , ` An humble good evening , and has your honour any commands ? ' 
May the -- '' `` Upon my word , '' said John , with a displeased look , `` I have always thought that a gentleman , like my master , the secretary to the grand council of state , might exchange a word in all honour with your daughter , without the wicked world -- '' `` Really ! 
exchange a word ! 
and after vesper bell in March ! 
He will not marry her , nevertheless ; and do you suppose the reputation of my daughter must not be kept as clean as the white cravat of your master ? 
I should like to know that ! '' 
Master Köhler 's voice during this conversation was raised to so high a pitch as to draw the attention of the bystanders , and having grasped Old John by the collar , there was no saying what might have been the consequences , had not the master smith dragged the querulous couple away by force , and separated them . 
He thereby quelled the dispute , but he could not stop the report , which was speedily circulated through the whole town , that Old John , having an intrigue in his old age with Master Köhler 's young daughter , had been brought to an account by her angry father , in the open field . 
The man -LSB- oe -RSB- uvres of the infantry were by this time at an end , the crowd separated , and the young man , who had been the original cause of the foregoing conversation , was observed to bend his way also towards the town . 
His step was slow , and undecided ; his face looked paler than usual , his eyes sought the ground , or wandered occasionally , with an expression of silent grief , towards the distant blue mountains , the boundaries of Würtemberg . 
Albert von Sturmfeder had never felt so unhappy as in these moments . 
Bertha had left Ulm with her father ; she had made him swear again to be faithful to his promise , an act which he unavailingly felt to create a lurking regret in his breast . 
It had cost him no small struggle at the time , to consent to her wishes , but the overwhelming pain at parting from her , and the grief exhibited by the beloved girl , had mastered every feeling but that of desire to soothe the agony of her mind . 
His position was now one of extreme difficulty , when he calmly considered his future plans . 
To crush in the bud all those golden dreams and bright hopes of glory and honour , with which he thought to render himself worthy the hand of the daughter of Lichtenstein , was nothing , he felt , compared with the disgrace and contempt , which he must expect to meet at the hands of men , whose esteem was dear to him , for having deserted their colours , at a moment when the struggle was about to commence . 
How could he give a reason , or find words sufficiently convincing , to justify his conduct , before that gallant old friend of his father , Breitenstein ? 
How could he appear before the noble Fronsberg ? 
Ah , that friendly salute , with which he appeared to encourage the son of his brave companion in arms , produced a thousand torments . 
His father had fallen by his side , and he had heard him , in his dying moments , bequeath to his orphan child the renown of his name and a brilliant example , as his sole inheritance . 
Before this man , who , mindful of his father 's bequest , had kindly opened to him a path which would lead to the accomplishment of his parent 's wishes , he must now appear in very doubtful light . 
Troubled with these gloomy forebodings , he had slowly approached the gate of the town , when he was suddenly seized by the arm , and turning around , a man , to appearance a peasant , stood before him . 
`` What is your business with me ? '' 
asked Albert , rather angrily , annoyed at being disturbed in his musing . 
`` My answer will depend upon whether you are the person I am looking for , '' answered the man . 
`` Tell me , what belongs to Licht and Sturm ? '' 
Albert was astonished at this singular question , and observed him more closely . 
He was not very tall , but strongly built , broad-chested , and of mean appearance . 
His face , much tanned by the sun , might have passed as plain and insignificant to a superficial observer , but , upon a narrower inspection , there was a certain expression about the eyes and mouth which , in addition to cunning and acuteness , bespoke daring and audacity . 
His hair and beard were dark yellow , and smooth ; he carried a long dagger or knife in his leathern girdle ; in one hand he held an axe , in the other a low round leathern cap , such as the Swabian peasant of the present day wears . 
Whilst Albert made these hasty observations , he narrowly watched the expression of his features . 
`` Perhaps you did not thoroughly understand me , sir knight , '' continued the other , after a short silence ; `` so I will explain myself more fully . 
Let me ask , what should be added to Sturm and Licht , to form two noble names ? '' '' 
Feder and stein , '' answered the young man , to whom it was immediately clear , what was to be understood by the question ; `` but what is your business ? '' 
`` So you are Albert von Sturmfeder ? '' 
said the other ; `` and I come from Bertha von -- '' `` For heaven 's sake be silent , friend ; mention no names , '' said Albert ; `` tell me quickly , have you got any thing for me ? '' 
`` A note , sir , '' said the peasant ; when , unbuckling a broad black leather band , wound under his knee , he produced a small strip of parchment . 
Albert took the parchment with hasty joy ; there were a few words written on it with black shining ink . 
It appeared to have cost some trouble to the writer , and proved that the young ladies of 1519 were not so ready with their pen , to express their tender feelings , as those of the present day , when every village beauty can write an epistle to her swain as long as her garter . 
The chronicle whence we have taken this history , has happily preserved every word of the confused traces on the parchment , which Albert 's greedy eye now speedily deciphered as follows : `` Remember your oath -- fly bytimes . 
God conduct thee . 
Your Bertha -- to eternity . '' 
These few words expressed a pious , tender feeling , dictated by a loving heart . 
No wonder then that Albert was for some moments lost in a state of joyous intoxication . 
He sent a look of gratitude toward the distant blue mountains in the direction of Lichtenstein , and thanked his love for the consolation these lines afforded him , for truly , never had he stood so much in need of comfort , as at this moment . 
He was now convinced , that a being , the dearest that existed in the world to him , had not forsaken him . 
His heart resumed its usual cheerfulness , he proffered his hand to the trusty messenger , thanked him cordially , and asked him how he came by the strip of parchment . 
`` Did not I know , '' he answered , `` that that little scrap of paper contained no evil enchantment , for the young lady smiled most kindly as she pressed it into my rough hand ! 
I came to Blaubeuren last Wednesday , where our army is encamped . 
There is a magnificent high altar in the convent church there , over which the history of my patron , John the Baptist , is represented . 
About seven years ago , when I was in great distress of mind , and upon the point of suffering an ignominious death , I made a vow , to perform a pilgrimage to the spot every year about this time . 
I have never neglected this duty , having been saved from the hangman 's hand , by a miracle performed by my saint . 
When I have finished my prayers , I always go to the abbot to present my offering of a couple of fine geese or a lamb , or any thing else he may prefer . 
But , sir , you will be tired with my gossip . '' 
`` No , no , -- go on , '' said Albert ; `` come , sit down on that bench , beside me . '' 
`` That would not be proper , '' answered the messenger ; `` for a common peasant to place himself beside a gentleman , whom the general took such notice of before all the people this morning , would be out of all character : I would rather stand , with your permission . '' 
Albert seated himself on the stone bench by the road side , and the countryman , leaning on his axe , went on with his story . 
`` I had little inclination to prosecute my pilgrimage in these unsettled times , but it is said , an unfulfilled oath is displeasing to the Almighty ; so I was obliged to perform my vow . 
This year , when I rose from my prayer , and , as usual , was going to present my offering to the abbot , one of the priests told me , I could not go to his reverence this time , because many nobles and knights were waiting on him ; but I insisted on it , for I knew the abbot to be a kind benevolent man , and he would have been displeased , had I gone away without seeing him . 
Should you ever visit the convent , do n't forget to notice a long and narrow staircase leading from the high altar to the dormitory , through a thick wall , which separates it from the church . 
There it was that the lady met me . 
She approached me , a delicate-formed female , descending the stairs , covered with a long veil , with breviary and rosary in her hands . 
I pressed myself close to the wall , to allow her to pass , but she stood still , and said , ` Well , Hans , whither are you going ? ' '' 
`` But how did the lady know you ? '' 
Albert interrupted him . 
`` My sister is her nurse , and -- '' `` How , is old Rosel your sister ? '' 
said the young man . 
`` Do you know her also ? '' 
said the messenger , `` only think ! 
but let me proceed . 
I was very happy to see her again , for I visited my sister often in Lichtenstein , and I have known the young lady , ever since she was taught to walk with the help of her father 's sword belt . 
I should scarcely have known her again , she is grown so much , but her rosy cheeks have disappeared , like the snow on the first day of May . 
I do n't know how it was , but I was so much struck by her looks , that I could not help asking her if any thing was the matter with her , and whether I could render her any assistance . 
She thought for a moment , and then said , ` Yes , Hans , if you can be discreet you may indeed render me a very great service ! ' 
I promised , and she appointed a meeting after vespers . '' 
`` But how is it , that she is in the convent ? '' 
Albert asked ; `` for formerly no female foot dared cross its threshold . '' 
`` The abbot is a friend of her father 's , and as there are so many people in Blaubeuren at present , she is in greater safety in the convent than in the town , where strange things come to pass . 
After vespers , therefore , when all was quiet , I stole softly into the cloister , and met her . 
I cheered her sunken spirits , as well as we peasants know how to do , when she gave me that strip of parchment , and bid me find you out . '' 
`` I thank you heartily , good Hans , '' said Albert ; `` but is that all she charged you with ? '' 
`` No , '' answered the messenger ; `` she moreover commissioned me to tell you , by word of mouth , to be upon your guard , for there was a plot laid against you . '' 
`` Against me ? '' 
said Albert ; `` you must have misunderstood her . 
Who , and what can any one have to say about me ? '' 
`` Ah , there you ask me more than I can answer , '' replied the other ; `` but , if I dare guess , I believe the League has an eye upon you . 
The lady added also , that her father had spoken about it . 
I saw Fronsberg nod to you to-day , and honour you like the Emperor 's son , to the astonishment of every one present . 
Believe me , there is something in the wind , when such a man beckons in so friendly a manner to another . '' 
Albert was surprised at the plain remark of the simple countryman . 
He recollected , however , that Bertha 's father , having pryed deeply into the secrets of the leaders of the League , might have heard something , which more immediately concerned him ; but , whichever way he turned his thoughts , he could discover no ground upon which Bertha 's mysterious warning could be founded . 
His mind was torn with doubt and conjecture ; and he abruptly asked the messenger , how he had found him out so soon ? 
`` Without Fronsberg 's aid , it had not been such an easy matter , '' said he : `` I was desired to inquire for you at Dieterick von Kraft 's house . 
But as I was entering the gate of the town , I saw a large crowd of people in the field . 
I thought half an hour would make no great difference , so I joined the spectators to see the infantry exercise . 
Really , Fronsberg has done wonders . 
Well ; it struck me I heard your name mentioned . 
I looked round , and saw three old men talking about you , and pointing to you . 
I noticed your figure , and followed your steps ; but not certain if I was quite right , I put the enigma of Sturm and Licht to you . '' 
`` You have acted cleverly , '' said Albert , smiling ; `` but come to my house , and get something to eat . 
When do you go home again ? '' 
Hans considered a moment ; at last , he said , with a cunning smile on his mouth , `` No offence , sir ; but I have pledged myself to the young lady , not to quit you before you have taken your leave of the League . '' 
`` And then ? '' 
asked Albert . 
`` And then I go direct to Lichtenstein , to give her good news from you . 
How she longs to hear the happy tidings ! 
She stands on the rock of the garden every day , and all day long , to see whether old Hans is coming . '' 
`` She shall soon have that pleasure , '' answered Albert ; `` I will be off to-morrow , if possible ; and will write to her in the mean time . '' 
`` But be cautious what you do , '' said Hans ; `` the strip of parchment must not be longer than the one I brought you , for I must conceal it also under my knee-band . 
We can not be too careful in these times ; and no one will look for it there . '' 
`` Let it be so , then , '' answered Albert , as he rose from his seat . 
`` And now adieu for the present ; come to me at noon at Dieterick von Kraft 's house , it is not far from the cathedral , and any one will shew it you . 
If they ask you where you come from , say you are a countryman of mine from Franconia , because the Ulmers are not well affected towards the Würtembergers . '' 
`` Do n't be afraid , sir ; you will not have any fault to find with me , '' replied Hans , as he parted from Albert . 
He looked back at the slim young man , and thought his sister 's foster child , had made no bad choice in the object of her love . 
`` The world and all I 'd sacrifice for thee ; And do it cheerfully -- but only flee . '' 
SCHILLER . 
Albert felt some uneasiness , at first , as to how his new acquaintance might behave in Kraft 's house . 
It was not without reason , that he feared he might betray himself by his dialect or inconsiderate explanations , which would put him in an awkward position ; for , though it was his firm resolution to quit the service of the League in a few days , still he did not wish it to be suspected that he was in correspondence with Würtemberg . 
Neither could he nor would he betray the secret of Bertha having sent a messenger to him , should he be unfortunately discovered . 
He thought of turning back , looking for the man , and begging him to leave the town as soon as possible ; but when he recollected that , he must have long since left the place where they had held their conversation , and that he might in the mean time have arrived at the house , it appeared to him more advisable to hasten home to put Hans on his guard , and warn him against committing an indiscretion . 
There was , however , something so peculiar in the sharp eye and the bold cunning countenance of the man , which gave him reason to hope , that Bertha , in the hasty choice she had made of the means of communicating with him , would not have confided her message to uncertain hands . 
Albert had scarcely entered Kraft 's house , when , at noon , a countryman from Franconia was announced ; and the messenger of his love was shewn in . 
Can this man now before me be the same who left me but a few moments ago , thought Albert , surprised at his appearance , with his back bent nearly double , his arms hanging lifeless by his body , his eyes devoid of all animation ? 
He could scarcely believe his eyes and ears , when he addressed Kraft , who saluted him in pure Franconian dialect , and answered his many questions with the volubility of a native of that country . 
Albert with difficulty repressed a smile at the strange metamorphosis of his new acquaintance ; and was tempted to believe in the supernatural stories he had heard in his childhood , which described kind magicians , or gracious fairies , devoting themselves under all sorts of forms to the service of true lovers , and carrying them safely through the wiles of fate . 
The charm was soon dispelled , when Albert and the messenger were left alone in the room ; and the Swabian peasant had assured him of his being the same person . 
But Albert could not conceal his astonishment at the part he had acted so well . 
`` I hope you will not think less honourably of me , '' said the countryman ; `` we are often put to our wits to get on in the world : such arts hurt no one , but assist him who knows how to practise them . '' 
Albert assured him of his confidence , when the messenger urgently pressed him to think of his immediate departure ; and not to forget how ardently the lady longed to hear the news of it . 
He added , that he dared not return home , before he could bring her the positive intelligence of his having quitted Ulm . 
Albert said , he would only wait until the army of the League had marched , and then return home . 
`` Oh ! 
then you will not have to remain much longer , '' said the messenger , `` for , if they do not march to-morrow , they will do so the day after , as the heart of the country is open before them . 
I know I can trust you , sir , therefore I tell you this . '' 
`` Is it true then , that the Swiss have deserted the Duke ; and that he will not fight a battle in the field ? '' 
asked Albert . 
The peasant threw a searching look around the room , carefully opened the door , to assure himself that no one was listening in the neighbourhood , and said , `` Sir , I was present at a scene , which I shall never forget , if I live ninety years . 
On my way hither , I met large bodies of Swiss on the Alb , going homewards , recalled by their councils and magistrates . 
But there were still eight thousand men at Blaubeuren , all good Würtembergers , and not a stranger among them . '' 
`` And the Duke , '' Albert interrupted him , `` where was he ? '' 
`` The Duke treated with the Swiss for the last time at Kirchheim ; but they withdrew from him , because he could not pay them . 
He then came to Blaubeuren , where his infantry was encamped . 
Yesterday morning it was made known by beat of drum , that all the people should assemble on the field of the convent by nine o'clock . 
The assembly was numerous ; and but one feeling ran through the whole . 
Look ye , sir , Duke Ulerich is a severe master ; and does not understand the manner of winning over the peasantry . 
Taxes are oppressive -- the injury done to our fields by hunting is ruinous and galling -- and the court squanders what is taken from us ; -- but when such a master , though tyrant he be , is in misfortune , it is quite a different thing . 
The only feeling now among us is , that he is our legitimate Duke ; and , though unfortunate , he is a brave man , whom his enemies would drive from his country . 
A whisper was no sooner circulated that he wished to fight a battle , than each man grasped his sword firmer , shook his spear fiercely , and vociferated loud curses on the League . 
The Duke then came forward -- '' `` Did you see him ? 
do you know him ? '' 
said Albert , with impatient curiosity , `` Oh ! 
tell me , what is his appearance ? '' 
`` Do I know him ? '' 
replied the messenger , with a peculiar smile , `` truly , I saw him at a time when the sight of me was not welcome to him . 
He is still a young man , about two and thirty years old . 
His person is stately and powerful , and it is easy to perceive that he is well skilled in the use of arms . 
His eyes sparkle like fire , '' he added , `` and few there are who can withstand his piercing glance , or penetrate his thoughts . 
The Duke stepped into the circle which the armed multitude had formed , and the stillness of death reigned among them . 
He said , with an audible , firm voice , that , seeing himself deserted by his allies , he knew not where to look for help . 
Betrayed by those upon whose aid he had relied , -- he was become the sport of his enemies , -- for , without the Swiss , he dare not risk a battle . 
An hoary-headed old man then came forward , and said : ` Duke , do you give up all hope before you have tried the strength of our arms ? 
Look , sir , every man of us is ready to bleed for you ; I have brought my four boys , each with his spear and knife , and so have many thousands besides . 
Are you tired of your country , that you disdain our assistance ? ' 
These simple but patriotic words touched the Duke 's heart ; he wiped the tears from his eyes , and gave the old man his hand . ' 
I do n't doubt your courage , ' said he , with a loud voice , ` but we are too few , -- death , not victory , will be our fate . 
Go to your homes , my good faithful people , and there remain true to me . 
I must fly my country , and wander about with bitter misery for my portion ; but , with God 's assistance , I hope soon to return . ' 
So spake the Duke ; our people wept , and , grinding their teeth in anger against his enemies , withdrew in sorrow and despondency . '' 
`` And the Duke , what became of him ? '' 
asked Albert . 
`` He rode away from Blaubeuren , it is not known whither . 
The knights occupy his castles , to defend them , until he can procure succour . '' 
The appearance of old John , the servant , interrupted the messenger , and announced that Albert was ordered to attend the council of war , which was to be held at Fronsberg 's quarters at two o'clock . 
The young man was not a little astonished at this summons . 
What could they want with him at the council of war , of all places ? 
His conscience acquitted him , indeed , of having given rise to any suspicion of his intentions , but he was fearful lest his friend Fronsberg might have proposed his being employed on some service which would compromise his promise to Bertha , and from which it might be difficult for him to excuse himself honourably -- these were the thoughts which flew through his mind . 
`` Take care of yourself , sir , '' said the messenger , as soon as old John had left the room , `` and think of the promise you gave the young lady . 
Above all , do n't forget what she said to you , namely , to be on your guard against a plot . 
Allow me to remain in your house as your servant ; I can look after your horse , and am ready for any other service you may require . '' 
The offer of the faithful man was accepted with thanks by his new master , and Hans entered at once into his service , by assisting him to put on his sword , and arranging his cap properly . 
He again reminded him of his oath , and warned him of the plot , on the threshold of the door , as Albert left his abode . 
Albert proceeded towards the house pointed out to him , meditating upon the incomprehensible summons to the council of war , and the peculiarly striking warning sent to him by Bertha . 
When he arrived there , a broad winding staircase was pointed out to him , at the top of which , in the first room on the right , he would find the military commanders assembled . 
But he was not permitted immediate entrance into this sanctuary , for , just as he was on the point of opening the door , a grey-bearded soldier , asking his business , gave him to understand that he would have to wait at least half an hour before he obtained an audience , and , taking the young man by the hand , led him through a narrow passage into a small room , there to exercise his patience awhile . 
Whoever has danced attendance , under the excitement of anxious expectation , in an anteroom , may well imagine the torment Albert experienced during that hour of solitary meditation . 
His heart beat impatiently to learn the result of his present unexpected position , his mind was on the stretch , and when he heard a distant door creak on its hinges , or footsteps in the passage , or when indistinct voices in an adjoining chamber became plainer , he hoped that rescue was at hand . 
But in vain did the doors creak , the approaching footsteps receded , and the indistinct voices died away into mere whispering sounds . 
He endeavoured to beguile time by counting the boards in the floor , and the windows of the neighbouring houses , when the clear tones of a clock reminded him of having passed a tedious half hour . 
He then paced the confined space of the apartment in nervous agitation , until , his patience being nearly exhausted , he heard a door open again , and heavy footsteps coming towards his room . 
The door opened , and the same old grey-headed soldier entered , and said , `` George von Fronsberg sends you his compliments , and a can of wine for vespers . 
The council may still last some time , but , as it is uncertain how long , you must remain here in the meanwhile . '' 
Saying which , he set the wine on the ledge of the window , for there was no table , and left the apartment . 
Albert followed the old warrior with a look of amazement , for he thought such treatment unpardonable . 
He passed more than an hour in this situation , and still nothing had come to pass . 
He took a draught of wine , which he found was not indifferent , but it was out of the question enjoying his glass in his present painful solitude . 
It is a fault common to young people of Albert 's years to conceive themselves of more importance than their station in the world really warrants . 
An experienced man will bear with patience , or , at least , restrain his displeasure , upon feeling himself slighted , whilst the young man is apt to take fire upon the least hint derogatory to what he imagines a point of honour . 
No wonder , then , that Albert , when he was called to attend the council , after having been kept waiting two long solitary hours , was not in the best of humours . 
The old soldier , at length , having returned , conducted Albert to the council , leading the way through a narrow passage , with a silence and precaution observed in cases of a prisoner 's presence . 
When they came to the door , he turned to Albert , and said , in a friendly way , `` Do not despise the advice of an old man , sir , and put aside that fierce sullen look of yours ; it will be of no service to you in the presence of the stern men in there . '' 
Around a large unwieldly table sat eight elderly men , who formed the council of war of the League . 
Some of them were known to Albert . 
George Truchses , Baron of Waldburg , occupied the upper place at the table ; on each side of him sat Fronsberg and Sickingen . 
He was not acquainted with the rest , excepting old Ludwig von Hutten ; but the chronicle whence this tale is taken has faithfully transmitted their names to us . 
There was Christoph Count of Ortenberg , Alban von Closen , Christoph von Frauenberg , and Diepold von Stein , aged men , and of repute in the army . 
Albert paused at the door as he entered , but Fronsberg beckoned to him in a kind way to approach . 
He went up to the table , and faced the assembly with an open bold look peculiar to him . 
The members also took a survey of him , and appeared pleased with his appearance and manly bearing , for their eyes rested upon him with kindness , whilst some even encouraged him by a friendly nod . 
Truchses von Waldburg at length addressed him . 
`` It has been reported to us that you have been brought up at the high school in Tübingen ; is it so ? '' 
`` Yes , sir knight , '' answered Albert . 
`` Are you well acquainted with the neighbourhood of Tübingen ? '' 
continued the other . 
Albert blushed when this question was put to him . 
He thought of his love , who was now at Lichtenstein , only a few hours -LRB- stunden -RRB- distant from the university . 
But he answered composedly , `` I have not hunted much in that neighbourhood ; neither have I made many excursions there ; but I am generally acquainted with its locality . '' 
`` We have determined , '' said Truchses , `` to send a confidential person into that neighbourhood to find out what may be the Duke 's intentions upon our approach , and to gain correct information upon the state of the fortifications of the castle of Tübingen , together with the feeling of the people of the surrounding country . 
Such a person , by prudence and sagacity , may do more harm to the Duke 's cause than a hundred horsemen : we have selected you for this service . '' 
`` Me ! '' 
cried Albert , in horror . 
`` You , Albert von Sturmfeder : dexterity and experience are no doubt requisite in such undertakings : but you must look to that ; whatever is wanting on your part , in the execution of this piece of service , your head will answer for . '' 
The effect which this order produced on the young man was visibly depicted on his features . 
His face turned pale , his eyes became fixed , his lips firmly pressed together . 
The warning of Bertha flashed across his mind , and struck him with increased force ; but , however favourable this opportunity might be to quit the service of the League , he was too much taken by surprise to be able to decide at that moment . 
Truchses fidgeted about in his chair , showing evident symptoms of impatience at the young man 's hesitation to give an answer : `` Well , '' he cried , `` will it come out soon ? 
what are you thinking about so long ? '' 
`` Spare me this commission , '' said Albert , at length , but not without dread ; `` I can not , I dare not undertake it . '' 
The old men looked at each other in astonishment , as if they did not trust their ears . 
`` You dare not , you can not , '' Truchses repeated slowly , a deep red at the same time mounting up to his eyes , and colouring his forehead , the forerunner of rising anger . 
Albert immediately perceived he had been too hasty in his expression ; he recovered himself , and spoke with more composure : `` I proffered my services to the League for the glory of honourable fight , not to steal into the enemy 's country in the ignominious guise of a spy , to discover by secrecy and treachery what is not to be obtained openly . 
It is true , I am young and inexperienced ; but this much I know , that I am answerable to myself alone for the propriety of my conduct . 
Who among you , as a father , would advise his son to commence his military career in the dishonourable garb of a spy ? '' 
Truchses contracted his dark eyebrows into a frown , and shot a penetrating glance at the young man , who had ventured to entertain an opinion so different to his own . 
`` What are you thinking about , sir ? '' 
he cried , `` your opinion has nothing to do here ; the question is , not whether your conscience will allow you to execute our orders -- it treats of obedience to our commands , which we insist upon , and which you must submit to . '' 
`` And I will not , '' replied the young man , with a resolute voice . 
He felt his courage increase every moment , in proportion as the insulting tone of Waldburg excited his anger . 
He even hoped Truchses might persist in his offensive manner ; for it would strengthen him still more in his resolve , and fully justify his determination to quit their service . 
`` Yes , yes ! '' 
laughed Waldburg , in sarcastic rage , `` to ride about alone in the enemy 's country is certainly a dangerous undertaking . 
Ha , ha ! 
These are your fine-spoken gentlemen , proffering head and arm , with high-sounding words and lofty looks ; but , when it comes to the point , if any service is required of them which is attended with danger , their hearts fail them . 
But one generation resembles the other ; the apple does not fall far from its stem ; and where there is nothing to be gained , the Emperor has lost his rights . '' 
`` If those words be meant as a reflection on my father , '' answered Albert , irritated , `` there are witnesses sitting here , who can vouch that he lives in their memory as a brave man . 
You think to have achieved sufficient renown to warrant your taking the liberty of undervaluing the merits of others . '' 
`` Shall such a downy chin prescribe to me what I shall say ? '' 
interrupted Waldburg . 
`` But an end to this trash . 
I want to know , youngster , whether or not you will saddle your horse to-morrow , and follow our orders ? '' 
`` Truchses von Waldburg , '' answered Albert , with more composure than he thought himself master of , `` your arrogant language only convinces me how little you know the way to address a gentleman , who has tendered his services to the League with honourable motives , and who is the son of a brave father . 
