Well , the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied that young fellow . 
Blamed if he did n't inquire about everybody and everything in that blessed town , and all about the Wilkses ; and about Peter 's business -- which was a tanner ; and about George 's -- which was a carpenter ; and about Harvey 's -- which was a dissentering minister ; and so on , and so on . 
Then he says : `` What did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for ? '' 
`` Because she 's a big Orleans boat , and I was afeard she might n't stop there . 
When they 're deep they wo n't stop for a hail . 
A Cincinnati boat will , but this is a St. Louis one . '' 
`` Was Peter Wilks well off ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , pretty well off . 
He had houses and land , and it 's reckoned he left three or four thousand in cash hid up som ` ers . '' 
`` When did you say he died ? '' 
`` I did n't say , but it was last night . '' 
`` Funeral to-morrow , likely ? '' 
`` Yes , ` bout the middle of the day . '' 
`` Well , it 's all terrible sad ; but we 've all got to go , one time or another . 
So what we want to do is to be prepared ; then we 're all right . '' 
`` Yes , sir , it 's the best way . 
Ma used to always say that . '' 
When we struck the boat she was about done loading , and pretty soon she got off . 
The king never said nothing about going aboard , so I lost my ride , after all . 
When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up another mile to a lonesome place , and then he got ashore and says : `` Now hustle back , right off , and fetch the duke up here , and the new carpet-bags . 
And if he 's gone over to t ` other side , go over there and git him . 
And tell him to git himself up regardless . 
Shove along , now . '' 
I see what HE was up to ; but I never said nothing , of course . 
When I got back with the duke we hid the canoe , and then they set down on a log , and the king told him everything , just like the young fellow had said it -- every last word of it . 
And all the time he was a-doing it he tried to talk like an Englishman ; and he done it pretty well , too , for a slouch . 
I ca n't imitate him , and so I ai n't a-going to try to ; but he really done it pretty good . 
Then he says : `` How are you on the deef and dumb , Bilgewater ? '' 
The duke said , leave him alone for that ; said he had played a deef and dumb person on the histronic boards . 
So then they waited for a steamboat . 
About the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along , but they did n't come from high enough up the river ; but at last there was a big one , and they hailed her . 
She sent out her yawl , and we went aboard , and she was from Cincinnati ; and when they found we only wanted to go four or five mile they was booming mad , and gave us a cussing , and said they would n't land us . 
But the king was ca 'm . 
He says : `` If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and put off in a yawl , a steamboat kin afford to carry 'em , ca n't it ? '' 
So they softened down and said it was all right ; and when we got to the village they yawled us ashore . 
About two dozen men flocked down when they see the yawl a-coming , and when the king says : `` Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher ' Mr. Peter Wilks lives ? '' 
they give a glance at one another , and nodded their heads , as much as to say , `` What d' I tell you ? '' 
Then one of them says , kind of soft and gentle : `` I 'm sorry sir , but the best we can do is to tell you where he DID live yesterday evening . '' 
Sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash , and fell up against the man , and put his chin on his shoulder , and cried down his back , and says : `` Alas , alas , our poor brother -- gone , and we never got to see him ; oh , it 's too , too hard ! '' 
Then he turns around , blubbering , and makes a lot of idiotic signs to the duke on his hands , and blamed if he did n't drop a carpet-bag and bust out a-crying . 
If they war n't the beatenest lot , them two frauds , that ever I struck . 
Well , the men gathered around and sympathized with them , and said all sorts of kind things to them , and carried their carpet-bags up the hill for them , and let them lean on them and cry , and told the king all about his brother 's last moments , and the king he told it all over again on his hands to the duke , and both of them took on about that dead tanner like they 'd lost the twelve disciples . 
Well , if ever I struck anything like it , I 'm a nigger . 
It was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race . 
THE news was all over town in two minutes , and you could see the people tearing down on the run from every which way , some of them putting on their coats as they come . 
Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd , and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march . 
The windows and dooryards was full ; and every minute somebody would say , over a fence : `` Is it THEM ? '' 
And somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say : `` You bet it is . '' 
When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed , and the three girls was standing in the door . 
Mary Jane WAS red-headed , but that do n't make no difference , she was most awful beautiful , and her face and her eyes was all lit up like glory , she was so glad her uncles was come . 
The king he spread his arms , and Marsy Jane she jumped for them , and the hare-lip jumped for the duke , and there they HAD it ! 
Everybody most , leastways women , cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have such good times . 
Then the king he hunched the duke private -- I see him do it -- and then he looked around and see the coffin , over in the corner on two chairs ; so then him and the duke , with a hand across each other 's shoulder , and t ` other hand to their eyes , walked slow and solemn over there , everybody dropping back to give them room , and all the talk and noise stopping , people saying `` Sh ! '' 
and all the men taking their hats off and drooping their heads , so you could a heard a pin fall . 
And when they got there they bent over and looked in the coffin , and took one sight , and then they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to Orleans , most ; and then they put their arms around each other 's necks , and hung their chins over each other 's shoulders ; and then for three minutes , or maybe four , I never see two men leak the way they done . 
And , mind you , everybody was doing the same ; and the place was that damp I never see anything like it . 
Then one of them got on one side of the coffin , and t ` other on t ` other side , and they kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the coffin , and let on to pray all to themselves . 
Well , when it come to that it worked the crowd like you never see anything like it , and everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out loud -- the poor girls , too ; and every woman , nearly , went up to the girls , without saying a word , and kissed them , solemn , on the forehead , and then put their hand on their head , and looked up towards the sky , with the tears running down , and then busted out and went off sobbing and swabbing , and give the next woman a show . 
I never see anything so disgusting . 
Well , by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little , and works himself up and slobbers out a speech , all full of tears and flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to lose the diseased , and to miss seeing diseased alive after the long journey of four thousand mile , but it 's a trial that 's sweetened and sanctified to us by this dear sympathy and these holy tears , and so he thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother 's heart , because out of their mouths they ca n't , words being too weak and cold , and all that kind of rot and slush , till it was just sickening ; and then he blubbers out a pious goody-goody Amen , and turns himself loose and goes to crying fit to bust . 
And the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer , and everybody joined in with all their might , and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting out . 
Music is a good thing ; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash I never see it freshen up things so , and sound so honest and bully . 
Then the king begins to work his jaw again , and says how him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family would take supper here with them this evening , and help set up with the ashes of the diseased ; and says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak he knows who he would name , for they was names that was very dear to him , and mentioned often in his letters ; and so he will name the same , to wit , as follows , vizz. : -- Rev. Mr. Hobson , and Deacon Lot Hovey , and Mr. Ben Rucker , and Abner Shackleford , and Levi Bell , and Dr. Robinson , and their wives , and the widow Bartley . 
Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting together -- that is , I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t ` other world , and the preacher was pinting him right . 
Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville on business . 
But the rest was on hand , and so they all come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him ; and then they shook hands with the duke and did n't say nothing , but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads whilst he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said `` Goo-goo -- goo-goo-goo '' all the time , like a baby that ca n't talk . 
So the king he blattered along , and managed to inquire about pretty much everybody and dog in town , by his name , and mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or another in the town , or to George 's family , or to Peter . 
And he always let on that Peter wrote him the things ; but that was a lie : he got every blessed one of them out of that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat . 
Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind , and the king he read it out loud and cried over it . 
It give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars , gold , to the girls ; and it give the tanyard -LRB- which was doing a good business -RRB- , along with some other houses and land -LRB- worth about seven thousand -RRB- , and three thousand dollars in gold to Harvey and William , and told where the six thousand cash was hid down cellar . 
So these two frauds said they 'd go and fetch it up , and have everything square and above-board ; and told me to come with a candle . 
We shut the cellar door behind us , and when they found the bag they spilt it out on the floor , and it was a lovely sight , all them yaller-boys . 
My , the way the king 's eyes did shine ! 
He slaps the duke on the shoulder and says : `` Oh , THIS ai n't bully nor noth ` n ! 
Oh , no , I reckon not ! 
Why , Biljy , it beats the Nonesuch , DO N'T it ? '' 
The duke allowed it did . 
They pawed the yaller-boys , and sifted them through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor ; and the king says : `` It ai n't no use talkin ' ; bein ' brothers to a rich dead man and representatives of furrin heirs that 's got left is the line for you and me , Bilge . 
Thish yer comes of trust 'n to Providence . 
It 's the best way , in the long run . 
I 've tried 'em all , and ther ' ai n't no better way . '' 
Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile , and took it on trust ; but no , they must count it . 
So they counts it , and it comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short . 
Says the king : `` Dern him , I wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen dollars ? '' 
They worried over that awhile , and ransacked all around for it . 
Then the duke says : `` Well , he was a pretty sick man , and likely he made a mistake -- I reckon that 's the way of it . 
The best way 's to let it go , and keep still about it . 
We can spare it . '' 
`` Oh , shucks , yes , we can SPARE it . 
I do n't k ` yer noth 'n ` bout that -- it 's the COUNT I 'm thinkin ' about . 
We want to be awful square and open and above-board here , you know . 
We want to lug this h-yer money up stairs and count it before everybody -- then ther ' ai n't noth 'n suspicious . 
But when the dead man says ther 's six thous 'n dollars , you know , we do n't want to -- '' `` Hold on , '' says the duke . 
`` Le 's make up the deffisit , '' and he begun to haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket . 
`` It 's a most amaz 'n' good idea , duke -- you HAVE got a rattlin ' clever head on you , '' says the king . 
`` Blest if the old Nonesuch ai n't a heppin ' us out agin , '' and HE begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them up . 
It most busted them , but they made up the six thousand clean and clear . 
`` Say , '' says the duke , `` I got another idea . 
Le 's go up stairs and count this money , and then take and GIVE IT TO THE GIRLS . '' 
`` Good land , duke , lem me hug you ! 
