Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when she was alive , and it did n't seem right that there war n't nobody to make some about her now she was gone ; so I tried to sweat out a verse or two myself , but I could n't seem to make it go somehow . 
They kept Emmeline 's room trim and nice , and all the things fixed in it just the way she liked to have them when she was alive , and nobody ever slept there . 
The old lady took care of the room herself , though there was plenty of niggers , and she sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there mostly . 
Well , as I was saying about the parlor , there was beautiful curtains on the windows : white , with pictures painted on them of castles with vines all down the walls , and cattle coming down to drink . 
There was a little old piano , too , that had tin pans in it , I reckon , and nothing was ever so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing `` The Last Link is Broken '' and play `` The Battle of Prague '' on it . 
The walls of all the rooms was plastered , and most had carpets on the floors , and the whole house was whitewashed on the outside . 
It was a double house , and the big open place betwixt them was roofed and floored , and sometimes the table was set there in the middle of the day , and it was a cool , comfortable place . 
Nothing could n't be better . 
And war n't the cooking good , and just bushels of it too ! 
COL. GRANGERFORD was a gentleman , you see . 
He was a gentleman all over ; and so was his family . 
He was well born , as the saying is , and that 's worth as much in a man as it is in a horse , so the Widow Douglas said , and nobody ever denied that she was of the first aristocracy in our town ; and pap he always said it , too , though he war n't no more quality than a mudcat himself . 
Col. Grangerford was very tall and very slim , and had a darkish-paly complexion , not a sign of red in it anywheres ; he was clean shaved every morning all over his thin face , and he had the thinnest kind of lips , and the thinnest kind of nostrils , and a high nose , and heavy eyebrows , and the blackest kind of eyes , sunk so deep back that they seemed like they was looking out of caverns at you , as you may say . 
His forehead was high , and his hair was black and straight and hung to his shoulders . 
His hands was long and thin , and every day of his life he put on a clean shirt and a full suit from head to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to look at it ; and on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it . 
He carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to it . 
There war n't no frivolishness about him , not a bit , and he war n't ever loud . 
He was as kind as he could be -- you could feel that , you know , and so you had confidence . 
Sometimes he smiled , and it was good to see ; but when he straightened himself up like a liberty-pole , and the lightning begun to flicker out from under his eyebrows , you wanted to climb a tree first , and find out what the matter was afterwards . 
He did n't ever have to tell anybody to mind their manners -- everybody was always good-mannered where he was . 
Everybody loved to have him around , too ; he was sunshine most always -- I mean he made it seem like good weather . 
When he turned into a cloudbank it was awful dark for half a minute , and that was enough ; there would n't nothing go wrong again for a week . 
When him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got up out of their chairs and give them good-day , and did n't set down again till they had set down . 
Then Tom and Bob went to the sideboard where the decanter was , and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him , and he held it in his hand and waited till Tom 's and Bob 's was mixed , and then they bowed and said , `` Our duty to you , sir , and madam ; '' and THEY bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you , and so they drank , all three , and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of water on the sugar and the mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers , and give it to me and Buck , and we drank to the old people too . 
Bob was the oldest and Tom next -- tall , beautiful men with very broad shoulders and brown faces , and long black hair and black eyes . 
They dressed in white linen from head to foot , like the old gentleman , and wore broad Panama hats . 
Then there was Miss Charlotte ; she was twenty-five , and tall and proud and grand , but as good as she could be when she war n't stirred up ; but when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks , like her father . 
She was beautiful . 
So was her sister , Miss Sophia , but it was a different kind . 
She was gentle and sweet like a dove , and she was only twenty . 
Each person had their own nigger to wait on them -- Buck too . 
My nigger had a monstrous easy time , because I war n't used to having anybody do anything for me , but Buck 's was on the jump most of the time . 
This was all there was of the family now , but there used to be more -- three sons ; they got killed ; and Emmeline that died . 
The old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers . 
Sometimes a stack of people would come there , horseback , from ten or fifteen mile around , and stay five or six days , and have such junketings round about and on the river , and dances and picnics in the woods daytimes , and balls at the house nights . 
These people was mostly kinfolks of the family . 
The men brought their guns with them . 
It was a handsome lot of quality , I tell you . 
There was another clan of aristocracy around there -- five or six families -- mostly of the name of Shepherdson . 
They was as high-toned and well born and rich and grand as the tribe of Grangerfords . 
The Shepherdsons and Grangerfords used the same steamboat landing , which was about two mile above our house ; so sometimes when I went up there with a lot of our folks I used to see a lot of the Shepherdsons there on their fine horses . 
One day Buck and me was away out in the woods hunting , and heard a horse coming . 
We was crossing the road . 
Buck says : `` Quick ! 
Jump for the woods ! '' 
We done it , and then peeped down the woods through the leaves . 
Pretty soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road , setting his horse easy and looking like a soldier . 
He had his gun across his pommel . 
I had seen him before . 
It was young Harney Shepherdson . 
I heard Buck 's gun go off at my ear , and Harney 's hat tumbled off from his head . 
He grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was hid . 
But we did n't wait . 
We started through the woods on a run . 
The woods war n't thick , so I looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet , and twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his gun ; and then he rode away the way he come -- to get his hat , I reckon , but I could n't see . 
We never stopped running till we got home . 
The old gentleman 's eyes blazed a minute -- 't was pleasure , mainly , I judged -- then his face sort of smoothed down , and he says , kind of gentle : `` I do n't like that shooting from behind a bush . 
Why did n't you step into the road , my boy ? '' 
`` The Shepherdsons do n't , father . 
They always take advantage . '' 
Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck was telling his tale , and her nostrils spread and her eyes snapped . 
The two young men looked dark , but never said nothing . 
Miss Sophia she turned pale , but the color come back when she found the man war n't hurt . 
Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the trees by ourselves , I says : `` Did you want to kill him , Buck ? '' 
`` Well , I bet I did . '' 
`` What did he do to you ? '' 
`` Him ? 
He never done nothing to me . '' 
`` Well , then , what did you want to kill him for ? '' 
`` Why , nothing -- only it 's on account of the feud . '' 
`` What 's a feud ? '' 
`` Why , where was you raised ? 
Do n't you know what a feud is ? '' 
`` Never heard of it before -- tell me about it . '' 
`` Well , '' says Buck , `` a feud is this way : A man has a quarrel with another man , and kills him ; then that other man 's brother kills HIM ; then the other brothers , on both sides , goes for one another ; then the COUSINS chip in -- and by and by everybody 's killed off , and there ai n't no more feud . 
But it 's kind of slow , and takes a long time . '' 
`` Has this one been going on long , Buck ? '' 
`` Well , I should RECKON ! 
It started thirty year ago , or som ` ers along there . 
There was trouble ` bout something , and then a lawsuit to settle it ; and the suit went agin one of the men , and so he up and shot the man that won the suit -- which he would naturally do , of course . 
Anybody would . '' 
`` What was the trouble about , Buck ? 
-- land ? '' 
`` I reckon maybe -- I do n't know . '' 
`` Well , who done the shooting ? 
Was it a Grangerford or a Shepherdson ? '' 
`` Laws , how do I know ? 
It was so long ago . '' 
`` Do n't anybody know ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , pa knows , I reckon , and some of the other old people ; but they do n't know now what the row was about in the first place . '' 
`` Has there been many killed , Buck ? '' 
`` Yes ; right smart chance of funerals . 
But they do n't always kill . 
Pa 's got a few buckshot in him ; but he do n't mind it ` cuz he do n't weigh much , anyway . 
Bob 's been carved up some with a bowie , and Tom 's been hurt once or twice . '' 
`` Has anybody been killed this year , Buck ? '' 
`` Yes ; we got one and they got one . 
` Bout three months ago my cousin Bud , fourteen year old , was riding through the woods on t ` other side of the river , and did n't have no weapon with him , which was blame ' foolishness , and in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind him , and sees old Baldy Shepherdson a-linkin ' after him with his gun in his hand and his white hair a-flying in the wind ; and ` stead of jumping off and taking to the brush , Bud ` lowed he could out-run him ; so they had it , nip and tuck , for five mile or more , the old man a-gaining all the time ; so at last Bud seen it war n't any use , so he stopped and faced around so as to have the bullet holes in front , you know , and the old man he rode up and shot him down . 
But he did n't git much chance to enjoy his luck , for inside of a week our folks laid HIM out . '' 
`` I reckon that old man was a coward , Buck . '' 
