So Jim went to work and told me the whole thing right through , just as it happened , only he painted it up considerable . 
Then he said he must start in and '' ` terpret '' it , because it was sent for a warning . 
He said the first towhead stood for a man that would try to do us some good , but the current was another man that would get us away from him . 
The whoops was warnings that would come to us every now and then , and if we did n't try hard to make out to understand them they 'd just take us into bad luck , ` stead of keeping us out of it . 
The lot of towheads was troubles we was going to get into with quarrelsome people and all kinds of mean folks , but if we minded our business and did n't talk back and aggravate them , we would pull through and get out of the fog and into the big clear river , which was the free States , and would n't have no more trouble . 
It had clouded up pretty dark just after I got on to the raft , but it was clearing up again now . 
`` Oh , well , that 's all interpreted well enough as far as it goes , Jim , '' I says ; `` but what does THESE things stand for ? '' 
It was the leaves and rubbish on the raft and the smashed oar . 
You could see them first-rate now . 
Jim looked at the trash , and then looked at me , and back at the trash again . 
He had got the dream fixed so strong in his head that he could n't seem to shake it loose and get the facts back into its place again right away . 
But when he did get the thing straightened around he looked at me steady without ever smiling , and says : `` What do dey stan ' for ? 
I ` se gwyne to tell you . 
When I got all wore out wid work , en wid de callin ' for you , en went to sleep , my heart wuz mos ' broke bekase you wuz los ' , en I didn ' k ` yer no ' mo ' what become er me en de raf ' . 
En when I wake up en fine you back agin , all safe en soun ' , de tears come , en I could a got down on my knees en kiss yo ' foot , I 's so thankful . 
En all you wuz thinkin ' ` bout wuz how you could make a fool uv ole Jim wid a lie . 
Dat truck dah is TRASH ; en trash is what people is dat puts dirt on de head er dey fren 's en makes 'em ashamed . '' 
Then he got up slow and walked to the wigwam , and went in there without saying anything but that . 
But that was enough . 
It made me feel so mean I could almost kissed HIS foot to get him to take it back . 
It was fifteen minutes before I could work myself up to go and humble myself to a nigger ; but I done it , and I war n't ever sorry for it afterwards , neither . 
I did n't do him no more mean tricks , and I would n't done that one if I 'd a knowed it would make him feel that way . 
WE slept most all day , and started out at night , a little ways behind a monstrous long raft that was as long going by as a procession . 
She had four long sweeps at each end , so we judged she carried as many as thirty men , likely . 
She had five big wigwams aboard , wide apart , and an open camp fire in the middle , and a tall flag-pole at each end . 
There was a power of style about her . 
It AMOUNTED to something being a raftsman on such a craft as that . 
We went drifting down into a big bend , and the night clouded up and got hot . 
The river was very wide , and was walled with solid timber on both sides ; you could n't see a break in it hardly ever , or a light . 
We talked about Cairo , and wondered whether we would know it when we got to it . 
I said likely we would n't , because I had heard say there war n't but about a dozen houses there , and if they did n't happen to have them lit up , how was we going to know we was passing a town ? 
Jim said if the two big rivers joined together there , that would show . 
But I said maybe we might think we was passing the foot of an island and coming into the same old river again . 
That disturbed Jim -- and me too . 
So the question was , what to do ? 
I said , paddle ashore the first time a light showed , and tell them pap was behind , coming along with a trading-scow , and was a green hand at the business , and wanted to know how far it was to Cairo . 
Jim thought it was a good idea , so we took a smoke on it and waited . 
There war n't nothing to do now but to look out sharp for the town , and not pass it without seeing it . 
He said he 'd be mighty sure to see it , because he 'd be a free man the minute he seen it , but if he missed it he 'd be in a slave country again and no more show for freedom . 
Every little while he jumps up and says : `` Dah she is ? '' 
But it war n't . 
It was Jack-o ' - lanterns , or lightning bugs ; so he set down again , and went to watching , same as before . 
Jim said it made him all over trembly and feverish to be so close to freedom . 
Well , I can tell you it made me all over trembly and feverish , too , to hear him , because I begun to get it through my head that he WAS most free -- and who was to blame for it ? 
Why , ME . 
I could n't get that out of my conscience , no how nor no way . 
It got to troubling me so I could n't rest ; I could n't stay still in one place . 
It had n't ever come home to me before , what this thing was that I was doing . 
But now it did ; and it stayed with me , and scorched me more and more . 
I tried to make out to myself that I war n't to blame , because I did n't run Jim off from his rightful owner ; but it war n't no use , conscience up and says , every time , `` But you knowed he was running for his freedom , and you could a paddled ashore and told somebody . '' 
That was so -- I could n't get around that noway . 
That was where it pinched . 
Conscience says to me , `` What had poor Miss Watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and never say one single word ? 
What did that poor old woman do to you that you could treat her so mean ? 
Why , she tried to learn you your book , she tried to learn you your manners , she tried to be good to you every way she knowed how . 
THAT 'S what she done . '' 
I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I was dead . 
I fidgeted up and down the raft , abusing myself to myself , and Jim was fidgeting up and down past me . 
We neither of us could keep still . 
Every time he danced around and says , `` Dah 's Cairo ! '' 
it went through me like a shot , and I thought if it WAS Cairo I reckoned I would die of miserableness . 
Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to myself . 
He was saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent , and when he got enough he would buy his wife , which was owned on a farm close to where Miss Watson lived ; and then they would both work to buy the two children , and if their master would n't sell them , they 'd get an Ab ` litionist to go and steal them . 
It most froze me to hear such talk . 
He would n't ever dared to talk such talk in his life before . 
Just see what a difference it made in him the minute he judged he was about free . 
It was according to the old saying , `` Give a nigger an inch and he 'll take an ell . '' 
Thinks I , this is what comes of my not thinking . 
Here was this nigger , which I had as good as helped to run away , coming right out flat-footed and saying he would steal his children -- children that belonged to a man I did n't even know ; a man that had n't ever done me no harm . 
I was sorry to hear Jim say that , it was such a lowering of him . 
My conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever , until at last I says to it , `` Let up on me -- it ai n't too late yet -- I 'll paddle ashore at the first light and tell . '' 
I felt easy and happy and light as a feather right off . 
All my troubles was gone . 
I went to looking out sharp for a light , and sort of singing to myself . 
By and by one showed . 
Jim sings out : `` We 's safe , Huck , we 's safe ! 
Jump up and crack yo ' heels ! 
Dat 's de good ole Cairo at las ' , I jis knows it ! '' 
I says : `` I 'll take the canoe and go and see , Jim . 
It might n't be , you know . '' 
He jumped and got the canoe ready , and put his old coat in the bottom for me to set on , and give me the paddle ; and as I shoved off , he says : `` Pooty soon I 'll be a-shout 'n' for joy , en I 'll say , it 's all on accounts o ' Huck ; I 's a free man , en I could n't ever ben free ef it hadn ' ben for Huck ; Huck done it . 
Jim wo n't ever forgit you , Huck ; you 's de bes ' fren ' Jim 's ever had ; en you 's de ONLY fren ' ole Jim 's got now . '' 
I was paddling off , all in a sweat to tell on him ; but when he says this , it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me . 
I went along slow then , and I war n't right down certain whether I was glad I started or whether I war n't . 
When I was fifty yards off , Jim says : `` Dah you goes , de ole true Huck ; de on ' y white genlman dat ever kep ' his promise to ole Jim . '' 
Well , I just felt sick . 
But I says , I GOT to do it -- I ca n't get OUT of it . 
Right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns , and they stopped and I stopped . 
One of them says : `` What 's that yonder ? '' 
`` A piece of a raft , '' I says . 
`` Do you belong on it ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` Any men on it ? '' 
`` Only one , sir . '' 
`` Well , there 's five niggers run off to-night up yonder , above the head of the bend . 
Is your man white or black ? '' 
I did n't answer up prompt . 
I tried to , but the words would n't come . 
I tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it , but I war n't man enough -- had n't the spunk of a rabbit . 
I see I was weakening ; so I just give up trying , and up and says : `` He 's white . '' 
