Who nailed him ? '' 
`` It was an old fellow -- a stranger -- and he sold out his chance in him for forty dollars , becuz he 's got to go up the river and ca n't wait . 
Think o ' that , now ! 
You bet I 'D wait , if it was seven year . '' 
`` That 's me , every time , '' says I. `` But maybe his chance ai n't worth no more than that , if he 'll sell it so cheap . 
Maybe there 's something ai n't straight about it . '' 
`` But it IS , though -- straight as a string . 
I see the handbill myself . 
It tells all about him , to a dot -- paints him like a picture , and tells the plantation he 's frum , below NewrLEANS . 
No-sirree-BOB , they ai n't no trouble ` bout THAT speculation , you bet you . 
Say , gim me a chaw tobacker , wo n't ye ? '' 
I did n't have none , so he left . 
I went to the raft , and set down in the wigwam to think . 
But I could n't come to nothing . 
I thought till I wore my head sore , but I could n't see no way out of the trouble . 
After all this long journey , and after all we 'd done for them scoundrels , here it was all come to nothing , everything all busted up and ruined , because they could have the heart to serve Jim such a trick as that , and make him a slave again all his life , and amongst strangers , too , for forty dirty dollars . 
Once I said to myself it would be a thousand times better for Jim to be a slave at home where his family was , as long as he 'd GOT to be a slave , and so I 'd better write a letter to Tom Sawyer and tell him to tell Miss Watson where he was . 
But I soon give up that notion for two things : she 'd be mad and disgusted at his rascality and ungratefulness for leaving her , and so she 'd sell him straight down the river again ; and if she did n't , everybody naturally despises an ungrateful nigger , and they 'd make Jim feel it all the time , and so he 'd feel ornery and disgraced . 
And then think of ME ! 
It would get all around that Huck Finn helped a nigger to get his freedom ; and if I was ever to see anybody from that town again I 'd be ready to get down and lick his boots for shame . 
That 's just the way : a person does a low-down thing , and then he do n't want to take no consequences of it . 
Thinks as long as he can hide , it ai n't no disgrace . 
That was my fix exactly . 
The more I studied about this the more my conscience went to grinding me , and the more wicked and low-down and ornery I got to feeling . 
And at last , when it hit me all of a sudden that here was the plain hand of Providence slapping me in the face and letting me know my wickedness was being watched all the time from up there in heaven , whilst I was stealing a poor old woman 's nigger that had n't ever done me no harm , and now was showing me there 's One that 's always on the lookout , and ai n't a-going to allow no such miserable doings to go only just so fur and no further , I most dropped in my tracks I was so scared . 
Well , I tried the best I could to kinder soften it up somehow for myself by saying I was brung up wicked , and so I war n't so much to blame ; but something inside of me kept saying , `` There was the Sunday-school , you could a gone to it ; and if you 'd a done it they 'd a learnt you there that people that acts as I 'd been acting about that nigger goes to everlasting fire . '' 
It made me shiver . 
And I about made up my mind to pray , and see if I could n't try to quit being the kind of a boy I was and be better . 
So I kneeled down . 
But the words would n't come . 
Why would n't they ? 
It war n't no use to try and hide it from Him . 
Nor from ME , neither . 
I knowed very well why they would n't come . 
It was because my heart war n't right ; it was because I war n't square ; it was because I was playing double . 
I was letting ON to give up sin , but away inside of me I was holding on to the biggest one of all . 
I was trying to make my mouth SAY I would do the right thing and the clean thing , and go and write to that nigger 's owner and tell where he was ; but deep down in me I knowed it was a lie , and He knowed it . 
You ca n't pray a lie -- I found that out . 
So I was full of trouble , full as I could be ; and did n't know what to do . 
At last I had an idea ; and I says , I 'll go and write the letter -- and then see if I can pray . 
Why , it was astonishing , the way I felt as light as a feather right straight off , and my troubles all gone . 
So I got a piece of paper and a pencil , all glad and excited , and set down and wrote : Miss Watson , your runaway nigger Jim is down here two mile below Pikesville , and Mr. Phelps has got him and he will give him up for the reward if you send . 
HUCK FINN . 
I felt good and all washed clean of sin for the first time I had ever felt so in my life , and I knowed I could pray now . 
But I did n't do it straight off , but laid the paper down and set there thinking -- thinking how good it was all this happened so , and how near I come to being lost and going to hell . 
And went on thinking . 
And got to thinking over our trip down the river ; and I see Jim before me all the time : in the day and in the night-time , sometimes moonlight , sometimes storms , and we a - floating along , talking and singing and laughing . 
But somehow I could n't seem to strike no places to harden me against him , but only the other kind . 
I 'd see him standing my watch on top of his ` n , ` stead of calling me , so I could go on sleeping ; and see him how glad he was when I come back out of the fog ; and when I come to him again in the swamp , up there where the feud was ; and such-like times ; and would always call me honey , and pet me and do everything he could think of for me , and how good he always was ; and at last I struck the time I saved him by telling the men we had small-pox aboard , and he was so grateful , and said I was the best friend old Jim ever had in the world , and the ONLY one he 's got now ; and then I happened to look around and see that paper . 
It was a close place . 
I took it up , and held it in my hand . 
I was a - trembling , because I 'd got to decide , forever , betwixt two things , and I knowed it . 
I studied a minute , sort of holding my breath , and then says to myself : `` All right , then , I 'll GO to hell '' -- and tore it up . 
It was awful thoughts and awful words , but they was said . 
And I let them stay said ; and never thought no more about reforming . 
I shoved the whole thing out of my head , and said I would take up wickedness again , which was in my line , being brung up to it , and the other war n't . 
And for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again ; and if I could think up anything worse , I would do that , too ; because as long as I was in , and in for good , I might as well go the whole hog . 
Then I set to thinking over how to get at it , and turned over some considerable many ways in my mind ; and at last fixed up a plan that suited me . 
So then I took the bearings of a woody island that was down the river a piece , and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with my raft and went for it , and hid it there , and then turned in . 
I slept the night through , and got up before it was light , and had my breakfast , and put on my store clothes , and tied up some others and one thing or another in a bundle , and took the canoe and cleared for shore . 
I landed below where I judged was Phelps 's place , and hid my bundle in the woods , and then filled up the canoe with water , and loaded rocks into her and sunk her where I could find her again when I wanted her , about a quarter of a mile below a little steam sawmill that was on the bank . 
Then I struck up the road , and when I passed the mill I see a sign on it , `` Phelps 's Sawmill , '' and when I come to the farm-houses , two or three hundred yards further along , I kept my eyes peeled , but did n't see nobody around , though it was good daylight now . 
But I did n't mind , because I did n't want to see nobody just yet -- I only wanted to get the lay of the land . 
According to my plan , I was going to turn up there from the village , not from below . 
So I just took a look , and shoved along , straight for town . 
Well , the very first man I see when I got there was the duke . 
He was sticking up a bill for the Royal Nonesuch -- three-night performance -- like that other time . 
They had the cheek , them frauds ! 
I was right on him before I could shirk . 
He looked astonished , and says : `` Hel-LO ! 
Where 'd YOU come from ? '' 
Then he says , kind of glad and eager , `` Where 's the raft ? 
-- got her in a good place ? '' 
I says : `` Why , that 's just what I was going to ask your grace . '' 
Then he did n't look so joyful , and says : `` What was your idea for asking ME ? '' 
he says . 
`` Well , '' I says , `` when I see the king in that doggery yesterday I says to myself , we ca n't get him home for hours , till he 's soberer ; so I went a - loafing around town to put in the time and wait . 
A man up and offered me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch a sheep , and so I went along ; but when we was dragging him to the boat , and the man left me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him along , he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run , and we after him . 
We did n't have no dog , and so we had to chase him all over the country till we tired him out . 
We never got him till dark ; then we fetched him over , and I started down for the raft . 
When I got there and see it was gone , I says to myself , ` They 've got into trouble and had to leave ; and they 've took my nigger , which is the only nigger I 've got in the world , and now I 'm in a strange country , and ai n't got no property no more , nor nothing , and no way to make my living ; ' so I set down and cried . 
I slept in the woods all night . 
But what DID become of the raft , then ? 
-- and Jim -- poor Jim ! '' 
`` Blamed if I know -- that is , what 's become of the raft . 
That old fool had made a trade and got forty dollars , and when we found him in the doggery the loafers had matched half-dollars with him and got every cent but what he 'd spent for whisky ; and when I got him home late last night and found the raft gone , we said , ` That little rascal has stole our raft and shook us , and run off down the river . ' '' 
`` I would n't shake my NIGGER , would I ? 
-- the only nigger I had in the world , and the only property . '' 
`` We never thought of that . 
Fact is , I reckon we 'd come to consider him OUR nigger ; yes , we did consider him so -- goodness knows we had trouble enough for him . 
So when we see the raft was gone and we flat broke , there war n't anything for it but to try the Royal Nonesuch another shake . 
And I 've pegged along ever since , dry as a powder-horn . 
Where 's that ten cents ? 
Give it here . '' 
I had considerable money , so I give him ten cents , but begged him to spend it for something to eat , and give me some , because it was all the money I had , and I had n't had nothing to eat since yesterday . 
He never said nothing . 
The next minute he whirls on me and says : `` Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us ? 
We 'd skin him if he done that ! '' 
`` How can he blow ? 
Hai n't he run off ? '' 
