When I got to where I found the boy I see I could n't cut the bullet out without some help , and he war n't in no condition for me to leave to go and get help ; and he got a little worse and a little worse , and after a long time he went out of his head , and would n't let me come a-nigh him any more , and said if I chalked his raft he 'd kill me , and no end of wild foolishness like that , and I see I could n't do anything at all with him ; so I says , I got to have HELP somehow ; and the minute I says it out crawls this nigger from somewheres and says he 'll help , and he done it , too , and done it very well . 
Of course I judged he must be a runaway nigger , and there I WAS ! 
and there I had to stick right straight along all the rest of the day and all night . 
It was a fix , I tell you ! 
I had a couple of patients with the chills , and of course I 'd of liked to run up to town and see them , but I das n't , because the nigger might get away , and then I 'd be to blame ; and yet never a skiff come close enough for me to hail . 
So there I had to stick plumb until daylight this morning ; and I never see a nigger that was a better nuss or faithfuller , and yet he was risking his freedom to do it , and was all tired out , too , and I see plain enough he 'd been worked main hard lately . 
I liked the nigger for that ; I tell you , gentlemen , a nigger like that is worth a thousand dollars -- and kind treatment , too . 
I had everything I needed , and the boy was doing as well there as he would a done at home -- better , maybe , because it was so quiet ; but there I WAS , with both of 'm on my hands , and there I had to stick till about dawn this morning ; then some men in a skiff come by , and as good luck would have it the nigger was setting by the pallet with his head propped on his knees sound asleep ; so I motioned them in quiet , and they slipped up on him and grabbed him and tied him before he knowed what he was about , and we never had no trouble . 
And the boy being in a kind of a flighty sleep , too , we muffled the oars and hitched the raft on , and towed her over very nice and quiet , and the nigger never made the least row nor said a word from the start . 
He ai n't no bad nigger , gentlemen ; that 's what I think about him . '' 
Somebody says : `` Well , it sounds very good , doctor , I 'm obleeged to say . '' 
Then the others softened up a little , too , and I was mighty thankful to that old doctor for doing Jim that good turn ; and I was glad it was according to my judgment of him , too ; because I thought he had a good heart in him and was a good man the first time I see him . 
Then they all agreed that Jim had acted very well , and was deserving to have some notice took of it , and reward . 
So every one of them promised , right out and hearty , that they would n't cuss him no more . 
Then they come out and locked him up . 
I hoped they was going to say he could have one or two of the chains took off , because they was rotten heavy , or could have meat and greens with his bread and water ; but they did n't think of it , and I reckoned it war n't best for me to mix in , but I judged I 'd get the doctor 's yarn to Aunt Sally somehow or other as soon as I 'd got through the breakers that was laying just ahead of me -- explanations , I mean , of how I forgot to mention about Sid being shot when I was telling how him and me put in that dratted night paddling around hunting the runaway nigger . 
But I had plenty time . 
Aunt Sally she stuck to the sick-room all day and all night , and every time I see Uncle Silas mooning around I dodged him . 
Next morning I heard Tom was a good deal better , and they said Aunt Sally was gone to get a nap . 
So I slips to the sick-room , and if I found him awake I reckoned we could put up a yarn for the family that would wash . 
But he was sleeping , and sleeping very peaceful , too ; and pale , not fire - faced the way he was when he come . 
So I set down and laid for him to wake . 
In about half an hour Aunt Sally comes gliding in , and there I was , up a stump again ! 
She motioned me to be still , and set down by me , and begun to whisper , and said we could all be joyful now , because all the symptoms was first-rate , and he 'd been sleeping like that for ever so long , and looking better and peacefuller all the time , and ten to one he 'd wake up in his right mind . 
So we set there watching , and by and by he stirs a bit , and opened his eyes very natural , and takes a look , and says : `` Hello ! 
-- why , I 'm at HOME ! 
How 's that ? 
Where 's the raft ? '' 
`` It 's all right , '' I says . 
`` And JIM ? '' 
`` The same , '' I says , but could n't say it pretty brash . 
But he never noticed , but says : `` Good ! 
Splendid ! 
NOW we 're all right and safe ! 
Did you tell Aunty ? '' 
I was going to say yes ; but she chipped in and says : `` About what , Sid ? '' 
`` Why , about the way the whole thing was done . '' 
`` What whole thing ? '' 
`` Why , THE whole thing . 
There ai n't but one ; how we set the runaway nigger free -- me and Tom . '' 
`` Good land ! 
Set the run -- What IS the child talking about ! 
Dear , dear , out of his head again ! '' 
`` NO , I ai n't out of my HEAD ; I know all what I 'm talking about . 
We DID set him free -- me and Tom . 
We laid out to do it , and we DONE it . 
And we done it elegant , too . '' 
He 'd got a start , and she never checked him up , just set and stared and stared , and let him clip along , and I see it war n't no use for ME to put in . 
`` Why , Aunty , it cost us a power of work -- weeks of it -- hours and hours , every night , whilst you was all asleep . 
And we had to steal candles , and the sheet , and the shirt , and your dress , and spoons , and tin plates , and case-knives , and the warming-pan , and the grindstone , and flour , and just no end of things , and you ca n't think what work it was to make the saws , and pens , and inscriptions , and one thing or another , and you ca n't think HALF the fun it was . 
And we had to make up the pictures of coffins and things , and nonnamous letters from the robbers , and get up and down the lightning-rod , and dig the hole into the cabin , and made the rope ladder and send it in cooked up in a pie , and send in spoons and things to work with in your apron pocket -- '' `` Mercy sakes ! '' '' 
-- and load up the cabin with rats and snakes and so on , for company for Jim ; and then you kept Tom here so long with the butter in his hat that you come near spiling the whole business , because the men come before we was out of the cabin , and we had to rush , and they heard us and let drive at us , and I got my share , and we dodged out of the path and let them go by , and when the dogs come they war n't interested in us , but went for the most noise , and we got our canoe , and made for the raft , and was all safe , and Jim was a free man , and we done it all by ourselves , and WAS N'T it bully , Aunty ! '' 
`` Well , I never heard the likes of it in all my born days ! 
So it was YOU , you little rapscallions , that 's been making all this trouble , and turned everybody 's wits clean inside out and scared us all most to death . 
I 've as good a notion as ever I had in my life to take it out o ' you this very minute . 
To think , here I 've been , night after night , a -- YOU just get well once , you young scamp , and I lay I 'll tan the Old Harry out o ' both o ' ye ! '' 
But Tom , he WAS so proud and joyful , he just COULD N'T hold in , and his tongue just WENT it -- she a-chipping in , and spitting fire all along , and both of them going it at once , like a cat convention ; and she says : `` WELL , you get all the enjoyment you can out of it NOW , for mind I tell you if I catch you meddling with him again -- '' `` Meddling with WHO ? '' 
Tom says , dropping his smile and looking surprised . 
`` With WHO ? 
Why , the runaway nigger , of course . 
Who 'd you reckon ? '' 
Tom looks at me very grave , and says : `` Tom , did n't you just tell me he was all right ? 
Has n't he got away ? '' 
`` HIM ? '' 
says Aunt Sally ; `` the runaway nigger ? 
` Deed he has n't . 
They 've got him back , safe and sound , and he 's in that cabin again , on bread and water , and loaded down with chains , till he 's claimed or sold ! '' 
Tom rose square up in bed , with his eye hot , and his nostrils opening and shutting like gills , and sings out to me : `` They hai n't no RIGHT to shut him up ! 
SHOVE ! 
-- and do n't you lose a minute . 
Turn him loose ! 
he ai n't no slave ; he 's as free as any cretur that walks this earth ! '' 
`` What DOES the child mean ? '' 
`` I mean every word I SAY , Aunt Sally , and if somebody do n't go , I 'LL go . 
I 've knowed him all his life , and so has Tom , there . 
Old Miss Watson died two months ago , and she was ashamed she ever was going to sell him down the river , and SAID so ; and she set him free in her will . '' 
`` Then what on earth did YOU want to set him free for , seeing he was already free ? '' 
`` Well , that IS a question , I must say ; and just like women ! 
Why , I wanted the ADVENTURE of it ; and I 'd a waded neck-deep in blood to -- goodness alive , AUNT POLLY ! '' 
If she war n't standing right there , just inside the door , looking as sweet and contented as an angel half full of pie , I wish I may never ! 
Aunt Sally jumped for her , and most hugged the head off of her , and cried over her , and I found a good enough place for me under the bed , for it was getting pretty sultry for us , seemed to me . 
And I peeped out , and in a little while Tom 's Aunt Polly shook herself loose and stood there looking across at Tom over her spectacles -- kind of grinding him into the earth , you know . 
And then she says : `` Yes , you BETTER turn y' r head away -- I would if I was you , Tom . '' 
`` Oh , deary me ! '' 
says Aunt Sally ; `` IS he changed so ? 
Why , that ai n't TOM , it 's Sid ; Tom 's -- Tom 's -- why , where is Tom ? 
He was here a minute ago . '' 
`` You mean where 's Huck FINN -- that 's what you mean ! 
I reckon I hai n't raised such a scamp as my Tom all these years not to know him when I SEE him . 
That WOULD be a pretty howdy-do . 
Come out from under that bed , Huck Finn . '' 
So I done it . 
But not feeling brash . 
Aunt Sally she was one of the mixed-upest-looking persons I ever see -- except one , and that was Uncle Silas , when he come in and they told it all to him . 
It kind of made him drunk , as you may say , and he did n't know nothing at all the rest of the day , and preached a prayer-meeting sermon that night that gave him a rattling ruputation , because the oldest man in the world could n't a understood it . 
So Tom 's Aunt Polly , she told all about who I was , and what ; and I had to up and tell how I was in such a tight place that when Mrs. Phelps took me for Tom Sawyer -- she chipped in and says , `` Oh , go on and call me Aunt Sally , I 'm used to it now , and ` tai n't no need to change '' -- that when Aunt Sally took me for Tom Sawyer I had to stand it -- there war n't no other way , and I knowed he would n't mind , because it would be nuts for him , being a mystery , and he 'd make an adventure out of it , and be perfectly satisfied . 
And so it turned out , and he let on to be Sid , and made things as soft as he could for me . 
And his Aunt Polly she said Tom was right about old Miss Watson setting Jim free in her will ; and so , sure enough , Tom Sawyer had gone and took all that trouble and bother to set a free nigger free ! 
and I could n't ever understand before , until that minute and that talk , how he COULD help a body set a nigger free with his bringing-up . 
Well , Aunt Polly she said that when Aunt Sally wrote to her that Tom and SID had come all right and safe , she says to herself : `` Look at that , now ! 
