Any book will tell you that . 
You try -- that 's all I ask ; just try for two or three days . 
Why , you can get him so in a little while that he 'll love you ; and sleep with you ; and wo n't stay away from you a minute ; and will let you wrap him round your neck and put his head in your mouth . '' 
`` PLEASE , Mars Tom -- DOAN ' talk so ! 
I ca n't STAN ' it ! 
He 'd LET me shove his head in my mouf -- fer a favor , hai n't it ? 
I lay he 'd wait a pow ` ful long time ` fo ' I AST him . 
En mo ' en dat , I doan ' WANT him to sleep wid me . '' 
`` Jim , do n't act so foolish . 
A prisoner 's GOT to have some kind of a dumb pet , and if a rattlesnake hai n't ever been tried , why , there 's more glory to be gained in your being the first to ever try it than any other way you could ever think of to save your life . '' 
`` Why , Mars Tom , I doan ' WANT no sich glory . 
Snake take 'n bite Jim 's chin off , den WHAH is de glory ? 
No , sah , I doan ' want no sich doin 's . '' 
`` Blame it , ca n't you TRY ? 
I only WANT you to try -- you need n't keep it up if it do n't work . '' 
`` But de trouble all DONE ef de snake bite me while I 's a tryin ' him . 
Mars Tom , I 's willin ' to tackle mos ' anything ` at ai n't onreasonable , but ef you en Huck fetches a rattlesnake in heah for me to tame , I 's gwyne to LEAVE , dat 's SHORE . '' 
`` Well , then , let it go , let it go , if you 're so bull-headed about it . 
We can get you some garter-snakes , and you can tie some buttons on their tails , and let on they 're rattlesnakes , and I reckon that 'll have to do . '' 
`` I k 'n stan ' DEM , Mars Tom , but blame ' ' f I couldn ' get along widout um , I tell you dat . 
I never knowed b ` fo ' ' t was so much bother and trouble to be a prisoner . '' 
`` Well , it ALWAYS is when it 's done right . 
You got any rats around here ? '' 
`` No , sah , I hai n't seed none . '' 
`` Well , we 'll get you some rats . '' 
`` Why , Mars Tom , I doan ' WANT no rats . 
Dey 's de dadblamedest creturs to ` sturb a body , en rustle roun ' over ` im , en bite his feet , when he 's tryin ' to sleep , I ever see . 
No , sah , gim me g ` yarter-snakes , ' f I 's got to have 'm , but doan ' gim me no rats ; I hain ' got no use f ' r um , skasely . '' 
`` But , Jim , you GOT to have 'em -- they all do . 
So do n't make no more fuss about it . 
Prisoners ai n't ever without rats . 
There ai n't no instance of it . 
And they train them , and pet them , and learn them tricks , and they get to be as sociable as flies . 
But you got to play music to them . 
You got anything to play music on ? '' 
`` I ain ' got nuffn but a coase comb en a piece o ' paper , en a juice-harp ; but I reck 'n dey wouldn ' take no stock in a juice-harp . '' 
`` Yes they would . 
THEY do n't care what kind of music 't is . 
A jews-harp 's plenty good enough for a rat . 
All animals like music -- in a prison they dote on it . 
Specially , painful music ; and you ca n't get no other kind out of a jews-harp . 
It always interests them ; they come out to see what 's the matter with you . 
Yes , you 're all right ; you 're fixed very well . 
You want to set on your bed nights before you go to sleep , and early in the mornings , and play your jews-harp ; play ` The Last Link is Broken ' -- that 's the thing that 'll scoop a rat quicker 'n anything else ; and when you 've played about two minutes you 'll see all the rats , and the snakes , and spiders , and things begin to feel worried about you , and come . 
And they 'll just fairly swarm over you , and have a noble good time . '' 
`` Yes , DEY will , I reck ` n , Mars Tom , but what kine er time is JIM havin ' ? 
Blest if I kin see de pint . 
But I 'll do it ef I got to . 
I reck 'n I better keep de animals satisfied , en not have no trouble in de house . '' 
Tom waited to think it over , and see if there was n't nothing else ; and pretty soon he says : `` Oh , there 's one thing I forgot . 
Could you raise a flower here , do you reckon ? '' 
`` I doan know but maybe I could , Mars Tom ; but it 's tolable dark in heah , en I ain ' got no use f ' r no flower , nohow , en she 'd be a pow ` ful sight o ' trouble . '' 
`` Well , you try it , anyway . 
Some other prisoners has done it . '' 
`` One er dem big cat-tail-lookin ' mullen-stalks would grow in heah , Mars Tom , I reck ` n , but she would n't be wuth half de trouble she 'd coss . '' 
`` Do n't you believe it . 
We 'll fetch you a little one and you plant it in the corner over there , and raise it . 
And do n't call it mullen , call it Pitchiola -- that 's its right name when it 's in a prison . 
And you want to water it with your tears . '' 
`` Why , I got plenty spring water , Mars Tom . '' 
`` You do n't WANT spring water ; you want to water it with your tears . 
It 's the way they always do . '' 
`` Why , Mars Tom , I lay I kin raise one er dem mullen-stalks twyste wid spring water whiles another man 's a START 'N one wid tears . '' 
`` That ai n't the idea . 
You GOT to do it with tears . '' 
`` She 'll die on my han 's , Mars Tom , she sholy will ; kase I doan ' skasely ever cry . '' 
So Tom was stumped . 
But he studied it over , and then said Jim would have to worry along the best he could with an onion . 
He promised he would go to the nigger cabins and drop one , private , in Jim 's coffee-pot , in the morning . 
Jim said he would `` jis ' 's soon have tobacker in his coffee ; '' and found so much fault with it , and with the work and bother of raising the mullen , and jews-harping the rats , and petting and flattering up the snakes and spiders and things , on top of all the other work he had to do on pens , and inscriptions , and journals , and things , which made it more trouble and worry and responsibility to be a prisoner than anything he ever undertook , that Tom most lost all patience with him ; and said he was just loadened down with more gaudier chances than a prisoner ever had in the world to make a name for himself , and yet he did n't know enough to appreciate them , and they was just about wasted on him . 
So Jim he was sorry , and said he would n't behave so no more , and then me and Tom shoved for bed . 
IN the morning we went up to the village and bought a wire rat-trap and fetched it down , and unstopped the best rat-hole , and in about an hour we had fifteen of the bulliest kind of ones ; and then we took it and put it in a safe place under Aunt Sally 's bed . 
But while we was gone for spiders little Thomas Franklin Benjamin Jefferson Elexander Phelps found it there , and opened the door of it to see if the rats would come out , and they did ; and Aunt Sally she come in , and when we got back she was a - standing on top of the bed raising Cain , and the rats was doing what they could to keep off the dull times for her . 
So she took and dusted us both with the hickry , and we was as much as two hours catching another fifteen or sixteen , drat that meddlesome cub , and they war n't the likeliest , nuther , because the first haul was the pick of the flock . 
I never see a likelier lot of rats than what that first haul was . 
We got a splendid stock of sorted spiders , and bugs , and frogs , and caterpillars , and one thing or another ; and we like to got a hornet 's nest , but we did n't . 
The family was at home . 
We did n't give it right up , but stayed with them as long as we could ; because we allowed we 'd tire them out or they 'd got to tire us out , and they done it . 
Then we got allycumpain and rubbed on the places , and was pretty near all right again , but could n't set down convenient . 
And so we went for the snakes , and grabbed a couple of dozen garters and house-snakes , and put them in a bag , and put it in our room , and by that time it was supper-time , and a rattling good honest day 's work : and hungry ? 
-- oh , no , I reckon not ! 
And there war n't a blessed snake up there when we went back -- we did n't half tie the sack , and they worked out somehow , and left . 
But it did n't matter much , because they was still on the premises somewheres . 
So we judged we could get some of them again . 
No , there war n't no real scarcity of snakes about the house for a considerable spell . 
You 'd see them dripping from the rafters and places every now and then ; and they generly landed in your plate , or down the back of your neck , and most of the time where you did n't want them . 
Well , they was handsome and striped , and there war n't no harm in a million of them ; but that never made no difference to Aunt Sally ; she despised snakes , be the breed what they might , and she could n't stand them no way you could fix it ; and every time one of them flopped down on her , it did n't make no difference what she was doing , she would just lay that work down and light out . 
I never see such a woman . 
And you could hear her whoop to Jericho . 
You could n't get her to take a-holt of one of them with the tongs . 
And if she turned over and found one in bed she would scramble out and lift a howl that you would think the house was afire . 
She disturbed the old man so that he said he could most wish there had n't ever been no snakes created . 
Why , after every last snake had been gone clear out of the house for as much as a week Aunt Sally war n't over it yet ; she war n't near over it ; when she was setting thinking about something you could touch her on the back of her neck with a feather and she would jump right out of her stockings . 
It was very curious . 
But Tom said all women was just so . 
He said they was made that way for some reason or other . 
We got a licking every time one of our snakes come in her way , and she allowed these lickings war n't nothing to what she would do if we ever loaded up the place again with them . 
I did n't mind the lickings , because they did n't amount to nothing ; but I minded the trouble we had to lay in another lot . 
But we got them laid in , and all the other things ; and you never see a cabin as blithesome as Jim 's was when they 'd all swarm out for music and go for him . 
Jim did n't like the spiders , and the spiders did n't like Jim ; and so they 'd lay for him , and make it mighty warm for him . 
