He often done that . 
When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with his head down betwixt his knees , moaning and mourning to himself . 
I did n't take notice nor let on . 
I knowed what it was about . 
He was thinking about his wife and his children , away up yonder , and he was low and homesick ; because he had n't ever been away from home before in his life ; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white folks does for their ` n . 
It do n't seem natural , but I reckon it 's so . 
He was often moaning and mourning that way nights , when he judged I was asleep , and saying , `` Po ' little ` Lizabeth ! 
po ' little Johnny ! 
it 's mighty hard ; I spec ' I ai n't ever gwyne to see you no mo ' , no mo ' ! '' 
He was a mighty good nigger , Jim was . 
But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young ones ; and by and by he says : `` What makes me feel so bad dis time ` uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder on de bank like a whack , er a slam , while ago , en it mine me er de time I treat my little ` Lizabeth so ornery . 
She war n't on ' y ` bout fo ' year ole , en she tuck de sk ` yarlet fever , en had a powful rough spell ; but she got well , en one day she was a-stannin ' aroun ' , en I says to her , I says : '' ` Shet de do ' . ' 
`` She never done it ; jis ' stood dah , kiner smilin ' up at me . 
It make me mad ; en I says agin , mighty loud , I says : '' ` Doan ' you hear me ? 
Shet de do ' ! ' 
`` She jis stood de same way , kiner smilin ' up . 
I was a-bilin ' ! 
I says : '' ' I lay I MAKE you mine ! ' 
`` En wid dat I fetch ' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin ' . 
Den I went into de yuther room , en ` uz gone ` bout ten minutes ; en when I come back dah was dat do ' a-stannin ' open YIT , en dat chile stannin ' mos ' right in it , a-lookin ' down and mournin ' , en de tears runnin ' down . 
My , but I WUZ mad ! 
I was a-gwyne for de chile , but jis ' den -- it was a do ' dat open innerds -- jis ' den , ` long come de wind en slam it to , behine de chile , ker-BLAM ! 
-- en my lan ' , de chile never move ' ! 
My breff mos ' hop outer me ; en I feel so -- so -- I doan ' know HOW I feel . 
I crope out , all a - tremblin ' , en crope aroun ' en open de do ' easy en slow , en poke my head in behine de chile , sof ' en still , en all uv a sudden I says POW ! 
jis ' as loud as I could yell . 
SHE NEVER BUDGE ! 
Oh , Huck , I bust out a-cryin ' en grab her up in my arms , en say , ` Oh , de po ' little thing ! 
De Lord God Amighty fogive po ' ole Jim , kaze he never gwyne to fogive hisself as long 's he live ! ' 
Oh , she was plumb deef en dumb , Huck , plumb deef en dumb -- en I 'd ben a-treat 'n her so ! '' 
NEXT day , towards night , we laid up under a little willow towhead out in the middle , where there was a village on each side of the river , and the duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns . 
Jim he spoke to the duke , and said he hoped it would n't take but a few hours , because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope . 
You see , when we left him all alone we had to tie him , because if anybody happened on to him all by himself and not tied it would n't look much like he was a runaway nigger , you know . 
So the duke said it WAS kind of hard to have to lay roped all day , and he 'd cipher out some way to get around it . 
He was uncommon bright , the duke was , and he soon struck it . 
He dressed Jim up in King Lear 's outfit -- it was a long curtain-calico gown , and a white horse-hair wig and whiskers ; and then he took his theater paint and painted Jim 's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead , dull , solid blue , like a man that 's been drownded nine days . 
Blamed if he war n't the horriblest looking outrage I ever see . 
Then the duke took and wrote out a sign on a shingle so : Sick Arab -- but harmless when not out of his head . 
And he nailed that shingle to a lath , and stood the lath up four or five foot in front of the wigwam . 
Jim was satisfied . 
He said it was a sight better than lying tied a couple of years every day , and trembling all over every time there was a sound . 
The duke told him to make himself free and easy , and if anybody ever come meddling around , he must hop out of the wigwam , and carry on a little , and fetch a howl or two like a wild beast , and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone . 
Which was sound enough judgment ; but you take the average man , and he would n't wait for him to howl . 
Why , he did n't only look like he was dead , he looked considerable more than that . 
These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again , because there was so much money in it , but they judged it would n't be safe , because maybe the news might a worked along down by this time . 
They could n't hit no project that suited exactly ; so at last the duke said he reckoned he 'd lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he could n't put up something on the Arkansaw village ; and the king he allowed he would drop over to t ` other village without any plan , but just trust in Providence to lead him the profitable way -- meaning the devil , I reckon . 
We had all bought store clothes where we stopped last ; and now the king put his 'n on , and he told me to put mine on . 
I done it , of course . 
The king 's duds was all black , and he did look real swell and starchy . 
I never knowed how clothes could change a body before . 
Why , before , he looked like the orneriest old rip that ever was ; but now , when he 'd take off his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile , he looked that grand and good and pious that you 'd say he had walked right out of the ark , and maybe was old Leviticus himself . 
Jim cleaned up the canoe , and I got my paddle ready . 
There was a big steamboat laying at the shore away up under the point , about three mile above the town -- been there a couple of hours , taking on freight . 
Says the king : `` Seein ' how I 'm dressed , I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St. Louis or Cincinnati , or some other big place . 
Go for the steamboat , Huckleberry ; we 'll come down to the village on her . '' 
I did n't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride . 
I fetched the shore a half a mile above the village , and then went scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water . 
Pretty soon we come to a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face , for it was powerful warm weather ; and he had a couple of big carpet-bags by him . 
`` Run her nose in shore , '' says the king . 
I done it . 
`` Wher ' you bound for , young man ? '' 
`` For the steamboat ; going to Orleans . '' 
`` Git aboard , '' says the king . 
`` Hold on a minute , my servant 'll he ' p you with them bags . 
Jump out and he ' p the gentleman , Adolphus '' -- meaning me , I see . 
I done so , and then we all three started on again . 
The young chap was mighty thankful ; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather . 
He asked the king where he was going , and the king told him he 'd come down the river and landed at the other village this morning , and now he was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there . 
The young fellow says : `` When I first see you I says to myself , ` It 's Mr. Wilks , sure , and he come mighty near getting here in time . ' 
But then I says again , ` No , I reckon it ai n't him , or else he would n't be paddling up the river . ' 
You AI N'T him , are you ? '' 
`` No , my name 's Blodgett -- Elexander Blodgett -- REVEREND Elexander Blodgett , I s ` pose I must say , as I 'm one o ' the Lord 's poor servants . 
But still I 'm jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving in time , all the same , if he 's missed anything by it -- which I hope he has n't . '' 
`` Well , he do n't miss any property by it , because he 'll get that all right ; but he 's missed seeing his brother Peter die -- which he may n't mind , nobody can tell as to that -- but his brother would a give anything in this world to see HIM before he died ; never talked about nothing else all these three weeks ; had n't seen him since they was boys together -- and had n't ever seen his brother William at all -- that 's the deef and dumb one -- William ai n't more than thirty or thirty-five . 
Peter and George were the only ones that come out here ; George was the married brother ; him and his wife both died last year . 
Harvey and William 's the only ones that 's left now ; and , as I was saying , they have n't got here in time . '' 
`` Did anybody send 'em word ? '' 
`` Oh , yes ; a month or two ago , when Peter was first took ; because Peter said then that he sorter felt like he war n't going to get well this time . 
You see , he was pretty old , and George 's g ` yirls was too young to be much company for him , except Mary Jane , the red-headed one ; and so he was kinder lonesome after George and his wife died , and did n't seem to care much to live . 
He most desperately wanted to see Harvey -- and William , too , for that matter -- because he was one of them kind that ca n't bear to make a will . 
He left a letter behind for Harvey , and said he 'd told in it where his money was hid , and how he wanted the rest of the property divided up so George 's g ` yirls would be all right -- for George did n't leave nothing . 
And that letter was all they could get him to put a pen to . '' 
`` Why do you reckon Harvey do n't come ? 
Wher ' does he live ? '' 
`` Oh , he lives in England -- Sheffield -- preaches there -- has n't ever been in this country . 
He has n't had any too much time -- and besides he might n't a got the letter at all , you know . '' 
`` Too bad , too bad he could n't a lived to see his brothers , poor soul . 
You going to Orleans , you say ? '' 
`` Yes , but that ai n't only a part of it . 
I 'm going in a ship , next Wednesday , for Ryo Janeero , where my uncle lives . '' 
`` It 's a pretty long journey . 
But it 'll be lovely ; wisht I was a-going . 
Is Mary Jane the oldest ? 
How old is the others ? '' 
`` Mary Jane 's nineteen , Susan 's fifteen , and Joanna 's about fourteen -- that 's the one that gives herself to good works and has a hare-lip . '' 
`` Poor things ! 
to be left alone in the cold world so . '' 
`` Well , they could be worse off . 
Old Peter had friends , and they ai n't going to let them come to no harm . 
There 's Hobson , the Babtis ' preacher ; and Deacon Lot Hovey , and Ben Rucker , and Abner Shackleford , and Levi Bell , the lawyer ; and Dr. Robinson , and their wives , and the widow Bartley , and -- well , there 's a lot of them ; but these are the ones that Peter was thickest with , and used to write about sometimes , when he wrote home ; so Harvey 'll know where to look for friends when he gets here . '' 
