For if it had n't been for that they 'd a jailed us till them Englishmen 's baggage come -- and then -- the penitentiary , you bet ! 
But that trick took 'em to the graveyard , and the gold done us a still bigger kindness ; for if the excited fools had n't let go all holts and made that rush to get a look we 'd a slept in our cravats to-night -- cravats warranted to WEAR , too -- longer than WE 'D need 'em . '' 
They was still a minute -- thinking ; then the king says , kind of absent - minded like : `` Mf ! 
And we reckoned the NIGGERS stole it ! '' 
That made me squirm ! 
`` Yes , '' says the duke , kinder slow and deliberate and sarcastic , `` WE did . '' 
After about a half a minute the king drawls out : `` Leastways , I did . '' 
The duke says , the same way : `` On the contrary , I did . '' 
The king kind of ruffles up , and says : `` Looky here , Bilgewater , what ' r you referrin ' to ? '' 
The duke says , pretty brisk : `` When it comes to that , maybe you 'll let me ask , what was YOU referring to ? '' 
`` Shucks ! '' 
says the king , very sarcastic ; `` but I do n't know -- maybe you was asleep , and did n't know what you was about . '' 
The duke bristles up now , and says : `` Oh , let UP on this cussed nonsense ; do you take me for a blame ' fool ? 
Do n't you reckon I know who hid that money in that coffin ? '' 
`` YES , sir ! 
I know you DO know , because you done it yourself ! '' 
`` It 's a lie ! '' 
-- and the duke went for him . 
The king sings out : `` Take y' r hands off ! 
-- leggo my throat ! 
-- I take it all back ! '' 
The duke says : `` Well , you just own up , first , that you DID hide that money there , intending to give me the slip one of these days , and come back and dig it up , and have it all to yourself . '' 
`` Wait jest a minute , duke -- answer me this one question , honest and fair ; if you did n't put the money there , say it , and I 'll b ` lieve you , and take back everything I said . '' 
`` You old scoundrel , I did n't , and you know I did n't . 
There , now ! '' 
`` Well , then , I b ` lieve you . 
But answer me only jest this one more -- now DO N'T git mad ; did n't you have it in your mind to hook the money and hide it ? '' 
The duke never said nothing for a little bit ; then he says : `` Well , I do n't care if I DID , I did n't DO it , anyway . 
But you not only had it in mind to do it , but you DONE it . '' 
`` I wisht I never die if I done it , duke , and that 's honest . 
I wo n't say I war n't goin ' to do it , because I WAS ; but you -- I mean somebody -- got in ahead o ' me . '' 
`` It 's a lie ! 
You done it , and you got to SAY you done it , or -- '' The king began to gurgle , and then he gasps out : '' ` Nough ! 
-- I OWN UP ! '' 
I was very glad to hear him say that ; it made me feel much more easier than what I was feeling before . 
So the duke took his hands off and says : `` If you ever deny it again I 'll drown you . 
It 's WELL for you to set there and blubber like a baby -- it 's fitten for you , after the way you 've acted . 
I never see such an old ostrich for wanting to gobble everything -- and I a-trusting you all the time , like you was my own father . 
You ought to been ashamed of yourself to stand by and hear it saddled on to a lot of poor niggers , and you never say a word for 'em . 
It makes me feel ridiculous to think I was soft enough to BELIEVE that rubbage . 
Cuss you , I can see now why you was so anxious to make up the deffisit -- you wanted to get what money I 'd got out of the Nonesuch and one thing or another , and scoop it ALL ! '' 
The king says , timid , and still a-snuffling : `` Why , duke , it was you that said make up the deffisit ; it war n't me . '' 
`` Dry up ! 
I do n't want to hear no more out of you ! '' 
says the duke . 
`` And NOW you see what you GOT by it . 
They 've got all their own money back , and all of OURN but a shekel or two BESIDES . 
G'long to bed , and do n't you deffersit ME no more deffersits , long 's YOU live ! '' 
So the king sneaked into the wigwam and took to his bottle for comfort , and before long the duke tackled HIS bottle ; and so in about a half an hour they was as thick as thieves again , and the tighter they got the lovinger they got , and went off a-snoring in each other 's arms . 
They both got powerful mellow , but I noticed the king did n't get mellow enough to forget to remember to not deny about hiding the money-bag again . 
That made me feel easy and satisfied . 
Of course when they got to snoring we had a long gabble , and I told Jim everything . 
WE das n't stop again at any town for days and days ; kept right along down the river . 
We was down south in the warm weather now , and a mighty long ways from home . 
We begun to come to trees with Spanish moss on them , hanging down from the limbs like long , gray beards . 
It was the first I ever see it growing , and it made the woods look solemn and dismal . 
So now the frauds reckoned they was out of danger , and they begun to work the villages again . 
First they done a lecture on temperance ; but they did n't make enough for them both to get drunk on . 
Then in another village they started a dancing-school ; but they did n't know no more how to dance than a kangaroo does ; so the first prance they made the general public jumped in and pranced them out of town . 
Another time they tried to go at yellocution ; but they did n't yellocute long till the audience got up and give them a solid good cussing , and made them skip out . 
They tackled missionarying , and mesmerizing , and doctoring , and telling fortunes , and a little of everything ; but they could n't seem to have no luck . 
So at last they got just about dead broke , and laid around the raft as she floated along , thinking and thinking , and never saying nothing , by the half a day at a time , and dreadful blue and desperate . 
And at last they took a change and begun to lay their heads together in the wigwam and talk low and confidential two or three hours at a time . 
Jim and me got uneasy . 
We did n't like the look of it . 
We judged they was studying up some kind of worse deviltry than ever . 
We turned it over and over , and at last we made up our minds they was going to break into somebody 's house or store , or was going into the counterfeit-money business , or something . 
So then we was pretty scared , and made up an agreement that we would n't have nothing in the world to do with such actions , and if we ever got the least show we would give them the cold shake and clear out and leave them behind . 
Well , early one morning we hid the raft in a good , safe place about two mile below a little bit of a shabby village named Pikesville , and the king he went ashore and told us all to stay hid whilst he went up to town and smelt around to see if anybody had got any wind of the Royal Nonesuch there yet . 
-LRB- `` House to rob , you MEAN , '' says I to myself ; `` and when you get through robbing it you 'll come back here and wonder what has become of me and Jim and the raft -- and you 'll have to take it out in wondering . '' -RRB- 
And he said if he war n't back by midday the duke and me would know it was all right , and we was to come along . 
So we stayed where we was . 
The duke he fretted and sweated around , and was in a mighty sour way . 
He scolded us for everything , and we could n't seem to do nothing right ; he found fault with every little thing . 
Something was a-brewing , sure . 
I was good and glad when midday come and no king ; we could have a change , anyway -- and maybe a chance for THE chance on top of it . 
So me and the duke went up to the village , and hunted around there for the king , and by and by we found him in the back room of a little low doggery , very tight , and a lot of loafers bullyragging him for sport , and he a-cussing and a-threatening with all his might , and so tight he could n't walk , and could n't do nothing to them . 
The duke he begun to abuse him for an old fool , and the king begun to sass back , and the minute they was fairly at it I lit out and shook the reefs out of my hind legs , and spun down the river road like a deer , for I see our chance ; and I made up my mind that it would be a long day before they ever see me and Jim again . 
I got down there all out of breath but loaded up with joy , and sung out : `` Set her loose , Jim ! 
we 're all right now ! '' 
But there war n't no answer , and nobody come out of the wigwam . 
Jim was gone ! 
I set up a shout -- and then another -- and then another one ; and run this way and that in the woods , whooping and screeching ; but it war n't no use -- old Jim was gone . 
Then I set down and cried ; I could n't help it . 
But I could n't set still long . 
Pretty soon I went out on the road , trying to think what I better do , and I run across a boy walking , and asked him if he 'd seen a strange nigger dressed so and so , and he says : `` Yes . '' 
`` Whereabouts ? '' 
says I. `` Down to Silas Phelps ' place , two mile below here . 
He 's a runaway nigger , and they 've got him . 
Was you looking for him ? '' 
`` You bet I ai n't ! 
I run across him in the woods about an hour or two ago , and he said if I hollered he 'd cut my livers out -- and told me to lay down and stay where I was ; and I done it . 
Been there ever since ; afeard to come out . '' 
`` Well , '' he says , `` you need n't be afeard no more , becuz they 've got him . 
He run off f 'm down South , som ` ers . '' 
`` It 's a good job they got him . '' 
`` Well , I RECKON ! 
There 's two hunderd dollars reward on him . 
It 's like picking up money out 'n the road . '' 
`` Yes , it is -- and I could a had it if I 'd been big enough ; I see him FIRST . 
