He started and run round and round the cabin , hollering `` Take him off ! 
take him off ! 
he 's biting me on the neck ! '' 
I never see a man look so wild in the eyes . 
Pretty soon he was all fagged out , and fell down panting ; then he rolled over and over wonderful fast , kicking things every which way , and striking and grabbing at the air with his hands , and screaming and saying there was devils a-hold of him . 
He wore out by and by , and laid still a while , moaning . 
Then he laid stiller , and did n't make a sound . 
I could hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods , and it seemed terrible still . 
He was laying over by the corner . 
By and by he raised up part way and listened , with his head to one side . 
He says , very low : `` Tramp -- tramp -- tramp ; that 's the dead ; tramp -- tramp -- tramp ; they 're coming after me ; but I wo n't go . 
Oh , they 're here ! 
do n't touch me -- do n't ! 
hands off -- they 're cold ; let go . 
Oh , let a poor devil alone ! '' 
Then he went down on all fours and crawled off , begging them to let him alone , and he rolled himself up in his blanket and wallowed in under the old pine table , still a-begging ; and then he went to crying . 
I could hear him through the blanket . 
By and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild , and he see me and went for me . 
He chased me round and round the place with a clasp-knife , calling me the Angel of Death , and saying he would kill me , and then I could n't come for him no more . 
I begged , and told him I was only Huck ; but he laughed SUCH a screechy laugh , and roared and cussed , and kept on chasing me up . 
Once when I turned short and dodged under his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my shoulders , and I thought I was gone ; but I slid out of the jacket quick as lightning , and saved myself . 
Pretty soon he was all tired out , and dropped down with his back against the door , and said he would rest a minute and then kill me . 
He put his knife under him , and said he would sleep and get strong , and then he would see who was who . 
So he dozed off pretty soon . 
By and by I got the old split-bottom chair and clumb up as easy as I could , not to make any noise , and got down the gun . 
I slipped the ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded , then I laid it across the turnip barrel , pointing towards pap , and set down behind it to wait for him to stir . 
And how slow and still the time did drag along . 
`` GIT up ! 
What you ` bout ? '' 
I opened my eyes and looked around , trying to make out where I was . 
It was after sun-up , and I had been sound asleep . 
Pap was standing over me looking sour and sick , too . 
He says : `` What you doin ' with this gun ? '' 
I judged he did n't know nothing about what he had been doing , so I says : `` Somebody tried to get in , so I was laying for him . '' 
`` Why did n't you roust me out ? '' 
`` Well , I tried to , but I could n't ; I could n't budge you . '' 
`` Well , all right . 
Do n't stand there palavering all day , but out with you and see if there 's a fish on the lines for breakfast . 
I 'll be along in a minute . '' 
He unlocked the door , and I cleared out up the river-bank . 
I noticed some pieces of limbs and such things floating down , and a sprinkling of bark ; so I knowed the river had begun to rise . 
I reckoned I would have great times now if I was over at the town . 
The June rise used to be always luck for me ; because as soon as that rise begins here comes cordwood floating down , and pieces of log rafts -- sometimes a dozen logs together ; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the wood-yards and the sawmill . 
I went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t ` other one out for what the rise might fetch along . 
Well , all at once here comes a canoe ; just a beauty , too , about thirteen or fourteen foot long , riding high like a duck . 
I shot head-first off of the bank like a frog , clothes and all on , and struck out for the canoe . 
I just expected there 'd be somebody laying down in it , because people often done that to fool folks , and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they 'd raise up and laugh at him . 
But it war n't so this time . 
It was a drift-canoe sure enough , and I clumb in and paddled her ashore . 
Thinks I , the old man will be glad when he sees this -- she 's worth ten dollars . 
But when I got to shore pap was n't in sight yet , and as I was running her into a little creek like a gully , all hung over with vines and willows , I struck another idea : I judged I 'd hide her good , and then , ` stead of taking to the woods when I run off , I 'd go down the river about fifty mile and camp in one place for good , and not have such a rough time tramping on foot . 
It was pretty close to the shanty , and I thought I heard the old man coming all the time ; but I got her hid ; and then I out and looked around a bunch of willows , and there was the old man down the path a piece just drawing a bead on a bird with his gun . 
So he had n't seen anything . 
When he got along I was hard at it taking up a `` trot '' line . 
He abused me a little for being so slow ; but I told him I fell in the river , and that was what made me so long . 
I knowed he would see I was wet , and then he would be asking questions . 
We got five catfish off the lines and went home . 
While we laid off after breakfast to sleep up , both of us being about wore out , I got to thinking that if I could fix up some way to keep pap and the widow from trying to follow me , it would be a certainer thing than trusting to luck to get far enough off before they missed me ; you see , all kinds of things might happen . 
Well , I did n't see no way for a while , but by and by pap raised up a minute to drink another barrel of water , and he says : `` Another time a man comes a-prowling round here you roust me out , you hear ? 
That man war n't here for no good . 
I 'd a shot him . 
Next time you roust me out , you hear ? '' 
Then he dropped down and went to sleep again ; but what he had been saying give me the very idea I wanted . 
I says to myself , I can fix it now so nobody wo n't think of following me . 
About twelve o'clock we turned out and went along up the bank . 
The river was coming up pretty fast , and lots of driftwood going by on the rise . 
By and by along comes part of a log raft -- nine logs fast together . 
We went out with the skiff and towed it ashore . 
Then we had dinner . 
Anybody but pap would a waited and seen the day through , so as to catch more stuff ; but that war n't pap 's style . 
Nine logs was enough for one time ; he must shove right over to town and sell . 
So he locked me in and took the skiff , and started off towing the raft about half-past three . 
I judged he would n't come back that night . 
I waited till I reckoned he had got a good start ; then I out with my saw , and went to work on that log again . 
Before he was t ` other side of the river I was out of the hole ; him and his raft was just a speck on the water away off yonder . 
I took the sack of corn meal and took it to where the canoe was hid , and shoved the vines and branches apart and put it in ; then I done the same with the side of bacon ; then the whisky-jug . 
I took all the coffee and sugar there was , and all the ammunition ; I took the wadding ; I took the bucket and gourd ; I took a dipper and a tin cup , and my old saw and two blankets , and the skillet and the coffee-pot . 
I took fish-lines and matches and other things -- everything that was worth a cent . 
I cleaned out the place . 
I wanted an axe , but there was n't any , only the one out at the woodpile , and I knowed why I was going to leave that . 
I fetched out the gun , and now I was done . 
I had wore the ground a good deal crawling out of the hole and dragging out so many things . 
So I fixed that as good as I could from the outside by scattering dust on the place , which covered up the smoothness and the sawdust . 
Then I fixed the piece of log back into its place , and put two rocks under it and one against it to hold it there , for it was bent up at that place and did n't quite touch ground . 
If you stood four or five foot away and did n't know it was sawed , you would n't never notice it ; and besides , this was the back of the cabin , and it war n't likely anybody would go fooling around there . 
It was all grass clear to the canoe , so I had n't left a track . 
I followed around to see . 
I stood on the bank and looked out over the river . 
All safe . 
So I took the gun and went up a piece into the woods , and was hunting around for some birds when I see a wild pig ; hogs soon went wild in them bottoms after they had got away from the prairie farms . 
I shot this fellow and took him into camp . 
I took the axe and smashed in the door . 
I beat it and hacked it considerable a-doing it . 
I fetched the pig in , and took him back nearly to the table and hacked into his throat with the axe , and laid him down on the ground to bleed ; I say ground because it was ground -- hard packed , and no boards . 
Well , next I took an old sack and put a lot of big rocks in it -- all I could drag -- and I started it from the pig , and dragged it to the door and through the woods down to the river and dumped it in , and down it sunk , out of sight . 
You could easy see that something had been dragged over the ground . 
I did wish Tom Sawyer was there ; I knowed he would take an interest in this kind of business , and throw in the fancy touches . 
Nobody could spread himself like Tom Sawyer in such a thing as that . 
Well , last I pulled out some of my hair , and blooded the axe good , and stuck it on the back side , and slung the axe in the corner . 
Then I took up the pig and held him to my breast with my jacket -LRB- so he could n't drip -RRB- till I got a good piece below the house and then dumped him into the river . 
