I hope so , anyway . '' 
`` I did n't hope so . 
They all crowded up and leaned over the rails , nearly in my face , and kept still , watching with all their might . 
I could see them first-rate , but they could n't see me . 
Then the captain sung out : `` Stand away ! '' 
and the cannon let off such a blast right before me that it made me deef with the noise and pretty near blind with the smoke , and I judged I was gone . 
If they 'd a had some bullets in , I reckon they 'd a got the corpse they was after . 
Well , I see I war n't hurt , thanks to goodness . 
The boat floated on and went out of sight around the shoulder of the island . 
I could hear the booming now and then , further and further off , and by and by , after an hour , I did n't hear it no more . 
The island was three mile long . 
I judged they had got to the foot , and was giving it up . 
But they did n't yet a while . 
They turned around the foot of the island and started up the channel on the Missouri side , under steam , and booming once in a while as they went . 
I crossed over to that side and watched them . 
When they got abreast the head of the island they quit shooting and dropped over to the Missouri shore and went home to the town . 
I knowed I was all right now . 
Nobody else would come a-hunting after me . 
I got my traps out of the canoe and made me a nice camp in the thick woods . 
I made a kind of a tent out of my blankets to put my things under so the rain could n't get at them . 
I catched a catfish and haggled him open with my saw , and towards sundown I started my camp fire and had supper . 
Then I set out a line to catch some fish for breakfast . 
When it was dark I set by my camp fire smoking , and feeling pretty well satisfied ; but by and by it got sort of lonesome , and so I went and set on the bank and listened to the current swashing along , and counted the stars and drift logs and rafts that come down , and then went to bed ; there ai n't no better way to put in time when you are lonesome ; you ca n't stay so , you soon get over it . 
And so for three days and nights . 
No difference -- just the same thing . 
But the next day I went exploring around down through the island . 
I was boss of it ; it all belonged to me , so to say , and I wanted to know all about it ; but mainly I wanted to put in the time . 
I found plenty strawberries , ripe and prime ; and green summer grapes , and green razberries ; and the green blackberries was just beginning to show . 
They would all come handy by and by , I judged . 
Well , I went fooling along in the deep woods till I judged I war n't far from the foot of the island . 
I had my gun along , but I had n't shot nothing ; it was for protection ; thought I would kill some game nigh home . 
About this time I mighty near stepped on a good-sized snake , and it went sliding off through the grass and flowers , and I after it , trying to get a shot at it . 
I clipped along , and all of a sudden I bounded right on to the ashes of a camp fire that was still smoking . 
My heart jumped up amongst my lungs . 
I never waited for to look further , but uncocked my gun and went sneaking back on my tiptoes as fast as ever I could . 
Every now and then I stopped a second amongst the thick leaves and listened , but my breath come so hard I could n't hear nothing else . 
I slunk along another piece further , then listened again ; and so on , and so on . 
If I see a stump , I took it for a man ; if I trod on a stick and broke it , it made me feel like a person had cut one of my breaths in two and I only got half , and the short half , too . 
When I got to camp I war n't feeling very brash , there war n't much sand in my craw ; but I says , this ai n't no time to be fooling around . 
So I got all my traps into my canoe again so as to have them out of sight , and I put out the fire and scattered the ashes around to look like an old last year 's camp , and then clumb a tree . 
I reckon I was up in the tree two hours ; but I did n't see nothing , I did n't hear nothing -- I only THOUGHT I heard and seen as much as a thousand things . 
Well , I could n't stay up there forever ; so at last I got down , but I kept in the thick woods and on the lookout all the time . 
All I could get to eat was berries and what was left over from breakfast . 
By the time it was night I was pretty hungry . 
So when it was good and dark I slid out from shore before moonrise and paddled over to the Illinois bank -- about a quarter of a mile . 
I went out in the woods and cooked a supper , and I had about made up my mind I would stay there all night when I hear a PLUNKETY-PLUNK , PLUNKETY-PLUNK , and says to myself , horses coming ; and next I hear people 's voices . 
I got everything into the canoe as quick as I could , and then went creeping through the woods to see what I could find out . 
I had n't got far when I hear a man say : `` We better camp here if we can find a good place ; the horses is about beat out . 
Let 's look around . '' 
I did n't wait , but shoved out and paddled away easy . 
I tied up in the old place , and reckoned I would sleep in the canoe . 
I did n't sleep much . 
I could n't , somehow , for thinking . 
And every time I waked up I thought somebody had me by the neck . 
So the sleep did n't do me no good . 
By and by I says to myself , I ca n't live this way ; I 'm a - going to find out who it is that 's here on the island with me ; I 'll find it out or bust . 
Well , I felt better right off . 
So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two , and then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows . 
The moon was shining , and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day . 
I poked along well on to an hour , everything still as rocks and sound asleep . 
Well , by this time I was most down to the foot of the island . 
A little ripply , cool breeze begun to blow , and that was as good as saying the night was about done . 
I give her a turn with the paddle and brung her nose to shore ; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge of the woods . 
I sat down there on a log , and looked out through the leaves . 
I see the moon go off watch , and the darkness begin to blanket the river . 
But in a little while I see a pale streak over the treetops , and knowed the day was coming . 
So I took my gun and slipped off towards where I had run across that camp fire , stopping every minute or two to listen . 
But I had n't no luck somehow ; I could n't seem to find the place . 
But by and by , sure enough , I catched a glimpse of fire away through the trees . 
I went for it , cautious and slow . 
By and by I was close enough to have a look , and there laid a man on the ground . 
It most give me the fantods . 
He had a blanket around his head , and his head was nearly in the fire . 
I set there behind a clump of bushes in about six foot of him , and kept my eyes on him steady . 
It was getting gray daylight now . 
Pretty soon he gapped and stretched himself and hove off the blanket , and it was Miss Watson 's Jim ! 
I bet I was glad to see him . 
I says : `` Hello , Jim ! '' 
and skipped out . 
He bounced up and stared at me wild . 
Then he drops down on his knees , and puts his hands together and says : `` Doan ' hurt me -- do n't ! 
I hai n't ever done no harm to a ghos ' . 
I alwuz liked dead people , en done all I could for 'em . 
You go en git in de river agin , whah you b ` longs , en doan ' do nuffn to Ole Jim , ` at ` uz awluz yo ' fren ' . '' 
Well , I war n't long making him understand I war n't dead . 
I was ever so glad to see Jim . 
I war n't lonesome now . 
I told him I war n't afraid of HIM telling the people where I was . 
I talked along , but he only set there and looked at me ; never said nothing . 
Then I says : `` It 's good daylight . 
Le 's get breakfast . 
Make up your camp fire good . '' 
`` What 's de use er makin ' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich truck ? 
But you got a gun , hai n't you ? 
Den we kin git sumfn better den strawbries . '' 
`` Strawberries and such truck , '' I says . 
`` Is that what you live on ? '' 
`` I couldn ' git nuffn else , '' he says . 
`` Why , how long you been on the island , Jim ? '' 
`` I come heah de night arter you 's killed . '' 
