It 's the most dazzling idea ` at ever a man struck . 
You have cert ` nly got the most astonishin ' head I ever see . 
Oh , this is the boss dodge , ther ' ai n't no mistake ` bout it . 
Let 'em fetch along their suspicions now if they want to -- this 'll lay 'em out . '' 
When we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table , and the king he counted it and stacked it up , three hundred dollars in a pile -- twenty elegant little piles . 
Everybody looked hungry at it , and licked their chops . 
Then they raked it into the bag again , and I see the king begin to swell himself up for another speech . 
He says : `` Friends all , my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by them that 's left behind in the vale of sorrers . 
He has done generous by these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered , and that 's left fatherless and motherless . 
Yes , and we that knowed him knows that he would a done MORE generous by 'em if he had n't ben afeard o ' woundin ' his dear William and me . 
Now , WOULD N'T he ? 
Ther ' ai n't no question ` bout it in MY mind . 
Well , then , what kind o ' brothers would it be that 'd stand in his way at sech a time ? 
And what kind o ' uncles would it be that 'd rob -- yes , ROB -- sech poor sweet lambs as these ` at he loved so at sech a time ? 
If I know William -- and I THINK I do -- he -- well , I 'll jest ask him . '' 
He turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to the duke with his hands , and the duke he looks at him stupid and leather-headed a while ; then all of a sudden he seems to catch his meaning , and jumps for the king , goo-gooing with all his might for joy , and hugs him about fifteen times before he lets up . 
Then the king says , `` I knowed it ; I reckon THAT 'll convince anybody the way HE feels about it . 
Here , Mary Jane , Susan , Joanner , take the money -- take it ALL . 
It 's the gift of him that lays yonder , cold but joyful . '' 
Mary Jane she went for him , Susan and the hare-lip went for the duke , and then such another hugging and kissing I never see yet . 
And everybody crowded up with the tears in their eyes , and most shook the hands off of them frauds , saying all the time : `` You DEAR good souls ! 
-- how LOVELY ! 
-- how COULD you ! '' 
Well , then , pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased again , and how good he was , and what a loss he was , and all that ; and before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside , and stood a-listening and looking , and not saying anything ; and nobody saying anything to him either , because the king was talking and they was all busy listening . 
The king was saying -- in the middle of something he 'd started in on -- '' -- they bein ' partickler friends o ' the diseased . 
That 's why they 're invited here this evenin ' ; but tomorrow we want ALL to come -- everybody ; for he respected everybody , he liked everybody , and so it 's fitten that his funeral orgies sh 'd be public . '' 
And so he went a-mooning on and on , liking to hear himself talk , and every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again , till the duke he could n't stand it no more ; so he writes on a little scrap of paper , `` OBSEQUIES , you old fool , '' and folds it up , and goes to goo-gooing and reaching it over people 's heads to him . 
The king he reads it and puts it in his pocket , and says : `` Poor William , afflicted as he is , his HEART 'S aluz right . 
Asks me to invite everybody to come to the funeral -- wants me to make 'em all welcome . 
But he need n't a worried -- it was jest what I was at . '' 
Then he weaves along again , perfectly ca 'm , and goes to dropping in his funeral orgies again every now and then , just like he done before . 
And when he done it the third time he says : `` I say orgies , not because it 's the common term , because it ai n't -- obsequies bein ' the common term -- but because orgies is the right term . 
Obsequies ai n't used in England no more now -- it 's gone out . 
We say orgies now in England . 
Orgies is better , because it means the thing you 're after more exact . 
It 's a word that 's made up out 'n the Greek ORGO , outside , open , abroad ; and the Hebrew JEESUM , to plant , cover up ; hence inTER . 
So , you see , funeral orgies is an open er public funeral . '' 
He was the WORST I ever struck . 
Well , the iron-jawed man he laughed right in his face . 
Everybody was shocked . 
Everybody says , `` Why , DOCTOR ! '' 
and Abner Shackleford says : `` Why , Robinson , hai n't you heard the news ? 
This is Harvey Wilks . '' 
The king he smiled eager , and shoved out his flapper , and says : `` Is it my poor brother 's dear good friend and physician ? 
I -- '' `` Keep your hands off of me ! '' 
says the doctor . 
`` YOU talk like an Englishman , DO N'T you ? 
It 's the worst imitation I ever heard . 
YOU Peter Wilks 's brother ! 
You 're a fraud , that 's what you are ! '' 
Well , how they all took on ! 
They crowded around the doctor and tried to quiet him down , and tried to explain to him and tell him how Harvey 'd showed in forty ways that he WAS Harvey , and knowed everybody by name , and the names of the very dogs , and begged and BEGGED him not to hurt Harvey 's feelings and the poor girl 's feelings , and all that . 
But it war n't no use ; he stormed right along , and said any man that pretended to be an Englishman and could n't imitate the lingo no better than what he did was a fraud and a liar . 
The poor girls was hanging to the king and crying ; and all of a sudden the doctor ups and turns on THEM . 
He says : `` I was your father 's friend , and I 'm your friend ; and I warn you as a friend , and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of harm and trouble , to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing to do with him , the ignorant tramp , with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew , as he calls it . 
He is the thinnest kind of an impostor -- has come here with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres , and you take them for PROOFS , and are helped to fool yourselves by these foolish friends here , who ought to know better . 
Mary Jane Wilks , you know me for your friend , and for your unselfish friend , too . 
Now listen to me ; turn this pitiful rascal out -- I BEG you to do it . 
Will you ? '' 
Mary Jane straightened herself up , and my , but she was handsome ! 
She says : `` HERE is my answer . '' 
She hove up the bag of money and put it in the king 's hands , and says , `` Take this six thousand dollars , and invest for me and my sisters any way you want to , and do n't give us no receipt for it . '' 
Then she put her arm around the king on one side , and Susan and the hare - lip done the same on the other . 
Everybody clapped their hands and stomped on the floor like a perfect storm , whilst the king held up his head and smiled proud . 
The doctor says : `` All right ; I wash MY hands of the matter . 
But I warn you all that a time 's coming when you 're going to feel sick whenever you think of this day . '' 
And away he went . 
`` All right , doctor , '' says the king , kinder mocking him ; `` we 'll try and get 'em to send for you ; '' which made them all laugh , and they said it was a prime good hit . 
WELL , when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was off for spare rooms , and she said she had one spare room , which would do for Uncle William , and she 'd give her own room to Uncle Harvey , which was a little bigger , and she would turn into the room with her sisters and sleep on a cot ; and up garret was a little cubby , with a pallet in it . 
The king said the cubby would do for his valley -- meaning me . 
So Mary Jane took us up , and she showed them their rooms , which was plain but nice . 
She said she 'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps took out of her room if they was in Uncle Harvey 's way , but he said they war n't . 
The frocks was hung along the wall , and before them was a curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor . 
There was an old hair trunk in one corner , and a guitar-box in another , and all sorts of little knickknacks and jimcracks around , like girls brisken up a room with . 
The king said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for these fixings , and so do n't disturb them . 
The duke 's room was pretty small , but plenty good enough , and so was my cubby . 
That night they had a big supper , and all them men and women was there , and I stood behind the king and the duke 's chairs and waited on them , and the niggers waited on the rest . 
Mary Jane she set at the head of the table , with Susan alongside of her , and said how bad the biscuits was , and how mean the preserves was , and how ornery and tough the fried chickens was -- and all that kind of rot , the way women always do for to force out compliments ; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop , and said so -- said `` How DO you get biscuits to brown so nice ? '' 
and `` Where , for the land 's sake , DID you get these amaz 'n pickles ? '' 
and all that kind of humbug talky-talk , just the way people always does at a supper , you know . 
And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen off of the leavings , whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up the things . 
The hare-lip she got to pumping me about England , and blest if I did n't think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes . 
She says : `` Did you ever see the king ? '' 
`` Who ? 
William Fourth ? 
Well , I bet I have -- he goes to our church . '' 
I knowed he was dead years ago , but I never let on . 
So when I says he goes to our church , she says : `` What -- regular ? '' 
`` Yes -- regular . 
His pew 's right over opposite ourn -- on t ` other side the pulpit . '' 
`` I thought he lived in London ? '' 
`` Well , he does . 
Where WOULD he live ? '' 
`` But I thought YOU lived in Sheffield ? '' 
I see I was up a stump . 
I had to let on to get choked with a chicken bone , so as to get time to think how to get down again . 
Then I says : `` I mean he goes to our church regular when he 's in Sheffield . 
That 's only in the summer time , when he comes there to take the sea baths . '' 
`` Why , how you talk -- Sheffield ai n't on the sea . '' 
`` Well , who said it was ? '' 
