We do n't run daytimes no more now ; nights they do n't bother us . '' 
The duke says : `` Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we want to . 
I 'll think the thing over -- I 'll invent a plan that 'll fix it . 
We 'll let it alone for to-day , because of course we do n't want to go by that town yonder in daylight -- it might n't be healthy . '' 
Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain ; the heat lightning was squirting around low down in the sky , and the leaves was beginning to shiver -- it was going to be pretty ugly , it was easy to see that . 
So the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam , to see what the beds was like . 
My bed was a straw tick better than Jim 's , which was a corn-shuck tick ; there 's always cobs around about in a shuck tick , and they poke into you and hurt ; and when you roll over the dry shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves ; it makes such a rustling that you wake up . 
Well , the duke allowed he would take my bed ; but the king allowed he would n't . 
He says : `` I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that a corn-shuck bed war n't just fitten for me to sleep on . 
Your Grace 'll take the shuck bed yourself . '' 
Jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute , being afraid there was going to be some more trouble amongst them ; so we was pretty glad when the duke says : '' 'T is my fate to be always ground into the mire under the iron heel of oppression . 
Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit ; I yield , I submit ; 't is my fate . 
I am alone in the world -- let me suffer ; can bear it . '' 
We got away as soon as it was good and dark . 
The king told us to stand well out towards the middle of the river , and not show a light till we got a long ways below the town . 
We come in sight of the little bunch of lights by and by -- that was the town , you know -- and slid by , about a half a mile out , all right . 
When we was three-quarters of a mile below we hoisted up our signal lantern ; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain and blow and thunder and lighten like everything ; so the king told us to both stay on watch till the weather got better ; then him and the duke crawled into the wigwam and turned in for the night . 
It was my watch below till twelve , but I would n't a turned in anyway if I 'd had a bed , because a body do n't see such a storm as that every day in the week , not by a long sight . 
My souls , how the wind did scream along ! 
And every second or two there 'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half a mile around , and you 'd see the islands looking dusty through the rain , and the trees thrashing around in the wind ; then comes a H-WHACK ! 
-- bum ! 
bum ! 
bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum -- and the thunder would go rumbling and grumbling away , and quit -- and then RIP comes another flash and another sockdolager . 
The waves most washed me off the raft sometimes , but I had n't any clothes on , and did n't mind . 
We did n't have no trouble about snags ; the lightning was glaring and flittering around so constant that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or that and miss them . 
I had the middle watch , you know , but I was pretty sleepy by that time , so Jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me ; he was always mighty good that way , Jim was . 
I crawled into the wigwam , but the king and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there war n't no show for me ; so I laid outside -- I did n't mind the rain , because it was warm , and the waves war n't running so high now . 
About two they come up again , though , and Jim was going to call me ; but he changed his mind , because he reckoned they war n't high enough yet to do any harm ; but he was mistaken about that , for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a regular ripper and washed me overboard . 
It most killed Jim a-laughing . 
He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was , anyway . 
I took the watch , and Jim he laid down and snored away ; and by and by the storm let up for good and all ; and the first cabin-light that showed I rousted him out , and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the day . 
The king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast , and him and the duke played seven-up a while , five cents a game . 
Then they got tired of it , and allowed they would `` lay out a campaign , '' as they called it . 
The duke went down into his carpet-bag , and fetched up a lot of little printed bills and read them out loud . 
One bill said , `` The celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban , of Paris , '' would `` lecture on the Science of Phrenology '' at such and such a place , on the blank day of blank , at ten cents admission , and `` furnish charts of character at twenty-five cents apiece . '' 
The duke said that was HIM . 
In another bill he was the `` world - renowned Shakespearian tragedian , Garrick the Younger , of Drury Lane , London . '' 
In other bills he had a lot of other names and done other wonderful things , like finding water and gold with a `` divining-rod , '' `` dissipating witch spells , '' and so on . 
By and by he says : `` But the histrionic muse is the darling . 
Have you ever trod the boards , Royalty ? '' 
`` No , '' says the king . 
`` You shall , then , before you 're three days older , Fallen Grandeur , '' says the duke . 
`` The first good town we come to we 'll hire a hall and do the sword fight in Richard III . 
and the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet . 
How does that strike you ? '' 
`` I 'm in , up to the hub , for anything that will pay , Bilgewater ; but , you see , I do n't know nothing about play-actin ' , and hai n't ever seen much of it . 
I was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace . 
Do you reckon you can learn me ? '' 
`` Easy ! '' 
`` All right . 
I 'm jist a-freezn ' for something fresh , anyway . 
Le 's commence right away . '' 
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was , and said he was used to being Romeo , so the king could be Juliet . 
`` But if Juliet 's such a young gal , duke , my peeled head and my white whiskers is goin ' to look oncommon odd on her , maybe . '' 
`` No , do n't you worry ; these country jakes wo n't ever think of that . 
Besides , you know , you 'll be in costume , and that makes all the difference in the world ; Juliet 's in a balcony , enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed , and she 's got on her night-gown and her ruffled nightcap . 
Here are the costumes for the parts . '' 
He got out two or three curtain-calico suits , which he said was meedyevil armor for Richard III . 
and t ` other chap , and a long white cotton nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match . 
The king was satisfied ; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the most splendid spread-eagle way , prancing around and acting at the same time , to show how it had got to be done ; then he give the book to the king and told him to get his part by heart . 
There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend , and after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run in daylight without it being dangersome for Jim ; so he allowed he would go down to the town and fix that thing . 
The king allowed he would go , too , and see if he could n't strike something . 
We was out of coffee , so Jim said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some . 
When we got there there war n't nobody stirring ; streets empty , and perfectly dead and still , like Sunday . 
We found a sick nigger sunning himself in a back yard , and he said everybody that war n't too young or too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting , about two mile back in the woods . 
The king got the directions , and allowed he 'd go and work that camp-meeting for all it was worth , and I might go , too . 
The duke said what he was after was a printing-office . 
We found it ; a little bit of a concern , up over a carpenter shop -- carpenters and printers all gone to the meeting , and no doors locked . 
It was a dirty , littered-up place , and had ink marks , and handbills with pictures of horses and runaway niggers on them , all over the walls . 
The duke shed his coat and said he was all right now . 
So me and the king lit out for the camp-meeting . 
We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping , for it was a most awful hot day . 
There was as much as a thousand people there from twenty mile around . 
The woods was full of teams and wagons , hitched everywheres , feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off the flies . 
There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with branches , where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell , and piles of watermelons and green corn and such-like truck . 
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds , only they was bigger and held crowds of people . 
The benches was made out of outside slabs of logs , with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into for legs . 
They did n't have no backs . 
The preachers had high platforms to stand on at one end of the sheds . 
The women had on sun-bonnets ; and some had linsey-woolsey frocks , some gingham ones , and a few of the young ones had on calico . 
Some of the young men was barefooted , and some of the children did n't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen shirt . 
Some of the old women was knitting , and some of the young folks was courting on the sly . 
The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn . 
He lined out two lines , everybody sung it , and it was kind of grand to hear it , there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way ; then he lined out two more for them to sing -- and so on . 
The people woke up more and more , and sung louder and louder ; and towards the end some begun to groan , and some begun to shout . 
Then the preacher begun to preach , and begun in earnest , too ; and went weaving first to one side of the platform and then the other , and then a-leaning down over the front of it , with his arms and his body going all the time , and shouting his words out with all his might ; and every now and then he would hold up his Bible and spread it open , and kind of pass it around this way and that , shouting , `` It 's the brazen serpent in the wilderness ! 
Look upon it and live ! '' 
And people would shout out , `` Glory ! 
-- A-a-MEN ! '' 
And so he went on , and the people groaning and crying and saying amen : `` Oh , come to the mourners ' bench ! 
come , black with sin ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , sick and sore ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , lame and halt and blind ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , pore and needy , sunk in shame ! 
-LRB- A-A-MEN ! -RRB- 
come , all that 's worn and soiled and suffering ! 
-- come with a broken spirit ! 
