That was all right as far as it went , but the towhead war n't sixty yards long , and the minute I flew by the foot of it I shot out into the solid white fog , and had n't no more idea which way I was going than a dead man . 
Thinks I , it wo n't do to paddle ; first I know I 'll run into the bank or a towhead or something ; I got to set still and float , and yet it 's mighty fidgety business to have to hold your hands still at such a time . 
I whooped and listened . 
Away down there somewheres I hears a small whoop , and up comes my spirits . 
I went tearing after it , listening sharp to hear it again . 
The next time it come I see I war n't heading for it , but heading away to the right of it . 
And the next time I was heading away to the left of it -- and not gaining on it much either , for I was flying around , this way and that and t ` other , but it was going straight ahead all the time . 
I did wish the fool would think to beat a tin pan , and beat it all the time , but he never did , and it was the still places between the whoops that was making the trouble for me . 
Well , I fought along , and directly I hears the whoop BEHIND me . 
I was tangled good now . 
That was somebody else 's whoop , or else I was turned around . 
I throwed the paddle down . 
I heard the whoop again ; it was behind me yet , but in a different place ; it kept coming , and kept changing its place , and I kept answering , till by and by it was in front of me again , and I knowed the current had swung the canoe 's head down-stream , and I was all right if that was Jim and not some other raftsman hollering . 
I could n't tell nothing about voices in a fog , for nothing do n't look natural nor sound natural in a fog . 
The whooping went on , and in about a minute I come a-booming down on a cut bank with smoky ghosts of big trees on it , and the current throwed me off to the left and shot by , amongst a lot of snags that fairly roared , the currrent was tearing by them so swift . 
In another second or two it was solid white and still again . 
I set perfectly still then , listening to my heart thump , and I reckon I did n't draw a breath while it thumped a hundred . 
I just give up then . 
I knowed what the matter was . 
That cut bank was an island , and Jim had gone down t ` other side of it . 
It war n't no towhead that you could float by in ten minutes . 
It had the big timber of a regular island ; it might be five or six miles long and more than half a mile wide . 
I kept quiet , with my ears cocked , about fifteen minutes , I reckon . 
I was floating along , of course , four or five miles an hour ; but you do n't ever think of that . 
No , you FEEL like you are laying dead still on the water ; and if a little glimpse of a snag slips by you do n't think to yourself how fast YOU 'RE going , but you catch your breath and think , my ! 
how that snag 's tearing along . 
If you think it ai n't dismal and lonesome out in a fog that way by yourself in the night , you try it once -- you 'll see . 
Next , for about a half an hour , I whoops now and then ; at last I hears the answer a long ways off , and tries to follow it , but I could n't do it , and directly I judged I 'd got into a nest of towheads , for I had little dim glimpses of them on both sides of me -- sometimes just a narrow channel between , and some that I could n't see I knowed was there because I 'd hear the wash of the current against the old dead brush and trash that hung over the banks . 
Well , I war n't long loosing the whoops down amongst the towheads ; and I only tried to chase them a little while , anyway , because it was worse than chasing a Jack-o ' - lantern . 
You never knowed a sound dodge around so , and swap places so quick and so much . 
I had to claw away from the bank pretty lively four or five times , to keep from knocking the islands out of the river ; and so I judged the raft must be butting into the bank every now and then , or else it would get further ahead and clear out of hearing -- it was floating a little faster than what I was . 
Well , I seemed to be in the open river again by and by , but I could n't hear no sign of a whoop nowheres . 
I reckoned Jim had fetched up on a snag , maybe , and it was all up with him . 
I was good and tired , so I laid down in the canoe and said I would n't bother no more . 
I did n't want to go to sleep , of course ; but I was so sleepy I could n't help it ; so I thought I would take jest one little cat-nap . 
But I reckon it was more than a cat-nap , for when I waked up the stars was shining bright , the fog was all gone , and I was spinning down a big bend stern first . 
First I did n't know where I was ; I thought I was dreaming ; and when things began to come back to me they seemed to come up dim out of last week . 
It was a monstrous big river here , with the tallest and the thickest kind of timber on both banks ; just a solid wall , as well as I could see by the stars . 
I looked away down-stream , and seen a black speck on the water . 
I took after it ; but when I got to it it war n't nothing but a couple of sawlogs made fast together . 
Then I see another speck , and chased that ; then another , and this time I was right . 
It was the raft . 
When I got to it Jim was setting there with his head down between his knees , asleep , with his right arm hanging over the steering-oar . 
The other oar was smashed off , and the raft was littered up with leaves and branches and dirt . 
So she 'd had a rough time . 
I made fast and laid down under Jim 's nose on the raft , and began to gap , and stretch my fists out against Jim , and says : `` Hello , Jim , have I been asleep ? 
Why did n't you stir me up ? '' 
`` Goodness gracious , is dat you , Huck ? 
En you ain ' dead -- you ain ' drownded -- you 's back agin ? 
It 's too good for true , honey , it 's too good for true . 
Lem me look at you chile , lem me feel o ' you . 
No , you ain ' dead ! 
you 's back agin , ` live en soun ' , jis de same ole Huck -- de same ole Huck , thanks to goodness ! '' 
`` What 's the matter with you , Jim ? 
You been a-drinking ? '' 
`` Drinkin ' ? 
Has I ben a-drinkin ' ? 
Has I had a chance to be a-drinkin ' ? '' 
`` Well , then , what makes you talk so wild ? '' 
`` How does I talk wild ? '' 
`` HOW ? 
Why , hai n't you been talking about my coming back , and all that stuff , as if I 'd been gone away ? '' 
`` Huck -- Huck Finn , you look me in de eye ; look me in de eye . 
HAI N'T you ben gone away ? '' 
`` Gone away ? 
Why , what in the nation do you mean ? 
I hai n't been gone anywheres . 
Where would I go to ? '' 
`` Well , looky here , boss , dey 's sumf 'n wrong , dey is . 
Is I ME , or who IS I ? 
Is I heah , or whah IS I ? 
Now dat 's what I wants to know . '' 
`` Well , I think you 're here , plain enough , but I think you 're a tangle - headed old fool , Jim . '' 
`` I is , is I ? 
Well , you answer me dis : Did n't you tote out de line in de canoe fer to make fas ' to de tow-head ? '' 
`` No , I did n't . 
What tow-head ? 
I hai n't see no tow-head . '' 
`` You hai n't seen no towhead ? 
Looky here , did n't de line pull loose en de raf ' go a-hummin ' down de river , en leave you en de canoe behine in de fog ? '' 
`` What fog ? '' 
`` Why , de fog ! 
-- de fog dat 's been aroun ' all night . 
En did n't you whoop , en did n't I whoop , tell we got mix ' up in de islands en one un us got los ' en t ` other one was jis ' as good as los ' , ` kase he didn ' know whah he wuz ? 
En did n't I bust up agin a lot er dem islands en have a turrible time en mos ' git drownded ? 
Now ain ' dat so , boss -- ai n't it so ? 
You answer me dat . '' 
`` Well , this is too many for me , Jim . 
I hai n't seen no fog , nor no islands , nor no troubles , nor nothing . 
I been setting here talking with you all night till you went to sleep about ten minutes ago , and I reckon I done the same . 
You could n't a got drunk in that time , so of course you 've been dreaming . '' 
`` Dad fetch it , how is I gwyne to dream all dat in ten minutes ? '' 
`` Well , hang it all , you did dream it , because there did n't any of it happen . '' 
`` But , Huck , it 's all jis ' as plain to me as -- '' `` It do n't make no difference how plain it is ; there ai n't nothing in it . 
I know , because I 've been here all the time . '' 
Jim did n't say nothing for about five minutes , but set there studying over it . 
Then he says : `` Well , den , I reck 'n I did dream it , Huck ; but dog my cats ef it ai n't de powerfullest dream I ever see . 
En I hai n't ever had no dream b ` fo ' dat 's tired me like dis one . '' 
`` Oh , well , that 's all right , because a dream does tire a body like everything sometimes . 
But this one was a staving dream ; tell me all about it , Jim . '' 
