it hurt her arm so . 
Then she told me to try for the next one . 
I wanted to be getting away before the old man got back , but of course I did n't let on . 
I got the thing , and the first rat that showed his nose I let drive , and if he 'd a stayed where he was he 'd a been a tolerable sick rat . 
She said that was first-rate , and she reckoned I would hive the next one . 
She went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back , and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with . 
I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them , and went on talking about her and her husband 's matters . 
But she broke off to say : `` Keep your eye on the rats . 
You better have the lead in your lap , handy . '' 
So she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment , and I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking . 
But only about a minute . 
Then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face , and very pleasant , and says : `` Come , now , what 's your real name ? '' 
`` Wh -- what , mum ? '' 
`` What 's your real name ? 
Is it Bill , or Tom , or Bob ? 
-- or what is it ? '' 
I reckon I shook like a leaf , and I did n't know hardly what to do . 
But I says : `` Please to do n't poke fun at a poor girl like me , mum . 
If I 'm in the way here , I 'll -- '' `` No , you wo n't . 
Set down and stay where you are . 
I ai n't going to hurt you , and I ai n't going to tell on you , nuther . 
You just tell me your secret , and trust me . 
I 'll keep it ; and , what 's more , I 'll help you . 
So 'll my old man if you want him to . 
You see , you 're a runaway ` prentice , that 's all . 
It ai n't anything . 
There ai n't no harm in it . 
You 've been treated bad , and you made up your mind to cut . 
Bless you , child , I would n't tell on you . 
Tell me all about it now , that 's a good boy . '' 
So I said it would n't be no use to try to play it any longer , and I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything , but she mus n't go back on her promise . 
Then I told her my father and mother was dead , and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back from the river , and he treated me so bad I could n't stand it no longer ; he went away to be gone a couple of days , and so I took my chance and stole some of his daughter 's old clothes and cleared out , and I had been three nights coming the thirty miles . 
I traveled nights , and hid daytimes and slept , and the bag of bread and meat I carried from home lasted me all the way , and I had a-plenty . 
I said I believed my uncle Abner Moore would take care of me , and so that was why I struck out for this town of Goshen . 
`` Goshen , child ? 
This ai n't Goshen . 
This is St. Petersburg . 
Goshen 's ten mile further up the river . 
Who told you this was Goshen ? '' 
`` Why , a man I met at daybreak this morning , just as I was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep . 
He told me when the roads forked I must take the right hand , and five mile would fetch me to Goshen . '' 
`` He was drunk , I reckon . 
He told you just exactly wrong . '' 
`` Well , he did act like he was drunk , but it ai n't no matter now . 
I got to be moving along . 
I 'll fetch Goshen before daylight . '' 
`` Hold on a minute . 
I 'll put you up a snack to eat . 
You might want it . '' 
So she put me up a snack , and says : `` Say , when a cow 's laying down , which end of her gets up first ? 
Answer up prompt now -- do n't stop to study over it . 
Which end gets up first ? '' 
`` The hind end , mum . '' 
`` Well , then , a horse ? '' 
`` The for ` rard end , mum . '' 
`` Which side of a tree does the moss grow on ? '' 
`` North side . '' 
`` If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside , how many of them eats with their heads pointed the same direction ? '' 
`` The whole fifteen , mum . '' 
`` Well , I reckon you HAVE lived in the country . 
I thought maybe you was trying to hocus me again . 
What 's your real name , now ? '' 
`` George Peters , mum . '' 
`` Well , try to remember it , George . 
Do n't forget and tell me it 's Elexander before you go , and then get out by saying it 's George Elexander when I catch you . 
And do n't go about women in that old calico . 
You do a girl tolerable poor , but you might fool men , maybe . 
Bless you , child , when you set out to thread a needle do n't hold the thread still and fetch the needle up to it ; hold the needle still and poke the thread at it ; that 's the way a woman most always does , but a man always does t ` other way . 
And when you throw at a rat or anything , hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can , and miss your rat about six or seven foot . 
Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder , like there was a pivot there for it to turn on , like a girl ; not from the wrist and elbow , with your arm out to one side , like a boy . 
And , mind you , when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees apart ; she do n't clap them together , the way you did when you catched the lump of lead . 
Why , I spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle ; and I contrived the other things just to make certain . 
Now trot along to your uncle , Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters , and if you get into trouble you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus , which is me , and I 'll do what I can to get you out of it . 
Keep the river road all the way , and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you . 
The river road 's a rocky one , and your feet 'll be in a condition when you get to Goshen , I reckon . '' 
I went up the bank about fifty yards , and then I doubled on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was , a good piece below the house . 
I jumped in , and was off in a hurry . 
I went up-stream far enough to make the head of the island , and then started across . 
I took off the sun - bonnet , for I did n't want no blinders on then . 
When I was about the middle I heard the clock begin to strike , so I stops and listens ; the sound come faint over the water but clear -- eleven . 
When I struck the head of the island I never waited to blow , though I was most winded , but I shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be , and started a good fire there on a high and dry spot . 
Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place , a mile and a half below , as hard as I could go . 
I landed , and slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern . 
There Jim laid , sound asleep on the ground . 
I roused him out and says : `` Git up and hump yourself , Jim ! 
There ai n't a minute to lose . 
They 're after us ! '' 
Jim never asked no questions , he never said a word ; but the way he worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared . 
By that time everything we had in the world was on our raft , and she was ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid . 
We put out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing , and did n't show a candle outside after that . 
I took the canoe out from the shore a little piece , and took a look ; but if there was a boat around I could n't see it , for stars and shadows ai n't good to see by . 
Then we got out the raft and slipped along down in the shade , past the foot of the island dead still -- never saying a word . 
IT must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at last , and the raft did seem to go mighty slow . 
If a boat was to come along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the Illinois shore ; and it was well a boat did n't come , for we had n't ever thought to put the gun in the canoe , or a fishing-line , or anything to eat . 
We was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things . 
It war n't good judgment to put EVERYTHING on the raft . 
If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I built , and watched it all night for Jim to come . 
Anyways , they stayed away from us , and if my building the fire never fooled them it war n't no fault of mine . 
I played it as low down on them as I could . 
When the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a big bend on the Illinois side , and hacked off cottonwood branches with the hatchet , and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there had been a cave-in in the bank there . 
