The duke says yes . 
Then there was a fine time . 
Everybody sings out , `` Sold ! '' 
and rose up mad , and was a-going for that stage and them tragedians . 
But a big , fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts : `` Hold on ! 
Just a word , gentlemen . '' 
They stopped to listen . 
`` We are sold -- mighty badly sold . 
But we do n't want to be the laughing stock of this whole town , I reckon , and never hear the last of this thing as long as we live . 
NO . 
What we want is to go out of here quiet , and talk this show up , and sell the REST of the town ! 
Then we 'll all be in the same boat . 
Ai n't that sensible ? '' 
-LRB- `` You bet it is ! 
-- the jedge is right ! '' 
everybody sings out . -RRB- 
`` All right , then -- not a word about any sell . 
Go along home , and advise everybody to come and see the tragedy . '' 
Next day you could n't hear nothing around that town but how splendid that show was . 
House was jammed again that night , and we sold this crowd the same way . 
When me and the king and the duke got home to the raft we all had a supper ; and by and by , about midnight , they made Jim and me back her out and float her down the middle of the river , and fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town . 
The third night the house was crammed again -- and they war n't new-comers this time , but people that was at the show the other two nights . 
I stood by the duke at the door , and I see that every man that went in had his pockets bulging , or something muffled up under his coat -- and I see it war n't no perfumery , neither , not by a long sight . 
I smelt sickly eggs by the barrel , and rotten cabbages , and such things ; and if I know the signs of a dead cat being around , and I bet I do , there was sixty-four of them went in . 
I shoved in there for a minute , but it was too various for me ; I could n't stand it . 
Well , when the place could n't hold no more people the duke he give a fellow a quarter and told him to tend door for him a minute , and then he started around for the stage door , I after him ; but the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark he says : `` Walk fast now till you get away from the houses , and then shin for the raft like the dickens was after you ! '' 
I done it , and he done the same . 
We struck the raft at the same time , and in less than two seconds we was gliding down stream , all dark and still , and edging towards the middle of the river , nobody saying a word . 
I reckoned the poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with the audience , but nothing of the sort ; pretty soon he crawls out from under the wigwam , and says : `` Well , how 'd the old thing pan out this time , duke ? '' 
He had n't been up - town at all . 
We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village . 
Then we lit up and had a supper , and the king and the duke fairly laughed their bones loose over the way they 'd served them people . 
The duke says : `` Greenhorns , flatheads ! 
I knew the first house would keep mum and let the rest of the town get roped in ; and I knew they 'd lay for us the third night , and consider it was THEIR turn now . 
Well , it IS their turn , and I 'd give something to know how much they 'd take for it . 
I WOULD just like to know how they 're putting in their opportunity . 
They can turn it into a picnic if they want to -- they brought plenty provisions . '' 
Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that three nights . 
I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that before . 
By and by , when they was asleep and snoring , Jim says : `` Do n't it s ` prise you de way dem kings carries on , Huck ? '' 
`` No , '' I says , `` it do n't . '' 
`` Why do n't it , Huck ? '' 
`` Well , it do n't , because it 's in the breed . 
I reckon they 're all alike , '' `` But , Huck , dese kings o ' ourn is reglar rapscallions ; dat 's jist what dey is ; dey 's reglar rapscallions . '' 
`` Well , that 's what I 'm a-saying ; all kings is mostly rapscallions , as fur as I can make out . '' 
`` Is dat so ? '' 
`` You read about them once -- you 'll see . 
Look at Henry the Eight ; this 'n 's a Sunday-school Superintendent to HIM . 
And look at Charles Second , and Louis Fourteen , and Louis Fifteen , and James Second , and Edward Second , and Richard Third , and forty more ; besides all them Saxon heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain . 
My , you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he was in bloom . 
He WAS a blossom . 
He used to marry a new wife every day , and chop off her head next morning . 
And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs . 
` Fetch up Nell Gwynn , ' he says . 
They fetch her up . 
Next morning , ` Chop off her head ! ' 
And they chop it off . 
` Fetch up Jane Shore , ' he says ; and up she comes , Next morning , ` Chop off her head ' -- and they chop it off . 
` Ring up Fair Rosamun . ' 
Fair Rosamun answers the bell . 
Next morning , ` Chop off her head . ' 
And he made every one of them tell him a tale every night ; and he kept that up till he had hogged a thousand and one tales that way , and then he put them all in a book , and called it Domesday Book -- which was a good name and stated the case . 
You do n't know kings , Jim , but I know them ; and this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I 've struck in history . 
Well , Henry he takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country . 
How does he go at it -- give notice ? 
-- give the country a show ? 
No . 
All of a sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard , and whacks out a declaration of independence , and dares them to come on . 
That was HIS style -- he never give anybody a chance . 
He had suspicions of his father , the Duke of Wellington . 
Well , what did he do ? 
Ask him to show up ? 
No -- drownded him in a butt of mamsey , like a cat . 
S'pose people left money laying around where he was -- what did he do ? 
He collared it . 
S'pose he contracted to do a thing , and you paid him , and did n't set down there and see that he done it -- what did he do ? 
He always done the other thing . 
S'pose he opened his mouth -- what then ? 
If he did n't shut it up powerful quick he 'd lose a lie every time . 
That 's the kind of a bug Henry was ; and if we 'd a had him along ` stead of our kings he 'd a fooled that town a heap worse than ourn done . 
I do n't say that ourn is lambs , because they ai n't , when you come right down to the cold facts ; but they ai n't nothing to THAT old ram , anyway . 
All I say is , kings is kings , and you got to make allowances . 
Take them all around , they 're a mighty ornery lot . 
It 's the way they 're raised . '' 
`` But dis one do SMELL so like de nation , Huck . '' 
`` Well , they all do , Jim . 
We ca n't help the way a king smells ; history do n't tell no way . '' 
`` Now de duke , he 's a tolerble likely man in some ways . '' 
`` Yes , a duke 's different . 
But not very different . 
This one 's a middling hard lot for a duke . 
When he 's drunk there ai n't no near-sighted man could tell him from a king . '' 
`` Well , anyways , I doan ' hanker for no mo ' un um , Huck . 
Dese is all I kin stan ' . '' 
`` It 's the way I feel , too , Jim . 
But we 've got them on our hands , and we got to remember what they are , and make allowances . 
Sometimes I wish we could hear of a country that 's out of kings . '' 
What was the use to tell Jim these war n't real kings and dukes ? 
It would n't a done no good ; and , besides , it was just as I said : you could n't tell them from the real kind . 
I went to sleep , and Jim did n't call me when it was my turn . 
