`` Where ` bouts do you live ? 
In this neighborhood ? ' 
`` No 'm . 
In Hookerville , seven mile below . 
I 've walked all the way and I 'm all tired out . '' 
`` Hungry , too , I reckon . 
I 'll find you something . '' 
`` No 'm , I ai n't hungry . 
I was so hungry I had to stop two miles below here at a farm ; so I ai n't hungry no more . 
It 's what makes me so late . 
My mother 's down sick , and out of money and everything , and I come to tell my uncle Abner Moore . 
He lives at the upper end of the town , she says . 
I hai n't ever been here before . 
Do you know him ? '' 
`` No ; but I do n't know everybody yet . 
I have n't lived here quite two weeks . 
It 's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town . 
You better stay here all night . 
Take off your bonnet . '' 
`` No , '' I says ; `` I 'll rest a while , I reckon , and go on . 
I ai n't afeared of the dark . '' 
She said she would n't let me go by myself , but her husband would be in by and by , maybe in a hour and a half , and she 'd send him along with me . 
Then she got to talking about her husband , and about her relations up the river , and her relations down the river , and about how much better off they used to was , and how they did n't know but they 'd made a mistake coming to our town , instead of letting well alone -- and so on and so on , till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was going on in the town ; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the murder , and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right along . 
She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars -LRB- only she got it ten -RRB- and all about pap and what a hard lot he was , and what a hard lot I was , and at last she got down to where I was murdered . 
I says : `` Who done it ? 
We 've heard considerable about these goings on down in Hookerville , but we do n't know who 't was that killed Huck Finn . '' 
`` Well , I reckon there 's a right smart chance of people HERE that 'd like to know who killed him . 
Some think old Finn done it himself . '' 
`` No -- is that so ? '' 
`` Most everybody thought it at first . 
He 'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched . 
But before night they changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named Jim . '' 
`` Why HE -- '' I stopped . 
I reckoned I better keep still . 
She run on , and never noticed I had put in at all : `` The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed . 
So there 's a reward out for him -- three hundred dollars . 
And there 's a reward out for old Finn , too -- two hundred dollars . 
You see , he come to town the morning after the murder , and told about it , and was out with 'em on the ferryboat hunt , and right away after he up and left . 
Before night they wanted to lynch him , but he was gone , you see . 
Well , next day they found out the nigger was gone ; they found out he had n't ben seen sence ten o'clock the night the murder was done . 
So then they put it on him , you see ; and while they was full of it , next day , back comes old Finn , and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over Illinois with . 
The judge gave him some , and that evening he got drunk , and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty hard - looking strangers , and then went off with them . 
Well , he hai n't come back sence , and they ai n't looking for him back till this thing blows over a little , for people thinks now that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think robbers done it , and then he 'd get Huck 's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit . 
People do say he war n't any too good to do it . 
Oh , he 's sly , I reckon . 
If he do n't come back for a year he 'll be all right . 
You ca n't prove anything on him , you know ; everything will be quieted down then , and he 'll walk in Huck 's money as easy as nothing . '' 
`` Yes , I reckon so , 'm . 
I do n't see nothing in the way of it . 
Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it ? '' 
`` Oh , no , not everybody . 
A good many thinks he done it . 
But they 'll get the nigger pretty soon now , and maybe they can scare it out of him . '' 
`` Why , are they after him yet ? '' 
`` Well , you 're innocent , ai n't you ! 
Does three hundred dollars lay around every day for people to pick up ? 
Some folks think the nigger ai n't far from here . 
I 'm one of them -- but I hai n't talked it around . 
A few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log shanty , and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island over yonder that they call Jackson 's Island . 
Do n't anybody live there ? 
says I. No , nobody , says they . 
I did n't say any more , but I done some thinking . 
I was pretty near certain I 'd seen smoke over there , about the head of the island , a day or two before that , so I says to myself , like as not that nigger 's hiding over there ; anyway , says I , it 's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt . 
I hai n't seen any smoke sence , so I reckon maybe he 's gone , if it was him ; but husband 's going over to see -- him and another man . 
He was gone up the river ; but he got back to-day , and I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago . '' 
I had got so uneasy I could n't set still . 
I had to do something with my hands ; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it . 
My hands shook , and I was making a bad job of it . 
When the woman stopped talking I looked up , and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling a little . 
I put down the needle and thread , and let on to be interested -- and I was , too -- and says : `` Three hundred dollars is a power of money . 
I wish my mother could get it . 
Is your husband going over there to-night ? '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
He went up-town with the man I was telling you of , to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun . 
They 'll go over after midnight . '' 
`` Could n't they see better if they was to wait till daytime ? '' 
`` Yes . 
And could n't the nigger see better , too ? 
After midnight he 'll likely be asleep , and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark , if he 's got one . '' 
`` I did n't think of that . '' 
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious , and I did n't feel a bit comfortable . 
Pretty soon she says '' `` What did you say your name was , honey ? '' 
`` M -- Mary Williams . '' 
Somehow it did n't seem to me that I said it was Mary before , so I did n't look up -- seemed to me I said it was Sarah ; so I felt sort of cornered , and was afeared maybe I was looking it , too . 
I wished the woman would say something more ; the longer she set still the uneasier I was . 
But now she says : `` Honey , I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in ? '' 
`` Oh , yes 'm , I did . 
Sarah Mary Williams . 
Sarah 's my first name . 
Some calls me Sarah , some calls me Mary . '' 
`` Oh , that 's the way of it ? '' 
`` Yes 'm . '' 
I was feeling better then , but I wished I was out of there , anyway . 
I could n't look up yet . 
Well , the woman fell to talking about how hard times was , and how poor they had to live , and how the rats was as free as if they owned the place , and so forth and so on , and then I got easy again . 
She was right about the rats . 
You 'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner every little while . 
She said she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was alone , or they would n't give her no peace . 
She showed me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot , and said she was a good shot with it generly , but she 'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago , and did n't know whether she could throw true now . 
But she watched for a chance , and directly banged away at a rat ; but she missed him wide , and said `` Ouch ! '' 
