A tow-head is a sandbar that has cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth . 
We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois side , and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place , so we war n't afraid of anybody running across us . 
We laid there all day , and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore , and up - bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle . 
I told Jim all about the time I had jabbering with that woman ; and Jim said she was a smart one , and if she was to start after us herself she would n't set down and watch a camp fire -- no , sir , she 'd fetch a dog . 
Well , then , I said , why could n't she tell her husband to fetch a dog ? 
Jim said he bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start , and he believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time , or else we would n't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the village -- no , indeedy , we would be in that same old town again . 
So I said I did n't care what was the reason they did n't get us as long as they did n't . 
When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the cottonwood thicket , and looked up and down and across ; nothing in sight ; so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy , and to keep the things dry . 
Jim made a floor for the wigwam , and raised it a foot or more above the level of the raft , so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach of steamboat waves . 
Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place ; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly ; the wigwam would keep it from being seen . 
We made an extra steering-oar , too , because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something . 
We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on , because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming down - stream , to keep from getting run over ; but we would n't have to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a `` crossing '' ; for the river was pretty high yet , very low banks being still a little under water ; so up-bound boats did n't always run the channel , but hunted easy water . 
This second night we run between seven and eight hours , with a current that was making over four mile an hour . 
We catched fish and talked , and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness . 
It was kind of solemn , drifting down the big , still river , laying on our backs looking up at the stars , and we did n't ever feel like talking loud , and it war n't often that we laughed -- only a little kind of a low chuckle . 
We had mighty good weather as a general thing , and nothing ever happened to us at all -- that night , nor the next , nor the next . 
Every night we passed towns , some of them away up on black hillsides , nothing but just a shiny bed of lights ; not a house could you see . 
The fifth night we passed St. Louis , and it was like the whole world lit up . 
In St. Petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis , but I never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights at two o'clock that still night . 
There war n't a sound there ; everybody was asleep . 
Every night now I used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little village , and buy ten or fifteen cents ' worth of meal or bacon or other stuff to eat ; and sometimes I lifted a chicken that war n't roosting comfortable , and took him along . 
Pap always said , take a chicken when you get a chance , because if you do n't want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does , and a good deed ai n't ever forgot . 
I never see pap when he did n't want the chicken himself , but that is what he used to say , anyway . 
Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a watermelon , or a mushmelon , or a punkin , or some new corn , or things of that kind . 
Pap always said it war n't no harm to borrow things if you was meaning to pay them back some time ; but the widow said it war n't anything but a soft name for stealing , and no decent body would do it . 
Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right ; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list and say we would n't borrow them any more -- then he reckoned it would n't be no harm to borrow the others . 
So we talked it over all one night , drifting along down the river , trying to make up our minds whether to drop the watermelons , or the cantelopes , or the mushmelons , or what . 
But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory , and concluded to drop crabapples and p ` simmons . 
We war n't feeling just right before that , but it was all comfortable now . 
I was glad the way it come out , too , because crabapples ai n't ever good , and the p ` simmons would n't be ripe for two or three months yet . 
We shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or did n't go to bed early enough in the evening . 
Take it all round , we lived pretty high . 
The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight , with a power of thunder and lightning , and the rain poured down in a solid sheet . 
We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself . 
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead , and high , rocky bluffs on both sides . 
By and by says I , `` Hel-LO , Jim , looky yonder ! '' 
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock . 
We was drifting straight down for her . 
The lightning showed her very distinct . 
She was leaning over , with part of her upper deck above water , and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear , and a chair by the big bell , with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it , when the flashes come . 
Well , it being away in the night and stormy , and all so mysterious-like , I felt just the way any other boy would a felt when I see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river . 
I wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little , and see what there was there . 
So I says : `` Le 's land on her , Jim . '' 
But Jim was dead against it at first . 
He says : `` I doan ' want to go fool 'n ` long er no wrack . 
We 's doin ' blame ' well , en we better let blame ' well alone , as de good book says . 
Like as not dey 's a watchman on dat wrack . '' 
`` Watchman your grandmother , '' I says ; `` there ai n't nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house ; and do you reckon anybody 's going to resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this , when it 's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute ? '' 
Jim could n't say nothing to that , so he did n't try . 
`` And besides , '' I says , `` we might borrow something worth having out of the captain 's stateroom . 
Seegars , I bet you -- and cost five cents apiece , solid cash . 
Steamboat captains is always rich , and get sixty dollars a month , and THEY do n't care a cent what a thing costs , you know , long as they want it . 
Stick a candle in your pocket ; I ca n't rest , Jim , till we give her a rummaging . 
Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing ? 
Not for pie , he would n't . 
He 'd call it an adventure -- that 's what he 'd call it ; and he 'd land on that wreck if it was his last act . 
And would n't he throw style into it ? 
-- would n't he spread himself , nor nothing ? 
Why , you 'd think it was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come . 
I wish Tom Sawyer WAS here . '' 
Jim he grumbled a little , but give in . 
He said we must n't talk any more than we could help , and then talk mighty low . 
The lightning showed us the wreck again just in time , and we fetched the stabboard derrick , and made fast there . 
The deck was high out here . 
We went sneaking down the slope of it to labboard , in the dark , towards the texas , feeling our way slow with our feet , and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys , for it was so dark we could n't see no sign of them . 
Pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight , and clumb on to it ; and the next step fetched us in front of the captain 's door , which was open , and by Jimminy , away down through the texas-hall we see a light ! 
and all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in yonder ! 
Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick , and told me to come along . 
I says , all right , and was going to start for the raft ; but just then I heard a voice wail out and say : `` Oh , please do n't , boys ; I swear I wo n't ever tell ! '' 
Another voice said , pretty loud : `` It 's a lie , Jim Turner . 
You 've acted this way before . 
You always want more 'n your share of the truck , and you 've always got it , too , because you 've swore ' t if you did n't you 'd tell . 
But this time you 've said it jest one time too many . 
You 're the meanest , treacherousest hound in this country . '' 
By this time Jim was gone for the raft . 
I was just a-biling with curiosity ; and I says to myself , Tom Sawyer would n't back out now , and so I wo n't either ; I 'm a-going to see what 's going on here . 
So I dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage , and crept aft in the dark till there war n't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas . 
Then in there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand and foot , and two men standing over him , and one of them had a dim lantern in his hand , and the other one had a pistol . 
This one kept pointing the pistol at the man 's head on the floor , and saying : `` I 'd LIKE to ! 
And I orter , too -- a mean skunk ! '' 
The man on the floor would shrivel up and say , `` Oh , please do n't , Bill ; I hai n't ever goin ' to tell . '' 
And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say : '' ` Deed you AI N'T ! 
You never said no truer thing 'n that , you bet you . '' 
And once he said : `` Hear him beg ! 
and yit if we had n't got the best of him and tied him he 'd a killed us both . 
And what FOR ? 
Jist for noth ` n. Jist because we stood on our RIGHTS -- that 's what for . 
But I lay you ai n't a-goin ' to threaten nobody any more , Jim Turner . 
Put UP that pistol , Bill . '' 
Bill says : `` I do n't want to , Jake Packard . 
I 'm for killin ' him -- and did n't he kill old Hatfield jist the same way -- and do n't he deserve it ? '' 
`` But I do n't WANT him killed , and I 've got my reasons for it . '' 
`` Bless yo ' heart for them words , Jake Packard ! 
I 'll never forgit you long 's I live ! '' 
says the man on the floor , sort of blubbering . 
Packard did n't take no notice of that , but hung up his lantern on a nail and started towards where I was there in the dark , and motioned Bill to come . 
I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards , but the boat slanted so that I could n't make very good time ; so to keep from getting run over and catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side . 
The man came a-pawing along in the dark , and when Packard got to my stateroom , he says : `` Here -- come in here . '' 
And in he come , and Bill after him . 
But before they got in I was up in the upper berth , cornered , and sorry I come . 
