You make them a witch pie ; that 's the thing for YOU to do . '' 
`` But my lan ' , Mars Sid , how 's I gwyne to make 'm a witch pie ? 
I doan ' know how to make it . 
I hai n't ever hearn er sich a thing b ` fo ' . '' 
`` Well , then , I 'll have to make it myself . '' 
`` Will you do it , honey ? 
-- will you ? 
I 'll wusshup de groun ' und ' yo ' foot , I will ! '' 
`` All right , I 'll do it , seeing it 's you , and you 've been good to us and showed us the runaway nigger . 
But you got to be mighty careful . 
When we come around , you turn your back ; and then whatever we 've put in the pan , do n't you let on you see it at all . 
And do n't you look when Jim unloads the pan -- something might happen , I do n't know what . 
And above all , do n't you HANDLE the witch-things . '' 
`` HANNEL 'm , Mars Sid ? 
What IS you a-talkin ' ` bout ? 
I wouldn ' lay de weight er my finger on um , not f ' r ten hund 'd thous 'n billion dollars , I would n't . '' 
THAT was all fixed . 
So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile in the back yard , where they keep the old boots , and rags , and pieces of bottles , and wore-out tin things , and all such truck , and scratched around and found an old tin washpan , and stopped up the holes as well as we could , to bake the pie in , and took it down cellar and stole it full of flour and started for breakfast , and found a couple of shingle-nails that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and sorrows on the dungeon walls with , and dropped one of them in Aunt Sally 's apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair , and t ` other we stuck in the band of Uncle Silas 's hat , which was on the bureau , because we heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger 's house this morning , and then went to breakfast , and Tom dropped the pewter spoon in Uncle Silas 's coat-pocket , and Aunt Sally was n't come yet , so we had to wait a little while . 
And when she come she was hot and red and cross , and could n't hardly wait for the blessing ; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one hand and cracking the handiest child 's head with her thimble with the other , and says : `` I 've hunted high and I 've hunted low , and it does beat all what HAS become of your other shirt . '' 
My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things , and a hard piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the road with a cough , and was shot across the table , and took one of the children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm , and let a cry out of him the size of a warwhoop , and Tom he turned kinder blue around the gills , and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for about a quarter of a minute or as much as that , and I would a sold out for half price if there was a bidder . 
But after that we was all right again -- it was the sudden surprise of it that knocked us so kind of cold . 
Uncle Silas he says : `` It 's most uncommon curious , I ca n't understand it . 
I know perfectly well I took it OFF , because -- '' `` Because you hai n't got but one ON . 
Just LISTEN at the man ! 
I know you took it off , and know it by a better way than your wool-gethering memory , too , because it was on the clo 's - line yesterday -- I see it there myself . 
But it 's gone , that 's the long and the short of it , and you 'll just have to change to a red flann ' l one till I can get time to make a new one . 
And it 'll be the third I 've made in two years . 
It just keeps a body on the jump to keep you in shirts ; and whatever you do manage to DO with 'm all is more 'n I can make out . 
A body 'd think you WOULD learn to take some sort of care of 'em at your time of life . '' 
`` I know it , Sally , and I do try all I can . 
But it ought n't to be altogether my fault , because , you know , I do n't see them nor have nothing to do with them except when they 're on me ; and I do n't believe I 've ever lost one of them OFF of me . '' 
`` Well , it ai n't YOUR fault if you have n't , Silas ; you 'd a done it if you could , I reckon . 
And the shirt ai n't all that 's gone , nuther . 
Ther 's a spoon gone ; and THAT ai n't all . 
There was ten , and now ther 's only nine . 
The calf got the shirt , I reckon , but the calf never took the spoon , THAT 'S certain . '' 
`` Why , what else is gone , Sally ? '' 
`` Ther 's six CANDLES gone -- that 's what . 
The rats could a got the candles , and I reckon they did ; I wonder they do n't walk off with the whole place , the way you 're always going to stop their holes and do n't do it ; and if they war n't fools they 'd sleep in your hair , Silas -- YOU 'D never find it out ; but you ca n't lay the SPOON on the rats , and that I know . '' 
`` Well , Sally , I 'm in fault , and I acknowledge it ; I 've been remiss ; but I wo n't let to-morrow go by without stopping up them holes . '' 
`` Oh , I would n't hurry ; next year 'll do . 
Matilda Angelina Araminta PHELPS ! '' 
Whack comes the thimble , and the child snatches her claws out of the sugar-bowl without fooling around any . 
Just then the nigger woman steps on to the passage , and says : `` Missus , dey 's a sheet gone . '' 
`` A SHEET gone ! 
Well , for the land 's sake ! '' 
`` I 'll stop up them holes to-day , '' says Uncle Silas , looking sorrowful . 
`` Oh , DO shet up ! 
-- s ` pose the rats took the SHEET ? 
WHERE 'S it gone , Lize ? '' 
`` Clah to goodness I hai n't no notion , Miss ' Sally . 
She wuz on de clo ` sline yistiddy , but she done gone : she ain ' dah no mo ' now . '' 
`` I reckon the world IS coming to an end . 
I NEVER see the beat of it in all my born days . 
A shirt , and a sheet , and a spoon , and six can -- '' `` Missus , '' comes a young yaller wench , `` dey 's a brass cannelstick miss ` n. '' `` Cler out from here , you hussy , er I 'll take a skillet to ye ! '' 
Well , she was just a-biling . 
I begun to lay for a chance ; I reckoned I would sneak out and go for the woods till the weather moderated . 
She kept a-raging right along , running her insurrection all by herself , and everybody else mighty meek and quiet ; and at last Uncle Silas , looking kind of foolish , fishes up that spoon out of his pocket . 
She stopped , with her mouth open and her hands up ; and as for me , I wished I was in Jeruslem or somewheres . 
But not long , because she says : `` It 's JUST as I expected . 
So you had it in your pocket all the time ; and like as not you 've got the other things there , too . 
How 'd it get there ? '' 
`` I reely do n't know , Sally , '' he says , kind of apologizing , `` or you know I would tell . 
I was a-studying over my text in Acts Seventeen before breakfast , and I reckon I put it in there , not noticing , meaning to put my Testament in , and it must be so , because my Testament ai n't in ; but I 'll go and see ; and if the Testament is where I had it , I 'll know I did n't put it in , and that will show that I laid the Testament down and took up the spoon , and -- '' `` Oh , for the land 's sake ! 
Give a body a rest ! 
Go ` long now , the whole kit and biling of ye ; and do n't come nigh me again till I 've got back my peace of mind . '' 
I 'd a heard her if she 'd a said it to herself , let alone speaking it out ; and I 'd a got up and obeyed her if I 'd a been dead . 
As we was passing through the setting-room the old man he took up his hat , and the shingle - nail fell out on the floor , and he just merely picked it up and laid it on the mantel-shelf , and never said nothing , and went out . 
Tom see him do it , and remembered about the spoon , and says : `` Well , it ai n't no use to send things by HIM no more , he ai n't reliable . '' 
Then he says : `` But he done us a good turn with the spoon , anyway , without knowing it , and so we 'll go and do him one without HIM knowing it -- stop up his rat-holes . '' 
There was a noble good lot of them down cellar , and it took us a whole hour , but we done the job tight and good and shipshape . 
Then we heard steps on the stairs , and blowed out our light and hid ; and here comes the old man , with a candle in one hand and a bundle of stuff in t ` other , looking as absent-minded as year before last . 
He went a mooning around , first to one rat-hole and then another , till he 'd been to them all . 
Then he stood about five minutes , picking tallow-drip off of his candle and thinking . 
Then he turns off slow and dreamy towards the stairs , saying : `` Well , for the life of me I ca n't remember when I done it . 
I could show her now that I war n't to blame on account of the rats . 
But never mind -- let it go . 
I reckon it would n't do no good . '' 
And so he went on a-mumbling up stairs , and then we left . 
He was a mighty nice old man . 
And always is . 
Tom was a good deal bothered about what to do for a spoon , but he said we 'd got to have it ; so he took a think . 
When he had ciphered it out he told me how we was to do ; then we went and waited around the spoon-basket till we see Aunt Sally coming , and then Tom went to counting the spoons and laying them out to one side , and I slid one of them up my sleeve , and Tom says : `` Why , Aunt Sally , there ai n't but nine spoons YET . '' 
She says : `` Go ` long to your play , and do n't bother me . 
I know better , I counted 'm myself . '' 
`` Well , I 've counted them twice , Aunty , and I ca n't make but nine . '' 
She looked out of all patience , but of course she come to count -- anybody would . 
`` I declare to gracious ther ' AI N'T but nine ! '' 
she says . 
`` Why , what in the world -- plague TAKE the things , I 'll count 'm again . '' 
So I slipped back the one I had , and when she got done counting , she says : `` Hang the troublesome rubbage , ther 's TEN now ! '' 
and she looked huffy and bothered both . 
But Tom says : `` Why , Aunty , I do n't think there 's ten . '' 
`` You numskull , did n't you see me COUNT 'm ? '' 
`` I know , but -- '' `` Well , I 'll count 'm AGAIN . '' 
So I smouched one , and they come out nine , same as the other time . 
Well , she WAS in a tearing way -- just a-trembling all over , she was so mad . 
But she counted and counted till she got that addled she 'd start to count in the basket for a spoon sometimes ; and so , three times they come out right , and three times they come out wrong . 
Then she grabbed up the basket and slammed it across the house and knocked the cat galley-west ; and she said cle ' r out and let her have some peace , and if we come bothering around her again betwixt that and dinner she 'd skin us . 
So we had the odd spoon , and dropped it in her apron-pocket whilst she was a - giving us our sailing orders , and Jim got it all right , along with her shingle nail , before noon . 
