Want to keep it off ? '' 
And he said : `` Ef you 's got hairy arms en a hairy breas ' , it 's a sign dat you 's agwyne to be rich . 
Well , dey 's some use in a sign like dat , ` kase it 's so fur ahead . 
You see , maybe you 's got to be po ' a long time fust , en so you might git discourage ' en kill yo ` sef ' f you didn ' know by de sign dat you gwyne to be rich bymeby . '' 
`` Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast , Jim ? '' 
`` What 's de use to ax dat question ? 
Do n't you see I has ? '' 
`` Well , are you rich ? '' 
`` No , but I ben rich wunst , and gwyne to be rich agin . 
Wunst I had foteen dollars , but I tuck to specalat 'n' , en got busted out . '' 
`` What did you speculate in , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , fust I tackled stock . '' 
`` What kind of stock ? '' 
`` Why , live stock -- cattle , you know . 
I put ten dollars in a cow . 
But I ain ' gwyne to resk no mo ' money in stock . 
De cow up 'n' died on my han 's . '' 
`` So you lost the ten dollars . '' 
`` No , I did n't lose it all . 
I on ' y los ' ` bout nine of it . 
I sole de hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents . '' 
`` You had five dollars and ten cents left . 
Did you speculate any more ? '' 
`` Yes . 
You know that one-laigged nigger dat b ` longs to old Misto Bradish ? 
Well , he sot up a bank , en say anybody dat put in a dollar would git fo ' dollars mo ' at de en ' er de year . 
Well , all de niggers went in , but dey did n't have much . 
I wuz de on ' y one dat had much . 
So I stuck out for mo ' dan fo ' dollars , en I said ' f I didn ' git it I 'd start a bank mysef . 
Well , o ' course dat nigger want ' to keep me out er de business , bekase he says dey war n't business ` nough for two banks , so he say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en ' er de year . 
`` So I done it . 
Den I reck 'n' d I 'd inves ' de thirty-five dollars right off en keep things a-movin ' . 
Dey wuz a nigger name ' Bob , dat had ketched a wood-flat , en his marster didn ' know it ; en I bought it off 'n him en told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en ' er de year come ; but somebody stole de wood-flat dat night , en nex day de one-laigged nigger say de bank 's busted . 
So dey didn ' none uv us git no money . '' 
`` What did you do with the ten cents , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , I ` uz gwyne to spen ' it , but I had a dream , en de dream tole me to give it to a nigger name ' Balum -- Balum 's Ass dey call him for short ; he 's one er dem chuckleheads , you know . 
But he 's lucky , dey say , en I see I war n't lucky . 
De dream say let Balum inves ' de ten cents en he 'd make a raise for me . 
Well , Balum he tuck de money , en when he wuz in church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po ' len ' to de Lord , en boun ' to git his money back a hund 'd times . 
So Balum he tuck en give de ten cents to de po ' , en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to come of it . '' 
`` Well , what did come of it , Jim ? '' 
`` Nuffn never come of it . 
I couldn ' manage to k ` leck dat money no way ; en Balum he couldn ' . 
I ain ' gwyne to len ' no mo ' money ` dout I see de security . 
Boun ' to git yo ' money back a hund 'd times , de preacher says ! 
Ef I could git de ten CENTS back , I 'd call it squah , en be glad er de chanst . '' 
`` Well , it 's all right anyway , Jim , long as you 're going to be rich again some time or other . '' 
`` Yes ; en I 's rich now , come to look at it . 
I owns mysef , en I 's wuth eight hund 'd dollars . 
I wisht I had de money , I wouldn ' want no mo ' . '' 
I WANTED to go and look at a place right about the middle of the island that I 'd found when I was exploring ; so we started and soon got to it , because the island was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide . 
This place was a tolerable long , steep hill or ridge about forty foot high . 
We had a rough time getting to the top , the sides was so steep and the bushes so thick . 
We tramped and clumb around all over it , and by and by found a good big cavern in the rock , most up to the top on the side towards Illinois . 
The cavern was as big as two or three rooms bunched together , and Jim could stand up straight in it . 
It was cool in there . 
Jim was for putting our traps in there right away , but I said we did n't want to be climbing up and down there all the time . 
Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place , and had all the traps in the cavern , we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island , and they would never find us without dogs . 
And , besides , he said them little birds had said it was going to rain , and did I want the things to get wet ? 
So we went back and got the canoe , and paddled up abreast the cavern , and lugged all the traps up there . 
Then we hunted up a place close by to hide the canoe in , amongst the thick willows . 
We took some fish off of the lines and set them again , and begun to get ready for dinner . 
The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in , and on one side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit , and was flat and a good place to build a fire on . 
So we built it there and cooked dinner . 
We spread the blankets inside for a carpet , and eat our dinner in there . 
We put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern . 
Pretty soon it darkened up , and begun to thunder and lighten ; so the birds was right about it . 
Directly it begun to rain , and it rained like all fury , too , and I never see the wind blow so . 
It was one of these regular summer storms . 
It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black outside , and lovely ; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby ; and here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the pale underside of the leaves ; and then a perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set the branches to tossing their arms as if they was just wild ; and next , when it was just about the bluest and blackest -- FST ! 
it was as bright as glory , and you 'd have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in the storm , hundreds of yards further than you could see before ; dark as sin again in a second , and now you 'd hear the thunder let go with an awful crash , and then go rumbling , grumbling , tumbling , down the sky towards the under side of the world , like rolling empty barrels down stairs -- where it 's long stairs and they bounce a good deal , you know . 
`` Jim , this is nice , '' I says . 
`` I would n't want to be nowhere else but here . 
Pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread . '' 
`` Well , you would n't a ben here ' f it had n't a ben for Jim . 
You 'd a ben down dah in de woods widout any dinner , en gittn ' mos ' drownded , too ; dat you would , honey . 
Chickens knows when it 's gwyne to rain , en so do de birds , chile . '' 
The river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days , till at last it was over the banks . 
The water was three or four foot deep on the island in the low places and on the Illinois bottom . 
On that side it was a good many miles wide , but on the Missouri side it was the same old distance across -- a half a mile -- because the Missouri shore was just a wall of high bluffs . 
Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe , It was mighty cool and shady in the deep woods , even if the sun was blazing outside . 
We went winding in and out amongst the trees , and sometimes the vines hung so thick we had to back away and go some other way . 
Well , on every old broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things ; and when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame , on account of being hungry , that you could paddle right up and put your hand on them if you wanted to ; but not the snakes and turtles -- they would slide off in the water . 
The ridge our cavern was in was full of them . 
We could a had pets enough if we 'd wanted them . 
One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft -- nice pine planks . 
It was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long , and the top stood above water six or seven inches -- a solid , level floor . 
We could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes , but we let them go ; we did n't show ourselves in daylight . 
Another night when we was up at the head of the island , just before daylight , here comes a frame-house down , on the west side . 
She was a two-story , and tilted over considerable . 
We paddled out and got aboard -- clumb in at an upstairs window . 
But it was too dark to see yet , so we made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight . 
The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island . 
Then we looked in at the window . 
We could make out a bed , and a table , and two old chairs , and lots of things around about on the floor , and there was clothes hanging against the wall . 
There was something laying on the floor in the far corner that looked like a man . 
So Jim says : `` Hello , you ! '' 
But it did n't budge . 
So I hollered again , and then Jim says : `` De man ai n't asleep -- he 's dead . 
You hold still -- I 'll go en see . '' 
He went , and bent down and looked , and says : `` It 's a dead man . 
Yes , indeedy ; naked , too . 
He 's ben shot in de back . 
I reck 'n he 's ben dead two er three days . 
Come in , Huck , but doan ' look at his face -- it 's too gashly . '' 
I did n't look at him at all . 
Jim throwed some old rags over him , but he need n't done it ; I did n't want to see him . 
There was heaps of old greasy cards scattered around over the floor , and old whisky bottles , and a couple of masks made out of black cloth ; and all over the walls was the ignorantest kind of words and pictures made with charcoal . 
There was two old dirty calico dresses , and a sun-bonnet , and some women 's underclothes hanging against the wall , and some men 's clothing , too . 
We put the lot into the canoe -- it might come good . 
There was a boy 's old speckled straw hat on the floor ; I took that , too . 
And there was a bottle that had had milk in it , and it had a rag stopper for a baby to suck . 
We would a took the bottle , but it was broke . 
There was a seedy old chest , and an old hair trunk with the hinges broke . 
They stood open , but there war n't nothing left in them that was any account . 
The way things was scattered about we reckoned the people left in a hurry , and war n't fixed so as to carry off most of their stuff . 
We got an old tin lantern , and a butcher-knife without any handle , and a bran-new Barlow knife worth two bits in any store , and a lot of tallow candles , and a tin candlestick , and a gourd , and a tin cup , and a ratty old bedquilt off the bed , and a reticule with needles and pins and beeswax and buttons and thread and all such truck in it , and a hatchet and some nails , and a fishline as thick as my little finger with some monstrous hooks on it , and a roll of buckskin , and a leather dog-collar , and a horseshoe , and some vials of medicine that did n't have no label on them ; and just as we was leaving I found a tolerable good curry-comb , and Jim he found a ratty old fiddle-bow , and a wooden leg . 
The straps was broke off of it , but , barring that , it was a good enough leg , though it was too long for me and not long enough for Jim , and we could n't find the other one , though we hunted all around . 
And so , take it all around , we made a good haul . 
When we was ready to shove off we was a quarter of a mile below the island , and it was pretty broad day ; so I made Jim lay down in the canoe and cover up with the quilt , because if he set up people could tell he was a nigger a good ways off . 
I paddled over to the Illinois shore , and drifted down most a half a mile doing it . 
I crept up the dead water under the bank , and had n't no accidents and did n't see nobody . 
We got home all safe . 
AFTER breakfast I wanted to talk about the dead man and guess out how he come to be killed , but Jim did n't want to . 
He said it would fetch bad luck ; and besides , he said , he might come and ha ` nt us ; he said a man that war n't buried was more likely to go a-ha ` nting around than one that was planted and comfortable . 
That sounded pretty reasonable , so I did n't say no more ; but I could n't keep from studying over it and wishing I knowed who shot the man , and what they done it for . 
We rummaged the clothes we 'd got , and found eight dollars in silver sewed up in the lining of an old blanket overcoat . 
Jim said he reckoned the people in that house stole the coat , because if they 'd a knowed the money was there they would n't a left it . 
I said I reckoned they killed him , too ; but Jim did n't want to talk about that . 
I says : `` Now you think it 's bad luck ; but what did you say when I fetched in the snake-skin that I found on the top of the ridge day before yesterday ? 
You said it was the worst bad luck in the world to touch a snake-skin with my hands . 
Well , here 's your bad luck ! 
We 've raked in all this truck and eight dollars besides . 
I wish we could have some bad luck like this every day , Jim . '' 
`` Never you mind , honey , never you mind . 
Do n't you git too peart . 
It 's a-comin ' . 
Mind I tell you , it 's a-comin ' . '' 
It did come , too . 
It was a Tuesday that we had that talk . 
Well , after dinner Friday we was laying around in the grass at the upper end of the ridge , and got out of tobacco . 
I went to the cavern to get some , and found a rattlesnake in there . 
I killed him , and curled him up on the foot of Jim 's blanket , ever so natural , thinking there 'd be some fun when Jim found him there . 
Well , by night I forgot all about the snake , and when Jim flung himself down on the blanket while I struck a light the snake 's mate was there , and bit him . 
He jumped up yelling , and the first thing the light showed was the varmint curled up and ready for another spring . 
I laid him out in a second with a stick , and Jim grabbed pap 's whisky-jug and begun to pour it down . 
He was barefooted , and the snake bit him right on the heel . 
That all comes of my being such a fool as to not remember that wherever you leave a dead snake its mate always comes there and curls around it . 
Jim told me to chop off the snake 's head and throw it away , and then skin the body and roast a piece of it . 
I done it , and he eat it and said it would help cure him . 
He made me take off the rattles and tie them around his wrist , too . 
He said that that would help . 
Then I slid out quiet and throwed the snakes clear away amongst the bushes ; for I war n't going to let Jim find out it was all my fault , not if I could help it . 
Jim sucked and sucked at the jug , and now and then he got out of his head and pitched around and yelled ; but every time he come to himself he went to sucking at the jug again . 
His foot swelled up pretty big , and so did his leg ; but by and by the drunk begun to come , and so I judged he was all right ; but I 'd druther been bit with a snake than pap 's whisky . 
Jim was laid up for four days and nights . 
Then the swelling was all gone and he was around again . 
I made up my mind I would n't ever take a-holt of a snake-skin again with my hands , now that I see what had come of it . 
Jim said he reckoned I would believe him next time . 
And he said that handling a snake-skin was such awful bad luck that maybe we had n't got to the end of it yet . 
He said he druther see the new moon over his left shoulder as much as a thousand times than take up a snake-skin in his hand . 
Well , I was getting to feel that way myself , though I 've always reckoned that looking at the new moon over your left shoulder is one of the carelessest and foolishest things a body can do . 
Old Hank Bunker done it once , and bragged about it ; and in less than two years he got drunk and fell off of the shot-tower , and spread himself out so that he was just a kind of a layer , as you may say ; and they slid him edgeways between two barn doors for a coffin , and buried him so , so they say , but I did n't see it . 
Pap told me . 
But anyway it all come of looking at the moon that way , like a fool . 
Well , the days went along , and the river went down between its banks again ; and about the first thing we done was to bait one of the big hooks with a skinned rabbit and set it and catch a catfish that was as big as a man , being six foot two inches long , and weighed over two hundred pounds . 
We could n't handle him , of course ; he would a flung us into Illinois . 
We just set there and watched him rip and tear around till he drownded . 
We found a brass button in his stomach and a round ball , and lots of rubbage . 
We split the ball open with the hatchet , and there was a spool in it . 
Jim said he 'd had it there a long time , to coat it over so and make a ball of it . 
It was as big a fish as was ever catched in the Mississippi , I reckon . 
Jim said he had n't ever seen a bigger one . 
He would a been worth a good deal over at the village . 
They peddle out such a fish as that by the pound in the market-house there ; everybody buys some of him ; his meat 's as white as snow and makes a good fry . 
Next morning I said it was getting slow and dull , and I wanted to get a stirring up some way . 
I said I reckoned I would slip over the river and find out what was going on . 
Jim liked that notion ; but he said I must go in the dark and look sharp . 
Then he studied it over and said , could n't I put on some of them old things and dress up like a girl ? 
That was a good notion , too . 
So we shortened up one of the calico gowns , and I turned up my trouser-legs to my knees and got into it . 
Jim hitched it behind with the hooks , and it was a fair fit . 
I put on the sun-bonnet and tied it under my chin , and then for a body to look in and see my face was like looking down a joint of stove-pipe . 
Jim said nobody would know me , even in the daytime , hardly . 
I practiced around all day to get the hang of the things , and by and by I could do pretty well in them , only Jim said I did n't walk like a girl ; and he said I must quit pulling up my gown to get at my britches-pocket . 
I took notice , and done better . 
I started up the Illinois shore in the canoe just after dark . 
I started across to the town from a little below the ferry-landing , and the drift of the current fetched me in at the bottom of the town . 
I tied up and started along the bank . 
There was a light burning in a little shanty that had n't been lived in for a long time , and I wondered who had took up quarters there . 
I slipped up and peeped in at the window . 
There was a woman about forty year old in there knitting by a candle that was on a pine table . 
I did n't know her face ; she was a stranger , for you could n't start a face in that town that I did n't know . 
Now this was lucky , because I was weakening ; I was getting afraid I had come ; people might know my voice and find me out . 
But if this woman had been in such a little town two days she could tell me all I wanted to know ; so I knocked at the door , and made up my mind I would n't forget I was a girl . 
`` COME in , '' says the woman , and I did . 
She says : `` Take a cheer . '' 
I done it . 
She looked me all over with her little shiny eyes , and says : `` What might your name be ? '' 
`` Sarah Williams . '' 
`` Where ` bouts do you live ? 
In this neighborhood ? ' 
`` No 'm . 
In Hookerville , seven mile below . 
I 've walked all the way and I 'm all tired out . '' 
`` Hungry , too , I reckon . 
I 'll find you something . '' 
`` No 'm , I ai n't hungry . 
I was so hungry I had to stop two miles below here at a farm ; so I ai n't hungry no more . 
It 's what makes me so late . 
My mother 's down sick , and out of money and everything , and I come to tell my uncle Abner Moore . 
He lives at the upper end of the town , she says . 
I hai n't ever been here before . 
Do you know him ? '' 
`` No ; but I do n't know everybody yet . 
I have n't lived here quite two weeks . 
It 's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town . 
You better stay here all night . 
Take off your bonnet . '' 
`` No , '' I says ; `` I 'll rest a while , I reckon , and go on . 
I ai n't afeared of the dark . '' 
She said she would n't let me go by myself , but her husband would be in by and by , maybe in a hour and a half , and she 'd send him along with me . 
Then she got to talking about her husband , and about her relations up the river , and her relations down the river , and about how much better off they used to was , and how they did n't know but they 'd made a mistake coming to our town , instead of letting well alone -- and so on and so on , till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was going on in the town ; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the murder , and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right along . 
She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars -LRB- only she got it ten -RRB- and all about pap and what a hard lot he was , and what a hard lot I was , and at last she got down to where I was murdered . 
I says : `` Who done it ? 
We 've heard considerable about these goings on down in Hookerville , but we do n't know who 't was that killed Huck Finn . '' 
`` Well , I reckon there 's a right smart chance of people HERE that 'd like to know who killed him . 
Some think old Finn done it himself . '' 
`` No -- is that so ? '' 
`` Most everybody thought it at first . 
He 'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched . 
But before night they changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named Jim . '' 
`` Why HE -- '' I stopped . 
I reckoned I better keep still . 
She run on , and never noticed I had put in at all : `` The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed . 
So there 's a reward out for him -- three hundred dollars . 
And there 's a reward out for old Finn , too -- two hundred dollars . 
You see , he come to town the morning after the murder , and told about it , and was out with 'em on the ferryboat hunt , and right away after he up and left . 
Before night they wanted to lynch him , but he was gone , you see . 
Well , next day they found out the nigger was gone ; they found out he had n't ben seen sence ten o'clock the night the murder was done . 
So then they put it on him , you see ; and while they was full of it , next day , back comes old Finn , and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over Illinois with . 
The judge gave him some , and that evening he got drunk , and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty hard - looking strangers , and then went off with them . 
Well , he hai n't come back sence , and they ai n't looking for him back till this thing blows over a little , for people thinks now that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think robbers done it , and then he 'd get Huck 's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit . 
People do say he war n't any too good to do it . 
Oh , he 's sly , I reckon . 
If he do n't come back for a year he 'll be all right . 
You ca n't prove anything on him , you know ; everything will be quieted down then , and he 'll walk in Huck 's money as easy as nothing . '' 
`` Yes , I reckon so , 'm . 
I do n't see nothing in the way of it . 
Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it ? '' 
`` Oh , no , not everybody . 
A good many thinks he done it . 
But they 'll get the nigger pretty soon now , and maybe they can scare it out of him . '' 
`` Why , are they after him yet ? '' 
`` Well , you 're innocent , ai n't you ! 
Does three hundred dollars lay around every day for people to pick up ? 
Some folks think the nigger ai n't far from here . 
I 'm one of them -- but I hai n't talked it around . 
A few days ago I was talking with an old couple that lives next door in the log shanty , and they happened to say hardly anybody ever goes to that island over yonder that they call Jackson 's Island . 
Do n't anybody live there ? 
says I. No , nobody , says they . 
I did n't say any more , but I done some thinking . 
I was pretty near certain I 'd seen smoke over there , about the head of the island , a day or two before that , so I says to myself , like as not that nigger 's hiding over there ; anyway , says I , it 's worth the trouble to give the place a hunt . 
I hai n't seen any smoke sence , so I reckon maybe he 's gone , if it was him ; but husband 's going over to see -- him and another man . 
He was gone up the river ; but he got back to-day , and I told him as soon as he got here two hours ago . '' 
I had got so uneasy I could n't set still . 
I had to do something with my hands ; so I took up a needle off of the table and went to threading it . 
My hands shook , and I was making a bad job of it . 
When the woman stopped talking I looked up , and she was looking at me pretty curious and smiling a little . 
I put down the needle and thread , and let on to be interested -- and I was , too -- and says : `` Three hundred dollars is a power of money . 
I wish my mother could get it . 
Is your husband going over there to-night ? '' 
`` Oh , yes . 
He went up-town with the man I was telling you of , to get a boat and see if they could borrow another gun . 
They 'll go over after midnight . '' 
`` Could n't they see better if they was to wait till daytime ? '' 
`` Yes . 
And could n't the nigger see better , too ? 
After midnight he 'll likely be asleep , and they can slip around through the woods and hunt up his camp fire all the better for the dark , if he 's got one . '' 
`` I did n't think of that . '' 
The woman kept looking at me pretty curious , and I did n't feel a bit comfortable . 
Pretty soon she says '' `` What did you say your name was , honey ? '' 
`` M -- Mary Williams . '' 
Somehow it did n't seem to me that I said it was Mary before , so I did n't look up -- seemed to me I said it was Sarah ; so I felt sort of cornered , and was afeared maybe I was looking it , too . 
I wished the woman would say something more ; the longer she set still the uneasier I was . 
But now she says : `` Honey , I thought you said it was Sarah when you first come in ? '' 
`` Oh , yes 'm , I did . 
Sarah Mary Williams . 
Sarah 's my first name . 
Some calls me Sarah , some calls me Mary . '' 
`` Oh , that 's the way of it ? '' 
`` Yes 'm . '' 
I was feeling better then , but I wished I was out of there , anyway . 
I could n't look up yet . 
Well , the woman fell to talking about how hard times was , and how poor they had to live , and how the rats was as free as if they owned the place , and so forth and so on , and then I got easy again . 
She was right about the rats . 
You 'd see one stick his nose out of a hole in the corner every little while . 
She said she had to have things handy to throw at them when she was alone , or they would n't give her no peace . 
She showed me a bar of lead twisted up into a knot , and said she was a good shot with it generly , but she 'd wrenched her arm a day or two ago , and did n't know whether she could throw true now . 
But she watched for a chance , and directly banged away at a rat ; but she missed him wide , and said `` Ouch ! '' 
it hurt her arm so . 
Then she told me to try for the next one . 
I wanted to be getting away before the old man got back , but of course I did n't let on . 
I got the thing , and the first rat that showed his nose I let drive , and if he 'd a stayed where he was he 'd a been a tolerable sick rat . 
She said that was first-rate , and she reckoned I would hive the next one . 
She went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back , and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with . 
I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them , and went on talking about her and her husband 's matters . 
But she broke off to say : `` Keep your eye on the rats . 
You better have the lead in your lap , handy . '' 
So she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment , and I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking . 
But only about a minute . 
Then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face , and very pleasant , and says : `` Come , now , what 's your real name ? '' 
`` Wh -- what , mum ? '' 
`` What 's your real name ? 
Is it Bill , or Tom , or Bob ? 
-- or what is it ? '' 
I reckon I shook like a leaf , and I did n't know hardly what to do . 
But I says : `` Please to do n't poke fun at a poor girl like me , mum . 
If I 'm in the way here , I 'll -- '' `` No , you wo n't . 
Set down and stay where you are . 
I ai n't going to hurt you , and I ai n't going to tell on you , nuther . 
You just tell me your secret , and trust me . 
I 'll keep it ; and , what 's more , I 'll help you . 
So 'll my old man if you want him to . 
You see , you 're a runaway ` prentice , that 's all . 
It ai n't anything . 
There ai n't no harm in it . 
You 've been treated bad , and you made up your mind to cut . 
Bless you , child , I would n't tell on you . 
Tell me all about it now , that 's a good boy . '' 
So I said it would n't be no use to try to play it any longer , and I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything , but she mus n't go back on her promise . 
Then I told her my father and mother was dead , and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back from the river , and he treated me so bad I could n't stand it no longer ; he went away to be gone a couple of days , and so I took my chance and stole some of his daughter 's old clothes and cleared out , and I had been three nights coming the thirty miles . 
I traveled nights , and hid daytimes and slept , and the bag of bread and meat I carried from home lasted me all the way , and I had a-plenty . 
I said I believed my uncle Abner Moore would take care of me , and so that was why I struck out for this town of Goshen . 
`` Goshen , child ? 
This ai n't Goshen . 
This is St. Petersburg . 
Goshen 's ten mile further up the river . 
Who told you this was Goshen ? '' 
`` Why , a man I met at daybreak this morning , just as I was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep . 
He told me when the roads forked I must take the right hand , and five mile would fetch me to Goshen . '' 
`` He was drunk , I reckon . 
He told you just exactly wrong . '' 
`` Well , he did act like he was drunk , but it ai n't no matter now . 
I got to be moving along . 
I 'll fetch Goshen before daylight . '' 
`` Hold on a minute . 
I 'll put you up a snack to eat . 
You might want it . '' 
So she put me up a snack , and says : `` Say , when a cow 's laying down , which end of her gets up first ? 
Answer up prompt now -- do n't stop to study over it . 
Which end gets up first ? '' 
`` The hind end , mum . '' 
`` Well , then , a horse ? '' 
`` The for ` rard end , mum . '' 
`` Which side of a tree does the moss grow on ? '' 
`` North side . '' 
`` If fifteen cows is browsing on a hillside , how many of them eats with their heads pointed the same direction ? '' 
`` The whole fifteen , mum . '' 
`` Well , I reckon you HAVE lived in the country . 
I thought maybe you was trying to hocus me again . 
What 's your real name , now ? '' 
`` George Peters , mum . '' 
`` Well , try to remember it , George . 
Do n't forget and tell me it 's Elexander before you go , and then get out by saying it 's George Elexander when I catch you . 
And do n't go about women in that old calico . 
You do a girl tolerable poor , but you might fool men , maybe . 
Bless you , child , when you set out to thread a needle do n't hold the thread still and fetch the needle up to it ; hold the needle still and poke the thread at it ; that 's the way a woman most always does , but a man always does t ` other way . 
And when you throw at a rat or anything , hitch yourself up a tiptoe and fetch your hand up over your head as awkward as you can , and miss your rat about six or seven foot . 
Throw stiff-armed from the shoulder , like there was a pivot there for it to turn on , like a girl ; not from the wrist and elbow , with your arm out to one side , like a boy . 
And , mind you , when a girl tries to catch anything in her lap she throws her knees apart ; she do n't clap them together , the way you did when you catched the lump of lead . 
Why , I spotted you for a boy when you was threading the needle ; and I contrived the other things just to make certain . 
Now trot along to your uncle , Sarah Mary Williams George Elexander Peters , and if you get into trouble you send word to Mrs. Judith Loftus , which is me , and I 'll do what I can to get you out of it . 
Keep the river road all the way , and next time you tramp take shoes and socks with you . 
The river road 's a rocky one , and your feet 'll be in a condition when you get to Goshen , I reckon . '' 
I went up the bank about fifty yards , and then I doubled on my tracks and slipped back to where my canoe was , a good piece below the house . 
I jumped in , and was off in a hurry . 
I went up-stream far enough to make the head of the island , and then started across . 
I took off the sun - bonnet , for I did n't want no blinders on then . 
When I was about the middle I heard the clock begin to strike , so I stops and listens ; the sound come faint over the water but clear -- eleven . 
When I struck the head of the island I never waited to blow , though I was most winded , but I shoved right into the timber where my old camp used to be , and started a good fire there on a high and dry spot . 
Then I jumped in the canoe and dug out for our place , a mile and a half below , as hard as I could go . 
I landed , and slopped through the timber and up the ridge and into the cavern . 
There Jim laid , sound asleep on the ground . 
I roused him out and says : `` Git up and hump yourself , Jim ! 
There ai n't a minute to lose . 
They 're after us ! '' 
Jim never asked no questions , he never said a word ; but the way he worked for the next half an hour showed about how he was scared . 
By that time everything we had in the world was on our raft , and she was ready to be shoved out from the willow cove where she was hid . 
We put out the camp fire at the cavern the first thing , and did n't show a candle outside after that . 
I took the canoe out from the shore a little piece , and took a look ; but if there was a boat around I could n't see it , for stars and shadows ai n't good to see by . 
Then we got out the raft and slipped along down in the shade , past the foot of the island dead still -- never saying a word . 
IT must a been close on to one o'clock when we got below the island at last , and the raft did seem to go mighty slow . 
If a boat was to come along we was going to take to the canoe and break for the Illinois shore ; and it was well a boat did n't come , for we had n't ever thought to put the gun in the canoe , or a fishing-line , or anything to eat . 
We was in ruther too much of a sweat to think of so many things . 
It war n't good judgment to put EVERYTHING on the raft . 
If the men went to the island I just expect they found the camp fire I built , and watched it all night for Jim to come . 
Anyways , they stayed away from us , and if my building the fire never fooled them it war n't no fault of mine . 
I played it as low down on them as I could . 
When the first streak of day began to show we tied up to a towhead in a big bend on the Illinois side , and hacked off cottonwood branches with the hatchet , and covered up the raft with them so she looked like there had been a cave-in in the bank there . 
A tow-head is a sandbar that has cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth . 
We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois side , and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place , so we war n't afraid of anybody running across us . 
We laid there all day , and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore , and up - bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle . 
I told Jim all about the time I had jabbering with that woman ; and Jim said she was a smart one , and if she was to start after us herself she would n't set down and watch a camp fire -- no , sir , she 'd fetch a dog . 
Well , then , I said , why could n't she tell her husband to fetch a dog ? 
Jim said he bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start , and he believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time , or else we would n't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the village -- no , indeedy , we would be in that same old town again . 
So I said I did n't care what was the reason they did n't get us as long as they did n't . 
When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the cottonwood thicket , and looked up and down and across ; nothing in sight ; so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy , and to keep the things dry . 
Jim made a floor for the wigwam , and raised it a foot or more above the level of the raft , so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach of steamboat waves . 
Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place ; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly ; the wigwam would keep it from being seen . 
We made an extra steering-oar , too , because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something . 
We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on , because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming down - stream , to keep from getting run over ; but we would n't have to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a `` crossing '' ; for the river was pretty high yet , very low banks being still a little under water ; so up-bound boats did n't always run the channel , but hunted easy water . 
This second night we run between seven and eight hours , with a current that was making over four mile an hour . 
We catched fish and talked , and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness . 
It was kind of solemn , drifting down the big , still river , laying on our backs looking up at the stars , and we did n't ever feel like talking loud , and it war n't often that we laughed -- only a little kind of a low chuckle . 
We had mighty good weather as a general thing , and nothing ever happened to us at all -- that night , nor the next , nor the next . 
Every night we passed towns , some of them away up on black hillsides , nothing but just a shiny bed of lights ; not a house could you see . 
The fifth night we passed St. Louis , and it was like the whole world lit up . 
In St. Petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis , but I never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights at two o'clock that still night . 
There war n't a sound there ; everybody was asleep . 
Every night now I used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little village , and buy ten or fifteen cents ' worth of meal or bacon or other stuff to eat ; and sometimes I lifted a chicken that war n't roosting comfortable , and took him along . 
Pap always said , take a chicken when you get a chance , because if you do n't want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does , and a good deed ai n't ever forgot . 
I never see pap when he did n't want the chicken himself , but that is what he used to say , anyway . 
Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a watermelon , or a mushmelon , or a punkin , or some new corn , or things of that kind . 
Pap always said it war n't no harm to borrow things if you was meaning to pay them back some time ; but the widow said it war n't anything but a soft name for stealing , and no decent body would do it . 
Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right ; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list and say we would n't borrow them any more -- then he reckoned it would n't be no harm to borrow the others . 
So we talked it over all one night , drifting along down the river , trying to make up our minds whether to drop the watermelons , or the cantelopes , or the mushmelons , or what . 
But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory , and concluded to drop crabapples and p ` simmons . 
We war n't feeling just right before that , but it was all comfortable now . 
I was glad the way it come out , too , because crabapples ai n't ever good , and the p ` simmons would n't be ripe for two or three months yet . 
We shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or did n't go to bed early enough in the evening . 
Take it all round , we lived pretty high . 
The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight , with a power of thunder and lightning , and the rain poured down in a solid sheet . 
We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself . 
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead , and high , rocky bluffs on both sides . 
By and by says I , `` Hel-LO , Jim , looky yonder ! '' 
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock . 
We was drifting straight down for her . 
The lightning showed her very distinct . 
She was leaning over , with part of her upper deck above water , and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear , and a chair by the big bell , with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it , when the flashes come . 
Well , it being away in the night and stormy , and all so mysterious-like , I felt just the way any other boy would a felt when I see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river . 
I wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little , and see what there was there . 
So I says : `` Le 's land on her , Jim . '' 
But Jim was dead against it at first . 
He says : `` I doan ' want to go fool 'n ` long er no wrack . 
We 's doin ' blame ' well , en we better let blame ' well alone , as de good book says . 
Like as not dey 's a watchman on dat wrack . '' 
`` Watchman your grandmother , '' I says ; `` there ai n't nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house ; and do you reckon anybody 's going to resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this , when it 's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute ? '' 
Jim could n't say nothing to that , so he did n't try . 
`` And besides , '' I says , `` we might borrow something worth having out of the captain 's stateroom . 
Seegars , I bet you -- and cost five cents apiece , solid cash . 
Steamboat captains is always rich , and get sixty dollars a month , and THEY do n't care a cent what a thing costs , you know , long as they want it . 
Stick a candle in your pocket ; I ca n't rest , Jim , till we give her a rummaging . 
Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing ? 
Not for pie , he would n't . 
He 'd call it an adventure -- that 's what he 'd call it ; and he 'd land on that wreck if it was his last act . 
And would n't he throw style into it ? 
-- would n't he spread himself , nor nothing ? 
Why , you 'd think it was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come . 
I wish Tom Sawyer WAS here . '' 
Jim he grumbled a little , but give in . 
He said we must n't talk any more than we could help , and then talk mighty low . 
The lightning showed us the wreck again just in time , and we fetched the stabboard derrick , and made fast there . 
The deck was high out here . 
We went sneaking down the slope of it to labboard , in the dark , towards the texas , feeling our way slow with our feet , and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys , for it was so dark we could n't see no sign of them . 
Pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight , and clumb on to it ; and the next step fetched us in front of the captain 's door , which was open , and by Jimminy , away down through the texas-hall we see a light ! 
and all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in yonder ! 
Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick , and told me to come along . 
I says , all right , and was going to start for the raft ; but just then I heard a voice wail out and say : `` Oh , please do n't , boys ; I swear I wo n't ever tell ! '' 
Another voice said , pretty loud : `` It 's a lie , Jim Turner . 
You 've acted this way before . 
You always want more 'n your share of the truck , and you 've always got it , too , because you 've swore ' t if you did n't you 'd tell . 
But this time you 've said it jest one time too many . 
You 're the meanest , treacherousest hound in this country . '' 
By this time Jim was gone for the raft . 
I was just a-biling with curiosity ; and I says to myself , Tom Sawyer would n't back out now , and so I wo n't either ; I 'm a-going to see what 's going on here . 
So I dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage , and crept aft in the dark till there war n't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas . 
Then in there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand and foot , and two men standing over him , and one of them had a dim lantern in his hand , and the other one had a pistol . 
This one kept pointing the pistol at the man 's head on the floor , and saying : `` I 'd LIKE to ! 
And I orter , too -- a mean skunk ! '' 
The man on the floor would shrivel up and say , `` Oh , please do n't , Bill ; I hai n't ever goin ' to tell . '' 
And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say : '' ` Deed you AI N'T ! 
You never said no truer thing 'n that , you bet you . '' 
And once he said : `` Hear him beg ! 
and yit if we had n't got the best of him and tied him he 'd a killed us both . 
And what FOR ? 
Jist for noth ` n. Jist because we stood on our RIGHTS -- that 's what for . 
But I lay you ai n't a-goin ' to threaten nobody any more , Jim Turner . 
Put UP that pistol , Bill . '' 
Bill says : `` I do n't want to , Jake Packard . 
I 'm for killin ' him -- and did n't he kill old Hatfield jist the same way -- and do n't he deserve it ? '' 
`` But I do n't WANT him killed , and I 've got my reasons for it . '' 
`` Bless yo ' heart for them words , Jake Packard ! 
I 'll never forgit you long 's I live ! '' 
says the man on the floor , sort of blubbering . 
Packard did n't take no notice of that , but hung up his lantern on a nail and started towards where I was there in the dark , and motioned Bill to come . 
I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards , but the boat slanted so that I could n't make very good time ; so to keep from getting run over and catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side . 
The man came a-pawing along in the dark , and when Packard got to my stateroom , he says : `` Here -- come in here . '' 
And in he come , and Bill after him . 
But before they got in I was up in the upper berth , cornered , and sorry I come . 
