The conversation turned on one of the neighbouring landowners . 
` Rotten aristocratic snob , ' observed Bazarov indifferently . 
He had met him in Petersburg . 
` Allow me to ask you , ' began Pavel Petrovitch , and his lips were trembling , ` according to your ideas , have the words `` rotten '' and `` aristocrat '' the same meaning ? ' ' 
I said `` aristocratic snob , '' ' replied Bazarov , lazily swallowing a sip of tea . 
` Precisely so ; but I imagine you have the same opinion of aristocrats as of aristocratic snobs . 
I think it my duty to inform you that I do not share that opinion . 
I venture to assert that every one knows me for a man of liberal ideas and devoted to progress ; but , exactly for that reason , I respect aristocrats -- real aristocrats . 
Kindly remember , sir ' -LRB- at these words Bazarov lifted his eyes and looked at Pavel Petrovitch -RRB- , ` kindly remember , sir , ' he repeated , with acrimony -- ` the English aristocracy . 
They do not abate one iota of their rights , and for that reason they respect the rights of others ; they demand the performance of what is due to them , and for that reason they perform their own duties . 
The aristocracy has given freedom to England , and maintains it for her . ' 
` We 've heard that story a good many times , ' replied Bazarov ; ` but what are you trying to prove by that ? ' ' 
I am tryin ' to prove by that , sir ' -LRB- when Pavel Petrovitch was angry he intentionally clipped his words in this way , though , of course , he knew very well that such forms are not strictly grammatical . 
In this fashionable whim could be discerned a survival of the habits of the times of Alexander . 
The exquisites of those days , on the rare occasions when they spoke their own language , made use of such slipshod forms ; as much as to say , ` We , of course , are born Russians , at the same time we are great swells , who are at liberty to neglect the rules of scholars ' -RRB- ; ' I am tryin ' to prove by that , sir , that without the sense of personal dignity , without self-respect -- and these two sentiments are well developed in the aristocrat -- there is no secure foundation for the social ... bien public ... the social fabric . 
Personal character , sir -- that is the chief thing ; a man 's personal character must be firm as a rock , since everything is built on it . 
I am very well aware , for instance , that you are pleased to consider my habits , my dress , my refinements , in fact , ridiculous ; but all that proceeds from a sense of self-respect , from a sense of duty -- yes , indeed , of duty . 
I live in the country , in the wilds , but I will not lower myself . 
I respect the dignity of man in myself . ' 
` Let me ask you , Pavel Petrovitch , ' commented Bazarov ; ` you respect yourself , and sit with your hands folded ; what sort of benefit does that do to the bien public ? 
If you did n't respect yourself , you 'd do just the same . ' 
Pavel Petrovitch turned white . 
` That 's a different question . 
It 's absolutely unnecessary for me to explain to you now why I sit with folded hands , as you are pleased to express yourself . 
I wish only to tell you that aristocracy is a principle , and in our days none but immoral or silly people can live without principles . 
I said that to Arkady the day after he came home , and I repeat it now . 
Is n't it so , Nikolai ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch nodded his head . 
` Aristocracy , Liberalism , progress , principles , ' Bazarov was saying meanwhile ; ` if you think of it , what a lot of foreign ... and useless words ! 
To a Russian they 're good for nothing . ' 
` What is good for something according to you ? 
If we listen to you , we shall find ourselves outside humanity , outside its laws . 
Come -- the logic of history demands ... ' ` But what 's that logic to us ? 
We call get on without that too . ' 
` How do you mean ? ' 
` Why , this . 
You do n't need logic , I hope , to put a bit of bread in your mouth when you 're hungry . 
What 's the object of these abstractions to us ? ' 
Pavel Petrovitch raised his hands in horror . ' 
I do n't understand you , after that . 
You insult the Russian people . 
I do n't understand how it 's possible not to acknowledge principles , rules ! 
By virtue of what do you act then ? ' 
` I 've told you already , uncle , that we do n't accept any authorities , ' put in Arkady . 
` We act by virtue of what we recognise as beneficial , ' observed Bazarov . 
` At the present time , negation is the most beneficial of all -- and we deny -- ' ` Everything ? ' 
` Everything ! ' 
` What ? 
not only art and poetry ... but even ... horrible to say ... ' ` Everything , ' repeated Bazarov , with indescribable composure . 
Pavel Petrovitch stared at him . 
He had not expected this ; while Arkady fairly blushed with delight . 
` Allow me , though , ' began Nikolai Petrovitch . 
` You deny everything ; or , speaking more precisely , you destroy everything ... . 
But one must construct too , you know . ' 
` That 's not our business now ... . 
The ground wants clearing first . ' 
` The present condition of the people requires it , ' added Arkady , with dignity ; ` we are bound to carry out these requirements , we have no right to yield to the satisfaction of our personal egoism . ' 
This last phrase obviously displeased Bazarov ; there was a flavour of philosophy , that is to say , romanticism about it , for Bazarov called philosophy , too , romanticism , but he did not think it necessary to correct his young disciple . 
` No , no ! ' 
cried Pavel Petrovitch , with sudden energy . 
` I 'm not willing to believe that you , young men , know the Russian people really , that you are the representatives of their requirements , their efforts ! 
No ; the Russian people is not what you imagine it . 
Tradition it holds sacred ; it is a patriarchal people ; it can not live without faith ... ' ` I 'm not going to dispute that , ' Bazarov interrupted . 
` I 'm even ready to agree that in that you 're right . ' 
` But if I am right ... ' ` And , all the same , that proves nothing . ' 
` It just proves nothing , ' repeated Arkady , with the confidence of a practised chess-player , who has foreseen an apparently dangerous move on the part of his adversary , and so is not at all taken aback by it . 
` How does it prove nothing ? ' 
muttered Pavel Petrovitch , astounded . 
` You must be going against the people then ? ' 
` And what if we are ? ' 
shouted Bazarov . 
` The people imagine that , when it thunders , the prophet Ilya 's riding across the sky in his chariot . 
What then ? 
Are we to agree with them ? 
Besides , the people 's Russian ; but am I not Russian too ? ' 
` No , you are not Russian , after all you have just been saying ! 
I ca n't acknowledge you as Russian . ' 
` My grandfather ploughed the land , ' answered Bazarov with haughty pride . 
` Ask any one of your peasants which of us -- you or me -- he 'd more readily acknowledge as a fellow-countryman . 
You do n't even know how to talk to them . ' 
` While you talk to him and despise him at the same time . ' 
` Well , suppose he deserves contempt . 
You find fault with my attitude , but how do you know that I have got it by chance , that it 's not a product of that very national spirit , in the name of which you wage war on it ? ' 
` What an idea ! 
Much use in nihilists ! ' 
` Whether they 're of use or not , is not for us to decide . 
Why , even you suppose you 're not a useless person . ' 
` Gentlemen , gentlemen , no personalities , please ! ' 
cried Nikolai Petrovitch , getting up . 
Pavel Petrovitch smiled , and laying his hand on his brother 's shoulder , forced him to sit down again . 
` Do n't be uneasy , ' he said ; ' I shall not forget myself , just through that sense of dignity which is made fun of so mercilessly by our friend -- our friend , the doctor . 
Let me ask , ' he resumed , turning again to Bazarov ; ` you suppose , possibly , that your doctrine is a novelty ? 
That is quite a mistake . 
The materialism you advocate has been more than once in vogue already , and has always proved insufficient ... ' ' A foreign word again ! ' 
broke in Bazarov . 
He was beginning to feel vicious , and his face assumed a peculiar coarse coppery hue . 
` In the first place , we advocate nothing ; that 's not our way . ' 
` What do you do , then ? ' 
` I 'll tell you what we do . 
Not long ago we used to say that our officials took bribes , that we had no roads , no commerce , no real justice ... ' ` Oh , I see , you are reformers -- that 's what that 's called , I fancy . 
I too should agree to many of your reforms , but ... ' ` Then we suspected that talk , perpetual talk , and nothing but talk , about our social diseases , was not worth while , that it all led to nothing but superficiality and pedantry ; we saw that our leading men , so-called advanced people and reformers , are no good ; that we busy ourselves over foolery , talk rubbish about art , unconscious creativeness , parliamentarism , trial by jury , and the deuce knows what all ; while , all the while , it 's a question of getting bread to eat , while we 're stifling under the grossest superstition , while all our enterprises come to grief , simply because there are n't honest men enough to carry them on , while the very emancipation our Government 's busy upon will hardly come to any good , because peasants are glad to rob even themselves to get drunk at the gin-shop . ' 
` Yes , ' interposed Pavel Petrovitch , ` yes ; you were convinced of all this , and decided not to undertake anything seriously , yourselves . ' 
` We decided not to undertake anything , ' repeated Bazarov grimly . 
He suddenly felt vexed with himself for having , without reason , been so expansive before this gentleman . 
` But to confine yourselves to abuse ? ' 
` To confine ourselves to abuse . ' 
` And that is called nihilism ? ' 
` And that 's called nihilism , ' Bazarov repeated again , this time with peculiar rudeness . 
Pavel Petrovitch puckered up his face a little . 
` So that 's it ! ' 
he observed in a strangely composed voice . 
` Nihilism is to cure all our woes , and you , you are our heroes and saviours . 
But why do you abuse others , those reformers even ? 
Do n't you do as much talking as every one else ? ' 
` Whatever faults we have , we do not err in that way , ' Bazarov muttered between his teeth . 
` What , then ? 
Do you act , or what ? 
Are you preparing for action ? ' 
Bazarov made no answer . 
Something like a tremor passed over Pavel Petrovitch , but he at once regained control of himself . 
` Hm ! 
... Action , destruction ... ' he went on . 
` But how destroy without even knowing why ? ' 
` We shall destroy , because we are a force , ' observed Arkady . 
Pavel Petrovitch looked at his nephew and laughed . 
` Yes , a force is not to be called to account , ' said Arkady , drawing himself up . 
` Unhappy boy ! ' 
wailed Pavel Petrovitch , he was positively incapable of maintaining his firm demeanour any longer . 
` If you could only realise what it is you are doing for your country . 
No ; it 's enough to try the patience of an angel ! 
Force ! 
There 's force in the savage Kalmuck , in the Mongolian ; but what is it to us ? 
What is precious to us is civilisation ; yes , yes , sir , its fruits are precious to us . 
And do n't tell me those fruits are worthless ; the poorest dauber , un barbouilleur , the man who plays dance music for five farthings an evening , is of more use than you , because they are the representatives of civilisation , and not of brute Mongolian force ! 
You fancy yourselves advanced people , and all the while you are only fit for the Kalmuck 's hovel ! 
Force ! 
And recollect , you forcible gentlemen , that you 're only four men and a half , and the others are millions , who wo n't let you trample their sacred traditions under foot , who will crush you and walk over you ! ' 
` If we 're crushed , serve us right , ' observed Bazarov . 
` But that 's an open question . 
We are not so few as you suppose . ' 
` What ? 
You seriously suppose you will come to terms with a whole people ? ' 
` All Moscow was burnt down , you know , by a farthing dip , ' answered Bazarov . 
` Yes , yes . 
First a pride almost Satanic , then ridicule -- that , that 's what it is attracts the young , that 's what gains an ascendancy over the inexperienced hearts of boys ! 
Here 's one of them sitting beside you , ready to worship the ground under your feet . 
Look at him ! 
-LRB- Arkady turned away and frowned . -RRB- 
And this plague has spread far already . 
I have been told that in Rome our artists never set foot in the Vatican . 
Raphael they regard as almost a fool , because , if you please , he 's an authority ; while they 're all the while most disgustingly sterile and unsuccessful , men whose imagination does not soar beyond ` Girls at a Fountain , ' however they try ! 
And the girls even out of drawing . 
They are fine fellows to your mind , are they not ? ' 
` To my mind , ' retorted Bazarov , ` Raphael 's not worth a brass farthing ; and they 're no better than he . ' 
` Bravo ! 
bravo ! 
Listen , Arkady ... that 's how young men of to-day ought to express themselves ! 
And if you come to think of it , how could they fail to follow you ! 
In old days , young men had to study ; they did n't want to be called dunces , so they had to work hard whether they liked it or not . 
But now , they need only say , `` Everything in the world is foolery ! '' 
and the trick 's done . 
Young men are delighted . 
And , to be sure , they were simply geese before , and now they have suddenly turned nihilists . ' 
` Your praiseworthy sense of personal dignity has given way , ' remarked Bazarov phlegmatically , while Arkady was hot all over , and his eyes were flashing . 
` Our argument has gone too far ; it 's better to cut it short , I think . 
I shall be quite ready to agree with you , ' he added , getting up , ` when you bring forward a single institution in our present mode of life , in family or in social life , which does not call for complete and unqualified destruction . ' ' 
I will bring forward millions of such institutions , ' cried Pavel Petrovitch -- ` millions ! 
Well -- the Mir , for instance . ' 
A cold smile curved Bazarov 's lips . 
` Well , as regards the Mir , ' he commented ; ` you had better talk to your brother . 
He has seen by now , I should fancy , what sort of thing the Mir is in fact -- its common guarantee , its sobriety , and other features of the kind . ' 
` The family , then , the family as it exists among our peasants ! ' 
cried Pavel Petrovitch . 
` And that subject , too , I imagine , it will be better for yourselves not to go into in detail . 
Do n't you realise all the advantages of the head of the family choosing his daughters-in-law ? 
Take my advice , Pavel Petrovitch , allow yourself two days to think about it ; you 're not likely to find anything on the spot . 
Go through all our classes , and think well over each , while I and Arkady will ... ' ` Will go on turning everything into ridicule , ' broke in Pavel Petrovitch . 
` No , will go on dissecting frogs . 
Come , Arkady ; good-bye for the present , gentlemen ! ' 
The two friends walked off . 
The brothers were left alone , and at first they only looked at one another . 
` So that , ' began Pavel Petrovitch , ` so that 's what our young men of this generation are ! 
They are like that -- our successors ! ' 
` Our successors ! ' 
repeated Nikolai Petrovitch , with a dejected smile . 
He had been sitting on thorns , all through the argument , and had done nothing but glance stealthily , with a sore heart , at Arkady . 
` Do you know what I was reminded of , brother ? 
I once had a dispute with our poor mother ; she stormed , and would n't listen to me . 
At last I said to her , `` Of course , you ca n't understand me ; we belong , '' I said , `` to two different generations . '' 
She was dreadfully offended , while I thought , `` There 's no help for it . 
It 's a bitter pill , but she has to swallow it . '' 
You see , now , our turn has come , and our successors can say to us , `` You are not of our generation ; swallow your pill . '' ' 
` You are beyond everything in your generosity and modesty , ' replied Pavel Petrovitch . 
` I 'm convinced , on the contrary , that you and I are far more in the right than these young gentlemen , though we do perhaps express ourselves in old-fashioned language , vieilli , and have not the same insolent conceit ... . 
And the swagger of the young men nowadays ! 
You ask one , `` Do you take red wine or white ? '' 
`` It is my custom to prefer red ! '' 
he answers in a deep bass , with a face as solemn as if the whole universe had its eyes on him at that instant ... ' ` Do you care for any more tea ? ' 
asked Fenitchka , putting her head in at the door ; she had not been able to make up her mind to come into the drawing-room while there was the sound of voices in dispute there . 
` No , you can tell them to take the samovar , ' answered Nikolai Petrovitch , and he got up to meet her . 
Pavel Petrovitch said ' bon soir ' to him abruptly , and went away to his study . 
Half an hour later Nikolai Petrovitch went into the garden to his favourite arbour . 
He was overtaken by melancholy thoughts . 
For the first time he realised clearly the distance between him and his son ; he foresaw that every day it would grow wider and wider . 
In vain , then , had he spent whole days sometimes in the winter at Petersburg over the newest books ; in vain had he listened to the talk of the young men ; in vain had he rejoiced when he succeeded in putting in his word too in their heated discussions . 
` My brother says we are right , ' he thought , ` and apart from all vanity , I do think myself that they are further from the truth than we are , though at the same time I feel there is something behind them we have not got , some superiority over us ... . 
Is it youth ? 
No ; not only youth . 
Does n't their superiority consist in there being fewer traces of the slaveowner in them than in us ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch 's head sank despondently , and he passed his hand over his face . 
` But to renounce poetry ? ' 
he thought again ; ` to have no feeling for art , for nature ... ' And he looked round , as though trying to understand how it was possible to have no feeling for nature . 
It was already evening ; the sun was hidden behind a small copse of aspens which lay a quarter of a mile from the garden ; its shadow stretched indefinitely across the still fields . 
A peasant on a white nag went at a trot along the dark , narrow path close beside the copse ; his whole figure was clearly visible even to the patch on his shoulder , in spite of his being in the shade ; the horse 's hoofs flew along bravely . 
The sun 's rays from the farther side fell full on the copse , and piercing through its thickets , threw such a warm light on the aspen trunks that they looked like pines , and their leaves were almost a dark blue , while above them rose a pale blue sky , faintly tinged by the glow of sunset . 
The swallows flew high ; the wind had quite died away , belated bees hummed slowly and drowsily among the lilac blossom ; a swarm of midges hung like a cloud over a solitary branch which stood out against the sky . 
` How beautiful , my God ! ' 
thought Nikolai Petrovitch , and his favourite verses were almost on his lips ; he remembered Arkady 's Stoff und Kraft -- and was silent , but still he sat there , still he gave himself up to the sorrowful consolation of solitary thought . 
He was fond of dreaming ; his country life had developed the tendency in him . 
How short a time ago , he had been dreaming like this , waiting for his son at the posting station , and what a change already since that day ; their relations that were then undefined , were defined now -- and how defined ! 
Again his dead wife came back to his imagination , but not as he had known her for many years , not as the good domestic housewife , but as a young girl with a slim figure , innocently inquiring eyes , and a tight twist of hair on her childish neck . 
He remembered how he had seen her for the first time . 
He was still a student then . 
He had met her on the staircase of his lodgings , and , jostling by accident against her , he tried to apologise , and could only mutter , ' Pardon , monsieur , ' while she bowed , smiled , and suddenly seemed frightened , and ran away , though at the bend of the staircase she had glanced rapidly at him , assumed a serious air , and blushed . 
Afterwards , the first timid visits , the half-words , the half-smiles , and embarrassment ; and melancholy , and yearnings , and at last that breathing rapture ... . 
Where had it all vanished ? 
She had been his wife , he had been happy as few on earth are happy ... ` But , ' he mused , ` these sweet first moments , why could one not live an eternal , undying life in them ? ' 
He did not try to make his thought clear to himself ; but he felt that he longed to keep that blissful time by something stronger than memory ; he longed to feel his Marya near him again to have the sense of her warmth and breathing , and already he could fancy that over him ... ` Nikolai Petrovitch , ' came the sound of Fenitchka 's voice close by him ; ` where are you ? ' 
He started . 
He felt no pang , no shame . 
He never even admitted the possibility of comparison between his wife and Fenitchka , but he was sorry she had thought of coming to look for him . 
Her voice had brought back to him at once his grey hairs , his age , his reality ... . 
The enchanted world into which he was just stepping , which was just rising out of the dim mists of the past , was shaken -- and vanished . 
` I 'm here , ' he answered ; ` I 'm coming , run along . ' 
` There it is , the traces of the slave owner , ' flashed through his mind . 
Fenitchka peeped into the arbour at him without speaking , and disappeared ; while he noticed with astonishment that the night had come on while he had been dreaming . 
Everything around was dark and hushed . 
Fenitchka 's face had glimmered so pale and slight before him . 
He got up , and was about to go home ; but the emotion stirred in his heart could not be soothed at once , and he began slowly walking about the garden , sometimes looking at the ground at his feet , and then raising his eyes towards the sky where swarms of stars were twinkling . 
He walked a great deal , till he was almost tired out , while the restlessness within him , a kind of yearning , vague , melancholy restlessness , still was not appeased . 
Oh , how Bazarov would have laughed at him , if he had known what was passing within him then ! 
Arkady himself would have condemned him . 
He , a man forty-four years old , an agriculturist and a farmer , was shedding tears , causeless tears ; this was a hundred times worse than the violoncello . 
Nikolai Petrovitch continued walking , and could not make up his mind to go into the house , into the snug peaceful nest , which looked out at him so hospitably from all its lighted windows ; he had not the force to tear himself away from the darkness , the garden , the sense of the fresh air in his face , from that melancholy , that restless craving . 
At a turn in the path , he was met by Pavel Petrovitch . 
` What 's the matter with you ? ' 
he asked Nikolai Petrovitch ; ` you are as white as a ghost ; you are not well ; why do n't you go to bed ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch explained to him briefly his state of feeling and moved away . 
Pavel Petrovitch went to the end of the garden , and he too grew thoughtful , and he too raised his eyes toward the heavens . 
But in his beautiful dark eyes , nothing was reflected but the light of the stars . 
He was not born an idealist , and his fastidiously dry and sensuous soul , with its French tinge of cynicism was not capable of dreaming ... ` Do you know what ? ' 
Bazarov was saying to Arkady the same night . 
` I 've got a splendid idea . 
Your father was saying to-day that he 'd had an invitation from your illustrious relative . 
Your father 's not going ; let us be off to X -- ; you know the worthy man invites you too . 
You see what fine weather it is ; we 'll stroll about and look at the town . 
We 'll have five or six days ' outing , and enjoy ourselves . ' 
` And you 'll come back here again ? ' 
` No ; I must go to my father 's . 
You know , he lives about twenty-five miles from X -- . 
I 've not seen him for a long while , and my mother too ; I must cheer the old people up . 
They 've been good to me , especially my father ; he 's awfully funny . 
I 'm their only one too . ' 
` And will you be long with them ? ' ' 
I do n't suppose so . 
It will be dull , of course . ' 
` And you 'll come to us on your way back ? ' ' 
I do n't know ... I 'll see . 
Well , what do you say ? 
Shall we go ? ' 
` If you like , ' observed Arkady languidly . 
In his heart he was highly delighted with his friend 's suggestion , but he thought it a duty to conceal his feeling . 
He was not a nihilist for nothing ! 
The next day he set off with Bazarov to X -- . 
The younger part of the household at Maryino were sorry at their going ; Dunyasha even cried ... but the old folks breathed more easily . 
The town of X -- to which our friends set off was in the jurisdiction of a governor who was a young man , and at once a progressive and a despot , as often happens with Russians . 
Before the end of the first year of his government , he had managed to quarrel not only with the marshal of nobility , a retired officer of the guards , who kept open house and a stud of horses , but even with his own subordinates . 
The feuds arising from this cause assumed at last such proportions that the ministry in Petersburg had found it necessary to send down a trusted personage with a commission to investigate it all on the spot . 
The choice of the authorities fell upon Matvy Ilyitch Kolyazin , the son of the Kolyazin , under whose protection the brothers Kirsanov had once found themselves . 
He , too , was a ` young man ' ; that is to say , he had not long passed forty , but he was already on the high road to becoming a statesman , and wore a star on each side of his breast -- one , to be sure , a foreign star , not of the first magnitude . 
Like the governor , whom he had come down to pass judgment upon , he was reckoned a progressive ; and though he was already a bigwig , he was not like the majority of bigwigs . 
He had the highest opinion of himself ; his vanity knew no bounds , but he behaved simply , looked affable , listened condescendingly , and laughed so good-naturedly , that on a first acquaintance he might even be taken for ' a jolly good fellow . ' 
On important occasions , however , he knew , as the saying is , how to make his authority felt . 
` Energy is essential , ' he used to say then , ' l'énergie est la première qualité d'un homme d'état ; ' and for all that , he was usually taken in , and any moderately experienced official could turn him round his finger . 
Matvy Ilyitch used to speak with great respect of Guizot , and tried to impress every one with the idea that he did not belong to the class of routiniers and high-and-dry bureaucrats , that not a single phenomenon of social life passed unnoticed by him ... . 
All such phrases were very familiar to him . 
He even followed , with dignified indifference , it is true , the development of contemporary literature ; so a grown-up man who meets a procession of small boys in the street will sometimes walk after it . 
In reality , Matvy Ilyitch had not got much beyond those political men of the days of Alexander , who used to prepare for an evening party at Madame Svyetchin 's by reading a page of Condillac ; only his methods were different , more modern . 
He was an adroit courtier , a great hypocrite , and nothing more ; he had no special aptitude for affairs , and no intellect , but he knew how to manage his own business successfully ; no one could get the better of him there , and , to be sure , that 's the principal thing . 
Matvy Ilyitch received Arkady with the good-nature , we might even call it playfulness , characteristic of the enlightened higher official . 
He was astonished , however , when he heard that the cousins he had invited had remained at home in the country . 
` Your father was always a queer fellow , ' he remarked , playing with the tassels of his magnificent velvet dressing-gown , and suddenly turning to a young official in a discreetly buttoned-up uniform , he cried , with an air of concentrated attention , ` What ? ' 
The young man , whose lips were glued together from prolonged silence , got up and looked in perplexity at his chief . 
But , having nonplussed his subordinate , Matvy Ilyitch paid him no further attention . 
Our higher officials are fond as a rule of nonplussing their subordinates ; the methods to which they have recourse to attain that end are rather various . 
The following means , among others , is in great vogue , ' is quite a favourite , ' as the English say ; a high official suddenly ceases to understand the simplest words , assuming total deafness . 
He will ask , for instance , What 's to-day ? ' 
He is respectfully informed , ` To-day 's Friday , your Ex-s-s-s-lency . ' 
` Eh ? 
What ? 
What 's that ? 
What do you say ? ' 
the great man repeats with intense attention . 
` To-day 's Friday , your Ex -- s -- s -- lency . ' 
` Eh ? 
What ? 
What 's Friday ? 
What Friday ? ' 
` Friday , your Ex -- s -- s -- s -- lency , the day of the week . ' 
` What , do you pretend to teach me , eh ? ' 
Matvy Ilyitch was a higher official all the same , though he was reckoned a liberal . ' 
I advise you , my dear boy , to go and call on the Governor , ' he said to Arkady ; ` you understand , I do n't advise you to do so because I adhere to old-fashioned ideas of the necessity of paying respect to authorities , but simply because the Governor 's a very decent fellow ; besides , you probably want to make acquaintance with the society here ... . 
You 're not a bear , I hope ? 
And he 's giving a great ball the day after to-morrow . ' 
` Will you be at the ball ? ' 
inquired Arkady . 
` He gives it in my honour , ' answered Matvy Ilyitch , almost pityingly . 
` Do you dance ? ' 
` Yes ; I dance , but not well . ' 
` That 's a pity ! 
There are pretty girls here , and it 's a disgrace for a young man not to dance . 
Again , I do n't say that through any old-fashioned ideas ; I do n't in the least imagine that a man 's wit lies in his feet , but Byronism is ridiculous , il a fait son temps . ' 
` But , uncle , it 's not through Byronism , I ... ' ' I will introduce you to the ladies here ; I will take you under my wing , ' interrupted Matvy Ilyitch , and he laughed complacently . 
` You 'll find it warm , eh ? ' 
A servant entered and announced the arrival of the superintendent of the Crown domains , a mild-eyed old man , with deep creases round his mouth , who was excessively fond of nature , especially on a summer day , when , in his words , ` every little busy bee takes a little bribe from every little flower . ' 
Arkady withdrew . 
He found Bazarov at the tavern where they were staying , and was a long while persuading him to go with him to the Governor 's . 
` Well , there 's no help for it , ' said Bazarov at last . 
` It 's no good doing things by halves . 
We came to look at the gentry ; let 's look at them ! ' 
The Governor received the young men affably , but he did not ask them to sit down , nor did he sit down himself . 
He was in an everlasting fuss and hurry ; in the morning he used to put on a tight uniform and an excessively stiff cravat ; he never ate or drank enough ; he was for ever making arrangements . 
He invited Kirsanov and Bazarov to his ball , and within a few minutes invited them a second time , regarding them as brothers , and calling them Kisarov . 
They were on their way home from the Governor 's , when suddenly a short man , in a Slavophil national dress , leaped out of a trap that was passing them , and crying , ` Yevgeny Vassilyitch ! ' 
dashed up to Bazarov . 
` Ah ! 
it 's you , Herr Sitnikov , ' observed Bazarov , still stepping along on the pavement ; ` by what chance did you come here ? ' 
` Fancy , absolutely by chance , ' he replied , and returning to the trap , he waved his hand several times , and shouted , ` Follow , follow us ! 
My father had business here , ' he went on , hopping across the gutter , ` and so he asked me ... . 
I heard to-day of your arrival , and have already been to see you ... ' -LRB- The friends did , in fact , on returning to their room , find there a card , with the corners turned down , bearing the name of Sitnikov , on one side in French , on the other in Slavonic characters . -RRB- ' 
I hope you are not coming from the Governor 's ? ' 
` It 's no use to hope ; we come straight from him . ' 
` Ah ! 
in that case I will call on him too ... . 
Yevgeny Vassilyitch , introduce me to your ... to the ... ' ` Sitnikov , Kirsanov , ' mumbled Bazarov , not stopping . ' 
I am greatly flattered , ' began Sitnikov , walking sidewise , smirking , and hurriedly pulling off his really over-elegant gloves . ' 
I have heard so much ... . 
I am an old acquaintance of Yevgeny Vassilyitch , and , I may say -- his disciple . 
I am indebted to him for my regeneration ... ' Arkady looked at Bazarov 's disciple . 
There was an expression of excitement and dulness imprinted on the small but pleasant features of his well-groomed face ; his small eyes , that seemed squeezed in , had a fixed and uneasy look , and his laugh , too , was uneasy -- a sort of short , wooden laugh . 
` Would you believe it , ' he pursued , ` when Yevgeny Vassilyitch for the first time said before me that it was not right to accept any authorities , I felt such enthusiasm ... as though my eyes were opened ! 
Here , I thought , at last I have found a man ! 
By the way , Yevgeny Vassilyitch , you positively must come to know a lady here , who is really capable of understanding you , and for whom your visit would be a real festival ; you have heard of her , I suppose ? ' 
` Who is it ? ' 
Bazarov brought out unwillingly . 
` Kukshina , Eudoxie , Evdoksya Kukshin . 
She 's a remarkable nature , émancipée in the true sense of the word , an advanced woman . 
Do you know what ? 
We 'll all go together to see her now . 
She lives only two steps from here . 
We will have lunch there . 
I suppose you have not lunched yet ? ' 
` No ; not yet . ' 
` Well , that 's capital . 
She has separated , you understand , from her husband ; she is not dependent on any one . ' 
` Is she pretty ? ' 
Bazarov cut in . 
` N-no , one could n't say that . ' 
` Then , what the devil are you asking us to see her for ? ' 
` Fie ; you must have your joke ... . 
She will give us a bottle of champagne . ' 
` Oh , that 's it . 
One can see the practical man at once . 
By the way , is your father still in the gin business ? ' 
` Yes , ' said Sitnikov , hurriedly , and he gave a shrill spasmodic laugh . 
` Well ? 
Will you come ? ' ' 
I do n't really know . ' 
` You wanted to see people , go along , ' said Arkady in an undertone . 
` And what do you say to it , Mr. Kirsanov ? ' 
Sitnikov put in . 
` You must come too ; we ca n't go without you . ' 
` But how can we burst in upon her all at once ? ' 
` That 's no matter . 
Kukshina 's a brick ! ' 
` There will be a bottle of champagne ? ' 
asked Bazarov . 
` Three ! ' 
cried Sitnikov ; ` that I answer for . ' 
` What with ? ' 
` My own head . ' 
` Your father 's purse would be better . 
However , we are coming . ' 
The small gentleman 's house in the Moscow style , in which Avdotya Nikitishna , otherwise Evdoksya , Kukshin , lived , was in one of the streets of X -- , which had been lately burnt down ; it is well known that our provincial towns are burnt down every five years . 
At the door , above a visiting card nailed on all askew , there was a bell-handle to be seen , and in the hall the visitors were met by some one , not exactly a servant , nor exactly a companion , in a cap -- unmistakable tokens of the progressive tendencies of the lady of the house . 
Sitnikov inquired whether Avdotya Nikitishna was at home . 
` Is that you , Victor ? ' 
sounded a shrill voice from the adjoining room . 
` Come in . ' 
The woman in the cap disappeared at once . 
` I 'm not alone , ' observed Sitnikov , with a sharp look at Arkady and Bazarov as he briskly pulled off his overcoat , beneath which appeared something of the nature of a coachman 's velvet jacket . 
` No matter , ' answered the voice . ' 
Entrez . ' 
The young men went in . 
The room into which they walked was more like a working study than a drawing-room . 
Papers , letters , fat numbers of Russian journals , for the most part uncut , lay at random on the dusty tables ; white cigarette ends lay scattered in every direction . 
On a leather-covered sofa , a lady , still young , was half reclining . 
Her fair hair was rather dishevelled ; she wore a silk gown , not perfectly tidy , heavy bracelets on her short arms , and a lace handkerchief on her head . 
She got up from the sofa , and carelessly drawing a velvet cape trimmed with yellowish ermine over her shoulders , she said languidly , ` Good-morning , Victor , ' and pressed Sitnikov 's hand . 
` Bazarov , Kirsanov , ' he announced abruptly in imitation of Bazarov . 
` Delighted , ' answered Madame Kukshin , and fixing on Bazarov a pair of round eyes , between which was a forlorn little turned-up red nose , ' I know you , ' she added , and pressed his hand too . 
Bazarov scowled . 
There was nothing repulsive in the little plain person of the emancipated woman ; but the expression of her face produced a disagreeable effect on the spectator . 
One felt impelled to ask her , ` What 's the matter ; are you hungry ? 
Or bored ? 
Or shy ? 
What are you in a fidget about ? ' 
Both she and Sitnikov had always the same uneasy air . 
She was extremely unconstrained , and at the same time awkward ; she obviously regarded herself as a good-natured , simple creature , and all the while , whatever she did , it always struck one that it was not just what she wanted to do ; everything with her seemed , as children say , done on purpose , that 's to say , not simply , not naturally . 
` Yes , yes , I know you , Bazarov , ' she repeated . 
-LRB- She had the habit -- peculiar to many provincial and Moscow ladies -- of calling men by their surnames from the first day of acquaintance with them . -RRB- 
` Will you have a cigar ? ' ' 
A cigar 's all very well , ' put in Sitnikov , who by now was lolling in an armchair , his legs in the air ; ` but give us some lunch . 
We 're awfully hungry ; and tell them to bring us up a little bottle of champagne . ' 
` Sybarite , ' commented Evdoksya , and she laughed . 
-LRB- When she laughed the gum showed above her upper teeth . -RRB- 
` Is n't it true , Bazarov ; he 's a Sybarite ? ' ' 
I like comfort in life , ' Sitnikov brought out , with dignity . 
` That does not prevent my being a Liberal . ' 
` No , it does ; it does prevent it ! ' 
cried Evdoksya . 
She gave directions , however , to her maid , both as regards the lunch and the champagne . 
` What do you think about it ? ' 
she added , turning to Bazarov . 
` I 'm persuaded you share my opinion . ' 
` Well , no , ' retorted Bazarov ; ' a piece of meat 's better than a piece of bread even from the chemical point of view . ' 
` You are studying chemistry ? 
That is my passion . 
I 've even invented a new sort of composition myself . ' ' 
A composition ? 
You ? ' 
` Yes . 
And do you know for what purpose ? 
To make dolls ' heads so that they should n't break . 
I 'm practical , too , yon see . 
But everything 's not quite ready yet . 
I 've still to read Liebig . 
By the way , have you read Kislyakov 's article on Female Labour , in the Moscow Gazette ? 
Read it please . 
You 're interested in the woman question , I suppose ? 
And in the schools too ? 
What does your friend do ? 
What is his name ? ' 
Madame Kukshin shed her questions one after another with affected negligence , not waiting for an answer ; spoilt children talk so to their nurses . 
` My name 's Arkady Nikolaitch Kirsanov , ' said Arkady , ` and I 'm doing nothing . ' 
Evdoksya giggled . 
` How charming ! 
What , do n't you smoke ? 
Victor , do you know , I 'm very angry with you . ' 
` What for ? ' 
` They tell me you 've begun singing the praises of George Sand again . 
A retrograde woman , and nothing else ! 
How can people compare her with Emerson ! 
She has n't an idea on education , nor physiology , nor anything . 
She 'd never , I 'm persuaded , heard of embryology , and in these days -- what can be done without that ? ' 
-LRB- Evdoksya even threw up her hands . -RRB- 
` Ah , what a wonderful article Elisyevitch has written on that subject ! 
He 's a gentleman of genius . ' 
-LRB- Evdoksya constantly made use of the word ` gentleman ' instead of the word ` man . ' -RRB- 
` Bazarov , sit by me on the sofa . 
You do n't know , perhaps , I 'm awfully afraid of you . ' 
` Why so ? 
Allow me to ask . ' 
` You 're a dangerous gentleman ; you 're such a critic . 
Good God ! 
yes ! 
why , how absurd , I 'm talking like some country lady . 
I really am a country lady , though . 
I manage my property myself ; and only fancy , my bailiff Erofay 's a wonderful type , quite like Cooper 's Pathfinder ; something in him so spontaneous ! 
I 've come to settle here finally ; it 's an intolerable town , is n't it ? 
But what 's one to do ? ' 
` The town 's like every town , ' Bazarov remarked coolly . 
` All its interests are so petty , that 's what 's so awful ! 
I used to spend the winters in Moscow ... but now my lawful spouse , Monsieur Kukshin 's residing there . 
And besides , Moscow nowadays ... there , I do n't know -- it 's not the same as it was . 
I 'm thinking of going abroad ; last year I was on the point of setting off . ' 
` To Paris , I suppose ? ' 
queried Bazarov . 
` To Paris and to Heidelberg . ' 
` Why to Heidelberg ? ' 
` How can you ask ? 
Why , Bunsen 's there ! ' 
To this Bazarov could find no reply . ' 
Pierre Sapozhnikov ... do you know him ? ' 
` No , I do n't . ' 
` Not know Pierre Sapozhnikov ... he 's always at Lidia Hestatov 's . ' ' 
I do n't know her either . ' 
` Well , it was he undertook to escort me . 
Thank God , I 'm independent ; I 've no children ... . 
What was that I said : thank God ! 
