Arkady Nikolaitch was telling us just now that you accept no authorities ? 
Do n't you believe in them ? ' 
` And how am I accepting them ? 
And what am I to believe in ? 
They tell me the truth , I agree , that 's all . ' 
` And do all Germans tell the truth ? ' 
said Pavel Petrovitch , and his face assumed an expression as unsympathetic , as remote , as if he had withdrawn to some cloudy height . 
` Not all , ' replied Bazarov , with a short yawn . 
He obviously did not care to continue the discussion . 
Pavel Petrovitch glanced at Arkady , as though he would say to him , ` Your friend 's polite , I must say . ' 
` For my own part , ' he began again , not without some effort , ' I am so unregenerate as not to like Germans . 
Russian Germans I am not speaking of now ; we all know what sort of creatures they are . 
But even German Germans are not to my liking . 
In former days there were some here and there ; they had -- well , Schiller , to be sure , Goethe ... my brother -- he takes a particularly favourable view of them ... . 
But now they have all turned chemists and materialists ... ' ' A good chemist is twenty times as useful as any poet , ' broke in Bazarov . 
` Oh , indeed , ' commented Pavel Petrovitch , and , as though falling asleep , he faintly raised his eyebrows . 
` You do n't acknowledge art then , I suppose ? ' 
` The art of making money or of advertising pills ! ' 
cried Bazarov , with a contemptuous laugh . 
` Ah , ah . 
You are pleased to jest , I see . 
You reject all that , no doubt ? 
Granted . 
Then you believe in science only ? ' ' 
I have already explained to you that I do n't believe in anything ; and what is science -- science in the abstract ? 
There are sciences , as there are trades and crafts ; but abstract science does n't exist at all . ' 
` Very good . 
Well , and in regard to the other traditions accepted in human conduct , do you maintain the same negative attitude ? ' 
` What 's this , an examination ? ' 
asked Bazarov . 
Pavel Petrovitch turned slightly pale ... . 
Nikolai Petrovitch thought it his duty to interpose in the conversation . 
` We will converse on this subject with you more in detail some day , dear Yevgeny Vassilyitch ; we will hear your views , and express our own . 
For my part , I am heartily glad you are studying the natural sciences . 
I have heard that Liebig has made some wonderful discoveries in the amelioration of soils . 
You can be of assistance to me in my agricultural labours ; you can give me some useful advice . ' ' 
I am at your service , Nikolai Petrovitch ; but Liebig 's miles over our heads ! 
One has first to learn the a b c , and then begin to read , and we have n't set eyes on the alphabet yet . ' 
` You are certainly a nihilist , I see that , ' thought Nikolai Petrovitch . 
` Still , you will allow me to apply to you on occasion , ' he added aloud . 
` And now I fancy , brother , it 's time for us to be going to have a talk with the bailiff . ' 
Pavel Petrovitch got up from his seat . 
` Yes , ' he said , without looking at any one ; ` it 's a misfortune to live five years in the country like this , far from mighty intellects ! 
You turn into a fool directly . 
You may try not to forget what you 've been taught , but -- in a snap ! 
-- they 'll prove all that 's rubbish , and tell you that sensible men have nothing more to do with such foolishness , and that you , if you please , are an antiquated old fogey . 
What 's to be done ? 
Young people , of course , are cleverer than we are ! ' 
Pavel Petrovitch turned slowly on his heels , and slowly walked away ; Nikolai Petrovitch went after him . 
` Is he always like that ? ' 
Bazarov coolly inquired of Arkady directly the door had closed behind the two brothers . ' 
I must say , Yevgeny , you were n't nice to him , ' remarked Arkady . 
` You have hurt his feelings . ' 
` Well , am I going to consider them , these provincial aristocrats ! 
Why , it 's all vanity , dandy habits , fatuity . 
He should have continued his career in Petersburg , if that 's his bent . 
But there , enough of him ! 
I 've found a rather rare species of a water-beetle , Dytiscus marginatus ; do you know it ? 
I will show you . ' ' 
I promised to tell you his story , ' began Arkady . 
` The story of the beetle ? ' 
` Come , do n't , Yevgeny . 
The story of my uncle . 
You will see he 's not the sort of man you fancy . 
He deserves pity rather than ridicule . ' ' 
I do n't dispute it ; but why are you worrying over him ? ' 
` One ought to be just , Yevgeny . ' 
` How does that follow ? ' 
` No ; listen ... ' And Arkady told him his uncle 's story . 
The reader will find it in the following chapter . 
Pavel Petrovitch Kirsanov was educated first at home , like his younger brother , and afterwards in the Corps of Pages . 
From childhood he was distinguished by remarkable beauty ; moreover he was self-confident , somewhat ironical , and had a rather biting humour ; he could not fail to please . 
He began to be seen everywhere , directly he had received his commission as an officer . 
He was much admired in society , and he indulged every whim , even every caprice and every folly , and gave himself airs , but that too was attractive in him . 
Women went out of their senses over him ; men called him a coxcomb , and were secretly jealous of him . 
He lived , as has been related already , in the same apartments as his brother , whom he loved sincerely , though he was not at all like him . 
Nikolai Petrovitch was a little lame , he had small , pleasing features of a rather melancholy cast , small , black eyes , and thin , soft hair ; he liked being lazy , but he also liked reading , and was timid in society . 
Pavel Petrovitch did not spend a single evening at home , prided himself on his ease and audacity -LRB- he was just bringing gymnastics into fashion among young men in society -RRB- , and had read in all some five or six French books . 
At twenty-eight he was already a captain ; a brilliant career awaited him . 
Suddenly everything was changed . 
At that time , there was sometimes seen in Petersburg society a woman who has even yet not been forgotten . 
Princess R -- . 
She had a well-educated , well-bred , but rather stupid husband , and no children . 
She used suddenly to go abroad , and suddenly return to Russia , and led an eccentric life in general . 
She had the reputation of being a frivolous coquette , abandoned herself eagerly to every sort of pleasure , danced to exhaustion , laughed and jested with young men , whom she received in the dim light of her drawing-room before dinner ; while at night she wept and prayed , found no peace in anything , and often paced her room till morning , wringing her hands in anguish , or sat , pale and chill , over a psalter . 
Day came , and she was transformed again into a grand lady ; again she went out , laughed , chattered , and simply flung herself headlong into anything which could afford her the slightest distraction . 
She was marvellously well-proportioned , her hair coloured like gold and heavy as gold hung below her knees , but no one would have called her a beauty ; in her whole face the only good point was her eyes , and even her eyes were not good -- they were grey , and not large -- but their glance was swift and deep , unconcerned to the point of audacity , and thoughtful to the point of melancholy -- an enigmatic glance . 
There was a light of something extraordinary in them , even while her tongue was lisping the emptiest of inanities . 
She dressed with elaborate care . 
Pavel Petrovitch met her at a ball , danced a mazurka with her , in the course of which she did not utter a single rational word , and fell passionately in love with her . 
Being accustomed to make conquests , in this instance , too , he soon attained his object , but his easy success did not damp his ardour . 
On the contrary , he was in still more torturing , still closer bondage to this woman , in whom , even at the very moment when she surrendered herself utterly , there seemed always something still mysterious and unattainable , to which none could penetrate . 
What was hidden in that soul -- God knows ! 
It seemed as though she were in the power of mysterious forces , incomprehensible even to herself ; they seemed to play on her at will ; her intellect was not powerful enough to master their caprices . 
Her whole behaviour presented a series of inconsistencies ; the only letters which could have awakened her husband 's just suspicions , she wrote to a man who was almost a stranger to her , whilst her love had always an element of melancholy ; with a man she had chosen as a lover , she ceased to laugh and to jest , she listened to him , and gazed at him with a look of bewilderment . 
Sometimes , for the most part suddenly , this bewilderment passed into chill horror ; her face took a wild , death-like expression ; she locked herself up in her bedroom , and her maid , putting her ear to the keyhole , could hear her smothered sobs . 
More than once , as he went home after a tender interview , Kirsanov felt within him that heartrending , bitter vexation which follows on a total failure . 
` What more do I want ? ' 
he asked himself , while his heart was heavy . 
He once gave her a ring with a sphinx engraved on the stone . 
` What 's that ? ' 
she asked ; ' a sphinx ? ' 
` Yes , ' he answered , ` and that sphinx is you . ' 
` I ? ' 
she queried , and slowly raising her enigmatical glance upon him . 
` Do you know that 's awfully flattering ? ' 
she added with a meaningless smile , while her eyes still kept the same strange look . 
Pavel Petrovitch suffered even while Princess R -- loved him ; but when she grew cold to him , and that happened rather quickly , he almost went out of his mind . 
He was on the rack , and he was jealous ; he gave her no peace , followed her about everywhere ; she grew sick of his pursuit of her , and she went abroad . 
He resigned his commission in spite of the entreaties of his friends and the exhortations of his superiors , and followed the princess ; four years he spent in foreign countries , at one time pursuing her , at another time intentionally losing sight of her . 
He was ashamed of himself , he was disgusted with his own lack of spirit ... but nothing availed . 
Her image , that incomprehensible , almost meaningless , but bewitching image , was deeply rooted in his heart . 
At Baden he once more regained his old footing with her ; it seemed as though she had never loved him so passionately ... but in a month it was all at an end : the flame flickered up for the last time and went out for ever . 
Foreseeing inevitable separation , he wanted at least to remain her friend , as though friendship with such a woman was possible ... . 
She secretly left Baden , and from that time steadily avoided Kirsanov . 
He returned to Russia , and tried to live his former life again ; but he could not get back into the old groove . 
He wandered from place to place like a man possessed ; he still went into society ; he still retained the habits of a man of the world ; he could boast of two or three fresh conquests ; but he no longer expected anything much of himself or of others , and he undertook nothing . 
He grew old and grey ; spending all his evenings at the club , jaundiced and bored , and arguing in bachelor society became a necessity for him -- a bad sign , as we all know . 
Marriage , of course , he did not even think of . 
Ten years passed in this way ; they passed by colourless and fruitless -- and quickly , fearfully quickly . 
Nowhere does time fly past as in Russia ; in prison they say it flies even faster . 
One day at dinner at the club , Pavel Petrovitch heard of the death of the Princess R -- . 
She had died at Paris in a state bordering on insanity . 
He got up from the table , and a long time he paced about the rooms of the club , or stood stockstill near the card-players , but he did not go home earlier than usual . 
Some time later he received a packet addressed to him ; in it was the ring he had given the princess . 
She had drawn lines in the shape of a cross over the sphinx and sent him word that the solution of the enigma -- was the cross . 
This happened at the beginning of the year 1848 , at the very time when Nikolai Petrovitch came to Petersburg , after the loss of his wife . 
Pavel Petrovitch had scarcely seen his brother since the latter had settled in the country ; the marriage of Nikolai Petrovitch had coincided with the very first days of Pavel Petrovitch 's acquaintance with the princess . 
When he came back from abroad , he had gone to him with the intention of staying a couple of months with him , in sympathetic enjoyment of his happiness , but he had only succeeded in standing a week of it . 
The difference in the positions of the two brothers was too great . 
In 1848 , this difference had grown less ; Nikolai Petrovitch had lost his wife , Pavel Petrovitch had lost his memories ; after the death of the princess he tried not to think of her . 
But to Nikolai , there remained the sense of a well-spent life , his son was growing up under his eyes ; Pavel , on the contrary , a solitary bachelor , was entering upon that indefinite twilight period of regrets that are akin to hopes , and hopes that are akin to regrets , when youth is over , while old age has not yet come . 
This time was harder for Pavel Petrovitch than for another man ; in losing his past , he lost everything . ' 
I will not invite you to Maryino now , ' Nikolai Petrovitch said to him one day , -LRB- he had called his property by that name in honour of his wife -RRB- ; ` you were dull there in my dear wife 's time , and now I think you would be bored to death . ' ' 
I was stupid and fidgety then , ' answered Pavel Petrovitch ; ` since then I have grown quieter , if not wiser . 
On the contrary , now , if you will let me , I am ready to settle with you for good . ' 
For all answer Nikolai Petrovitch embraced him ; but a year and a half passed after this conversation , before Pavel Petrovitch made up his mind to carry out his intention . 
When he was once settled in the country , however , he did not leave it , even during the three winters which Nikolai Petrovitch spent in Petersburg with his son . 
He began to read , chiefly English ; he arranged his whole life , roughly speaking , in the English style , rarely saw the neighbours , and only went out to the election of marshals , where he was generally silent , only occasionally annoying and alarming land-owners of the old school by his liberal sallies , and not associating with the representatives of the younger generation . 
Both the latter and the former considered him ` stuck up ' ; and both parties respected him for his fine aristocratic manners ; for his reputation for successes in love ; for the fact that he was very well dressed and always stayed in the best room in the best hotel ; for the fact that he generally dined well , and had once even dined with Wellington at Louis Philippe 's table ; for the fact that he always took everywhere with him a real silver dressing-case and a portable bath ; for the fact that he always smelt of some exceptionally ` good form ' scent ; for the fact that he played whist in masterly fashion , and always lost ; and lastly , they respected him also for his incorruptible honesty . 
Ladies considered him enchantingly romantic , but he did not cultivate ladies ' acquaintance ... ` So you see , Yevgeny , ' observed Arkady , as he finished his story , ` how unjustly you judge of my uncle ! 
To say nothing of his having more than once helped my father out of difficulties , given him all his money -- the property , perhaps you do n't know , was n't divided -- he 's glad to help any one , among other things he always sticks up for the peasants ; it 's true , when he talks to them he frowns and sniffs eau de cologne . ' 
... ` His nerves , no doubt , ' put in Bazarov . 
` Perhaps ; but his heart is very good . 
And he 's far from being stupid . 
What useful advice he has given me especially ... especially in regard to relations with women . ' 
` Aha ! 
a scalded dog fears cold water , we know that ! ' 
` In short , ' continued Arkady , ` he 's profoundly unhappy , believe me ; it 's a sin to despise him . ' 
` And who does despise him ? ' 
retorted Bazarov . 
` Still , I must say that a fellow who stakes his whole life on one card -- a woman 's love -- and when that card fails , turns sour , and lets himself go till he 's fit for nothing , is not a man , but a male . 
You say he 's unhappy ; you ought to know best ; to be sure , he 's not got rid of all his fads . 
I 'm convinced that he solemnly imagines himself a superior creature because he reads that wretched Galignani , and once a month saves a peasant from a flogging . ' 
` But remember his education , the age in which he grew up , ' observed Arkady . 
` Education ? ' 
broke in Bazarov . 
` Every man must educate himself , just as I 've done , for instance ... . 
And as for the age , why should I depend on it ? 
Let it rather depend on me . 
No , my dear fellow , that 's all shallowness , want of backbone ! 
And what stuff it all is , about these mysterious relations between a man and woman ? 
We physiologists know what these relations are . 
You study the anatomy of the eye ; where does the enigmatical glance you talk about come in there ? 
That 's all romantic , nonsensical , æsthetic rot . 
We had much better go and look at the beetle . ' 
And the two friends went off to Bazarov 's room , which was already pervaded by a sort of medico-surgical odour , mingled with the smell of cheap tobacco . 
Pavel Petrovitch did not long remain present at his brother 's interview with his bailiff , a tall , thin man with a sweet consumptive voice and knavish eyes , who to all Nikolai Petrovitch 's remarks answered , ` Certainly , sir , ' and tried to make the peasants out to be thieves and drunkards . 
The estate had only recently been put on to the new reformed system , and the new mechanism worked , creaking like an ungreased wheel , warping and cracking like homemade furniture of unseasoned wood . 
Nikolai Petrovitch did not lose heart , but often he sighed , and was gloomy ; he felt that the thing could not go on without money , and his money was almost all spent . 
Arkady had spoken the truth ; Pavel Petrovitch had more than once helped his brother ; more than once , seeing him struggling and cudgelling his brains , at a loss which way to turn , Pavel Petrovitch moved deliberately to the window , and with his hands thrust into his pockets , muttered between his teeth , ' mais je puis vous de l'argent , ' and gave him money ; but to-day he had none himself , and he preferred to go away . 
The petty details of agricultural management worried him ; besides , it constantly struck him that Nikolai Petrovitch , for all his zeal and industry , did not set about things in the right way , though he would not have been able to point out precisely where Nikolai Petrovitch 's mistake lay . 
` My brother 's not practical enough , ' he reasoned to himself ; ` they impose upon him . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch , on the other hand , had the highest opinion of Pavel Petrovitch 's practical ability , and always asked his advice . 
` I 'm a soft , weak fellow , I 've spent my life in the wilds , ' he used to say ; ` while you have n't seen so much of the world for nothing , you see through people ; you have an eagle eye . ' 
In answer to which Pavel Petrovitch only turned away , but did not contradict his brother . 
Leaving Nikolai Petrovitch in his study , he walked along the corridor , which separated the front part of the house from the back ; when he had reached a low door , he stopped in hesitation , then pulling his moustaches , he knocked at it . 
` Who 's there ? 
Come in , ' sounded Fenitchka 's voice . 
` It 's I , ' said Pavel Petrovitch , and he opened the door . 
Fenitchka jumped up from the chair on which she was sitting with her baby , and giving him into the arms of a girl , who at once carried him out of the room , she put straight her kerchief hastily . 
` Pardon me , if I disturb you , ' began Pavel Petrovitch , not looking at her ; ' I only wanted to ask you ... they are sending into the town to-day , I think ... please let them buy me some green tea . ' 
` Certainly , ' answered Fenitchka ; ` how much do you desire them to buy ? ' 
` Oh , half a pound will be enough , I imagine . 
You have made a change here , I see , ' he added , with a rapid glance round him , which glided over Fenitchka 's face too . 
` The curtains here , ' he explained , seeing she did not understand him . 
` Oh , yes , the curtains ; Nikolai Petrovitch was so good as to make me a present of them ; but they have been put up a long while now . ' 
` Yes , and it 's a long while since I have been to see you . 
Now it is very nice here . ' 
` Thanks to Nikolai Petrovitch 's kindness , ' murmured Fenitchka . 
` You are more comfortable here than in the little lodge you used to have ? ' 
inquired Pavel Petrovitch urbanely , but without the slightest smile . 
` Certainly , it 's more comfortable . ' 
` Who has been put in your place now ? ' 
` The laundry-maids are there now . ' 
` Ah ! ' 
Pavel Petrovitch was silent . 
` Now he is going , ' thought Fenitchka ; but he did not go , and she stood before him motionless . 
` What did you send your little one away for ? ' 
said Pavel Petrovitch at last . ' 
I love children ; let me see him . ' 
Fenitchka blushed all over with confusion and delight . 
She was afraid of Pavel Petrovitch ; he had scarcely ever spoken to her . 
` Dunyasha , ' she called ; ` will you bring Mitya , please . ' 
-LRB- Fenitchka did not treat any one in the house familiarly . -RRB- 
` But wait a minute , he must have a frock on , ' Fenitchka was going towards the door . 
` That does n't matter , ' remarked Pavel Petrovitch . ' 
I will be back directly , ' answered Fenitchka , and she went out quickly . 
Pavel Petrovitch was left alone , and he looked round this time with special attention . 
The small low-pitched room in which he found himself was very clean and snug . 
It smelt of the freshly painted floor and of camomile . 
Along the walls stood chairs with lyre-shaped backs , bought by the late general on his campaign in Poland ; in one corner was a little bedstead under a muslin canopy beside an iron-clamped chest with a convex lid . 
In the opposite corner a little lamp was burning before a big dark picture of St. Nikolai the wonder-worker ; a tiny porcelain egg hung by a red ribbon from the protruding gold halo down to the saint 's breast ; by the windows greenish glass jars of last year 's jam carefully tied down could be seen ; on their paper covers Fenitchka herself had written in big letters ` Gooseberry ' ; Nikolai Petrovitch was particularly fond of that preserve . 
On a long cord from the ceiling a cage hung with a short-tailed siskin in it ; he was constantly chirping and hopping about , the cage was constantly shaking and swinging , while hempseeds fell with a light tap on to the floor . 
On the wall just above a small chest of drawers hung some rather bad photographs of Nikolai Petrovitch in various attitudes , taken by an itinerant photographer ; there too hung a photograph of Fenitchka herself , which was an absolute failure ; it was an eyeless face wearing a forced smile , in a dingy frame , nothing more could be made out ; while above Fenitchka , General Yermolov , in a Circassian cloak , scowled menacingly upon the Caucasian mountains in the distance , from beneath a little silk shoe for pins which fell right on to his brows . 
Five minutes passed ; bustling and whispering could be heard in the next room . 
Pavel Petrovitch took up from the chest of drawers a greasy book , an odd volume of Masalsky 's Musketeer , and turned over a few pages ... . 
The door opened , and Fenitchka came in with Mitya in her arms . 
She had put on him a little red smock with embroidery on the collar , had combed his hair and washed his face ; he was breathing heavily , his whole body working , and his little hands waving in the air , as is the way with all healthy babies ; but his smart smock obviously impressed him , an expression of delight was reflected in every part of his little fat person . 
Fenitchka had put her own hair too in order , and had arranged her kerchief ; but she might well have remained as she was . 
And really is there anything in the world more captivating than a beautiful young mother with a healthy baby in her arms ? 
` What a chubby fellow ! ' 
said Pavel Petrovitch graciously , and he tickled Mitya 's little double chin with the tapering nail of his forefinger . 
The baby stared at the siskin , and chuckled . 
` That 's uncle , ' said Fenitchka , bending her face down to him and slightly rocking him , while Dunyasha quietly set in the window a smouldering perfumed stick , putting a halfpenny under it . 
` How many months old is he ? ' 
asked Pavel Petrovitch . 
` Six months ; it will soon be seven , on the eleventh . ' 
` Is n't it eight , Fedosya Nikolaevna ? ' 
put in Dunyasha , with some timidity . 
` No , seven ; what an idea ! ' 
The baby chuckled again , stared at the chest , and suddenly caught hold of his mother 's nose and mouth with all his five little fingers . 
` Saucy mite , ' said Fenitchka , not drawing her face away . 
` He 's like my brother , ' observed Pavel Petrovitch . 
` Who else should he be like ? ' 
thought Fenitchka . 
` Yes , ' continued Pavel Petrovitch , as though speaking to himself ; ` there 's an unmistakable likeness . ' 
He looked attentively , almost mournfully , at Fenitchka . 
` That 's uncle , ' she repeated , in a whisper this time . 
` Ah ! 
Pavel ! 
so you 're here ! ' 
was heard suddenly the voice of Nikolai Petrovitch . 
Pavel Petrovitch turned hurriedly round , frowning ; but his brother looked at him with such delight , such gratitude , that he could not help responding to his smile . 
` You 've a splendid little cherub , ' he said , and looking at his watch , ' I came in here to speak about some tea . ' 
And , assuming an expression of indifference , Pavel Petrovitch at once went out of the room . 
` Did he come of himself ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch asked Fenitchka . 
` Yes ; he knocked and came in . ' 
` Well , and has Arkasha been in to see you again ? ' 
` No . 
Had n't I better move into the lodge , Nikolai Petrovitch ? ' 
` Why so ? ' ' 
I wonder whether it would n't be best just for the first . ' 
'N ... no , ' Nikolai Petrovitch brought out hesitatingly , rubbing his forehead . 
` We ought to have done it before ... . 
How are you , fatty ? ' 
he said , suddenly brightening , and going up to the baby , he kissed him on the cheek ; then he bent a little and pressed his lips to Fenitchka 's hand , which lay white as milk upon Mitya 's little red smock . 
` Nikolai Petrovitch ! 
what are you doing ? ' 
she whispered , dropping her eyes , then slowly raising them . 
Very charming was the expression of her eyes when she peeped , as it were , from under her lids , and smiled tenderly and a little foolishly . 
Nikolai Petrovitch had made Fenitchka 's acquaintance in the following manner . 
He had once happened three years before to stay a night at an inn in a remote district town . 
He was agreeably struck by the cleanness of the room assigned to him , the freshness of the bed-linen . 
Surely the woman of the house must be a German ? 
was the idea that occurred to him ; but she proved to be a Russian , a woman of about fifty , neatly dressed , of a good-looking , sensible countenance and discreet speech . 
He entered into conversation with her at tea ; he liked her very much . 
Nikolai Petrovitch had at that time only just moved into his new home , and not wishing to keep serfs in the house , he was on the look-out for wage-servants ; the woman of the inn on her side complained of the small number of visitors to the town , and the hard times ; he proposed to her to come into his house in the capacity of housekeeper ; she consented . 
Her husband had long been dead , leaving her an only daughter , Fenitchka . 
Within a fortnight Arina Savishna -LRB- that was the new housekeeper 's name -RRB- arrived with her daughter at Maryino and installed herself in the little lodge . 
Nikolai Petrovitch 's choice proved a successful one . 
Arina brought order into the household . 
As for Fenitchka , who was at that time seventeen , no one spoke of her , and scarcely any one saw her ; she lived quietly and sedately , and only on Sundays Nikolai Petrovitch noticed in the church somewhere in a side place the delicate profile of her white face . 
More than a year passed thus . 
One morning , Arina came into his study , and bowing low as usual , she asked him if he could do anything for her daughter , who had got a spark from the stove in her eye . 
Nikolai Petrovitch , like all stay-at-home people , had studied doctoring and even compiled a homoeopathic guide . 
He at once told Arina to bring the patient to him . 
Fenitchka was much frightened when she heard the master had sent for her ; however , she followed her mother . 
Nikolai Petrovitch led her to the window and took her head in his two hands . 
After thoroughly examining her red and swollen eye , he prescribed a fomentation , which he made up himself at once , and tearing his handkerchief in pieces , he showed her how it ought to be applied . 
Fenitchka listened to all he had to say , and then was going . 
` Kiss the master 's hand , silly girl , ' said Arina . 
Nikolai Petrovitch did not give her his hand , and in confusion himself kissed her bent head on the parting of her hair . 
Fenitchka 's eye was soon well again , but the impression she had made on Nikolai Petrovitch did not pass away so quickly . 
He was for ever haunted by that pure , delicate , timidly raised face ; he felt on the palms of his hands that soft hair , and saw those innocent , slightly parted lips , through which pearly teeth gleamed with moist brilliance in the sunshine . 
He began to watch her with great attention in church , and tried to get into conversation with her . 
At first she was shy of him , and one day meeting him at the approach of evening in a narrow footpath through a field of rye , she ran into the tall thick rye , overgrown with cornflowers and wormwood , so as not to meet him face to face . 
He caught sight of her little head through a golden network of ears of rye , from which she was peeping out like a little animal , and called affectionately to her -- ` Good-evening , Fenitchka ! 
I do n't bite . ' 
` Good-evening , ' she whispered , not coming out of her ambush . 
By degrees she began to be more at home with him , but was still shy in his presence , when suddenly her mother , Arina , died of cholera . 
What was to become of Fenitchka ? 
She inherited from her mother a love for order , regularity , and respectability ; but she was so young , so alone . 
Nikolai Petrovitch was himself so good and considerate ... . 
It 's needless to relate the rest ... ` So my brother came in to see you ? ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch questioned her . 
` He knocked and came in ? ' 
` Yes . ' 
` Well , that 's a good thing . 
Let me give Mitya a swing . ' 
And Nikolai Petrovitch began tossing him almost up to the ceiling , to the huge delight of the baby , and to the considerable uneasiness of the mother , who every time he flew up stretched her arms up towards his little bare legs . 
Pavel Petrovitch went back to his artistic study , with its walls covered with handsome bluish-grey hangings , with weapons hanging upon a variegated Persian rug nailed to the wall ; with walnut furniture , upholstered in dark green velveteen , with a renaissance bookcase of old black oak , with bronze statuettes on the magnificent writing-table , with an open hearth . 
He threw himself on the sofa , clasped his hands behind his head , and remained without moving , looking with a face almost of despair at the ceiling . 
Whether he wanted to hide from the very walls that which was reflected in his face , or for some other reason , he got up , drew the heavy window curtains , and again threw himself on the sofa . 
On the same day Bazarov made acquaintance with Fenitchka . 
He was walking with Arkady in the garden , and explaining to him why some of the trees , especially the oaks , had not done well . 
` You ought to have planted silver poplars here by preference , and spruce firs , and perhaps limes , giving them some loam . 
The arbour there has done well , ' he added , ` because it 's acacia and lilac ; they 're accommodating good fellows , those trees , they do n't want much care . 
But there 's some one in here . ' 
In the arbour was sitting Fenitchka , with Dunyasha and Mitya . 
Bazarov stood still , while Arkady nodded to Fenitchka like an old friend . 
` Who 's that ? ' 
Bazarov asked him directly they had passed by . 
` What a pretty girl ! ' 
` Whom are you speaking of ? ' 
` You know ; only one of them was pretty . ' 
Arkady , not without embarrassment , explained to him briefly who Fenitchka was . 
` Aha ! ' 
commented Bazarov ; ` your father 's got good taste , one can see . 
I like him , your father , ay , ay ! 
He 's a jolly fellow . 
We must make friends though , ' he added , and turned back towards the arbour . 
` Yevgeny ! ' 
Arkady cried after him in dismay ; ` mind what you are about , for mercy 's sake . ' 
` Do n't worry yourself , ' said Bazarov ; ' I know how to behave myself -- I 'm not a booby . ' 
Going up to Fenitchka , he took off his cap . 
` Allow me to introduce myself , ' he began , with a polite bow . 
` I 'm a harmless person , and a friend of Arkady Nikolaevitch 's . ' 
Fenitchka got up from the garden seat and looked at him without speaking . 
` What a splendid baby ! ' 
continued Bazarov ; ` do n't be uneasy , my praises have never brought ill-luck yet . 
Why is it his cheeks are so flushed ? 
Is he cutting his teeth ? ' 
` Yes , ' said Fenitchka ; ` he has cut four teeth already , and now the gums are swollen again . ' 
` Show me , and do n't be afraid , I 'm a doctor . ' 
Bazarov took the baby up in his arms , and to the great astonishment both of Fenitchka and Dunyasha the child made no resistance , and was not frightened . ' 
I see , I see ... . 
It 's nothing , everything 's as it should be ; he will have a good set of teeth . 
If anything goes wrong , tell me . 
And are you quite well yourself ? ' 
` Quite , thank God . ' 
` Thank God , indeed -- that 's the great thing . 
And you ? ' 
he added , turning to Dunyasha . 
Dunyasha , a girl very prim in the master 's house , and a romp outside the gates , only giggled in answer . 
` Well , that 's all right . 
Here 's your gallant fellow . ' 
Fenitchka received the baby in her arms . 
` How good he was with you ! ' 
she commented in an undertone . 
` Children are always good with me . ' 
answered Bazarov ; ' I have a way with them . ' 
` Children know who loves them , ' remarked Dunyasha . 
` Yes , they certainly do , ' Fenitchka said . 
` Why , Mitya will not go to some people for anything . ' 
` Will he come to me ? ' 
asked Arkady , who , after standing in the distance for some time , had gone up to the arbour . 
He tried to entice Mitya to come to him , but Mitya threw his head back and screamed , to Fenitchka 's great confusion . 
` Another day , when he 's had time to get used to me , ' said Arkady indulgently , and the two friends walked away . 
` What 's her name ? ' 
asked Bazarov . 
` Fenitchka ... Fedosya , ' answered Arkady . 
` And her father 's name ? 
One must know that too . ' 
` Nikolaevna . ' ' 
Bene . 
What I like in her is that she 's not too embarrassed . 
Some people , I suppose , would think ill of her for it . 
What nonsense ! 
What is there to embarrass her ? 
She 's a mother -- she 's all right . ' 
` She 's all right , ' observed Arkady , -- ` but my father . ' 
` And he 's right too , ' put in Bazarov . 
` Well , no , I do n't think so . ' ' 
I suppose an extra heir 's not to your liking ? ' ' 
I wonder you 're not ashamed to attribute such ideas to me ! ' 
retorted Arkady hotly ; ' I do n't consider my father wrong from that point of view ; I think he ought to marry her . ' 
` Hoity-toity ! ' 
responded Bazarov tranquilly . 
` What magnanimous fellows we are ! 
You still attach significance to marriage ; I did not expect that of you . ' 
The friends walked a few paces in silence . ' 
I have looked at all your father 's establishment , ' Bazarov began again . 
` The cattle are inferior , the horses are broken down ; the buildings are n't up to much , and the workmen look confirmed loafers ; while the superintendent is either a fool , or a knave , I have n't quite found out which yet . ' 
` You are rather hard on everything to-day , Yevgeny Vassilyevitch . ' 
` And the dear good peasants are taking your father in to a dead certainty . 
You know the Russian proverb , `` The Russian peasant will cheat God Himself . '' ' ' 
I begin to agree with my uncle , ' remarked Arkady ; ` you certainly have a poor opinion of Russians . ' 
` As though that mattered ! 
The only good point in a Russian is his having the lowest possible opinion of himself . 
What does matter is that two and two make four , and the rest is all foolery . ' 
` And is nature foolery ? ' 
said Arkady , looking pensively at the bright-coloured fields in the distance , in the beautiful soft light of the sun , which was not yet high up in the sky . 
` Nature , too , is foolery in the sense you understand it . 
Nature 's not a temple , but a workshop , and man 's the workman in it . ' 
At that instant , the long drawn notes of a violoncello floated out to them from the house . 
Some one was playing Schubert 's Expectation with much feeling , though with an untrained hand , and the melody flowed with honey sweetness through the air . 
` What 's that ? ' 
cried Bazarov in amazement . 
` It 's my father . ' 
` Your father plays the violoncello ? ' 
` Yes . ' 
` And how old is your father ? ' 
` Forty-four . ' 
Bazarov suddenly burst into a roar of laughter . 
` What are you laughing at ? ' 
` Upon my word , a man of forty-four , a paterfamilias in this out-of-the-way district , playing on the violoncello ! ' 
Bazarov went on laughing ; but much as he revered his master , this time Arkady did not even smile . 
About a fortnight passed by . 
Life at Maryino went on its accustomed course , while Arkady was lazy and enjoyed himself , and Bazarov worked . 
Every one in the house had grown used to him , to his careless manners , and his curt and abrupt speeches . 
Fenitchka , in particular , was so far at home with him that one night she sent to wake him up ; Mitya had had convulsions ; and he had gone , and , half joking , half-yawning as usual , he stayed two hours with her and relieved the child . 
On the other hand Pavel Petrovitch had grown to detest Bazarov with all the strength of his soul ; he regarded him as stuck-up , impudent , cynical , and vulgar ; he suspected that Bazarov had no respect for him , that he had all but a contempt for him -- him , Pavel Kirsanov ! 
Nikolai Petrovitch was rather afraid of the young ` nihilist , ' and was doubtful whether his influence over Arkady was for the good ; but he was glad to listen to him , and was glad to be present at his scientific and chemical experiments . 
Bazarov had brought with him a microscope , and busied himself for hours together with it . 
The servants , too , took to him , though he made fun of them ; they felt , all the same , that he was one of themselves , not a master . 
Dunyasha was always ready to giggle with him , and used to cast significant and stealthy glances at him when she skipped by like a rabbit ; Piotr , a man vain and stupid to the last degree , for ever wearing an affected frown on his brow , a man whose whole merit consisted in the fact that he looked civil , could spell out a page of reading , and was diligent in brushing his coat -- even he smirked and brightened up directly Bazarov paid him any attention ; the boys on the farm simply ran after the ` doctor ' like puppies . 
The old man Prokofitch was the only one who did not like him ; he handed him the dishes at table with a surly face , called him a ` butcher ' and ` an upstart , ' and declared that with his great whiskers he looked like a pig in a stye . 
Prokofitch in his own way was quite as much of an aristocrat as Pavel Petrovitch . 
The best days of the year had come -- the first days of June . 
The weather kept splendidly fine ; in the distance , it is true , the cholera was threatening , but the inhabitants of that province had had time to get used to its visits . 
Bazarov used to get up very early and go out for two or three miles , not for a walk -- he could n't bear walking without an object -- but to collect specimens of plants and insects . 
Sometimes he took Arkady with him . 
On the way home an argument usually sprang up , and Arkady was usually vanquished in it , though he said more than his companion . 
One day they had lingered rather late ; Nikolai Petrovitch went to meet them in the garden , and as he reached the arbour he suddenly heard the quick steps and voices of the two young men . 
They were walking on the other side of the arbour , and could not see him . 
` You do n't know my father well enough , ' said Arkady . 
` Your father 's a nice chap , ' said Bazarov , ` but he 's behind the times ; his day is done . ' 
Nikolai Petrovitch listened intently ... . 
Arkady made no answer . 
The man whose day was done remained two minutes motionless , and stole slowly home . 
` The day before yesterday I saw him reading Pushkin , ' Bazarov was continuing meanwhile . 
` Explain to him , please , that that 's no earthly use . 
He 's not a boy , you know ; it 's time to throw up that rubbish . 
And what an idea to be a romantic at this time of day ! 
Give him something sensible to read . ' 
` What ought I to give him ? ' 
asked Arkady . 
` Oh , I think Büchner 's Stoff und Kraft to begin with . ' ' 
I think so too , ' observed Arkady approving , ' Stoff und Kraft is written in popular language ... ' ` So it seems , ' Nikolai Petrovitch said the same day after dinner to his brother , as he sat in his study , ` you and I are behind the times , our day 's over . 
Well , well . 
Perhaps Bazarov is right ; but one thing I confess , makes me feel sore ; I did so hope , precisely now , to get on to such close intimate terms with Arkady , and it turns out I 'm left behind , and he has gone forward , and we ca n't understand one another . ' 
` How has he gone forward ? 
And in what way is he so superior to us already ? ' 
cried Pavel Petrovitch impatiently . 
` It 's that high and mighty gentleman , that nihilist , who 's knocked all that into his head . 
I hate that doctor fellow ; in my opinion , he 's simply a quack ; I 'm convinced , for all his tadpoles , he 's not got very far even in medicine . ' 
` No , brother , you must n't say that ; Bazarov is clever , and knows his subject . ' 
` And his conceit 's something revolting , ' Pavel Petrovitch broke in again . 
` Yes , ' observed Nikolai Petrovitch , ` he is conceited . 
But there 's no doing without that , it seems ; only that 's what I did not take into account . 
I thought I was doing everything to keep up with the times ; I have started a model farm ; I have done well by the peasants , so that I am positively called a `` Red Radical '' all over the province ; I read , I study , I try in every way to keep abreast with the requirements of the day -- and they say my day 's over . 
And , brother , I begin to think that it is . ' 
` Why so ? ' 
` I 'll tell you why . 
This morning I was sitting reading Pushkin ... . 
I remember , it happened to be The Gipsies ... all of a sudden Arkady came up to me , and , without speaking , with such a kindly compassion on his face , as gently as if I were a baby , took the book away from me , and laid another before me -- a German book ... smiled , and went away , carrying Pushkin off with him . ' 
` Upon my word ! 
What book did he give you ? ' 
` This one here . ' 
And Nikolai Petrovitch pulled the famous treatise of Büchner , in the ninth edition , out of his coat-tail pocket . 
Pavel Petrovitch turned it over in his hands . 
` Hm ! ' 
he growled . 
` Arkady Nikolaevitch is taking your education in hand . 
Well , did you try reading it ? ' 
` Yes , I tried it . ' 
` Well , what did you think of it ? ' 
` Either I 'm stupid , or it 's all -- nonsense . 
I must be stupid , I suppose . ' 
` Have n't you forgotten your German ? ' 
queried Pavel Petrovitch . 
` Oh , I understand the German . ' 
Pavel Petrovitch again turned the book over in his hands , and glanced from under his brows at his brother . 
Both were silent . 
` Oh , by the way , ' began Nikolai Petrovitch , obviously wishing to change the subject , ` I 've got a letter from Kolyazin . ' 
` Matvy Ilyitch ? ' 
` Yes . 
He has come to -- to inspect the province . 
He 's quite a bigwig now ; and writes to me that , as a relation , he should like to see us again , and invites you and me and Arkady to the town . ' 
` Are you going ? ' 
asked Pavel Petrovitch . 
` No ; are you ? ' 
` No , I sha n't go either . 
Much object there would be in dragging oneself over forty miles on a wild-goose chase . 
Mathieu wants to show himself in all his glory . 
Damn him ! 
he will have the whole province doing him homage ; he can get on without the likes of us . 
A grand dignity , indeed , a privy councillor ! 
If I had stayed in the service , if I had drudged on in official harness , I should have been a general-adjutant by now . 
Besides , you and I are behind the times , you know . ' 
` Yes , brother ; it 's time , it seems , to order a coffin and cross one 's arms on ones breast , ' remarked Nikolai Petrovitch , with a sigh . 
` Well , I 'm not going to give in quite so soon , ' muttered his brother . 
` I 've got a tussle with that doctor fellow before me , I feel sure of that . ' 
A tussle came off that same day at evening tea . 
Pavel Petrovitch came into the drawing-room , all ready for the fray , irritable and determined . 
He was only waiting for an excuse to fall upon the enemy ; but for a long while an excuse did not present itself . 
As a rule , Bazarov said little in the presence of the ` old Kirsanovs ' -LRB- that was how he spoke of the brothers -RRB- , and that evening he felt out of humour , and drank off cup after cup of tea without a word . 
Pavel Petrovitch was all aflame with impatience ; his wishes were fulfilled at last . 
