I must have some ... to burn a cut . ' 
` For whom ? ' 
` For myself . ' 
` What , yourself ? 
Why is that ? 
What sort of a cut ? 
Where is it ? ' 
` Look here , on my finger . 
I went to-day to the village , you know , where they brought that peasant with typhus fever . 
They were just going to open the body for some reason or other , and I 've had no practice of that sort for a long while . ' 
` Well ? ' 
` Well , so I asked the district doctor about it ; and so I dissected it . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch all at once turned quite white , and , without uttering a word , rushed to his study , from which he returned at once with a bit of caustic in his hand . 
Bazarov was about to take it and go away . 
` For mercy 's sake , ' said Vassily Ivanovitch , ` let me do it myself . ' 
Bazarov smiled . 
` What a devoted practitioner ! ' 
` Do n't laugh , please . 
Show me your finger . 
The cut is not a large one . 
Do I hurt ? ' 
` Press harder ; do n't be afraid . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch stopped . 
` What do you think , Yevgeny ; would n't it be better to burn it with hot iron ? ' 
` That ought to have been done sooner ; the caustic even is useless , really , now . 
If I 've taken the infection , it 's too late now . ' 
` How ... too late ... ' Vassily Ivanovitch could scarcely articulate the words . ' 
I should think so ! 
It 's more than four hours ago . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch burnt the cut a little more . 
` But had the district doctor no caustic ? ' 
` No . ' 
` How was that , good Heavens ? 
A doctor not have such an indispensable thing as that ! ' 
` You should have seen his lancets , ' observed Bazarov as he walked away . 
Up till late that evening , and all the following day , Vassily Ivanovitch kept catching at every possible excuse to go into his son 's room ; and though far from referring to the cut -- he even tried to talk about the most irrelevant subjects -- he looked so persistently into his face , and watched him in such trepidation , that Bazarov lost patience and threatened to go away . 
Vassily Ivanovitch gave him a promise not to bother him , the more readily as Arina Vlasyevna , from whom , of course , he kept it all secret , was beginning to worry him as to why he did not sleep , and what had come over him . 
For two whole days he held himself in , though he did not at all like the look of his son , whom he kept watching stealthily , ... but on the third day , at dinner , he could bear it no longer . 
Bazarov sat with downcast looks , and had not touched a single dish . 
` Why do n't you eat , Yevgeny ? ' 
he inquired , putting on an expression of the most perfect carelessness . 
` The food , I think , is very nicely cooked . ' ' 
I do n't want anything , so I do n't eat . ' 
` Have you no appetite ? 
And your head ? ' 
he added timidly ; ` does it ache ? ' 
` Yes . 
Of course , it aches . ' 
Arina Vlasyevna sat up and was all alert . 
` Do n't be angry , please , Yevgeny , ' continued Vassily Ivanovitch ; ` wo n't you let me feel your pulse ? ' 
Bazarov got up . ' 
I can tell you without feeling my pulse ; I 'm feverish . ' 
` Has there been any shivering ? ' 
` Yes , there has been shivering too . 
I 'll go and lie down , and you can send me some lime-flower tea . 
I must have caught cold . ' 
` To be sure , I heard you coughing last night , ' observed Arina Vlasyevna . 
` I 've caught cold , ' repeated Bazarov , and he went away . 
Arina Vlasyevna busied herself about the preparation of the decoction of lime-flowers , while Vassily Ivanovitch went into the next room and clutched at his hair in silent desperation . 
Bazarov did not get up again that day , and passed the whole night in heavy , half-unconscious torpor . 
At one o'clock in the morning , opening his eyes with an effort , he saw by the light of a lamp his father 's pale face bending over him , and told him to go away . 
The old man begged his pardon , but he quickly came back on tiptoe , and half-hidden by the cupboard door , he gazed persistently at his son . 
Arina Vlasyevna did not go to bed either , and leaving the study door just open a very little , she kept coming up to it to listen ` how Enyusha was breathing , ' and to look at Vassily Ivanovitch . 
She could see nothing but his motionless bent back , but even that afforded her some faint consolation . 
In the morning Bazarov tried to get up ; he was seized with giddiness , his nose began to bleed ; he lay down again . 
Vassily Ivanovitch waited on him in silence ; Arina Vlasyevna went in to him and asked him how he was feeling . 
He answered , ` Better , ' and turned to the wall . 
Vassily Ivanovitch gesticulated at his wife with both hands ; she bit her lips so as not to cry , and went away . 
The whole house seemed suddenly darkened ; every one looked gloomy ; there was a strange hush ; a shrill cock was carried away from the yard to the village , unable to comprehend why he should be treated so . 
Bazarov still lay , turned to the wall . 
Vassily Ivanovitch tried to address him with various questions , but they fatigued Bazarov , and the old man sank into his armchair , motionless , only cracking his finger-joints now and then . 
He went for a few minutes into the garden , stood there like a statue , as though overwhelmed with unutterable bewilderment -LRB- the expression of amazement never left his face all through -RRB- , and went back again to his son , trying to avoid his wife 's questions . 
She caught him by the arm at last and passionately , almost menacingly , said , ` What is wrong with him ? ' 
Then he came to himself , and forced himself to smile at her in reply ; but to his own horror , instead of a smile , he found himself taken somehow by a fit of laughter . 
He had sent at daybreak for a doctor . 
He thought it necessary to inform his son of this , for fear he should be angry . 
Bazarov suddenly turned over on the sofa , bent a fixed dull look on his father , and asked for drink . 
Vassily Ivanovitch gave him some water , and as he did so felt his forehead . 
It seemed on fire . 
` Governor , ' began Bazarov , in a slow , drowsy voice ; ` I 'm in a bad way ; I 've got the infection , and in a few days you 'll have to bury me . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch staggered back , as though some one had aimed a blow at his legs . 
` Yevgeny ! ' 
he faltered ; ` what do you mean ! 
... God have mercy on you ! 
You 've caught cold ! ' 
` Hush ! ' 
Bazarov interposed deliberately . ' 
A doctor ca n't be allowed to talk like that . 
There 's every symptom of infection ; you know yourself . ' 
` Where are the symptoms ... of infection Yevgeny ? 
... Good Heavens ! ' 
` What 's this ? ' 
said Bazarov , and , pulling up his shirtsleeve , he showed his father the ominous red patches coming out on his arm . 
Vassily Ivanovitch was shaking and chill with terror . 
` Supposing , ' he said at last , ` even supposing ... if even there 's something like ... infection ... ' ` Pyæmia , ' put in his son . 
` Well , well ... something of the epidemic ... ' ` Pyæmia , ' Bazarov repeated sharply and distinctly ; ` have you forgotten your text-books ? ' 
` Well , well -- as you like ... . 
Anyway , we will cure you ! ' 
` Come , that 's humbug . 
But that 's not the point . 
I did n't expect to die so soon ; it 's a most unpleasant incident , to tell the truth . 
You and mother ought to make the most of your strong religious belief ; now 's the time to put it to the test . ' 
He drank off a little water . ' 
I want to ask you about one thing ... while my head is still under my control . 
To-morrow or next day my brain , you know , will send in its resignation . 
I 'm not quite certain even now whether I 'm expressing myself clearly . 
While I 've been lying here , I 've kept fancying red dogs were running round me , while you were making them point at me , as if I were a woodcock . 
Just as if I were drunk . 
Do you understand me all right ? ' ' 
I assure you , Yevgeny , you are talking perfectly correctly . ' 
` All the better . 
You told me you 'd sent for the doctor . 
You did that to comfort yourself ... comfort me too ; send a messenger ... ' ` To Arkady Nikolaitch ? ' 
put in the old man . 
` Who 's Arkady Nikolaitch ? ' 
said Bazarov , as though in doubt ... ` Oh , yes ! 
that chicken ! 
No , let him alone ; he 's turned jackdaw now . 
Do n't be surprised ; that 's not delirium yet . 
You send a messenger to Madame Odintsov , Anna Sergyevna ; she 's a lady with an estate ... . 
Do you know ? ' 
-LRB- Vassily Ivanovitch nodded . -RRB- 
` Yevgeny Bazarov , say , sends his greetings , and sends word he is dying . 
Will you do that ? ' 
` Yes , I will do it ... . 
But is it a possible thing for you to die , Yevgeny ? 
... Think only ! 
Where would divine justice be after that ? ' ' 
I know nothing about that ; only you send the messenger . ' 
` I 'll send this minute , and I 'll write a letter myself . ' 
` No , why ? 
Say I sent greetings ; nothing more is necessary . 
And now I 'll go back to my dogs . 
Strange ! 
I want to fix my thoughts on death , and nothing comes of it . 
I see a kind of blur ... and nothing more . ' 
He turned painfully back to the wall again ; while Vassily Ivanovitch went out of the study , and struggling as far as his wife 's bedroom , simply dropped down on to his knees before the holy pictures . 
` Pray , Arina , pray for us ! ' 
he moaned ; ` our son is dying . ' 
The doctor , the same district doctor who had had no caustic , arrived , and after looking at the patient , advised them to persevere with a cooling treatment , and at that point said a few words of the chance of recovery . 
` Have you ever chanced to see people in my state not set off for Elysium ? ' 
asked Bazarov , and suddenly snatching the leg of a heavy table that stood near his sofa , he swung it round , and pushed it away . 
` There 's strength , there 's strength , ' he murmured ; ` everything 's here still , and I must die ! 
... An old man at least has time to be weaned from life , but I ... Well , go and try to disprove death . 
Death will disprove you , and that 's all ! 
Who 's crying there ? ' 
he added , after a short pause -- ` Mother ? 
Poor thing ! 
Whom will she feed now with her exquisite beetroot-soup ? 
You , Vassily Ivanovitch , whimpering too , I do believe ! 
Why , if Christianity 's no help to you , be a philosopher , a Stoic , or what not ! 
Why , did n't you boast you were a philosopher ? ' 
` Me a philosopher ! ' 
wailed Vassily Ivanovitch , while the tears fairly streamed down his cheeks . 
Bazarov got worse every hour ; the progress of the disease was rapid , as is usually the way in cases of surgical poisoning . 
He still had not lost consciousness , and understood what was said to him ; he was still struggling . ' 
I do n't want to lose my wits , ' he muttered , clenching his fists ; ` what rot it all is ! ' 
And at once he would say , ` Come , take ten from eight , what remains ? ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch wandered about like one possessed , proposed first one remedy , then another , and ended by doing nothing but cover up his son 's feet . 
` Try cold pack ... emetic ... mustard plasters on the stomach ... bleeding , ' he would murmur with an effort . 
The doctor , whom he had entreated to remain , agreed with him , ordered the patient lemonade to drink , and for himself asked for a pipe and something ` warming and strengthening ' -- that 's to say , brandy . 
Arina Vlasyevna sat on a low stool near the door , and only went out from time to time to pray . 
A few days before , a looking-glass had slipped out of her hands and been broken , and this she had always considered an omen of evil ; even Anfisushka could say nothing to her . 
Timofeitch had gone off to Madame Odintsov 's . 
The night passed badly for Bazarov ... . 
He was in the agonies of high fever . 
Towards morning he was a little easier . 
He asked for Arina Vlasyevna to comb his hair , kissed her hand , and swallowed two gulps of tea . 
Vassily Ivanovitch revived a little . 
` Thank God ! ' 
he kept declaring ; ` the crisis is coming , the crisis is at hand ! ' 
` There , to think now ! ' 
murmured Bazarov ; ` what a word can do ! 
He 's found it ; he 's said `` crisis , '' and is comforted . 
It 's an astounding thing how man believes in words . 
If he 's told he 's a fool , for instance , though he 's not thrashed , he 'll be wretched ; call him a clever fellow , and he 'll be delighted if you go off without paying him . ' 
This little speech of Bazarov 's , recalling his old retorts , moved Vassily Ivanovitch greatly . 
` Bravo ! 
well said , very good ! ' 
he cried , making as though he were clapping his hands . 
Bazarov smiled mournfully . 
` So what do you think , ' he said ; ` is the crisis over , or coming ? ' 
` You are better , that 's what I see , that 's what rejoices me , ' answered Vassily Ivanovitch . 
` Well , that 's good ; rejoicings never come amiss . 
And to her , do you remember ? 
did you send ? ' 
` To be sure I did . ' 
The change for the better did not last long . 
The disease resumed its onslaughts . 
Vassily Ivanovitch was sitting by Bazarov . 
It seemed as though the old man were tormented by some special anguish . 
He was several times on the point of speaking -- and could not . 
` Yevgeny ! ' 
he brought out at last ; ` my son , my one , dear son ! ' 
This unfamiliar mode of address produced an effect on Bazarov . 
He turned his head a little , and , obviously trying to fight against the load of oblivion weighing upon him , he articulated : ` What is it , father ? ' 
` Yevgeny , ' Vassily Ivanovitch went on , and he fell on his knees before Bazarov , though the latter had closed his eyes and could not see him . 
` Yevgeny , you are better now ; please God , you will get well , but make use of this time , comfort your mother and me , perform the duty of a Christian ! 
What it means for me to say this to you , it 's awful ; but still more awful ... for ever and ever , Yevgeny ... think a little , what ... ' The old man 's voice broke , and a strange look passed over his son 's face , though he still lay with closed eyes . ' 
I wo n't refuse , if that can be any comfort to you , ' he brought out at last ; ` but it seems to me there 's no need to be in a hurry . 
You say yourself I am better . ' 
` Oh , yes , Yevgeny , better certainly ; but who knows , it is all in God 's hands , and in doing the duty ... ' ` No , I will wait a bit , ' broke in Bazarov . ' 
I agree with you that the crisis has come . 
And if we 're mistaken , well ! 
they give the sacrament to men who 're unconscious , you know . ' 
` Yevgeny , I beg . ' 
` I 'll wait a little . 
And now I want to go to sleep . 
Do n't disturb me . ' 
And he laid his head back on the pillow . 
The old man rose from his knees , sat down in the armchair , and , clutching his beard , began biting his own fingers ... The sound of a light carriage on springs , that sound which is peculiarly impressive in the wilds of the country , suddenly struck upon his hearing . 
Nearer and nearer rolled the light wheels ; now even the neighing of the horses could be heard ... . 
Vassily Ivanovitch jumped up and ran to the little window . 
There drove into the courtyard of his little house a carriage with seats for two , with four horses harnessed abreast . 
Without stopping to consider what it could mean , with a rush of a sort of senseless joy , he ran out on to the steps ... . 
A groom in livery was opening the carriage doors ; a lady in a black veil and a black mantle was getting out of it ... ' I am Madame Odintsov , ' she said . 
` Yevgeny Vassilvitch is still living ? 
You are his father ? 
I have a doctor with me . ' 
` Benefactress ! ' 
cried Vassily Ivanovitch , and snatching her hand , he pressed it convulsively to his lips , while the doctor brought by Anna Sergyevna , a little man in spectacles , of German physiognomy , stepped very deliberately out of the carriage . 
` Still living , my Yevgeny is living , and now he will be saved ! 
Wife ! 
wife ! 
... An angel from heaven has come to us ... ' ` What does it mean , good Lord ! ' 
faltered the old woman , running out of the drawing-room ; and , comprehending nothing , she fell on the spot in the passage at Anna Sergyevna 's feet , and began kissing her garments like a mad woman . 
` What are you doing ! ' 
protested Anna Sergyevna ; but Arina Vlasyevna did not heed her , while Vassily Ivanovitch could only repeat , ` An angel ! 
an angel ! ' ' 
Wo ist der Kranke ? 
and where is the patient ? ' 
said the doctor at last , with some impatience . 
Vassily Ivanovitch recovered himself . 
` Here , here , follow me , würdigster Herr Collega , ' he added through old associations . 
` Ah ! ' 
articulated the German , grinning sourly . 
Vassily Ivanovitch led him into the study . 
` The doctor from Anna Sergyevna Odintsov , ' he said , bending down quite to his son 's ear , ` and she herself is here . ' 
Bazarov suddenly opened his eyes . 
` What did you say ? ' ' 
I say that Anna Sergyevna is here , and has brought this gentleman , a doctor , to you . ' 
Bazarov moved his eyes about him . 
` She is here ... . 
I want to see her . ' 
` You shall see her , Yevgeny ; but first we must have a little talk with the doctor . 
I will tell him the whole history of your illness since Sidor Sidoritch ' -LRB- this was the name of the district doctor -RRB- ` has gone , and we will have a little consultation . ' 
Bazarov glanced at the German . 
` Well , talk away quickly , only not in Latin ; you see , I know the meaning of jam moritur . ' ' 
Der Herr scheint des Deutschen mächtig zu sein , ' began the new follower of Æsculapius , turning to Vassily Ivanovitch . ' 
Ich ... gabe ... We had better speak Russian , ' said the old man . 
` Ah , ah ! 
so that 's how it is ... . 
To be sure ... ' And the consultation began . 
Half-an-hour later Anna Sergyevna , conducted by Vassily Ivanovitch , came into the study . 
The doctor had had time to whisper to her that it was hopeless even to think of the patient 's recovery . 
She looked at Bazarov ... and stood still in the doorway , so greatly was she impressed by the inflamed , and at the same time deathly face , with its dim eyes fastened upon her . 
She felt simply dismayed , with a sort of cold and suffocating dismay ; the thought that she would not have felt like that if she had really loved him flashed instantaneously through her brain . 
` Thanks , ' he said painfully , ' I did not expect this . 
It 's a deed of mercy . 
So we have seen each other again , as you promised . ' 
` Anna Sergyevna has been so kind , ' began Vassily Ivanovitch ... ` Father , leave us alone . 
Anna Sergyevna , you will allow it , I fancy , now ? ' 
With a motion of his head , he indicated his prostrate helpless frame . 
Vassily Ivanovitch went out . 
` Well , thanks , ' repeated Bazarov . 
` This is royally done . 
Monarchs , they say , visit the dying too . ' 
` Yevgeny Vassilyitch , I hope -- ' ` Ah , Anna Sergyevna , let us speak the truth . 
It 's all over with me . 
I 'm under the wheel . 
So it turns out that it was useless to think of the future . 
Death 's an old joke , but it comes fresh to every one . 
So far I 'm not afraid ... but there , senselessness is coming , and then it 's all up ! 
-- ' he waved his hand feebly . 
` Well , what had I to say to you ... I loved you ! 
there was no sense in that even before , and less than ever now . 
Love is a form , and my own form is already breaking up . 
Better say how lovely you are ! 
And now here you stand , so beautiful ... ' Anna Sergyevna gave an involuntary shudder . 
` Never mind , do n't be uneasy ... . 
Sit down there ... . 
Do n't come close to me ; you know , my illness is catching . ' 
Anna Sergyevna swiftly crossed the room , and sat down in the armchair near the sofa on which Bazarov was lying . 
` Noble-hearted ! ' 
he whispered . 
` Oh , how near , and how young , and fresh , and pure ... in this loathsome room ! 
... Well , good-bye ! 
live long , that 's the best of all , and make the most of it while there is time . 
You see what a hideous spectacle ; the worm half-crushed , but writhing still . 
And , you see , I thought too : I 'd break down so many things , I would n't die , why should I ! 
there were problems to solve , and I was a giant ! 
And now all the problem for the giant is how to die decently , though that makes no difference to any one either ... . 
Never mind ; I 'm not going to turn tail . ' 
Bazarov was silent , and began feeling with his hand for the glass . 
Anna Sergyevna gave him some drink , not taking off her glove , and drawing her breath timorously . 
` You will forget me , ' he began again ; ` the dead 's no companion for the living . 
My father will tell you what a man Russia is losing ... . 
That 's nonsense , but do n't contradict the old man . 
Whatever toy will comfort the child ... you know . 
And be kind to mother . 
People like them are n't to be found in your great world if you look by daylight with a candle ... . 
I was needed by Russia ... . 
No , it 's clear , I was n't needed . 
And who is needed ? 
The shoemaker 's needed , the tailor 's needed , the butcher ... gives us meat ... the butcher ... wait a little , I 'm getting mixed ... . 
There 's a forest here ... ' Bazarov put his hand to his brow . 
Anna Sergyevna bent down to him . 
` Yevgeny Vassilyitch , I am here ... ' He at once took his hand away , and raised himself . 
` Good-bye , ' he said with sudden force , and his eyes gleamed with their last light . 
` Good-bye ... . 
Listen ... you know I did n't kiss you then ... . 
Breathe on the dying lamp , and let it go out ... ' Anna Sergyevna put her lips to his forehead . 
` Enough ! ' 
he murmured , and dropped back on to the pillow . 
` Now ... darkness ... ' Anna Sergyevna went softly out . 
` Well ? ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch asked her in a whisper . 
` He has fallen asleep , ' she answered , hardly audibly . 
Bazarov was not fated to awaken . 
Towards evening he sank into complete unconsciousness , and the following day he died . 
Father Alexey performed the last rites of religion over him . 
When they anointed him with the last unction , when the holy oil touched his breast , one eye opened , and it seemed as though at the sight of the priest in his vestments , the smoking censers , the light before the image , something like a shudder of horror passed over the death-stricken face . 
When at last he had breathed his last , and there arose a universal lamentation in the house , Vassily Ivanovitch was seized by a sudden frenzy . ' 
I said I should rebel , ' he shrieked hoarsely , with his face inflamed and distorted , shaking his fist in the air , as though threatening some one ; ` and I rebel , I rebel ! ' 
But Arina Vlasyevna , all in tears , hung upon his neck , and both fell on their faces together . 
` Side by side , ' Anfisushka related afterwards in the servants ' room , ` they dropped their poor heads like lambs at noonday ... ' But the heat of noonday passes , and evening comes and night , and then , too , the return to the kindly refuge , where sleep is sweet for the weary and heavy laden ... . 
Six months had passed by . 
White winter had come with the cruel stillness of unclouded frosts , the thick-lying , crunching snow , the rosy rime on the trees , the pale emerald sky , the wreaths of smoke above the chimneys , the clouds of steam rushing out of the doors when they are opened for an instant , with the fresh faces , that look stung by the cold , and the hurrying trot of the chilled horses . 
A January day was drawing to its close ; the cold evening was more keen than ever in the motionless air , and a lurid sunset was rapidly dying away . 
There were lights burning in the windows of the house at Maryino ; Prokofitch in a black frockcoat and white gloves , with a special solemnity , laid the table for seven . 
A week before in the small parish church two weddings had taken place quietly , and almost without witnesses -- Arkady and Katya 's , and Nikolai Petrovitch and Fenitchka 's ; and on this day Nikolai Petrovitch was giving a farewell dinner to his brother , who was going away to Moscow on business . 
Anna Sergyevna had gone there also directly after the ceremony was over , after making very handsome presents to the young people . 
Precisely at three o'clock they all gathered about the table . 
Mitya was placed there too ; with him appeared a nurse in a cap of glazed brocade . 
Pavel Petrovitch took his seat between Katya and Fenitchka ; the ` husbands ' took their places beside their wives . 
Our friends had changed of late ; they all seemed to have grown stronger and better looking ; only Pavel Petrovitch was thinner , which gave even more of an elegant and ` grand seigneur ' air to his expressive features ... . 
And Fenitchka too was different . 
In a fresh silk gown , with a wide velvet head-dress on her hair , with a gold chain round her neck , she sat with deprecating immobility , respectful towards herself and everything surrounding her , and smiled as though she would say , ' I beg your pardon ; I 'm not to blame . ' 
And not she alone -- all the others smiled , and also seemed apologetic ; they were all a little awkward , a little sorry , and in reality very happy . 
They all helped one another with humorous attentiveness , as though they had all agreed to rehearse a sort of artless farce . 
Katya was the most composed of all ; she looked confidently about her , and it could be seen that Nikolai Petrovitch was already devotedly fond of her . 
At the end of dinner he got up , and , his glass in his hand , turned to Pavel Petrovitch . 
` You are leaving us ... you are leaving us , dear brother , ' he began ; ` not for long , to be sure ; but still , I can not help expressing what I ... what we ... how much I ... how much we ... . 
There , the worst of it is , we do n't know how to make speeches . 
Arkady , you speak . ' 
` No , daddy , I 've not prepared anything . ' 
` As though I were so well prepared ! 
Well , brother , I will simply say , let us embrace you , wish you all good luck , and come back to us as quickly as you can ! ' 
Pavel Petrovitch exchanged kisses with every one , of course not excluding Mitya ; in Fenitchka 's case , he kissed also her hand , which she had not yet learned to offer properly , and drinking off the glass which had been filled again , he said with a deep sigh , ` May you be happy , my friends ! 
Farewell ! ' 
This English finale passed unnoticed ; but all were touched . 
` To the memory of Bazarov , ' Katya whispered in her husband 's ear , as she clinked glasses with him . 
Arkady pressed her hand warmly in response , but he did not venture to propose this toast aloud . 
The end , would it seem ? 
But perhaps some one of our readers would care to know what each of the characters we have introduced is doing in the present , the actual present . 
We are ready to satisfy him . 
Anna Sergyevna has recently made a marriage , not of love but of good sense , with one of the future leaders of Russia , a very clever man , a lawyer , possessed of vigorous practical sense , a strong will , and remarkable fluency -- still young , good-natured , and cold as ice . 
They live in the greatest harmony together , and will live perhaps to attain complete happiness ... perhaps love . 
The Princess K -- is dead , forgotten the day of her death . 
The Kirsanovs , father and son , live at Maryino ; their fortunes are beginning to mend . 
Arkady has become zealous in the management of the estate , and the ` farm ' now yields a fairly good income . 
Nikolai Petrovitch has been made one of the mediators appointed to carry out the emancipation reforms , and works with all his energies ; he is for ever driving about over his district ; delivers long speeches -LRB- he maintains the opinion that the peasants ought to be ` brought to comprehend things , ' that is to say , they ought to be reduced to a state of quiescence by the constant repetition of the same words -RRB- ; and yet , to tell the truth , he does not give complete satisfaction either to the refined gentry , who talk with chic , or depression of the emancipation -LRB- pronouncing it as though it were French -RRB- , nor of the uncultivated gentry , who unceremoniously curse ` the damned ` mancipation . ' 
He is too soft-hearted for both sets . 
Katerina Sergyevna has a son , little Nikolai , while Mitya runs about merrily and talks fluently . 
Fenitchka , Fedosya Nikolaevna , after her husband and Mitya , adores no one so much as her daughter-in-law , and when the latter is at the piano , she would gladly spend the whole day at her side . 
A passing word of Piotr . 
He has grown perfectly rigid with stupidity and dignity , but he too is married , and received a respectable dowry with his bride , the daughter of a market-gardener of the town , who had refused two excellent suitors , only because they had no watch ; while Piotr had not only a watch -- he had a pair of kid shoes . 
In the Brühl Terrace in Dresden , between two and four o'clock -- the most fashionable time for walking -- you may meet a man about fifty , quite grey , and looking as though he suffered from gout , but still handsome , elegantly dressed , and with that special stamp , which is only gained by moving a long time in the higher strata of society . 
That is Pavel Petrovitch . 
From Moscow he went abroad for the sake of his health , and has settled for good at Dresden , where he associates most with English and Russian visitors . 
With English people he behaves simply , almost modestly , but with dignity ; they find him rather a bore , but respect him for being , as they say , ' a perfect gentleman . ' 
With Russians he is more free and easy , gives vent to his spleen , and makes fun of himself and them , but that is done by him with great amiability , negligence , and propriety . 
He holds Slavophil views ; it is well known that in the highest society this is regarded as très distingué ! 
He reads nothing in Russian , but on his writing table there is a silver ashpan in the shape of a peasant 's plaited shoe . 
He is much run after by our tourists . 
Matvy Ilyitch Kolyazin , happening to be in temporary opposition , paid him a majestic visit ; while the natives , with whom , however , he is very little seen , positively grovel before him . 
No one can so readily and quickly obtain a ticket for the court chapel , for the theatre , and such things as der Herr Baron von Kirsanoff . 
He does everything good-naturedly that he can ; he still makes some little noise in the world ; it is not for nothing that he was once a great society lion ; -- but life is a burden to him ... a heavier burden than he suspects himself . 
One need but glance at him in the Russian church , when , leaning against the wall on one side , he sinks into thought , and remains long without stirring , bitterly compressing his lips , then suddenly recollects himself , and begins almost imperceptibly crossing himself ... . 
Madame Kukshin , too , went abroad . 
She is in Heidelberg , and is now studying not natural science , but architecture , in which , according to her own account , she has discovered new laws . 
She still fraternises with students , especially with the young Russians studying natural science and chemistry , with whom Heidelberg is crowded , and who , astounding the naïve German professors at first by the soundness of their views of things , astound the same professors no less in the sequel by their complete inefficiency and absolute idleness . 
In company with two or three such young chemists , who do n't know oxygen from nitrogen , but are filled with scepticism and self-conceit , and , too , with the great Elisyevitch , Sitnikov roams about Petersburg , also getting ready to be great , and in his own conviction continues the ` work ' of Bazarov . 
There is a story that some one recently gave him a beating ; but he was avenged upon him ; in an obscure little article , hidden in an obscure little journal , he has hinted that the man who beat him was a coward . 
He calls this irony . 
His father bullies him as before , while his wife regards him as a fool ... and a literary man . 
There is a small village graveyard in one of the remote corners of Russia . 
Like almost all our graveyards , it presents a wretched appearance ; the ditches surrounding it have long been overgrown ; the grey wooden crosses lie fallen and rotting under their once painted gables ; the stone slabs are all displaced , as though some one were pushing them up from behind ; two or three bare trees give a scanty shade ; the sheep wander unchecked among the tombs ... . 
But among them is one untouched by man , untrampled by beast , only the birds perch upon it and sing at daybreak . 
An iron railing runs round it ; two young fir-trees have been planted , one at each end . 
Yevgeny Bazarov is buried in this tomb . 
Often from the little village not far off , two quite feeble old people come to visit it -- a husband and wife . 
Supporting one another , they move to it with heavy steps ; they go up to the railing , fall down , and remain on their knees , and long and bitterly they weep , and yearn and intently gaze at the dumb stone , under which their son is lying ; they exchange some brief word , wipe away the dust from the stone , set straight a branch of a fir-tree , and pray again , and can not tear themselves from this place , where they seem to be nearer to their son , to their memories of him ... . 
Can it be that their prayers , their tears are fruitless ? 
Can it be that love , sacred , devoted love , is not all-powerful ? 
Oh , no ! 
However passionate , sinning , and rebellious the heart hidden in the tomb , the flowers growing over it peep serenely at us with their innocent eyes ; they tell us not of eternal peace alone , of that great peace of ` indifferent ' nature ; tell us too of eternal reconciliation and of life without end . 
