It 's not exactly that I do n't like him , but I feel that he 's of a different order from me , and I am different from him ... and you too are different from him . ' 
` How 's that ? ' 
` How can I tell you ... . 
He 's a wild animal , and you and I are tame . ' 
` Am I tame too ? ' 
Katya nodded . 
Arkady scratched his ear . 
` Let me tell you , Katerina Sergyevna , do you know , that 's really an insult ? ' 
` Why , would you like to be a wild -- ' ` Not wild , but strong , full of force . ' 
` It 's no good wishing for that ... . 
Your friend , you see , does n't wish for it , but he has it . ' 
` Hm ! 
So you imagine he had a great influence on Anna Sergyevna ? ' 
` Yes . 
But no one can keep the upper hand of her for long , ' added Katya in a low voice . 
` Why do you think that ? ' 
` She 's very proud ... . 
I did n't mean that ... she values her independence a great deal . ' 
` Who does n't value it ? ' 
asked Arkady , and the thought flashed through his mind , ` What good is it ? ' 
` What good is it ? ' 
it occurred to Katya to wonder too . 
When young people are often together on friendly terms , they are constantly stumbling on the same ideas . 
Arkady smiled , and , coming slightly closer to Katya , he said in a whisper , ` Confess that you are a little afraid of her . ' 
` Of whom ? ' 
` Her , ' repeated Arkady significantly . 
` And how about you ? ' 
Katya asked in her turn . ' 
I am too , observe I said , I am too . ' 
Katya threatened him with her finger . ' 
I wonder at that , ' she began ; ` my sister has never felt so friendly to you as just now ; much more so than when you first came . ' 
` Really ! ' 
` Why , have n't you noticed it ? 
Are n't you glad of it ? ' 
Arkady grew thoughtful . 
` How have I succeeded in gaining Anna Sergyevna 's good opinion ? 
Was n't it because I brought her your mother 's letters ? ' 
` Both that and other causes , which I sha n't tell you . ' 
` Why ? ' ' 
I sha n't say . ' 
` Oh ! 
I know ; you 're very obstinate . ' 
` Yes , I am . ' 
` And observant . ' 
Katya gave Arkady a sidelong look . 
` Perhaps so ; does that irritate you ? 
What are you thinking of ? ' ' 
I am wondering how you have come to be as observant as in fact you are . 
You are so shy so reserved ; you keep every one at a distance . ' ' 
I have lived a great deal alone ; that drives one to reflection . 
But do I really keep every one at a distance ? ' 
Arkady flung a grateful glance at Katya . 
` That 's all very well , ' he pursued ; ` but people in your position -- I mean in your circumstances -- do n't often have that faculty ; it is hard for them , as it is for sovereigns , to get at the truth . ' 
` But , you see , I am not rich . ' 
Arkady was taken aback , and did not at once understand Katya . 
` Why , of course , the property 's all her sister 's ! ' 
struck him suddenly ; the thought was not unpleasing to him . 
` How nicely you said that ! ' 
he commented . 
` What ? ' 
` You said it nicely , simply , without being ashamed or making a boast of it . 
By the way , I imagine there must always be something special , a kind of pride of a sort in the feeling of any man , who knows and says he is poor . ' ' 
I have never experienced anything of that sort , thanks to my sister . 
I only referred to my position just now because it happened to come up . ' 
` Well ; but you must own you have a share of that pride I spoke of just now . ' 
` For instance ? ' 
` For instance , you -- forgive the question -- you would n't marry a rich man , I fancy , would you ? ' 
` If I loved him very much ... . 
No , I think even then I would n't marry him . ' 
` There ! 
you see ! ' 
cried Arkady , and after a short pause he added , ` And why would n't you marry him ? ' 
` Because even in the ballads unequal matches are always unlucky . ' 
` You want to rule , perhaps , or ... ' ` Oh , no ! 
why should I ? 
On the contrary , I am ready to obey ; only inequality is intolerable . 
To respect one 's self and obey , that I can understand , that 's happiness ; but a subordinate existence ... No , I 've had enough of that as it is . ' 
` Enough of that as it is , ' Arkady repeated after Katya . 
` Yes , yes , ' he went on , ` you 're not Anna Sergyevna 's sister for nothing ; you 're just as independent as she is ; but you 're more reserved . 
I 'm certain you would n't be the first to give expression to your feeling , however strong and holy it might be ... ' ` Well , what would you expect ? ' 
asked Katya . 
` You 're equally clever ; and you 've as much , if not more , character than she . ' 
` Do n't compare me with my sister , please , ' interposed Katya hurriedly ; ` that 's too much to my disadvantage . 
You seem to forget my sister 's beautiful and clever , and ... you in particular , Arkady Nikolaevitch , ought not to say such things , and with such a serious face too . ' 
` What do you mean by `` you in particular '' -- and what makes you suppose I am joking ? ' 
` Of course , you are joking . ' 
` You think so ? 
But what if I 'm persuaded of what I say ? 
If I believe I have not put it strongly enough even ? ' ' 
I do n't understand you . ' 
` Really ? 
Well , now I see ; I certainly took you to be more observant than you are . ' 
` How ? ' 
Arkady made no answer , and turned away , while Katya looked for a few more crumbs in the basket , and began throwing them to the sparrows ; but she moved her arm too vigorously , and they flew away , without stopping to pick them up . 
` Katerina Sergyevna ! ' 
began Arkady suddenly ; ` it 's of no consequence to you , probably ; but , let me tell you , I put you not only above your sister , but above every one in the world . ' 
He got up and went quickly away , as though he were frightened at the words that had fallen from his lips . 
Katya let her two hands drop together with the basket on to her lap , and with bent head she stared a long while after Arkady . 
Gradually a crimson flush came faintly out upon her cheeks ; but her lips did not smile and her dark eyes had a look of perplexity and some other , as yet undefined , feeling . 
` Are you alone ? ' 
she heard the voice of Anna Sergyevna near her ; ' I thought you came into the garden with Arkady . ' 
Katya slowly raised her eyes to her sister -LRB- elegantly , even elaborately dressed , she was standing in the path and tickling Fifi 's ears with the tip of her open parasol -RRB- , and slowly replied , ` Yes , I 'm alone . ' 
` So I see , ' she answered with a smile ; ' I suppose he has gone to his room . ' 
` Yes . ' 
` Have you been reading together ? ' 
` Yes . ' 
Anna Sergyevna took Katya by the chin and lifted her face up . 
` You have not been quarrelling , I hope ? ' 
` No , ' said Katya , and she quietly removed her sister 's hand . 
` How solemnly you answer ! 
I expected to find him here , and meant to suggest his coming a walk with me . 
That 's what he is always asking for . 
They have sent you some shoes from the town ; go and try them on ; I noticed only yesterday your old ones are quite shabby . 
You never think enough about it , and you have such charming little feet ! 
Your hands are nice too ... though they 're large ; so you must make the most of your little feet . 
But you 're not vain . ' 
Anna Sergyevna went farther along the path with a light rustle of her beautiful gown ; Katya got up from the grass , and , taking Heine with her , went away too -- but not to try on her shoes . 
` Charming little feet ! ' 
she thought , as she slowly and lightly mounted the stone steps of the terrace , which were burning with the heat of the sun ; ` charming little feet you call them ... . 
Well , he shall be at them . ' 
But all at once a feeling of shame came upon her , and she ran swiftly upstairs . 
Arkady had gone along the corridor to his room ; a steward had overtaken him , and announced that Mr. Bazarov was in his room . 
` Yevgeny ! ' 
murmured Arkady , almost with dismay ; ` has he been here long ? ' 
` Mr. Bazarov arrived this minute , sir , and gave orders not to announce him to Anna Sergyevna , but to show him straight up to you . ' 
` Can any misfortune have happened at home ? ' 
thought Arkady , and running hurriedly up the stairs , he at once opened the door . 
The sight of Bazarov at once reassured him , though a more experienced eye might very probably have discerned signs of inward agitation in the sunken , though still energetic face of the unexpected visitor . 
With a dusty cloak over his shoulders , with a cap on his head , he was sitting at the window ; he did not even get up when Arkady flung himself with noisy exclamations on his neck . 
` This is unexpected ! 
What good luck brought you ? ' 
he kept repeating , bustling about the room like one who both imagines himself and wishes to show himself delighted . ' 
I suppose everything 's all right at home ; every one 's well , eh ? ' 
` Everything 's all right , but not every one 's well , ' said Bazarov . 
` Do n't be a chatterbox , but send for some kvass for me , sit down , and listen while I tell you all about it in a few , but , I hope , pretty vigorous sentences . ' 
Arkady was quiet while Bazarov described his duel with Pavel Petrovitch . 
Arkady was very much surprised , and even grieved , but he did not think it necessary to show this ; he only asked whether his uncle 's wound was really not serious ; and on receiving the reply that it was most interesting , but not from a medical point of view , he gave a forced smile , but at heart he felt both wounded and as it were ashamed . 
Bazarov seemed to understand him . 
` Yes , my dear fellow , ' he commented , ` you see what comes of living with feudal personages . 
You turn a feudal personage yourself , and find yourself taking part in knightly tournaments . 
Well , so I set off for my father 's , ' Bazarov wound up , ` and I 've turned in here on the way ... to tell you all this , I should say , if I did n't think a useless lie a piece of foolery . 
No , I turned in here -- the devil only knows why . 
You see , it 's sometimes a good thing for a man to take himself by the scruff of the neck and pull himself up , like a radish out of its bed ; that 's what I 've been doing of late ... . 
But I wanted to have one more look at what I 'm giving up , at the bed where I 've been planted . ' ' 
I hope those words do n't refer to me , ' responded Arkady with some emotion ; ' I hope you do n't think of giving me up ? ' 
Bazarov turned an intent , almost piercing look upon him . 
` Would that be such a grief to you ? 
It strikes me you have given me up already , you look so fresh and smart ... . 
Your affair with Anna Sergyevna must be getting on successfully . ' 
` What do you mean by my affair with Anna Sergyevna ? ' 
` Why , did n't you come here from the town on her account , chicken ? 
By the way , how are those Sunday schools getting on ? 
Do you mean to tell me you 're not in love with her ? 
Or have you already reached the stage of discretion ? ' 
` Yevgeny , you know I have always been open with you ; I can assure you , I will swear to you , you 're making a mistake . ' 
` Hm ! 
That 's another story , ' remarked Bazarov in an undertone . 
` But you need n't be in a taking , it 's a matter of absolute indifference to me . 
A sentimentalist would say , `` I feel that our paths are beginning to part , '' but I will simply say that we 're tired of each other . ' 
` Yevgeny ... ' ` My dear soul , there 's no great harm in that . 
One gets tired of much more than that in this life . 
And now I suppose we 'd better say good-bye , had n't we ? 
Ever since I 've been here I 've had such a loathsome feeling , just as if I 'd been reading Gogol 's effusions to the governor of Kalouga 's wife . 
By the way , I did n't tell them to take the horses out . ' 
` Upon my word , this is too much ! ' 
` Why ? ' 
` I 'll say nothing of myself ; but that would be discourteous to the last degree to Anna Sergyevna , who will certainly wish to see you . ' 
` Oh , you 're mistaken there . ' 
` On the contrary , I am certain I 'm right , ' retorted Arkady . 
` And what are you pretending for ? 
If it comes to that , have n't you come here on her account yourself ? ' 
` That may be so , but you 're mistaken any way . ' 
But Arkady was right . 
Anna Sergyevna desired to see Bazarov , and sent a summons to him by a steward . 
Bazarov changed his clothes before going to her ; it turned out that he had packed his new suit so as to be able to get it out easily . 
Madame Odintsov received him not in the room where he had so unexpectedly declared his love to her , but in the drawing-room . 
She held her finger tips out to him cordially , but her face betrayed an involuntary sense of tension . 
` Anna Sergyevna , ' Bazarov hastened to say , ` before everything else I must set your mind at rest . 
Before you is a poor mortal , who has come to his senses long ago , and hopes other people too have forgotten his follies . 
I am going away for a long while ; and though , as you will allow , I 'm by no means a very soft creature , it would be anything but cheerful for me to carry away with me the idea that you remember me with repugnance . ' 
Anna Sergyevna gave a deep sigh like one who has just climbed up a high mountain , and her face was lighted up by a smile . 
She held out her hand a second time to Bazarov , and responded to his pressure . 
` Let bygones be bygones , ' she said . ' 
I am all the readier to do so because , speaking from my conscience , I was to blame then too for flirting or something . 
In a word , let us be friends as before . 
That was a dream , was n't it ? 
And who remembers dreams ? ' 
` Who remembers them ? 
And besides , love ... you know , is a purely imaginary feeling . ' 
` Really ? 
I am very glad to hear that . ' 
So Anna Sergyevna spoke , and so spoke Bazarov ; they both supposed they were speaking the truth . 
Was the truth , the whole truth , to be found in their words ? 
They could not themselves have said , and much less could the author . 
But a conversation followed between them precisely as though they completely believed one another . 
Anna Sergyevna asked Bazarov , among other things , what he had been doing at the Kirsanovs ' . 
He was on the point of telling her about his duel with Pavel Petrovitch , but he checked himself with the thought that she might imagine he was trying to make himself interesting , and answered that he had been at work all the time . 
` And I , ' observed Anna Sergyevna , ` had a fit of depression at first , goodness knows why ; I even made plans for going abroad , fancy ! 
... Then it passed off , your friend Arkady Nikolaitch came , and I fell back into my old routine , and took up my real part again . ' 
` What part is that , may I ask ? ' 
` The character of aunt , guardian , mother -- call it what you like . 
By the way , do you know I used not quite to understand your close friendship with Arkady Nikolaitch ; I thought him rather insignificant . 
But now I have come to know him better , and to see that he is clever ... . 
And he 's young , he 's young ... that 's the great thing ... not like you and me , Yevgeny Vassilyitch . ' 
` Is he still as shy in your company ? ' 
queried Bazarov . 
` Why , was he ? ' 
... Anna Sergyevna began , and after a brief pause she went on : ` He has grown more confiding now ; he talks to me . 
He used to avoid me before . 
Though , indeed , I did n't seek his society either . 
He 's more friends with Katya . ' 
Bazarov felt irritated . ' 
A woman ca n't help humbugging , of course ! ' 
he thought . 
` You say he used to avoid you , ' he said aloud , with a chilly smile ; ` but it is probably no secret to you that he was in love with you ? ' 
` What ! 
he too ? ' 
fell from Anna Sergyevna 's lips . 
` He too , ' repeated Bazarov , with a submissive bow . 
` Can it be you did n't know it , and I 've told you something new ? ' 
Anna Sergyevna dropped her eyes . 
` You are mistaken , Yevgeny Vassilyitch . ' ' 
I do n't think so . 
But perhaps I ought not to have mentioned it . ' 
` And do n't you try telling me lies again for the future , ' he added to himself . 
` Why not ? 
But I imagine that in this too you are attributing too much importance to a passing impression . 
I begin to suspect you are inclined to exaggeration . ' 
` We had better not talk about it , Anna Sergyevna . ' 
` Oh , why ? ' 
she retorted ; but she herself led the conversation into another channel . 
She was still ill at ease with Bazarov , though she had told him , and assured herself that everything was forgotten . 
While she was exchanging the simplest sentences with him , even while she was jesting with him , she was conscious of a faint spasm of dread . 
So people on a steamer at sea talk and laugh carelessly , for all the world as though they were on dry land ; but let only the slightest hitch occur , let the least sign be seen of anything out of the common , and at once on every face there comes out an expression of peculiar alarm , betraying the constant consciousness of constant danger . 
Anna Sergyevna 's conversation with Bazarov did not last long . 
She began to seem absorbed in thought , answered abstractedly , and suggested at last that they should go into the hall , where they found the princess and Katya . 
` But where is Arkady Nikolaitch ? ' 
inquired the lady of the house ; and on hearing that he had not shown himself for more than an hour , she sent for him . 
He was not very quickly found ; he had hidden himself in the very thickest part of the garden , and with his chin propped on his folded hands , he was sitting lost in meditation . 
They were deep and serious meditations , but not mournful . 
He knew Anna Sergyevna was sitting alone with Bazarov , and he felt no jealousy , as once he had ; on the contrary , his face slowly brightened ; he seemed to be at once wondering and rejoicing , and resolving on something . 
The deceased Odintsov had not liked innovations , but he had tolerated ` the fine arts within a certain sphere , ' and had in consequence put up in his garden , between the hothouse and the lake , an erection after the fashion of a Greek temple , made of Russian brick . 
Along the dark wall at the back of this temple or gallery were placed six niches for statues , which Odintsov had proceeded to order from abroad . 
These statues were to represent Solitude , Silence , Meditation , Melancholy , Modesty , and Sensibility . 
One of them , the goddess of Silence , with her finger on her lip , had been sent and put up ; but on the very same day some boys on the farm had broken her nose ; and though a plasterer of the neighbourhood undertook to make her a new nose ` twice as good as the old one , ' Odintsov ordered her to be taken away , and she was still to be seen in the corner of the threshing barn , where she had stood many long years , a source of superstitious terror to the peasant women . 
The front part of the temple had long ago been overgrown with thick bushes ; only the pediments of the columns could be seen above the dense green . 
In the temple itself it was cool even at mid-day . 
Anna Sergyevna had not liked visiting this place ever since she had seen a snake there ; but Katya often came and sat on the wide stone seat under one of the niches . 
Here , in the midst of the shade and coolness , she used to read and work , or to give herself up to that sensation of perfect peace , known , doubtless , to each of us , the charm of which consists in the half-unconscious , silent listening to the vast current of life that flows for ever both around us and within us . 
The day after Bazarov 's arrival Katya was sitting on her favourite stone seat , and beside her again was sitting Arkady . 
He had besought her to come with him to the ` temple . ' 
There was about an hour still to lunch-time ; the dewy morning had already given place to a sultry day . 
Arkady 's face retained the expression of the preceding day ; Katya had a preoccupied look . 
Her sister had , directly after their morning tea , called her into her room , and after some preliminary caresses , which always scared Katya a little , she had advised her to be more guarded in her behaviour with Arkady , and especially to avoid solitary talks with him , as likely to attract the notice of her aunt and all the household . 
Besides this , even the previous evening Anna Sergyevna had not been herself ; and Katya herself had felt ill at ease , as though she were conscious of some fault in herself . 
As she yielded to Arkady 's entreaties , she said to herself that it was for the last time . 
` Katerina Sergyevna , ' he began with a sort of bashful easiness , ` since I 've had the happiness of living in the same house with you , I have discussed a great many things with you ; but meanwhile there is one , very important ... for me ... one question , which I have not touched upon up till now . 
You remarked yesterday that I have been changed here , ' he went on , at once catching and avoiding the questioning glance Katya was turning upon him . ' 
I have changed certainly a great deal , and you know that better than any one else -- you to whom I really owe this change . ' 
` I ? 
... Me ? 
... ' said Katya . ' 
I am not now the conceited boy I was when I came here , ' Arkady went on . 
` I 've not reached twenty-three for nothing ; as before , I want to be useful , I want to devote all my powers to the truth ; but I no longer look for my ideals where I did ; they present themselves to me ... much closer to hand . 
Up till now I did not understand myself ; I set myself tasks which were beyond my powers ... . 
My eyes have been opened lately , thanks to one feeling ... . 
I 'm not expressing myself quite clearly , but I hope you understand me . ' 
Katya made no reply , but she ceased looking at Arkady . ' 
I suppose , ' he began again , this time in a more agitated voice , while above his head a chaffinch sang its song unheeding among the leaves of the birch -- ' I suppose it 's the duty of every one to be open with those ... with those people who ... in fact , with those who are near to him , and so I ... I resolved ... ' But here Arkady 's eloquence deserted him ; he lost the thread , stammered , and was forced to be silent for a moment . 
Katya still did not raise her eyes . 
She seemed not to understand what he was leading up to in all this , and to be waiting for something . ' 
I foresee I shall surprise you , ' began Arkady , pulling himself together again with an effort , ` especially since this feeling relates in a way ... in a way , notice ... to you . 
You reproached me , if you remember , yesterday with a want of seriousness , ' Arkady went on , with the air of a man who has got into a bog , feels that he is sinking further and further in at every step , and yet hurries onwards in the hope of crossing it as soon as possible ; ` that reproach is often aimed ... often falls ... on young men even when they cease to deserve it ; and if I had more self-confidence ... ' -LRB- ` Come , help me , do help me ! ' 
Arkady was thinking , in desperation ; but , as before , Katya did not turn her head . -RRB- 
` If I could hope ... ' ` If I could feel sure of what you say , ' was heard at that instant the clear voice of Anna Sergyevna . 
Arkady was still at once , while Katya turned pale . 
Close by the bushes that screened the temple ran a little path . 
Anna Sergyevna was walking along it escorted by Bazarov . 
Katya and Arkady could not see them , but they heard every word , the rustle of their clothes , their very breathing . 
They walked on a few steps , and , as though on purpose , stood still just opposite the temple . 
` You see , ' pursued Anna Sergyevna , ` you and I made a mistake ; we are both past our first youth , I especially so ; we have seen life , we are tired ; we are both -- why affect not to know it ? 
-- clever ; at first we interested each other , curiosity was aroused ... and then ... ' ` And then I grew stale , ' put in Bazarov . 
` You know that was not the cause of our misunderstanding . 
But , however , it was to be , we had no need of one another , that 's the chief point ; there was too much ... what shall I say ? 
... that was alike in us . 
We did not realise it all at once . 
Now , Arkady ... ' ` So you need him ? ' 
queried Bazarov . 
` Hush , Yevgeny Vassilyitch . 
You tell me he is not indifferent to me , and it always seemed to me he liked me . 
I know that I might well be his aunt , but I do n't wish to conceal from you that I have come to think more often of him . 
In such youthful , fresh feeling there is a special charm ... ' ` The word fascination is most usual in such cases , ' Bazarov interrupted ; the effervescence of his spleen could be heard in his choked though steady voice . 
` Arkady was mysterious over something with me yesterday , and did n't talk either of you or your sister ... . 
That 's a serious symptom . ' 
` He is just like a brother with Katya , ' commented Anna Sergyevna , ` and I like that in him , though , perhaps , I ought not to have allowed such intimacy between them . ' 
` That idea is prompted by ... your feelings as a sister ? ' 
Bazarov brought out , drawling . 
` Of course ... but why are we standing still ? 
Let us go on . 
What a strange talk we are having , are n't we ? 
I could never have believed I should talk to you like this . 
You know , I am afraid of you ... and at the same time I trust you , because in reality you are so good . ' 
` In the first place , I am not in the least good ; and in the second place , I have lost all significance for you , and you tell me I am good ... . 
It 's like a laying a wreath of flowers on the head of a corpse . ' 
` Yevgeny Vassilyitch , we are not responsible ... ' Anna Sergyevna began ; but a gust of wind blew across , set the leaves rustling , and carried away her words . 
` Of course , you are free ... ' Bazarov declared after a brief pause . 
Nothing more could be distinguished ; the steps retreated ... everything was still . 
Arkady turned to Katya . 
She was sitting in the same position , but her head was bent still lower . 
` Katerina Sergyevna , ' he said with a shaking voice , and clasping his hands tightly together , ' I love you for ever and irrevocably , and I love no one but you . 
I wanted to tell you this , to find out your opinion of me , and to ask for your hand , since I am not rich , and I feel ready for any sacrifice ... . 
You do n't answer me ? 
You do n't believe me ? 
Do you think I speak lightly ? 
But remember these last days ! 
Surely for a long time past you must have known that everything -- understand me -- everything else has vanished long ago and left no trace ? 
Look at me , say one word to me ... I love ... I love you ... believe me ! ' 
Katya glanced at Arkady with a bright and serious look , and after long hesitation , with the faintest smile , she said , ` Yes . ' 
Arkady leapt up from the stone seat . 
` Yes ! 
You said Yes , Katerina Sergyevna ! 
What does that word mean ? 
Only that I do love you , that you believe me ... or ... or ... I dare n't go on ... ' ` Yes , ' repeated Katya , and this time he understood her . 
He snatched her large beautiful hands , and , breathless with rapture , pressed them to his heart . 
He could scarcely stand on his feet , and could only repeat , ` Katya , Katya ... ' while she began weeping in a guileless way , smiling gently at her own tears . 
No one who has not seen those tears in the eyes of the beloved , knows yet to what a point , faint with shame and gratitude , a man may be happy on earth . 
The next day , early in the morning , Anna Sergyevna sent to summon Bazarov to her boudoir , and with a forced laugh handed him a folded sheet of notepaper . 
It was a letter from Arkady ; in it he asked for her sister 's hand . 
Bazarov quickly scanned the letter , and made an effort to control himself , that he might not show the malignant feeling which was instantaneously aflame in his breast . 
` So that 's how it is , ' he commented ; ` and you , I fancy , only yesterday imagined he loved Katerina Sergyevna as a brother . 
What are you intending to do now ? ' 
` What do you advise me ? ' 
asked Anna Sergyevna , still laughing . 
` Well , I suppose , ' answered Bazarov , also with a laugh , though he felt anything but cheerful , and had no more inclination to laugh than she had ; ' I suppose you ought to give the young people your blessing . 
It 's a good match in every respect ; Kirsanov 's position is passable , he 's the only son , and his father 's a good-natured fellow , he wo n't try to thwart him . ' 
Madame Odintsov walked up and down the room . 
By turns her face flushed and grew pale . 
` You think so , ' she said . 
` Well , I see no obstacles ... I am glad for Katya ... and for Arkady Nikolaevitch too . 
Of course , I will wait for his father 's answer . 
I will send him in person to him . 
But it turns out , you see , that I was right yesterday when I told you we were both old people ... . 
How was it I saw nothing ? 
That 's what amazes me ! ' 
Anna Sergyevna laughed again , and quickly turned her head away . 
` The younger generation have grown awfully sly , ' remarked Bazarov , and he too laughed . 
` Good-bye , ' he began again after a short silence . ' 
I hope you will bring the matter to the most satisfactory conclusion ; and I will rejoice from a distance . ' 
Madame Odintsov turned quickly to him . 
` You are not going away ? 
Why should you not stay now ? 
Stay ... it 's exciting talking to you ... one seems walking on the edge of a precipice . 
At first one feels timid , but one gains courage as one goes on . 
Do stay . ' 
` Thanks for the suggestion , Anna Sergyevna , and for your flattering opinion of my conversational talents . 
But I think I have already been moving too long in a sphere which is not my own . 
Flying fishes can hold out for a time in the air ; but soon they must splash back into the water ; allow me , too , to paddle in my own element . ' 
Madame Odintsov looked at Bazarov . 
His pale face was twitching with a bitter smile . 
` This man did love me ! ' 
she thought , and she felt pity for him , and held out her hand to him with sympathy . 
But he too understood her . 
` No ! ' 
he said , stepping back a pace . 
` I 'm a poor man , but I 've never taken charity so far . 
Good-bye , and good luck to you . ' ' 
I am certain we are not seeing each other for the last time , ' Anna Sergyevna declared with an unconscious gesture . 
` Anything may happen ! ' 
answered Bazarov , and he bowed and went away . 
` So you are thinking of making yourself a nest ? ' 
he said the same day to Arkady , as he packed his box , crouching on the floor . 
` Well , it 's a capital thing . 
But you need n't have been such a humbug . 
I expected something from you in quite another quarter . 
Perhaps , though , it took you by surprise yourself ? ' ' 
I certainly did n't expect this when I parted from you , ' answered Arkady ; ` but why are you a humbug yourself , calling it `` a capital thing , '' as though I did n't know your opinion of marriage . ' 
` Ah , my dear fellow , ' said Bazarov , ` how you talk ! 
You see what I 'm doing ; there seems to be an empty space in the box , and I am putting hay in ; that 's how it is in the box of our life ; we would stuff it up with anything rather than have a void . 
Do n't be offended , please ; you remember , no doubt , the opinion I have always had of Katerina Sergyevna . 
Many a young lady 's called clever simply because she can sigh cleverly ; but yours can hold her own , and , indeed , she 'll hold it so well that she 'll have you under her thumb -- to be sure , though , that 's quite as it ought to be . ' 
He slammed the lid to , and got up from the floor . 
` And now , I say again , good-bye , for it 's useless to deceive ourselves -- we are parting for good , and you know that yourself ... you have acted sensibly ; you 're not made for our bitter , rough , lonely existence . 
There 's no dash , no hate in you , but you 've the daring of youth and the fire of youth . 
Your sort , you gentry , can never get beyond refined submission or refined indignation , and that 's no good . 
You wo n't fight -- and yet you fancy yourselves gallant chaps -- but we mean to fight . 
Oh well ! 
Our dust would get into your eyes , our mud would bespatter you , but yet you 're not up to our level , you 're admiring yourselves unconsciously , you like to abuse yourselves ; but we 're sick of that -- we want something else ! 
we want to smash other people ! 
You 're a capital fellow ; but you 're a sugary , liberal snob for all that -- ay volla-too , as my parent is fond of saying . ' 
` You are parting from me for ever , Yevgeny , ' responded Arkady mournfully ; ` and have you nothing else to say to me ? ' 
Bazarov scratched the back of his head . 
` Yes , Arkady , yes , I have other things to say to you , but I 'm not going to say them , because that 's sentimentalism -- that means , mawkishness . 
And you get married as soon as you can ; and build your nest , and get children to your heart 's content . 
They 'll have the wit to be born in a better time than you and me . 
Aha ! 
I see the horses are ready . 
Time 's up ! 
I 've said good-bye to every one ... . 
What now ? 
embracing , eh ? ' 
Arkady flung himself on the neck of his former leader and friend , and the tears fairly gushed from his eyes . 
` That 's what comes of being young ! ' 
Bazarov commented calmly . 
` But I rest my hopes on Katerina Sergyevna . 
You 'll see how quickly she 'll console you ! 
Good-bye , brother ! ' 
he said to Arkady when he had got into the light cart , and , pointing to a pair of jackdaws sitting side by side on the stable roof , he added , ` That 's for you ! 
follow that example . ' 
` What does that mean ? ' 
asked Arkady . 
` What ? 
Are you so weak in natural history , or have you forgotten that the jackdaw is a most respectable family bird ? 
An example to you ! 
... Good-bye ! ' 
The cart creaked and rolled away . 
Bazarov had spoken truly . 
In talking that evening with Katya , Arkady completely forgot about his former teacher . 
He already began to follow her lead , and Katya was conscious of this , and not surprised at it . 
He was to set off the next day for Maryino , to see Nikolai Petrovitch . 
Anna Sergyevna was not disposed to put any constraint on the young people , and only on account of the proprieties did not leave them by themselves for too long together . 
She magnanimously kept the princess out of their way ; the latter had been reduced to a state of tearful frenzy by the news of the proposed marriage . 
At first Anna Sergyevna was afraid the sight of their happiness might prove rather trying to herself , but it turned out quite the other way ; this sight not only did not distress her , it interested her , it even softened her at last . 
Anna Sergyevna felt both glad and sorry at this . 
` It is clear that Bazarov was right , ' she thought ; ` it has been curiosity , nothing but curiosity , and love of ease , and egoism ... ' ` Children , ' she said aloud , ` what do you say , is love a purely imaginary feeling ? ' 
But neither Katya nor Arkady even understood her . 
They were shy with her ; the fragment of conversation they had involuntarily overheard haunted their minds . 
But Anna Sergyevna soon set their minds at rest ; and it was not difficult for her -- she had set her own mind at rest . 
Bazarov 's old parents were all the more overjoyed by their son 's arrival , as it was quite unexpected . 
Arina Vlasyevna was greatly excited , and kept running backwards and forwards in the house , so that Vassily Ivanovitch compared her to a ` hen partridge ' ; the short tail of her abbreviated jacket did , in fact , give her something of a birdlike appearance . 
He himself merely growled and gnawed the amber mouthpiece of his pipe , or , clutching his neck with his fingers , turned his head round , as though he were trying whether it were properly screwed on , then all at once he opened his wide mouth and went off into a perfectly noiseless chuckle . 
` I 've come to you for six whole weeks , governor , ' Bazarov said to him . ' 
I want to work , so please do n't hinder me now . ' 
` You shall forget my face completely , if you call that hindering you ! ' 
answered Vassily Ivanovitch . 
He kept his promise . 
After installing his son as before in his study , he almost hid himself away from him , and he kept his wife from all superfluous demonstrations of tenderness . 
` On Enyusha 's first visit , my dear soul , ' he said to her , ` we bothered him a little ; we must be wiser this time . ' 
Arina Vlasyevna agreed with her husband , but that was small compensation since she saw her son only at meals , and was now absolutely afraid to address him . 
` Enyushenka , ' she would say sometimes -- and before he had time to look round , she was nervously fingering the tassels of her reticule and faltering , ` Never mind , never mind , I only -- ' and afterwards she would go to Vassily Ivanovitch and , her cheek in her hand , would consult him : ` If you could only find out , darling , which Enyusha would like for dinner to-day -- cabbage-broth or beetroot-soup ? ' 
-- ` But why did n't you ask him yourself ? ' 
-- ` Oh , he will get sick of me ! ' 
Bazarov , however , soon ceased to shut himself up ; the fever of work fell away , and was replaced by dreary boredom or vague restlessness . 
A strange weariness began to show itself in all his movements ; even his walk , firm , bold and strenuous , was changed . 
He gave up walking in solitude , and began to seek society ; he drank tea in the drawing-room , strolled about the kitchen-garden with Vassily Ivanovitch , and smoked with him in silence ; once even asked after Father Alexey . 
Vassily Ivanovitch at first rejoiced at this change , but his joy was not long-lived . 
` Enyusha 's breaking my heart , ' he complained in secret to his wife ; ` it 's not that he 's discontented or angry -- that would be nothing ; he 's sad , he 's sorrowful -- that 's what 's so terrible . 
He 's always silent . 
If he 'd only abuse us ; he 's growing thin , he 's lost his colour . ' 
-- ` Mercy on us , mercy on us ! ' 
whispered the old woman ; ' I would put an amulet on his neck , but , of course , he wo n't allow it . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch several times attempted in the most circumspect manner to question Bazarov about his work , about his health , and about Arkady ... . 
But Bazarov 's replies were reluctant and casual ; and , once noticing that his father was trying gradually to lead up to something in conversation , he said to him in a tone of vexation : ` Why do you always seem to be walking round me on tiptoe ? 
That way 's worse than the old one . ' 
-- ` There , there , I meant nothing ! ' 
poor Vassily Ivanovitch answered hurriedly . 
So his diplomatic hints remained fruitless . 
He hoped to awaken his son 's sympathy one day by beginning à propos of the approaching emancipation of the peasantry , to talk about progress ; but the latter responded indifferently : ` Yesterday I was walking under the fence , and I heard the peasant boys here , instead of some old ballad , bawling a street song . 
That 's what progress is . ' 
Sometimes Bazarov went into the village , and in his usual bantering tone entered into conversation with some peasant : ` Come , ' he would say to him , ` expound your views on life to me , brother ; you see , they say all the strength and future of Russia lies in your hands , a new epoch in history will be started by you -- you give us our real language and our laws . ' 
The peasant either made no reply , or articulated a few words of this sort , ` Well , we 'll try ... because , you see , to be sure ... ' ` You explain to me what your mir is , ' Bazarov interrupted ; ` and is it the same mir that is said to rest on three fishes ? ' 
` That , little father , is the earth that rests on three fishes , ' the peasant would declare soothingly , in a kind of patriarchal , simple-hearted sing-song ; ` and over against ours , that 's to say , the mir , we know there 's the master 's will ; wherefore you are our fathers . 
And the stricter the master 's rule , the better for the peasant . ' 
After listening to such a reply one day , Bazarov shrugged his shoulders contemptuously and turned away , while the peasant sauntered slowly homewards . 
` What was he talking about ? ' 
inquired another peasant of middle age and surly aspect , who at a distance from the door of his hut had been following his conversation with Bazarov . 
-- ` Arrears ? 
eh ? ' 
` Arrears , no indeed , mate ! ' 
answered the first peasant , and now there was no trace of patriarchal singsong in his voice ; on the contrary , there was a certain scornful gruffness to be heard in it : ` Oh , he clacked away about something or other ; wanted to stretch his tongue a bit . 
Of course , he 's a gentleman ; what does he understand ? ' 
` What should he understand ! ' 
answered the other peasant , and jerking back their caps and pushing down their belts , they proceeded to deliberate upon their work and their wants . 
Alas ! 
Bazarov , shrugging his shoulders contemptuously , Bazarov , who knew how to talk to peasants -LRB- as he had boasted in his dispute with Pavel Petrovitch -RRB- , did not in his self-confidence even suspect that in their eyes he was all the while something of the nature of a buffooning clown . 
He found employment for himself at last , however . 
One day Vassily Ivanovitch bound up a peasant 's wounded leg before him , but the old man 's hands trembled , and he could not manage the bandages ; his son helped him , and from time to time began to take a share in his practice , though at the same time he was constantly sneering both at the remedies he himself advised and at his father , who hastened to make use of them . 
But Bazarov 's jeers did not in the least perturb Vassily Ivanovitch ; they were positively a comfort to him . 
Holding his greasy dressing-gown across his stomach with two fingers , and smoking his pipe , he used to listen with enjoyment to Bazarov ; and the more malicious his sallies , the more good-humouredly did his delighted father chuckle , showing every one of his black teeth . 
He used even to repeat these sometimes flat or pointless retorts , and would , for instance , for several days constantly without rhyme or reason , reiterate , ` Not a matter of the first importance ! ' 
simply because his son , on hearing he was going to matins , had made use of that expression . 
` Thank God ! 
he has got over his melancholy ! ' 
he whispered to his wife ; ` how he gave it to me to-day , it was splendid ! ' 
Moreover , the idea of having such an assistant excited him to ecstasy , filled him with pride . 
` Yes , yes , ' he would say to some peasant woman in a man 's cloak , and a cap shaped like a horn , as he handed her a bottle of Goulard 's extract or a box of white ointment , ` you ought to be thanking God , my good woman , every minute that my son is staying with me ; you will be treated now by the most scientific , most modern method . 
Do you know what that means ? 
The Emperor of the French , Napoleon , even , has no better doctor . ' 
And the peasant woman , who had come to complain that she felt so sort of queer all over -LRB- the exact meaning of these words she was not able , however , herself to explain -RRB- , merely bowed low and rummaged in her bosom , where four eggs lay tied up in the corner of a towel . 
Bazarov once even pulled out a tooth for a passing pedlar of cloth ; and though this tooth was an average specimen , Vassily Ivanovitch preserved it as a curiosity , and incessantly repeated , as he showed it to Father Alexey , ` Just look , what a fang ! 
The force Yevgeny has ! 
The pedlar seemed to leap into the air . 
If it had been an oak , he 'd have rooted it up ! ' 
` Most promising ! ' 
Father Alexey would comment at last , not knowing what answer to make , and how to get rid of the ecstatic old man . 
One day a peasant from a neighbouring village brought his brother to Vassily Ivanovitch , ill with typhus . 
The unhappy man , lying flat on a truss of straw , was dying ; his body was covered with dark patches , he had long ago lost consciousness . 
Vassily Ivanovitch expressed his regret that no one had taken steps to procure medical aid sooner , and declared there was no hope . 
And , in fact , the peasant did not get his brother home again ; he died in the cart . 
Three days later Bazarov came into his father 's room and asked him if he had any caustic . 
` Yes ; what do you want it for ? ' ' 
