asked Arkady . 
` I 'm not alluding to anything ; I 'm saying straight out that we 've both behaved like fools . 
What 's the use of talking about it ! 
Still , I 've noticed in hospital practice , the man who 's furious at his illness -- he 's sure to get over it . ' ' 
I do n't quite understand you , ' observed Arkady ; ' I should have thought you had nothing to complain of . ' 
` And since you do n't quite understand me , I 'll tell you this -- to my mind , it 's better to break stones on the highroad than to let a woman have the mastery of even the end of one 's little finger . 
That 's all ... ' Bazarov was on the point of uttering his favourite word , ` romanticism , ' but he checked himself , and said , ` rubbish . 
You do n't believe me now , but I tell you ; you and I have been in feminine society , and very nice we found it ; but to throw up society like that is for all the world like a dip in cold water on a hot day . 
A man has n't time to attend to such trifles ; a man ought not to be tame , says an excellent Spanish proverb . 
Now , you , I suppose , my sage friend , ' he added , turning to the peasant sitting on the box -- ` you 've a wife ? ' 
The peasant showed both the friends his dull blear-eyed face . ' 
A wife ? 
Yes . 
Every man has a wife . ' 
` Do you beat her ? ' 
` My wife ? 
Everything happens sometimes . 
We do n't beat her without good reason ! ' 
` That 's excellent . 
Well , and does she beat you ? ' 
The peasant gave a tug at the reins . 
` That 's a strange thing to say , sir . 
You like your joke . ' 
... He was obviously offended . 
` You hear , Arkady Nikolaevitch ! 
But we have taken a beating ... that 's what comes of being educated people . ' 
Arkady gave a forced laugh , while Bazarov turned away , and did not open his mouth again the whole journey . 
The twenty miles seemed to Arkady quite forty . 
But at last , on the slope of some rising ground , appeared the small hamlet where Bazarov 's parents lived . 
Beside it , in a young birch copse , could be seen a small house with a thatched roof . 
Two peasants stood with their hats on at the first hut , abusing each other . 
` You 're a great sow , ' said one ; ` and worse than a little sucking pig . ' 
` And your wife 's a witch , ' retorted the other . 
` From their unconstrained behaviour , ' Bazarov remarked to Arkady , ` and the playfulness of their retorts , you can guess that my father 's peasants are not too much oppressed . 
Why , there he is himself coming out on the steps of his house . 
They must have heard the bells . 
It 's he ; it 's he -- I know his figure . 
Ay , ay ! 
how grey he 's grown though , poor chap ! ' 
Bazarov leaned out of the coach , while Arkady thrust his head out behind his companion 's back , and caught sight on the steps of the little manor-house of a tall , thinnish man with dishevelled hair , and a thin hawk nose , dressed in an old military coat not buttoned up . 
He was standing , his legs wide apart , smoking a long pipe and screwing up his eyes to keep the sun out of them . 
The horses stopped . 
` Arrived at last , ' said Bazarov 's father , still going on smoking though the pipe was fairly dancing up and down between his fingers . 
` Come , get out ; get out ; let me hug you . ' 
He began embracing his son ... ` Enyusha , Enyusha , ' was heard a trembling woman 's voice . 
The door was flung open , and in the doorway was seen a plump , short , little old woman in a white cap and a short striped jacket . 
She moaned , staggered , and would certainly have fallen , had not Bazarov supported her . 
Her plump little hands were instantly twined round his neck , her head was pressed to his breast , and there was a complete hush . 
The only sound heard was her broken sobs . 
Old Bazarov breathed hard and screwed his eyes up more than ever . 
` There , that 's enough , that 's enough , Arisha ! 
give over , ' he said , exchanging a glance with Arkady , who remained motionless in the coach , while the peasant on the box even turned his head away ; ` that 's not at all necessary , please give over . ' 
` Ah , Vassily Ivanitch , ' faltered the old woman , ` for what ages , my dear one , my darling , Enyusha , ' ... and , not unclasping her hands , she drew her wrinkled face , wet with tears and working with tenderness , a little away from Bazarov , and gazed at him with blissful and comic-looking eyes , and again fell on his neck . 
` Well , well , to be sure , that 's all in the nature of things , ' commented Vassily Ivanitch , ` only we 'd better come indoors . 
Here 's a visitor come with Yevgeny . 
You must excuse it , ' he added , turning to Arkady , and scraping with his foot ; ` you understand , a woman 's weakness ; and well , a mother 's heart ... ' His lips and eyebrows too were twitching , and his beard was quivering ... but he was obviously trying to control himself and appear almost indifferent . 
` Let 's come in , mother , really , ' said Bazarov , and he led the enfeebled old woman into the house . 
Putting her into a comfortable armchair , he once more hurriedly embraced his father and introduced Arkady to him . 
` Heartily glad to make your acquaintance , ' said Vassily Ivanovitch , ` but you must n't expect great things ; everything here in my house is done in a plain way , on a military footing . 
Arina Vlasyevna , calm yourself , pray ; what weakness ! 
The gentleman our guest will think ill of you . ' 
` My dear sir , ' said the old lady through her tears , ` your name and your father 's I have n't the honour of knowing ... ' ` Arkady Nikolaitch , ' put in Vassily Ivanitch solemnly , in a low voice . 
` You must excuse a silly old woman like me . ' 
The old woman blew her nose , and bending her head to right and to left , carefully wiped one eye after the other . 
` You must excuse me . 
You see , I thought I should die , that I should not live to see my da . . 
arling . ' 
` Well , here we have lived to see him , madam , ' put in Vassily Ivanovitch . 
` Tanyushka , ' he turned to a bare-legged little girl of thirteen in a bright red cotton dress , who was timidly peeping in at the door , ` bring your mistress a glass of water -- on a tray , do you hear ? 
-- and you , gentlemen , ' he added , with a kind of old-fashioned playfulness , ` let me ask you into the study of a retired old veteran . ' 
` Just once more let me embrace you , Enyusha , ' moaned Arina Vlasyevna . 
Bazarov bent down to her . 
` Why , what a handsome fellow you have grown ! ' 
` Well , I do n't know about being handsome , ' remarked Vassily Ivanovitch , ` but he 's a man , as the saying is , ommfay . 
And now I hope , Arina Vlasyevna , that having satisfied your maternal heart , you will turn your thoughts to satisfying the appetites of our dear guests , because , as you 're aware , even nightingales ca n't be fed on fairy tales . ' 
The old lady got up from her chair . 
` This minute , Vassily Ivanovitch , the table shall be laid . 
I will run myself to the kitchen and order the samovar to be brought in ; everything shall be ready , everything . 
Why , I have not seen him , not given him food or drink these three years ; is that nothing ? ' 
` There , mind , good mother , bustle about ; do n't put us to shame ; while you , gentlemen , I beg you to follow me . 
Here 's Timofeitch come to pay his respects to you , Yevgeny . 
He , too , I daresay , is delighted , the old dog . 
Eh , are n't you delighted , old dog ? 
Be so good as to follow me . ' 
And Vassily Ivanovitch went bustling forward , scraping and flapping with his slippers trodden down at heel . 
His whole house consisted of six tiny rooms . 
One of them -- the one to which he led our friends -- was called the study . 
A thick-legged table , littered over with papers black with the accumulation of ancient dust as though they had been smoked , occupied all the space between the two windows ; on the walls hung Turkish firearms , whips , a sabre , two maps , some anatomical diagrams , a portrait of Hoffland , a monogram woven in hair in a blackened frame , and a diploma under glass ; a leather sofa , torn and worn into hollows in parts , was placed between two huge cupboards of birch-wood ; on the shelves books , boxes , stuffed birds , jars , and phials were huddled together in confusion ; in one corner stood a broken galvanic battery . ' 
I warned you , my dear Arkady Nikolaitch , ' began Vassily Ivanitch , ` that we live , so to say , bivouacking ... ' ` There , stop that , what are you apologising for ? ' 
Bazarov interrupted . 
` Kirsanov knows very well we 're not Croesuses , and that you have no butler . 
Where are we going to put him , that 's the question ? ' 
` To be sure , Yevgeny ; I have a capital room there in the little lodge ; he will be very comfortable there . ' 
` Have you had a lodge put up then ? ' 
` Why , where the bath-house is , ' put in Timofeitch . 
` That is next to the bathroom , ' Vassily Ivanitch added hurriedly . 
` It 's summer now ... I will run over there at once , and make arrangements ; and you , Timofeitch , meanwhile bring in their things . 
You , Yevgeny , I shall of course offer my study . 
Suum cuique . ' 
` There you have him ! 
A comical old chap , and very good-natured , ' remarked Bazarov , directly Vassily Ivanitch had gone . 
` Just such a queer fish as yours , only in another way . 
He chatters too much . ' 
` And your mother seems an awfully nice woman , ' observed Arkady . 
` Yes , there 's no humbug about her . 
You 'll see what a dinner she 'll give us . ' 
` They did n't expect you to-day , sir ; they 've not brought any beef ? ' 
observed Timofeitch , who was just dragging in Bazarov 's box . 
` We shall get on very well without beef . 
It 's no use crying for the moon . 
Poverty , they say , is no vice . ' 
` How many serfs has your father ? ' 
Arkady asked suddenly . 
` The estate 's not his , but mother 's ; there are fifteen serfs , if I remember . ' 
` Twenty-two in all , ' Timofeitch added , with an air of displeasure . 
The flapping of slippers was heard , and Vassily Ivanovitch reappeared . 
` In a few minutes your room will be ready to receive you , ' he cried triumphantly . 
Arkady ... Nikolaitch ? 
I think that is right ? 
And here is your attendant , ' he added , indicating a short-cropped boy , who had come in with him in a blue full-skirted coat with ragged elbows and a pair of boots which did not belong to him . 
` His name is Fedka . 
Again , I repeat , even though my son tells me not to , you must n't expect great things . 
He knows how to fill a pipe , though . 
You smoke , of course ? ' ' 
I generally smoke cigars , ' answered Arkady . 
` And you do very sensibly . 
I myself give the preference to cigars , but in these solitudes it is exceedingly difficult to obtain them . ' 
` There , that 's enough humble pie , ' Bazarov interrupted again . 
` You 'd much better sit here on the sofa and let us have a look at you . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch laughed and sat down . 
He was very like his son in face , only his brow was lower and narrower , and his mouth rather wider , and he was for ever restless , shrugging up his shoulder as though his coat cut him under the armpits , blinking , clearing his throat , and gesticulating with his fingers , while his son was distinguished by a kind of nonchalant immobility . 
` Humble-pie ! ' 
repeated Vassily Ivanovitch . 
` You must not imagine , Yevgeny , I want to appeal , so to speak , to our guest 's sympathies by making out we live in such a wilderness . 
Quite the contrary , I maintain that for a thinking man nothing is a wilderness . 
At least , I try as far as possible not to get rusty , so to speak , not to fall behind the age . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch drew out of his pocket a new yellow silk handkerchief , which he had had time to snatch up on the way to Arkady 's room , and flourishing it in the air , he proceeded : ' I am not now alluding to the fact that , for example , at the cost of sacrifices not inconsiderable for me , I have put my peasants on the rent-system and given up my land to them on half profits . 
I regarded that as my duty ; common sense itself enjoins such a proceeding , though other proprietors do not even dream of it ; I am alluding to the sciences , to culture . ' 
` Yes ; I see you have here The Friend of Health for 1855 , ' remarked Bazarov . 
` It 's sent me by an old comrade out of friendship , ' Vassily Ivanovitch made haste to answer ; ` but we have , for instance , some idea even of phrenology , ' he added , addressing himself principally , however , to Arkady , and pointing to a small plaster head on the cupboard , divided into numbered squares ; ` we are not unacquainted even with Schenlein and Rademacher . ' 
` Why do people still believe in Rademacher in this province ? ' 
asked Bazarov . 
Vassily Ivanovitch cleared his throat . 
` In this province ... . 
Of course , gentlemen , you know best ; how could we keep pace with you ? 
You are here to take our places . 
In my day , too , there was some sort of a Humouralist school , Hoffmann , and Brown too with his vitalism -- they seemed very ridiculous to us , but , of course , they too had been great men at one time or other . 
Some one new has taken the place of Rademacher with you ; you bow down to him , but in another twenty years it will be his turn to be laughed at . ' 
` For your consolation I will tell you , ' observed Bazarov , ` that nowadays we laugh at medicine altogether , and do n't bow down to any one . ' 
` How 's that ? 
Why , you 're going to be a doctor , are n't you ? ' 
` Yes , but the one fact does n't prevent the other . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch poked his third finger into his pipe , where a little smouldering ash was still left . 
` Well , perhaps , perhaps -- I am not going to dispute . 
What am I ? 
A retired army-doctor , volla-too ; now fate has made me take to farming . 
I served in your grandfather 's brigade , ' he addressed himself again to Arkady ; ` yes , yes , I have seen many sights in my day . 
And I was thrown into all kinds of society , brought into contact with all sorts of people ! 
I myself , the man you see before you now , have felt the pulse of Prince Wittgenstein and of Zhukovsky ! 
They were in the southern army , in the fourteenth , you understand ' -LRB- and here Vassily Ivanovitch pursed his mouth up significantly -RRB- . 
` Well , well , but my business was on one side ; stick to your lancet , and let everything else go hang ! 
Your grandfather was a very honourable man , a real soldier . ' 
` Confess , now , he was rather a blockhead , ' remarked Bazarov lazily . 
` Ah , Yevgeny , how can you use such an expression ! 
Do consider ... . 
Of course , General Kirsanov was not one of the ... ' ` Come , drop him , ' broke in Bazarov ; ' I was pleased as I was driving along here to see your birch copse ; it has shot up capitally . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch brightened up . 
` And you must see what a little garden I 've got now ! 
I planted every tree myself . 
I 've fruit , and raspberries , and all kinds of medicinal herbs . 
However clever you young gentlemen may be , old Paracelsus spoke the holy truth : in herbis verbis et lapidibus ... . 
I 've retired from practice , you know , of course , but two or three times a week it will happen that I 'm brought back to my old work . 
They come for advice -- I ca n't drive them away . 
Sometimes the poor have recourse to me for help . 
And indeed there are no doctors here at all . 
There 's one of the neighbours here , a retired major , only fancy , he doctors the people too . 
I asked the question , `` Has he studied medicine ? '' 
And they told me , `` No , he 's not studied ; he does it more from philanthropy . '' 
... Ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! 
from philanthropy ! 
What do you think of that ? 
Ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! ' 
` Fedka , fill me a pipe ! ' 
said Bazarov rudely . 
` And there 's another doctor here who just got to a patient , ' Vassily Ivanovitch persisted in a kind of desperation , ` when the patient had gone ad patres ; the servant did n't let the doctor speak ; you 're no longer wanted , he told him . 
He had n't expected this , got confused , and asked , `` Why , did your master hiccup before his death ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Did he hiccup much ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Ah , well , that 's all right , '' and off he set back again . 
Ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! ' 
The old man was alone in his laughter ; Arkady forced a smile on his face . 
Bazarov simply stretched . 
The conversation went on in this way for about an hour ; Arkady had time to go to his room , which turned out to be the anteroom attached to the bathroom , but was very snug and clean . 
At last Tanyusha came in and announced that dinner was ready . 
Vassily Ivanovitch was the first to get up . 
` Come , gentlemen . 
You must be magnanimous and pardon me if I 've bored you . 
I daresay my good wife will give you more satisfaction . ' 
The dinner , though prepared in haste , turned out to be very good , even abundant ; only the wine was not quite up to the mark ; it was almost black sherry , bought by Timofeitch in the town at a well-known merchant 's , and had a faint coppery , resinous taste , and the flies were a great nuisance . 
On ordinary days a serf-boy used to keep driving them away with a large green branch ; but on this occasion Vassily Ivanovitch had sent him away through dread of the criticism of the younger generation . 
Arina Vlasyevna had had time to dress : she had put on a high cap with silk ribbons and a pale blue flowered shawl . 
She broke down again directly she caught sight of her Enyusha , but her husband had no need to admonish her ; she made haste to wipe away her tears herself , for fear of spotting her shawl . 
Only the young men ate anything ; the master and mistress of the house had dined long ago . 
Fedka waited at table , obviously encumbered by having boots on for the first time ; he was assisted by a woman of a masculine cast of face and one eye , by name Anfisushka , who performed the duties of housekeeper , poultry-woman , and laundress . 
Vassily Ivanovitch walked up and down during the whole of dinner , and with a perfectly happy , positively beatific countenance , talked about the serious anxiety he felt at Napoleon 's policy , and the intricacy of the Italian question . 
Arina Vlasyevna took no notice of Arkady . 
She did not press him to eat ; leaning her round face , to which the full cherry-coloured lips and the little moles on the cheeks and over the eyebrows gave a very simple good-natured expression , on her little closed fist , she did not take her eyes off her son , and kept constantly sighing ; she was dying to know for how long he had come , but she was afraid to ask him . 
` What if he says for two days , ' she thought , and her heart sank . 
After the roast Vassily Ivanovitch disappeared for an instant , and returned with an opened half-bottle of champagne . 
` Here , ' he cried , ` though we do live in the wilds , we have something to make merry with on festive occasions ! ' 
He filled three champagne glasses and a little wineglass , proposed the health of ` our inestimable guests , ' and at once tossed off his glass in military fashion ; while he made Arina Vlasyevna drink her wineglass to the last drop . 
When the time came in due course for preserves , Arkady , who could not bear anything sweet , thought it his duty , however , to taste four different kinds which had been freshly made , all the more as Bazarov flatly refused them and began at once smoking a cigarette . 
Then tea came on the scene with cream , butter , and cracknels ; then Vassily Ivanovitch took them all into the garden to admire the beauty of the evening . 
As they passed a garden seat he whispered to Arkady -- ` At this spot I love to meditate , as I watch the sunset ; it suits a recluse like me . 
And there , a little farther off , I have planted some of the trees beloved of Horace . ' 
` What trees ? ' 
asked Bazarov , overhearing . 
` Oh ... acacias . ' 
Bazarov began to yawn . ' 
I imagine it 's time our travellers were in the arms of Morpheus , ' observed Vassily Ivanovitch . 
` That is , it 's time for bed , ' Bazarov put in . 
` That 's a correct idea . 
It is time , certainly . ' 
As he said good-night to his mother , he kissed her on the forehead , while she embraced him , and stealthily behind his back she gave him her blessing three times . 
Vassily Ivanovitch conducted Arkady to his room , and wished him ` as refreshing repose as I enjoyed at your happy years . ' 
And Arkady did as a fact sleep excellently in his bath-house ; there was a smell of mint in it , and two crickets behind the stove rivalled each other in their drowsy chirping . 
Vassily Ivanovitch went from Arkady 's room to his study , and perching on the sofa at his son 's feet , he was looking forward to having a chat with him ; but Bazarov at once sent him away , saying he was sleepy , and did not fall asleep till morning . 
With wide open eyes he stared vindictively into the darkness ; the memories of childhood had no power over him ; and besides , he had not yet had time to get rid of the impression of his recent bitter emotions . 
Arina Vlasyevna first prayed to her heart 's content , then she had a long , long conversation with Anfisushka , who stood stock-still before her mistress , and fixing her solitary eye upon her , communicated in a mysterious whisper all her observations and conjectures in regard to Yevgeny Vassilyevitch . 
The old lady 's head was giddy with happiness and wine and tobacco smoke ; her husband tried to talk to her , but with a wave of his hand gave it up in despair . 
Arina Vlasyevna was a genuine Russian gentlewoman of the olden times ; she ought to have lived two centuries before , in the old Moscow days . 
She was very devout and emotional ; she believed in fortune-telling , charms , dreams , and omens of every possible kind ; she believed in the prophecies of crazy people , in house-spirits , in wood-spirits , in unlucky meetings , in the evil eye , in popular remedies , she ate specially prepared salt on Holy Thursday , and believed that the end of the world was at hand ; she believed that if on Easter Sunday the lights did not go out at vespers , then there would be a good crop of buckwheat , and that a mushroom will not grow after it has been looked on by the eye of man ; she believed that the devil likes to be where there is water , and that every Jew has a blood-stained patch on his breast ; she was afraid of mice , of snakes , of frogs , of sparrows , of leeches , of thunder , of cold water , of draughts , of horses , of goats , of red-haired people , and black cats , and she regarded crickets and dogs as unclean beasts ; she never ate veal , doves , crayfishes , cheese , asparagus , artichokes , hares , nor water-melons , because a cut water-melon suggested the head of John the Baptist , and of oysters she could not speak without a shudder ; she was fond of eating -- and fasted rigidly ; she slept ten hours out of the twenty-four -- and never went to bed at all if Vassily Ivanovitch had so much as a headache ; she had never read a single book except Alexis or the Cottage in the Forest ; she wrote one , or at the most two letters in a year , but was great in housewifery , preserving , and jam-making , though with her own hands she never touched a thing , and was generally disinclined to move from her place . 
Arina Vlasyevna was very kindhearted , and in her way not at all stupid . 
She knew that the world is divided into masters whose duty it is to command , and simple folk whose duty it is to serve them -- and so she felt no repugnance to servility and prostrations to the ground ; but she treated those in subjection to her kindly and gently , never let a single beggar go away empty-handed , and never spoke ill of any one , though she was fond of gossip . 
In her youth she had been pretty , had played the clavichord , and spoken French a little ; but in the course of many years ' wanderings with her husband , whom she had married against her will , she had grown stout , and forgotten music and French . 
Her son she loved and feared unutterably ; she had given up the management of the property to Vassily Ivanovitch -- and now did not interfere in anything ; she used to groan , wave her handkerchief , and raise her eyebrows higher and higher with horror directly her old husband began to discuss the impending government reforms and his own plans . 
She was apprehensive , and constantly expecting some great misfortune , and began to weep directly she remembered anything sorrowful ... . 
Such women are not common nowadays . 
God knows whether we ought to rejoice ! 
On getting up Arkady opened the window , and the first object that met his view was Vassily Ivanovitch . 
In an Oriental dressing-gown girt round the waist with a pocket-handkerchief he was industriously digging in his garden . 
He perceived his young visitor , and leaning on his spade , he called , ` The best of health to you ! 
How have you slept ? ' 
` Capitally , ' answered Arkady . 
` Here am I , as you see , like some Cincinnatus , marking out a bed for late turnips . 
The time has come now -- and thank God for it ! 
-- when every one ought to obtain his sustenance with his own hands ; it 's useless to reckon on others ; one must labour oneself . 
And it turns out that Jean Jacques Rousseau is right . 
Half an hour ago , my dear young gentleman , you might have seen me in a totally different position . 
One peasant woman , who complained of looseness -- that 's how they express it , but in our language , dysentery -- I ... how can I express it best ? 
I administered opium , and for another I extracted a tooth . 
I proposed an anæsthetic to her ... but she would not consent . 
All that I do gratis -- anamatyer -LRB- en amateur -RRB- . 
I 'm used to it , though ; you see , I 'm a plebeian , homo novus -- not one of the old stock , not like my spouse ... . 
Would n't you like to come this way into the shade , to breathe the morning freshness a little before tea ? ' 
Arkady went out to him . 
` Welcome once again , ' said Vassily Ivanovitch , raising his hand in a military salute to the greasy skull-cap which covered his head . 
` You , I know , are accustomed to luxury , to amusements , but even the great ones of this world do not disdain to spend a brief space under a cottage roof . ' 
` Good heavens , ' protested Arkady , ` as though I were one of the great ones of this world ! 
And I 'm not accustomed to luxury . ' 
` Pardon me , pardon me , ' rejoined Vassily Ivanovitch with a polite simper . 
` Though I am laid on the shelf now , I have knocked about the world too -- I can tell a bird by its flight . 
I am something of a psychologist too in my own way , and a physiognomist . 
If I had not , I will venture to say , been endowed with that gift , I should have come to grief long ago ; I should have stood no chance , a poor man like me . 
I tell you without flattery , I am sincerely delighted at the friendship I observe between you and my son . 
I have just seen him ; he got up as he usually does -- no doubt you are aware of it -- very early , and went a ramble about the neighbourhood . 
Permit me to inquire -- have you known my son long ? ' 
` Since last winter . ' 
` Indeed . 
And permit me to question you further -- but had n't we better sit down ? 
Permit me , as a father , to ask without reserve , What is your opinion of my Yevgeny ? ' 
` Your son is one of the most remarkable men I have ever met , ' Arkady answered emphatically . 
Vassily Ivanovitch 's eyes suddenly grew round , and his cheeks were suffused with a faint flush . 
The spade fell out of his hand . 
` And so you expect , ' he began ... ` I 'm convinced , ' Arkady put in , ` that your son has a great future before him ; that he will do honour to your name . 
I 've been certain of that ever since I first met him . ' 
` How ... how was that ? ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch articulated with an effort . 
His wide mouth was relaxed in a triumphant smile , which would not leave it . 
` Would you like me to tell you how we met ? ' 
` Yes ... and altogether ... ' Arkady began to tell his tale , and to talk of Bazarov with even greater warmth , even greater enthusiasm than he had done on the evening when he danced a mazurka with Madame Odintsov . 
Vassily Ivanovitch listened and listened , blinked , and rolled his handkerchief up into a ball in both his hands , cleared his throat , ruffled up his hair , and at last could stand it no longer ; he bent down to Arkady and kissed him on his shoulder . 
` You have made me perfectly happy , ' he said , never ceasing to smile . ' 
I ought to tell you , I ... idolise my son ; my old wife I wo n't speak of -- we all know what mothers are ! 
-- but I dare not show my feelings before him , because he does n't like it . 
He is averse to every kind of demonstration of feeling ; many people even find fault with him for such firmness of character , and regard it as a proof of pride or lack of feeling , but men like him ought not to be judged by the common standard , ought they ? 
And here , for example , many another fellow in his place would have been a constant drag on his parents ; but he , would you believe it ? 
has never from the day he was born taken a farthing more than he could help , that 's God 's truth ! ' 
` He is a disinterested , honest man , ' observed Arkady . 
` Exactly so ; he is disinterested . 
And I do n't only idolise him , Arkady Nikolaitch , I am proud of him , and the height of my ambition is that some day there will be the following lines in his biography : `` The son of a simple army-doctor , who was , however , capable of divining his greatness betimes , and spared nothing for his education ... '' ' The old man 's voice broke . 
Arkady pressed his hand . 
` What do you think , ' inquired Vassily Ivanovitch , after a short silence , ` will it be in the career of medicine that he will attain the celebrity you anticipate for him ? ' 
` Of course , not in medicine , though even in that department he will be one of the leading scientific men . ' 
` In what then , Arkady Nikolaitch ? ' 
` It would he hard to say now , but he will be famous . ' 
` He will be famous ! ' 
repeated the old man , and he sank into a reverie . 
` Arina Vlasyevna sent me to call you in to tea , ' announced Anfisushka , coming by with an immense dish of ripe raspberries . 
Vassily Ivanovitch started . 
` And will there be cooled cream for the raspberries ? ' 
` Yes . ' 
` Cold now , mind ! 
Do n't stand on ceremony , Arkady Nikolaitch ; take some more . 
How is it Yevgeny does n't come ? ' 
` I 'm here , ' was heard Bazarov 's voice from Arkady 's room . 
Vassily Ivanovitch turned round quickly . 
` Aha ! 
you wanted to pay a visit to your friend ; but you were too late , amice , and we have already had a long conversation with him . 
Now we must go in to tea , mother summons us . 
By the way , I want to have a little talk with you . ' 
` What about ? ' 
` There 's a peasant here ; he 's suffering from icterus ... ` You mean jaundice ? ' 
` Yes , a chronic and very obstinate case of icterus . 
I have prescribed him centaury and St. John 's wort , ordered him to eat carrots , given him soda ; but all that 's merely palliative measures ; we want some more decided treatment . 
Though you do laugh at medicine , I am certain you can give me practical advice . 
But we will talk of that later . 
Now come in to tea . ' 
Vassily Ivanovitch jumped up briskly from the garden seat , and hummed from Robert le Diable -- ` The rule , the rule we set ourselves , To live , to live for pleasure ! ' 
` Singular vitality ! ' 
observed Bazarov , going away from the window . 
It was midday . 
The sun was burning hot behind a thin veil of unbroken whitish clouds . 
Everything was hushed ; there was no sound but the cocks crowing irritably at one another in the village , producing in every one who heard them a strange sense of drowsiness and ennui ; and somewhere , high up in a tree-top , the incessant plaintive cheep of a young hawk . 
Arkady and Bazarov lay in the shade of a small haystack , putting under themselves two armfuls of dry and rustling , but still greenish and fragrant grass . 
` That aspen-tree , ' began Bazarov , ` reminds me of my childhood ; it grows at the edge of the clay-pits where the bricks were dug , and in those days I believed firmly that that clay-pit and aspen-tree possessed a peculiar talismanic power ; I never felt dull near them . 
I did not understand then that I was not dull , because I was a child . 
Well , now I 'm grown up , the talisman 's lost its power . ' 
` How long did you live here altogether ? ' 
asked Arkady . 
` Two years on end ; then we travelled about . 
We led a roving life , wandering from town to town for the most part . ' 
` And has this house been standing long ? ' 
` Yes . 
My grandfather built it -- my mother 's father . ' 
` Who was he -- your grandfather ? ' 
` Devil knows . 
Some second-major . 
He served with Suvorov , and was always telling stories about the crossing of the Alps -- inventions probably . ' 
` You have a portrait of Suvorov hanging in the drawing-room . 
I like these dear little houses like yours ; they 're so warm and old-fashioned ; and there 's always a special sort of scent about them . ' ' 
A smell of lamp-oil and clover , ' Bazarov remarked , yawning . 
` And the flies in those dear little houses ... . 
Faugh ! ' 
` Tell me , ' began Arkady , after a brief pause , ` were they strict with you when you were a child ? ' 
` You can see what my parents are like . 
They 're not a severe sort . ' 
` Are you fond of them , Yevgeny ? ' ' 
I am , Arkady . ' 
` How fond they are of you ! ' 
Bazarov was silent for a little . 
` Do you know what I 'm thinking about ? ' 
he brought out at last , clasping his hands behind his head . 
` No . 
What is it ? ' 
` I 'm thinking life is a happy thing for my parents . 
My father at sixty is fussing around , talking about `` palliative '' measures , doctoring people , playing the bountiful master with the peasants -- having a festive time , in fact ; and my mother 's happy too ; her day 's so chockful of duties of all sorts , and sighs and groans that she 's no time even to think of herself ; while I ... ' ` While you ? ' ' 
I think ; here I lie under a haystack ... . 
The tiny space I occupy is so infinitely small in comparison with the rest of space , in which I am not , and which has nothing to do with me ; and the period of time in which it is my lot to live is so petty beside the eternity in which I have not been , and shall not be ... . 
And in this atom , this mathematical point , the blood is circulating , the brain is working and wanting something ... . 
Is n't it loathsome ? 
Is n't it petty ? ' 
` Allow me to remark that what you 're saying applies to men in general . ' 
` You are right , ' Bazarov cut in . ' 
I was going to say that they now -- my parents , I mean -- are absorbed and do n't trouble themselves about their own nothingness ; it does n't sicken them ... while I ... I feel nothing but weariness and anger . ' 
` Anger ? 
why anger ? ' 
` Why ? 
How can you ask why ? 
Have you forgotten ? ' ' 
I remember everything , but still I do n't admit that you have any right to be angry . 
You 're unlucky , I 'll allow , but ... ' ` Pooh ! 
then you , Arkady Nikolaevitch , I can see , regard love like all modern young men ; cluck , cluck , cluck you call to the hen , but if the hen comes near you , you run away . 
I 'm not like that . 
But that 's enough of that . 
What ca n't be helped , it 's shameful to talk about . ' 
He turned over on his side . 
` Aha ! 
there goes a valiant ant dragging off a half-dead fly . 
Take her , brother , take her ! 
Do n't pay attention to her resistance ; it 's your privilege as an animal to be free from the sentiment of pity -- make the most of it -- not like us conscientious self-destructive animals ! ' 
` You should n't say that , Yevgeny ! 
When have you destroyed yourself ? ' 
Bazarov raised his head . 
` That 's the only thing I pride myself on . 
I have n't crushed myself , so a woman ca n't crush me . 
Amen ! 
It 's all over ! 
You shall not hear another word from me about it . ' 
Both the friends lay for some time in silence . 
` Yes , ' began Bazarov , ` man 's a strange animal . 
When one gets a side view from a distance of the dead-alive life our `` fathers '' lead here , one thinks , What could be better ? 
You eat and drink , and know you are acting in the most reasonable , most judicious manner . 
But if not , you 're devoured by ennui . 
One wants to have to do with people if only to abuse them . ' 
` One ought so to order one 's life that every moment in it should be of significance , ' Arkady affirmed reflectively . ' 
I dare say ! 
What 's of significance is sweet , however mistaken ; one could make up one 's mind to what 's insignificant even . 
But pettiness , pettiness , that 's what 's insufferable . ' 
` Pettiness does n't exist for a man so long as he refuses to recognise it . ' 
` H 'm ... what you 've just said is a common-place reversed . ' 
` What ? 
What do you mean by that term ? ' 
` I 'll tell you ; saying , for instance , that education is beneficial , that 's a common-place ; but to say that education is injurious , that 's a common-place turned upside down . 
There 's more style about it , so to say , but in reality it 's one and the same . ' 
` And the truth is -- where , which side ? ' 
` Where ? 
Like an echo I answer , Where ? ' 
` You 're in a melancholy mood to-day , Yevgeny . ' 
` Really ? 
The sun must have softened my brain , I suppose , and I ca n't stand so many raspberries either . ' 
` In that case , a nap 's not a bad thing , ' observed Arkady . 
` Certainly ; only do n't look at me ; every man 's face is stupid when he 's asleep . ' 
` But is n't it all the same to you what people think of you ? ' ' 
I do n't know what to say to you . 
A real man ought not to care ; a real man is one whom it 's no use thinking about , whom one must either obey or hate . ' 
` It 's funny ! 
I do n't hate anybody , ' observed Arkady , after a moment 's thought . 
` And I hate so many . 
You are a soft-hearted , mawkish creature ; how could you hate any one ? 
... You 're timid ; you do n't rely on yourself much . ' 
` And you , ' interrupted Arkady , ` do you expect much of yourself ? 
Have you a high opinion of yourself ? ' 
Bazarov paused . 
` When I meet a man who can hold his own beside me , ' he said , dwelling on every syllable , ` then I 'll change my opinion of myself . 
Yes , hatred ! 
You said , for instance , to-day as we passed our bailiff Philip 's cottage -- it 's the one that 's so nice and clean -- well , you said , Russia will come to perfection when the poorest peasant has a house like that , and every one of us ought to work to bring it about ... . 
And I felt such a hatred for this poorest peasant , this Philip or Sidor , for whom I 'm to be ready to jump out of my skin , and who wo n't even thank me for it ... and why should he thank me ? 
Why , suppose he does live in a clean house , while the nettles are growing out of me , -- well what do I gain by it ? ' 
` Hush , Yevgeny ... if one listened to you to-day one would be driven to agreeing with those who reproach us for want of principles . ' 
` You talk like your uncle . 
There are no general principles -- you 've not made out that even yet ! 
There are feelings . 
Everything depends on them . ' 
` How so ? ' 
` Why , I , for instance , take up a negative attitude , by virtue of my sensations ; I like to deny -- my brain 's made on that plan , and that 's all about it ! 
Why do I like chemistry ? 
Why do you like apples ? 
-- by virtue of our sensations . 
It 's all the same thing . 
Deeper than that men will never penetrate . 
Not every one will tell you that , and , in fact , I sha n't tell you so another time . ' 
` What ? 
and is honesty a matter of the senses ? ' ' 
I should rather think so . ' 
` Yevgeny ! ' 
Arkady was beginning in a dejected voice ... ` Well ? 
What ? 
Is n't it to your taste ? ' 
broke in Bazarov . 
` No , brother . 
If you 've made up your mind to mow down everything , do n't spare your own legs . 
But we 've talked enough metaphysics . 
`` Nature breathes the silence of sleep , '' said Pushkin . ' 
` He never said anything of the sort , ' protested Arkady . 
` Well , if he did n't , as a poet he might have -- and ought to have said it . 
By the way , he must have been a military man . ' 
` Pushkin never was a military man ! ' 
` Why , on every page of him there 's , `` To arms ! 
to arms ! 
for Russia 's honour ! '' ' 
` Why , what stories you invent ! 
I declare , it 's positive calumny . ' 
` Calumny ? 
That 's a mighty matter ! 
What a word he 's found to frighten me with ! 
Whatever charge you make against a man , you may be certain he deserves twenty times worse than that in reality . ' 
` We had better go to sleep , ' said Arkady , in a tone of vexation . 
` With the greatest pleasure , ' answered Bazarov . 
But neither of them slept . 
A feeling almost of hostility had come over both the young men . 
Five minutes later , they opened their eyes and glanced at one another in silence . 
` Look , ' said Arkady suddenly , ' a dry maple leaf has come off and is falling to the earth ; its movement is exactly like a butterfly 's flight . 
Is n't it strange ? 
Gloom and decay -- like brightness and life . ' 
` Oh , my friend , Arkady Nikolaitch ! ' 
cried Bazarov , ` one thing I entreat of you ; no fine talk . ' ' 
I talk as best I can ... . 
And , I declare , its perfect despotism . 
An idea came into my head ; why should n't I utter it ? ' 
` Yes ; and why should n't I utter my ideas ? 
I think that fine talk 's positively indecent . ' 
` And what is decent ? 
Abuse ? ' 
` Ha ! 
ha ! 
you really do intend , I see , to walk in your uncle 's footsteps . 
How pleased that worthy imbecile would have been if he had heard you ! ' 
` What did you call Pavel Petrovitch ? ' ' 
I called him , very justly , an imbecile . ' 
` But this is unbearable ! ' 
cried Arkady . 
` Aha ! 
