`` How foolish man is in his youth ! '' 
exclaimed Mayakin , in a low voice . 
Foma did not look at him . 
`` Before him stands the stump of a tree , and yet he sees the snout of a beast -- that 's how he frightens himself . 
Oh , oh ! '' 
`` Speak more plainly , '' said Foma , sternly . 
`` What is there to say ? 
The thing is clear : girls are cream ; women are milk ; women are near , girls are far . 
Consequently , go to Sonka , if you can not do without it , and tell her plainly . 
That 's how the matter stands . 
Fool ! 
If she is a sinner , you can get her more easily . 
Why are you so angry , then ? 
Why so bristled up ? '' 
`` You do n't understand , '' said Foma , in a low voice . 
`` What is it I do not understand ? 
I understand everything ! '' 
`` The heart . 
Man has a heart , '' sighed the youth . 
Mayakin winked his eyes and said : `` Then he has no mind . '' 
WHEN Foma arrived in the city he was seized with sad , revengeful anger . 
He was burning with a passionate desire to insult Medinskaya , to abuse her . 
His teeth firmly set together , his hands thrust deep into his pockets , he walked for a few hours in succession about the deserted rooms of his house , he sternly knitted his brow , and constantly threw his chest forward . 
His breast was too narrow to hold his heart , which was filled with wrath . 
He stamped the floor with heavy and measured steps , as though he were forging his anger . 
`` The vile wretch -- disguised herself as an angel ! '' 
Pelageya vividly arose in his memory , and he whispered malignantly and bitterly : `` Though a fallen woman , she is better . 
She did not play the hypocrite . 
She at once unfolded her soul and her body , and her heart is surely just as her breast -- white and sound . '' 
Sometimes Hope would whisper timidly in his ear : `` Perhaps all that was said of her was a lie . '' 
But he recalled the eager certainty of his godfather , and the power of his words , and this thought perished . 
He set his teeth more firmly together and threw his chest still more forward . 
Evil thoughts like splinters of wood stuck into his heart , and his heart was shattered by the acute pain they caused . 
By disparaging Medinskaya , Mayakin made her more accessible to his godson , and Foma soon understood this . 
A few days passed , and Foma 's agitated feelings became calm , absorbed by the spring business cares . 
The sorrow for the loss of the individual deadened the spite he owed the woman , and the thought of the woman 's accessibility increased his passion for her . 
And somehow , without perceiving it himself , he suddenly understood and resolved that he ought to go up to Sophya Pavlovna and tell her plainly , openly , just what he wanted of her -- that 's all ! 
He even felt a certain joy at this resolution , and he boldly started off to Medinskaya , thinking on the way only how to tell her best all that was necessary . 
The servants of Medinskaya were accustomed to his visits , and to his question whether the lady was at home the maid replied : `` Please go into the drawing-room . 
She is there alone . '' 
He became somewhat frightened , but noticing in the mirror his stately figure neatly clad with a frock-coat , and his swarthy , serious face in a frame of a downy black beard , set with large dark eyes -- he raised his shoulders and confidently stepped forward through the parlour . 
Strange sounds of a string instrument were calmly floating to meet him ; they seemed to burst into quiet , cheerless laughter , complaining of something , tenderly stirring the heart , as though imploring it for attention and having no hopes of getting it . 
Foma did not like to hear music -- it always filled him with sadness . 
Even when the `` machine '' in the tavern played some sad tune , his heart filled with melancholy anguish , and he would either ask them to stop the `` machine '' or would go away some little distance feeling that he could not listen calmly to these tunes without words , but full of lamentation and tears . 
And now he involuntarily stopped short at the door of the drawing-room . 
A curtain of long strings of parti-coloured glass beads hung over the door . 
The beads had been strung so as to form a fantastic figure of some kind of plants ; the strings were quietly shaking and it seemed that pale shadows of flowers were soaring in the air . 
This transparent curtain did not hide the inside of the drawing-room from Foma 's eyes . 
Seated on a couch in her favourite corner , Medinskaya played the mandolin . 
A large Japanese umbrella , fastened up to the wall , shaded the little woman in black by its mixture of colours ; the high bronze lamp under a red lamp-shade cast on her the light of sunset . 
The mild sounds of the slender strings were trembling sadly in the narrow room , which was filled with soft and fragrant twilight . 
Now the woman lowered the mandolin on her knees and began running her fingers over the strings , also to examine fixedly something before her . 
Foma heaved a sigh . 
A soft sound of music soared about Medinskaya , and her face was forever changing as though shadows were falling on it , falling and melting away under the flash of her eyes . 
Foma looked at her and saw that when alone she was not quite so good-looking as in the presence of people -- now her face looked older , more serious -- her eyes had not the expression of kindness and gentleness , they had a rather tired and weary look . 
And her pose , too , was weary , as if the woman were about to stir but could not . 
Foma noticed that the feeling which prompted him to come to her was now changing in his heart into some other feeling . 
He scraped with his foot along the floor and coughed . 
`` Who is that ? '' 
asked the woman , starting with alarm . 
And the strings trembled , issuing an alarmed sound . 
`` It is I , '' said Foma , pushing aside the strings of the beads . 
`` Ah ! 
But how quietly you 've entered . 
I am glad to see you . 
Be seated ! 
Why did n't you come for such a long time ? '' 
Holding out her hand to him , she pointed with the other at a small armchair beside her , and her eyes were gaily smiling . 
`` I was out on the bay inspecting my steamers , '' said Foma , with exaggerated ease , moving his armchair nearer to the couch . 
`` Is there much snow yet on the fields ? '' 
`` As much as one may want . 
But it is already melting considerably . 
There is water on the roads everywhere . '' 
He looked at her and smiled . 
Evidently Medinskaya noticed the ease of his behaviour and something new in his smile , for she adjusted her dress and drew farther away from him . 
Their eyes met -- and Medinskaya lowered her head . 
`` Melting ! '' 
said she , thoughtfully , examining the ring on her little finger . 
`` Ye-es , streams everywhere . '' 
Foma informed her , admiring his boots . 
`` That 's good . 
Spring is coming . '' 
`` Now it wo n't be delayed long . '' 
`` Spring is coming , '' repeated Medinskaya , softly , as if listening to the sounds of her words . 
`` People will start to fall in love , '' said Foma , with a smile , and for some reason or other firmly rubbed his hands . 
`` Are you preparing yourself ? '' 
asked Medinskaya , drily . 
`` I have no need for it . 
I have been ready long ago . 
I am already in love for all my life . '' 
She cast a glance at him , and started to play again , looking at the strings and saying pensively : `` Spring . 
How good it is that you are but beginning to live . 
The heart is full of power , and there is nothing dark in it . '' 
`` Sophya Pavlovna ! '' 
exclaimed Foma , softly . 
She interrupted him with a caressing gesture . 
`` Wait , dearest ! 
Today I can tell you something good . 
Do you know , a person who has lived long has such moments that when he looks into his heart he unexpectedly finds there something long forgotten . 
For years it lay somewhere in the depth of his heart , but lost none of the fragrance of youth , and when memory touches it , then spring comes over that person , breathing upon him the vivifying freshness of the morning of his life . 
This is good , though it is very sad . '' 
The strings trembled and wept under the touch of her fingers , and it seemed to Foma that their sounds and the soft voice of the woman were touching his heart gently and caressingly . 
But , still firm in his decision , he listened to her words and , not knowing their meaning , thought : `` You may speak ! 
And I wo n't believe anything you may say . '' 
This thought irritated him . 
And he felt sorry that he could not listen to her words as attentively and trustfully as before . 
`` Are you thinking of how it is necessary to live ? '' 
asked the woman . 
`` Sometimes I think of it , and then I forget again . 
I have no time for it ! '' 
said Foma and smiled . 
`` And then , what is there to think of ? 
It is simple . 
You see how others live . 
Well , consequently , you must imitate them . '' 
`` Ah , do n't do this ! 
Spare yourself . 
You are so good ! 
There is something peculiar in you ; what -- I do not know . 
But it can be felt . 
And it seems to me , it will be very hard for you to get along in life . 
I am sure , you will not go along the usual way of the people of your circle . 
No ! 
You can not be pleased with a life which is wholly devoted to gain , to hunts after the rouble , to this business of yours . 
Oh , no ! 
I know , you will have a desire for something else , will you not ? '' 
She spoke quickly , with a look of alarm in her eyes . 
Looking at her , Foma thought : `` What is she driving at ? '' 
And he answered her slowly : `` Perhaps I will have a desire for something else . 
Perhaps I have it already . '' 
Drawing up closer to him , she looked into his face and spoke convincingly : `` Listen ! 
Do not live like all other people ! 
Arrange your life somehow differently . 
You are strong , young . 
You are good ! '' 
`` And if I am good then there must be good for me ! '' 
exclaimed Foma , feeling that he was seized with agitation , and that his heart was beginning to beat with anxiety . 
`` Ah , but that is not the case ! 
Here on earth it is worse for the good people than for the bad ones ! '' 
said Medinskaya , sadly . 
And again the trembling notes of music began to dance at the touch of her fingers . 
Foma felt that if he did not start to say at once what was necessary , he would tell her nothing later . 
`` God bless me ! '' 
he said to himself , and in a lowered voice , strengthening his heart , began : `` Sophya Pavlovna ! 
Enough ! 
I have something to say . 
I have come to tell you : ` Enough ! ' 
We must deal fairly , openly . 
At first you have attracted me to yourself , and now you are fencing away from me . 
I can not understand what you say . 
My mind is dull , but I can feel that you wish to hide yourself . 
I can see it -- do you understand now what brought me here ? '' 
His eyes began to flash and with each word his voice became warmer and louder . 
She moved her body forward and said with alarm : `` Oh , cease . '' 
`` No , I wo n't , I will speak ! '' 
`` I know what you want to say . '' 
`` You do n't know it all ! '' 
said Foma , threateningly , rising to his feet . 
`` But I know everything about you -- everything . '' 
`` Yes ? 
Then the better it is for me , '' said Medinskaya , calmly . 
She also arose from the couch , as though about to go away somewhere , but after a few seconds she again seated herself on the couch . 
Her face was serious , her lips were tightly compressed , but her eyes were lowered , and Foma could not see their expression . 
He thought that when he told her , `` I know everything about you ! '' 
she would be frightened , she would feel ashamed and confused , would ask his forgiveness for having made sport of him . 
Then he would embrace her and forgive her . 
But that was not the case ; it was he who was confused by her calmness . 
He looked at her , searching for words to resume his speech , but found them not . 
`` It is better , '' she repeated firmly and drily . 
`` So you have learned everything , have you ? 
And , of course , you 've censured me , as I deserve . 
I understand . 
I am guilty before you . 
But no , I can not justify myself . '' 
She became silent and suddenly , lifting her hands with a nervous gesture , clasped her head , and began to adjust her hair . 
Foma heaved a deep sigh . 
Her words had killed in him a certain hope -- a hope , whose presence in his heart he only felt now that it was dead . 
And shaking his head , he said , with bitter reproach : `` There was a time when I looked at you and thought , ` How beautiful she is , how good , the dove ! ' 
And now you say yourself , ' I am guilty . ' 
Ah ! '' 
The voice of the youth broke down . 
And the woman began to laugh softly . 
`` How fine and how ridiculous you are , and what a pity that you can not understand all this ! '' 
The youth looked at her , feeling himself disarmed by her caressing words and melancholy smile . 
That cold , harsh something , which he had in his heart against her , was now melting before the warm light of her eyes . 
The woman now seemed to him small , defenseless , like a child . 
She was saying something in a gentle voice as though imploring , and forever smiling , but he paid no attention to her words . 
`` I 've come to you , '' said he , interrupting her words , `` without pity . 
I meant to tell you everything . 
And yet I said nothing . 
I do n't feel like doing it . 
My heart sank . 
You are breathing upon me so strangely . 
Eh , I should not have seen you ! 
What are you to me ? 
It would be better for me to go away , it seems . '' 
`` Wait , dearest , do n't go away ! '' 
said the woman , hastily , holding out her hand to him . 
`` Why so severe ? 
Do not be angry at me ! 
What am I to you ? 
You need a different friend , a woman just as simple-minded and sound-souled as you are . 
She must be gay , healthy . 
I -- I am already an old woman . 
I am forever worrying . 
My life is so empty and so weary , so empty ! 
Do you know , when a person has grown accustomed to live merrily , and then can not be merry , he feels bad ! 
He desires to live cheerfully , he desires to laugh , yet he does not laugh -- it is life that is laughing at him . 
And as to men . 
Listen ! 
Like a mother , I advise you , I beg and implore you -- obey no one except your own heart ! 
Live in accordance with its promptings . 
Men know nothing , they can not tell you anything that is true . 
Do not heed them . '' 
Trying to speak as plainly and intelligibly as possible , she was agitated , and her words came incoherently hurriedly one after another . 
A pitiful smile played on her lips all the time , and her face was not beautiful . 
`` Life is very strict . 
It wants all people to submit to its requests , and only the very strong ones can resist it with impunity . 
It is yet questionable whether they can do it ! 
Oh , if you knew how hard it is to live . 
Man goes so far that he begins to fear his own self . 
He is split into judge and criminal -- he judges his own self and seeks justification before himself . 
And he is willing to pass days and nights with those that despise him , and that are repulsive to him -- just to avoid being alone with himself . '' 
Foma lifted his head and said distrustfully , with surprise : `` I can not understand what it is ! 
Lubov also says the same . '' 
`` Which Lubov ? 
What does she say ? '' 
`` My foster-sister . 
She says the same , -- she is forever complaining of life . 
It is impossible to live , she says . '' 
`` Oh , she is yet young ! 
And it is a great happiness that she already speaks of this . '' 
`` Happiness ! '' 
Foma drawled out mockingly . 
`` It must be a fine happiness that makes people sigh and complain . '' 
`` You 'd better listen to complaints . 
There is always much wisdom in these complaints of men . 
Oh ! 
There is more wisdom in these complaints than anywhere else . 
You listen to these , -- they will teach you to find your way . '' 
Foma heard the woman 's voice , which sounded convincing ; and perplexed , looked about him . 
Everything had long been familiar to him , but today it looked somewhat new to him . 
A mass of trifles filled the room , all the walls were covered with pictures and shelves , bright and beautiful objects were staring from every corner . 
The reddish light of the lamp filled one with melancholy . 
Twilight wrapped everything in the room , and only here and there the gold of the frames , or the white spots of marble flashed dimly . 
Heavy fabrics were motionlessly hanging before the doors . 
All this embarrassed and almost choked Foma ; he felt as though he had lost his way . 
He was sorry for the woman . 
But she also irritated him . 
`` Do you hear how I speak to you ? 
I wish I were your mother , or your sister . 
Never before did anybody awaken in me so warm and kindred a feeling as you have done . 
And you , you look at me in such an unfriendly way . 
Do you believe me ? 
Yes ? 
No ? '' 
He looked at her and said with a sigh : `` I do n't know . 
I used to believe you . '' 
`` And now ? '' 
she asked hastily . 
`` And now -- it is best for me to go ! 
I do n't understand anything , and yet I long to understand . 
I do not even understand myself . 
On my way to you I knew what to say , and here all is confused . 
You have put me up on the rack , you have set me on edge . 
And then you tell me -- ' I am as a mother to you ' -- which means -- begone ! '' 
`` Understand me , I feel sorry for you ! '' 
the woman exclaimed softly . 
Foma 's irritation against her was growing stronger and stronger , and as he went on speaking to her , his words became absurd . 
While he spoke , he kept on moving his shoulders as though tearing something that entangled him . 
`` Sorry ? 
What for ? 
I do not need it . 
Eh , I can not speak well ! 
It is bad to be dumb . 
But -- I would have told you ! 
You did not treat me properly -- indeed , why have you so enticed a man ? 
Am I a plaything for you ? '' 
`` I only wanted to see you by my side , '' said the woman simply , in a guilty voice . 
He did not hear these words . 
`` And when it came to the point , you were frightened and you shut yourself off from me . 
You began to repent . 
Ha , ha ! 
Life is bad ! 
And why are you always complaining of some life ? 
What life ? 
Man is life , and except man there is no life . 
You have invented some other monster . 
You have done this to deceive the eye , to justify yourself . 
You do some mischief , you lose yourself in different inventions and foolishnesses and then you sigh ! 
Ah , life ! 
Oh , life ! 
And have you not done it yourself ? 
And covering yourself with complaints , you confuse others . 
You have lost your way , very well , but why do you want to lead me astray ? 
Is it wickedness that speaks in you : ' I feel bad , ' you say , ` let him also feel bad -- there , I 'll besprinkle his heart with my poisonous tears ! ' 
Is n't that so ? 
Eh ! 
God has given you the beauty of an angel , but your heart -- where is it ? '' 
Standing before her , he trembled in every limb , and examined her from head to foot with reproachful looks . 
Now his words came freely from his heart , he spoke not loud , but with power and pleasure . 
Her head raised , the woman stared into his face , with wide-open eyes . 
Her lips were trembling and deep wrinkles appeared at the corners of her mouth . 
`` A beautiful person should lead a good life . 
While of you they say things . '' 
Foma 's voice broke down ; he raised his hand and concluded in a dull voice : `` Goodbye ! '' 
`` Goodbye ! '' 
said Medinskaya , softly . 
He did not give her his hand , but , turning abruptly , he walked away from her . 
But already at the door he felt that he was sorry for her , and he glanced at her across his shoulder . 
There , in the corner , she stood alone , her head bent , her hands hanging motionless . 
Understanding that he could not leave her thus , he became confused , and said softly , but without repenting : `` Perhaps I said something offensive -- forgive me ! 
For after all I love you , '' and he heaved a deep sigh . 
The woman burst into soft , nervous laughter . 
`` No , you have not offended me . 
God speed you . '' 
`` Well , then goodbye ! '' 
repeated Foma in a still lower voice . 
`` Yes , '' replied the woman , also in a low voice . 
Foma pushed aside the strings of beads with his hand ; they swung back noisily and touched his cheeks . 
He shuddered at this cold touch and went out , carrying away a heavy , perplexed feeling in his breast , with his heart beating as though a soft but strong net were cast over it . 
It was night by this time ; the moon was shining and the frost covered the puddles with coatings of dull silver . 
Foma walked along the sidewalk , he broke these with his cane , and they cracked mournfully . 
The shadows of the houses fell on the road in black squares , and the shadows of the trees -- in wonderful patterns . 
And some of them looked like thin hands , helplessly clutching the ground . 
`` What is she doing now ? '' 
thought Foma , picturing to himself the woman , alone , in the corner of a narrow room , in the reddish half-light . 
`` It is best for me to forget her , '' he decided . 
But he could not forget her ; she stood before him , provoking in him now intense pity , now irritation and even anger . 
And her image was so clear , and the thoughts of her were so painful , as though he was carrying this woman in his breast . 
A cab was coming from the opposite side , filling the silence of the night with the jarring of the wheels on the cobble-stones and with their creaking on the ice . 
When the cab was passing across a moonlit strip , the noise was louder and more brisk , and in the shadows it was heavier and duller . 
The driver and the passenger in it were shaking and hopping about ; for some reason or other they both bent forward and together with the horse formed one big , black mass . 
The street was speckled with spots of light and shade , but in the distance the darkness seemed thick as though the street were fenced off by a wall , rising from earth to the skies . 
Somehow it occurred to Foma that these people did not know whither they were going . 
And he , too , did not know whither he was going . 
His house rose before his imagination -- six big rooms , where he lived alone . 
Aunt Anfisa had gone to the cloister , perhaps never to return -- she might die there . 
At home were Ivan , the old deaf dvornik , the old maid , Sekleteya , his cook and servant , and a black , shaggy dog , with a snout as blunt as that of a sheat-fish . 
And the dog , too , was old . 
`` Perhaps I really ought to get married , '' thought Foma , with a sigh . 
But the very thought of how easy it was for him to get married made him ill at ease , and even ridiculous in his own eyes . 
It were but necessary to ask his godfather tomorrow for a bride , -- and before a month would pass , a woman would live with him in his house . 
And she would be near him day and night . 
He would say to her : `` Let 's go for a walk ! '' 
and she would go . 
He would tell her : `` Let 's go to sleep ! '' 
and again she would go . 
Should she desire to kiss him , she would kiss him , even though he did not like it . 
And if he should tell her : `` Go away , I do n't want it , '' she would feel offended . 
What would he speak to her about ? 
What would she tell him ? 
He thought and pictured to himself young ladies of his acquaintance , daughters of merchants . 
Some of them were very pretty , and he knew that any one of them would marry him willingly . 
But he did not care to have any of them as his wife . 
How awkward and shameful it must be when a girl becomes a wife . 
And what does the newly-married couple say to each other after the wedding , in the bedroom ? 
Foma tried to think what he would say in such a case , and confused , he began to laugh , finding no appropriate words . 
Then he recalled Luba Mayakin . 
She would surely be first to say something , uttering some unintelligible words , which were foreign to herself . 
Somehow it seemed to him that all her words were foreign , and she did not speak as was proper for a girl of her age , appearance and descent . 
And here his thoughts rested on Lubov 's complaints . 
His gait became slower ; he was now astounded by the fact that all the people that were near to him and with whom he talked a great deal , always spoke to him of life . 
His father , his aunt , his godfather , Lubov , Sophya Pavlovna , all these either taught him to understand life , or complained of it . 
He recalled the words said by the old man on the steamer about Fate , and many other remarks on life , reproaches and bitter complaints against it , which he happened to hear from all sorts of people . 
`` What does it mean ? '' 
he thought , `` what is life , if it is not man ? 
And man always speaks as if life were something else , something outside of man , and that something hinders him from living . 
Perhaps it is the devil ? '' 
A painful feeling of fear fell on the youth ; he shuddered and hastily looked around . 
The street was deserted and quiet ; the dark windows of the houses stared dimly into the dark of night , and along the walls and fences Foma 's shadow followed him . 
`` Driver ! '' 
he cried out aloud , quickening his steps . 
The shadow started and crawled after him , frightened , black , silent . 
It seemed to Foma that there was a cold breath behind him , and that something huge , invisible , and terrible was overtaking him . 
Frightened , he almost ran to meet the cab , which appeared noisily from the darkness , and when he seated himself in the cab , he dared not look back , though he wished to do so . 
ABOUT a week passed since Foma spoke to Medinskaya . 
And her image stood fixedly before Foma by night and by day , awakening in his heart a gnawing feeling of anxiety . 
He longed to go to her , and was so much afflicted over her that even his bones were aching from the desire of his heart to be near her again . 
But he was sternly silent ; he frowned and did not care to yield to this desire , industriously occupying himself with his affairs and provoking in himself a feeling of anger against the woman . 
He felt that if he went up to her , he would no longer find her to be the same as he had left her ; something must have changed within her after that conversation , and she would no longer receive him as cordially as before , would not smile at him the clear smile that used to awaken in him strange thoughts and hopes . 
Fearing that all this was lost and that something else must have taken its place , he restrained himself and suffered . 
His work and his longing for the woman did not hinder him from thinking of life . 
He did not philosophize about this enigma , which was already stirring a feeling of alarm in his heart ; he was not able to argue , but he began to listen attentively to everything that men said of life , and he tried to remember their words . 
They did not make anything clear to him ; nay , they increased his perplexity and prompted him to regard them suspiciously . 
They were clever , cunning and sensible -- he saw it ; in dealings with them it was always necessary to be on one 's guard ; he knew already that in important matters none of them spoke as they thought . 
And watching them carefully , he felt that their sighs and their complaints of life awakened in him distrust . 
Silently he looked at everybody with suspicion , and a thin wrinkle masked his forehead . 
One morning his godfather said to him on the Exchange : `` Anany has arrived . 
He would like to see you . 
Go up to him toward evening , and see that you hold your tongue . 
Anany will try to loosen it in order to make you talk on business matters . 
He is cunning , the old devil ; he is a holy fox ; he 'll lift his eyes toward heaven , and meanwhile will put his paw into your pocket and grab your purse . 
Be on your guard . '' 
`` Do we owe him anything ? '' 
asked Foma . 
`` Of course ! 
We have n't paid yet for the barge , and then fifty five-fathom beams were taken from him not long ago . 
If he wants everything at once -- do n't give . 
A rouble is a sticky thing ; the longer it turns about in your hand , the more copecks will stick to it . 
A rouble is like a good pigeon -- it goes up in the air , you turn around and see -- it has brought a whole flock with it into the pigeon-house . '' 
`` But how can we help paying it now , if he demands it ? '' 
`` Let him cry and ask for it -- and you roar -- but do n't give it to him . '' 
`` I 'll go up there soon . '' 
Anany Savvich Shchurov was a rich lumber-dealer , had a big saw-mill , built barges and ran rafts . 
He had had dealings with Ignat , and Foma had more than once seen this tall , heavily-bearded , long-armed , white-haired old man , who kept himself as erect as a pine-tree . 
His big , handsome figure , his open face and his clear eyes called forth in Foma a feeling of respect for Shchurov , although he heard it rumoured that this lumber-dealer had gained his wealth not by honest toil and that he was leading an evil life at home , in an obscure village of the forest district ; and Ignat had told Foma that when Shchurov was young and was but a poor peasant , he sheltered a convict in the bath-house , in his garden , and that there the convict made counterfeit money for him . 
Since that time Anany began to grow rich . 
One day his bathhouse burned down , and in the ashes they discovered the corpse of a man with a fractured skull . 
There was a rumour in the village that Shchurov himself had killed his workman -- killed and then burned him . 
Such things had happened more than once with the good-looking old man ; but similar rumours were on foot with reference to many a rich man in town -- they had all , it was said , hoarded up their millions by way of robberies , murders and , mainly , by passing counterfeit money . 
Foma had heard such stories in his childhood and he never before considered whether they were true or not . 
He also knew that Shchurov had got rid of two wives -- one of them died during the first night of the wedding , in Anany 's embraces . 
Then he took his son 's wife away from him , and his son took to drink for grief and would have perished in drunkenness had he not come to himself in time and gone off to save himself in a hermitage , in Irgiz . 
And when his mistress-daughter-in-law had passed away , Shchurov took into his house a dumb beggar-girl , who was living with him to this day , and who had recently borne him a dead child . 
On his way to the hotel , where Anany stayed , Foma involuntarily recalled all this , and felt that Shchurov had become strangely interesting to him . 
When Foma opened the door and stopped respectfully on the threshold of the small room , whose only window overlooked the rusty roof of the neighbouring house , he noticed that the old Shchurov had just risen from sleep , and sitting on his bed , leaning his hands against it , he stared at the ground ; and he was so bent that his long , white beard fell over his knees . 
But even bent , he was large . 
`` Who entered ? '' 
asked Anany in a hoarse and angry voice , without lifting his head . 
`` I . 
How do you do , Anany Savvich ? '' 
The old man raised his head slowly and , winking his large eyes , looked at Foma . 
`` Ignat 's son , is that right ? '' 
`` The same . '' 
`` Well , come over here , sit down by the window . 
Let me see how you 've grown up . 
Will you not have a glass of tea with me ? '' 
`` I would n't mind . '' 
`` Waiter ! '' 
cried the old man , expanding his chest , and , taking his beard in his hand , he began to examine Foma in silence . 
Foma also looked at him stealthily . 
The old man 's lofty forehead was all covered with wrinkles , and its skin was dark . 
Gray , curly locks covered his temples and his sharp-pointed ears ; his calm blue eyes lent the upper part of his face a wise and good expression . 
But his cheeks and his lips were thick and red , and seemed out of place on his face . 
His thin , long nose was turned downward as though it wished to hide itself in his white moustache ; the old man moved his lips , and from beneath them small , yellow teeth were gleaming . 
He had on a pink calico shirt , a silk belt around his waist , and black , loose trousers , which were tucked into his boots . 
Foma stared at his lips and thought that the old man was surely such as he was said to be . 
`` As a boy you looked more like your father , '' said Shchurov suddenly , and sighed . 
Then , after a moment 's silence , he asked : `` Do you remember your father ? 
Do you ever pray for him ? 
You must , you must pray ! '' 
he went on , after he heard Foma 's brief answer . 
`` Ignat was a terrible sinner , and he died without repentance , taken unawares . 
He was a great sinner ! '' 
`` He was not more sinful than others , '' replied Foma , angrily , offended in his father 's behalf . 
`` Than who , for instance ? '' 
demanded Shchurov , strictly . 
`` Are there not plenty of sinners ? '' 
`` There is but one man on earth more sinful than was the late Ignat -- and that is that cursed heathen , your godfather Yashka , '' ejaculated the old man . 
`` Are you sure of it ? '' 
inquired Foma , smiling . 
`` I ? 
Of course , I am ! '' 
said Shchurov , confidently , nodding his head , and his eyes became somewhat darker . 
`` I will also appear before the Lord , and that not sinless . 
I shall bring with me a heavy burden before His holy countenance . 
I have been pleasing the devil myself , only I trust to God for His mercy , while Yashka believes in nothing , neither in dreams , nor in the singing of birds . 
Yashka does not believe in God , this I know ! 
And for his non-belief he will yet receive his punishment on earth . '' 
`` Are you sure of this , too ? '' 
`` Yes , I am . 
And do n't you think I also know that you consider it ludicrous to listen to me . 
What a sagacious fellow , indeed ! 
But he who has committed many sins is always wise . 
Sin is a teacher . 
That 's why Yashka Mayakin is extraordinarily clever . '' 
Listening to the old man 's hoarse and confident voice , Foma thought : `` He is scenting death , it seems . '' 
The waiter , a small man , with a face which was pale and characterless , brought in the samovar and quickly hastened out of the room , with short steps . 
The old man was undoing some bundles on the window-sill and said , without looking at Foma : `` You are bold , and the look of your eyes is dark . 
Before , there used to be more light-eyed people , because then the souls used to be brighter . 
Before , everything was simpler -- both the people and the sins , and now everything has become complicated . 
Eh , eh ! '' 
He made tea , seated himself opposite Foma and went on again : `` Your father at your age was a water-pumper and stayed with the fleet near our village . 
At your age Ignat was as clear to me as glass . 
At a single glance you could tell what sort of a man he was . 
While you -- here I am looking at you , but can not see what you are . 
Who are you ? 
You do n't know it yourself , my lad , and that 's why you 'll suffer . 
Everybody nowadays must suffer , because they do not know themselves . 
Life is a mass of wind-fallen trees , and you must know how to find your way through it . 
Where is it ? 
All are going astray , and the devil is delighted . 
Are you married ? '' 
`` Not yet , '' said Foma . 
`` There again , you are not married , and yet , I 'm quite sure , you are not pure any longer . 
Well , are you working hard in your business ? '' 
`` Sometimes . 
Meanwhile I am with my godfather . '' 
`` What sort of work is it you have nowadays ? '' 
said the old man , shaking his head , and his eyes were constantly twinkling , now turning dark , now brightening up again . 
`` You have no labour now ! 
In former years the merchant travelled with horses on business . 
Even at night , in snowstorms , he used to go ! 
Murderers used to wait for him on the road and kill him . 
And he died a martyr , washing his sins away with blood . 
Now they travel by rail ; they are sending telegrams , or they 've even invented something that a man may speak in his office and you can hear him five miles away . 
There the devil surely has a hand in it ! 
A man sits , without motion , and commits sins merely because he feels lonesome , because he has nothing to do : the machine does all his work . 
He has no work , and without toil man is ruined ! 
