`` Can you tell the bells by their sounds ? '' 
`` No , '' answered Foma . 
`` Just listen . 
This one now -- do you hear ? 
the bass -- this is from the Nikola Church . 
It was presented by Peter Mitrich Vyagin -- and this , the hoarse one -- this is at the church of Praskeva Pyatnitza . '' 
The singing waves of the bell-tones agitated the air , which was filled with them , and they died away in the clear blue of the sky . 
Foma stared thoughtfully at his father 's face and saw that the alarm was disappearing from his eyes , and that they were now brighter . 
But suddenly the old man 's face turned very red , his eyes distended and rolled out of their orbits , his mouth opened with fright , and from it issued a strange , hissing sound : `` F-F-A-A-ch . '' 
Immediately after this Ignat 's head fell back on his shoulder , and his heavy body slowly slipped down from the chair to the ground as if the earth had dragged him imperiously unto itself . 
Foma was motionless and silent for awhile , then he rushed up to Ignat , lifted his head from the ground and looked into his face . 
The face was dark , motionless , and the wide-open eyes expressed nothing -- neither pain , nor fear , nor joy . 
Foma looked around him . 
As before , nobody was in the garden , and the resounding chatter of the bells was still roaring in the air . 
Foma 's hands began to tremble , he let go his father 's head , and it struck heavily against the ground . 
Dark , thick blood began to gush in a narrow stream from his open mouth across his blue cheek . 
Foma struck his breast with both hands , and kneeling before the dead body , he wildly cried aloud . 
He was trembling with fright , and with eyes like those of a madman he was searching for someone in the verdure of the garden . 
HIS father 's death stupefied Foma and filled him with a strange sensation ; quiet was poured into his soul -- a painful , immovable quiet , which absorbed all the sounds of life without accounting for it . 
All sorts of acquaintances were bustling about him ; they appeared , disappeared , said something to him -- his replies to them were untimely , and their words called forth no images in him , drowning , without leaving any trace , in the bottomless depths of the death-like silence which filled his soul . 
He neither cried , nor grieved , nor thought of anything ; pale and gloomy , with knitted brow , he was attentively listening to this quiet , which had forced out all his feelings , benumbed his heart and tightly clutched his brains . 
He was conscious but of the purely physical sensation of heaviness in all his frame and particularly in his breast , and then it also seemed to him that it was always twilight , and even though the sun was still high in the sky -- everything on earth looked dark and melancholy . 
The funeral was arranged by Mayakin . 
Hastily and briskly he was bustling about in the rooms , making much clatter with the heels of his boots ; he cried at the household help imperiously , clapped his godson on the shoulder , consoling him : `` And why are you petrified ? 
Roar and you will feel relieved . 
Your father was old -- old in body . 
Death is prepared for all of us , you can not escape it -- consequently you must not be prematurely torpid . 
You can not bring him to life again with your sorrow , and your grief is unnecessary to him , for it is said : ` When the body is robbed of the soul by the terrible angels , the soul forgets all relatives and acquaintances , ' which means that you are of no consequence to him now , whether you cry or laugh . 
But the living must care for the living . 
You had better cry , for this is human . 
It brings much relief to the heart . '' 
But neither did these words provoke anything in Foma 's head or in his heart . 
He came to himself , however , on the day of the funeral , thanks to the persistence of his godfather , who was assiduously and oddly trying to rouse his sad soul . 
The day of the funeral was cloudy and dreary . 
Amid a heavy cloud of dust an enormous crowd of people , winding like a black ribbon , followed the coffin of Ignat Gordyeeff . 
Here and there flashed the gold of the priest 's robes , and the dull noise of the slow movement of the crowd blended in harmony with the solemn music of the choir , composed of the bishop 's choristers . 
Foma was pushed from behind and from the sides ; he walked , seeing nothing but the gray head of his father , and the mournful singing resounded in his heart like a melancholy echo . 
And Mayakin , walking beside him , kept on intrusively whispering in his ears : `` Look , what a crowd -- thousands ! 
The governor himself came out to accompany your father to the church , the mayor , and almost the entire city council . 
And behind you -- just turn around ! 
There goes Sophya Pavlovna . 
The town pays its respects to Ignat . '' 
At first Foma did not listen to his godfather 's whisper , but when he mentioned Medinskaya , he involuntarily looked back and noticed the governor . 
A little drop of something pleasant fell into his heart at the sight of this important personage , with a bright ribbon across his shoulder , with orders on his breast , pacing after the coffin , an expression of sorrow on his stern countenance . 
`` Blessed is the road where this soul goeth today , '' Yakov Tarasovich hummed softly , moving his nose , and he again whispered in his godson 's ear : `` Seventy-five thousand roubles is such a sum that you can demand so many escorts for it . 
Have you heard that Sonka is making arrangements for the laying of the corner-stone on the fifteenth ? 
Just forty days after the death of your father . '' 
Foma again turned back , and his eyes met the eyes of Medinskaya . 
He heaved a deep sigh at her caressing glance , and felt relieved at once , as if a warm ray of light penetrated his soul and something melted there . 
And then and there he considered that it was unbecoming him to turn his head from side to side . 
At church Foma 's head began to ache , and it seemed to him that everything around and underneath him was shaking . 
In the stifling air , filled with dust , with the breathing of the people and the smoke of the incense , the flames of the candles were timidly trembling . 
The meek image of Christ looked down at him from the big ikon , and the flames of the candles , reflected in the tarnished gold of the crown over the Saviour 's brow , reminded him of drops of blood . 
Foma 's awakened soul was greedily feeding itself on the solemn , gloomy poetry of the liturgy , and when the touching citation was heard , `` Come , let us give him the last kiss , '' a loud , wailing sob escaped from Foma 's chest , and the crowd in church was stirred to agitation by this outburst of grief . 
Having uttered the sob , Foma staggered . 
His godfather immediately caught him by his arms and began to push him forward to the coffin , singing quite loudly and with some anger : `` Kiss him who was but lately with us . 
Kiss , Foma , kiss him -- he is given over to the grave , covered with a stone . 
He is settling down in darkness , and is buried with the dead . '' 
Foma touched his father 's forehead with his lips and sprang back from the coffin with horror . 
`` Hold your peace ! 
You nearly knocked me down , '' Mayakin remarked to him , in a low voice , and these simple , calm words supported Foma better than his godfather 's hands . 
`` Ye that behold me mute and lifeless before you , weep for me , brethren and friends , '' begged Ignat through the mouth of the Church . 
But his son was not crying any longer ; his horror was called forth by the black , swollen face of his father , and this horror somewhat sobered his soul , which had been intoxicated by the mournful music of the Church 's lament for its sinful son . 
He was surrounded by acquaintances , who were kindly consoling him ; he listened to them and understood that they all felt sorry for him and that he became dear to them . 
And his godfather whispered in his ear : `` See , how they all fawn upon you . 
The tom-cats have smelt the fat . '' 
These words were unpleasant to Foma , but they were useful to him , as they caused him to answer at all events . 
At the cemetery , when they sang for Ignat 's eternal memory , he cried again bitterly and loud . 
His godfather immediately seized him by the arms and led him away from the grave , speaking to him earnestly : `` What a faint-hearted fellow you are ! 
Do I not feel sorry for him ? 
I have known his real value , while you were but his son . 
And yet , I do not cry . 
For more than thirty years we lived together in perfect harmony -- how much had been spoken , how much thought -- how much sorrow drunk . 
You are young ; it is not for you to grieve ! 
Your life is before you , and you will be rich in all sorts of friendship ; while I am old , and now that I buried my only friend , I am like a pauper . 
I can no longer make a bosom friend ! '' 
The old man 's voice began to jar and squeak queerly . 
His face was distorted , his lips were stretched into a big grimace and were quivering , and from his small eyes frequent tears were running over the now contracted wrinkles of his face . 
He looked so pitiful and so unlike himself , that Foma stopped short , pressed him close to his body with the tenderness of a strong man and cried with alarm : `` Do n't cry , father -- darling ! 
Do n't cry . '' 
`` There you have it ! '' 
said Mayakin , faintly , and , heaving a deep sigh , he suddenly turned again into a firm and clever old man . 
`` You must not cry , '' said he , mysteriously , seating himself in the carriage beside his godson . 
`` You are now the commander-in-chief in the war and you must command your soldiers bravely . 
Your soldiers are the roubles , and you have a great army of these . 
Make war incessantly ! '' 
Surprised at the quickness of his transformation , Foma listened to his words and for some reason or other they reminded him of those clods of earth , which the people threw into Ignat 's grave upon his coffin . 
`` On whom am I to make war ? '' 
said Foma with a sigh . 
`` I 'll teach you that ! 
Did your father tell you that I was a clever old man and that you should mind me ? '' 
`` He did . '' 
`` Then do mind me ! 
If my mind should be added to your youthful strength , a good victory might be won . 
Your father was a great man , but he did not look far before him and he could not take my advice . 
He gained success in life not with his mind , but more with his head . 
Oh , what will become of you ? 
You had better move into my house , for you will feel lonesome in yours . '' 
`` Aunt is there . '' 
`` Aunt ? 
She is sick . 
She will not live long . '' 
`` Do not speak of it , '' begged Foma in a low voice . 
`` And I will speak of it . 
You need not fear death -- you are not an old woman on the oven . 
Live fearlessly and do what you were appointed to do . 
Man is appointed for the organisation of life on earth . 
Man is capital -- like a rouble , he is made up of trashy copper groshes and copecks . 
From the dust of the earth , as it is said ; and even as he has intercourse with the world , he absorbs grease and oil , sweat and tears -- a soul and a mind form themselves in him . 
And from this he starts to grow upward and downward . 
Now , you see his price is a grosh , now a fifteen copeck silver piece , now a hundred roubles , and sometimes he is above any price . 
He is put into circulation and he must bring interests to life . 
Life knows the value of each of us and will not check our course before time . 
Nobody , dear , works to his own detriment , if he is wise . 
And life has saved up much wisdom . 
Are you listening ? '' 
`` I am . '' 
`` And what do you understand ? '' 
`` Everything . '' 
`` You are probably lying ? '' 
Mayakin doubted . 
`` But , why must we die ? '' 
asked Foma in a low voice . 
Mayakin looked into his face with regret , smacked his lips and said : `` A wise man would never ask such a question . 
A wise man knows for himself that if it is a river , it must be flowing somewhere , and if it were standing in one place , it would be a swamp . '' 
`` You 're simply mocking me at random , '' said Foma , sternly . 
`` The sea is not flowing anywhere . '' 
`` The sea receives all rivers into itself , and then , powerful storms rage in it at times . 
Then the sea of life also submits on agitation , stirred up by men , and death renovates the waters of the sea of life , that they might not become spoiled . 
No matter how many people are dying , they are nevertheless forever growing in number . '' 
`` What of it ? 
But my father is dead . '' 
`` You will die as well . '' 
`` Then what have I to do with the fact that people are growing in number ? '' 
Foma smiled sadly . 
`` Eh , he , he ! '' 
sighed Mayakin . 
`` That , indeed , concerns none of us . 
There , your trousers probably reason in the same way : what have we to do with the fact that there are all sorts of stuff in the world ? 
But you do not mind them -- you wear them out and throw them away . '' 
Foma glanced at his godfather reproachfully , and noticing that the old man was smiling , he was astonished and he asked respectfully : `` Can it be true , father , that you do not fear death ? '' 
`` Most of all I fear foolishness , my child , '' replied Mayakin with humble bitterness . 
`` My opinion is this : if a fool give you honey , spit upon it ; if a wise man give you poison , drink it ! 
And I will tell you that the perch has a weak soul since his fins do not stand on end . '' 
The old man 's mocking words offended and angered Foma . 
He turned aside and said : `` You can never speak without these subterfuges . '' 
`` I can not ! '' 
exclaimed Mayakin , and his eyes began to sparkle with alarm . 
`` Each man uses the very same tongue he has . 
Do I seem to be stern ? 
Do I ? '' 
Foma was silent . 
`` Eh , you . 
Know this -- he loves who teaches . 
Remember this well . 
And as to death , do not think of it . 
It is foolish , dear , for a live man to think of death . 
` Ecclesiastes ' reflected on death better than anybody else reflected on it , and said that a living dog is better than a dead lion . '' 
They came home . 
The street near the house was crowded with carriages , and from the open windows came loud sounds of talk . 
As soon as Foma appeared in the hall , he was seized by the arms and led away to the table and there was urged to drink and eat something . 
A marketplace noise smote the air ; the hall was crowded and suffocating . 
Silently , Foma drank a glass of vodka , then another , and a third . 
Around him they were munching and smacking their lips ; the vodka poured out from the bottles was gurgling , the wine-glasses were tinkling . 
They were speaking of dried sturgeon and of the bass of the soloist of the bishop 's choir , and then again of the dried sturgeon , and then they said that the mayor also wished to make a speech , but did not venture to do so after the bishop had spoken , fearing lest he should not speak so well as the bishop . 
Someone was telling with feeling : `` The deceased one used to do thus : he would cut off a slice of salmon , pepper it thickly , cover it with another slice of salmon , and then send it down immediately after a drink . '' 
`` Let us follow his example , '' roared a thick basso . 
Offended to the quick , Foma looked with a frown at the fat lips and at the jaws chewing the tasty food , and he felt like crying out and driving away all these people , whose sedateness had but lately inspired him with respect for them . 
`` You had better be more kind , more sociable , '' said Mayakin in a low voice , coming up to him . 
`` Why are they gobbling here ? 
Is this a tavern ? '' 
cried Foma , angrily . 
`` Hush , '' Mayakin remarked with fright and hastily turned to look around with a kind smile on his face . 
But it was too late ; his smile was of no avail . 
Foma 's words had been overheard , the noise and the talk was subsiding , some of the guests began to bustle about hurriedly , others , offended , frowned , put down their forks and knives and walked away from the table , all looking at Foma askance . 
Silent and angry , he met these glances without lowering his eyes . 
`` I ask you to come up to the table ! '' 
cried Mayakin , gleaming amid the crowd of people like an ember amid ashes . 
`` Be seated , pray ! 
They 're soon serving pancakes . '' 
Foma shrugged his shoulders and walked off toward the door , saying aloud : `` I shall not eat . '' 
He heard a hostile rumbling behind him and his godfather 's wheedling voice saying to somebody : `` It 's for grief . 
Ignat was at once father and mother to him . '' 
Foma came out in the garden and sat down on the same place where his father had died . 
The feeling of loneliness and grief oppressed his heart . 
He unbuttoned the collar of his shirt to make his breathing easier , rested his elbows on the table , and with his head tightly pressed between his hands , he sat motionless . 
It was drizzling and the leaves of the apple-tree were rustling mournfully under the drops of the rain . 
He sat there for a long time alone , motionless , watching how the small drops were falling from the apple-tree . 
His head was heavy from the vodka , and in his heart there was a growing grudge against men . 
Some indefinite , impersonal feelings and thoughts were springing up and vanishing within him ; before him flashed the bald skull of his godfather with a little crown of silver hair and with a dark face , which resembled the faces of the ancient ikons . 
This face with the toothless mouth and the malicious smile , rousing in Foma hatred and fear , augmented in him the consciousness of solitude . 
Then he recalled the kind eyes of Medinskaya and her small , graceful figure ; and beside her arose the tall , robust , and rosy-cheeked Lubov Mayakina with smiling eyes and with a big light golden-coloured braid . 
`` Do not rely upon men , expect but little at their hands '' -- his father 's words began to ring in his memory . 
He sighed sadly and cast a glance around him . 
The tree leaves were fluttering from the rain , and the air was full of mournful sounds . 
The gray sky seemed as though weeping , and on the trees cold tears were trembling . 
And Foma 's soul was dry , dark ; it was filled with a painful feeling of orphanhood . 
But this feeling gave birth to the question : `` How shall I live now that I am alone ? '' 
The rain drenched his clothes , and when he felt that he was shivering with cold he arose and went into the house . 
Life was tugging him from all sides , giving him no chance to be concentrated in thinking of and grieving for his father , and on the fortieth day after Ignat 's death Foma , attired in holiday clothes , with a pleasant feeling in his heart , went to the ceremony of the corner-stone laying of the lodging-asylum . 
Medinskaya notified him in a letter the day before , that he had been elected as a member of the building committee and also as honorary member of the society of which she was president . 
This pleased him and he was greatly agitated by the part he was to play today at the laying of the corner-stone . 
On his way he thought of how everything would be and how he should behave in order not to be confused before the people . 
`` Eh , eh ! 
Hold on ! '' 
He turned around . 
Mayakin came hastening to him from the sidewalk . 
He was in a frock-coat that reached his heels , in a high cap , and he carried a huge umbrella in his hand . 
`` Come on , take me up there , '' said the old man , cleverly jumping into the carriage like a monkey . 
`` To tell the truth , I was waiting for you . 
I was looking around , thinking it was time for you to go . '' 
`` Are you going there ? '' 
asked Foma . 
`` Of course ! 
I must see how they will bury my friend 's money in the ground . '' 
Foma looked at him askance and was silent . 
`` Why do you frown upon me ? 
Do n't fear , you will also start out as a benefactor among men . '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
asked Foma , reservedly . 
`` I 've read in the newspaper this morning that you were elected as a member of the building committee and also as an honorary member of Sophya 's society . '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` This membership will eat into your pocket ! '' 
sighed Mayakin . 
`` That would n't ruin me . '' 
`` I do n't know it , '' observed the old man , maliciously . 
`` I speak of this more because there is altogether very little wisdom in this charity business , and I may even say that it is n't a business at all , but simply harmful nonsense . '' 
`` Is it harmful to aid people ? '' 
asked Foma , hotly . 
`` Eh , you cabbage head ! '' 
said Mayakin with a smile . 
`` You had better come up to my house , I 'll open your eyes in regard to this . 
I must teach you ! 
Will you come ? '' 
`` Very well , I will come ! '' 
replied Foma . 
`` So . 
And in the meantime , hold yourself proud at the laying of the corner-stone . 
Stand in view of everybody . 
If I do n't tell this to you , you might hide yourself behind somebody 's back . '' 
`` Why should I hide myself ? '' 
said Foma , displeased . 
`` That 's just what I say : there is no reason why . 
For the money was donated by your father and you are entitled to the honour as his heir . 
Honour is just the same as money . 
With honour a business man will get credit everywhere , and everywhere there is a way open to him . 
Then come forward , so that everybody may see you and that if you do five copecks ' worth of work , you should get a rouble in return for it . 
And if you will hide yourself -- nothing but foolishness will be the result . '' 
They arrived at their destination , where all the important people had gathered already , and an enormous crowd of people surrounded the piles of wood , bricks and earth . 
The bishop , the governor , the representatives of the city 's aristocracy and the administration formed , together with the splendidly dressed ladies , a big bright group and looked at the efforts of the two stonemasons , who were preparing the bricks and the lime . 
Mayakin and his godson wended their way toward this group . 
He whispered to Foma : `` Lose no courage , these people have robbed their bellies to cover themselves with silk . '' 
And he greeted the governor before the bishop , in a respectfully cheerful voice . 
`` How do you do , your Excellency ? 
Give me your blessing , your Holiness ! '' 
`` Ah , Yakov Tarasovich ! '' 
exclaimed the governor with a friendly smile , shaking and squeezing Mayakin 's hand , while the old man was at the same time kissing the bishop 's hand . 
`` How are you , deathless old man ? '' 
`` I thank you humbly , your Excellency ! 
My respects to Sophya Pavlovna ! '' 
Mayakin spoke fast , whirling like a peg-top amid the crowd of people . 
In a minute he managed to shake hands with the presiding justice of the court , with the prosecutor , with the mayor -- in a word , with all those people whom he considered it necessary to greet first ; such as these , however , were few . 
He jested , smiled and at once attracted everybody 's attention to his little figure , and Foma with downcast head stood behind him , looking askance at these people wrapped in costly stuffs , embroidered with gold ; he envied the old man 's adroitness and lost his courage , and feeling that he was losing his courage -- he grew still more timid . 
But now Mayakin seized him by the hand and drew him up to himself . 
`` There , your Excellency , this is my godson , Foma , the late Ignat 's only son . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the governor in his basso , `` I 'm very pleased . 
I sympathise with you in your misfortune , young man ! '' 
he said , shaking Foma 's hand , and became silent ; then he added resolutely and confidently : `` To lose a father , that is a very painful misfortune . '' 
And , having waited about two seconds for Foma 's answer , he turned away from him , addressing Mayakin approvingly : `` I am delighted with the speech you made yesterday in the city hall ! 
Beautiful , clever , Yakov Tarasovich . 
Proposing to use the money for this public club , they do not understand the real needs of the population . '' 
`` And then , your Excellency , a small capital means that the city will have to add its own money . '' 
`` Perfectly true ! 
Perfectly true ! '' 
`` Temperance , I say , is good ! 
Would to God that all were sober ! 
I do n't drink , either , but what is the use of these performances , libraries and all that , since the people can not even read ? '' 
The governor replied approvingly . 
`` Here , I say , you better use this money for a technical institution . 
If it should be established on a small plan , this money alone will suffice , and in case it should n't , we can ask for more in St. Petersburg -- they 'll give it to us . 
Then the city would n't have to add of its own money , and the whole affair would be more sensible . '' 
`` Precisely ! 
I fully agree with you ! 
But how the liberals began to cry at you ! 
Eh ? 
Ha , ha ! '' 
`` That has always been their business , to cry . '' 
The deep cough of the archdeacon of the cathedral announced the beginning of the divine service . 
Sophya Pavlovna came up to Foma , greeted him and said in a sad , low voice : `` I looked at your face on the day of the funeral , and my heart saddened . 
My God , I thought , how he must suffer ! '' 
And Foma listened to her and felt as though he was drinking honey . 
`` These cries of yours , they shook my soul , my poor child ! 
I may speak to you this way , for I am an old woman already . '' 
`` You ! '' 
exclaimed Foma , softly . 
`` Is n't that so ? '' 
she asked , naively looking into his face . 
Foma was silent , his head bent on his breast . 
`` Do n't you believe that I am an old woman ? '' 
`` I believe you ; that is , I believe everything you may say ; only this is not true ! '' 
said Foma , feelingly , in a low voice . 
`` What is not true ? 
What do you believe me ? '' 
`` No ! 
not this , but that . 
I -- excuse me ! 
I can not speak ! '' 
said Foma , sadly , all aflush with confusion . 
`` I am not cultured . '' 
`` You need not trouble yourself on this account , '' said Medinskaya , patronisingly . 
`` You are so young , and education is accessible to everybody . 
But there are people to whom education is not only unnecessary , but who can also be harmed by it . 
Those that are pure of heart , sanguine , sincere , like children , and you are of those people . 
You are , are you not ? '' 
What could Foma say in answer to this question ? 
He said sincerely : `` I thank you humbly ! '' 
And noticing that his words called forth a gay gleam in Medinskaya 's eyes , Foma appeared ridiculous and stupid in his own eyes ; he immediately became angry at himself and said in a muffled voice : `` Yes , I am such . 
I always speak my mind . 
I can not deceive . 
If I see something to laugh at , I laugh openly . 
I am stupid ! '' 
`` What makes you speak that way ? '' 
said the woman , reproachfully , and adjusting her dress , she accidentally stroked Foma 's hand , in which he held his hat . 
This made him look at his wrist and smile joyously and confusedly . 
`` You will surely be present at the dinner , wo n't you ? '' 
asked Medinskaya . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And tomorrow at the meeting in my house ? '' 
`` Without fail ! '' 
`` And perhaps sometime you will drop in , simply on a visit , would n't you ? '' 
`` I -- I thank you ! 
I 'll come ! '' 
`` I must thank you for the promise . '' 
They became silent . 
In the air soared the reverently soft voice of the bishop , who recited the prayer expressively , outstretching his hand over the place where the corner-stone of the house was laid : `` May neither the wind , nor water , nor anything else bring harm unto it ; may it be completed in thy benevolence , and free all those that are to live in it from all kinds of calumny . '' 
`` How rich and beautiful our prayers are , are they not ? '' 
asked Medinskaya . 
`` Yes , '' said Foma , shortly , without understanding her words and feeling that he was blushing again . 
`` They will always be opponents of our commercial interests , '' Mayakin whispered loudly and convincingly , standing beside the city mayor , not far from Foma . 
`` What is it to them ? 
All they want is somehow to deserve the approval of the newspaper . 
But they can not reach the main point . 
They live for mere display , not for the organisation of life ; these are their only measures : the newspapers and Sweden ! 
-LSB- Mayakin speaks of Sweden , meaning Switzerland . 
-- Translator 's note . -RSB- 
The doctor scoffed at me all day yesterday with this Sweden . 
The public education , says he , in Sweden , and everything else there is first-class ! 
But what is Sweden , anyway ? 
It may be that Sweden is but a fib , is but used as an example , and that there is no education whatever or any of the other things there . 
And then , we do n't live for the sake of Sweden , and Sweden can not put us to test . 
We have to make our lip according to our own last . 
Is n't it so ? '' 
And the archdeacon droned , his head thrown back : `` Eternal me-emo-ory to the founder of this ho-ouse ! '' 
Foma shuddered , but Mayakin was already by his side , and pulling him by the sleeve , asked : `` Are you going to the dinner ? '' 
And Medinskaya 's velvet-like , warm little hand glided once more over Foma 's hand . 
The dinner was to Foma a real torture . 
For the first time in his life among these uniformed people , he saw that they were eating and speaking -- doing everything better than he , and he felt that between him and Medinskaya , who was seated just opposite him , was a high mountain , not a table . 
Beside him sat the secretary of the society of which Foma had been made an honorary member ; he was a young court officer , bearing the odd name of Ookhtishchev . 
As if to make his name appear more absurd than it really was , he spoke in a loud , ringing tenor , and altogether -- plump , short , round-faced and a lively talker -- he looked like a brand new bell . 
`` The very best thing in our society is the patroness ; the most reasonable is what we are doing -- courting the patroness ; the most difficult is to tell the patroness such a compliment as would satisfy her ; and the most sensible thing is to admire the patroness silently and hopelessly . 
So that in reality , you are a member not of ` the Society of Solicitude , ' and so on , but of the Society of Tantaluses , which is composed of persons bent on pleasing Sophya Medinskaya . '' 
Foma listened to his chatter , now and then looking at the patroness , who was absorbed in a conversation with the chief of the police ; Foma roared in reply to his interlocutor , pretending to be busy eating , and he wished that all this would end the sooner . 
He felt that he was wretched , stupid , ridiculous and he was certain that everybody was watching and censuring him . 
This tied him with invisible shackles , thus checking his words and his thoughts . 
At last he went so far , that the line of various physiognomies , stretched out by the table opposite him , seemed to him a long and wavy white strip besprinkled with laughing eyes , and all these eyes were pricking him unpleasantly and painfully . 
Mayakin sat near the city mayor , waved his fork in the air quickly , and kept on talking all the time , now contracting , now expanding the wrinkles of his face . 
The mayor , a gray-headed , red-faced , short-necked man , stared at him like a bull , with obstinate attention and at times he rapped on the edge of the table with his big finger affirmatively . 
The animated talk and laughter drowned his godfather 's bold speech , and Foma was unable to hear a single word of it , much more so that the tenor of the secretary was unceasingly ringing in his ears : `` Look , there , the archdeacon arose ; he is filling his lungs with air ; he will soon proclaim an eternal memory for Ignat Matveyich . '' 
`` May I not go away ? '' 
asked Foma in a low voice . 
`` Why not ? 
Everybody will understand this . '' 
The deacon 's resounding voice drowned and seemed to have crushed the noise in the hail ; the eminent merchants fixed their eyes on the big , wide-open mouth , from which a deep sound was streaming forth , and availing himself of this moment , Foma arose from his seat and left the hall . 
After awhile he breathed freely and , sitting in his cab , thought sadly that there was no place for him amid these people . 
Inwardly , he called them polished . 
He did not like their brilliancy , their faces , their smiles or their words , but the freedom and the cleverness of their movements , their ability to speak much and on any subject , their pretty costumes -- all this aroused in him a mixture of envy and respect for them . 
He felt sad and oppressed at the consciousness of being unable to talk so much and so fluently as all these people , and here he recalled that Luba Mayakina had more than once scoffed at him on this account . 
Foma did not like Mayakin 's daughter , and since he had learned from his father of Mayakin 's intention to marry him to Luba , the young Gordyeeff began to shun her . 
But after his father 's death he was almost every day at the Mayakins , and somehow Luba said to him one day : `` I am looking at you , and , do you know ? 
-- you do not resemble a merchant at all . '' 
`` Nor do you look like a merchant 's daughter , '' said Foma , and looked at her suspiciously . 
He did not understand the meaning of her words ; did she mean to offend him , or did she say these words without any kind thoughts ? 
`` Thank God for this ! '' 
said she and smiled to him a kind , friendly smile . 
`` What makes you so glad ? '' 
he asked . 
`` The fact that we do n't resemble our fathers . '' 
Foma glanced at her in astonishment and kept silent . 
`` Tell me frankly , '' said she , lowering her voice , `` you do not love my father , do you ? 
You do n't like him ? '' 
`` Not very much , '' said Foma , slowly . 
`` And I dislike him very much . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` For everything . 
When you grow wiser , you will know it yourself . 
Your father was a better man . '' 
`` Of course ! '' 
said Foma , proudly . 
After this conversation an attachment sprang up between them almost immediately , and growing stronger from day to day , it soon developed into friendship , though a somewhat odd friendship it was . 
Though Luba was not older than her god-brother , she nevertheless treated him as an older person would treat a little boy . 
She spoke to him condescendingly , often jesting at his expense ; her talk was always full of words which were unfamiliar to Foma ; and she pronounced these words with particular emphasis and with evident satisfaction . 
She was especially fond of speaking about her brother Taras , whom she had never seen , but of whom she was telling such stories as would make him look like Aunt Anfisa 's brave and noble robbers . 
Often , when complaining of her father , she said to Foma : `` You will also be just such a skinflint . '' 
All this was unpleasant to the youth and stung his vanity . 
But at times she was straightforward , simple-minded , and particularly kind and friendly to him ; then he would unburden his heart before her , and for a long time they would share each other 's thoughts and feelings . 
Both spoke a great deal and spoke sincerely , but neither one understood the other ; it seemed to Foma that whatever Luba had to say was foreign to him and unnecessary to her , and at the same time he clearly saw that his awkward words did not at all interest her , and that she did not care to understand them . 
No matter how long these conversations lasted , they gave both of them the sensation of discomfort and dissatisfaction . 
As if an invisible wall of perplexity had suddenly arisen and stood between them . 
They did not venture to touch this wall , or to tell each other that they felt it was there -- they resumed their conversations , dimly conscious that there was something in each of them that might bind and unite them . 
When Foma arrived at his godfather 's house , he found Luba alone . 
She came out to meet him , and it was evident that she was either ill or out of humour ; her eyes were flashing feverishly and were surrounded with black circles . 
Feeling cold , she muffled herself in a warm shawl and said with a smile : `` It is good that you 've come ! 
For I was sitting here alone ; it is lonesome -- I do n't feel like going anywhere . 
Will you drink tea ? '' 
`` I will . 
What is the matter with you , are you ill ? '' 
`` Go to the dining-room , and I 'll tell them to bring the samovar , '' she said , not answering his question . 
He went into one of the small rooms of the house , whose two windows overlooked the garden . 
In the middle of the room stood an oval table , surrounded with old-fashioned , leather-covered chairs ; on one partition hung a clock in a long case with a glass door , in the corner was a cupboard for dishes , and opposite the windows , by the walls , was an oaken sideboard as big as a fair-sized room . 
`` Are you coming from the banquet ? '' 
asked Luba , entering . 
Foma nodded his head mutely . 
`` Well , how was it ? 
Grand ? '' 
`` It was terrible ! '' 
Foma smiled . 
`` I sat there as if on hot coals . 
They all looked there like peacocks , while I looked like a barn-owl . '' 
Luba was taking out dishes from the cupboard and said nothing to Foma . 
`` Really , why are you so sad ? '' 
asked Foma again , glancing at her gloomy face . 
She turned to him and said with enthusiasm and anxiety : `` Ah , Foma ! 
What a book I 've read ! 
If you could only understand it ! '' 
`` It must be a good book , since it worked you up in this way , '' said Foma , smiling . 
`` I did not sleep . 
I read all night long . 
Just think of it : you read -- and it seems to you that the gates of another kingdom are thrown open before you . 
And the people there are different , and their language is different , everything different ! 
Life itself is different there . '' 
`` I do n't like this , '' said Foma , dissatisfied . 
`` That 's all fiction , deceit ; so is the theatre . 
The merchants are ridiculed there . 
Are they really so stupid ? 
Of course ! 
Take your father , for example . '' 
`` The theatre and the school are one and the same , Foma , '' said Luba , instructively . 
`` The merchants used to be like this . 
And what deceit can there be in books ? '' 
`` Just as in fairy -- tales , nothing is real . '' 
`` You are wrong ! 
You have read no books ; how can you judge ? 
Books are precisely real . 
They teach you how to live . '' 
`` Come , come ! '' 
Foma waved his hand . 
`` Drop it ; no good will come out of your books ! 
There , take your father , for example , does he read books ? 
And yet he is clever ! 
I looked at him today and envied him . 
His relations with everybody are so free , so clever , he has a word for each and every one . 
You can see at once that whatever he should desire he is sure to attain . '' 
`` What is he striving for ? '' 
exclaimed Luba . 
`` Nothing but money . 
But there are people that want happiness for all on earth , and to gain this end they work without sparing themselves ; they suffer and perish ! 
How can my father be compared with these ? '' 
`` You need not compare them . 
They evidently like one thing , while your father likes another . '' 
`` They do not like anything ! '' 
How 's that ? 
`` They want to change everything . '' 
`` So they do strive for something ? '' 
said Foma , thoughtfully . 
`` They do wish for something ? '' 
`` They wish for happiness for all ! '' 
cried Luba , hotly . 
`` I ca n't understand this , '' said Foma , nodding his head . 
`` Who cares there for my happiness ? 
And then again , what happiness can they give me , since I , myself , do not know as yet what I want ? 
No , you should have rather looked at those that were at the banquet . '' 
`` Those are not men ! '' 
announced Luba , categorically . 
`` I do not know what they are in your eyes , but you can see at once that they know their place . 
A clever , easy-going lot . '' 
`` Ah , Foma ! '' 
exclaimed Luba , vexed . 
`` You understand nothing ! 
Nothing agitates you ! 
You are an idler . '' 
`` Now , that 's going too far ! 
I 've simply not had time enough to see where I am . '' 
`` You are simply an empty man , '' said Luba , resolutely and firmly . 
`` You were not within my soul , '' replied Foma , calmly . 
`` You can not know my thoughts . '' 
`` What is there that you should think of ? '' 
said Luba , shrugging her shoulders . 
`` So ? 
First of all , I am alone . 
