By and by he says : `` Starchy clothes -- very . 
You think you 're a good deal of a big-bug , DO N'T you ? '' 
`` Maybe I am , maybe I ai n't , '' I says . 
`` Do n't you give me none o ' your lip , '' says he . 
`` You 've put on considerable many frills since I been away . 
I 'll take you down a peg before I get done with you . 
You 're educated , too , they say -- can read and write . 
You think you 're better 'n your father , now , do n't you , because he ca n't ? 
I 'LL take it out of you . 
Who told you you might meddle with such hifalut 'n foolishness , hey ? 
-- who told you you could ? '' 
`` The widow . 
She told me . '' 
`` The widow , hey ? 
-- and who told the widow she could put in her shovel about a thing that ai n't none of her business ? '' 
`` Nobody never told her . '' 
`` Well , I 'll learn her how to meddle . 
And looky here -- you drop that school , you hear ? 
I 'll learn people to bring up a boy to put on airs over his own father and let on to be better 'n what HE is . 
You lem me catch you fooling around that school again , you hear ? 
Your mother could n't read , and she could n't write , nuther , before she died . 
None of the family could n't before THEY died . 
I ca n't ; and here you 're a - swelling yourself up like this . 
I ai n't the man to stand it -- you hear ? 
Say , lem me hear you read . '' 
I took up a book and begun something about General Washington and the wars . 
When I 'd read about a half a minute , he fetched the book a whack with his hand and knocked it across the house . 
He says : `` It 's so . 
You can do it . 
I had my doubts when you told me . 
Now looky here ; you stop that putting on frills . 
I wo n't have it . 
I 'll lay for you , my smarty ; and if I catch you about that school I 'll tan you good . 
First you know you 'll get religion , too . 
I never see such a son . '' 
He took up a little blue and yaller picture of some cows and a boy , and says : `` What 's this ? '' 
`` It 's something they give me for learning my lessons good . '' 
He tore it up , and says : `` I 'll give you something better -- I 'll give you a cowhide . '' 
He set there a-mumbling and a-growling a minute , and then he says : `` AI N'T you a sweet-scented dandy , though ? 
A bed ; and bedclothes ; and a look 'n' - glass ; and a piece of carpet on the floor -- and your own father got to sleep with the hogs in the tanyard . 
I never see such a son . 
I bet I 'll take some o ' these frills out o ' you before I 'm done with you . 
Why , there ai n't no end to your airs -- they say you 're rich . 
Hey ? 
-- how 's that ? '' 
`` They lie -- that 's how . '' 
`` Looky here -- mind how you talk to me ; I 'm a-standing about all I can stand now -- so do n't gim me no sass . 
I 've been in town two days , and I hai n't heard nothing but about you bein ' rich . 
I heard about it away down the river , too . 
That 's why I come . 
You git me that money to-morrow -- I want it . '' 
`` I hai n't got no money . '' 
`` It 's a lie . 
Judge Thatcher 's got it . 
You git it . 
I want it . '' 
`` I hai n't got no money , I tell you . 
You ask Judge Thatcher ; he 'll tell you the same . '' 
`` All right . 
I 'll ask him ; and I 'll make him pungle , too , or I 'll know the reason why . 
Say , how much you got in your pocket ? 
I want it . '' 
`` I hai n't got only a dollar , and I want that to -- '' `` It do n't make no difference what you want it for -- you just shell it out . '' 
He took it and bit it to see if it was good , and then he said he was going down town to get some whisky ; said he had n't had a drink all day . 
When he had got out on the shed he put his head in again , and cussed me for putting on frills and trying to be better than him ; and when I reckoned he was gone he come back and put his head in again , and told me to mind about that school , because he was going to lay for me and lick me if I did n't drop that . 
Next day he was drunk , and he went to Judge Thatcher 's and bullyragged him , and tried to make him give up the money ; but he could n't , and then he swore he 'd make the law force him . 
The judge and the widow went to law to get the court to take me away from him and let one of them be my guardian ; but it was a new judge that had just come , and he did n't know the old man ; so he said courts must n't interfere and separate families if they could help it ; said he 'd druther not take a child away from its father . 
So Judge Thatcher and the widow had to quit on the business . 
That pleased the old man till he could n't rest . 
He said he 'd cowhide me till I was black and blue if I did n't raise some money for him . 
I borrowed three dollars from Judge Thatcher , and pap took it and got drunk , and went a-blowing around and cussing and whooping and carrying on ; and he kept it up all over town , with a tin pan , till most midnight ; then they jailed him , and next day they had him before court , and jailed him again for a week . 
But he said HE was satisfied ; said he was boss of his son , and he 'd make it warm for HIM . 
When he got out the new judge said he was a-going to make a man of him . 
So he took him to his own house , and dressed him up clean and nice , and had him to breakfast and dinner and supper with the family , and was just old pie to him , so to speak . 
And after supper he talked to him about temperance and such things till the old man cried , and said he 'd been a fool , and fooled away his life ; but now he was a-going to turn over a new leaf and be a man nobody would n't be ashamed of , and he hoped the judge would help him and not look down on him . 
The judge said he could hug him for them words ; so he cried , and his wife she cried again ; pap said he 'd been a man that had always been misunderstood before , and the judge said he believed it . 
The old man said that what a man wanted that was down was sympathy , and the judge said it was so ; so they cried again . 
And when it was bedtime the old man rose up and held out his hand , and says : `` Look at it , gentlemen and ladies all ; take a-hold of it ; shake it . 
There 's a hand that was the hand of a hog ; but it ai n't so no more ; it 's the hand of a man that 's started in on a new life , and 'll die before he 'll go back . 
You mark them words -- do n't forget I said them . 
It 's a clean hand now ; shake it -- do n't be afeard . '' 
So they shook it , one after the other , all around , and cried . 
The judge 's wife she kissed it . 
Then the old man he signed a pledge -- made his mark . 
The judge said it was the holiest time on record , or something like that . 
Then they tucked the old man into a beautiful room , which was the spare room , and in the night some time he got powerful thirsty and clumb out on to the porch-roof and slid down a stanchion and traded his new coat for a jug of forty-rod , and clumb back again and had a good old time ; and towards daylight he crawled out again , drunk as a fiddler , and rolled off the porch and broke his left arm in two places , and was most froze to death when somebody found him after sun-up . 
And when they come to look at that spare room they had to take soundings before they could navigate it . 
The judge he felt kind of sore . 
He said he reckoned a body could reform the old man with a shotgun , maybe , but he did n't know no other way . 
WELL , pretty soon the old man was up and around again , and then he went for Judge Thatcher in the courts to make him give up that money , and he went for me , too , for not stopping school . 
He catched me a couple of times and thrashed me , but I went to school just the same , and dodged him or outrun him most of the time . 
I did n't want to go to school much before , but I reckoned I 'd go now to spite pap . 
That law trial was a slow business -- appeared like they war n't ever going to get started on it ; so every now and then I 'd borrow two or three dollars off of the judge for him , to keep from getting a cowhiding . 
Every time he got money he got drunk ; and every time he got drunk he raised Cain around town ; and every time he raised Cain he got jailed . 
He was just suited -- this kind of thing was right in his line . 
He got to hanging around the widow 's too much and so she told him at last that if he did n't quit using around there she would make trouble for him . 
Well , WAS N'T he mad ? 
He said he would show who was Huck Finn 's boss . 
So he watched out for me one day in the spring , and catched me , and took me up the river about three mile in a skiff , and crossed over to the Illinois shore where it was woody and there war n't no houses but an old log hut in a place where the timber was so thick you could n't find it if you did n't know where it was . 
He kept me with him all the time , and I never got a chance to run off . 
