Want to keep it off ? '' 
And he said : `` Ef you 's got hairy arms en a hairy breas ' , it 's a sign dat you 's agwyne to be rich . 
Well , dey 's some use in a sign like dat , ` kase it 's so fur ahead . 
You see , maybe you 's got to be po ' a long time fust , en so you might git discourage ' en kill yo ` sef ' f you didn ' know by de sign dat you gwyne to be rich bymeby . '' 
`` Have you got hairy arms and a hairy breast , Jim ? '' 
`` What 's de use to ax dat question ? 
Do n't you see I has ? '' 
`` Well , are you rich ? '' 
`` No , but I ben rich wunst , and gwyne to be rich agin . 
Wunst I had foteen dollars , but I tuck to specalat 'n' , en got busted out . '' 
`` What did you speculate in , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , fust I tackled stock . '' 
`` What kind of stock ? '' 
`` Why , live stock -- cattle , you know . 
I put ten dollars in a cow . 
But I ain ' gwyne to resk no mo ' money in stock . 
De cow up 'n' died on my han 's . '' 
`` So you lost the ten dollars . '' 
`` No , I did n't lose it all . 
I on ' y los ' ` bout nine of it . 
I sole de hide en taller for a dollar en ten cents . '' 
`` You had five dollars and ten cents left . 
Did you speculate any more ? '' 
`` Yes . 
You know that one-laigged nigger dat b ` longs to old Misto Bradish ? 
Well , he sot up a bank , en say anybody dat put in a dollar would git fo ' dollars mo ' at de en ' er de year . 
Well , all de niggers went in , but dey did n't have much . 
I wuz de on ' y one dat had much . 
So I stuck out for mo ' dan fo ' dollars , en I said ' f I didn ' git it I 'd start a bank mysef . 
Well , o ' course dat nigger want ' to keep me out er de business , bekase he says dey war n't business ` nough for two banks , so he say I could put in my five dollars en he pay me thirty-five at de en ' er de year . 
`` So I done it . 
Den I reck 'n' d I 'd inves ' de thirty-five dollars right off en keep things a-movin ' . 
Dey wuz a nigger name ' Bob , dat had ketched a wood-flat , en his marster didn ' know it ; en I bought it off 'n him en told him to take de thirty-five dollars when de en ' er de year come ; but somebody stole de wood-flat dat night , en nex day de one-laigged nigger say de bank 's busted . 
So dey didn ' none uv us git no money . '' 
`` What did you do with the ten cents , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , I ` uz gwyne to spen ' it , but I had a dream , en de dream tole me to give it to a nigger name ' Balum -- Balum 's Ass dey call him for short ; he 's one er dem chuckleheads , you know . 
But he 's lucky , dey say , en I see I war n't lucky . 
De dream say let Balum inves ' de ten cents en he 'd make a raise for me . 
Well , Balum he tuck de money , en when he wuz in church he hear de preacher say dat whoever give to de po ' len ' to de Lord , en boun ' to git his money back a hund 'd times . 
So Balum he tuck en give de ten cents to de po ' , en laid low to see what wuz gwyne to come of it . '' 
`` Well , what did come of it , Jim ? '' 
`` Nuffn never come of it . 
I couldn ' manage to k ` leck dat money no way ; en Balum he couldn ' . 
I ain ' gwyne to len ' no mo ' money ` dout I see de security . 
Boun ' to git yo ' money back a hund 'd times , de preacher says ! 
Ef I could git de ten CENTS back , I 'd call it squah , en be glad er de chanst . '' 
`` Well , it 's all right anyway , Jim , long as you 're going to be rich again some time or other . '' 
`` Yes ; en I 's rich now , come to look at it . 
I owns mysef , en I 's wuth eight hund 'd dollars . 
I wisht I had de money , I wouldn ' want no mo ' . '' 
I WANTED to go and look at a place right about the middle of the island that I 'd found when I was exploring ; so we started and soon got to it , because the island was only three miles long and a quarter of a mile wide . 
This place was a tolerable long , steep hill or ridge about forty foot high . 
We had a rough time getting to the top , the sides was so steep and the bushes so thick . 
We tramped and clumb around all over it , and by and by found a good big cavern in the rock , most up to the top on the side towards Illinois . 
The cavern was as big as two or three rooms bunched together , and Jim could stand up straight in it . 
It was cool in there . 
Jim was for putting our traps in there right away , but I said we did n't want to be climbing up and down there all the time . 
Jim said if we had the canoe hid in a good place , and had all the traps in the cavern , we could rush there if anybody was to come to the island , and they would never find us without dogs . 
And , besides , he said them little birds had said it was going to rain , and did I want the things to get wet ? 
So we went back and got the canoe , and paddled up abreast the cavern , and lugged all the traps up there . 
Then we hunted up a place close by to hide the canoe in , amongst the thick willows . 
We took some fish off of the lines and set them again , and begun to get ready for dinner . 
The door of the cavern was big enough to roll a hogshead in , and on one side of the door the floor stuck out a little bit , and was flat and a good place to build a fire on . 
So we built it there and cooked dinner . 
We spread the blankets inside for a carpet , and eat our dinner in there . 
We put all the other things handy at the back of the cavern . 
Pretty soon it darkened up , and begun to thunder and lighten ; so the birds was right about it . 
Directly it begun to rain , and it rained like all fury , too , and I never see the wind blow so . 
It was one of these regular summer storms . 
It would get so dark that it looked all blue-black outside , and lovely ; and the rain would thrash along by so thick that the trees off a little ways looked dim and spider-webby ; and here would come a blast of wind that would bend the trees down and turn up the pale underside of the leaves ; and then a perfect ripper of a gust would follow along and set the branches to tossing their arms as if they was just wild ; and next , when it was just about the bluest and blackest -- FST ! 
it was as bright as glory , and you 'd have a little glimpse of tree-tops a-plunging about away off yonder in the storm , hundreds of yards further than you could see before ; dark as sin again in a second , and now you 'd hear the thunder let go with an awful crash , and then go rumbling , grumbling , tumbling , down the sky towards the under side of the world , like rolling empty barrels down stairs -- where it 's long stairs and they bounce a good deal , you know . 
`` Jim , this is nice , '' I says . 
`` I would n't want to be nowhere else but here . 
Pass me along another hunk of fish and some hot corn-bread . '' 
`` Well , you would n't a ben here ' f it had n't a ben for Jim . 
You 'd a ben down dah in de woods widout any dinner , en gittn ' mos ' drownded , too ; dat you would , honey . 
Chickens knows when it 's gwyne to rain , en so do de birds , chile . '' 
The river went on raising and raising for ten or twelve days , till at last it was over the banks . 
The water was three or four foot deep on the island in the low places and on the Illinois bottom . 
On that side it was a good many miles wide , but on the Missouri side it was the same old distance across -- a half a mile -- because the Missouri shore was just a wall of high bluffs . 
Daytimes we paddled all over the island in the canoe , It was mighty cool and shady in the deep woods , even if the sun was blazing outside . 
We went winding in and out amongst the trees , and sometimes the vines hung so thick we had to back away and go some other way . 
Well , on every old broken-down tree you could see rabbits and snakes and such things ; and when the island had been overflowed a day or two they got so tame , on account of being hungry , that you could paddle right up and put your hand on them if you wanted to ; but not the snakes and turtles -- they would slide off in the water . 
The ridge our cavern was in was full of them . 
We could a had pets enough if we 'd wanted them . 
One night we catched a little section of a lumber raft -- nice pine planks . 
It was twelve foot wide and about fifteen or sixteen foot long , and the top stood above water six or seven inches -- a solid , level floor . 
We could see saw-logs go by in the daylight sometimes , but we let them go ; we did n't show ourselves in daylight . 
Another night when we was up at the head of the island , just before daylight , here comes a frame-house down , on the west side . 
She was a two-story , and tilted over considerable . 
We paddled out and got aboard -- clumb in at an upstairs window . 
But it was too dark to see yet , so we made the canoe fast and set in her to wait for daylight . 
The light begun to come before we got to the foot of the island . 
Then we looked in at the window . 
We could make out a bed , and a table , and two old chairs , and lots of things around about on the floor , and there was clothes hanging against the wall . 
There was something laying on the floor in the far corner that looked like a man . 
So Jim says : `` Hello , you ! '' 
But it did n't budge . 
So I hollered again , and then Jim says : `` De man ai n't asleep -- he 's dead . 
You hold still -- I 'll go en see . '' 
