I was most powerful sick , and slunk to a chair and set down . 
They was setting around , some of them talking a little , in a low voice , and all of them fidgety and uneasy , but trying to look like they war n't ; but I knowed they was , because they was always taking off their hats , and putting them on , and scratching their heads , and changing their seats , and fumbling with their buttons . 
I war n't easy myself , but I did n't take my hat off , all the same . 
I did wish Aunt Sally would come , and get done with me , and lick me , if she wanted to , and let me get away and tell Tom how we 'd overdone this thing , and what a thundering hornet 's - nest we 'd got ourselves into , so we could stop fooling around straight off , and clear out with Jim before these rips got out of patience and come for us . 
At last she come and begun to ask me questions , but I COULD N'T answer them straight , I did n't know which end of me was up ; because these men was in such a fidget now that some was wanting to start right NOW and lay for them desperadoes , and saying it war n't but a few minutes to midnight ; and others was trying to get them to hold on and wait for the sheep - signal ; and here was Aunty pegging away at the questions , and me a - shaking all over and ready to sink down in my tracks I was that scared ; and the place getting hotter and hotter , and the butter beginning to melt and run down my neck and behind my ears ; and pretty soon , when one of them says , `` I 'M for going and getting in the cabin FIRST and right NOW , and catching them when they come , '' I most dropped ; and a streak of butter come a-trickling down my forehead , and Aunt Sally she see it , and turns white as a sheet , and says : `` For the land 's sake , what IS the matter with the child ? 
He 's got the brain-fever as shore as you 're born , and they 're oozing out ! '' 
And everybody runs to see , and she snatches off my hat , and out comes the bread and what was left of the butter , and she grabbed me , and hugged me , and says : `` Oh , what a turn you did give me ! 
and how glad and grateful I am it ai n't no worse ; for luck 's against us , and it never rains but it pours , and when I see that truck I thought we 'd lost you , for I knowed by the color and all it was just like your brains would be if -- Dear , dear , whyd ` nt you TELL me that was what you 'd been down there for , I would n't a cared . 
Now cler out to bed , and do n't lem me see no more of you till morning ! '' 
I was up stairs in a second , and down the lightning-rod in another one , and shinning through the dark for the lean-to . 
I could n't hardly get my words out , I was so anxious ; but I told Tom as quick as I could we must jump for it now , and not a minute to lose -- the house full of men , yonder , with guns ! 
His eyes just blazed ; and he says : `` No ! 
-- is that so ? 
AI N'T it bully ! 
Why , Huck , if it was to do over again , I bet I could fetch two hundred ! 
If we could put it off till -- '' `` Hurry ! 
HURRY ! '' 
I says . 
`` Where 's Jim ? '' 
`` Right at your elbow ; if you reach out your arm you can touch him . 
He 's dressed , and everything 's ready . 
Now we 'll slide out and give the sheep - signal . '' 
But then we heard the tramp of men coming to the door , and heard them begin to fumble with the pad-lock , and heard a man say : `` I TOLD you we 'd be too soon ; they have n't come -- the door is locked . 
Here , I 'll lock some of you into the cabin , and you lay for 'em in the dark and kill 'em when they come ; and the rest scatter around a piece , and listen if you can hear 'em coming . '' 
So in they come , but could n't see us in the dark , and most trod on us whilst we was hustling to get under the bed . 
But we got under all right , and out through the hole , swift but soft -- Jim first , me next , and Tom last , which was according to Tom 's orders . 
Now we was in the lean-to , and heard trampings close by outside . 
So we crept to the door , and Tom stopped us there and put his eye to the crack , but could n't make out nothing , it was so dark ; and whispered and said he would listen for the steps to get further , and when he nudged us Jim must glide out first , and him last . 
So he set his ear to the crack and listened , and listened , and listened , and the steps a-scraping around out there all the time ; and at last he nudged us , and we slid out , and stooped down , not breathing , and not making the least noise , and slipped stealthy towards the fence in Injun file , and got to it all right , and me and Jim over it ; but Tom 's britches catched fast on a splinter on the top rail , and then he hear the steps coming , so he had to pull loose , which snapped the splinter and made a noise ; and as he dropped in our tracks and started somebody sings out : `` Who 's that ? 
Answer , or I 'll shoot ! '' 
But we did n't answer ; we just unfurled our heels and shoved . 
Then there was a rush , and a BANG , BANG , BANG ! 
and the bullets fairly whizzed around us ! 
We heard them sing out : `` Here they are ! 
They 've broke for the river ! 
After 'em , boys , and turn loose the dogs ! '' 
So here they come , full tilt . 
We could hear them because they wore boots and yelled , but we did n't wear no boots and did n't yell . 
We was in the path to the mill ; and when they got pretty close on to us we dodged into the bush and let them go by , and then dropped in behind them . 
They 'd had all the dogs shut up , so they would n't scare off the robbers ; but by this time somebody had let them loose , and here they come , making powwow enough for a million ; but they was our dogs ; so we stopped in our tracks till they catched up ; and when they see it war n't nobody but us , and no excitement to offer them , they only just said howdy , and tore right ahead towards the shouting and clattering ; and then we up-steam again , and whizzed along after them till we was nearly to the mill , and then struck up through the bush to where my canoe was tied , and hopped in and pulled for dear life towards the middle of the river , but did n't make no more noise than we was obleeged to . 
Then we struck out , easy and comfortable , for the island where my raft was ; and we could hear them yelling and barking at each other all up and down the bank , till we was so far away the sounds got dim and died out . 
And when we stepped on to the raft I says : `` NOW , old Jim , you 're a free man again , and I bet you wo n't ever be a slave no more . '' 
`` En a mighty good job it wuz , too , Huck . 
It ` uz planned beautiful , en it ` uz done beautiful ; en dey ai n't NOBODY kin git up a plan dat 's mo ' mixed-up en splendid den what dat one wuz . '' 
We was all glad as we could be , but Tom was the gladdest of all because he had a bullet in the calf of his leg . 
When me and Jim heard that we did n't feel so brash as what we did before . 
It was hurting him considerable , and bleeding ; so we laid him in the wigwam and tore up one of the duke 's shirts for to bandage him , but he says : `` Gim me the rags ; I can do it myself . 
Do n't stop now ; do n't fool around here , and the evasion booming along so handsome ; man the sweeps , and set her loose ! 
Boys , we done it elegant ! 
-- ` deed we did . 
I wish WE 'D a had the handling of Louis XVI. , there would n't a been no ` Son of Saint Louis , ascend to heaven ! ' 
wrote down in HIS biography ; no , sir , we 'd a whooped him over the BORDER -- that 's what we 'd a done with HIM -- and done it just as slick as nothing at all , too . 
Man the sweeps -- man the sweeps ! '' 
But me and Jim was consulting -- and thinking . 
And after we 'd thought a minute , I says : `` Say it , Jim . '' 
So he says : `` Well , den , dis is de way it look to me , Huck . 
Ef it wuz HIM dat ` uz bein ' sot free , en one er de boys wuz to git shot , would he say , ` Go on en save me , nemmine ` bout a doctor f ' r to save dis one ? ' 
Is dat like Mars Tom Sawyer ? 
Would he say dat ? 
You BET he would n't ! 
WELL , den , is JIM gywne to say it ? 
No , sah -- I doan ' budge a step out 'n dis place ` dout a DOCTOR , not if it 's forty year ! '' 
I knowed he was white inside , and I reckoned he 'd say what he did say -- so it was all right now , and I told Tom I was a-going for a doctor . 
He raised considerable row about it , but me and Jim stuck to it and would n't budge ; so he was for crawling out and setting the raft loose himself ; but we would n't let him . 
Then he give us a piece of his mind , but it did n't do no good . 
So when he sees me getting the canoe ready , he says : `` Well , then , if you re bound to go , I 'll tell you the way to do when you get to the village . 
Shut the door and blindfold the doctor tight and fast , and make him swear to be silent as the grave , and put a purse full of gold in his hand , and then take and lead him all around the back alleys and everywheres in the dark , and then fetch him here in the canoe , in a roundabout way amongst the islands , and search him and take his chalk away from him , and do n't give it back to him till you get him back to the village , or else he will chalk this raft so he can find it again . 
It 's the way they all do . '' 
So I said I would , and left , and Jim was to hide in the woods when he see the doctor coming till he was gone again . 
THE doctor was an old man ; a very nice , kind-looking old man when I got him up . 
I told him me and my brother was over on Spanish Island hunting yesterday afternoon , and camped on a piece of a raft we found , and about midnight he must a kicked his gun in his dreams , for it went off and shot him in the leg , and we wanted him to go over there and fix it and not say nothing about it , nor let anybody know , because we wanted to come home this evening and surprise the folks . 
`` Who is your folks ? '' 
he says . 
`` The Phelpses , down yonder . '' 
`` Oh , '' he says . 
And after a minute , he says : `` How 'd you say he got shot ? '' 
`` He had a dream , '' I says , `` and it shot him . '' 
`` Singular dream , '' he says . 
So he lit up his lantern , and got his saddle-bags , and we started . 
But when he sees the canoe he did n't like the look of her -- said she was big enough for one , but did n't look pretty safe for two . 
I says : `` Oh , you need n't be afeard , sir , she carried the three of us easy enough . '' 
`` What three ? '' 
`` Why , me and Sid , and -- and -- and THE GUNS ; that 's what I mean . '' 
`` Oh , '' he says . 
But he put his foot on the gunnel and rocked her , and shook his head , and said he reckoned he 'd look around for a bigger one . 
But they was all locked and chained ; so he took my canoe , and said for me to wait till he come back , or I could hunt around further , or maybe I better go down home and get them ready for the surprise if I wanted to . 
But I said I did n't ; so I told him just how to find the raft , and then he started . 
I struck an idea pretty soon . 
I says to myself , spos 'n he ca n't fix that leg just in three shakes of a sheep 's tail , as the saying is ? 
spos 'n it takes him three or four days ? 
What are we going to do ? 
-- lay around there till he lets the cat out of the bag ? 
No , sir ; I know what I 'LL do . 
I 'll wait , and when he comes back if he says he 's got to go any more I 'll get down there , too , if I swim ; and we 'll take and tie him , and keep him , and shove out down the river ; and when Tom 's done with him we 'll give him what it 's worth , or all we got , and then let him get ashore . 
So then I crept into a lumber-pile to get some sleep ; and next time I waked up the sun was away up over my head ! 
I shot out and went for the doctor 's house , but they told me he 'd gone away in the night some time or other , and war n't back yet . 
Well , thinks I , that looks powerful bad for Tom , and I 'll dig out for the island right off . 
So away I shoved , and turned the corner , and nearly rammed my head into Uncle Silas 's stomach ! 
He says : `` Why , TOM ! 
Where you been all this time , you rascal ? '' 
