`` No ! 
That old fool sold him , and never divided with me , and the money 's gone . '' 
`` SOLD him ? '' 
I says , and begun to cry ; `` why , he was MY nigger , and that was my money . 
Where is he ? 
-- I want my nigger . '' 
`` Well , you ca n't GET your nigger , that 's all -- so dry up your blubbering . 
Looky here -- do you think YOU 'D venture to blow on us ? 
Blamed if I think I 'd trust you . 
Why , if you WAS to blow on us -- '' He stopped , but I never see the duke look so ugly out of his eyes before . 
I went on a-whimpering , and says : `` I do n't want to blow on nobody ; and I ai n't got no time to blow , nohow . 
I got to turn out and find my nigger . '' 
He looked kinder bothered , and stood there with his bills fluttering on his arm , thinking , and wrinkling up his forehead . 
At last he says : `` I 'll tell you something . 
We got to be here three days . 
If you 'll promise you wo n't blow , and wo n't let the nigger blow , I 'll tell you where to find him . '' 
So I promised , and he says : `` A farmer by the name of Silas Ph -- '' and then he stopped . 
You see , he started to tell me the truth ; but when he stopped that way , and begun to study and think again , I reckoned he was changing his mind . 
And so he was . 
He would n't trust me ; he wanted to make sure of having me out of the way the whole three days . 
So pretty soon he says : `` The man that bought him is named Abram Foster -- Abram G. Foster -- and he lives forty mile back here in the country , on the road to Lafayette . '' 
`` All right , '' I says , `` I can walk it in three days . 
And I 'll start this very afternoon . '' 
`` No you wont , you 'll start NOW ; and do n't you lose any time about it , neither , nor do any gabbling by the way . 
Just keep a tight tongue in your head and move right along , and then you wo n't get into trouble with US , d'ye hear ? '' 
That was the order I wanted , and that was the one I played for . 
I wanted to be left free to work my plans . 
`` So clear out , '' he says ; `` and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want to . 
Maybe you can get him to believe that Jim IS your nigger -- some idiots do n't require documents -- leastways I 've heard there 's such down South here . 
And when you tell him the handbill and the reward 's bogus , maybe he 'll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for getting 'em out . 
Go ` long now , and tell him anything you want to ; but mind you do n't work your jaw any BETWEEN here and there . '' 
So I left , and struck for the back country . 
I did n't look around , but I kinder felt like he was watching me . 
But I knowed I could tire him out at that . 
I went straight out in the country as much as a mile before I stopped ; then I doubled back through the woods towards Phelps ' . 
I reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling around , because I wanted to stop Jim 's mouth till these fellows could get away . 
I did n't want no trouble with their kind . 
I 'd seen all I wanted to of them , and wanted to get entirely shut of them . 
WHEN I got there it was all still and Sunday-like , and hot and sunshiny ; the hands was gone to the fields ; and there was them kind of faint dronings of bugs and flies in the air that makes it seem so lonesome and like everybody 's dead and gone ; and if a breeze fans along and quivers the leaves it makes you feel mournful , because you feel like it 's spirits whispering -- spirits that 's been dead ever so many years -- and you always think they 're talking about YOU . 
As a general thing it makes a body wish HE was dead , too , and done with it all . 
Phelps ' was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations , and they all look alike . 
A rail fence round a two-acre yard ; a stile made out of logs sawed off and up-ended in steps , like barrels of a different length , to climb over the fence with , and for the women to stand on when they are going to jump on to a horse ; some sickly grass-patches in the big yard , but mostly it was bare and smooth , like an old hat with the nap rubbed off ; big double log-house for the white folks -- hewed logs , with the chinks stopped up with mud or mortar , and these mud-stripes been whitewashed some time or another ; round-log kitchen , with a big broad , open but roofed passage joining it to the house ; log smoke-house back of the kitchen ; three little log nigger-cabins in a row t ` other side the smoke-house ; one little hut all by itself away down against the back fence , and some outbuildings down a piece the other side ; ash-hopper and big kettle to bile soap in by the little hut ; bench by the kitchen door , with bucket of water and a gourd ; hound asleep there in the sun ; more hounds asleep round about ; about three shade trees away off in a corner ; some currant bushes and gooseberry bushes in one place by the fence ; outside of the fence a garden and a watermelon patch ; then the cotton fields begins , and after the fields the woods . 
I went around and clumb over the back stile by the ash-hopper , and started for the kitchen . 
When I got a little ways I heard the dim hum of a spinning-wheel wailing along up and sinking along down again ; and then I knowed for certain I wished I was dead -- for that IS the lonesomest sound in the whole world . 
I went right along , not fixing up any particular plan , but just trusting to Providence to put the right words in my mouth when the time come ; for I 'd noticed that Providence always did put the right words in my mouth if I left it alone . 
When I got half-way , first one hound and then another got up and went for me , and of course I stopped and faced them , and kept still . 
And such another powwow as they made ! 
In a quarter of a minute I was a kind of a hub of a wheel , as you may say -- spokes made out of dogs -- circle of fifteen of them packed together around me , with their necks and noses stretched up towards me , a-barking and howling ; and more a-coming ; you could see them sailing over fences and around corners from everywheres . 
A nigger woman come tearing out of the kitchen with a rolling-pin in her hand , singing out , `` Begone YOU Tige ! 
you Spot ! 
begone sah ! '' 
and she fetched first one and then another of them a clip and sent them howling , and then the rest followed ; and the next second half of them come back , wagging their tails around me , and making friends with me . 
There ai n't no harm in a hound , nohow . 
And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger boys without anything on but tow-linen shirts , and they hung on to their mother 's gown , and peeped out from behind her at me , bashful , the way they always do . 
And here comes the white woman running from the house , about forty-five or fifty year old , bareheaded , and her spinning-stick in her hand ; and behind her comes her little white children , acting the same way the little niggers was going . 
She was smiling all over so she could hardly stand -- and says : `` It 's YOU , at last ! 
-- AI N'T it ? '' 
I out with a `` Yes 'm '' before I thought . 
She grabbed me and hugged me tight ; and then gripped me by both hands and shook and shook ; and the tears come in her eyes , and run down over ; and she could n't seem to hug and shake enough , and kept saying , `` You do n't look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would ; but law sakes , I do n't care for that , I 'm so glad to see you ! 
Dear , dear , it does seem like I could eat you up ! 
Children , it 's your cousin Tom ! 
-- tell him howdy . '' 
But they ducked their heads , and put their fingers in their mouths , and hid behind her . 
So she run on : `` Lize , hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away -- or did you get your breakfast on the boat ? '' 
I said I had got it on the boat . 
So then she started for the house , leading me by the hand , and the children tagging after . 
When we got there she set me down in a split-bottomed chair , and set herself down on a little low stool in front of me , holding both of my hands , and says : `` Now I can have a GOOD look at you ; and , laws-a-me , I 've been hungry for it a many and a many a time , all these long years , and it 's come at last ! 
We been expecting you a couple of days and more . 
What kep ' you ? 
-- boat get aground ? '' 
`` Yes 'm -- she -- '' `` Do n't say yes 'm -- say Aunt Sally . 
Where 'd she get aground ? '' 
I did n't rightly know what to say , because I did n't know whether the boat would be coming up the river or down . 
But I go a good deal on instinct ; and my instinct said she would be coming up -- from down towards Orleans . 
That did n't help me much , though ; for I did n't know the names of bars down that way . 
I see I 'd got to invent a bar , or forget the name of the one we got aground on -- or -- Now I struck an idea , and fetched it out : `` It war n't the grounding -- that did n't keep us back but a little . 
We blowed out a cylinder-head . '' 
`` Good gracious ! 
anybody hurt ? '' 
`` No 'm . 
Killed a nigger . '' 
`` Well , it 's lucky ; because sometimes people do get hurt . 
Two years ago last Christmas your uncle Silas was coming up from Newrleans on the old Lally Rook , and she blowed out a cylinder-head and crippled a man . 
And I think he died afterwards . 
He was a Baptist . 
Your uncle Silas knowed a family in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well . 
Yes , I remember now , he DID die . 
Mortification set in , and they had to amputate him . 
But it did n't save him . 
Yes , it was mortification -- that was it . 
He turned blue all over , and died in the hope of a glorious resurrection . 
They say he was a sight to look at . 
Your uncle 's been up to the town every day to fetch you . 
And he 's gone again , not more 'n an hour ago ; he 'll be back any minute now . 
You must a met him on the road , did n't you ? 
-- oldish man , with a -- '' `` No , I did n't see nobody , Aunt Sally . 
The boat landed just at daylight , and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town and out a piece in the country , to put in the time and not get here too soon ; and so I come down the back way . '' 
`` Who 'd you give the baggage to ? '' 
`` Nobody . '' 
`` Why , child , it 'll be stole ! '' 
