We was very well satisfied with this business , and Tom allowed it was worth twice the trouble it took , because he said NOW she could n't ever count them spoons twice alike again to save her life ; and would n't believe she 'd counted them right if she DID ; and said that after she 'd about counted her head off for the next three days he judged she 'd give it up and offer to kill anybody that wanted her to ever count them any more . 
So we put the sheet back on the line that night , and stole one out of her closet ; and kept on putting it back and stealing it again for a couple of days till she did n't know how many sheets she had any more , and she did n't CARE , and war n't a-going to bullyrag the rest of her soul out about it , and would n't count them again not to save her life ; she druther die first . 
So we was all right now , as to the shirt and the sheet and the spoon and the candles , by the help of the calf and the rats and the mixed-up counting ; and as to the candlestick , it war n't no consequence , it would blow over by and by . 
But that pie was a job ; we had no end of trouble with that pie . 
We fixed it up away down in the woods , and cooked it there ; and we got it done at last , and very satisfactory , too ; but not all in one day ; and we had to use up three wash-pans full of flour before we got through , and we got burnt pretty much all over , in places , and eyes put out with the smoke ; because , you see , we did n't want nothing but a crust , and we could n't prop it up right , and she would always cave in . 
But of course we thought of the right way at last -- which was to cook the ladder , too , in the pie . 
So then we laid in with Jim the second night , and tore up the sheet all in little strings and twisted them together , and long before daylight we had a lovely rope that you could a hung a person with . 
We let on it took nine months to make it . 
And in the forenoon we took it down to the woods , but it would n't go into the pie . 
Being made of a whole sheet , that way , there was rope enough for forty pies if we 'd a wanted them , and plenty left over for soup , or sausage , or anything you choose . 
We could a had a whole dinner . 
But we did n't need it . 
All we needed was just enough for the pie , and so we throwed the rest away . 
We did n't cook none of the pies in the wash - pan -- afraid the solder would melt ; but Uncle Silas he had a noble brass warming-pan which he thought considerable of , because it belonged to one of his ancesters with a long wooden handle that come over from England with William the Conqueror in the Mayflower or one of them early ships and was hid away up garret with a lot of other old pots and things that was valuable , not on account of being any account , because they war n't , but on account of them being relicts , you know , and we snaked her out , private , and took her down there , but she failed on the first pies , because we did n't know how , but she come up smiling on the last one . 
We took and lined her with dough , and set her in the coals , and loaded her up with rag rope , and put on a dough roof , and shut down the lid , and put hot embers on top , and stood off five foot , with the long handle , cool and comfortable , and in fifteen minutes she turned out a pie that was a satisfaction to look at . 
But the person that et it would want to fetch a couple of kags of toothpicks along , for if that rope ladder would n't cramp him down to business I do n't know nothing what I 'm talking about , and lay him in enough stomach-ache to last him till next time , too . 
Nat did n't look when we put the witch pie in Jim 's pan ; and we put the three tin plates in the bottom of the pan under the vittles ; and so Jim got everything all right , and as soon as he was by himself he busted into the pie and hid the rope ladder inside of his straw tick , and scratched some marks on a tin plate and throwed it out of the window-hole . 
MAKING them pens was a distressid tough job , and so was the saw ; and Jim allowed the inscription was going to be the toughest of all . 
That 's the one which the prisoner has to scrabble on the wall . 
But he had to have it ; Tom said he 'd GOT to ; there war n't no case of a state prisoner not scrabbling his inscription to leave behind , and his coat of arms . 
`` Look at Lady Jane Grey , '' he says ; `` look at Gilford Dudley ; look at old Northumberland ! 
Why , Huck , s ` pose it IS considerble trouble ? 
-- what you going to do ? 
-- how you going to get around it ? 
Jim 's GOT to do his inscription and coat of arms . 
They all do . '' 
Jim says : `` Why , Mars Tom , I hai n't got no coat o ' arm ; I hai n't got nuffn but dish yer ole shirt , en you knows I got to keep de journal on dat . '' 
`` Oh , you do n't understand , Jim ; a coat of arms is very different . '' 
`` Well , '' I says , `` Jim 's right , anyway , when he says he ai n't got no coat of arms , because he hai n't . '' 
`` I reckon I knowed that , '' Tom says , `` but you bet he 'll have one before he goes out of this -- because he 's going out RIGHT , and there ai n't going to be no flaws in his record . '' 
So whilst me and Jim filed away at the pens on a brickbat apiece , Jim a - making his 'n out of the brass and I making mine out of the spoon , Tom set to work to think out the coat of arms . 
By and by he said he 'd struck so many good ones he did n't hardly know which to take , but there was one which he reckoned he 'd decide on . 
He says : `` On the scutcheon we 'll have a bend OR in the dexter base , a saltire MURREY in the fess , with a dog , couchant , for common charge , and under his foot a chain embattled , for slavery , with a chevron VERT in a chief engrailed , and three invected lines on a field AZURE , with the nombril points rampant on a dancette indented ; crest , a runaway nigger , SABLE , with his bundle over his shoulder on a bar sinister ; and a couple of gules for supporters , which is you and me ; motto , MAGGIORE FRETTA , MINORE OTTO . 
Got it out of a book -- means the more haste the less speed . '' 
`` Geewhillikins , '' I says , `` but what does the rest of it mean ? '' 
`` We ai n't got no time to bother over that , '' he says ; `` we got to dig in like all git-out . '' 
`` Well , anyway , '' I says , `` what 's SOME of it ? 
What 's a fess ? '' 
`` A fess -- a fess is -- YOU do n't need to know what a fess is . 
I 'll show him how to make it when he gets to it . '' 
`` Shucks , Tom , '' I says , `` I think you might tell a person . 
What 's a bar sinister ? '' 
`` Oh , I do n't know . 
But he 's got to have it . 
All the nobility does . '' 
That was just his way . 
If it did n't suit him to explain a thing to you , he would n't do it . 
You might pump at him a week , it would n't make no difference . 
He 'd got all that coat of arms business fixed , so now he started in to finish up the rest of that part of the work , which was to plan out a mournful inscription -- said Jim got to have one , like they all done . 
He made up a lot , and wrote them out on a paper , and read them off , so : 1 . 
Here a captive heart busted . 
2 . 
Here a poor prisoner , forsook by the world and friends , fretted his sorrowful life . 
3 . 
Here a lonely heart broke , and a worn spirit went to its rest , after thirty-seven years of solitary captivity . 
4 . 
Here , homeless and friendless , after thirty-seven years of bitter captivity , perished a noble stranger , natural son of Louis XIV . 
Tom 's voice trembled whilst he was reading them , and he most broke down . 
When he got done he could n't no way make up his mind which one for Jim to scrabble on to the wall , they was all so good ; but at last he allowed he would let him scrabble them all on . 
Jim said it would take him a year to scrabble such a lot of truck on to the logs with a nail , and he did n't know how to make letters , besides ; but Tom said he would block them out for him , and then he would n't have nothing to do but just follow the lines . 
Then pretty soon he says : `` Come to think , the logs ai n't a-going to do ; they do n't have log walls in a dungeon : we got to dig the inscriptions into a rock . 
We 'll fetch a rock . '' 
Jim said the rock was worse than the logs ; he said it would take him such a pison long time to dig them into a rock he would n't ever get out . 
But Tom said he would let me help him do it . 
Then he took a look to see how me and Jim was getting along with the pens . 
It was most pesky tedious hard work and slow , and did n't give my hands no show to get well of the sores , and we did n't seem to make no headway , hardly ; so Tom says : `` I know how to fix it . 
We got to have a rock for the coat of arms and mournful inscriptions , and we can kill two birds with that same rock . 
There 's a gaudy big grindstone down at the mill , and we 'll smouch it , and carve the things on it , and file out the pens and the saw on it , too . '' 
It war n't no slouch of an idea ; and it war n't no slouch of a grindstone nuther ; but we allowed we 'd tackle it . 
It war n't quite midnight yet , so we cleared out for the mill , leaving Jim at work . 
We smouched the grindstone , and set out to roll her home , but it was a most nation tough job . 
Sometimes , do what we could , we could n't keep her from falling over , and she come mighty near mashing us every time . 
Tom said she was going to get one of us , sure , before we got through . 
We got her half way ; and then we was plumb played out , and most drownded with sweat . 
We see it war n't no use ; we got to go and fetch Jim So he raised up his bed and slid the chain off of the bed-leg , and wrapt it round and round his neck , and we crawled out through our hole and down there , and Jim and me laid into that grindstone and walked her along like nothing ; and Tom superintended . 
He could out-superintend any boy I ever see . 
He knowed how to do everything . 
Our hole was pretty big , but it war n't big enough to get the grindstone through ; but Jim he took the pick and soon made it big enough . 
Then Tom marked out them things on it with the nail , and set Jim to work on them , with the nail for a chisel and an iron bolt from the rubbage in the lean - to for a hammer , and told him to work till the rest of his candle quit on him , and then he could go to bed , and hide the grindstone under his straw tick and sleep on it . 
Then we helped him fix his chain back on the bed - leg , and was ready for bed ourselves . 
But Tom thought of something , and says : `` You got any spiders in here , Jim ? '' 
`` No , sah , thanks to goodness I hai n't , Mars Tom . '' 
`` All right , we 'll get you some . '' 
`` But bless you , honey , I doan ' WANT none . 
I 's afeard un um . 
I jis ' 's soon have rattlesnakes aroun ' . '' 
Tom thought a minute or two , and says : `` It 's a good idea . 
And I reckon it 's been done . 
It MUST a been done ; it stands to reason . 
Yes , it 's a prime good idea . 
Where could you keep it ? '' 
`` Keep what , Mars Tom ? '' 
`` Why , a rattlesnake . '' 
`` De goodness gracious alive , Mars Tom ! 
Why , if dey was a rattlesnake to come in heah I 'd take en bust right out thoo dat log wall , I would , wid my head . '' 
Why , Jim , you would n't be afraid of it after a little . 
You could tame it . '' 
`` TAME it ! '' 
`` Yes -- easy enough . 
Every animal is grateful for kindness and petting , and they would n't THINK of hurting a person that pets them . 
