That muleheaded old fool would n't give in THEN ! 
Indeed he would n't . 
Said it war n't no fair test . 
Said his brother William was the cussedest joker in the world , and had n't tried to write -- HE see William was going to play one of his jokes the minute he put the pen to paper . 
And so he warmed up and went warbling right along till he was actuly beginning to believe what he was saying HIMSELF ; but pretty soon the new gentleman broke in , and says : `` I 've thought of something . 
Is there anybody here that helped to lay out my br -- helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks for burying ? '' 
`` Yes , '' says somebody , `` me and Ab Turner done it . 
We 're both here . '' 
Then the old man turns towards the king , and says : `` Peraps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast ? '' 
Blamed if the king did n't have to brace up mighty quick , or he 'd a squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut under , it took him so sudden ; and , mind you , it was a thing that was calculated to make most ANYBODY sqush to get fetched such a solid one as that without any notice , because how was HE going to know what was tattooed on the man ? 
He whitened a little ; he could n't help it ; and it was mighty still in there , and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him . 
Says I to myself , NOW he 'll throw up the sponge -- there ai n't no more use . 
Well , did he ? 
A body ca n't hardly believe it , but he did n't . 
I reckon he thought he 'd keep the thing up till he tired them people out , so they 'd thin out , and him and the duke could break loose and get away . 
Anyway , he set there , and pretty soon he begun to smile , and says : `` Mf ! 
It 's a VERY tough question , AI N'T it ! 
YES , sir , I k 'n tell you what 's tattooed on his breast . 
It 's jest a small , thin , blue arrow -- that 's what it is ; and if you do n't look clost , you ca n't see it . 
NOW what do you say -- hey ? '' 
Well , I never see anything like that old blister for clean out-and-out cheek . 
The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and his pard , and his eye lights up like he judged he 'd got the king THIS time , and says : `` There -- you 've heard what he said ! 
Was there any such mark on Peter Wilks ' breast ? '' 
Both of them spoke up and says : `` We did n't see no such mark . '' 
`` Good ! '' 
says the old gentleman . 
`` Now , what you DID see on his breast was a small dim P , and a B -LRB- which is an initial he dropped when he was young -RRB- , and a W , with dashes between them , so : P -- B -- W '' -- and he marked them that way on a piece of paper . 
`` Come , ai n't that what you saw ? '' 
Both of them spoke up again , and says : `` No , we DID N'T . 
We never seen any marks at all . '' 
Well , everybody WAS in a state of mind now , and they sings out : `` The whole BILIN ' of 'm 's frauds ! 
Le 's duck 'em ! 
le 's drown 'em ! 
le 's ride 'em on a rail ! '' 
and everybody was whooping at once , and there was a rattling powwow . 
But the lawyer he jumps on the table and yells , and says : `` Gentlemen -- gentleMEN ! 
Hear me just a word -- just a SINGLE word -- if you PLEASE ! 
There 's one way yet -- let 's go and dig up the corpse and look . '' 
That took them . 
`` Hooray ! '' 
they all shouted , and was starting right off ; but the lawyer and the doctor sung out : `` Hold on , hold on ! 
Collar all these four men and the boy , and fetch THEM along , too ! '' 
`` We 'll do it ! '' 
they all shouted ; `` and if we do n't find them marks we 'll lynch the whole gang ! '' 
I WAS scared , now , I tell you . 
But there war n't no getting away , you know . 
They gripped us all , and marched us right along , straight for the graveyard , which was a mile and a half down the river , and the whole town at our heels , for we made noise enough , and it was only nine in the evening . 
As we went by our house I wished I had n't sent Mary Jane out of town ; because now if I could tip her the wink she 'd light out and save me , and blow on our dead-beats . 
Well , we swarmed along down the river road , just carrying on like wildcats ; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up , and the lightning beginning to wink and flitter , and the wind to shiver amongst the leaves . 
This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever was in ; and I was kinder stunned ; everything was going so different from what I had allowed for ; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time if I wanted to , and see all the fun , and have Mary Jane at my back to save me and set me free when the close-fit come , here was nothing in the world betwixt me and sudden death but just them tattoo-marks . 
If they did n't find them -- I could n't bear to think about it ; and yet , somehow , I could n't think about nothing else . 
It got darker and darker , and it was a beautiful time to give the crowd the slip ; but that big husky had me by the wrist -- Hines -- and a body might as well try to give Goliar the slip . 
He dragged me right along , he was so excited , and I had to run to keep up . 
When they got there they swarmed into the graveyard and washed over it like an overflow . 
And when they got to the grave they found they had about a hundred times as many shovels as they wanted , but nobody had n't thought to fetch a lantern . 
But they sailed into digging anyway by the flicker of the lightning , and sent a man to the nearest house , a half a mile off , to borrow one . 
So they dug and dug like everything ; and it got awful dark , and the rain started , and the wind swished and swushed along , and the lightning come brisker and brisker , and the thunder boomed ; but them people never took no notice of it , they was so full of this business ; and one minute you could see everything and every face in that big crowd , and the shovelfuls of dirt sailing up out of the grave , and the next second the dark wiped it all out , and you could n't see nothing at all . 
At last they got out the coffin and begun to unscrew the lid , and then such another crowding and shouldering and shoving as there was , to scrouge in and get a sight , you never see ; and in the dark , that way , it was awful . 
Hines he hurt my wrist dreadful pulling and tugging so , and I reckon he clean forgot I was in the world , he was so excited and panting . 
All of a sudden the lightning let go a perfect sluice of white glare , and somebody sings out : `` By the living jingo , here 's the bag of gold on his breast ! '' 
Hines let out a whoop , like everybody else , and dropped my wrist and give a big surge to bust his way in and get a look , and the way I lit out and shinned for the road in the dark there ai n't nobody can tell . 
I had the road all to myself , and I fairly flew -- leastways , I had it all to myself except the solid dark , and the now-and-then glares , and the buzzing of the rain , and the thrashing of the wind , and the splitting of the thunder ; and sure as you are born I did clip it along ! 
When I struck the town I see there war n't nobody out in the storm , so I never hunted for no back streets , but humped it straight through the main one ; and when I begun to get towards our house I aimed my eye and set it . 
No light there ; the house all dark -- which made me feel sorry and disappointed , I did n't know why . 
But at last , just as I was sailing by , FLASH comes the light in Mary Jane 's window ! 
and my heart swelled up sudden , like to bust ; and the same second the house and all was behind me in the dark , and was n't ever going to be before me no more in this world . 
She WAS the best girl I ever see , and had the most sand . 
The minute I was far enough above the town to see I could make the towhead , I begun to look sharp for a boat to borrow , and the first time the lightning showed me one that was n't chained I snatched it and shoved . 
It was a canoe , and war n't fastened with nothing but a rope . 
The towhead was a rattling big distance off , away out there in the middle of the river , but I did n't lose no time ; and when I struck the raft at last I was so fagged I would a just laid down to blow and gasp if I could afforded it . 
But I did n't . 
As I sprung aboard I sung out : `` Out with you , Jim , and set her loose ! 
Glory be to goodness , we 're shut of them ! '' 
Jim lit out , and was a-coming for me with both arms spread , he was so full of joy ; but when I glimpsed him in the lightning my heart shot up in my mouth and I went overboard backwards ; for I forgot he was old King Lear and a drownded A-rab all in one , and it most scared the livers and lights out of me . 
But Jim fished me out , and was going to hug me and bless me , and so on , he was so glad I was back and we was shut of the king and the duke , but I says : `` Not now ; have it for breakfast , have it for breakfast ! 
Cut loose and let her slide ! '' 
So in two seconds away we went a-sliding down the river , and it DID seem so good to be free again and all by ourselves on the big river , and nobody to bother us . 
I had to skip around a bit , and jump up and crack my heels a few times -- I could n't help it ; but about the third crack I noticed a sound that I knowed mighty well , and held my breath and listened and waited ; and sure enough , when the next flash busted out over the water , here they come ! 
-- and just a-laying to their oars and making their skiff hum ! 
It was the king and the duke . 
So I wilted right down on to the planks then , and give up ; and it was all I could do to keep from crying . 
WHEN they got aboard the king went for me , and shook me by the collar , and says : `` Tryin ' to give us the slip , was ye , you pup ! 
Tired of our company , hey ? '' 
I says : `` No , your majesty , we war n't -- PLEASE do n't , your majesty ! '' 
`` Quick , then , and tell us what WAS your idea , or I 'll shake the insides out o ' you ! '' 
`` Honest , I 'll tell you everything just as it happened , your majesty . 
The man that had a-holt of me was very good to me , and kept saying he had a boy about as big as me that died last year , and he was sorry to see a boy in such a dangerous fix ; and when they was all took by surprise by finding the gold , and made a rush for the coffin , he lets go of me and whispers , ` Heel it now , or they 'll hang ye , sure ! ' 
and I lit out . 
It did n't seem no good for ME to stay -- I could n't do nothing , and I did n't want to be hung if I could get away . 
So I never stopped running till I found the canoe ; and when I got here I told Jim to hurry , or they 'd catch me and hang me yet , and said I was afeard you and the duke was n't alive now , and I was awful sorry , and so was Jim , and was awful glad when we see you coming ; you may ask Jim if I did n't . '' 
Jim said it was so ; and the king told him to shut up , and said , `` Oh , yes , it 's MIGHTY likely ! '' 
and shook me up again , and said he reckoned he 'd drownd me . 
But the duke says : `` Leggo the boy , you old idiot ! 
Would YOU a done any different ? 
Did you inquire around for HIM when you got loose ? 
I do n't remember it . '' 
So the king let go of me , and begun to cuss that town and everybody in it . 
But the duke says : `` You better a blame ' sight give YOURSELF a good cussing , for you 're the one that 's entitled to it most . 
You hai n't done a thing from the start that had any sense in it , except coming out so cool and cheeky with that imaginary blue-arrow mark . 
That WAS bright -- it was right down bully ; and it was the thing that saved us . 
