I said I did n't know ; I had n't heard about it before , no way . 
`` Well , guess , '' he says . 
`` How 'm I going to guess , '' says I , `` when I never heard tell of it before ? '' 
`` But you can guess , ca n't you ? 
It 's just as easy . '' 
`` WHICH candle ? '' 
I says . 
`` Why , any candle , '' he says . 
`` I do n't know where he was , '' says I ; `` where was he ? '' 
`` Why , he was in the DARK ! 
That 's where he was ! '' 
`` Well , if you knowed where he was , what did you ask me for ? '' 
`` Why , blame it , it 's a riddle , do n't you see ? 
Say , how long are you going to stay here ? 
You got to stay always . 
We can just have booming times -- they do n't have no school now . 
Do you own a dog ? 
I 've got a dog -- and he 'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in . 
Do you like to comb up Sundays , and all that kind of foolishness ? 
You bet I do n't , but ma she makes me . 
Confound these ole britches ! 
I reckon I 'd better put 'em on , but I 'd ruther not , it 's so warm . 
Are you all ready ? 
All right . 
Come along , old hoss . '' 
Cold corn-pone , cold corn-beef , butter and buttermilk -- that is what they had for me down there , and there ai n't nothing better that ever I 've come across yet . 
Buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes , except the nigger woman , which was gone , and the two young women . 
They all smoked and talked , and I eat and talked . 
The young women had quilts around them , and their hair down their backs . 
They all asked me questions , and I told them how pap and me and all the family was living on a little farm down at the bottom of Arkansaw , and my sister Mary Ann run off and got married and never was heard of no more , and Bill went to hunt them and he war n't heard of no more , and Tom and Mort died , and then there war n't nobody but just me and pap left , and he was just trimmed down to nothing , on account of his troubles ; so when he died I took what there was left , because the farm did n't belong to us , and started up the river , deck passage , and fell overboard ; and that was how I come to be here . 
So they said I could have a home there as long as I wanted it . 
Then it was most daylight and everybody went to bed , and I went to bed with Buck , and when I waked up in the morning , drat it all , I had forgot what my name was . 
So I laid there about an hour trying to think , and when Buck waked up I says : `` Can you spell , Buck ? '' 
`` Yes , '' he says . 
`` I bet you ca n't spell my name , '' says I. `` I bet you what you dare I can , '' says he . 
`` All right , '' says I , `` go ahead . '' 
`` G-e-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n -- there now , '' he says . 
`` Well , '' says I , `` you done it , but I did n't think you could . 
It ai n't no slouch of a name to spell -- right off without studying . '' 
I set it down , private , because somebody might want ME to spell it next , and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like I was used to it . 
It was a mighty nice family , and a mighty nice house , too . 
I had n't seen no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so much style . 
It did n't have an iron latch on the front door , nor a wooden one with a buckskin string , but a brass knob to turn , the same as houses in town . 
There war n't no bed in the parlor , nor a sign of a bed ; but heaps of parlors in towns has beds in them . 
There was a big fireplace that was bricked on the bottom , and the bricks was kept clean and red by pouring water on them and scrubbing them with another brick ; sometimes they wash them over with red water-paint that they call Spanish-brown , same as they do in town . 
They had big brass dog-irons that could hold up a saw-log . 
There was a clock on the middle of the mantelpiece , with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the glass front , and a round place in the middle of it for the sun , and you could see the pendulum swinging behind it . 
It was beautiful to hear that clock tick ; and sometimes when one of these peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in good shape , she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty before she got tuckered out . 
They would n't took any money for her . 
Well , there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock , made out of something like chalk , and painted up gaudy . 
By one of the parrots was a cat made of crockery , and a crockery dog by the other ; and when you pressed down on them they squeaked , but did n't open their mouths nor look different nor interested . 
They squeaked through underneath . 
There was a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those things . 
On the table in the middle of the room was a kind of a lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and grapes piled up in it , which was much redder and yellower and prettier than real ones is , but they war n't real because you could see where pieces had got chipped off and showed the white chalk , or whatever it was , underneath . 
This table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth , with a red and blue spread-eagle painted on it , and a painted border all around . 
It come all the way from Philadelphia , they said . 
There was some books , too , piled up perfectly exact , on each corner of the table . 
One was a big family Bible full of pictures . 
One was Pilgrim 's Progress , about a man that left his family , it did n't say why . 
I read considerable in it now and then . 
The statements was interesting , but tough . 
Another was Friendship 's Offering , full of beautiful stuff and poetry ; but I did n't read the poetry . 
Another was Henry Clay 's Speeches , and another was Dr. Gunn 's Family Medicine , which told you all about what to do if a body was sick or dead . 
There was a hymn book , and a lot of other books . 
And there was nice split-bottom chairs , and perfectly sound , too -- not bagged down in the middle and busted , like an old basket . 
They had pictures hung on the walls -- mainly Washingtons and Lafayettes , and battles , and Highland Marys , and one called `` Signing the Declaration . '' 
There was some that they called crayons , which one of the daughters which was dead made her own self when she was only fifteen years old . 
They was different from any pictures I ever see before -- blacker , mostly , than is common . 
One was a woman in a slim black dress , belted small under the armpits , with bulges like a cabbage in the middle of the sleeves , and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with a black veil , and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape , and very wee black slippers , like a chisel , and she was leaning pensive on a tombstone on her right elbow , under a weeping willow , and her other hand hanging down her side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule , and underneath the picture it said `` Shall I Never See Thee More Alas . '' 
Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed up straight to the top of her head , and knotted there in front of a comb like a chair-back , and she was crying into a handkerchief and had a dead bird laying on its back in her other hand with its heels up , and underneath the picture it said `` I Shall Never Hear Thy Sweet Chirrup More Alas . '' 
There was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at the moon , and tears running down her cheeks ; and she had an open letter in one hand with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it , and she was mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth , and underneath the picture it said `` And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas . '' 
These was all nice pictures , I reckon , but I did n't somehow seem to take to them , because if ever I was down a little they always give me the fan-tods . 
Everybody was sorry she died , because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do , and a body could see by what she had done what they had lost . 
But I reckoned that with her disposition she was having a better time in the graveyard . 
She was at work on what they said was her greatest picture when she took sick , and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it done , but she never got the chance . 
It was a picture of a young woman in a long white gown , standing on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump off , with her hair all down her back , and looking up to the moon , with the tears running down her face , and she had two arms folded across her breast , and two arms stretched out in front , and two more reaching up towards the moon -- and the idea was to see which pair would look best , and then scratch out all the other arms ; but , as I was saying , she died before she got her mind made up , and now they kept this picture over the head of the bed in her room , and every time her birthday come they hung flowers on it . 
Other times it was hid with a little curtain . 
The young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice sweet face , but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery , seemed to me . 
This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive , and used to paste obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of the Presbyterian Observer , and write poetry after them out of her own head . 
It was very good poetry . 
This is what she wrote about a boy by the name of Stephen Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was drownded : ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS , DEC 'D And did young Stephen sicken , And did young Stephen die ? 
And did the sad hearts thicken , And did the mourners cry ? 
No ; such was not the fate of Young Stephen Dowling Bots ; Though sad hearts round him thickened , 'T was not from sickness ' shots . 
No whooping-cough did rack his frame , Nor measles drear with spots ; Not these impaired the sacred name Of Stephen Dowling Bots . 
Despised love struck not with woe That head of curly knots , Nor stomach troubles laid him low , Young Stephen Dowling Bots . 
O no . 
Then list with tearful eye , Whilst I his fate do tell . 
His soul did from this cold world fly By falling down a well . 
They got him out and emptied him ; Alas it was too late ; His spirit was gone for to sport aloft In the realms of the good and great . 
If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she was fourteen , there ai n't no telling what she could a done by and by . 
Buck said she could rattle off poetry like nothing . 
She did n't ever have to stop to think . 
He said she would slap down a line , and if she could n't find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down another one , and go ahead . 
She war n't particular ; she could write about anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful . 
Every time a man died , or a woman died , or a child died , she would be on hand with her `` tribute '' before he was cold . 
She called them tributes . 
The neighbors said it was the doctor first , then Emmeline , then the undertaker -- the undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but once , and then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person 's name , which was Whistler . 
She war n't ever the same after that ; she never complained , but she kinder pined away and did not live long . 
Poor thing , many 's the time I made myself go up to the little room that used to be hers and get out her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures had been aggravating me and I had soured on her a little . 
I liked all that family , dead ones and all , and war n't going to let anything come between us . 
