Now I thought of something else . 
So I went and got the bag of meal and my old saw out of the canoe , and fetched them to the house . 
I took the bag to where it used to stand , and ripped a hole in the bottom of it with the saw , for there war n't no knives and forks on the place -- pap done everything with his clasp-knife about the cooking . 
Then I carried the sack about a hundred yards across the grass and through the willows east of the house , to a shallow lake that was five mile wide and full of rushes -- and ducks too , you might say , in the season . 
There was a slough or a creek leading out of it on the other side that went miles away , I do n't know where , but it did n't go to the river . 
The meal sifted out and made a little track all the way to the lake . 
I dropped pap 's whetstone there too , so as to look like it had been done by accident . 
Then I tied up the rip in the meal sack with a string , so it would n't leak no more , and took it and my saw to the canoe again . 
It was about dark now ; so I dropped the canoe down the river under some willows that hung over the bank , and waited for the moon to rise . 
I made fast to a willow ; then I took a bite to eat , and by and by laid down in the canoe to smoke a pipe and lay out a plan . 
I says to myself , they 'll follow the track of that sackful of rocks to the shore and then drag the river for me . 
And they 'll follow that meal track to the lake and go browsing down the creek that leads out of it to find the robbers that killed me and took the things . 
They wo n't ever hunt the river for anything but my dead carcass . 
They 'll soon get tired of that , and wo n't bother no more about me . 
All right ; I can stop anywhere I want to . 
Jackson 's Island is good enough for me ; I know that island pretty well , and nobody ever comes there . 
And then I can paddle over to town nights , and slink around and pick up things I want . 
Jackson 's Island 's the place . 
I was pretty tired , and the first thing I knowed I was asleep . 
When I woke up I did n't know where I was for a minute . 
I set up and looked around , a little scared . 
Then I remembered . 
The river looked miles and miles across . 
The moon was so bright I could a counted the drift logs that went a-slipping along , black and still , hundreds of yards out from shore . 
Everything was dead quiet , and it looked late , and SMELT late . 
You know what I mean -- I do n't know the words to put it in . 
I took a good gap and a stretch , and was just going to unhitch and start when I heard a sound away over the water . 
I listened . 
Pretty soon I made it out . 
It was that dull kind of a regular sound that comes from oars working in rowlocks when it 's a still night . 
I peeped out through the willow branches , and there it was -- a skiff , away across the water . 
I could n't tell how many was in it . 
It kept a-coming , and when it was abreast of me I see there war n't but one man in it . 
Think 's I , maybe it 's pap , though I war n't expecting him . 
He dropped below me with the current , and by and by he came a-swinging up shore in the easy water , and he went by so close I could a reached out the gun and touched him . 
Well , it WAS pap , sure enough -- and sober , too , by the way he laid his oars . 
I did n't lose no time . 
The next minute I was a-spinning down stream soft but quick in the shade of the bank . 
I made two mile and a half , and then struck out a quarter of a mile or more towards the middle of the river , because pretty soon I would be passing the ferry landing , and people might see me and hail me . 
I got out amongst the driftwood , and then laid down in the bottom of the canoe and let her float . 
I laid there , and had a good rest and a smoke out of my pipe , looking away into the sky ; not a cloud in it . 
The sky looks ever so deep when you lay down on your back in the moonshine ; I never knowed it before . 
And how far a body can hear on the water such nights ! 
I heard people talking at the ferry landing . 
I heard what they said , too -- every word of it . 
One man said it was getting towards the long days and the short nights now . 
T'other one said THIS war n't one of the short ones , he reckoned -- and then they laughed , and he said it over again , and they laughed again ; then they waked up another fellow and told him , and laughed , but he did n't laugh ; he ripped out something brisk , and said let him alone . 
The first fellow said he ` lowed to tell it to his old woman -- she would think it was pretty good ; but he said that war n't nothing to some things he had said in his time . 
I heard one man say it was nearly three o'clock , and he hoped daylight would n't wait more than about a week longer . 
After that the talk got further and further away , and I could n't make out the words any more ; but I could hear the mumble , and now and then a laugh , too , but it seemed a long ways off . 
I was away below the ferry now . 
I rose up , and there was Jackson 's Island , about two mile and a half down stream , heavy timbered and standing up out of the middle of the river , big and dark and solid , like a steamboat without any lights . 
There war n't any signs of the bar at the head -- it was all under water now . 
It did n't take me long to get there . 
I shot past the head at a ripping rate , the current was so swift , and then I got into the dead water and landed on the side towards the Illinois shore . 
I run the canoe into a deep dent in the bank that I knowed about ; I had to part the willow branches to get in ; and when I made fast nobody could a seen the canoe from the outside . 
I went up and set down on a log at the head of the island , and looked out on the big river and the black driftwood and away over to the town , three mile away , where there was three or four lights twinkling . 
A monstrous big lumber-raft was about a mile up stream , coming along down , with a lantern in the middle of it . 
I watched it come creeping down , and when it was most abreast of where I stood I heard a man say , `` Stern oars , there ! 
heave her head to stabboard ! '' 
I heard that just as plain as if the man was by my side . 
There was a little gray in the sky now ; so I stepped into the woods , and laid down for a nap before breakfast . 
THE sun was up so high when I waked that I judged it was after eight o'clock . 
I laid there in the grass and the cool shade thinking about things , and feeling rested and ruther comfortable and satisfied . 
I could see the sun out at one or two holes , but mostly it was big trees all about , and gloomy in there amongst them . 
There was freckled places on the ground where the light sifted down through the leaves , and the freckled places swapped about a little , showing there was a little breeze up there . 
A couple of squirrels set on a limb and jabbered at me very friendly . 
I was powerful lazy and comfortable -- did n't want to get up and cook breakfast . 
Well , I was dozing off again when I thinks I hears a deep sound of `` boom ! '' 
away up the river . 
I rouses up , and rests on my elbow and listens ; pretty soon I hears it again . 
I hopped up , and went and looked out at a hole in the leaves , and I see a bunch of smoke laying on the water a long ways up -- about abreast the ferry . 
And there was the ferryboat full of people floating along down . 
I knowed what was the matter now . 
`` Boom ! '' 
I see the white smoke squirt out of the ferryboat 's side . 
You see , they was firing cannon over the water , trying to make my carcass come to the top . 
I was pretty hungry , but it war n't going to do for me to start a fire , because they might see the smoke . 
So I set there and watched the cannon - smoke and listened to the boom . 
The river was a mile wide there , and it always looks pretty on a summer morning -- so I was having a good enough time seeing them hunt for my remainders if I only had a bite to eat . 
Well , then I happened to think how they always put quicksilver in loaves of bread and float them off , because they always go right to the drownded carcass and stop there . 
So , says I , I 'll keep a lookout , and if any of them 's floating around after me I 'll give them a show . 
I changed to the Illinois edge of the island to see what luck I could have , and I war n't disappointed . 
A big double loaf come along , and I most got it with a long stick , but my foot slipped and she floated out further . 
Of course I was where the current set in the closest to the shore -- I knowed enough for that . 
But by and by along comes another one , and this time I won . 
I took out the plug and shook out the little dab of quicksilver , and set my teeth in . 
It was `` baker 's bread '' -- what the quality eat ; none of your low-down corn-pone . 
I got a good place amongst the leaves , and set there on a log , munching the bread and watching the ferry-boat , and very well satisfied . 
And then something struck me . 
I says , now I reckon the widow or the parson or somebody prayed that this bread would find me , and here it has gone and done it . 
So there ai n't no doubt but there is something in that thing -- that is , there 's something in it when a body like the widow or the parson prays , but it do n't work for me , and I reckon it do n't work for only just the right kind . 
I lit a pipe and had a good long smoke , and went on watching . 
The ferryboat was floating with the current , and I allowed I 'd have a chance to see who was aboard when she come along , because she would come in close , where the bread did . 
When she 'd got pretty well along down towards me , I put out my pipe and went to where I fished out the bread , and laid down behind a log on the bank in a little open place . 
Where the log forked I could peep through . 
By and by she come along , and she drifted in so close that they could a run out a plank and walked ashore . 
Most everybody was on the boat . 
Pap , and Judge Thatcher , and Bessie Thatcher , and Jo Harper , and Tom Sawyer , and his old Aunt Polly , and Sid and Mary , and plenty more . 
Everybody was talking about the murder , but the captain broke in and says : `` Look sharp , now ; the current sets in the closest here , and maybe he 's washed ashore and got tangled amongst the brush at the water 's edge . 
