And he said that between the rats and the snakes and the grindstone there war n't no room in bed for him , skasely ; and when there was , a body could n't sleep , it was so lively , and it was always lively , he said , because THEY never all slept at one time , but took turn about , so when the snakes was asleep the rats was on deck , and when the rats turned in the snakes come on watch , so he always had one gang under him , in his way , and t ` other gang having a circus over him , and if he got up to hunt a new place the spiders would take a chance at him as he crossed over . 
He said if he ever got out this time he would n't ever be a prisoner again , not for a salary . 
Well , by the end of three weeks everything was in pretty good shape . 
The shirt was sent in early , in a pie , and every time a rat bit Jim he would get up and write a little in his journal whilst the ink was fresh ; the pens was made , the inscriptions and so on was all carved on the grindstone ; the bed-leg was sawed in two , and we had et up the sawdust , and it give us a most amazing stomach-ache . 
We reckoned we was all going to die , but did n't . 
It was the most undigestible sawdust I ever see ; and Tom said the same . 
But as I was saying , we 'd got all the work done now , at last ; and we was all pretty much fagged out , too , but mainly Jim . 
The old man had wrote a couple of times to the plantation below Orleans to come and get their runaway nigger , but had n't got no answer , because there war n't no such plantation ; so he allowed he would advertise Jim in the St. Louis and New Orleans papers ; and when he mentioned the St. Louis ones it give me the cold shivers , and I see we had n't no time to lose . 
So Tom said , now for the nonnamous letters . 
`` What 's them ? '' 
I says . 
`` Warnings to the people that something is up . 
Sometimes it 's done one way , sometimes another . 
But there 's always somebody spying around that gives notice to the governor of the castle . 
When Louis XVI . 
was going to light out of the Tooleries a servant-girl done it . 
It 's a very good way , and so is the nonnamous letters . 
We 'll use them both . 
And it 's usual for the prisoner 's mother to change clothes with him , and she stays in , and he slides out in her clothes . 
We 'll do that , too . '' 
`` But looky here , Tom , what do we want to WARN anybody for that something 's up ? 
Let them find it out for themselves -- it 's their lookout . '' 
`` Yes , I know ; but you ca n't depend on them . 
It 's the way they 've acted from the very start -- left us to do EVERYTHING . 
They 're so confiding and mullet-headed they do n't take notice of nothing at all . 
So if we do n't GIVE them notice there wo n't be nobody nor nothing to interfere with us , and so after all our hard work and trouble this escape 'll go off perfectly flat ; wo n't amount to nothing -- wo n't be nothing TO it . '' 
`` Well , as for me , Tom , that 's the way I 'd like . '' 
`` Shucks ! '' 
he says , and looked disgusted . 
So I says : `` But I ai n't going to make no complaint . 
Any way that suits you suits me . 
What you going to do about the servant-girl ? '' 
`` You 'll be her . 
You slide in , in the middle of the night , and hook that yaller girl 's frock . '' 
`` Why , Tom , that 'll make trouble next morning ; because , of course , she prob ` bly hai n't got any but that one . '' 
`` I know ; but you do n't want it but fifteen minutes , to carry the nonnamous letter and shove it under the front door . '' 
`` All right , then , I 'll do it ; but I could carry it just as handy in my own togs . '' 
`` You would n't look like a servant-girl THEN , would you ? '' 
`` No , but there wo n't be nobody to see what I look like , ANYWAY . '' 
`` That ai n't got nothing to do with it . 
The thing for us to do is just to do our DUTY , and not worry about whether anybody SEES us do it or not . 
Hai n't you got no principle at all ? '' 
`` All right , I ai n't saying nothing ; I 'm the servant-girl . 
Who 's Jim 's mother ? '' 
`` I 'm his mother . 
I 'll hook a gown from Aunt Sally . '' 
`` Well , then , you 'll have to stay in the cabin when me and Jim leaves . '' 
`` Not much . 
I 'll stuff Jim 's clothes full of straw and lay it on his bed to represent his mother in disguise , and Jim 'll take the nigger woman 's gown off of me and wear it , and we 'll all evade together . 
When a prisoner of style escapes it 's called an evasion . 
It 's always called so when a king escapes , f ` rinstance . 
And the same with a king 's son ; it do n't make no difference whether he 's a natural one or an unnatural one . '' 
So Tom he wrote the nonnamous letter , and I smouched the yaller wench 's frock that night , and put it on , and shoved it under the front door , the way Tom told me to . 
It said : Beware . 
Trouble is brewing . 
Keep a sharp lookout . 
UNKNOWN FRIEND . 
Next night we stuck a picture , which Tom drawed in blood , of a skull and crossbones on the front door ; and next night another one of a coffin on the back door . 
I never see a family in such a sweat . 
They could n't a been worse scared if the place had a been full of ghosts laying for them behind everything and under the beds and shivering through the air . 
If a door banged , Aunt Sally she jumped and said `` ouch ! '' 
if anything fell , she jumped and said `` ouch ! '' 
if you happened to touch her , when she war n't noticing , she done the same ; she could n't face noway and be satisfied , because she allowed there was something behind her every time -- so she was always a-whirling around sudden , and saying `` ouch , '' and before she 'd got two-thirds around she 'd whirl back again , and say it again ; and she was afraid to go to bed , but she das n't set up . 
So the thing was working very well , Tom said ; he said he never see a thing work more satisfactory . 
He said it showed it was done right . 
So he said , now for the grand bulge ! 
So the very next morning at the streak of dawn we got another letter ready , and was wondering what we better do with it , because we heard them say at supper they was going to have a nigger on watch at both doors all night . 
Tom he went down the lightning-rod to spy around ; and the nigger at the back door was asleep , and he stuck it in the back of his neck and come back . 
This letter said : Do n't betray me , I wish to be your friend . 
There is a desprate gang of cut-throats from over in the Indian Territory going to steal your runaway nigger to-night , and they have been trying to scare you so as you will stay in the house and not bother them . 
I am one of the gang , but have got religgion and wish to quit it and lead an honest life again , and will betray the helish design . 
They will sneak down from northards , along the fence , at midnight exact , with a false key , and go in the nigger 's cabin to get him . 
I am to be off a piece and blow a tin horn if I see any danger ; but stead of that I will BA like a sheep soon as they get in and not blow at all ; then whilst they are getting his chains loose , you slip there and lock them in , and can kill them at your leasure . 
Do n't do anything but just the way I am telling you ; if you do they will suspicion something and raise whoop-jamboreehoo . 
I do not wish any reward but to know I have done the right thing . 
UNKNOWN FRIEND . 
WE was feeling pretty good after breakfast , and took my canoe and went over the river a-fishing , with a lunch , and had a good time , and took a look at the raft and found her all right , and got home late to supper , and found them in such a sweat and worry they did n't know which end they was standing on , and made us go right off to bed the minute we was done supper , and would n't tell us what the trouble was , and never let on a word about the new letter , but did n't need to , because we knowed as much about it as anybody did , and as soon as we was half up stairs and her back was turned we slid for the cellar cubboard and loaded up a good lunch and took it up to our room and went to bed , and got up about half - past eleven , and Tom put on Aunt Sally 's dress that he stole and was going to start with the lunch , but says : `` Where 's the butter ? '' 
`` I laid out a hunk of it , '' I says , `` on a piece of a corn-pone . '' 
`` Well , you LEFT it laid out , then -- it ai n't here . '' 
`` We can get along without it , '' I says . 
`` We can get along WITH it , too , '' he says ; `` just you slide down cellar and fetch it . 
And then mosey right down the lightning-rod and come along . 
I 'll go and stuff the straw into Jim 's clothes to represent his mother in disguise , and be ready to BA like a sheep and shove soon as you get there . '' 
So out he went , and down cellar went I . 
The hunk of butter , big as a person 's fist , was where I had left it , so I took up the slab of corn - pone with it on , and blowed out my light , and started up stairs very stealthy , and got up to the main floor all right , but here comes Aunt Sally with a candle , and I clapped the truck in my hat , and clapped my hat on my head , and the next second she see me ; and she says : `` You been down cellar ? '' 
`` Yes 'm . '' 
`` What you been doing down there ? '' 
`` Noth ` n. '' `` NOTH ` N ! '' 
`` No 'm . '' 
`` Well , then , what possessed you to go down there this time of night ? '' 
`` I do n't know 'm . '' 
`` You do n't KNOW ? 
Do n't answer me that way . 
Tom , I want to know what you been DOING down there . '' 
`` I hai n't been doing a single thing , Aunt Sally , I hope to gracious if I have . '' 
I reckoned she 'd let me go now , and as a generl thing she would ; but I s ` pose there was so many strange things going on she was just in a sweat about every little thing that war n't yard-stick straight ; so she says , very decided : `` You just march into that setting-room and stay there till I come . 
You been up to something you no business to , and I lay I 'll find out what it is before I 'M done with you . '' 
So she went away as I opened the door and walked into the setting-room . 
My , but there was a crowd there ! 
Fifteen farmers , and every one of them had a gun . 
