So it was all up with Cairo . 
We talked it all over . 
It would n't do to take to the shore ; we could n't take the raft up the stream , of course . 
There war n't no way but to wait for dark , and start back in the canoe and take the chances . 
So we slept all day amongst the cottonwood thicket , so as to be fresh for the work , and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone ! 
We did n't say a word for a good while . 
There war n't anything to say . 
We both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin ; so what was the use to talk about it ? 
It would only look like we was finding fault , and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck -- and keep on fetching it , too , till we knowed enough to keep still . 
By and by we talked about what we better do , and found there war n't no way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy a canoe to go back in . 
We war n't going to borrow it when there war n't anybody around , the way pap would do , for that might set people after us . 
So we shoved out after dark on the raft . 
Anybody that do n't believe yet that it 's foolishness to handle a snake - skin , after all that that snake-skin done for us , will believe it now if they read on and see what more it done for us . 
The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore . 
But we did n't see no rafts laying up ; so we went along during three hours and more . 
Well , the night got gray and ruther thick , which is the next meanest thing to fog . 
You ca n't tell the shape of the river , and you ca n't see no distance . 
It got to be very late and still , and then along comes a steamboat up the river . 
We lit the lantern , and judged she would see it . 
Up-stream boats did n't generly come close to us ; they go out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs ; but nights like this they bull right up the channel against the whole river . 
We could hear her pounding along , but we did n't see her good till she was close . 
She aimed right for us . 
Often they do that and try to see how close they can come without touching ; sometimes the wheel bites off a sweep , and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs , and thinks he 's mighty smart . 
Well , here she comes , and we said she was going to try and shave us ; but she did n't seem to be sheering off a bit . 
She was a big one , and she was coming in a hurry , too , looking like a black cloud with rows of glow-worms around it ; but all of a sudden she bulged out , big and scary , with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining like red-hot teeth , and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right over us . 
There was a yell at us , and a jingling of bells to stop the engines , a powwow of cussing , and whistling of steam -- and as Jim went overboard on one side and I on the other , she come smashing straight through the raft . 
I dived -- and I aimed to find the bottom , too , for a thirty-foot wheel had got to go over me , and I wanted it to have plenty of room . 
I could always stay under water a minute ; this time I reckon I stayed under a minute and a half . 
Then I bounced for the top in a hurry , for I was nearly busting . 
I popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of my nose , and puffed a bit . 
Of course there was a booming current ; and of course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she stopped them , for they never cared much for raftsmen ; so now she was churning along up the river , out of sight in the thick weather , though I could hear her . 
I sung out for Jim about a dozen times , but I did n't get any answer ; so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was `` treading water , '' and struck out for shore , shoving it ahead of me . 
But I made out to see that the drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore , which meant that I was in a crossing ; so I changed off and went that way . 
It was one of these long , slanting , two-mile crossings ; so I was a good long time in getting over . 
I made a safe landing , and clumb up the bank . 
I could n't see but a little ways , but I went poking along over rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more , and then I run across a big old - fashioned double log-house before I noticed it . 
I was going to rush by and get away , but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and barking at me , and I knowed better than to move another peg . 
IN about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his head out , and says : `` Be done , boys ! 
Who 's there ? '' 
I says : `` It 's me . '' 
`` Who 's me ? '' 
`` George Jackson , sir . '' 
`` What do you want ? '' 
`` I do n't want nothing , sir . 
I only want to go along by , but the dogs wo n't let me . '' 
`` What are you prowling around here this time of night for -- hey ? '' 
`` I war n't prowling around , sir , I fell overboard off of the steamboat . '' 
`` Oh , you did , did you ? 
Strike a light there , somebody . 
What did you say your name was ? '' 
`` George Jackson , sir . 
I 'm only a boy . '' 
`` Look here , if you 're telling the truth you need n't be afraid -- nobody 'll hurt you . 
But do n't try to budge ; stand right where you are . 
Rouse out Bob and Tom , some of you , and fetch the guns . 
George Jackson , is there anybody with you ? '' 
`` No , sir , nobody . '' 
I heard the people stirring around in the house now , and see a light . 
The man sung out : `` Snatch that light away , Betsy , you old fool -- ai n't you got any sense ? 
Put it on the floor behind the front door . 
Bob , if you and Tom are ready , take your places . '' 
`` All ready . '' 
`` Now , George Jackson , do you know the Shepherdsons ? '' 
`` No , sir ; I never heard of them . '' 
`` Well , that may be so , and it may n't . 
Now , all ready . 
Step forward , George Jackson . 
And mind , do n't you hurry -- come mighty slow . 
If there 's anybody with you , let him keep back -- if he shows himself he 'll be shot . 
Come along now . 
Come slow ; push the door open yourself -- just enough to squeeze in , d' you hear ? '' 
I did n't hurry ; I could n't if I 'd a wanted to . 
I took one slow step at a time and there war n't a sound , only I thought I could hear my heart . 
The dogs were as still as the humans , but they followed a little behind me . 
When I got to the three log doorsteps I heard them unlocking and unbarring and unbolting . 
I put my hand on the door and pushed it a little and a little more till somebody said , `` There , that 's enough -- put your head in . '' 
I done it , but I judged they would take it off . 
The candle was on the floor , and there they all was , looking at me , and me at them , for about a quarter of a minute : Three big men with guns pointed at me , which made me wince , I tell you ; the oldest , gray and about sixty , the other two thirty or more -- all of them fine and handsome -- and the sweetest old gray-headed lady , and back of her two young women which I could n't see right well . 
The old gentleman says : `` There ; I reckon it 's all right . 
Come in . '' 
As soon as I was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it and bolted it , and told the young men to come in with their guns , and they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor , and got together in a corner that was out of the range of the front windows -- there war n't none on the side . 
They held the candle , and took a good look at me , and all said , `` Why , HE ai n't a Shepherdson -- no , there ai n't any Shepherdson about him . '' 
Then the old man said he hoped I would n't mind being searched for arms , because he did n't mean no harm by it -- it was only to make sure . 
So he did n't pry into my pockets , but only felt outside with his hands , and said it was all right . 
He told me to make myself easy and at home , and tell all about myself ; but the old lady says : `` Why , bless you , Saul , the poor thing 's as wet as he can be ; and do n't you reckon it may be he 's hungry ? '' 
`` True for you , Rachel -- I forgot . '' 
So the old lady says : `` Betsy '' -LRB- this was a nigger woman -RRB- , `` you fly around and get him something to eat as quick as you can , poor thing ; and one of you girls go and wake up Buck and tell him -- oh , here he is himself . 
Buck , take this little stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of yours that 's dry . '' 
Buck looked about as old as me -- thirteen or fourteen or along there , though he was a little bigger than me . 
He had n't on anything but a shirt , and he was very frowzy-headed . 
He came in gaping and digging one fist into his eyes , and he was dragging a gun along with the other one . 
He says : `` Ai n't they no Shepherdsons around ? '' 
They said , no , 't was a false alarm . 
`` Well , '' he says , `` if they 'd a ben some , I reckon I 'd a got one . '' 
They all laughed , and Bob says : `` Why , Buck , they might have scalped us all , you 've been so slow in coming . '' 
`` Well , nobody come after me , and it ai n't right I 'm always kept down ; I do n't get no show . '' 
`` Never mind , Buck , my boy , '' says the old man , `` you 'll have show enough , all in good time , do n't you fret about that . 
Go ` long with you now , and do as your mother told you . '' 
When we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a roundabout and pants of his , and I put them on . 
While I was at it he asked me what my name was , but before I could tell him he started to tell me about a bluejay and a young rabbit he had catched in the woods day before yesterday , and he asked me where Moses was when the candle went out . 
