come with a contrite heart ! 
come in your rags and sin and dirt ! 
the waters that cleanse is free , the door of heaven stands open -- oh , enter in and be at rest ! '' 
-LRB- A-A-MEN ! 
GLORY , GLORY HALLELUJAH ! -RRB- 
And so on . 
You could n't make out what the preacher said any more , on account of the shouting and crying . 
Folks got up everywheres in the crowd , and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners ' bench , with the tears running down their faces ; and when all the mourners had got up there to the front benches in a crowd , they sung and shouted and flung themselves down on the straw , just crazy and wild . 
Well , the first I knowed the king got a-going , and you could hear him over everybody ; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform , and the preacher he begged him to speak to the people , and he done it . 
He told them he was a pirate -- been a pirate for thirty years out in the Indian Ocean -- and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in a fight , and he was home now to take out some fresh men , and thanks to goodness he 'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat without a cent , and he was glad of it ; it was the blessedest thing that ever happened to him , because he was a changed man now , and happy for the first time in his life ; and , poor as he was , he was going to start right off and work his way back to the Indian Ocean , and put in the rest of his life trying to turn the pirates into the true path ; for he could do it better than anybody else , being acquainted with all pirate crews in that ocean ; and though it would take him a long time to get there without money , he would get there anyway , and every time he convinced a pirate he would say to him , `` Do n't you thank me , do n't you give me no credit ; it all belongs to them dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting , natural brothers and benefactors of the race , and that dear preacher there , the truest friend a pirate ever had ! '' 
And then he busted into tears , and so did everybody . 
Then somebody sings out , `` Take up a collection for him , take up a collection ! '' 
Well , a half a dozen made a jump to do it , but somebody sings out , `` Let HIM pass the hat around ! '' 
Then everybody said it , the preacher too . 
So the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes , and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being so good to the poor pirates away off there ; and every little while the prettiest kind of girls , with the tears running down their cheeks , would up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by ; and he always done it ; and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as five or six times -- and he was invited to stay a week ; and everybody wanted him to live in their houses , and said they 'd think it was an honor ; but he said as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he could n't do no good , and besides he was in a sweat to get to the Indian Ocean right off and go to work on the pirates . 
When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents . 
And then he had fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky , too , that he found under a wagon when he was starting home through the woods . 
The king said , take it all around , it laid over any day he 'd ever put in in the missionarying line . 
He said it war n't no use talking , heathens do n't amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with . 
The duke was thinking HE 'D been doing pretty well till the king come to show up , but after that he did n't think so so much . 
He had set up and printed off two little jobs for farmers in that printing-office -- horse bills -- and took the money , four dollars . 
And he had got in ten dollars ' worth of advertisements for the paper , which he said he would put in for four dollars if they would pay in advance -- so they done it . 
The price of the paper was two dollars a year , but he took in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him in advance ; they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as usual , but he said he had just bought the concern and knocked down the price as low as he could afford it , and was going to run it for cash . 
He set up a little piece of poetry , which he made , himself , out of his own head -- three verses -- kind of sweet and saddish -- the name of it was , `` Yes , crush , cold world , this breaking heart '' -- and he left that all set up and ready to print in the paper , and did n't charge nothing for it . 
Well , he took in nine dollars and a half , and said he 'd done a pretty square day 's work for it . 
Then he showed us another little job he 'd printed and had n't charged for , because it was for us . 
It had a picture of a runaway nigger with a bundle on a stick over his shoulder , and `` $ 200 reward '' under it . 
The reading was all about Jim , and just described him to a dot . 
It said he run away from St. Jacques ' plantation , forty mile below New Orleans , last winter , and likely went north , and whoever would catch him and send him back he could have the reward and expenses . 
`` Now , '' says the duke , `` after to-night we can run in the daytime if we want to . 
Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot with a rope , and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we captured him up the river , and were too poor to travel on a steamboat , so we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are going down to get the reward . 
Handcuffs and chains would look still better on Jim , but it would n't go well with the story of us being so poor . 
Too much like jewelry . 
Ropes are the correct thing -- we must preserve the unities , as we say on the boards . '' 
We all said the duke was pretty smart , and there could n't be no trouble about running daytimes . 
We judged we could make miles enough that night to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke 's work in the printing office was going to make in that little town ; then we could boom right along if we wanted to . 
We laid low and kept still , and never shoved out till nearly ten o'clock ; then we slid by , pretty wide away from the town , and did n't hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it . 
When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning , he says : `` Huck , does you reck 'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo ' kings on dis trip ? '' 
`` No , '' I says , `` I reckon not . '' 
`` Well , '' says he , `` dat 's all right , den . 
I doan ' mine one er two kings , but dat 's enough . 
Dis one 's powerful drunk , en de duke ain ' much better . '' 
I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French , so he could hear what it was like ; but he said he had been in this country so long , and had so much trouble , he 'd forgot it . 
IT was after sun-up now , but we went right on and did n't tie up . 
The king and the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty ; but after they 'd jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good deal . 
After breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft , and pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches , and let his legs dangle in the water , so as to be comfortable , and lit his pipe , and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by heart . 
When he had got it pretty good him and the duke begun to practice it together . 
The duke had to learn him over and over again how to say every speech ; and he made him sigh , and put his hand on his heart , and after a while he said he done it pretty well ; `` only , '' he says , `` you must n't bellow out ROMEO ! 
that way , like a bull -- you must say it soft and sick and languishy , so -- R-o-o-meo ! 
that is the idea ; for Juliet 's a dear sweet mere child of a girl , you know , and she does n't bray like a jackass . '' 
Well , next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out of oak laths , and begun to practice the sword fight -- the duke called himself Richard III. ; and the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was grand to see . 
But by and by the king tripped and fell overboard , and after that they took a rest , and had a talk about all kinds of adventures they 'd had in other times along the river . 
After dinner the duke says : `` Well , Capet , we 'll want to make this a first-class show , you know , so I guess we 'll add a little more to it . 
We want a little something to answer encores with , anyway . '' 
`` What 's onkores , Bilgewater ? '' 
The duke told him , and then says : `` I 'll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor 's hornpipe ; and you -- well , let me see -- oh , I 've got it -- you can do Hamlet 's soliloquy . '' 
`` Hamlet 's which ? '' 
`` Hamlet 's soliloquy , you know ; the most celebrated thing in Shakespeare . 
Ah , it 's sublime , sublime ! 
Always fetches the house . 
I have n't got it in the book -- I 've only got one volume -- but I reckon I can piece it out from memory . 
I 'll just walk up and down a minute , and see if I can call it back from recollection 's vaults . '' 
So he went to marching up and down , thinking , and frowning horrible every now and then ; then he would hoist up his eyebrows ; next he would squeeze his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan ; next he would sigh , and next he 'd let on to drop a tear . 
It was beautiful to see him . 
By and by he got it . 
He told us to give attention . 
Then he strikes a most noble attitude , with one leg shoved forwards , and his arms stretched away up , and his head tilted back , looking up at the sky ; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth ; and after that , all through his speech , he howled , and spread around , and swelled up his chest , and just knocked the spots out of any acting ever I see before . 
This is the speech -- I learned it , easy enough , while he was learning it to the king : To be , or not to be ; that is the bare bodkin That makes calamity of so long life ; For who would fardels bear , till Birnam Wood do come to Dunsinane , But that the fear of something after death Murders the innocent sleep , Great nature 's second course , And makes us rather sling the arrows of outrageous fortune Than fly to others that we know not of . 
There 's the respect must give us pause : Wake Duncan with thy knocking ! 
I would thou couldst ; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time , The oppressor 's wrong , the proud man 's contumely , The law 's delay , and the quietus which his pangs might take , In the dead waste and middle of the night , when churchyards yawn In customary suits of solemn black , But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns , Breathes forth contagion on the world , And thus the native hue of resolution , like the poor cat i ' the adage , Is sicklied o'er with care , And all the clouds that lowered o'er our housetops , With this regard their currents turn awry , And lose the name of action . 
'T is a consummation devoutly to be wished . 
But soft you , the fair Ophelia : Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws , But get thee to a nunnery -- go ! 
Well , the old man he liked that speech , and he mighty soon got it so he could do it first-rate . 
It seemed like he was just born for it ; and when he had his hand in and was excited , it was perfectly lovely the way he would rip and tear and rair up behind when he was getting it off . 
The first chance we got the duke he had some showbills printed ; and after that , for two or three days as we floated along , the raft was a most uncommon lively place , for there war n't nothing but sword fighting and rehearsing -- as the duke called it -- going on all the time . 
One morning , when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw , we come in sight of a little one-horse town in a big bend ; so we tied up about three-quarters of a mile above it , in the mouth of a crick which was shut in like a tunnel by the cypress trees , and all of us but Jim took the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that place for our show . 
We struck it mighty lucky ; there was going to be a circus there that afternoon , and the country people was already beginning to come in , in all kinds of old shackly wagons , and on horses . 
The circus would leave before night , so our show would have a pretty good chance . 
The duke he hired the courthouse , and we went around and stuck up our bills . 
They read like this : Shaksperean Revival ! ! ! 
Wonderful Attraction ! 
For One Night Only ! 
The world renowned tragedians , David Garrick the Younger , of Drury Lane Theatre London , and Edmund Kean the elder , of the Royal Haymarket Theatre , Whitechapel , Pudding Lane , Piccadilly , London , and the Royal Continental Theatres , in their sublime Shaksperean Spectacle entitled The Balcony Scene in Romeo and Juliet ! ! ! 
Romeo ... Mr. Garrick Juliet ... Mr. Kean Assisted by the whole strength of the company ! 
New costumes , new scenes , new appointments ! 
Also : The thrilling , masterly , and blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In Richard III . ! ! ! 
Richard III ... Mr. Garrick Richmond ... Mr. Kean Also : -LRB- by special request -RRB- Hamlet 's Immortal Soliloquy ! ! 
By The Illustrious Kean ! 
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris ! 
For One Night Only , On account of imperative European engagements ! 
Admission 25 cents ; children and servants , 10 cents . 
Then we went loafing around town . 
The stores and houses was most all old , shackly , dried up frame concerns that had n't ever been painted ; they was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts , so as to be out of reach of the water when the river was over-flowed . 
The houses had little gardens around them , but they did n't seem to raise hardly anything in them but jimpson-weeds , and sunflowers , and ash piles , and old curled-up boots and shoes , and pieces of bottles , and rags , and played-out tinware . 
The fences was made of different kinds of boards , nailed on at different times ; and they leaned every which way , and had gates that did n't generly have but one hinge -- a leather one . 
Some of the fences had been white - washed some time or another , but the duke said it was in Clumbus ' time , like enough . 
There was generly hogs in the garden , and people driving them out . 
All the stores was along one street . 
They had white domestic awnings in front , and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts . 
There was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings , and loafers roosting on them all day long , whittling them with their Barlow knives ; and chawing tobacco , and gaping and yawning and stretching -- a mighty ornery lot . 
