They had borrowed a melodeum -- a sick one ; and when everything was ready a young woman set down and worked it , and it was pretty skreeky and colicky , and everybody joined in and sung , and Peter was the only one that had a good thing , according to my notion . 
Then the Reverend Hobson opened up , slow and solemn , and begun to talk ; and straight off the most outrageous row busted out in the cellar a body ever heard ; it was only one dog , but he made a most powerful racket , and he kept it up right along ; the parson he had to stand there , over the coffin , and wait -- you could n't hear yourself think . 
It was right down awkward , and nobody did n't seem to know what to do . 
But pretty soon they see that long - legged undertaker make a sign to the preacher as much as to say , `` Do n't you worry -- just depend on me . '' 
Then he stooped down and begun to glide along the wall , just his shoulders showing over the people 's heads . 
So he glided along , and the powwow and racket getting more and more outrageous all the time ; and at last , when he had gone around two sides of the room , he disappears down cellar . 
Then in about two seconds we heard a whack , and the dog he finished up with a most amazing howl or two , and then everything was dead still , and the parson begun his solemn talk where he left off . 
In a minute or two here comes this undertaker 's back and shoulders gliding along the wall again ; and so he glided and glided around three sides of the room , and then rose up , and shaded his mouth with his hands , and stretched his neck out towards the preacher , over the people 's heads , and says , in a kind of a coarse whisper , `` HE HAD A RAT ! '' 
Then he drooped down and glided along the wall again to his place . 
You could see it was a great satisfaction to the people , because naturally they wanted to know . 
A little thing like that do n't cost nothing , and it 's just the little things that makes a man to be looked up to and liked . 
There war n't no more popular man in town than what that undertaker was . 
Well , the funeral sermon was very good , but pison long and tiresome ; and then the king he shoved in and got off some of his usual rubbage , and at last the job was through , and the undertaker begun to sneak up on the coffin with his screw-driver . 
I was in a sweat then , and watched him pretty keen . 
But he never meddled at all ; just slid the lid along as soft as mush , and screwed it down tight and fast . 
So there I was ! 
I did n't know whether the money was in there or not . 
So , says I , s ` pose somebody has hogged that bag on the sly ? 
-- now how do I know whether to write to Mary Jane or not ? 
S'pose she dug him up and did n't find nothing , what would she think of me ? 
Blame it , I says , I might get hunted up and jailed ; I 'd better lay low and keep dark , and not write at all ; the thing 's awful mixed now ; trying to better it , I 've worsened it a hundred times , and I wish to goodness I 'd just let it alone , dad fetch the whole business ! 
They buried him , and we come back home , and I went to watching faces again -- I could n't help it , and I could n't rest easy . 
But nothing come of it ; the faces did n't tell me nothing . 
The king he visited around in the evening , and sweetened everybody up , and made himself ever so friendly ; and he give out the idea that his congregation over in England would be in a sweat about him , so he must hurry and settle up the estate right away and leave for home . 
He was very sorry he was so pushed , and so was everybody ; they wished he could stay longer , but they said they could see it could n't be done . 
And he said of course him and William would take the girls home with them ; and that pleased everybody too , because then the girls would be well fixed and amongst their own relations ; and it pleased the girls , too -- tickled them so they clean forgot they ever had a trouble in the world ; and told him to sell out as quick as he wanted to , they would be ready . 
Them poor things was that glad and happy it made my heart ache to see them getting fooled and lied to so , but I did n't see no safe way for me to chip in and change the general tune . 
Well , blamed if the king did n't bill the house and the niggers and all the property for auction straight off -- sale two days after the funeral ; but anybody could buy private beforehand if they wanted to . 
So the next day after the funeral , along about noon-time , the girls ' joy got the first jolt . 
A couple of nigger traders come along , and the king sold them the niggers reasonable , for three-day drafts as they called it , and away they went , the two sons up the river to Memphis , and their mother down the river to Orleans . 
I thought them poor girls and them niggers would break their hearts for grief ; they cried around each other , and took on so it most made me down sick to see it . 
The girls said they had n't ever dreamed of seeing the family separated or sold away from the town . 
I ca n't ever get it out of my memory , the sight of them poor miserable girls and niggers hanging around each other 's necks and crying ; and I reckon I could n't a stood it all , but would a had to bust out and tell on our gang if I had n't knowed the sale war n't no account and the niggers would be back home in a week or two . 
The thing made a big stir in the town , too , and a good many come out flatfooted and said it was scandalous to separate the mother and the children that way . 
It injured the frauds some ; but the old fool he bulled right along , spite of all the duke could say or do , and I tell you the duke was powerful uneasy . 
Next day was auction day . 
About broad day in the morning the king and the duke come up in the garret and woke me up , and I see by their look that there was trouble . 
The king says : `` Was you in my room night before last ? '' 
`` No , your majesty '' -- which was the way I always called him when nobody but our gang war n't around . 
`` Was you in there yisterday er last night ? '' 
`` No , your majesty . '' 
`` Honor bright , now -- no lies . '' 
`` Honor bright , your majesty , I 'm telling you the truth . 
I hai n't been a - near your room since Miss Mary Jane took you and the duke and showed it to you . '' 
The duke says : `` Have you seen anybody else go in there ? '' 
`` No , your grace , not as I remember , I believe . '' 
`` Stop and think . '' 
I studied awhile and see my chance ; then I says : `` Well , I see the niggers go in there several times . '' 
Both of them gave a little jump , and looked like they had n't ever expected it , and then like they HAD . 
Then the duke says : `` What , all of them ? '' 
`` No -- leastways , not all at once -- that is , I do n't think I ever see them all come OUT at once but just one time . '' 
`` Hello ! 
When was that ? '' 
`` It was the day we had the funeral . 
In the morning . 
It war n't early , because I overslept . 
I was just starting down the ladder , and I see them . '' 
`` Well , go on , GO on ! 
What did they do ? 
How 'd they act ? '' 
`` They did n't do nothing . 
And they did n't act anyway much , as fur as I see . 
They tiptoed away ; so I seen , easy enough , that they 'd shoved in there to do up your majesty 's room , or something , s ` posing you was up ; and found you WAR N'T up , and so they was hoping to slide out of the way of trouble without waking you up , if they had n't already waked you up . '' 
`` Great guns , THIS is a go ! '' 
says the king ; and both of them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly . 
They stood there a-thinking and scratching their heads a minute , and the duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy chuckle , and says : `` It does beat all how neat the niggers played their hand . 
They let on to be SORRY they was going out of this region ! 
And I believed they WAS sorry , and so did you , and so did everybody . 
Do n't ever tell ME any more that a nigger ai n't got any histrionic talent . 
Why , the way they played that thing it would fool ANYBODY . 
In my opinion , there 's a fortune in 'em . 
If I had capital and a theater , I would n't want a better lay-out than that -- and here we 've gone and sold 'em for a song . 
Yes , and ai n't privileged to sing the song yet . 
Say , where IS that song -- that draft ? '' 
`` In the bank for to be collected . 
Where WOULD it be ? '' 
`` Well , THAT 'S all right then , thank goodness . '' 
Says I , kind of timid-like : `` Is something gone wrong ? '' 
The king whirls on me and rips out : `` None o ' your business ! 
You keep your head shet , and mind y' r own affairs -- if you got any . 
Long as you 're in this town do n't you forgit THAT -- you hear ? '' 
Then he says to the duke , `` We got to jest swaller it and say noth 'n' : mum 's the word for US . '' 
As they was starting down the ladder the duke he chuckles again , and says : `` Quick sales AND small profits ! 
It 's a good business -- yes . '' 
The king snarls around on him and says : `` I was trying to do for the best in sellin ' 'em out so quick . 
If the profits has turned out to be none , lackin ' considable , and none to carry , is it my fault any more 'n it 's yourn ? '' 
`` Well , THEY 'D be in this house yet and we WOULD N'T if I could a got my advice listened to . '' 
The king sassed back as much as was safe for him , and then swapped around and lit into ME again . 
He give me down the banks for not coming and TELLING him I see the niggers come out of his room acting that way -- said any fool would a KNOWED something was up . 
And then waltzed in and cussed HIMSELF awhile , and said it all come of him not laying late and taking his natural rest that morning , and he 'd be blamed if he 'd ever do it again . 
So they went off a-jawing ; and I felt dreadful glad I 'd worked it all off on to the niggers , and yet had n't done the niggers no harm by it . 
BY and by it was getting-up time . 
So I come down the ladder and started for down-stairs ; but as I come to the girls ' room the door was open , and I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk , which was open and she 'd been packing things in it -- getting ready to go to England . 
But she had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap , and had her face in her hands , crying . 
I felt awful bad to see it ; of course anybody would . 
I went in there and says : `` Miss Mary Jane , you ca n't a-bear to see people in trouble , and I ca n't -- most always . 
Tell me about it . '' 
So she done it . 
And it was the niggers -- I just expected it . 
She said the beautiful trip to England was most about spoiled for her ; she did n't know HOW she was ever going to be happy there , knowing the mother and the children war n't ever going to see each other no more -- and then busted out bitterer than ever , and flung up her hands , and says : `` Oh , dear , dear , to think they ai n't EVER going to see each other any more ! '' 
