When I got by myself I went to thinking the thing over . 
I says to myself , shall I go to that doctor , private , and blow on these frauds ? 
No -- that wo n't do . 
He might tell who told him ; then the king and the duke would make it warm for me . 
Shall I go , private , and tell Mary Jane ? 
No -- I das n't do it . 
Her face would give them a hint , sure ; they 've got the money , and they 'd slide right out and get away with it . 
If she was to fetch in help I 'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with , I judge . 
No ; there ai n't no good way but one . 
I got to steal that money , somehow ; and I got to steal it some way that they wo n't suspicion that I done it . 
They 've got a good thing here , and they ai n't a-going to leave till they 've played this family and this town for all they 're worth , so I 'll find a chance time enough . 
I 'll steal it and hide it ; and by and by , when I 'm away down the river , I 'll write a letter and tell Mary Jane where it 's hid . 
But I better hive it tonight if I can , because the doctor maybe has n't let up as much as he lets on he has ; he might scare them out of here yet . 
So , thinks I , I 'll go and search them rooms . 
Upstairs the hall was dark , but I found the duke 's room , and started to paw around it with my hands ; but I recollected it would n't be much like the king to let anybody else take care of that money but his own self ; so then I went to his room and begun to paw around there . 
But I see I could n't do nothing without a candle , and I das n't light one , of course . 
So I judged I 'd got to do the other thing -- lay for them and eavesdrop . 
About that time I hears their footsteps coming , and was going to skip under the bed ; I reached for it , but it was n't where I thought it would be ; but I touched the curtain that hid Mary Jane 's frocks , so I jumped in behind that and snuggled in amongst the gowns , and stood there perfectly still . 
They come in and shut the door ; and the first thing the duke done was to get down and look under the bed . 
Then I was glad I had n't found the bed when I wanted it . 
And yet , you know , it 's kind of natural to hide under the bed when you are up to anything private . 
They sets down then , and the king says : `` Well , what is it ? 
And cut it middlin ' short , because it 's better for us to be down there a-whoopin ' up the mournin ' than up here givin ' 'em a chance to talk us over . '' 
`` Well , this is it , Capet . 
I ai n't easy ; I ai n't comfortable . 
That doctor lays on my mind . 
I wanted to know your plans . 
I 've got a notion , and I think it 's a sound one . '' 
`` What is it , duke ? '' 
`` That we better glide out of this before three in the morning , and clip it down the river with what we 've got . 
Specially , seeing we got it so easy -- GIVEN back to us , flung at our heads , as you may say , when of course we allowed to have to steal it back . 
I 'm for knocking off and lighting out . '' 
That made me feel pretty bad . 
About an hour or two ago it would a been a little different , but now it made me feel bad and disappointed , The king rips out and says : `` What ! 
And not sell out the rest o ' the property ? 
March off like a passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous 'n' dollars ' worth o ' property layin ' around jest sufferin ' to be scooped in ? 
-- and all good , salable stuff , too . '' 
The duke he grumbled ; said the bag of gold was enough , and he did n't want to go no deeper -- did n't want to rob a lot of orphans of EVERYTHING they had . 
`` Why , how you talk ! '' 
says the king . 
`` We sha 'n' t rob 'em of nothing at all but jest this money . 
The people that BUYS the property is the suff ` rers ; because as soon 's it 's found out ` at we did n't own it -- which wo n't be long after we 've slid -- the sale wo n't be valid , and it 'll all go back to the estate . 
These yer orphans 'll git their house back agin , and that 's enough for THEM ; they 're young and spry , and k 'n easy earn a livin ' . 
THEY ai n't a-goin to suffer . 
Why , jest think -- there 's thous 'n' s and thous 'n' s that ai n't nigh so well off . 
Bless you , THEY ai n't got noth 'n' to complain of . '' 
Well , the king he talked him blind ; so at last he give in , and said all right , but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay , and that doctor hanging over them . 
But the king says : `` Cuss the doctor ! 
What do we k ` yer for HIM ? 
Hai n't we got all the fools in town on our side ? 
And ai n't that a big enough majority in any town ? '' 
So they got ready to go down stairs again . 
The duke says : `` I do n't think we put that money in a good place . '' 
That cheered me up . 
I 'd begun to think I war n't going to get a hint of no kind to help me . 
The king says : `` Why ? '' 
`` Because Mary Jane 'll be in mourning from this out ; and first you know the nigger that does up the rooms will get an order to box these duds up and put 'em away ; and do you reckon a nigger can run across money and not borrow some of it ? '' 
`` Your head 's level agin , duke , '' says the king ; and he comes a-fumbling under the curtain two or three foot from where I was . 
I stuck tight to the wall and kept mighty still , though quivery ; and I wondered what them fellows would say to me if they catched me ; and I tried to think what I 'd better do if they did catch me . 
But the king he got the bag before I could think more than about a half a thought , and he never suspicioned I was around . 
They took and shoved the bag through a rip in the straw tick that was under the feather-bed , and crammed it in a foot or two amongst the straw and said it was all right now , because a nigger only makes up the feather-bed , and do n't turn over the straw tick only about twice a year , and so it war n't in no danger of getting stole now . 
But I knowed better . 
I had it out of there before they was half-way down stairs . 
I groped along up to my cubby , and hid it there till I could get a chance to do better . 
I judged I better hide it outside of the house somewheres , because if they missed it they would give the house a good ransacking : I knowed that very well . 
Then I turned in , with my clothes all on ; but I could n't a gone to sleep if I 'd a wanted to , I was in such a sweat to get through with the business . 
By and by I heard the king and the duke come up ; so I rolled off my pallet and laid with my chin at the top of my ladder , and waited to see if anything was going to happen . 
But nothing did . 
So I held on till all the late sounds had quit and the early ones had n't begun yet ; and then I slipped down the ladder . 
I CREPT to their doors and listened ; they was snoring . 
So I tiptoed along , and got down stairs all right . 
There war n't a sound anywheres . 
I peeped through a crack of the dining-room door , and see the men that was watching the corpse all sound asleep on their chairs . 
The door was open into the parlor , where the corpse was laying , and there was a candle in both rooms . 
I passed along , and the parlor door was open ; but I see there war n't nobody in there but the remainders of Peter ; so I shoved on by ; but the front door was locked , and the key was n't there . 
Just then I heard somebody coming down the stairs , back behind me . 
I run in the parlor and took a swift look around , and the only place I see to hide the bag was in the coffin . 
The lid was shoved along about a foot , showing the dead man 's face down in there , with a wet cloth over it , and his shroud on . 
I tucked the money-bag in under the lid , just down beyond where his hands was crossed , which made me creep , they was so cold , and then I run back across the room and in behind the door . 
The person coming was Mary Jane . 
She went to the coffin , very soft , and kneeled down and looked in ; then she put up her handkerchief , and I see she begun to cry , though I could n't hear her , and her back was to me . 
I slid out , and as I passed the dining-room I thought I 'd make sure them watchers had n't seen me ; so I looked through the crack , and everything was all right . 
They had n't stirred . 
I slipped up to bed , feeling ruther blue , on accounts of the thing playing out that way after I had took so much trouble and run so much resk about it . 
Says I , if it could stay where it is , all right ; because when we get down the river a hundred mile or two I could write back to Mary Jane , and she could dig him up again and get it ; but that ai n't the thing that 's going to happen ; the thing that 's going to happen is , the money 'll be found when they come to screw on the lid . 
Then the king 'll get it again , and it 'll be a long day before he gives anybody another chance to smouch it from him . 
Of course I WANTED to slide down and get it out of there , but I das n't try it . 
Every minute it was getting earlier now , and pretty soon some of them watchers would begin to stir , and I might get catched -- catched with six thousand dollars in my hands that nobody had n't hired me to take care of . 
I do n't wish to be mixed up in no such business as that , I says to myself . 
When I got down stairs in the morning the parlor was shut up , and the watchers was gone . 
There war n't nobody around but the family and the widow Bartley and our tribe . 
I watched their faces to see if anything had been happening , but I could n't tell . 
Towards the middle of the day the undertaker come with his man , and they set the coffin in the middle of the room on a couple of chairs , and then set all our chairs in rows , and borrowed more from the neighbors till the hall and the parlor and the dining-room was full . 
I see the coffin lid was the way it was before , but I das n't go to look in under it , with folks around . 
Then the people begun to flock in , and the beats and the girls took seats in the front row at the head of the coffin , and for a half an hour the people filed around slow , in single rank , and looked down at the dead man 's face a minute , and some dropped in a tear , and it was all very still and solemn , only the girls and the beats holding handkerchiefs to their eyes and keeping their heads bent , and sobbing a little . 
There war n't no other sound but the scraping of the feet on the floor and blowing noses -- because people always blows them more at a funeral than they do at other places except church . 
When the place was packed full the undertaker he slid around in his black gloves with his softy soothering ways , putting on the last touches , and getting people and things all ship-shape and comfortable , and making no more sound than a cat . 
He never spoke ; he moved people around , he squeezed in late ones , he opened up passageways , and done it with nods , and signs with his hands . 
Then he took his place over against the wall . 
He was the softest , glidingest , stealthiest man I ever see ; and there war n't no more smile to him than there is to a ham . 
