`` Not where I hid it I reckon it wo n't , '' I says . 
`` How 'd you get your breakfast so early on the boat ? '' 
It was kinder thin ice , but I says : `` The captain see me standing around , and told me I better have something to eat before I went ashore ; so he took me in the texas to the officers ' lunch , and give me all I wanted . '' 
I was getting so uneasy I could n't listen good . 
I had my mind on the children all the time ; I wanted to get them out to one side and pump them a little , and find out who I was . 
But I could n't get no show , Mrs. Phelps kept it up and run on so . 
Pretty soon she made the cold chills streak all down my back , because she says : `` But here we 're a-running on this way , and you hai n't told me a word about Sis , nor any of them . 
Now I 'll rest my works a little , and you start up yourn ; just tell me EVERYTHING -- tell me all about 'm all every one of 'm ; and how they are , and what they 're doing , and what they told you to tell me ; and every last thing you can think of . '' 
Well , I see I was up a stump -- and up it good . 
Providence had stood by me this fur all right , but I was hard and tight aground now . 
I see it war n't a bit of use to try to go ahead -- I 'd got to throw up my hand . 
So I says to myself , here 's another place where I got to resk the truth . 
I opened my mouth to begin ; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind the bed , and says : `` Here he comes ! 
Stick your head down lower -- there , that 'll do ; you ca n't be seen now . 
Do n't you let on you 're here . 
I 'll play a joke on him . 
Children , do n't you say a word . '' 
I see I was in a fix now . 
But it war n't no use to worry ; there war n't nothing to do but just hold still , and try and be ready to stand from under when the lightning struck . 
I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in ; then the bed hid him . 
Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him , and says : `` Has he come ? '' 
`` No , '' says her husband . 
`` Good-NESS gracious ! '' 
she says , `` what in the warld can have become of him ? '' 
`` I ca n't imagine , '' says the old gentleman ; `` and I must say it makes me dreadful uneasy . '' 
`` Uneasy ! '' 
she says ; `` I 'm ready to go distracted ! 
He MUST a come ; and you 've missed him along the road . 
I KNOW it 's so -- something tells me so . '' 
`` Why , Sally , I COULD N'T miss him along the road -- YOU know that . '' 
`` But oh , dear , dear , what WILL Sis say ! 
He must a come ! 
You must a missed him . 
He -- '' `` Oh , do n't distress me any more 'n I 'm already distressed . 
I do n't know what in the world to make of it . 
I 'm at my wit 's end , and I do n't mind acknowledging ' t I 'm right down scared . 
But there 's no hope that he 's come ; for he COULD N'T come and me miss him . 
Sally , it 's terrible -- just terrible -- something 's happened to the boat , sure ! '' 
`` Why , Silas ! 
Look yonder ! 
-- up the road ! 
-- ai n't that somebody coming ? '' 
He sprung to the window at the head of the bed , and that give Mrs. Phelps the chance she wanted . 
She stooped down quick at the foot of the bed and give me a pull , and out I come ; and when he turned back from the window there she stood , a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire , and I standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside . 
The old gentleman stared , and says : `` Why , who 's that ? '' 
`` Who do you reckon ' t is ? '' 
`` I hai n't no idea . 
Who IS it ? '' 
`` It 's TOM SAWYER ! '' 
By jings , I most slumped through the floor ! 
But there war n't no time to swap knives ; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook , and kept on shaking ; and all the time how the woman did dance around and laugh and cry ; and then how they both did fire off questions about Sid , and Mary , and the rest of the tribe . 
But if they was joyful , it war n't nothing to what I was ; for it was like being born again , I was so glad to find out who I was . 
Well , they froze to me for two hours ; and at last , when my chin was so tired it could n't hardly go any more , I had told them more about my family -- I mean the Sawyer family -- than ever happened to any six Sawyer families . 
And I explained all about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of White River , and it took us three days to fix it . 
Which was all right , and worked first-rate ; because THEY did n't know but what it would take three days to fix it . 
If I 'd a called it a bolthead it would a done just as well . 
Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side , and pretty uncomfortable all up the other . 
Being Tom Sawyer was easy and comfortable , and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by I hear a steamboat coughing along down the river . 
Then I says to myself , s ` pose Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat ? 
And s ` pose he steps in here any minute , and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep quiet ? 
Well , I could n't HAVE it that way ; it would n't do at all . 
I must go up the road and waylay him . 
So I told the folks I reckoned I would go up to the town and fetch down my baggage . 
The old gentleman was for going along with me , but I said no , I could drive the horse myself , and I druther he would n't take no trouble about me . 
SO I started for town in the wagon , and when I was half-way I see a wagon coming , and sure enough it was Tom Sawyer , and I stopped and waited till he come along . 
I says `` Hold on ! '' 
and it stopped alongside , and his mouth opened up like a trunk , and stayed so ; and he swallowed two or three times like a person that 's got a dry throat , and then says : `` I hai n't ever done you no harm . 
You know that . 
So , then , what you want to come back and ha ` nt ME for ? '' 
I says : `` I hai n't come back -- I hai n't been GONE . '' 
When he heard my voice it righted him up some , but he war n't quite satisfied yet . 
He says : `` Do n't you play nothing on me , because I would n't on you . 
Honest injun , you ai n't a ghost ? '' 
`` Honest injun , I ai n't , '' I says . 
`` Well -- I -- I -- well , that ought to settle it , of course ; but I ca n't somehow seem to understand it no way . 
Looky here , war n't you ever murdered AT ALL ? '' 
`` No . 
I war n't ever murdered at all -- I played it on them . 
You come in here and feel of me if you do n't believe me . '' 
So he done it ; and it satisfied him ; and he was that glad to see me again he did n't know what to do . 
And he wanted to know all about it right off , because it was a grand adventure , and mysterious , and so it hit him where he lived . 
But I said , leave it alone till by and by ; and told his driver to wait , and we drove off a little piece , and I told him the kind of a fix I was in , and what did he reckon we better do ? 
He said , let him alone a minute , and do n't disturb him . 
So he thought and thought , and pretty soon he says : `` It 's all right ; I 've got it . 
Take my trunk in your wagon , and let on it 's your ` n ; and you turn back and fool along slow , so as to get to the house about the time you ought to ; and I 'll go towards town a piece , and take a fresh start , and get there a quarter or a half an hour after you ; and you need n't let on to know me at first . '' 
I says : `` All right ; but wait a minute . 
There 's one more thing -- a thing that NOBODY do n't know but me . 
And that is , there 's a nigger here that I 'm a - trying to steal out of slavery , and his name is JIM -- old Miss Watson 's Jim . '' 
He says : `` What ! 
Why , Jim is -- '' He stopped and went to studying . 
I says : `` I know what you 'll say . 
You 'll say it 's dirty , low-down business ; but what if it is ? 
I 'm low down ; and I 'm a-going to steal him , and I want you keep mum and not let on . 
Will you ? '' 
His eye lit up , and he says : `` I 'll HELP you steal him ! '' 
Well , I let go all holts then , like I was shot . 
It was the most astonishing speech I ever heard -- and I 'm bound to say Tom Sawyer fell considerable in my estimation . 
Only I could n't believe it . 
Tom Sawyer a NIGGER-STEALER ! 
`` Oh , shucks ! '' 
