The men ripped around awhile , and then rode away . 
As soon as they was out of sight I sung out to Buck and told him . 
He did n't know what to make of my voice coming out of the tree at first . 
He was awful surprised . 
He told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the men come in sight again ; said they was up to some devilment or other -- would n't be gone long . 
I wished I was out of that tree , but I das n't come down . 
Buck begun to cry and rip , and ` lowed that him and his cousin Joe -LRB- that was the other young chap -RRB- would make up for this day yet . 
He said his father and his two brothers was killed , and two or three of the enemy . 
Said the Shepherdsons laid for them in ambush . 
Buck said his father and brothers ought to waited for their relations -- the Shepherdsons was too strong for them . 
I asked him what was become of young Harney and Miss Sophia . 
He said they 'd got across the river and was safe . 
I was glad of that ; but the way Buck did take on because he did n't manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him -- I hai n't ever heard anything like it . 
All of a sudden , bang ! 
bang ! 
bang ! 
goes three or four guns -- the men had slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their horses ! 
The boys jumped for the river -- both of them hurt -- and as they swum down the current the men run along the bank shooting at them and singing out , `` Kill them , kill them ! '' 
It made me so sick I most fell out of the tree . 
I ai n't a-going to tell ALL that happened -- it would make me sick again if I was to do that . 
I wished I had n't ever come ashore that night to see such things . 
I ai n't ever going to get shut of them -- lots of times I dream about them . 
I stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark , afraid to come down . 
Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods ; and twice I seen little gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns ; so I reckoned the trouble was still a-going on . 
I was mighty downhearted ; so I made up my mind I would n't ever go anear that house again , because I reckoned I was to blame , somehow . 
I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two and run off ; and I judged I ought to told her father about that paper and the curious way she acted , and then maybe he would a locked her up , and this awful mess would n't ever happened . 
When I got down out of the tree I crept along down the river bank a piece , and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water , and tugged at them till I got them ashore ; then I covered up their faces , and got away as quick as I could . 
I cried a little when I was covering up Buck 's face , for he was mighty good to me . 
It was just dark now . 
I never went near the house , but struck through the woods and made for the swamp . 
Jim war n't on his island , so I tramped off in a hurry for the crick , and crowded through the willows , red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that awful country . 
The raft was gone ! 
My souls , but I was scared ! 
I could n't get my breath for most a minute . 
Then I raised a yell . 
A voice not twenty-five foot from me says : `` Good lan ' ! 
is dat you , honey ? 
Doan ' make no noise . '' 
It was Jim 's voice -- nothing ever sounded so good before . 
I run along the bank a piece and got aboard , and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me , he was so glad to see me . 
He says : `` Laws bless you , chile , I ` uz right down sho ' you 's dead agin . 
Jack 's been heah ; he say he reck 'n you 's ben shot , kase you didn ' come home no mo ' ; so I 's jes ' dis minute a startin ' de raf ' down towards de mouf er de crick , so 's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for certain you IS dead . 
Lawsy , I 's mighty glad to git you back again , honey . '' 
I says : `` All right -- that 's mighty good ; they wo n't find me , and they 'll think I 've been killed , and floated down the river -- there 's something up there that 'll help them think so -- so do n't you lose no time , Jim , but just shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can . '' 
I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the middle of the Mississippi . 
Then we hung up our signal lantern , and judged that we was free and safe once more . 
I had n't had a bite to eat since yesterday , so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk , and pork and cabbage and greens -- there ai n't nothing in the world so good when it 's cooked right -- and whilst I eat my supper we talked and had a good time . 
I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds , and so was Jim to get away from the swamp . 
We said there war n't no home like a raft , after all . 
Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery , but a raft do n't . 
You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft . 
TWO or three days and nights went by ; I reckon I might say they swum by , they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely . 
Here is the way we put in the time . 
It was a monstrous big river down there -- sometimes a mile and a half wide ; we run nights , and laid up and hid daytimes ; soon as night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up -- nearly always in the dead water under a towhead ; and then cut young cottonwoods and willows , and hid the raft with them . 
Then we set out the lines . 
Next we slid into the river and had a swim , so as to freshen up and cool off ; then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee deep , and watched the daylight come . 
Not a sound anywheres -- perfectly still -- just like the whole world was asleep , only sometimes the bullfrogs a - cluttering , maybe . 
The first thing to see , looking away over the water , was a kind of dull line -- that was the woods on t ` other side ; you could n't make nothing else out ; then a pale place in the sky ; then more paleness spreading around ; then the river softened up away off , and war n't black any more , but gray ; you could see little dark spots drifting along ever so far away -- trading scows , and such things ; and long black streaks -- rafts ; sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking ; or jumbled up voices , it was so still , and sounds come so far ; and by and by you could see a streak on the water which you know by the look of the streak that there 's a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it and makes that streak look that way ; and you see the mist curl up off of the water , and the east reddens up , and the river , and you make out a log-cabin in the edge of the woods , away on the bank on t ` other side of the river , being a woodyard , likely , and piled by them cheats so you can throw a dog through it anywheres ; then the nice breeze springs up , and comes fanning you from over there , so cool and fresh and sweet to smell on account of the woods and the flowers ; but sometimes not that way , because they 've left dead fish laying around , gars and such , and they do get pretty rank ; and next you 've got the full day , and everything smiling in the sun , and the song - birds just going it ! 
A little smoke could n't be noticed now , so we would take some fish off of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast . 
And afterwards we would watch the lonesomeness of the river , and kind of lazy along , and by and by lazy off to sleep . 
Wake up by and by , and look to see what done it , and maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream , so far off towards the other side you could n't tell nothing about her only whether she was a stern-wheel or side-wheel ; then for about an hour there would n't be nothing to hear nor nothing to see -- just solid lonesomeness . 
Next you 'd see a raft sliding by , away off yonder , and maybe a galoot on it chopping , because they 're most always doing it on a raft ; you 'd see the axe flash and come down -- you do n't hear nothing ; you see that axe go up again , and by the time it 's above the man 's head then you hear the K'CHUNK ! 
-- it had took all that time to come over the water . 
So we would put in the day , lazying around , listening to the stillness . 
Once there was a thick fog , and the rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the steamboats would n't run over them . 
A scow or a raft went by so close we could hear them talking and cussing and laughing -- heard them plain ; but we could n't see no sign of them ; it made you feel crawly ; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air . 
Jim said he believed it was spirits ; but I says : `` No ; spirits would n't say , ` Dern the dern fog . ' '' 
Soon as it was night out we shoved ; when we got her out to about the middle we let her alone , and let her float wherever the current wanted her to ; then we lit the pipes , and dangled our legs in the water , and talked about all kinds of things -- we was always naked , day and night , whenever the mosquitoes would let us -- the new clothes Buck 's folks made for me was too good to be comfortable , and besides I did n't go much on clothes , nohow . 
Sometimes we 'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest time . 
Yonder was the banks and the islands , across the water ; and maybe a spark -- which was a candle in a cabin window ; and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or two -- on a raft or a scow , you know ; and maybe you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts . 
It 's lovely to live on a raft . 
We had the sky up there , all speckled with stars , and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them , and discuss about whether they was made or only just happened . 
Jim he allowed they was made , but I allowed they happened ; I judged it would have took too long to MAKE so many . 
Jim said the moon could a LAID them ; well , that looked kind of reasonable , so I did n't say nothing against it , because I 've seen a frog lay most as many , so of course it could be done . 
We used to watch the stars that fell , too , and see them streak down . 
Jim allowed they 'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest . 
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the dark , and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of her chimbleys , and they would rain down in the river and look awful pretty ; then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and her powwow shut off and leave the river still again ; and by and by her waves would get to us , a long time after she was gone , and joggle the raft a bit , and after that you would n't hear nothing for you could n't tell how long , except maybe frogs or something . 
After midnight the people on shore went to bed , and then for two or three hours the shores was black -- no more sparks in the cabin windows . 
These sparks was our clock -- the first one that showed again meant morning was coming , so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away . 
One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to the main shore -- it was only two hundred yards -- and paddled about a mile up a crick amongst the cypress woods , to see if I could n't get some berries . 
Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed the crick , here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as they could foot it . 
I thought I was a goner , for whenever anybody was after anybody I judged it was ME -- or maybe Jim . 
I was about to dig out from there in a hurry , but they was pretty close to me then , and sung out and begged me to save their lives -- said they had n't been doing nothing , and was being chased for it -- said there was men and dogs a-coming . 
They wanted to jump right in , but I says : `` Do n't you do it . 
I do n't hear the dogs and horses yet ; you 've got time to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways ; then you take to the water and wade down to me and get in -- that 'll throw the dogs off the scent . '' 
They done it , and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our towhead , and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off , shouting . 
We heard them come along towards the crick , but could n't see them ; they seemed to stop and fool around a while ; then , as we got further and further away all the time , we could n't hardly hear them at all ; by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the river , everything was quiet , and we paddled over to the towhead and hid in the cottonwoods and was safe . 
One of these fellows was about seventy or upwards , and had a bald head and very gray whiskers . 
He had an old battered-up slouch hat on , and a greasy blue woollen shirt , and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed into his boot-tops , and home-knit galluses -- no , he only had one . 
He had an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over his arm , and both of them had big , fat , ratty-looking carpet-bags . 
The other fellow was about thirty , and dressed about as ornery . 
After breakfast we all laid off and talked , and the first thing that come out was that these chaps did n't know one another . 
`` What got you into trouble ? '' 
says the baldhead to t ` other chap . 
`` Well , I 'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth -- and it does take it off , too , and generly the enamel along with it -- but I stayed about one night longer than I ought to , and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran across you on the trail this side of town , and you told me they were coming , and begged me to help you to get off . 
So I told you I was expecting trouble myself , and would scatter out WITH you . 
That 's the whole yarn -- what 's yourn ? 
`` Well , I 'd ben a-running ' a little temperance revival thar ` bout a week , and was the pet of the women folks , big and little , for I was makin ' it mighty warm for the rummies , I TELL you , and takin ' as much as five or six dollars a night -- ten cents a head , children and niggers free -- and business a-growin ' all the time , when somehow or another a little report got around last night that I had a way of puttin ' in my time with a private jug on the sly . 
A nigger rousted me out this mornin ' , and told me the people was getherin ' on the quiet with their dogs and horses , and they 'd be along pretty soon and give me ` bout half an hour 's start , and then run me down if they could ; and if they got me they 'd tar and feather me and ride me on a rail , sure . 
I did n't wait for no breakfast -- I war n't hungry . '' 
