They generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella , but did n't wear no coats nor waistcoats , they called one another Bill , and Buck , and Hank , and Joe , and Andy , and talked lazy and drawly , and used considerable many cuss words . 
There was as many as one loafer leaning up against every awning-post , and he most always had his hands in his britches-pockets , except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw of tobacco or scratch . 
What a body was hearing amongst them all the time was : `` Gim me a chaw ' v tobacker , Hank . '' 
`` Cai n't ; I hai n't got but one chaw left . 
Ask Bill . '' 
Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw ; maybe he lies and says he ai n't got none . 
Some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world , nor a chaw of tobacco of their own . 
They get all their chawing by borrowing ; they say to a fellow , `` I wisht you 'd len ' me a chaw , Jack , I jist this minute give Ben Thompson the last chaw I had '' -- which is a lie pretty much everytime ; it do n't fool nobody but a stranger ; but Jack ai n't no stranger , so he says : `` YOU give him a chaw , did you ? 
So did your sister 's cat 's grandmother . 
You pay me back the chaws you 've awready borry 'd off 'n me , Lafe Buckner , then I 'll loan you one or two ton of it , and wo n't charge you no back intrust , nuther . '' 
`` Well , I DID pay you back some of it wunst . '' 
`` Yes , you did -- ` bout six chaws . 
You borry 'd store tobacker and paid back nigger-head . '' 
Store tobacco is flat black plug , but these fellows mostly chaws the natural leaf twisted . 
When they borrow a chaw they do n't generly cut it off with a knife , but set the plug in between their teeth , and gnaw with their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two ; then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it when it 's handed back , and says , sarcastic : `` Here , gim me the CHAW , and you take the PLUG . '' 
All the streets and lanes was just mud ; they war n't nothing else BUT mud -- mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places , and two or three inches deep in ALL the places . 
The hogs loafed and grunted around everywheres . 
You 'd see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come lazying along the street and whollop herself right down in the way , where folks had to walk around her , and she 'd stretch out and shut her eyes and wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking her , and look as happy as if she was on salary . 
And pretty soon you 'd hear a loafer sing out , `` Hi ! 
SO boy ! 
sick him , Tige ! '' 
and away the sow would go , squealing most horrible , with a dog or two swinging to each ear , and three or four dozen more a - coming ; and then you would see all the loafers get up and watch the thing out of sight , and laugh at the fun and look grateful for the noise . 
Then they 'd settle back again till there was a dog fight . 
There could n't anything wake them up all over , and make them happy all over , like a dog fight -- unless it might be putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him , or tying a tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to death . 
On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank , and they was bowed and bent , and about ready to tumble in , The people had moved out of them . 
The bank was caved away under one corner of some others , and that corner was hanging over . 
People lived in them yet , but it was dangersome , because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house caves in at a time . 
Sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the river in one summer . 
Such a town as that has to be always moving back , and back , and back , because the river 's always gnawing at it . 
The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the wagons and horses in the streets , and more coming all the time . 
Families fetched their dinners with them from the country , and eat them in the wagons . 
There was considerable whisky drinking going on , and I seen three fights . 
By and by somebody sings out : `` Here comes old Boggs ! 
-- in from the country for his little old monthly drunk ; here he comes , boys ! '' 
All the loafers looked glad ; I reckoned they was used to having fun out of Boggs . 
One of them says : `` Wonder who he 's a-gwyne to chaw up this time . 
If he 'd a-chawed up all the men he 's ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he 'd have considerable ruputation now . '' 
Another one says , `` I wisht old Boggs 'd threaten me , ` cuz then I 'd know I war n't gwyne to die for a thousan ' year . '' 
Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse , whooping and yelling like an Injun , and singing out : `` Cler the track , thar . 
I 'm on the waw-path , and the price uv coffins is a-gwyne to raise . '' 
He was drunk , and weaving about in his saddle ; he was over fifty year old , and had a very red face . 
Everybody yelled at him and laughed at him and sassed him , and he sassed back , and said he 'd attend to them and lay them out in their regular turns , but he could n't wait now because he 'd come to town to kill old Colonel Sherburn , and his motto was , `` Meat first , and spoon vittles to top off on . '' 
He see me , and rode up and says : `` Whar 'd you come f 'm , boy ? 
You prepared to die ? '' 
Then he rode on . 
I was scared , but a man says : `` He do n't mean nothing ; he 's always a-carryin ' on like that when he 's drunk . 
He 's the best naturedest old fool in Arkansaw -- never hurt nobody , drunk nor sober . '' 
Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town , and bent his head down so he could see under the curtain of the awning and yells : `` Come out here , Sherburn ! 
Come out and meet the man you 've swindled . 
You 're the houn ' I 'm after , and I 'm a-gwyne to have you , too ! '' 
And so he went on , calling Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue to , and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and going on . 
By and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five -- and he was a heap the best dressed man in that town , too -- steps out of the store , and the crowd drops back on each side to let him come . 
He says to Boggs , mighty ca 'm and slow -- he says : `` I 'm tired of this , but I 'll endure it till one o'clock . 
Till one o'clock , mind -- no longer . 
If you open your mouth against me only once after that time you ca n't travel so far but I will find you . '' 
Then he turns and goes in . 
The crowd looked mighty sober ; nobody stirred , and there war n't no more laughing . 
Boggs rode off blackguarding Sherburn as loud as he could yell , all down the street ; and pretty soon back he comes and stops before the store , still keeping it up . 
Some men crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up , but he would n't ; they told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen minutes , and so he MUST go home -- he must go right away . 
But it did n't do no good . 
He cussed away with all his might , and throwed his hat down in the mud and rode over it , and pretty soon away he went a-raging down the street again , with his gray hair a-flying . 
Everybody that could get a chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock him up and get him sober ; but it war n't no use -- up the street he would tear again , and give Sherburn another cussing . 
By and by somebody says : `` Go for his daughter ! 
-- quick , go for his daughter ; sometimes he 'll listen to her . 
If anybody can persuade him , she can . '' 
So somebody started on a run . 
I walked down street a ways and stopped . 
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again , but not on his horse . 
He was a-reeling across the street towards me , bare-headed , with a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along . 
He was quiet , and looked uneasy ; and he war n't hanging back any , but was doing some of the hurrying himself . 
Somebody sings out : `` Boggs ! '' 
I looked over there to see who said it , and it was that Colonel Sherburn . 
He was standing perfectly still in the street , and had a pistol raised in his right hand -- not aiming it , but holding it out with the barrel tilted up towards the sky . 
The same second I see a young girl coming on the run , and two men with her . 
Boggs and the men turned round to see who called him , and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side , and the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to a level -- both barrels cocked . 
Boggs throws up both of his hands and says , `` O Lord , do n't shoot ! '' 
Bang ! 
goes the first shot , and he staggers back , clawing at the air -- bang ! 
goes the second one , and he tumbles backwards on to the ground , heavy and solid , with his arms spread out . 
That young girl screamed out and comes rushing , and down she throws herself on her father , crying , and saying , `` Oh , he 's killed him , he 's killed him ! '' 
The crowd closed up around them , and shouldered and jammed one another , with their necks stretched , trying to see , and people on the inside trying to shove them back and shouting , `` Back , back ! 
give him air , give him air ! '' 
Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground , and turned around on his heels and walked off . 
They took Boggs to a little drug store , the crowd pressing around just the same , and the whole town following , and I rushed and got a good place at the window , where I was close to him and could see in . 
They laid him on the floor and put one large Bible under his head , and opened another one and spread it on his breast ; but they tore open his shirt first , and I seen where one of the bullets went in . 
He made about a dozen long gasps , his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in his breath , and letting it down again when he breathed it out -- and after that he laid still ; he was dead . 
Then they pulled his daughter away from him , screaming and crying , and took her off . 
She was about sixteen , and very sweet and gentle looking , but awful pale and scared . 
Well , pretty soon the whole town was there , squirming and scrouging and pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look , but people that had the places would n't give them up , and folks behind them was saying all the time , `` Say , now , you 've looked enough , you fellows ; ` tai n't right and ` tai n't fair for you to stay thar all the time , and never give nobody a chance ; other folks has their rights as well as you . '' 
There was considerable jawing back , so I slid out , thinking maybe there was going to be trouble . 
The streets was full , and everybody was excited . 
Everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened , and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows , stretching their necks and listening . 
One long , lanky man , with long hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head , and a crooked-handled cane , marked out the places on the ground where Boggs stood and where Sherburn stood , and the people following him around from one place to t ` other and watching everything he done , and bobbing their heads to show they understood , and stooping a little and resting their hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with his cane ; and then he stood up straight and stiff where Sherburn had stood , frowning and having his hat-brim down over his eyes , and sung out , `` Boggs ! '' 
and then fetched his cane down slow to a level , and says `` Bang ! '' 
staggered backwards , says `` Bang ! '' 
again , and fell down flat on his back . 
The people that had seen the thing said he done it perfect ; said it was just exactly the way it all happened . 
Then as much as a dozen people got out their bottles and treated him . 
Well , by and by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched . 
In about a minute everybody was saying it ; so away they went , mad and yelling , and snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with . 
