`` I reckon he WAR N'T a coward . 
Not by a blame ' sight . 
There ai n't a coward amongst them Shepherdsons -- not a one . 
And there ai n't no cowards amongst the Grangerfords either . 
Why , that old man kep ' up his end in a fight one day for half an hour against three Grangerfords , and come out winner . 
They was all a-horseback ; he lit off of his horse and got behind a little woodpile , and kep ' his horse before him to stop the bullets ; but the Grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around the old man , and peppered away at him , and he peppered away at them . 
Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled , but the Grangerfords had to be FETCHED home -- and one of 'em was dead , and another died the next day . 
No , sir ; if a body 's out hunting for cowards he do n't want to fool away any time amongst them Shepherdsons , becuz they do n't breed any of that KIND . '' 
Next Sunday we all went to church , about three mile , everybody a - horseback . 
The men took their guns along , so did Buck , and kept them between their knees or stood them handy against the wall . 
The Shepherdsons done the same . 
It was pretty ornery preaching -- all about brotherly love , and such-like tiresomeness ; but everybody said it was a good sermon , and they all talked it over going home , and had such a powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and preforeordestination , and I do n't know what all , that it did seem to me to be one of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet . 
About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around , some in their chairs and some in their rooms , and it got to be pretty dull . 
Buck and a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep . 
I went up to our room , and judged I would take a nap myself . 
I found that sweet Miss Sophia standing in her door , which was next to ours , and she took me in her room and shut the door very soft , and asked me if I liked her , and I said I did ; and she asked me if I would do something for her and not tell anybody , and I said I would . 
Then she said she 'd forgot her Testament , and left it in the seat at church between two other books , and would I slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her , and not say nothing to nobody . 
I said I would . 
So I slid out and slipped off up the road , and there war n't anybody at the church , except maybe a hog or two , for there war n't any lock on the door , and hogs likes a puncheon floor in summer - time because it 's cool . 
If you notice , most folks do n't go to church only when they 've got to ; but a hog is different . 
Says I to myself , something 's up ; it ai n't natural for a girl to be in such a sweat about a Testament . 
So I give it a shake , and out drops a little piece of paper with `` HALF-PAST TWO '' wrote on it with a pencil . 
I ransacked it , but could n't find anything else . 
I could n't make anything out of that , so I put the paper in the book again , and when I got home and upstairs there was Miss Sophia in her door waiting for me . 
She pulled me in and shut the door ; then she looked in the Testament till she found the paper , and as soon as she read it she looked glad ; and before a body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze , and said I was the best boy in the world , and not to tell anybody . 
She was mighty red in the face for a minute , and her eyes lighted up , and it made her powerful pretty . 
I was a good deal astonished , but when I got my breath I asked her what the paper was about , and she asked me if I had read it , and I said no , and she asked me if I could read writing , and I told her `` no , only coarse-hand , '' and then she said the paper war n't anything but a book-mark to keep her place , and I might go and play now . 
I went off down to the river , studying over this thing , and pretty soon I noticed that my nigger was following along behind . 
When we was out of sight of the house he looked back and around a second , and then comes a - running , and says : `` Mars Jawge , if you 'll come down into de swamp I 'll show you a whole stack o ' water-moccasins . '' 
Thinks I , that 's mighty curious ; he said that yesterday . 
He oughter know a body do n't love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for them . 
What is he up to , anyway ? 
So I says : `` All right ; trot ahead . '' 
I followed a half a mile ; then he struck out over the swamp , and waded ankle deep as much as another half-mile . 
We come to a little flat piece of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines , and he says : `` You shove right in dah jist a few steps , Mars Jawge ; dah 's whah dey is . 
I 's seed 'm befo ' ; I do n't k ` yer to see 'em no mo ' . '' 
Then he slopped right along and went away , and pretty soon the trees hid him . 
I poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch as big as a bedroom all hung around with vines , and found a man laying there asleep -- and , by jings , it was my old Jim ! 
I waked him up , and I reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to him to see me again , but it war n't . 
He nearly cried he was so glad , but he war n't surprised . 
Said he swum along behind me that night , and heard me yell every time , but das n't answer , because he did n't want nobody to pick HIM up and take him into slavery again . 
Says he : `` I got hurt a little , en could n't swim fas ' , so I wuz a considable ways behine you towards de las ' ; when you landed I reck ` ned I could ketch up wid you on de lan ' ` dout havin ' to shout at you , but when I see dat house I begin to go slow . 
I ` uz off too fur to hearwhat dey say to you -- I wuz ` fraid o ' de dogs ; but when it ` uz all quiet agin I knowed you 's in de house , so I struck out for de woods to wait for day . 
Early in de mawnin ' some er de niggers come along , gwyne to de fields , en dey tuk me en showed me dis place , whah de dogs ca n't track me on accounts o ' de water , en dey brings me truck to eat every night , en tells me how you 's a-gitt 'n along . '' 
`` Why did n't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , ` twar n't no use to ` sturb you , Huck , tell we could do sumfn -- but we 's all right now . 
I ben a-buyin ' pots en pans en vittles , as I got a chanst , en a-patchin ' up de raf ' nights when -- '' `` WHAT raft , Jim ? '' 
`` Our ole raf ' . '' 
`` You mean to say our old raft war n't smashed all to flinders ? '' 
`` No , she war n't . 
She was tore up a good deal -- one en ' of her was ; but dey war n't no great harm done , on ' y our traps was mos ' all los ' . 
Ef we hadn ' dive ' so deep en swum so fur under water , en de night hadn ' ben so dark , en we war n't so sk ` yerd , en ben sich punkin-heads , as de sayin ' is , we 'd a seed de raf ' . 
But it 's jis ' as well we did n't , ` kase now she 's all fixed up agin mos ' as good as new , en we 's got a new lot o ' stuff , in de place o ' what ` uz los ' . '' 
`` Why , how did you get hold of the raft again , Jim -- did you catch her ? '' 
`` How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods ? 
No ; some er de niggers foun ' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben ' , en dey hid her in a crick ` mongst de willows , en dey wuz so much jawin ' ` bout which un ` um she b ` long to de mos ' dat I come to heah ` bout it pooty soon , so I ups en settles de trouble by tellin ' ` um she do n't b ` long to none uv um , but to you en me ; en I ast 'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman 's propaty , en git a hid 'n for it ? 
Den I gin 'm ten cents apiece , en dey ` uz mighty well satisfied , en wisht some mo ' raf 's ` ud come along en make 'm rich agin . 
Dey 's mighty good to me , dese niggers is , en whatever I wants 'm to do fur me I doan ' have to ast 'm twice , honey . 
Dat Jack 's a good nigger , en pooty smart . '' 
`` Yes , he is . 
He ai n't ever told me you was here ; told me to come , and he 'd show me a lot of water-moccasins . 
If anything happens HE ai n't mixed up in it . 
He can say he never seen us together , and it 'll be the truth . '' 
I do n't want to talk much about the next day . 
I reckon I 'll cut it pretty short . 
I waked up about dawn , and was a-going to turn over and go to sleep again when I noticed how still it was -- did n't seem to be anybody stirring . 
That war n't usual . 
Next I noticed that Buck was up and gone . 
Well , I gets up , a-wondering , and goes down stairs -- nobody around ; everything as still as a mouse . 
Just the same outside . 
Thinks I , what does it mean ? 
Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack , and says : `` What 's it all about ? '' 
Says he : `` Do n't you know , Mars Jawge ? '' 
`` No , '' says I , `` I do n't . '' 
`` Well , den , Miss Sophia 's run off ! 
` deed she has . 
She run off in de night some time -- nobody do n't know jis ' when ; run off to get married to dat young Harney Shepherdson , you know -- leastways , so dey ` spec . 
De fambly foun ' it out ` bout half an hour ago -- maybe a little mo ' -- en ' I TELL you dey war n't no time los ' . 
Sich another hurryin ' up guns en hosses YOU never see ! 
De women folks has gone for to stir up de relations , en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him ` fo ' he kin git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia . 
I reck 'n dey 's gwyne to be mighty rough times . '' 
`` Buck went off ` thout waking me up . '' 
`` Well , I reck 'n he DID ! 
Dey war n't gwyne to mix you up in it . 
Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en ` lowed he 's gwyne to fetch home a Shepherdson or bust . 
Well , dey 'll be plenty un 'm dah , I reck ` n , en you bet you he 'll fetch one ef he gits a chanst . '' 
I took up the river road as hard as I could put . 
By and by I begin to hear guns a good ways off . 
When I came in sight of the log store and the woodpile where the steamboats lands I worked along under the trees and brush till I got to a good place , and then I clumb up into the forks of a cottonwood that was out of reach , and watched . 
There was a wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the tree , and first I was going to hide behind that ; but maybe it was luckier I did n't . 
There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open place before the log store , cussing and yelling , and trying to get at a couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the steamboat landing ; but they could n't come it . 
Every time one of them showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at . 
The two boys was squatting back to back behind the pile , so they could watch both ways . 
By and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling . 
They started riding towards the store ; then up gets one of the boys , draws a steady bead over the wood-rank , and drops one of them out of his saddle . 
All the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started to carry him to the store ; and that minute the two boys started on the run . 
They got half way to the tree I was in before the men noticed . 
Then the men see them , and jumped on their horses and took out after them . 
They gained on the boys , but it did n't do no good , the boys had too good a start ; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree , and slipped in behind it , and so they had the bulge on the men again . 
One of the boys was Buck , and the other was a slim young chap about nineteen years old . 
