`` That 's odd ! 
But still I do n't see quite ... I can understand that thereby you could spoil a valuable stone , but personal invisibility is a far cry . '' 
`` Precisely , '' said Griffin . 
`` But consider , visibility depends on the action of the visible bodies on light . 
Either a body absorbs light , or it reflects or refracts it , or does all these things . 
If it neither reflects nor refracts nor absorbs light , it can not of itself be visible . 
You see an opaque red box , for instance , because the colour absorbs some of the light and reflects the rest , all the red part of the light , to you . 
If it did not absorb any particular part of the light , but reflected it all , then it would be a shining white box . 
Silver ! 
A diamond box would neither absorb much of the light nor reflect much from the general surface , but just here and there where the surfaces were favourable the light would be reflected and refracted , so that you would get a brilliant appearance of flashing reflections and translucencies -- a sort of skeleton of light . 
A glass box would not be so brilliant , not so clearly visible , as a diamond box , because there would be less refraction and reflection . 
See that ? 
From certain points of view you would see quite clearly through it . 
Some kinds of glass would be more visible than others , a box of flint glass would be brighter than a box of ordinary window glass . 
A box of very thin common glass would be hard to see in a bad light , because it would absorb hardly any light and refract and reflect very little . 
And if you put a sheet of common white glass in water , still more if you put it in some denser liquid than water , it would vanish almost altogether , because light passing from water to glass is only slightly refracted or reflected or indeed affected in any way . 
It is almost as invisible as a jet of coal gas or hydrogen is in air . 
And for precisely the same reason ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said Kemp , `` that is pretty plain sailing . '' 
`` And here is another fact you will know to be true . 
If a sheet of glass is smashed , Kemp , and beaten into a powder , it becomes much more visible while it is in the air ; it becomes at last an opaque white powder . 
This is because the powdering multiplies the surfaces of the glass at which refraction and reflection occur . 
In the sheet of glass there are only two surfaces ; in the powder the light is reflected or refracted by each grain it passes through , and very little gets right through the powder . 
But if the white powdered glass is put into water , it forthwith vanishes . 
The powdered glass and water have much the same refractive index ; that is , the light undergoes very little refraction or reflection in passing from one to the other . 
`` You make the glass invisible by putting it into a liquid of nearly the same refractive index ; a transparent thing becomes invisible if it is put in any medium of almost the same refractive index . 
And if you will consider only a second , you will see also that the powder of glass might be made to vanish in air , if its refractive index could be made the same as that of air ; for then there would be no refraction or reflection as the light passed from glass to air . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' said Kemp . 
`` But a man 's not powdered glass ! '' 
`` No , '' said Griffin . 
`` He 's more transparent ! '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
`` That from a doctor ! 
How one forgets ! 
Have you already forgotten your physics , in ten years ? 
Just think of all the things that are transparent and seem not to be so . 
Paper , for instance , is made up of transparent fibres , and it is white and opaque only for the same reason that a powder of glass is white and opaque . 
Oil white paper , fill up the interstices between the particles with oil so that there is no longer refraction or reflection except at the surfaces , and it becomes as transparent as glass . 
And not only paper , but cotton fibre , linen fibre , wool fibre , woody fibre , and bone , Kemp , flesh , Kemp , hair , Kemp , nails and nerves , Kemp , in fact the whole fabric of a man except the red of his blood and the black pigment of hair , are all made up of transparent , colourless tissue . 
So little suffices to make us visible one to the other . 
For the most part the fibres of a living creature are no more opaque than water . '' 
`` Great Heavens ! '' 
cried Kemp . 
`` Of course , of course ! 
I was thinking only last night of the sea larvae and all jelly-fish ! '' 
`` Now you have me ! 
And all that I knew and had in mind a year after I left London -- six years ago . 
But I kept it to myself . 
I had to do my work under frightful disadvantages . 
Oliver , my professor , was a scientific bounder , a journalist by instinct , a thief of ideas -- he was always prying ! 
And you know the knavish system of the scientific world . 
I simply would not publish , and let him share my credit . 
I went on working ; I got nearer and nearer making my formula into an experiment , a reality . 
I told no living soul , because I meant to flash my work upon the world with crushing effect and become famous at a blow . 
I took up the question of pigments to fill up certain gaps . 
And suddenly , not by design but by accident , I made a discovery in physiology . '' 
`` Yes ? '' 
`` You know the red colouring matter of blood ; it can be made white -- colourless -- and remain with all the functions it has now ! '' 
Kemp gave a cry of incredulous amazement . 
The Invisible Man rose and began pacing the little study . 
`` You may well exclaim . 
I remember that night . 
It was late at night -- in the daytime one was bothered with the gaping , silly students -- and I worked then sometimes till dawn . 
It came suddenly , splendid and complete in my mind . 
I was alone ; the laboratory was still , with the tall lights burning brightly and silently . 
In all my great moments I have been alone . 
` One could make an animal -- a tissue -- transparent ! 
One could make it invisible ! 
All except the pigments -- I could be invisible ! ' 
I said , suddenly realising what it meant to be an albino with such knowledge . 
It was overwhelming . 
I left the filtering I was doing , and went and stared out of the great window at the stars . ' 
I could be invisible ! ' 
I repeated . 
`` To do such a thing would be to transcend magic . 
And I beheld , unclouded by doubt , a magnificent vision of all that invisibility might mean to a man -- the mystery , the power , the freedom . 
Drawbacks I saw none . 
You have only to think ! 
And I , a shabby , poverty-struck , hemmed-in demonstrator , teaching fools in a provincial college , might suddenly become -- this . 
I ask you , Kemp if you ... Anyone , I tell you , would have flung himself upon that research . 
And I worked three years , and every mountain of difficulty I toiled over showed another from its summit . 
The infinite details ! 
And the exasperation ! 
A professor , a provincial professor , always prying . 
` When are you going to publish this work of yours ? ' 
was his everlasting question . 
And the students , the cramped means ! 
Three years I had of it -- `` And after three years of secrecy and exasperation , I found that to complete it was impossible -- impossible . '' 
`` How ? '' 
asked Kemp . 
`` Money , '' said the Invisible Man , and went again to stare out of the window . 
He turned around abruptly . 
`` I robbed the old man -- robbed my father . 
`` The money was not his , and he shot himself . '' 
AT THE HOUSE IN GREAT PORTLAND STREET For a moment Kemp sat in silence , staring at the back of the headless figure at the window . 
Then he started , struck by a thought , rose , took the Invisible Man 's arm , and turned him away from the outlook . 
`` You are tired , '' he said , `` and while I sit , you walk about . 
Have my chair . '' 
He placed himself between Griffin and the nearest window . 
For a space Griffin sat silent , and then he resumed abruptly : `` I had left the Chesilstowe cottage already , '' he said , `` when that happened . 
