-- then stopped . 
` Here , ' I said , ` is an outcast like myself . 
This is the man for me . ' 
So I turned back and came to you -- you . 
And -- '' `` Lord ! '' 
said Mr. Marvel . 
`` But I 'm all in a tizzy . 
May I ask -- How is it ? 
And what you may be requiring in the way of help ? 
-- Invisible ! '' 
`` I want you to help me get clothes -- and shelter -- and then , with other things . 
I 've left them long enough . 
If you wo n't -- well ! 
But you will -- must . '' 
`` Look here , '' said Mr. Marvel . 
`` I 'm too flabbergasted . 
Do n't knock me about any more . 
And leave me go . 
I must get steady a bit . 
And you 've pretty near broken my toe . 
It 's all so unreasonable . 
Empty downs , empty sky . 
Nothing visible for miles except the bosom of Nature . 
And then comes a voice . 
A voice out of heaven ! 
And stones ! 
And a fist -- Lord ! '' 
`` Pull yourself together , '' said the Voice , `` for you have to do the job I 've chosen for you . '' 
Mr. Marvel blew out his cheeks , and his eyes were round . 
`` I 've chosen you , '' said the Voice . 
`` You are the only man except some of those fools down there , who knows there is such a thing as an invisible man . 
You have to be my helper . 
Help me -- and I will do great things for you . 
An invisible man is a man of power . '' 
He stopped for a moment to sneeze violently . 
`` But if you betray me , '' he said , `` if you fail to do as I direct you -- '' He paused and tapped Mr. Marvel 's shoulder smartly . 
Mr. Marvel gave a yelp of terror at the touch . 
`` I do n't want to betray you , '' said Mr. Marvel , edging away from the direction of the fingers . 
`` Do n't you go a-thinking that , whatever you do . 
All I want to do is to help you -- just tell me what I got to do . 
-LRB- Lord ! -RRB- 
Whatever you want done , that I 'm most willing to do . '' 
MR. MARVEL 'S VISIT TO IPING After the first gusty panic had spent itself Iping became argumentative . 
Scepticism suddenly reared its head -- rather nervous scepticism , not at all assured of its back , but scepticism nevertheless . 
It is so much easier not to believe in an invisible man ; and those who had actually seen him dissolve into air , or felt the strength of his arm , could be counted on the fingers of two hands . 
And of these witnesses Mr. Wadgers was presently missing , having retired impregnably behind the bolts and bars of his own house , and Jaffers was lying stunned in the parlour of the `` Coach and Horses . '' 
Great and strange ideas transcending experience often have less effect upon men and women than smaller , more tangible considerations . 
Iping was gay with bunting , and everybody was in gala dress . 
Whit Monday had been looked forward to for a month or more . 
By the afternoon even those who believed in the Unseen were beginning to resume their little amusements in a tentative fashion , on the supposition that he had quite gone away , and with the sceptics he was already a jest . 
But people , sceptics and believers alike , were remarkably sociable all that day . 
Haysman 's meadow was gay with a tent , in which Mrs. Bunting and other ladies were preparing tea , while , without , the Sunday-school children ran races and played games under the noisy guidance of the curate and the Misses Cuss and Sackbut . 
No doubt there was a slight uneasiness in the air , but people for the most part had the sense to conceal whatever imaginative qualms they experienced . 
On the village green an inclined strong , down which , clinging the while to a pulley-swung handle , one could be hurled violently against a sack at the other end , came in for considerable favour among the adolescent , as also did the swings and the cocoanut shies . 
There was also promenading , and the steam organ attached to a small roundabout filled the air with a pungent flavour of oil and with equally pungent music . 
Members of the club , who had attended church in the morning , were splendid in badges of pink and green , and some of the gayer-minded had also adorned their bowler hats with brilliant-coloured favours of ribbon . 
Old Fletcher , whose conceptions of holiday-making were severe , was visible through the jasmine about his window or through the open door -LRB- whichever way you chose to look -RRB- , poised delicately on a plank supported on two chairs , and whitewashing the ceiling of his front room . 
About four o'clock a stranger entered the village from the direction of the downs . 
He was a short , stout person in an extraordinarily shabby top hat , and he appeared to be very much out of breath . 
His cheeks were alternately limp and tightly puffed . 
His mottled face was apprehensive , and he moved with a sort of reluctant alacrity . 
He turned the corner of the church , and directed his way to the `` Coach and Horses . '' 
Among others old Fletcher remembers seeing him , and indeed the old gentleman was so struck by his peculiar agitation that he inadvertently allowed a quantity of whitewash to run down the brush into the sleeve of his coat while regarding him . 
This stranger , to the perceptions of the proprietor of the cocoanut shy , appeared to be talking to himself , and Mr. Huxter remarked the same thing . 
He stopped at the foot of the `` Coach and Horses '' steps , and , according to Mr. Huxter , appeared to undergo a severe internal struggle before he could induce himself to enter the house . 
Finally he marched up the steps , and was seen by Mr. Huxter to turn to the left and open the door of the parlour . 
Mr. Huxter heard voices from within the room and from the bar apprising the man of his error . 
`` That room 's private ! '' 
said Hall , and the stranger shut the door clumsily and went into the bar . 
In the course of a few minutes he reappeared , wiping his lips with the back of his hand with an air of quiet satisfaction that somehow impressed Mr. Huxter as assumed . 
He stood looking about him for some moments , and then Mr. Huxter saw him walk in an oddly furtive manner towards the gates of the yard , upon which the parlour window opened . 
The stranger , after some hesitation , leant against one of the gate-posts , produced a short clay pipe , and prepared to fill it . 
His fingers trembled while doing so . 
He lit it clumsily , and folding his arms began to smoke in a languid attitude , an attitude which his occasional glances up the yard altogether belied . 
All this Mr. Huxter saw over the canisters of the tobacco window , and the singularity of the man 's behaviour prompted him to maintain his observation . 
Presently the stranger stood up abruptly and put his pipe in his pocket . 
Then he vanished into the yard . 
Forthwith Mr. Huxter , conceiving he was witness of some petty larceny , leapt round his counter and ran out into the road to intercept the thief . 
As he did so , Mr. Marvel reappeared , his hat askew , a big bundle in a blue table-cloth in one hand , and three books tied together -- as it proved afterwards with the Vicar 's braces -- in the other . 
Directly he saw Huxter he gave a sort of gasp , and turning sharply to the left , began to run . 
`` Stop , thief ! '' 
cried Huxter , and set off after him . 
Mr. Huxter 's sensations were vivid but brief . 
He saw the man just before him and spurting briskly for the church corner and the hill road . 
He saw the village flags and festivities beyond , and a face or so turned towards him . 
He bawled , `` Stop ! '' 
again . 
He had hardly gone ten strides before his shin was caught in some mysterious fashion , and he was no longer running , but flying with inconceivable rapidity through the air . 
He saw the ground suddenly close to his face . 
The world seemed to splash into a million whirling specks of light , and subsequent proceedings interested him no more . 
IN THE `` COACH AND HORSES '' Now in order clearly to understand what had happened in the inn , it is necessary to go back to the moment when Mr. Marvel first came into view of Mr. Huxter 's window . 
At that precise moment Mr. Cuss and Mr. Bunting were in the parlour . 
They were seriously investigating the strange occurrences of the morning , and were , with Mr. Hall 's permission , making a thorough examination of the Invisible Man 's belongings . 
Jaffers had partially recovered from his fall and had gone home in the charge of his sympathetic friends . 
The stranger 's scattered garments had been removed by Mrs. Hall and the room tidied up . 
And on the table under the window where the stranger had been wont to work , Cuss had hit almost at once on three big books in manuscript labelled `` Diary . '' 
`` Diary ! '' 
said Cuss , putting the three books on the table . 
`` Now , at any rate , we shall learn something . '' 
The Vicar stood with his hands on the table . 
