It was last December . 
I had taken a room in London , a large unfurnished room in a big ill-managed lodging-house in a slum near Great Portland Street . 
The room was soon full of the appliances I had bought with his money ; the work was going on steadily , successfully , drawing near an end . 
I was like a man emerging from a thicket , and suddenly coming on some unmeaning tragedy . 
I went to bury him . 
My mind was still on this research , and I did not lift a finger to save his character . 
I remember the funeral , the cheap hearse , the scant ceremony , the windy frost-bitten hillside , and the old college friend of his who read the service over him -- a shabby , black , bent old man with a snivelling cold . 
`` I remember walking back to the empty house , through the place that had once been a village and was now patched and tinkered by the jerry builders into the ugly likeness of a town . 
Every way the roads ran out at last into the desecrated fields and ended in rubble heaps and rank wet weeds . 
I remember myself as a gaunt black figure , going along the slippery , shiny pavement , and the strange sense of detachment I felt from the squalid respectability , the sordid commercialism of the place . 
`` I did not feel a bit sorry for my father . 
He seemed to me to be the victim of his own foolish sentimentality . 
The current cant required my attendance at his funeral , but it was really not my affair . 
`` But going along the High Street , my old life came back to me for a space , for I met the girl I had known ten years since . 
Our eyes met . 
`` Something moved me to turn back and talk to her . 
She was a very ordinary person . 
`` It was all like a dream , that visit to the old places . 
I did not feel then that I was lonely , that I had come out from the world into a desolate place . 
I appreciated my loss of sympathy , but I put it down to the general inanity of things . 
Re-entering my room seemed like the recovery of reality . 
There were the things I knew and loved . 
There stood the apparatus , the experiments arranged and waiting . 
And now there was scarcely a difficulty left , beyond the planning of details . 
`` I will tell you , Kemp , sooner or later , all the complicated processes . 
We need not go into that now . 
For the most part , saving certain gaps I chose to remember , they are written in cypher in those books that tramp has hidden . 
We must hunt him down . 
We must get those books again . 
But the essential phase was to place the transparent object whose refractive index was to be lowered between two radiating centres of a sort of ethereal vibration , of which I will tell you more fully later . 
No , not those Roentgen vibrations -- I do n't know that these others of mine have been described . 
Yet they are obvious enough . 
I needed two little dynamos , and these I worked with a cheap gas engine . 
My first experiment was with a bit of white wool fabric . 
It was the strangest thing in the world to see it in the flicker of the flashes soft and white , and then to watch it fade like a wreath of smoke and vanish . 
`` I could scarcely believe I had done it . 
I put my hand into the emptiness , and there was the thing as solid as ever . 
I felt it awkwardly , and threw it on the floor . 
I had a little trouble finding it again . 
`` And then came a curious experience . 
I heard a miaow behind me , and turning , saw a lean white cat , very dirty , on the cistern cover outside the window . 
A thought came into my head . 
` Everything ready for you , ' I said , and went to the window , opened it , and called softly . 
She came in , purring -- the poor beast was starving -- and I gave her some milk . 
All my food was in a cupboard in the corner of the room . 
After that she went smelling round the room , evidently with the idea of making herself at home . 
The invisible rag upset her a bit ; you should have seen her spit at it ! 
But I made her comfortable on the pillow of my truckle-bed . 
And I gave her butter to get her to wash . '' 
`` And you processed her ? '' 
`` I processed her . 
But giving drugs to a cat is no joke , Kemp ! 
And the process failed . '' 
`` Failed ! '' 
`` In two particulars . 
These were the claws and the pigment stuff , what is it ? 
-- at the back of the eye in a cat . 
You know ? '' 
`` Tapetum . '' 
`` Yes , the tapetum . 
It did n't go . 
After I 'd given the stuff to bleach the blood and done certain other things to her , I gave the beast opium , and put her and the pillow she was sleeping on , on the apparatus . 
And after all the rest had faded and vanished , there remained two little ghosts of her eyes . '' 
`` Odd ! '' 
`` I ca n't explain it . 
She was bandaged and clamped , of course -- so I had her safe ; but she woke while she was still misty , and miaowed dismally , and someone came knocking . 
It was an old woman from downstairs , who suspected me of vivisecting -- a drink-sodden old creature , with only a white cat to care for in all the world . 
I whipped out some chloroform , applied it , and answered the door . 
` Did I hear a cat ? ' 
she asked . 
` My cat ? ' 
` Not here , ' said I , very politely . 
She was a little doubtful and tried to peer past me into the room ; strange enough to her no doubt -- bare walls , uncurtained windows , truckle-bed , with the gas engine vibrating , and the seethe of the radiant points , and that faint ghastly stinging of chloroform in the air . 
She had to be satisfied at last and went away again . '' 
`` How long did it take ? '' 
asked Kemp . 
`` Three or four hours -- the cat . 
The bones and sinews and the fat were the last to go , and the tips of the coloured hairs . 
And , as I say , the back part of the eye , tough , iridescent stuff it is , would n't go at all . 
`` It was night outside long before the business was over , and nothing was to be seen but the dim eyes and the claws . 
I stopped the gas engine , felt for and stroked the beast , which was still insensible , and then , being tired , left it sleeping on the invisible pillow and went to bed . 
I found it hard to sleep . 
I lay awake thinking weak aimless stuff , going over the experiment over and over again , or dreaming feverishly of things growing misty and vanishing about me , until everything , the ground I stood on , vanished , and so I came to that sickly falling nightmare one gets . 
About two , the cat began miaowing about the room . 
I tried to hush it by talking to it , and then I decided to turn it out . 
I remember the shock I had when striking a light -- there were just the round eyes shining green -- and nothing round them . 
I would have given it milk , but I had n't any . 
It would n't be quiet , it just sat down and miaowed at the door . 
I tried to catch it , with an idea of putting it out of the window , but it would n't be caught , it vanished . 
Then it began miaowing in different parts of the room . 
At last I opened the window and made a bustle . 
I suppose it went out at last . 
I never saw any more of it . 
`` Then -- Heaven knows why -- I fell thinking of my father 's funeral again , and the dismal windy hillside , until the day had come . 
I found sleeping was hopeless , and , locking my door after me , wandered out into the morning streets . '' 
`` You do n't mean to say there 's an invisible cat at large ! '' 
said Kemp . 
`` If it has n't been killed , '' said the Invisible Man . 
`` Why not ? '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
