`` I 'm rare sorry the darg -- '' `` Not a bit , '' said the stranger . 
`` Never broke the skin . 
Hurry up with those things . '' 
He then swore to himself , so Mr. Hall asserts . 
Directly the first crate was , in accordance with his directions , carried into the parlour , the stranger flung himself upon it with extraordinary eagerness , and began to unpack it , scattering the straw with an utter disregard of Mrs. Hall 's carpet . 
And from it he began to produce bottles -- little fat bottles containing powders , small and slender bottles containing coloured and white fluids , fluted blue bottles labeled Poison , bottles with round bodies and slender necks , large green-glass bottles , large white-glass bottles , bottles with glass stoppers and frosted labels , bottles with fine corks , bottles with bungs , bottles with wooden caps , wine bottles , salad-oil bottles -- putting them in rows on the chiffonnier , on the mantel , on the table under the window , round the floor , on the bookshelf -- everywhere . 
The chemist 's shop in Bramblehurst could not boast half so many . 
Quite a sight it was . 
Crate after crate yielded bottles , until all six were empty and the table high with straw ; the only things that came out of these crates besides the bottles were a number of test-tubes and a carefully packed balance . 
And directly the crates were unpacked , the stranger went to the window and set to work , not troubling in the least about the litter of straw , the fire which had gone out , the box of books outside , nor for the trunks and other luggage that had gone upstairs . 
When Mrs. Hall took his dinner in to him , he was already so absorbed in his work , pouring little drops out of the bottles into test-tubes , that he did not hear her until she had swept away the bulk of the straw and put the tray on the table , with some little emphasis perhaps , seeing the state that the floor was in . 
Then he half turned his head and immediately turned it away again . 
But she saw he had removed his glasses ; they were beside him on the table , and it seemed to her that his eye sockets were extraordinarily hollow . 
He put on his spectacles again , and then turned and faced her . 
She was about to complain of the straw on the floor when he anticipated her . 
`` I wish you would n't come in without knocking , '' he said in the tone of abnormal exasperation that seemed so characteristic of him . 
`` I knocked , but seemingly -- '' `` Perhaps you did . 
But in my investigations -- my really very urgent and necessary investigations -- the slightest disturbance , the jar of a door -- I must ask you -- '' `` Certainly , sir . 
You can turn the lock if you 're like that , you know . 
Any time . '' 
`` A very good idea , '' said the stranger . 
`` This stror , sir , if I might make so bold as to remark -- '' `` Do n't . 
If the straw makes trouble put it down in the bill . '' 
And he mumbled at her -- words suspiciously like curses . 
He was so odd , standing there , so aggressive and explosive , bottle in one hand and test-tube in the other , that Mrs. Hall was quite alarmed . 
But she was a resolute woman . 
`` In which case , I should like to know , sir , what you consider -- '' `` A shilling -- put down a shilling . 
Surely a shilling 's enough ? '' 
`` So be it , '' said Mrs. Hall , taking up the table-cloth and beginning to spread it over the table . 
`` If you 're satisfied , of course -- '' He turned and sat down , with his coat-collar toward her . 
All the afternoon he worked with the door locked and , as Mrs. Hall testifies , for the most part in silence . 
But once there was a concussion and a sound of bottles ringing together as though the table had been hit , and the smash of a bottle flung violently down , and then a rapid pacing athwart the room . 
Fearing `` something was the matter , '' she went to the door and listened , not caring to knock . 
`` I ca n't go on , '' he was raving . 
`` I _ ca n't _ go on . 
Three hundred thousand , four hundred thousand ! 
The huge multitude ! 
Cheated ! 
All my life it may take me ! 
... Patience ! 
Patience indeed ! 
... Fool ! 
fool ! '' 
There was a noise of hobnails on the bricks in the bar , and Mrs. Hall had very reluctantly to leave the rest of his soliloquy . 
When she returned the room was silent again , save for the faint crepitation of his chair and the occasional clink of a bottle . 
It was all over ; the stranger had resumed work . 
When she took in his tea she saw broken glass in the corner of the room under the concave mirror , and a golden stain that had been carelessly wiped . 
She called attention to it . 
`` Put it down in the bill , '' snapped her visitor . 
`` For God 's sake do n't worry me . 
If there 's damage done , put it down in the bill , '' and he went on ticking a list in the exercise book before him . 
`` I 'll tell you something , '' said Fearenside , mysteriously . 
It was late in the afternoon , and they were in the little beer-shop of Iping Hanger . 
`` Well ? '' 
said Teddy Henfrey . 
`` This chap you 're speaking of , what my dog bit . 
Well -- he 's black . 
Leastways , his legs are . 
I seed through the tear of his trousers and the tear of his glove . 
You 'd have expected a sort of pinky to show , would n't you ? 
Well -- there was n't none . 
Just blackness . 
I tell you , he 's as black as my hat . '' 
`` My sakes ! '' 
said Henfrey . 
`` It 's a rummy case altogether . 
Why , his nose is as pink as paint ! '' 
`` That 's true , '' said Fearenside . 
`` I knows that . 
And I tell ` ee what I 'm thinking . 
That marn 's a piebald , Teddy . 
Black here and white there -- in patches . 
And he 's ashamed of it . 
He 's a kind of half-breed , and the colour 's come off patchy instead of mixing . 
I 've heard of such things before . 
And it 's the common way with horses , as any one can see . '' 
MR. CUSS INTERVIEWS THE STRANGER I have told the circumstances of the stranger 's arrival in Iping with a certain fulness of detail , in order that the curious impression he created may be understood by the reader . 
But excepting two odd incidents , the circumstances of his stay until the extraordinary day of the club festival may be passed over very cursorily . 
There were a number of skirmishes with Mrs. Hall on matters of domestic discipline , but in every case until late April , when the first signs of penury began , he over-rode her by the easy expedient of an extra payment . 
Hall did not like him , and whenever he dared he talked of the advisability of getting rid of him ; but he showed his dislike chiefly by concealing it ostentatiously , and avoiding his visitor as much as possible . 
`` Wait till the summer , '' said Mrs. Hall sagely , `` when the artisks are beginning to come . 
Then we 'll see . 
He may be a bit overbearing , but bills settled punctual is bills settled punctual , whatever you 'd like to say . '' 
The stranger did not go to church , and indeed made no difference between Sunday and the irreligious days , even in costume . 
He worked , as Mrs. Hall thought , very fitfully . 
Some days he would come down early and be continuously busy . 
On others he would rise late , pace his room , fretting audibly for hours together , smoke , sleep in the armchair by the fire . 
Communication with the world beyond the village he had none . 
His temper continued very uncertain ; for the most part his manner was that of a man suffering under almost unendurable provocation , and once or twice things were snapped , torn , crushed , or broken in spasmodic gusts of violence . 
He seemed under a chronic irritation of the greatest intensity . 
His habit of talking to himself in a low voice grew steadily upon him , but though Mrs. Hall listened conscientiously she could make neither head nor tail of what she heard . 
He rarely went abroad by daylight , but at twilight he would go out muffled up invisibly , whether the weather were cold or not , and he chose the loneliest paths and those most overshadowed by trees and banks . 
His goggling spectacles and ghastly bandaged face under the penthouse of his hat , came with a disagreeable suddenness out of the darkness upon one or two home-going labourers , and Teddy Henfrey , tumbling out of the `` Scarlet Coat '' one night , at half-past nine , was scared shamefully by the stranger 's skull-like head -LRB- he was walking hat in hand -RRB- lit by the sudden light of the opened inn door . 
Such children as saw him at nightfall dreamt of bogies , and it seemed doubtful whether he disliked boys more than they disliked him , or the reverse ; but there was certainly a vivid enough dislike on either side . 
It was inevitable that a person of so remarkable an appearance and bearing should form a frequent topic in such a village as Iping . 
Opinion was greatly divided about his occupation . 
Mrs. Hall was sensitive on the point . 
When questioned , she explained very carefully that he was an `` experimental investigator , '' going gingerly over the syllables as one who dreads pitfalls . 
When asked what an experimental investigator was , she would say with a touch of superiority that most educated people knew such things as that , and would thus explain that he `` discovered things . '' 
Her visitor had had an accident , she said , which temporarily discoloured his face and hands , and being of a sensitive disposition , he was averse to any public notice of the fact . 
