He hesitated and advanced with outstretched hand . 
A man pulled up short to see what he was catching , and then a girl . 
In another moment he would have touched me . 
Then I saw what to do . 
I made a step , the boy started back with an exclamation , and with a rapid movement I swung myself over into the portico of the next house . 
But the smaller boy was sharp-eyed enough to follow the movement , and before I was well down the steps and upon the pavement , he had recovered from his momentary astonishment and was shouting out that the feet had gone over the wall . 
`` They rushed round and saw my new footmarks flash into being on the lower step and upon the pavement . 
` What 's up ? ' 
asked someone . 
` Feet ! 
Look ! 
Feet running ! ' 
`` Everybody in the road , except my three pursuers , was pouring along after the Salvation Army , and this blow not only impeded me but them . 
There was an eddy of surprise and interrogation . 
At the cost of bowling over one young fellow I got through , and in another moment I was rushing headlong round the circuit of Russell Square , with six or seven astonished people following my footmarks . 
There was no time for explanation , or else the whole host would have been after me . 
`` Twice I doubled round corners , thrice I crossed the road and came back upon my tracks , and then , as my feet grew hot and dry , the damp impressions began to fade . 
At last I had a breathing space and rubbed my feet clean with my hands , and so got away altogether . 
The last I saw of the chase was a little group of a dozen people perhaps , studying with infinite perplexity a slowly drying footprint that had resulted from a puddle in Tavistock Square , a footprint as isolated and incomprehensible to them as Crusoe 's solitary discovery . 
`` This running warmed me to a certain extent , and I went on with a better courage through the maze of less frequented roads that runs hereabouts . 
My back had now become very stiff and sore , my tonsils were painful from the cabman 's fingers , and the skin of my neck had been scratched by his nails ; my feet hurt exceedingly and I was lame from a little cut on one foot . 
I saw in time a blind man approaching me , and fled limping , for I feared his subtle intuitions . 
Once or twice accidental collisions occurred and I left people amazed , with unaccountable curses ringing in their ears . 
Then came something silent and quiet against my face , and across the Square fell a thin veil of slowly falling flakes of snow . 
I had caught a cold , and do as I would I could not avoid an occasional sneeze . 
And every dog that came in sight , with its pointing nose and curious sniffing , was a terror to me . 
`` Then came men and boys running , first one and then others , and shouting as they ran . 
It was a fire . 
They ran in the direction of my lodging , and looking back down a street I saw a mass of black smoke streaming up above the roofs and telephone wires . 
It was my lodging burning ; my clothes , my apparatus , all my resources indeed , except my cheque-book and the three volumes of memoranda that awaited me in Great Portland Street , were there . 
Burning ! 
I had burnt my boats -- if ever a man did ! 
The place was blazing . '' 
The Invisible Man paused and thought . 
Kemp glanced nervously out of the window . 
`` Yes ? '' 
he said . 
`` Go on . '' 
IN THE EMPORIUM `` So last January , with the beginning of a snowstorm in the air about me -- and if it settled on me it would betray me ! 
-- weary , cold , painful , inexpressibly wretched , and still but half convinced of my invisible quality , I began this new life to which I am committed . 
I had no refuge , no appliances , no human being in the world in whom I could confide . 
To have told my secret would have given me away -- made a mere show and rarity of me . 
Nevertheless , I was half-minded to accost some passer-by and throw myself upon his mercy . 
But I knew too clearly the terror and brutal cruelty my advances would evoke . 
I made no plans in the street . 
My sole object was to get shelter from the snow , to get myself covered and warm ; then I might hope to plan . 
But even to me , an Invisible Man , the rows of London houses stood latched , barred , and bolted impregnably . 
`` Only one thing could I see clearly before me -- the cold exposure and misery of the snowstorm and the night . 
`` And then I had a brilliant idea . 
I turned down one of the roads leading from Gower Street to Tottenham Court Road , and found myself outside Omniums , the big establishment where everything is to be bought -- you know the place : meat , grocery , linen , furniture , clothing , oil paintings even -- a huge meandering collection of shops rather than a shop . 
I had thought I should find the doors open , but they were closed , and as I stood in the wide entrance a carriage stopped outside , and a man in uniform -- you know the kind of personage with ` Omnium ' on his cap -- flung open the door . 
I contrived to enter , and walking down the shop -- it was a department where they were selling ribbons and gloves and stockings and that kind of thing -- came to a more spacious region devoted to picnic baskets and wicker furniture . 
`` I did not feel safe there , however ; people were going to and fro , and I prowled restlessly about until I came upon a huge section in an upper floor containing multitudes of bedsteads , and over these I clambered , and found a resting-place at last among a huge pile of folded flock mattresses . 
The place was already lit up and agreeably warm , and I decided to remain where I was , keeping a cautious eye on the two or three sets of shopmen and customers who were meandering through the place , until closing time came . 
Then I should be able , I thought , to rob the place for food and clothing , and disguised , prowl through it and examine its resources , perhaps sleep on some of the bedding . 
That seemed an acceptable plan . 
My idea was to procure clothing to make myself a muffled but acceptable figure , to get money , and then to recover my books and parcels where they awaited me , take a lodging somewhere and elaborate plans for the complete realisation of the advantages my invisibility gave me -LRB- as I still imagined -RRB- over my fellow-men . 
`` Closing time arrived quickly enough . 
It could not have been more than an hour after I took up my position on the mattresses before I noticed the blinds of the windows being drawn , and customers being marched doorward . 
And then a number of brisk young men began with remarkable alacrity to tidy up the goods that remained disturbed . 
I left my lair as the crowds diminished , and prowled cautiously out into the less desolate parts of the shop . 
I was really surprised to observe how rapidly the young men and women whipped away the goods displayed for sale during the day . 
All the boxes of goods , the hanging fabrics , the festoons of lace , the boxes of sweets in the grocery section , the displays of this and that , were being whipped down , folded up , slapped into tidy receptacles , and everything that could not be taken down and put away had sheets of some coarse stuff like sacking flung over them . 
Finally all the chairs were turned up on to the counters , leaving the floor clear . 
Directly each of these young people had done , he or she made promptly for the door with such an expression of animation as I have rarely observed in a shop assistant before . 
Then came a lot of youngsters scattering sawdust and carrying pails and brooms . 
I had to dodge to get out of the way , and as it was , my ankle got stung with the sawdust . 
For some time , wandering through the swathed and darkened departments , I could hear the brooms at work . 
And at last a good hour or more after the shop had been closed , came a noise of locking doors . 
Silence came upon the place , and I found myself wandering through the vast and intricate shops , galleries , show-rooms of the place , alone . 
It was very still ; in one place I remember passing near one of the Tottenham Court Road entrances and listening to the tapping of boot-heels of the passers-by . 
`` My first visit was to the place where I had seen stockings and gloves for sale . 
It was dark , and I had the devil of a hunt after matches , which I found at last in the drawer of the little cash desk . 
Then I had to get a candle . 
I had to tear down wrappings and ransack a number of boxes and drawers , but at last I managed to turn out what I sought ; the box label called them lambswool pants , and lambswool vests . 
Then socks , a thick comforter , and then I went to the clothing place and got trousers , a lounge jacket , an overcoat and a slouch hat -- a clerical sort of hat with the brim turned down . 
I began to feel a human being again , and my next thought was food . 
`` Upstairs was a refreshment department , and there I got cold meat . 
There was coffee still in the urn , and I lit the gas and warmed it up again , and altogether I did not do badly . 
Afterwards , prowling through the place in search of blankets -- I had to put up at last with a heap of down quilts -- I came upon a grocery section with a lot of chocolate and candied fruits , more than was good for me indeed -- and some white burgundy . 
And near that was a toy department , and I had a brilliant idea . 
I found some artificial noses -- dummy noses , you know , and I thought of dark spectacles . 
But Omniums had no optical department . 
My nose had been a difficulty indeed -- I had thought of paint . 
But the discovery set my mind running on wigs and masks and the like . 
Finally I went to sleep in a heap of down quilts , very warm and comfortable . 
`` My last thoughts before sleeping were the most agreeable I had had since the change . 
I was in a state of physical serenity , and that was reflected in my mind . 
I thought that I should be able to slip out unobserved in the morning with my clothes upon me , muffling my face with a white wrapper I had taken , purchase , with the money I had taken , spectacles and so forth , and so complete my disguise . 
I lapsed into disorderly dreams of all the fantastic things that had happened during the last few days . 
I saw the ugly little Jew of a landlord vociferating in his rooms ; I saw his two sons marvelling , and the wrinkled old woman 's gnarled face as she asked for her cat . 
I experienced again the strange sensation of seeing the cloth disappear , and so I came round to the windy hillside and the sniffing old clergyman mumbling ` Earth to earth , ashes to ashes , dust to dust , ' at my father 's open grave . '' 
` You also , ' said a voice , and suddenly I was being forced towards the grave . 
I struggled , shouted , appealed to the mourners , but they continued stonily following the service ; the old clergyman , too , never faltered droning and sniffing through the ritual . 
I realised I was invisible and inaudible , that overwhelming forces had their grip on me . 
I struggled in vain , I was forced over the brink , the coffin rang hollow as I fell upon it , and the gravel came flying after me in spadefuls . 
Nobody heeded me , nobody was aware of me . 
I made convulsive struggles and awoke . 
`` The pale London dawn had come , the place was full of a chilly grey light that filtered round the edges of the window blinds . 
I sat up , and for a time I could not think where this ample apartment , with its counters , its piles of rolled stuff , its heap of quilts and cushions , its iron pillars , might be . 
