The Invisible Man started and stood still . 
`` Traitor ! '' 
cried the Voice , and suddenly the dressing-gown opened , and sitting down the Unseen began to disrobe . 
Kemp made three swift steps to the door , and forthwith the Invisible Man -- his legs had vanished -- sprang to his feet with a shout . 
Kemp flung the door open . 
As it opened , there came a sound of hurrying feet downstairs and voices . 
With a quick movement Kemp thrust the Invisible Man back , sprang aside , and slammed the door . 
The key was outside and ready . 
In another moment Griffin would have been alone in the belvedere study , a prisoner . 
Save for one little thing . 
The key had been slipped in hastily that morning . 
As Kemp slammed the door it fell noisily upon the carpet . 
Kemp 's face became white . 
He tried to grip the door handle with both hands . 
For a moment he stood lugging . 
Then the door gave six inches . 
But he got it closed again . 
The second time it was jerked a foot wide , and the dressing-gown came wedging itself into the opening . 
His throat was gripped by invisible fingers , and he left his hold on the handle to defend himself . 
He was forced back , tripped and pitched heavily into the corner of the landing . 
The empty dressing-gown was flung on the top of him . 
Halfway up the staircase was Colonel Adye , the recipient of Kemp 's letter , the chief of the Burdock police . 
He was staring aghast at the sudden appearance of Kemp , followed by the extraordinary sight of clothing tossing empty in the air . 
He saw Kemp felled , and struggling to his feet . 
He saw him rush forward , and go down again , felled like an ox . 
Then suddenly he was struck violently . 
By nothing ! 
A vast weight , it seemed , leapt upon him , and he was hurled headlong down the staircase , with a grip on his throat and a knee in his groin . 
An invisible foot trod on his back , a ghostly patter passed downstairs , he heard the two police officers in the hall shout and run , and the front door of the house slammed violently . 
He rolled over and sat up staring . 
He saw , staggering down the staircase , Kemp , dusty and disheveled , one side of his face white from a blow , his lip bleeding , and a pink dressing-gown and some underclothing held in his arms . 
`` My God ! '' 
cried Kemp , `` the game 's up ! 
He 's gone ! '' 
THE HUNTING OF THE INVISIBLE MAN For a space Kemp was too inarticulate to make Adye understand the swift things that had just happened . 
They stood on the landing , Kemp speaking swiftly , the grotesque swathings of Griffin still on his arm . 
But presently Adye began to grasp something of the situation . 
`` He is mad , '' said Kemp ; `` inhuman . 
He is pure selfishness . 
He thinks of nothing but his own advantage , his own safety . 
I have listened to such a story this morning of brutal self-seeking ... . 
He has wounded men . 
He will kill them unless we can prevent him . 
He will create a panic . 
Nothing can stop him . 
He is going out now -- furious ! '' 
`` He must be caught , '' said Adye . 
`` That is certain . '' 
`` But how ? '' 
cried Kemp , and suddenly became full of ideas . 
`` You must begin at once . 
You must set every available man to work ; you must prevent his leaving this district . 
Once he gets away , he may go through the countryside as he wills , killing and maiming . 
He dreams of a reign of terror ! 
A reign of terror , I tell you . 
You must set a watch on trains and roads and shipping . 
The garrison must help . 
You must wire for help . 
The only thing that may keep him here is the thought of recovering some books of notes he counts of value . 
I will tell you of that ! 
There is a man in your police station -- Marvel . '' 
`` I know , '' said Adye , `` I know . 
Those books -- yes . 
But the tramp ... '' `` Says he has n't them . 
But he thinks the tramp has . 
And you must prevent him from eating or sleeping ; day and night the country must be astir for him . 
Food must be locked up and secured , all food , so that he will have to break his way to it . 
The houses everywhere must be barred against him . 
Heaven send us cold nights and rain ! 
The whole country-side must begin hunting and keep hunting . 
I tell you , Adye , he is a danger , a disaster ; unless he is pinned and secured , it is frightful to think of the things that may happen . '' 
`` What else can we do ? '' 
said Adye . 
`` I must go down at once and begin organising . 
But why not come ? 
Yes -- you come too ! 
Come , and we must hold a sort of council of war -- get Hopps to help -- and the railway managers . 
By Jove ! 
it 's urgent . 
Come along -- tell me as we go . 
What else is there we can do ? 
Put that stuff down . '' 
In another moment Adye was leading the way downstairs . 
They found the front door open and the policemen standing outside staring at empty air . 
`` He 's got away , sir , '' said one . 
`` We must go to the central station at once , '' said Adye . 
`` One of you go on down and get a cab to come up and meet us -- quickly . 
And now , Kemp , what else ? '' 
`` Dogs , '' said Kemp . 
`` Get dogs . 
They do n't see him , but they wind him . 
Get dogs . '' 
`` Good , '' said Adye . 
`` It 's not generally known , but the prison officials over at Halstead know a man with bloodhounds . 
Dogs . 
What else ? '' 
`` Bear in mind , '' said Kemp , `` his food shows . 
After eating , his food shows until it is assimilated . 
So that he has to hide after eating . 
You must keep on beating . 
