Then , as recollection came back to me , I heard voices in conversation . 
`` Then far down the place , in the brighter light of some department which had already raised its blinds , I saw two men approaching . 
I scrambled to my feet , looking about me for some way of escape , and even as I did so the sound of my movement made them aware of me . 
I suppose they saw merely a figure moving quietly and quickly away . 
` Who 's that ? ' 
cried one , and ` Stop , there ! ' 
shouted the other . 
I dashed around a corner and came full tilt -- a faceless figure , mind you ! 
-- on a lanky lad of fifteen . 
He yelled and I bowled him over , rushed past him , turned another corner , and by a happy inspiration threw myself behind a counter . 
In another moment feet went running past and I heard voices shouting , ` All hands to the doors ! ' 
asking what was ` up , ' and giving one another advice how to catch me . 
`` Lying on the ground , I felt scared out of my wits . 
But -- odd as it may seem -- it did not occur to me at the moment to take off my clothes as I should have done . 
I had made up my mind , I suppose , to get away in them , and that ruled me . 
And then down the vista of the counters came a bawling of ` Here he is ! ' 
`` I sprang to my feet , whipped a chair off the counter , and sent it whirling at the fool who had shouted , turned , came into another round a corner , sent him spinning , and rushed up the stairs . 
He kept his footing , gave a view hallo , and came up the staircase hot after me . 
Up the staircase were piled a multitude of those bright-coloured pot things -- what are they ? '' 
`` Art pots , '' suggested Kemp . 
`` That 's it ! 
Art pots . 
Well , I turned at the top step and swung round , plucked one out of a pile and smashed it on his silly head as he came at me . 
The whole pile of pots went headlong , and I heard shouting and footsteps running from all parts . 
I made a mad rush for the refreshment place , and there was a man in white like a man cook , who took up the chase . 
I made one last desperate turn and found myself among lamps and ironmongery . 
I went behind the counter of this , and waited for my cook , and as he bolted in at the head of the chase , I doubled him up with a lamp . 
Down he went , and I crouched down behind the counter and began whipping off my clothes as fast as I could . 
Coat , jacket , trousers , shoes were all right , but a lambswool vest fits a man like a skin . 
I heard more men coming , my cook was lying quiet on the other side of the counter , stunned or scared speechless , and I had to make another dash for it , like a rabbit hunted out of a wood-pile . '' 
` This way , policeman ! ' 
I heard someone shouting . 
I found myself in my bedstead storeroom again , and at the end of a wilderness of wardrobes . 
I rushed among them , went flat , got rid of my vest after infinite wriggling , and stood a free man again , panting and scared , as the policeman and three of the shopmen came round the corner . 
They made a rush for the vest and pants , and collared the trousers . 
` He 's dropping his plunder , ' said one of the young men . 
` He must be somewhere here . ' 
`` But they did not find me all the same . 
`` I stood watching them hunt for me for a time , and cursing my ill-luck in losing the clothes . 
Then I went into the refreshment-room , drank a little milk I found there , and sat down by the fire to consider my position . 
`` In a little while two assistants came in and began to talk over the business very excitedly and like the fools they were . 
I heard a magnified account of my depredations , and other speculations as to my whereabouts . 
Then I fell to scheming again . 
The insurmountable difficulty of the place , especially now it was alarmed , was to get any plunder out of it . 
I went down into the warehouse to see if there was any chance of packing and addressing a parcel , but I could not understand the system of checking . 
About eleven o'clock , the snow having thawed as it fell , and the day being finer and a little warmer than the previous one , I decided that the Emporium was hopeless , and went out again , exasperated at my want of success , with only the vaguest plans of action in my mind . '' 
IN DRURY LANE `` But you begin now to realise , '' said the Invisible Man , `` the full disadvantage of my condition . 
I had no shelter -- no covering -- to get clothing was to forego all my advantage , to make myself a strange and terrible thing . 
I was fasting ; for to eat , to fill myself with unassimilated matter , would be to become grotesquely visible again . '' 
`` I never thought of that , '' said Kemp . 
`` Nor had I. And the snow had warned me of other dangers . 
I could not go abroad in snow -- it would settle on me and expose me . 
Rain , too , would make me a watery outline , a glistening surface of a man -- a bubble . 
And fog -- I should be like a fainter bubble in a fog , a surface , a greasy glimmer of humanity . 
Moreover , as I went abroad -- in the London air -- I gathered dirt about my ankles , floating smuts and dust upon my skin . 
I did not know how long it would be before I should become visible from that cause also . 
But I saw clearly it could not be for long . 
`` Not in London at any rate . 
`` I went into the slums towards Great Portland Street , and found myself at the end of the street in which I had lodged . 
I did not go that way , because of the crowd halfway down it opposite to the still smoking ruins of the house I had fired . 
My most immediate problem was to get clothing . 
What to do with my face puzzled me . 
Then I saw in one of those little miscellaneous shops -- news , sweets , toys , stationery , belated Christmas tomfoolery , and so forth -- an array of masks and noses . 
I realised that problem was solved . 
In a flash I saw my course . 
I turned about , no longer aimless , and went -- circuitously in order to avoid the busy ways , towards the back streets north of the Strand ; for I remembered , though not very distinctly where , that some theatrical costumiers had shops in that district . 
`` The day was cold , with a nipping wind down the northward running streets . 
I walked fast to avoid being overtaken . 
Every crossing was a danger , every passenger a thing to watch alertly . 
One man as I was about to pass him at the top of Bedford Street , turned upon me abruptly and came into me , sending me into the road and almost under the wheel of a passing hansom . 
The verdict of the cab-rank was that he had had some sort of stroke . 
I was so unnerved by this encounter that I went into Covent Garden Market and sat down for some time in a quiet corner by a stall of violets , panting and trembling . 
I found I had caught a fresh cold , and had to turn out after a time lest my sneezes should attract attention . 
`` At last I reached the object of my quest , a dirty , fly-blown little shop in a by-way near Drury Lane , with a window full of tinsel robes , sham jewels , wigs , slippers , dominoes and theatrical photographs . 
The shop was old-fashioned and low and dark , and the house rose above it for four storeys , dark and dismal . 
I peered through the window and , seeing no one within , entered . 
The opening of the door set a clanking bell ringing . 
I left it open , and walked round a bare costume stand , into a corner behind a cheval glass . 
For a minute or so no one came . 
Then I heard heavy feet striding across a room , and a man appeared down the shop . 
`` My plans were now perfectly definite . 
I proposed to make my way into the house , secrete myself upstairs , watch my opportunity , and when everything was quiet , rummage out a wig , mask , spectacles , and costume , and go into the world , perhaps a grotesque but still a credible figure . 
And incidentally of course I could rob the house of any available money . 
`` The man who had just entered the shop was a short , slight , hunched , beetle-browed man , with long arms and very short bandy legs . 
Apparently I had interrupted a meal . 
He stared about the shop with an expression of expectation . 
This gave way to surprise , and then to anger , as he saw the shop empty . 
` Damn the boys ! ' 
he said . 
He went to stare up and down the street . 
He came in again in a minute , kicked the door to with his foot spitefully , and went muttering back to the house door . 
`` I came forward to follow him , and at the noise of my movement he stopped dead . 
I did so too , startled by his quickness of ear . 
He slammed the house door in my face . 
`` I stood hesitating . 
Suddenly I heard his quick footsteps returning , and the door reopened . 
He stood looking about the shop like one who was still not satisfied . 
Then , murmuring to himself , he examined the back of the counter and peered behind some fixtures . 
Then he stood doubtful . 
He had left the house door open and I slipped into the inner room . 
