To gain time I answered them . 
The invisible rag and pillow came to hand and I opened the window and pitched them out on to the cistern cover . 
As the window opened , a heavy crash came at the door . 
Someone had charged it with the idea of smashing the lock . 
But the stout bolts I had screwed up some days before stopped him . 
That startled me , made me angry . 
I began to tremble and do things hurriedly . 
`` I tossed together some loose paper , straw , packing paper and so forth , in the middle of the room , and turned on the gas . 
Heavy blows began to rain upon the door . 
I could not find the matches . 
I beat my hands on the wall with rage . 
I turned down the gas again , stepped out of the window on the cistern cover , very softly lowered the sash , and sat down , secure and invisible , but quivering with anger , to watch events . 
They split a panel , I saw , and in another moment they had broken away the staples of the bolts and stood in the open doorway . 
It was the landlord and his two step-sons , sturdy young men of three or four and twenty . 
Behind them fluttered the old hag of a woman from downstairs . 
`` You may imagine their astonishment to find the room empty . 
One of the younger men rushed to the window at once , flung it up and stared out . 
His staring eyes and thick-lipped bearded face came a foot from my face . 
I was half minded to hit his silly countenance , but I arrested my doubled fist . 
He stared right through me . 
So did the others as they joined him . 
The old man went and peered under the bed , and then they all made a rush for the cupboard . 
They had to argue about it at length in Yiddish and Cockney English . 
They concluded I had not answered them , that their imagination had deceived them . 
A feeling of extraordinary elation took the place of my anger as I sat outside the window and watched these four people -- for the old lady came in , glancing suspiciously about her like a cat , trying to understand the riddle of my behaviour . 
`` The old man , so far as I could understand his patois , agreed with the old lady that I was a vivisectionist . 
The sons protested in garbled English that I was an electrician , and appealed to the dynamos and radiators . 
They were all nervous about my arrival , although I found subsequently that they had bolted the front door . 
The old lady peered into the cupboard and under the bed , and one of the young men pushed up the register and stared up the chimney . 
One of my fellow lodgers , a coster-monger who shared the opposite room with a butcher , appeared on the landing , and he was called in and told incoherent things . 
`` It occurred to me that the radiators , if they fell into the hands of some acute well-educated person , would give me away too much , and watching my opportunity , I came into the room and tilted one of the little dynamos off its fellow on which it was standing , and smashed both apparatus . 
Then , while they were trying to explain the smash , I dodged out of the room and went softly downstairs . 
`` I went into one of the sitting-rooms and waited until they came down , still speculating and argumentative , all a little disappointed at finding no ` horrors , ' and all a little puzzled how they stood legally towards me . 
Then I slipped up again with a box of matches , fired my heap of paper and rubbish , put the chairs and bedding thereby , led the gas to the affair , by means of an india-rubber tube , and waving a farewell to the room left it for the last time . '' 
`` You fired the house ! '' 
exclaimed Kemp . 
`` Fired the house . 
It was the only way to cover my trail -- and no doubt it was insured . 
I slipped the bolts of the front door quietly and went out into the street . 
I was invisible , and I was only just beginning to realise the extraordinary advantage my invisibility gave me . 
My head was already teeming with plans of all the wild and wonderful things I had now impunity to do . 
IN OXFORD STREET `` In going downstairs the first time I found an unexpected difficulty because I could not see my feet ; indeed I stumbled twice , and there was an unaccustomed clumsiness in gripping the bolt . 
By not looking down , however , I managed to walk on the level passably well . 
`` My mood , I say , was one of exaltation . 
I felt as a seeing man might do , with padded feet and noiseless clothes , in a city of the blind . 
I experienced a wild impulse to jest , to startle people , to clap men on the back , fling people 's hats astray , and generally revel in my extraordinary advantage . 
`` But hardly had I emerged upon Great Portland Street , however -LRB- my lodging was close to the big draper 's shop there -RRB- , when I heard a clashing concussion and was hit violently behind , and turning saw a man carrying a basket of soda-water syphons , and looking in amazement at his burden . 
Although the blow had really hurt me , I found something so irresistible in his astonishment that I laughed aloud . 
` The devil 's in the basket , ' I said , and suddenly twisted it out of his hand . 
He let go incontinently , and I swung the whole weight into the air . 
`` But a fool of a cabman , standing outside a public house , made a sudden rush for this , and his extending fingers took me with excruciating violence under the ear . 
I let the whole down with a smash on the cabman , and then , with shouts and the clatter of feet about me , people coming out of shops , vehicles pulling up , I realised what I had done for myself , and cursing my folly , backed against a shop window and prepared to dodge out of the confusion . 
In a moment I should be wedged into a crowd and inevitably discovered . 
I pushed by a butcher boy , who luckily did not turn to see the nothingness that shoved him aside , and dodged behind the cab-man 's four-wheeler . 
I do not know how they settled the business , I hurried straight across the road , which was happily clear , and hardly heeding which way I went , in the fright of detection the incident had given me , plunged into the afternoon throng of Oxford Street . 
`` I tried to get into the stream of people , but they were too thick for me , and in a moment my heels were being trodden upon . 
I took to the gutter , the roughness of which I found painful to my feet , and forthwith the shaft of a crawling hansom dug me forcibly under the shoulder blade , reminding me that I was already bruised severely . 
I staggered out of the way of the cab , avoided a perambulator by a convulsive movement , and found myself behind the hansom . 
A happy thought saved me , and as this drove slowly along I followed in its immediate wake , trembling and astonished at the turn of my adventure . 
And not only trembling , but shivering . 
It was a bright day in January and I was stark naked and the thin slime of mud that covered the road was freezing . 
Foolish as it seems to me now , I had not reckoned that , transparent or not , I was still amenable to the weather and all its consequences . 
`` Then suddenly a bright idea came into my head . 
I ran round and got into the cab . 
And so , shivering , scared , and sniffing with the first intimations of a cold , and with the bruises in the small of my back growing upon my attention , I drove slowly along Oxford Street and past Tottenham Court Road . 
My mood was as different from that in which I had sallied forth ten minutes ago as it is possible to imagine . 
This invisibility indeed ! 
The one thought that possessed me was -- how was I to get out of the scrape I was in . 
`` We crawled past Mudie 's , and there a tall woman with five or six yellow-labelled books hailed my cab , and I sprang out just in time to escape her , shaving a railway van narrowly in my flight . 
I made off up the roadway to Bloomsbury Square , intending to strike north past the Museum and so get into the quiet district . 
I was now cruelly chilled , and the strangeness of my situation so unnerved me that I whimpered as I ran . 
At the northward corner of the Square a little white dog ran out of the Pharmaceutical Society 's offices , and incontinently made for me , nose down . 
`` I had never realised it before , but the nose is to the mind of a dog what the eye is to the mind of a seeing man . 
Dogs perceive the scent of a man moving as men perceive his vision . 
This brute began barking and leaping , showing , as it seemed to me , only too plainly that he was aware of me . 
I crossed Great Russell Street , glancing over my shoulder as I did so , and went some way along Montague Street before I realised what I was running towards . 
`` Then I became aware of a blare of music , and looking along the street saw a number of people advancing out of Russell Square , red shirts , and the banner of the Salvation Army to the fore . 
Such a crowd , chanting in the roadway and scoffing on the pavement , I could not hope to penetrate , and dreading to go back and farther from home again , and deciding on the spur of the moment , I ran up the white steps of a house facing the museum railings , and stood there until the crowd should have passed . 
Happily the dog stopped at the noise of the band too , hesitated , and turned tail , running back to Bloomsbury Square again . 
`` On came the band , bawling with unconscious irony some hymn about ` When shall we see His face ? ' 
and it seemed an interminable time to me before the tide of the crowd washed along the pavement by me . 
Thud , thud , thud , came the drum with a vibrating resonance , and for the moment I did not notice two urchins stopping at the railings by me . 
` See 'em , ' said one . 
` See what ? ' 
said the other . 
` Why -- them footmarks -- bare . 
Like what you makes in mud . ' 
`` I looked down and saw the youngsters had stopped and were gaping at the muddy footmarks I had left behind me up the newly whitened steps . 
The passing people elbowed and jostled them , but their confounded intelligence was arrested . 
` Thud , thud , thud , when , thud , shall we see , thud , his face , thud , thud . ' 
` There 's a barefoot man gone up them steps , or I do n't know nothing , ' said one . 
` And he ai n't never come down again . 
And his foot was a-bleeding . ' 
`` The thick of the crowd had already passed . 
` Looky there , Ted , ' quoth the younger of the detectives , with the sharpness of surprise in his voice , and pointed straight to my feet . 
I looked down and saw at once the dim suggestion of their outline sketched in splashes of mud . 
For a moment I was paralysed . '' 
` Why , that 's rum , ' said the elder . 
` Dashed rum ! 
It 's just like the ghost of a foot , ai n't it ? ' 
