Well , he was at home , and asked the devil what he wanted . 
The devil , switching his hoofs , up and says , ' I want John . ' 
` What for ? ' 
says the old governor . 
` What business is that of yours , ' says the devil , getting mad , -- ' I want to use him . ' 
` Take him , ' says the governor -- and by the Lord , Flask , if the devil did n't give John the Asiatic cholera before he got through with him , I 'll eat this whale in one mouthful . 
But look sharp -- ai n't you all ready there ? 
Well , then , pull ahead , and let 's get the whale alongside . '' 
`` I think I remember some such story as you were telling , '' said Flask , when at last the two boats were slowly advancing with their burden towards the ship , `` but I ca n't remember where . '' 
`` Three Spaniards ? 
Adventures of those three bloody-minded soldadoes ? 
Did ye read it there , Flask ? 
I guess ye did ? '' 
`` No : never saw such a book ; heard of it , though . 
But now , tell me , Stubb , do you suppose that that devil you was speaking of just now , was the same you say is now on board the Pequod ? '' 
`` Am I the same man that helped kill this whale ? 
Does n't the devil live for ever ; who ever heard that the devil was dead ? 
Did you ever see any parson a wearing mourning for the devil ? 
And if the devil has a latch-key to get into the admiral 's cabin , do n't you suppose he can crawl into a porthole ? 
Tell me that , Mr. Flask ? '' 
`` How old do you suppose Fedallah is , Stubb ? '' 
`` Do you see that mainmast there ? '' 
pointing to the ship ; `` well , that 's the figure one ; now take all the hoops in the Pequod 's hold , and string 'em along in a row with that mast , for oughts , do you see ; well , that would n't begin to be Fedallah 's age . 
Nor all the coopers in creation could n't show hoops enough to make oughts enough . '' 
`` But see here , Stubb , I thought you a little boasted just now , that you meant to give Fedallah a sea-toss , if you got a good chance . 
Now , if he 's so old as all those hoops of yours come to , and if he is going to live for ever , what good will it do to pitch him overboard -- tell me that ? 
`` Give him a good ducking , anyhow . '' 
`` But he 'd crawl back . '' 
`` Duck him again ; and keep ducking him . '' 
`` Suppose he should take it into his head to duck you , though -- yes , and drown you -- what then ? '' 
`` I should like to see him try it ; I 'd give him such a pair of black eyes that he would n't dare to show his face in the admiral 's cabin again for a long while , let alone down in the orlop there , where he lives , and hereabouts on the upper decks where he sneaks so much . 
Damn the devil , Flask ; do you suppose I 'm afraid of the devil ? 
Who 's afraid of him , except the old governor who dares n't catch him and put him in double-darbies , as he deserves , but lets him go about kidnapping people ; aye , and signed a bond with him , that all the people the devil kidnapped , he 'd roast for him ? 
There 's a governor ! '' 
`` Do you suppose Fedallah wants to kidnap Captain Ahab ? '' 
`` Do I suppose it ? 
You 'll know it before long , Flask . 
But I am going now to keep a sharp look-out on him ; and if I see anything very suspicious going on , I 'll just take him by the nape of his neck , and say -- Look here , Beelzebub , you do n't do it ; and if he makes any fuss , by the Lord I 'll make a grab into his pocket for his tail , take it to the capstan , and give him such a wrenching and heaving , that his tail will come short off at the stump -- do you see ; and then , I rather guess when he finds himself docked in that queer fashion , he 'll sneak off without the poor satisfaction of feeling his tail between his legs . '' 
`` And what will you do with the tail , Stubb ? '' 
`` Do with it ? 
Sell it for an ox whip when we get home ; -- what else ? '' 
`` Now , do you mean what you say , and have been saying all along , Stubb ? '' 
`` Mean or not mean , here we are at the ship . '' 
The boats were here hailed , to tow the whale on the larboard side , where fluke chains and other necessaries were already prepared for securing him . 
`` Did n't I tell you so ? '' 
said Flask ; `` yes , you 'll soon see this right whale 's head hoisted up opposite that parmacety 's . '' 
In good time , Flask 's saying proved true . 
As before , the Pequod steeply leaned over towards the sperm whale 's head , now , by the counterpoise of both heads , she regained her even keel ; though sorely strained , you may well believe . 
So , when on one side you hoist in Locke 's head , you go over that way ; but now , on the other side , hoist in Kant 's and you come back again ; but in very poor plight . 
Thus , some minds for ever keep trimming boat . 
Oh , ye foolish ! 
throw all these thunder-heads overboard , and then you will float light and right . 
In disposing of the body of a right whale , when brought alongside the ship , the same preliminary proceedings commonly take place as in the case of a sperm whale ; only , in the latter instance , the head is cut off whole , but in the former the lips and tongue are separately removed and hoisted on deck , with all the well known black bone attached to what is called the crown-piece . 
But nothing like this , in the present case , had been done . 
The carcases of both whales had dropped astern ; and the head-laden ship not a little resembled a mule carrying a pair of overburdening panniers . 
Meantime , Fedallah was calmly eyeing the right whale 's head , and ever and anon glancing from the deep wrinkles there to the lines in his own hand . 
And Ahab chanced so to stand , that the Parsee occupied his shadow ; while , if the Parsee 's shadow was there at all it seemed only to blend with , and lengthen Ahab 's . 
As the crew toiled on , Laplandish speculations were bandied among them , concerning all these passing things . 
The Sperm Whale 's Head - Contrasted View Here , now , are two great whales , laying their heads together ; let us join them , and lay together our own . 
Of the grand order of folio leviathans , the Sperm Whale and the Right Whale are by far the most noteworthy . 
They are the only whales regularly hunted by man . 
To the Nantucketer , they present the two extremes of all the known varieties of the whale . 
As the external difference between them is mainly observable in their heads ; and as a head of each is this moment hanging from the Pequod 's side ; and as we may freely go from one to the other , by merely stepping across the deck : -- where , I should like to know , will you obtain a better chance to study practical cetology than here ? 
In the first place , you are struck by the general contrast between these heads . 
Both are massive enough in all conscience ; but , there is a certain mathematical symmetry in the Sperm Whale 's which the Right Whale 's sadly lacks . 
There is more character in the Sperm Whale 's head . 
As you behold it , you involuntarily yield the immense superiority to him , in point of pervading dignity . 
In the present instance , too , this dignity is heightened by the pepper and salt color of his head at the summit , giving token of advanced age and large experience . 
In short , he is what the fishermen technically call a `` grey-headed whale . '' 
Let us now note what is least dissimilar in these heads -- namely , the two most important organs , the eye and the ear . 
Far back on the side of the head , and low down , near the angle of either whale 's jaw , if you narrowly search , you will at last see a lashless eye , which you would fancy to be a young colt 's eye ; so out of all proportion is it to the magnitude of the head . 
Now , from this peculiar sideway position of the whale 's eyes , it is plain that he can never see an object which is exactly ahead , no more than he can one exactly astern . 
In a word , the position of the whale 's eyes corresponds to that of a man 's ears ; and you may fancy , for yourself , how it would fare with you , did you sideways survey objects through your ears . 
You would find that you could only command some thirty degrees of vision in advance of the straight side-line of sight ; and about thirty more behind it . 
If your bitterest foe were walking straight towards you , with dagger uplifted in broad day , you would not be able to see him , any more than if he were stealing upon you from behind . 
In a word , you would have two backs , so to speak ; but , at the same time , also , two fronts -LRB- side fronts -RRB- : for what is it that makes the front of a man -- what , indeed , but his eyes ? 
Moreover , while in most other animals that I can now think of , the eyes are so planted as imperceptibly to blend their visual power , so as to produce one picture and not two to the brain ; the peculiar position of the whale 's eyes , effectually divided as they are by many cubic feet of solid head , which towers between them like a great mountain separating two lakes in valleys ; this , of course , must wholly separate the impressions which each independent organ imparts . 
The whale , therefore , must see one distinct picture on this side , and another distinct picture on that side ; while all between must be profound darkness and nothingness to him . 
Man may , in effect , be said to look out on the world from a sentry-box with two joined sashes for his window . 
But with the whale , these two sashes are separately inserted , making two distinct windows , but sadly impairing the view . 
This peculiarity of the whale 's eyes is a thing always to be borne in mind in the fishery ; and to be remembered by the reader in some subsequent scenes . 
A curious and most puzzling question might be started concerning this visual matter as touching the Leviathan . 
But I must be content with a hint . 
So long as a man 's eyes are open in the light , the act of seeing is involuntary ; that is , he can not then help mechanically seeing whatever objects are before him . 
Nevertheless , any one 's experience will teach him , that though he can take in an undiscriminating sweep of things at one glance , it is quite impossible for him , attentively , and completely , to examine any two things -- however large or however small -- at one and the same instant of time ; never mind if they lie side by side and touch each other . 
But if you now come to separate these two objects , and surround each by a circle of profound darkness ; then , in order to see one of them , in such a manner as to bring your mind to bear on it , the other will be utterly excluded from your contemporary consciousness . 
How is it , then , with the whale ? 
True , both his eyes , in themselves , must simultaneously act ; but is his brain so much more comprehensive , combining , and subtle than man 's , that he can at the same moment of time attentively examine two distinct prospects , one on one side of him , and the other in an exactly opposite direction ? 
If he can , then is it as marvellous a thing in him , as if a man were able simultaneously to go through the demonstrations of two distinct problems in Euclid . 
Nor , strictly investigated , is there any incongruity in this comparison . 
It may be but an idle whim , but it has always seemed to me , that the extraordinary vacillations of movement displayed by some whales when beset by three or four boats ; the timidity and liability to queer frights , so common to such whales ; I think that all this indirectly proceeds from the helpless perplexity of volition , in which their divided and diametrically opposite powers of vision must involve them . 
But the ear of the whale is full as curious as the eye . 
If you are an entire stranger to their race , you might hunt over these two heads for hours , and never discover that organ . 
The ear has no external leaf whatever ; and into the hole itself you can hardly insert a quill , so wondrously minute is it . 
It is lodged a little behind the eye . 
With respect to their ears , this important difference is to be observed between the sperm whale and the right . 
While the ears of the former has an external opening , that of the latter is entirely and evenly covered over with a membrane , so as to be quite imperceptible from without . 
Is it not curious , that so vast a being as the whale should see the world through so small an eye , and hear the thunder through an ear which is smaller than a hare 's ? 
But if his eyes were broad as the lens of Herschel 's great telescope ; and his ears capacious as the porches of cathedrals ; would that make him any longer of sight , or sharper of hearing ? 
Not at all . 
