thou mightest well be taken now for the sea-chariot of the sun . 
Ho , ho ! 
all ye nations before my prow , I bring the sun to ye ! 
Yoke on the further billows ; hallo ! 
a tandem , I drive the sea ! '' 
But suddenly reined back by some counter thought , he hurried towards the helm , huskily demanding how the ship was heading . 
`` East-sou-east , sir , '' said the frightened steersman . 
`` Thou liest ! '' 
smiting him with his clenched fist . 
`` Heading East at this hour in the morning , and the sun astern ? '' 
Upon this every soul was confounded ; for the phenomenon just then observed by Ahab had unaccountably escaped every one else ; but its very blinding palpableness must have been the cause . 
Thrusting his head half-way into the binnacle , Ahab caught one glimpse of the compasses ; his uplifted arm slowly fell ; for a moment he almost seemed to stagger . 
Standing behind him Starbuck looked , and lo ! 
the two compasses pointed East , and the Pequod was as infallibly going West . 
But ere the first wild alarm could get out abroad among the crew , the old man with a rigid laugh exclaimed , `` I have it ! 
It has happened before . 
Mr. Starbuck , last night 's thunder turned our compasses -- that 's all . 
Thou hast before now heard of such a thing , I take it . '' 
`` Aye ; but never before has it happened to me , sir , '' said the pale mate , gloomily . 
Here , it must needs be said , that accidents like this have in more than one case occurred to ships in violent storms . 
The magnetic energy , as developed in the mariner 's needle , is , as all know , essentially one with the electricity beheld in heaven ; hence it is not to be much marvelled at , that such things should be . 
In instances where the lightning has actually struck the vessel , so as to smite down some of the spars and rigging , the effect upon the needle has at times been still more fatal ; all its loadstone virtue being annihilated , so that the before magnetic steel was of no more use than an old wife 's knitting needle . 
But in either case , the needle never again , of itself , recovers the original virtue thus marred or lost ; and if the binnacle compasses be affected , the same fate reaches all the others that may be in the ship ; even were the lowermost one inserted into the kelson . 
Deliberately standing before the binnacle , and eyeing the transpointed compasses , the old man , with the sharp of his extended hand , now took the precise bearing of the sun , and satisfied that the needles were exactly inverted , shouted out his orders for the ship 's course to be changed accordingly . 
The yards were hard up ; and once more the Pequod thrust her undaunted bows into the opposing wind , for the supposed fair one had only been juggling her . 
Meanwhile , whatever were his own secret thoughts , Starbuck said nothing , but quietly he issued all requisite orders ; while Stubb and Flask -- who in some small degree seemed then to be sharing his feelings -- likewise unmurmuringly acquiesced . 
As for the men , though some of them lowly rumbled , their fear of Ahab was greater than their fear of Fate . 
But as ever before , the pagan harpooneers remained almost wholly unimpressed ; or if impressed , it was only with a certain magnetism shot into their congenial hearts from inflexible Ahab 's . 
For a space the old man walked the deck in rolling reveries . 
But chancing to slip with his ivory heel , he saw the crushed copper sight-tubes of the quadrant he had the day before dashed to the deck . 
`` Thou poor , proud heaven-gazer and sun 's pilot ! 
yesterday I wrecked thee , and to-day the compasses would fain have wrecked me . 
So , so . 
But Ahab is lord over the level loadstone yet . 
Mr. Starbuck -- a lance without the pole ; a top-maul , and the smallest of the sail-maker 's needles . 
Quick ! '' 
Accessory , perhaps , to the impulse dictating the thing he was now about to do , were certain prudential motives , whose object might have been to revive the spirits of his crew by a stroke of his subtile skill , in a matter so wondrous as that of the inverted compasses . 
Besides , the old man well knew that to steer by transpointed needles , though clumsily practicable , was not a thing to be passed over by superstitious sailors , without some shudderings and evil portents . 
`` Men , '' said he , steadily turning upon the crew , as the mate handed him the things he had demanded , `` my men , the thunder turned old Ahab 's needles ; but out of this bit of steel Ahab can make one of his own , that will point as true as any . '' 
Abashed glances of servile wonder were exchanged by the sailors , as this was said ; and with fascinated eyes they awaited whatever magic might follow . 
But Starbuck looked away . 
With a blow from the top-maul Ahab knocked off the steel head of the lance , and then handing to the mate the long iron rod remaining , bade him hold it upright , without its touching the deck . 
Then , with the maul , after repeatedly smiting the upper end of this iron rod , he placed the blunted needle endwise on the top of it , and less strongly hammered that , several times , the mate still holding the rod as before . 
Then going through some small strange motions with it -- whether indispensable to the magnetizing of the steel , or merely intended to augment the awe of the crew , is uncertain -- he called for linen thread ; and moving to the binnacle , slipped out the two reversed needles there , and horizontally suspended the sail-needle by its middle , over one of the compass cards . 
At first , the steel went round and round , quivering and vibrating at either end ; but at last it settled to its place , when Ahab , who had been intently watching for this result , stepped frankly back from the binnacle , and pointing his stretched arm towards it , exclaimed , -- `` Look ye , for yourselves , if Ahab be not the lord of the level loadstone ! 
The sun is East , and that compass swears it ! '' 
One after another they peered in , for nothing but their own eyes could persuade such ignorance as theirs , and one after another they slunk away . 
In his fiery eyes of scorn and triumph , you then saw Ahab in all his fatal pride . 
The Log and Line While now the fated Pequod had been so long afloat this voyage , the log and line had but very seldom been in use . 
Owing to a confident reliance upon other means of determining the vessel 's place , some merchantmen , and many whalemen , especially when cruising , wholly neglect to heave the log ; though at the same time , and frequently more for form 's sake than anything else , regularly putting down upon the customary slate the course steered by the ship , as well as the presumed average rate of progression every hour . 
It had been thus with the Pequod . 
The wooden reel and angular log attached hung , long untouched , just beneath the railing of the after bulwarks . 
Rains and spray had damped it ; the sun and wind had warped it ; all the elements had combined to rot a thing that hung so idly . 
But heedless of all this , his mood seized Ahab , as he happened to glance upon the reel , not many hours after the magnet scene , and he remembered how his quadrant was no more , and recalled his frantic oath about the level log and line . 
The ship was sailing plungingly ; astern the billows rolled in riots . 
`` Forward , there ! 
Heave the log ! '' 
Two seamen came . 
The golden-hued Tahitian and the grizzly Manxman . 
`` Take the reel , one of ye , I 'll heave . '' 
They went towards the extreme stern , on the ship 's lee side , where the deck , with the oblique energy of the wind , was now almost dipping into the creamy , sidelong-rushing sea . 
The Manxman took the reel , and holding it high up , by the projecting handle-ends of the spindle , round which the spool of line revolved , so stood with the angular log hanging downwards , till Ahab advanced to him . 
Ahab stood before him , and was lightly unwinding some thirty or forty turns to form a preliminary hand-coil to toss overboard , when the old Manxman , who was intently eyeing both him and the line , made bold to speak . 
`` Sir , I mistrust it ; this line looks far gone , long heat and wet have spoiled it . '' '' 
` Twill hold , old gentleman . 
Long heat and wet , have they spoiled thee ? 
Thou seem ` st to hold . 
Or , truer perhaps , life holds thee ; not thou it . '' 
`` I hold the spool , sir . 
But just as my captain says . 
With these grey hairs of mine 't is not worth while disputing , ` specially with a superior , who 'll ne'er confess . '' 
`` What 's that ? 
There now 's a patched professor in Queen Nature 's granite-founded College ; but methinks he 's too subservient . 
Where wert thou born ? '' 
`` In the little rocky Isle of Man , sir . '' 
`` Excellent ! 
Thou ` st hit the world by that . '' 
`` I know not , sir , but I was born there . '' 
`` In the Isle of Man , hey ? 
Well , the other way , it 's good . 
Here 's a man from Man ; a man born in once independent Man , and now unmanned of Man ; which is sucked in -- by what ? 
Up with the reel ! 
The dead , blind wall butts all inquiring heads at last . 
Up with it ! 
So . '' 
The log was heaved . 
The loose coils rapidly straightened out in a long dragging line astern , and then , instantly , the reel began to whirl . 
In turn , jerkingly raised and lowered by the rolling billows , the towing resistance of the log caused the old reelman to stagger strangely . 
`` Hold hard ! '' 
Snap ! 
the overstrained line sagged down in one long festoon ; the tugging log was gone . 
`` I crush the quadrant , the thunder turns the needles , and now the mad sea parts the log-line . 
But Ahab can mend all . 
Haul in here , Tahitian ; reel up , Manxman . 
And look ye , let the carpenter make another log , and mend thou the line . 
See to it . '' 
`` There he goes now ; to him nothing 's happened ; but to me , the skewer seems loosening out of the middle of the world . 
Haul in , haul in , Tahitian ! 
These lines run whole , and whirling out : come in broken , and dragging slow . 
Ha , Pip ? 
