jolly is the gale , And a joker is the whale , A ' flourishin ' his tail , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
The scud all a flyin ' , That 's his flip only foamin ' ; When he stirs in the spicin ' , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
Thunder splits the ships , But he only smacks his lips , A tastin ' of this flip , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
`` Avast Stubb , '' cried Starbuck , `` let the Typhoon sing , and strike his harp here in our rigging ; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace . '' 
`` But I am not a brave man ; never said I was a brave man ; I am a coward ; and I sing to keep up my spirits . 
And I tell you what it is , Mr. Starbuck , there 's no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat . 
And when that 's done , ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up . '' 
`` Madman ! 
look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own . '' 
`` What ! 
how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else , never mind how foolish ? '' 
`` Here ! '' 
cried Starbuck , seizing Stubb by the shoulder , and pointing his hand towards the weather bow , `` markest thou not that the gale comes from the eastward , the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick ? 
the very course he swung to this day noon ? 
now mark his boat there ; where is that stove ? 
In the stern-sheets , man ; where he is wont to stand -- his stand-point is stove , man ! 
Now jump overboard , and sing away , if thou must ! 
`` I do n't half understand ye : what 's in the wind ? '' 
`` Yes , yes , round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket , '' soliloquized Starbuck suddenly , heedless of Stubb 's question . 
`` The gale that now hammers at us to stave us , we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive us towards home . 
Yonder , to windward , all is blackness of doom ; but to leeward , homeward -- I see it lightens up there ; but not with the lightning . '' 
At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness , following the flashes , a voice was heard at his side ; and almost at the same instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
`` Old Thunder ! '' 
said Ahab , groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-hole ; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of fire . 
Now , as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the perilous fluid into the soil ; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry to each mast , is intended to conduct it into the water . 
But as this conductor must descend to considerable depth , that its end may avoid all contact with the hull ; and as moreover , if kept constantly towing there , it would be liable to many mishaps , besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging , and more or less impeding the vessel 's way in the water ; because of all this , the lower parts of a ship 's lightning-rods are not always overboard ; but are generally made in long slender links , so as to be the more readily hauled up into the chains outside , or thrown down into the sea , as occasion may require . 
`` The rods ! 
the rods ! '' 
cried Starbuck to the crew , suddenly admonished to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux , to light Ahab to his post . 
`` Are they overboard ? 
drop them over , fore and aft . 
Quick ! '' 
`` Avast ! '' 
cried Ahab ; `` let 's have fair play here , though we be the weaker side . 
Yet I 'll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes , that all the world may be secured ; but out on privileges ! 
Let them be , sir . '' 
`` Look aloft ! '' 
cried Starbuck . 
`` The corpusants ! 
the corpusants ! 
All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire ; and touched at each tri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames , each of the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air , like three gigantic wax tapers before an altar . 
`` Blast the boat ! 
let it go ! '' 
cried Stubb at this instant , as a swashing sea heaved up under his own little craft so that its gunwale violently jammed his hand , as he was passing a lashing . 
`` Blast it ! '' 
-- but slipping backward on the deck , his uplifted eyes caught the flames ; and immediately shifting his tone he cried -- `` The corpusants have mercy on us all ! '' 
To sailors , oaths are household words ; they will swear in the trance of the calm , and in the teeth of the tempest ; they will imprecate curses from the topsail-yard-arms , when most they teeter over to a seething sea ; but in all my voyagings , seldom have I heard a common oath when God 's burning finger has been laid on the ship ; when His `` Mene , Mene , Tekel Upharsin '' has been woven into the shrouds and the cordage . 
While this pallidness was burning aloft , few words were heard from the enchanted crew ; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle , all their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence , like a faraway constellation of stars . 
Relieved against the ghostly light , the gigantic jet negro , Daggoo , loomed up to thrice his real stature , and seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come . 
The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth , which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants ; while lit up by the preternatural light , Queequeg 's tattooing burned like Satanic blue flames on his body . 
The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft ; and once more the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall . 
A moment or two passed , when Starbuck , going forward , pushed against some one . 
It was Stubb . 
`` What thinkest thou now , man ; I heard thy cry ; it was not the same in the song . '' 
`` No , no , it was n't ; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all ; and I hope they will , still . 
But do they only have mercy on long faces ? 
-- have they no bowels for a laugh ? 
And look ye , Mr. Starbuck -- but it 's too dark to look . 
Hear me , then ; I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck ; for those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a ' block with sperm-oil , d'ye see ; and so , all that sperm will work up into the masts , like sap in a tree . 
Yes , our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti candles -- that 's the good promise we saw . '' 
At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb 's face slowly beginning to glimmer into sight . 
Glancing upwards , he cried : `` See ! 
see ! '' 
and once more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness in their pallor . 
`` The corpusants have mercy on us all , '' cried Stubb , again . 
At the base of the main-mast , full beneath the doubloon and the flame , the Parsee was kneeling in Ahab 's front , but with his head bowed away from him ; while near by , from the arched and overhanging rigging , where they had just been engaged securing a spar , a number of the seamen , arrested by the glare , now cohered together , and hung pendulous , like a knot of numbed wasps from a drooping , orchard twig . 
In various enchanted attitudes like the standing , or stepping , or running skeletons in Herculaneum , others remained rooted to the deck ; but all their eyes upcast . 
`` Aye , aye , men ! '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Look up at it ; mark it well ; the white flame but lights the way to the White Whale ! 
Hand me those mainmast links there ; I would fain feel this pulse , and let mine beat against it ; blood against fire ! 
So . '' 
Then turning -- the last link held fast in his left hand , he put his foot upon the Parsee ; and with fixed upward eye , and high-flung right arm , he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames . 
`` Oh ! 
thou clear spirit of clear fire , whom on these seas I as Persian once did worship , till in the sacramental act so burned by thee , that to this hour I bear the scar ; I now know thee , thou clear spirit , and I now know that thy right worship is defiance . 
To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind ; and e ` en for hate thou canst but kill ; and all are killed . 
No fearless fool now fronts thee . 
I own thy speechless , placeless power ; but to the last gasp of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional , unintegral mastery in me . 
In the midst of the personified impersonal , a personality stands here . 
Though but a point at best ; whenceso'er I came ; whereso'er I go ; yet while I earthly live , the queenly personality lives in me , and feels her royal rights . 
But war is pain , and hate is woe . 
Come in thy lowest form of love , and I will kneel and kiss thee ; but at thy highest , come as mere supernal power ; and though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds , there 's that in here that still remains indifferent . 
Oh , thou clear spirit , of thy fire thou madest me , and like a true child of fire , I breathe it back to thee . '' 
-LSB- Sudden , repeated flashes of lightning ; the nine flames leap lengthwise to thrice their previous height ; Ahab , with the rest , closes his eyes , his right hand pressed hard upon them . -RSB- 
`` I own thy speechless , placeless power ; said I not so ? 
Nor was it wrung from me ; nor do I now drop these links . 
Thou canst blind ; but I can then grope . 
Thou canst consume ; but I can then be ashes . 
Take the homage of these poor eyes , and shutter-hands . 
I would not take it . 
The lightning flashes through my skull ; mine eyeballs ache and ache ; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded , and rolling on some stunning ground . 
Oh , oh ! 
Yet blindfold , yet will I talk to thee . 
Light though thou be , thou leapest out of darkness ; but I am darkness leaping out of light , leaping out of thee ! 
The javelins cease ; open eyes ; see , or not ? 
There burn the flames ! 
Oh , thou magnanimous ! 
now do I do glory in my genealogy . 
But thou art but my fiery father ; my sweet mother , I know not . 
