He only asked for water -- fresh water -- something to wipe the brine off ; that done , he put on dry clothes , lighted his pipe , and leaning against the bulwarks , and mildly eyeing those around him , seemed to be saying to himself -- `` It 's a mutual , joint-stock world , in all meridians . 
We cannibals must help these Christians . '' 
Nantucket Nothing more happened on the passage worthy the mentioning ; so , after a fine run , we safely arrived in Nantucket . 
Nantucket ! 
Take out your map and look at it . 
See what a real corner of the world it occupies ; how it stands there , away off shore , more lonely than the Eddystone lighthouse . 
Look at it -- a mere hillock , and elbow of sand ; all beach , without a background . 
There is more sand there than you would use in twenty years as a substitute for blotting paper . 
Some gamesome wights will tell you that they have to plant weeds there , they do n't grow naturally ; that they import Canada thistles ; that they have to send beyond seas for a spile to stop a leak in an oil cask ; that pieces of wood in Nantucket are carried about like bits of the true cross in Rome ; that people there plant toadstools before their houses , to get under the shade in summer time ; that one blade of grass makes an oasis , three blades in a day 's walk a prairie ; that they wear quicksand shoes , something like Laplander snow-shoes ; that they are so shut up , belted about , every way inclosed , surrounded , and made an utter island of by the ocean , that to their very chairs and tables small clams will sometimes be found adhering as to the backs of sea turtles . 
But these extravaganzas only show that Nantucket is no Illinois . 
Look now at the wondrous traditional story of how this island was settled by the red-men . 
Thus goes the legend . 
In olden times an eagle swooped down upon the New England coast and carried off an infant Indian in his talons . 
With loud lament the parents saw their child borne out of sight over the wide waters . 
They resolved to follow in the same direction . 
Setting out in their canoes , after a perilous passage they discovered the island , and there they found an empty ivory casket , -- the poor little Indian 's skeleton . 
What wonder , then , that these Nantucketers , born on a beach , should take to the sea for a livelihood ! 
They first caught crabs and quahogs in the sand ; grown bolder , they waded out with nets for mackerel ; more experienced , they pushed off in boats and captured cod ; and at last , launching a navy of great ships on the sea , explored this watery world ; put an incessant belt of circumnavigations round it ; peeped in at Behring 's Straits ; and in all seasons and all oceans declared everlasting war with the mightiest animated mass that has survived the flood ; most monstrous and most mountainous ! 
That Himmalehan , salt-sea , Mastodon , clothed with such portentousness of unconscious power , that his very panics are more to be dreaded than his most fearless and malicious assaults ! 
And thus have these naked Nantucketers , these sea hermits , issuing from their ant-hill in the sea , overrun and conquered the watery world like so many Alexanders ; parcelling out among them the Atlantic , Pacific , and Indian oceans , as the three pirate powers did Poland . 
Let America add Mexico to Texas , and pile Cuba upon Canada ; let the English overswarm all India , and hang out their blazing banner from the sun ; two thirds of this terraqueous globe are the Nantucketer 's . 
For the sea is his ; he owns it , as Emperors own empires ; other seamen having but a right of way through it . 
Merchant ships are but extension bridges ; armed ones but floating forts ; even pirates and privateers , though following the sea as highwaymen the road . 
they but plunder other ships , other fragments of the land like themselves , without seeking to draw their living from the bottomless deep itself . 
The Nantucketer , he alone resides and riots on the sea ; he alone , in Bible language , goes down to it in ships ; to and fro ploughing it as his own special plantation . 
There is his home ; there lies his business which a Noah 's flood would not interrupt , though it overwhelmed all the millions in China . 
He lives on the sea , as prairie cocks in the prairie ; he hides among the waves , he climbs them as chamois hunters climb the Alps . 
For years he knows not the land ; so that when he comes to it at last , it smells like another world , more strangely than the moon would to an Earthsman . 
With the landless gull , that at sunset folds her wings and is rocked to sleep between billows ; so at nightfall , the Nantucketer , out of sight of land , furls his sails , and lays him to his rest , while under his very pillow rush herds of walruses and whales . 
Chowder It was quite late in the evening when the little Moss came snugly to anchor , and Queequeg and I went ashore ; so we could attend to no business that day , at least none but a supper and a bed . 
The landlord of the Spouter-Inn had recommended us to his cousin Hosea Hussey of the Try Pots , whom he asserted to be the proprietor of one of the best kept hotels in all Nantucket , and moreover he had assured us that Cousin Hosea , as he called him , was famous for his chowders . 
In short , he plainly hinted that we could not possibly do better than try pot-luck at the Try Pots . 
But the directions he had given us about keeping a yellow warehouse on our starboard hand till we opened a white church to the larboard , and then keeping that on the larboard hand till we made a corner three points to the starboard , and that done , then ask the first man we met where the place was ; these crooked directions of his very much puzzled us at first , especially as , at the outset , Queequeg insisted that the yellow warehouse -- our first point of departure -- must be left on the larboard hand , whereas I had understood Peter Coffin to say it was on the starboard . 
However , by dint of beating about a little in the dark , and now and then knocking up a peaceable inhabitant to inquire the way , we at last came to something which there was no mistaking . 
Two enormous wooden pots painted black , and suspended by asses ' ears , swung from the cross-trees of an old top-mast , planted in front of an old doorway . 
The horns of the cross-trees were sawed off on the other side , so that this old top-mast looked not a little like a gallows . 
Perhaps I was over sensitive to such impressions at the time , but I could not help staring at this gallows with a vague misgiving . 
A sort of crick was in my neck as I gazed up to the two remaining horns ; yes , two of them , one for Queequeg , and one for me . 
It 's ominous , thinks I . 
A Coffin my Innkeeper upon landing in my first whaling port ; tombstones staring at me in the whalemen 's chapel , and here a gallows ! 
and a pair of prodigious black pots too ! 
Are these last throwing out oblique hints touching Tophet ? 
I was called from these reflections by the sight of a freckled woman with yellow hair and a yellow gown , standing in the porch of the inn , under a dull red lamp swinging there , that looked much like an injured eye , and carrying on a brisk scolding with a man in a purple woollen shirt . 
`` Get along with ye , '' said she to the man , `` or I 'll be combing ye ! '' 
`` Come on , Queequeg , '' said I , `` all right . 
There 's Mrs. Hussey . '' 
And so it turned out ; Mr. Hosea Hussey being from home , but leaving Mrs. Hussey entirely competent to attend to all his affairs . 
Upon making known our desires for a supper and a bed , Mrs. Hussey , postponing further scolding for the present , ushered us into a little room , and seating us at a table spread with the relics of a recently concluded repast , turned round to us and said -- `` Clam or Cod ? '' 
`` What 's that about Cods , ma'am ? '' 
said I , with much politeness . 
`` Clam or Cod ? '' 
she repeated . 
`` A clam for supper ? 
a cold clam ; is that what you mean , Mrs. Hussey ? '' 
says I , `` but that 's a rather cold and clammy reception in the winter time , ai n't it , Mrs. Hussey ? '' 
But being in a great hurry to resume scolding the man in the purple shirt who was waiting for it in the entry , and seeming to hear nothing but the word `` clam , '' Mrs. Hussey hurried towards an open door leading to the kitchen , and bawling out `` clam for two , '' disappeared . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , `` do you think that we can make out a supper for us both on one clam ? '' 
However , a warm savory steam from the kitchen served to belie the apparently cheerless prospect before us . 
But when that smoking chowder came in , the mystery was delightfully explained . 
Oh ! 
sweet friends , hearken to me . 
It was made of small juicy clams , scarcely bigger than hazel nuts , mixed with pounded ship biscuits , and salted pork cut up into little flakes ! 
the whole enriched with butter , and plentifully seasoned with pepper and salt . 
Our appetites being sharpened by the frosty voyage , and in particular , Queequeg seeing his favourite fishing food before him , and the chowder being surpassingly excellent , we despatched it with great expedition : when leaning back a moment and bethinking me of Mrs. Hussey 's clam and cod announcement , I thought I would try a little experiment . 
Stepping to the kitchen door , I uttered the word `` cod '' with great emphasis , and resumed my seat . 
In a few moments the savoury steam came forth again , but with a different flavor , and in good time a fine cod-chowder was placed before us . 
We resumed business ; and while plying our spoons in the bowl , thinks I to myself , I wonder now if this here has any effect on the head ? 
What 's that stultifying saying about chowder-headed people ? 
`` But look , Queequeg , ai n't that a live eel in your bowl ? 
Where 's your harpoon ? '' 
Fishiest of all fishy places was the Try Pots , which well deserved its name ; for the pots there were always boiling chowders . 
Chowder for breakfast , and chowder for dinner , and chowder for supper , till you began to look for fish-bones coming through your clothes . 
The area before the house was paved with clam-shells . 
Mrs. Hussey wore a polished necklace of codfish vertebra ; and Hosea Hussey had his account books bound in superior old shark-skin . 
There was a fishy flavor to the milk , too , which I could not at all account for , till one morning happening to take a stroll along the beach among some fishermen 's boats , I saw Hosea 's brindled cow feeding on fish remnants , and marching along the sand with each foot in a cod 's decapitated head , looking very slipshod , I assure ye . 
Supper concluded , we received a lamp , and directions from Mrs. Hussey concerning the nearest way to bed ; but , as Queequeg was about to precede me up the stairs , the lady reached forth her arm , and demanded his harpoon ; she allowed no harpoon in her chambers . 
`` Why not ? 
said I ; `` every true whaleman sleeps with his harpoon -- but why not ? '' 
`` Because it 's dangerous , '' says she . 
`` Ever since young Stiggs coming from that unfort ` nt v ` y' ge of his , when he was gone four years and a half , with only three barrels of ile , was found dead in my first floor back , with his harpoon in his side ; ever since then I allow no boarders to take sich dangerous weepons in their rooms at night . 
So , Mr. Queequeg '' -LRB- for she had learned his name -RRB- , `` I will just take this here iron , and keep it for you till morning . 
But the chowder ; clam or cod to-morrow for breakfast , men ? '' 
`` Both , '' says I ; `` and let 's have a couple of smoked herring by way of variety . '' 
The Ship In bed we concocted our plans for the morrow . 
But to my surprise and no small concern , Queequeg now gave me to understand , that he had been diligently consulting Yojo -- the name of his black little god -- and Yojo had told him two or three times over , and strongly insisted upon it everyway , that instead of our going together among the whaling-fleet in harbor , and in concert selecting our craft ; instead of this , I say , Yojo earnestly enjoined that the selection of the ship should rest wholly with me , inasmuch as Yojo purposed befriending us ; and , in order to do so , had already pitched upon a vessel , which , if left to myself , I , Ishmael , should infallibly light upon , for all the world as though it had turned out by chance ; and in that vessel I must immediately ship myself , for the present irrespective of Queequeg . 
I have forgotten to mention that , in many things , Queequeg placed great confidence in the excellence of Yojo 's judgment and surprising forecast of things ; and cherished Yojo with considerable esteem , as a rather good sort of god , who perhaps meant well enough upon the whole , but in all cases did not succeed in his benevolent designs . 
Now , this plan of Queequeg 's or rather Yojo 's , touching the selection of our craft ; I did not like that plan at all . 
I had not a little relied on Queequeg 's sagacity to point out the whaler best fitted to carry us and our fortunes securely . 
But as all my remonstrances produced no effect upon Queequeg , I was obliged to acquiesce ; and accordingly prepared to set about this business with a determined rushing sort of energy and vigor , that should quickly settle that trifling little affair . 
Next morning early , leaving Queequeg shut up with Yojo in our little bedroom -- for it seemed that it was some sort of Lent or Ramadan , or day of fasting , humiliation , and prayer with Queequeg and Yojo that day ; how it was I never could find out , for , though I applied myself to it several times , I never could master his liturgies and XXXIX Articles -- leaving Queequeg , then , fasting on his tomahawk pipe , and Yojo warming himself at his sacrificial fire of shavings , I sallied out among the shipping . 
After much prolonged sauntering , and many random inquiries , I learnt that there were three ships up for three-years ' voyages -- The Devil-Dam the Tit-bit , and the Pequod . 
Devil-dam , I do not know the origin of ; Tit-bit is obvious ; Pequod you will no doubt remember , was the name of a celebrated tribe of Massachusetts Indians ; now extinct as the ancient Medes . 
I peered and pryed about the Devil-Dam ; from her , hopped over to the Tit-bit ; and finally , going on board the Pequod , looked around her for a moment , and then decided that this was the very ship for us . 
You may have seen many a quaint craft in your day , for aught I know ; -- square-toed luggers ; mountainous Japanese junks ; butter-box galliots , and what not ; but take my word for it , you never saw such a rare old craft as this same rare old Pequod . 
She was a ship of the old school , rather small if anything ; with an old-fashioned claw-footed look about her . 
Long seasoned and weather-stained in the typhoons and calms of all four oceans , her old hull 's complexion was darkened like a French grenadier 's , who has alike fought in Egypt and Siberia . 
Her venerable bows looked bearded . 
Her masts -- cut somewhere on the coast of Japan , where her original ones were lost overboard in a gale -- her masts stood stiffly up like the spines of the three old kings of Cologne . 
Her ancient decks were worn and wrinkled , like the pilgrim-worshipped flag-stone in Canterbury Cathedral where Beckett bled . 
But to all these her old antiquities , were added new and marvellous features , pertaining to the wild business that for more than half a century she had followed . 
