Consider ! 
Most of the scientific drawings have been taken from the stranded fish ; and these are about as correct as a drawing of a wrecked ship , with broken back , would correctly represent the noble animal itself in all its undashed pride of hull and spars . 
Though elephants have stood for their full-lengths , the living Leviathan has never yet fairly floated himself for his portrait . 
The living whale , in his full majesty and significance , is only to be seen at sea in unfathomable waters ; and afloat the vast bulk of him is out of sight , like a launched line-of-battle ship ; and out of that element it is a thing eternally impossible for mortal man to hoist him bodily into the air , so as to preserve all his mighty swells and undulations . 
And , not to speak of the highly presumable difference of contour between a young suckling whale and a full-grown Platonian Leviathan ; yet , even in the case of one of those young sucking whales hoisted to a ship 's deck , such is then the outlandish , eel-like , limbered , varying shape of him , that his precise expression the devil himself could not catch . 
But it may be fancied , that from the naked skeleton of the stranded whale , accurate hints may be derived touching his true form . 
Not at all . 
For it is one of the more curious things about this Leviathan , that his skeleton gives very little idea of his general shape . 
Though Jeremy Bentham 's skeleton , which hangs for candelabra in the library of one of his executors , correctly conveys the idea of a burly-browed utilitarian old gentleman , with all Jeremy 's other leading personal characteristics ; yet nothing of this kind could be inferred from any leviathan 's articulated bones . 
In fact , as the great Hunter says , the mere skeleton of the whale bears the same relation to the fully invested and padded animal as the insect does to the chrysalis that so roundingly envelopes it . 
This peculiarity is strikingly evinced in the head , as in some part of this book will be incidentally shown . 
It is also very curiously displayed in the side fin , the bones of which almost exactly answer to the bones of the human hand , minus only the thumb . 
This fin has four regular bone-fingers , the index , middle , ring , and little finger . 
But all these are permanently lodged in their fleshy covering , as the human fingers in an artificial covering . 
`` However recklessly the whale may sometimes serve us , '' said humorous Stubb one day , `` he can never be truly said to handle us without mittens . '' 
For all these reasons , then , any way you may look at it , you must needs conclude that the great Leviathan is that one creature in the world which must remain unpainted to the last . 
True , one portrait may hit the mark much nearer than another , but none can hit it with any very considerable degree of exactness . 
So there is no earthly way of finding out precisely what the whale really looks like . 
And the only mode in which you can derive even a tolerable idea of his living contour , is by going a whaling yourself ; but by so doing , you run no small risk of being eternally stove and sunk by him . 
Wherefore , it seems to me you had best not be too fastidious in your curiosity touching this Leviathan . 
Of the Less Erroneous Pictures of Whales and the True Pictures of Whaling Scenes In connexion with the monstrous pictures of whales , I am strongly tempted here to enter upon those still more monstrous stories of them which are to be found in certain books , both ancient and modern , especially in Pliny , Purchas , Hackluyt , Harris , Cuvier , & c . 
But I pass that matter by . 
I know of only four published outlines of the great Sperm Whale ; Colnett 's , Huggins 's , Frederick Cuvier 's , and Beale 's . 
In the previous chapter Colnett and Cuvier have been referred to . 
Huggins 's is far better than theirs ; but , by great odds , Beale 's is the best . 
All Beale 's drawings of this whale are good , excepting the middle figure in the picture of three whales in various attitudes , capping his second chapter . 
His frontispiece , boats attacking Sperm Whales , though no doubt calculated to excite the civil scepticism of some parlor men , is admirably correct and life-like in its general effect . 
Some of the Sperm Whale drawings in J. Ross Browne are pretty correct in contour ; but they are wretchedly engraved . 
That is not his fault though . 
Of the Right Whale , the best outline pictures are in Scoresby ; but they are drawn on too small a scale to convey a desirable impression . 
He has but one picture of whaling scenes , and this is a sad deficiency , because it is by such pictures only , when at all well done , that you can derive anything like a truthful idea of the living whale as seen by his living hunters . 
But , taken for all in all , by far the finest , though in some details not the most correct , presentations of whales and whaling scenes to be anywhere found , are two large French engravings , well executed , and taken from paintings by one Garnery . 
Respectively , they represent attacks on the Sperm and Right Whale . 
In the first engraving a noble Sperm Whale is depicted in full majesty of might , just risen beneath the boat from the profundities of the ocean , and bearing high in the . 
air upon his back the terrific wreck of the stoven planks . 
The prow of the boat is partially unbroken , and is drawn just balancing upon the monster 's spine ; and standing in that prow , for that one single incomputable flash of time , you behold an oarsman , half shrouded by the incensed boiling spout of the whale , and in the act of leaping , as if from a precipice . 
The action of the whole thing is wonderfully good and true . 
The half-emptied line-tub floats on the whitened sea ; the wooden poles of the spilled harpoons obliquely bob in it ; the heads of the swimming crew are scattered about the whale in contrasting expressions of affright ; while in the black stormy distance the ship is bearing down upon the scene . 
Serious fault might be found with the anatomical details of this whale , but let that pass ; since , for the life of me , I could not draw so good a one . 
In the second engraving , the boat is in the act of drawing alongside the barnacled flank of a large running Right Whale , that rolls his black weedy bulk in the sea like some mossy rock-slide from the Patagonian cliffs . 
His jets are erect , full , and black like soot ; so that from so abounding a smoke in the chimney , you would think there must be a brave supper cooking in the great bowels below . 
Sea fowls are pecking at the small crabs , shell-fish , and other sea candies and maccaroni , which the Right Whale sometimes carries on his pestilent back . 
And all the while the thick-lipped leviathan is rushing through the deep , leaving tons of tumultuous white curds in his wake , and causing the slight boat to rock in the swells like a skiff caught nigh the paddle-wheels of an ocean steamer . 
Thus , the fore-ground is all raging commotion ; but behind , in admirable artistic contrast , is the glassy level of a sea becalmed , the drooping unstarched sails of the powerless ship , and the inert mass of a dead whale , a conquered fortress , with the flag of capture lazily hanging from the whale-pole inserted into his spout-hole . 
Who Garnery the painter is , or was , I know not . 
But my life for it he was either practically conversant with his subject , or else marvellously tutored by some experienced whaleman . 
The French are the lads for painting action . 
Go and gaze upon all the paintings in Europe , and where will you find such a gallery of living and breathing commotion on canvas , as in that triumphal hall at Versailles ; where the beholder fights his way , pell-mell , through the consecutive great battles of France ; where every sword seems a flash of the Northern Lights , and the successive armed kings and Emperors dash by , like a charge of crowned centaurs ? 
Not wholly unworthy of a place in that gallery , are these sea battle-pieces of Garnery . 
The natural aptitude of the French for seizing the picturesqueness of things seems to be peculiarly evinced in what paintings and engravings they have of their whaling scenes . 
With not one tenth of England 's experience in the fishery , and not the thousandth part of that of the Americans , they have nevertheless furnished both nations with the only finished sketches at all capable of conveying the real spirit of the whale hunt . 
For the most part , the English and American whale draughtsmen seem entirely content with presenting the mechanical outline of things , such as the vacant profile of the whale ; which , so far as picturesqueness of effect is concerned , is about tantamount to sketching the profile of a pyramid . 
Even Scoresby , the justly renowned Right whaleman , after giving us a stiff full length of the Greenland whale , and three or four delicate miniatures of narwhales and porpoises , treats us to a series of classical engravings of boat hooks , chopping knives , and grapnels ; and with the microscopic diligence of a Leuwenhoeck submits to the inspection of a shivering world ninety-six fac-similes of magnified Arctic snow crystals . 
I mean no disparagement to the excellent voyager -LRB- I honor him for a veteran -RRB- , but in so important a matter it was certainly an oversight not to have procured for every crystal a sworn affidavit taken before a Greenland Justice of the Peace . 
In addition to those fine engravings from Garnery , there are two other French engravings worthy of note , by some one who subscribes himself `` H. Durand . '' 
One of them , though not precisely adapted to our present purpose , nevertheless deserves mention on other accounts . 
It is a quiet noon-scene among the isles of the Pacific ; a French whaler anchored , inshore , in a calm , and lazily taking water on board ; the loosened sails of the ship , and the long leaves of the palms in the background , both drooping together in the breezeless air . 
The effect is very fine , when considered with reference to its presenting the hardy fishermen under one of their few aspects of oriental repose . 
The other engraving is quite a different affair : the ship hove-to upon the open sea , and in the very heart of the Leviathanic life , with a Right Whale alongside ; the vessel -LRB- in the act of cutting-in -RRB- hove over to the monster as if to a quay ; and a boat , hurriedly pushing off from this scene of activity , is about giving chase to whales in the distance . 
The harpoons and lances lie levelled for use ; three oarsmen are just setting the mast in its hole ; while from a sudden roll of the sea , the little craft stands half-erect out of the water , like a rearing horse . 
From the ship , the smoke of the torments of the boiling whale is going up like the smoke over a village of smithies ; and to windward , a black cloud , rising up with earnest of squalls and rains , seems to quicken the activity of the excited seamen . 
Of Whales in Paint ; in Teeth ; in Wood ; in Sheet-Iron ; in Stone ; in Mountains ; in Stars On Tower-hill , as you go down to the London docks , you may have seen a crippled beggar -LRB- or kedger , as the sailors say -RRB- holding a painted board before him , representing the tragic scene in which he lost his leg . 
There are three whales and three boats ; and one of the boats -LRB- presumed to contain the missing leg in all its original integrity -RRB- is being crunched by the jaws of the foremost whale . 
Any time these ten years , they tell me , has that man held up that picture , and exhibited that stump to an incredulous world . 
But the time of his justification has now come . 
His three whales are as good whales as were ever published in Wapping , at any rate ; and his stump as unquestionable a stump as any you will find in the western clearings . 
But , though for ever mounted on that stump , never a stump-speech does the poor whaleman make ; but , with downcast eyes , stands ruefully contemplating his own amputation . 
Throughout the Pacific , and also in Nantucket , and New Bedford , and Sag Harbor , you will come across lively sketches of whales and whaling-scenes , graven by the fishermen themselves on Sperm Whale-teeth , or ladies ' busks wrought out of the Right Whale-bone , and other like skrimshander articles , as the whalemen call the numerous little ingenious contrivances they elaborately carve out of the rough material , in their hours of ocean leisure . 
Some of them have little boxes of dentistical-looking implements , specially intended for the skrimshandering business . 
But , in general , they toil with their jack-knives alone ; and , with that almost omnipotent tool of the sailor , they will turn you out anything you please , in the way of a mariner 's fancy . 
Long exile from Christendom and civilization inevitably restores a man to that condition in which God placed him , i.e. what is called savagery . 
Your true whale-hunter is as much a savage as an Iroquois . 
I myself am a savage , owning no allegiance but to the King of the Cannibals ; and ready at any moment to rebel against him . 
Now , one of the peculiar characteristics of the savage in his domestic hours , is his wonderful patience of industry . 
An ancient Hawaiian war-club or spear-paddle , in its full multiplicity and elaboration of carving , is as great a trophy of human perseverance as a Latin lexicon . 
For , with but a bit of broken sea-shell or a shark 's tooth , that miraculous intricacy of wooden net-work has been achieved ; and it has cost steady years of steady application . 
As with the Hawaiian savage , so with the white sailor-savage . 
With the same marvellous patience , and with the same single shark 's tooth , of his one poor jack-knife , he will carve you a bit of bone sculpture , not quite as workmanlike , but as close packed in its maziness of design , as the Greek savage , Achilles 's shield ; and full of barbaric spirit and suggestiveness , as the prints of that fine old Dutch savage , Albert Durer . 
Wooden whales , or whales cut in profile out of the small dark slabs of the noble South Sea war-wood , are frequently met with in the forecastles of American whalers . 
Some of them are done with much accuracy . 
At some old gable-roofed country houses you will see brass whales hung by the tail for knockers to the road-side door . 
When the porter is sleepy , the anvil-headed whale would be best . 
But these knocking whales are seldom remarkable as faithful essays . 
On the spires of some old-fashioned churches you will see sheet-iron whales placed there for weathercocks ; but they are so elevated , and besides that are to all intents and purposes so labelled with `` Hands off ! '' 
you can not examine them closely enough to decide upon their merit . 
In bony , ribby regions of the earth , where at the base of high broken cliffs masses of rock lie strewn in fantastic groupings upon the plain , you will often discover images as of the petrified forms of the Leviathan partly merged in grass , which of a windy day breaks against them in a surf of green surges . 
Then , again , in mountainous countries where the traveller is continually girdled by amphitheatrical heights ; here and there from some lucky point of view you will catch passing glimpses of the profiles of whales defined along the undulating ridges . 
But you must be a thorough whaleman , to see these sights ; and not only that , but if you wish to return to such a sight again , you must be sure and take the exact intersecting latitude and longitude of your first stand-point , else so chance-like are such observations of the hills , that your precise , previous stand-point would require a laborious re-discovery ; like the Solomon islands , which still remain incognita , though once high-ruffed Mendanna trod them and old Figuera chronicled them . 
Nor when expandingly lifted by your subject , can you fail to trace out great whales in the starry heavens , and boats in pursuit of them ; as when long filled with thoughts of war the Eastern nations saw armies locked in battle among the clouds . 
Thus at the North have I chased Leviathan round and round the Pole with the revolutions of the bright points that first defined him to me . 
And beneath the effulgent Antarctic skies I have boarded the Argo-Navis , and joined the chase against the starry Cetus far beyond the utmost stretch of Hydrus and the Flying Fish . 
With a frigate 's anchors for my bridle-bitts and fasces of harpoons for spurs , would I could mount that whale and leap the topmost skies , to see whether the fabled heavens with all their countless tents really lie encamped beyond my mortal sight ! 
Brit Steering north-eastward from the Crozetts , we fell in with vast meadows of brit , the minute , yellow substance , upon which the Right Whale largely feeds . 
For leagues and leagues it undulated round us , so that we seemed to be sailing through boundless fields of ripe and golden wheat . 
On the second day , numbers of Right Whales were seen , who , secure from the attack of a Sperm-Whaler like the Pequod , with open jaws sluggishly swam through the brit , which , adhering to the fringing fibres of that wondrous Venetian blind in their mouths , was in that manner separated from the water that escaped at the lips . 
As morning mowers , who side by side slowly and seethingly advance their scythes through the long wet grass of marshy meads ; even so these monsters swam , making a strange , grassy , cutting sound ; and leaving behind them endless swaths of blue upon the yellow sea . 
* * That part of the sea known among whalemen as the `` Brazil Banks '' does not bear that name as the Banks of Newfoundland do , because of there being shallows and soundings there , but because of this remarkable meadow-like appearance , caused by the vast drifts of brit continually floating in those latitudes , where the Right Whale is often chased . 
But it was only the sound they made as they parted the brit which at all reminded one of mowers . 
Seen from the mast-heads , especially when they paused and were stationary for a while , their vast black forms looked more like lifeless masses of rock than anything else . 
And as in the great hunting countries of India , the stranger at a distance will sometimes pass on the plains recumbent elephants without knowing them to be such , taking them for bare , blackened elevations of the soil ; even so , often , with him , who for the first time beholds this species of the leviathans of the sea . 
