said the Guernsey-man , when the Captain had returned to them . 
`` Why , let me see ; yes , you may as well tell him now that -- that -- in fact , tell him I 've diddled him , and -LRB- aside to himself -RRB- perhaps somebody else . '' 
`` He says , Monsieur , that he 's very happy to have been of any service to us . '' 
Hearing this , the captain vowed that they were the grateful parties -LRB- meaning himself and mate -RRB- , and concluded by inviting Stubb down into his cabin to drink a bottle of Bordeaux . 
`` He wants you to take a glass of wine with him , '' said the interpreter . 
`` Thank him heartily ; but tell him it 's against my principles to drink with the man I 've diddled . 
In fact , tell him I must go . '' 
`` He says , Monsieur , that his principles wo n't admit of his drinking ; but that if Monsieur wants to live another day to drink , then Monsieur had best drop all four boats , and pull the ship away from these whales , for it 's so calm they wo n't drift . '' 
By this time Stubb was over the side , and getting into his boat , hailed the Guernsey-man to this effect , -- that having a long tow-line in his boat , he would do what he could to help them , by pulling out the lighter whale of the two from the ship 's side . 
While the Frenchman 's boats , then , were engaged in towing the ship one way , Stubb benevolently towed away at his whale the other way , ostentatiously slacking out a most unusually long tow-line . 
Presently a breeze sprang up ; Stubb feigned to cast off from the whale ; hoisting his boats , the Frenchman soon increased his distance , while the Pequod slid in between him and Stubb 's whale . 
Whereupon Stubb quickly pulled to the floating body , and hailing the Pequod to give notice of his intentions , at once proceeded to reap the fruit of his unrighteous cunning . 
Seizing his sharp boat-spade , he commenced an excavation in the body , a little behind the side fin . 
You would almost have thought he was digging a cellar there in the sea ; and when at length his spade struck against the gaunt ribs , it was like turning up old Roman tiles and pottery buried in fat English loam . 
His boat 's crew were all in high excitement , eagerly helping their chief , and looking as anxious as gold-hunters . 
And all the time numberless fowls were diving , and ducking , and screaming , and yelling , and fighting around them . 
Stubb was beginning to look disappointed , especially as the horrible nosegay increased , when suddenly from out the very heart of this plague , there stole a faint stream of perfume , which flowed through the tide of bad smells without being absorbed by it , as one river will flow into and then along with another , without at all blending with it for a time . 
`` I have it , I have it , '' cried Stubb , with delight , striking something in the subterranean regions , `` a purse ! 
a purse ! '' 
Dropping his spade , he thrust both hands in , and drew out handfuls of something that looked like ripe Windsor soap , or rich mottled old cheese ; very unctuous and savory withal . 
You might easily dent it with your thumb ; it is of a hue between yellow and ash color . 
And this , good friends , is ambergris , worth a gold guinea an ounce to any druggist . 
Some six handfuls were obtained ; but more was unavoidably lost in the sea , and still more , perhaps , might have been secured were it not for impatient Ahab 's loud command to Stubb to desist , and come on board , else the ship would bid them good-bye . 
Ambergris Now this ambergris is a very curious substance , and so important as an article of commerce , that in 1791 a certain Nantucket-born Captain Coffin was examined at the bar of the English House of Commons on that subject . 
For at that time , and indeed until a comparatively late day , the precise origin of ambergris remained , like amber itself , a problem to the learned . 
Though the word ambergris is but the French compound for grey amber , yet the two substances are quite distinct . 
For amber , though at times found on the sea-coast , is also dug up in some far inland soils , whereas ambergris is never found except upon the sea . 
Besides , amber is a hard , transparent , brittle , odorless substance , used for mouth-pieces to pipes , for beads and ornaments ; but ambergris is soft , waxy , and so highly fragrant and spicy , that it is largely used in perfumery , in pastiles , precious candles , hair-powders , and pomatum . 
The Turks use it in cooking , and also carry it to Mecca , for the same purpose that frankincense is carried to St. Peter 's in Rome . 
Some wine merchants drop a few grains into claret , to flavor it . 
Who would think , then , that such fine ladies and gentlemen should regale themselves with an essence found in the inglorious bowels of a sick whale ! 
Yet so it is . 
By some , ambergris is supposed to be the cause , and by others the effect , of the dyspepsia in the whale . 
How to cure such a dyspepsia it were hard to say , unless by administering three or four boat loads of Brandreth 's pills , and then running out of harm 's way , as laborers do in blasting rocks . 
I have forgotten to say that there were found in this ambergris , certain hard , round , bony plates , which at first Stubb thought might be sailors ' trousers buttons ; but it afterwards turned out that they were nothing , more than pieces of small squid bones embalmed in that manner . 
Now that the incorruption of this most fragrant ambergris should be found in the heart of such decay ; is this nothing ? 
Bethink thee of that saying of St. Paul in Corinthians , about corruption and incorruption ; how that we are sown in dishonor , but raised in glory . 
And likewise call to mind that saying of Paracelsus about what it is that maketh the best musk . 
Also forget not the strange fact that of all things of ill-savor , Cologne-water , in its rudimental manufacturing stages , is the worst . 
I should like to conclude the chapter with the above appeal , but can not , owing to my anxiety to repel a charge often made against whalemen , and which , in the estimation of some already biased minds , might be considered as indirectly substantiated by what has been said of the Frenchman 's two whales . 
Elsewhere in this volume the slanderous aspersion has been disproved , that the vocation of whaling is throughout a slatternly , untidy business . 
But there is another thing to rebut . 
They hint that all whales always smell bad . 
Now how did this odious stigma originate ? 
I opine , that it is plainly traceable to the first arrival of the Greenland whaling ships in London , more than two centuries ago . 
Because those whalemen did not then , and do not now , try out their oil at sea as the Southern ships have always done ; but cutting up the fresh blubber in small bits , thrust it through the bung holes of large casks , and carry it home in that manner ; the shortness of the season in those Icy Seas , and the sudden and violent storms to which they are exposed , forbidding any other course . 
The consequence is , that upon breaking into the hold , and unloading one of these whale cemeteries , in the Greenland dock , a savor is given forth somewhat similar to that arising from excavating an old city graveyard , for the foundations of a Lying-in Hospital . 
I partly surmise also , that this wicked charge against whalers may be likewise imputed to the existence on the coast of Greenland , in former times , of a Dutch village called Schmerenburgh or Smeerenberg , which latter name is the one used by the learned Fogo Von Slack , in his great work on Smells , a text-book on that subject . 
As its name imports -LRB- smeer , fat ; berg , to put up -RRB- , this village was founded in order to afford a place for the blubber of the Dutch whale fleet to be tried out , without being taken home to Holland for that purpose . 
It was a collection of furnaces , fat-kettles , and oil sheds ; and when the works were in full operation certainly gave forth no very pleasant savor . 
But all this is quite different from a South Sea Sperm Whaler ; which in a voyage of four years perhaps , after completely filling her hold with oil , does not , perhaps , consume fifty days in the business of boiling out ; and in the state that it is casked , the oil is nearly scentless . 
The truth is , that living or dead , if but decently treated , whales as a species are by no means creatures of ill odor ; nor can whalemen be recognised , as the people of the middle ages affected to detect a Jew in the company , by the nose . 
Nor indeed can the whale possibly be otherwise than fragrant , when , as a general thing , he enjoys such high health ; taking abundance of exercise ; always out of doors ; though , it is true , seldom in the open air . 
I say , that the motion of a Sperm Whale 's flukes above water dispenses a perfume , as when a musk-scented lady rustles her dress in a warm parlor . 
What then shall I liken the Sperm Whale to for fragrance , considering his magnitude ? 
Must it not be to that famous elephant , with jewelled tusks , and redolent with myrrh , which was led out of an Indian town to do honor to Alexander the Great ? 
The Castaway It was but some few days after encountering the Frenchman , that a most significant event befell the most insignificant of the Pequod 's crew ; an event most lamentable ; and which ended in providing the sometimes madly merry and predestinated craft with a living and ever accompanying prophecy of whatever shattered sequel might prove her own . 
Now , in the whale ship , it is not every one that goes in the boats . 
Some few hands are reserved called shipkeepers , whose province it is to work the vessel while the boats are pursuing the whale . 
As a general thing , these shipkeepers are as hardy fellows as the men comprising the boats ' crews . 
But if there happen to be an unduly slender , clumsy , or timorous wight in the ship , that wight is certain to be made a ship-keeper . 
It was so in the Pequod with the little negro Pippin by nick-name , Pip by abbreviation . 
Poor Pip ! 
ye have heard of him before ; ye must remember his tambourine on that dramatic midnight , so gloomy-jolly . 
In outer aspect , Pip and Dough-Boy made a match , like a black pony and a white one , of equal developments , though of dissimilar color , driven in one eccentric span . 
But while hapless Dough-Boy was by nature dull and torpid in his intellects , Pip , though over tender-hearted , was at bottom very bright , with that pleasant , genial , jolly brightness peculiar to his tribe ; a tribe , which ever enjoy all holidays and festivities with finer , freer relish than any other race . 
For blacks , the year 's calendar should show naught but three hundred and sixty-five Fourth of Julys and New Year 's Days . 
Nor smile so , while I write that this little black was brilliant , for even blackness has its brilliancy ; behold yon lustrous ebony , panelled in king 's cabinets . 
But Pip loved life , and all life 's peaceable securities ; so that the panic-striking business in which he had somehow unaccountably become entrapped , had most sadly blurred his brightness ; though , as ere long will be seen , what was thus temporarily subdued in him , in the end was destined to be luridly illumined by strange wild fires , that fictitiously showed him off to ten times the natural lustre with which in his native Tolland County in Connecticut , he had once enlivened many a fiddler 's frolic on the green ; and at melodious even-tide , with his gay ha-ha ! 
had turned the round horizon into one star-belled tambourine . 
So , though in the clear air of day , suspended against a blue-veined neck , the pure-watered diamond drop will healthful glow ; yet , when the cunning jeweller would show you the diamond in its most impressive lustre , he lays it against a gloomy ground , and then lights it up , not by the sun , but by some unnatural gases . 
Then come out those fiery effulgences , infernally superb ; then the evil-blazing diamond , once the divinest symbol of the crystal skies , looks like some crown-jewel stolen from the King of Hell . 
But let us to the story . 
It came to pass , that in the ambergris affair Stubb 's after-oarsman chanced so to sprain his hand , as for a time to become quite maimed ; and , temporarily , Pip was put into his place . 
The first time Stubb lowered with him , Pip evinced much nervousness ; but happily , for that time , escaped close contact with the whale ; and therefore came off not altogether discreditably ; though Stubb observing him , took care , afterwards , to exhort him to cherish his courageousness to the utmost , for he might often find it needful . 
Now upon the second lowering , the boat paddled upon the whale ; and as the fish received the darted iron , it gave its customary rap , which happened , in this instance , to be right under poor Pip 's seat . 
The involuntary consternation of the moment caused him to leap , paddle in hand , out of the boat ; and in such a way , that part of the slack whale line coming against his chest , he breasted it overboard with him , so as to become entangled in it , when at last plumping into the water . 
That instant the stricken whale started on a fierce run , the line swiftly straightened ; and presto ! 
poor Pip came all foaming up to the chocks of the boat , remorselessly dragged there by the line , which had taken several turns around his chest and neck . 
Tashtego stood in the bows . 
He was full of the fire of the hunt . 
He hated Pip for a poltroon . 
Snatching the boat-knife from its sheath , he suspended its sharp edge over the line , and turning towards Stubb , exclaimed interrogatively , `` Cut ? '' 
Meantime Pip 's blue , choked face plainly looked , Do , for God 's sake ! 
All passed in a flash . 
In less than half a minute , this entire thing happened . 
`` Damn him , cut ! '' 
roared Stubb ; and so the whale was lost and Pip was saved . 
So soon as he recovered himself , the poor little negro was assailed by yells and execrations from the crew . 
Tranquilly permitting these irregular cursings to evaporate , Stubb then in a plain , business-like , but still half humorous manner , cursed Pip officially ; and that done , unofficially gave him much wholesome advice . 
The substance was , Never jump from a boat , Pip , except -- but all the rest was indefinite , as the soundest advice ever is . 
Now , in general , Stick to the boat , is your true motto in whaling ; but cases will sometimes happen when Leap from the boat , is still better . 
Moreover , as if perceiving at last that if he should give undiluted conscientious advice to Pip , he would be leaving him too wide a margin to jump in for the future ; Stubb suddenly dropped all advice , and concluded with a peremptory command `` Stick to the boat , Pip , or by the Lord , I wo n't pick you up if you jump ; mind that . 
We ca n't afford to lose whales by the likes of you ; a whale would sell for thirty times what you would , Pip , in Alabama . 
Bear that in mind , and do n't jump any more . '' 
Hereby perhaps Stubb indirectly hinted , that though man loved his fellow , yet man is a money-making animal , which propensity too often interferes with his benevolence . 
But we are all in the hands of the Gods ; and Pip jumped again . 
It was under very similar circumstances to the first performance ; but this time he did not breast out the line ; and hence , when the whale started to run , Pip was left behind on the sea , like a hurried traveller 's trunk . 
Alas ! 
Stubb was but too true to his word . 
