Adieu , Doubloon ! 
But stop ; here comes little King-Post ; dodge round the try-works , now , and let 's hear what he 'll have to say . 
There ; he 's before it ; he 'll out with something presently . 
So , so ; he 's beginning . '' 
`` I see nothing here , but a round thing made of gold , and whoever raises a certain whale , this round thing belongs to him . 
So , what 's all this staring been about ? 
It is worth sixteen dollars , that 's true ; and at two cents the cigar , that 's nine hundred and sixty cigars . 
I wo n't smoke dirty pipes like Stubb , but I like cigars , and here 's nine hundred and sixty of them ; so here goes Flask aloft to spy 'em out . '' 
`` Shall I call that Wise or foolish , now ; if it be really wise it has a foolish look to it ; yet , if it be really foolish , then has it a sort of wiseish look to it . 
But , avast ; here comes our old Manxman -- the old hearse-driver , he must have been , that is , before he took to the sea . 
He luffs up before the doubloon ; halloa , and goes round on the other side of the mast ; why , there 's a horse-shoe nailed on that side ; and now he 's back again ; what does that mean ? 
Hark ! 
he 's muttering -- voice like an old worn-out coffee-mill . 
Prick ears , and listen ! '' 
`` If the White Whale be raised , it must be in a month and a day , when the sun stands in some one of these signs . 
I 've studied signs , and know their marks ; they were taught me two score years ago , by the old witch in Copenhagen . 
Now , in what sign will the sun then be ? 
The horse-shoe sign ; for there it is , right opposite the gold . 
And what 's the horse-shoe sign ? 
The lion is the horse-shoe sign -- the roaring and devouring lion . 
Ship , old ship ! 
my old head shakes to think of thee . '' 
`` There 's another rendering now ; but still one text . 
All sorts of men in one kind of world , you see . 
Dodge again ! 
here comes Queequeg -- all tattooing -- looks like the signs of the Zodiac himself . 
What says the Cannibal ? 
As I live he 's comparing notes ; looking at his thigh bone ; thinks the sun is in the thigh , or in the calf , or in the bowels , I suppose , as the old women talk Surgeon 's Astronomy in the back country . 
And by Jove , he 's found something there in the vicinity of his thigh -- I guess it 's Sagittarius , or the Archer . 
No : he do n't know what to make of the doubloon ; he takes it for an old button off some king 's trowsers . 
But , aside again ! 
here comes that ghost-devil , Fedallah ; tail coiled out of sight as usual , oakum in the toes of his pumps as usual . 
What does he say , with that look of his ? 
Ah , only makes a sign to the sign and bows himself ; there is a sun on the coin -- fire worshipper , depend upon it . 
Ho ! 
more and more . 
This way comes Pip -- poor boy ! 
would he had died , or I ; he 's half horrible to me . 
He too has been watching all of these interpreters myself included -- and look now , he comes to read , with that unearthly idiot face . 
Stand away again and hear him . 
Hark ! '' 
`` I look , you look , he `` Upon my soul , he 's says now -- hist ! '' 
`` I look , you look , he `` Why , he 's getting it `` I look , you look , he `` Well , that 's funny . '' 
`` And I , you , and he ; pine tree here . 
Caw ! 
two bones stuck into looks ; we look , ye look , they look . '' 
been studying Murray 's Grammar ! 
Improving his mind , poor fellow ! 
But what 's that he looks ; we look , ye look , they look . '' 
by heart -- hist ! 
again . '' 
looks ; we look , ye look , they look . '' 
and we , ye , and they , are all bats ; and I 'm a crow , especially when I stand a ` top of this caw ! 
caw ! 
caw ! 
caw ! 
caw ! 
Ai n't I a crow ? 
And where 's the scare-crow ? 
There he stands ; a pair of old trowsers , and two more poked into the sleeves of an old jacket . '' 
`` Wonder if he means me ? 
-- complimentary -- poor lad ! 
-- I could go hang myself . 
Any way , for the present , I 'll quit Pip 's vicinity . 
I can stand the rest , for they have plain wits ; but he 's too crazy-witty for my sanity . 
So , so , I leave him muttering . '' 
`` Here 's the ship 's navel , this doubloon here , and they are all one fire to unscrew it . 
But , unscrew your navel , and what 's the consequence ? 
Then again , if it stays here , that is ugly , too , for when aught 's nailed to the mast it 's a sign that things grow desperate . 
Ha ! 
ha ! 
old Ahab ! 
the White Whale ; he 'll nail ye ! 
This is a pine tree . 
My father , in old Tolland county , cut down a pine tree once , and found a silver ring grown over in it ; some old darkey 's wedding ring . 
How did it get there ? 
And so they 'll say in the resurrection , when they come to fish up this old mast , and find a doubloon lodged in it , with bedded oysters for the shaggy bark . 
Oh , the gold ! 
the precious , precious gold ! 
-- the green miser 'll hoard ye soon ! 
Hish ! 
hish ! 
God goes ` mong the worlds blackberrying . 
Cook ! 
ho , cook ! 
and cook us ! 
Jenny ! 
hey , hey , hey , hey , hey , Jenny , Jenny ! 
and get your hoe-cake done ! '' 
Leg and Arm The Pequod of Nantucket , Meets the Samuel Enderby , of London `` Ship , ahoy ! 
Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
So cried Ahab , once more hailing a ship showing English colors , bearing down under the stern . 
Trumpet to mouth , the old man was standing in his hoisted quarter-deck , his ivory leg plainly revealed to the stranger captain , who was carelessly reclining in his own boat 's bow . 
He was a darkly-tanned , burly , goodnatured , fine-looking man , of sixty or thereabouts , dressed in a spacious roundabout , that hung round him in festoons of blue pilot-cloth ; and one empty arm of this jacket streamed behind him like the broidered arm of a huzzar 's surcoat . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ! '' 
`` See you this ? '' 
and withdrawing it from the folds that had hidden it , he held up a white arm of sperm whale bone , terminating in a wooden head like a mallet . 
`` Man my boat ! '' 
cried Ahab , impetuously , and tossing about the oars near him -- `` Stand by to lower ! '' 
In less than a minute , without quitting his little craft , he and his crew were dropped to the water , and were soon alongside of the stranger . 
