So that though Moby Dick had in a former year been seen , for example , on what is called the Seychelle ground in the Indian ocean , or Volcano Bay on the Japanese Coast ; yet it did not follow that were the Pequod to visit either of those spots at any subsequent corresponding season , she would infallibly encounter him there . 
So , too , with some other feeding-grounds , where he had at times revealed himself . 
But all these seemed only his casual stopping-places and ocean-inns , so to speak , not his places of prolonged abode . 
And where Ahab 's chances of accomplishing his object have hitherto been spoken of , allusion has only been made to whatever way-side , antecedent , extra prospects were his , ere a particular set time or place were attained , when all possibilities would become probabilities , and , as Ahab fondly thought , every possibility the next thing to a certainty . 
That particular set time and place were conjoined in the one technical phrase -- the Season-on-the-Line . 
For there and then , for several consecutive years , Moby Dick had been periodically descried , lingering in those waters for awhile , as the sun , in its annual round , loiters for a predicted interval in any one sign of the Zodiac . 
There it was , too , that most of the deadly encounters with the white whale had taken place ; there the waves were storied with his deeds ; there also was that tragic spot where the monomaniac old man had found the awful motive to his vengeance . 
But in the cautious comprehensiveness and unloitering vigilance with which Ahab threw his brooding soul into this unfaltering hunt , he would not permit himself to rest all his hopes upon the one crowning fact above mentioned , however flattering it might be to those hopes ; nor in the sleeplessness of his vow could he so tranquillize his unquiet heart as to postpone all intervening quest . 
Now , the Pequod had sailed from Nantucket at the very beginning of the Season-on-the-Line . 
No possible endeavor then could enable her commander to make the great passage southwards , double Cape Horn , and then running down sixty degrees of latitude arrive in the equatorial Pacific in time to cruise there . 
Therefore , he must wait for the next ensuing season . 
Yet the premature hour of the Pequod 's sailing had , perhaps , been correctly selected by Ahab , with a view to this very complexion of things . 
Because , an interval of three hundred and sixty-five days and nights was before him ; an interval which , instead of impatiently enduring ashore , he would spend in a miscellaneous hunt ; if by chance the White Whale , spending his vacation in seas far remote from his periodical feeding-grounds , should turn up his wrinkled brow off the Persian Gulf , or in the Bengal Bay , or China Seas , or in any other waters haunted by his race . 
So that Monsoons , Pampas , Nor-Westers , Harmattans , Trades ; any wind but the Levanter and Simoon , might blow Moby Dick into the devious zig-zag world-circle of the Pequod 's circumnavigating wake . 
But granting all this ; yet , regarded discreetly and coolly , seems it not but a mad idea , this ; that in the broad boundless ocean , one solitary whale , even if encountered , should be thought capable of individual recognition from his hunter , even as a white-bearded Mufti in the thronged thoroughfares of Constantinople ? 
Yes . 
For the peculiar snow-white brow of Moby Dick , and his snow-white hump , could not but be unmistakable . 
And have I not tallied the whale , Ahab would mutter to himself , as after poring over his charts till long after midnight he would throw himself back in reveries -- tallied him , and shall he escape ? 
His broad fins are bored , and scalloped out like a lost sheep 's ear ! 
And here , his mad mind would run on in a breathless race ; till a weariness and faintness of pondering came over him ! 
and in the open air of the deck he would seek to recover his strength . 
Ah , God ! 
what trances of torments does that man endure who is consumed with one unachieved revengeful desire . 
He sleeps with clenched hands ; and wakes with his own bloody nails in his palms . 
Often , when forced from his hammock by exhausting and intolerably vivid dreams of the night , which , resuming his own intense thoughts through the day , carried them on amid a clashing of phrensies , and whirled them round and round and round in his blazing brain , till the very throbbing of his life-spot became insufferable anguish ; and when , as was sometimes the case , these spiritual throes in him heaved his being up from its base , and a chasm seemed opening in him , from which forked flames and lightnings shot up , and accursed fiends beckoned him to leap down among them ; when this hell in himself yawned beneath him , a wild cry would be heard through the ship ; and with glaring eyes Ahab would burst from his state room , as though escaping from a bed that was on fire . 
Yet these , perhaps , instead of being the unsuppressable symptoms of some latent weakness , or fright at his own resolve , were but the plainest tokens of its intensity . 
For , at such times , crazy Ahab , the scheming , unappeasedly steadfast hunter of the white whale ; this Ahab that had gone to his hammock , was not the agent that so caused him to burst from it in horror again . 
The latter was the eternal , living principle or soul in him ; and in sleep , being for the time dissociated from the characterizing mind , which at other times employed it for its outer vehicle or agent , it spontaneously sought escape from the scorching contiguity of the frantic thing , of which , for the time , it was no longer an integral . 
But as the mind does not exist unless leagued with the soul , therefore it must have been that , in Ahab 's case , yielding up all his thoughts and fancies to his one supreme purpose ; that purpose , by its own sheer inveteracy of will , forced itself against gods and devils into a kind of self-assumed , independent being of its own . 
Nay , could grimly live and burn , while the common vitality to which it was conjoined , fled horror-stricken from the unbidden and unfathered birth . 
Therefore , the tormented spirit that glared out of bodily eyes , when what seemed Ahab rushed from his room , was for the time but a vacated thing , a formless somnambulistic being , a ray of living light , to be sure , but without an object to color , and therefore a blankness in itself . 
God help thee , old man , thy thoughts have created a creature in thee ; and he whose intense thinking thus makes him a Prometheus ; a vulture feeds upon that heart for ever ; that vulture the very creature he creates . 
The Affidavit So far as what there may be of a narrative in this book ; and , indeed , as indirectly touching one or two very interesting and curious particulars in the habits of sperm whales , the foregoing chapter , in its earlier part , is as important a one as will be found in this volume ; but the leading matter of it requires to be still further and more familiarly enlarged upon , in order to be adequately understood , and moreover to take away any incredulity which a profound ignorance of the entire subject may induce in some minds , as to the natural verity of the main points of this affair . 
I care not to perform this part of my task methodically ; but shall be content to produce the desired impression by separate citations of items , practically or reliably known to me as a whaleman ; and from these citations , I take it -- the conclusion aimed at will naturally follow of itself . 
First : I have personally known three instances where a whale , after receiving a harpoon , has effected a complete escape ; and , after an interval -LRB- in one instance of three years -RRB- , has been again struck by the same hand , and slain ; when the two irons , both marked by the same private cypher , have been taken from the body . 
In the instance where three years intervened between the flinging of the two harpoons ; and I think it may have been something more than that ; the man who darted them happening , in the interval , to go in a trading ship on a voyage to Africa , went ashore there , joined a discovery party , and penetrated far into the interior , where he travelled for a period of nearly two years , often endangered by serpents , savages , tigers , poisonous miasmas , with all the other common perils incident to wandering in the heart of unknown regions . 
Meanwhile , the whale he had struck must also have been on its travels ; no doubt it had thrice circumnavigated the globe , brushing with its flanks all the coasts of Africa ; but to no purpose . 
This man and this whale again came together , and the one vanquished the other . 
I say I , myself , have known three instances similar to this ; that is in two of them I saw the whales struck ; and , upon the second attack , saw the two irons with the respective marks cut in them , afterwards taken from the dead fish . 
In the three-year instance , it so fell out that I was in the boat both times , first and last , and the last time distinctly recognized a peculiar sort of huge mole under the whale 's eye , which I had observed there three years previous . 
I say three years , but I am pretty sure it was more than that . 
Here are three instances , then , which I personally know the truth of ; but I have heard of many other instances from persons whose veracity in the matter there is no good ground to impeach . 
Secondly : It is well known in the Sperm Whale Fishery , however ignorant the world ashore may be of it , that there have been several memorable historical instances where a particular whale in the ocean has been at distant times and places popularly cognisable . 
Why such a whale became thus marked was not altogether and originally owing to his bodily peculiarities as distinguished from other whales ; for however peculiar in that respect any chance whale may be , they soon put an end to his peculiarities by killing him , and boiling him down into a peculiarly valuable oil . 
No : the reason was this : that from the fatal experiences of the fishery there hung a terrible prestige of perilousness about such a whale as there did about Rinaldo Rinaldini , insomuch that most fishermen were content to recognise him by merely touching their tarpaulins when he would be discovered lounging by them on the sea , without seeking to cultivate a more intimate acquaintance . 
Like some poor devils ashore that happen to known an irascible great man , they make distant unobtrusive salutations to him in the street , lest if they pursued the acquaintance further , they might receive a summary thump for their presumption . 
But not only did each of these famous whales enjoy great individual celebrity -- nay , you may call it an oceanwide renown ; not only was he famous in life and now is immortal in forecastle stories after death , but he was admitted into all the rights , privileges , and distinctions of a name ; had as much a name indeed as Cambyses or Caesar . 
Was it not so , O Timor Tom ! 
thou famed leviathan , scarred like an iceberg , who so long did ` st lurk in the Oriental straits of that name , whose spout was oft seen from the palmy beach of Ombay ? 
Was it not so , O New Zealand Jack ! 
thou terror of all cruisers that crossed their wakes in the vicinity of the Tattoo Land ? 
Was it not so , O Morquan ! 
King of Japan , whose lofty jet they say at times assumed the semblance of a snow-white cross against the sky ? 
Was it not so , O Don Miguel ! 
thou Chilian whale , marked like an old tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back ! 
In plain prose , here are four whales as well known to the students of Cetacean History as Marius or Sylla to the classic scholar . 
But this is not all . 
New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel , after at various times creating great havoc among the boats of different vessels , were finally gone in quest of , systematically hunted out , chased and killed by valiant whaling captains , who heaved up their anchors with that express object as much in view , as in setting out through the Narragansett Woods , Captain Butler of old had it in his mind to capture that notorious murderous savage Annawon , the headmost warrior of the Indian King Philip . 
I do not know where I can find a better place than just here , to make mention of one or two other things , which to me seem important , as in printed form establishing in all respects the reasonableness of the whole story of the White Whale , more especially the catastrophe . 
For this is one of those disheartening instances where truth requires full as much bolstering as error . 
So ignorant are most landsmen of some of the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world , that without some hints touching the plain facts , historical and otherwise , of the fishery , they might scout at Moby Dick as a monstrous fable , or still worse and more detestable , a hideous and intolerable allegory . 
First : Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the general perils of the grand fishery , yet they have nothing like a fixed , vivid conception of those perils , and the frequency with which they recur . 
One reason perhaps is , that not one in fifty of the actual disasters and deaths by casualties in the fishery , ever finds a public record at home , however transient and immediately forgotten that record . 
Do you suppose that that poor fellow there , who this moment perhaps caught by the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea , is being carried down to the bottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan -- do you suppose that that poor fellow 's name will appear in the newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast ? 
No : because the mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea . 
In fact , did you ever hear what might be called regular news direct or indirect from New Guinea ? 
Yet I will tell you that upon one particular voyage which I made to the Pacific , among many others we spoke thirty different ships , every one of which had had a death by a whale , some of them more than one , and three that had each lost a boat 's crew . 
For God 's sake , be economical with your lamps and candles ! 
not a gallon you burn , but at least one drop of man 's blood was spilled for it . 
Secondly : People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale is an enormous creature of enormous power ; but I have ever found that when narrating to them some specific example of this two-fold enormousness , they have significantly complimented me upon my facetiousness ; when , I declare upon my soul , I had no more idea of being facetious than Moses , when he wrote the history of the plagues of Egypt . 
But fortunately the special point I here seek can be established upon testimony entirely independent of my own . 
That point is this : The Sperm Whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful , knowing , and judiciously malicious , as with direct aforethought to stave in , utterly destroy , and sink a large ship ; and what is more , the Sperm Whale has done it . 
First : In the year 1820 the ship Essex , Captain Pollard , of Nantucket , was cruising in the Pacific Ocean . 
One day she saw spouts , lowered her boats , and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales . 
Ere long , several of the whales were wounded ; when , suddenly , a very large whale escaping from the boats , issued from the shoal , and bore directly down upon the ship . 
Dashing his forehead against her hull , he so stove her in , that in less than `` ten minutes '' she settled down and fell over . 
Not a surviving plank of her has been seen since . 
After the severest exposure , part of the crew reached the land in their boats . 
Being returned home at last , Captain Pollard once more sailed for the Pacific in command of another ship , but the gods shipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks and breakers ; for the second time his ship was utterly lost , and forthwith forswearing the sea , he has never attempted it since . 
At this day Captain Pollard is a resident of Nantucket . 
I have seen Owen Chace , who was chief mate of the Essex at the time of the tragedy ; I have read his plain and faithful narrative ; I have conversed with his son ; and all this within a few miles of the scene of the catastrophe . 
* * The following are extracts from Chace 's narrative : `` Every fact seemed to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance which directed his operations ; he made two several attacks upon the ship , at a short interval between them , both of this catastrophe I have never chanced to their direction , were calculated to do us the whale hunters I have now and then heard casual allusions to it . 
Thirdly : Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commodore J -- then commanding an American sloop-of-war of the first class , happened to be dining with a party of whaling captains , on board a Nantucket ship in the harbor of Oahu , Sandwich Islands . 
Conversation turning upon whales , the Commodore was pleased to be sceptical touching the amazing strength ascribed to them by the professional gentlemen present . 
He peremptorily denied for example , that any whale could so smite his stout sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a thimbleful . 
Very good ; but there is more coming . 
Some weeks later , the Commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for Valparaiso . 
But he was stopped on the way by a portly sperm whale , that begged a few moments ' confidential business with him . 
That business consisted in fetching the Commodore 's craft such a thwack , that with all his pumps going he made straight for the nearest port to heave down and repair . 
I am not superstitious , but I consider the Commodore 's interview with that whale as providential . 
Was not Saul of Tarsus converted from unbelief by a similar fright ? 
I tell you , the sperm whale will stand no nonsense . 
I will now refer you to Langsdorff 's Voyages for a little circumstance in point , peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof . 
Langsdorff , you must know by the way , was attached to the Russian Admiral Krusenstern 's famous Discovery Expedition in the beginning of the present century . 
Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter : `` By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail , and the next day we were out in the open sea , on our way to Ochotsh . 
The weather was very clear and fine , but so intolerably cold that we were obliged to keep on our fur clothing . 
For some days we had very little wind ; it was not till the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the northwest sprang up . 
An uncommonly large whale , the body of which was larger than the ship itself , lay almost at the surface of the water , but was not perceived by any one on board till the moment when the ship , which was in full sail , was almost upon him , so that it was impossible to prevent its striking against him . 
We were thus placed in the most imminent danger , as this gigantic creature , setting up its back , raised the ship three feet at least out of the water . 
The masts reeled , and the sails fell altogether , while we who were below all sprang instantly upon the deck , concluding that we had struck upon some rock ; instead of this we saw the monster sailing off with the utmost gravity and solemnity . 
