But there are other instances where this whiteness loses all that accessory and strange glory which invests it in the White Steed and Albatross . 
What is it that in the Albino man so peculiarly repels and often shocks the eye , as that sometimes he is loathed by his own kith and kin ! 
It is that whiteness which invests him , a thing expressed by the name he bears . 
The Albino is as well made as other men -- has no substantive deformity -- and yet this mere aspect of all-pervading whiteness makes him more strangely hideous than the ugliest abortion . 
Why should this be so ? 
Nor , in quite other aspects , does Nature in her least palpable but not the less malicious agencies , fail to enlist among her forces this crowning attribute of the terrible . 
From its snowy aspect , the gauntleted ghost of the Southern Seas has been denominated the White Squall . 
Nor , in some historic instances , has the art of human malice omitted so potent an auxiliary . 
How wildly it heightens the effect of that passage in Froissart , when , masked in the snowy symbol of their faction , the desperate White Hoods of Ghent murder their bailiff in the market-place ! 
Nor , in some things , does the common , hereditary experience of all mankind fail to bear witness to the supernaturalism of this hue . 
It can not well be doubted , that the one visible quality in the aspect of the dead which most appals the gazer , is the marble pallor lingering there ; as if indeed that pallor were as much like the badge of consternation in the other world , as of mortal trepidation here . 
And from that pallor of the dead , we borrow the expressive hue of the shroud in which we wrap them . 
Nor even in our superstitions do we fail to throw the same snowy mantle round our phantoms ; all ghosts rising in a milk-white fog -- Yea , while these terrors seize us , let us add , that even the king of terrors , when personified by the evangelist , rides on his pallid horse . 
Therefore , in his other moods , symbolize whatever grand or gracious thing he will by whiteness , no man can deny that in its profoundest idealized significance it calls up a peculiar apparition to the soul . 
But though without dissent this point be fixed , how is mortal man to account for it ? 
To analyse it , would seem impossible . 
Can we , then , by the citation of some of those instances wherein this thing of whiteness -- though for the time either wholly or in great part stripped of all direct associations calculated to impart to it aught fearful , but nevertheless , is found to exert over us the same sorcery , however modified ; -- can we thus hope to light upon some chance clue to conduct us to the hidden cause we seek ? 
Let us try . 
But in a matter like this , subtlety appeals to subtlety , and without imagination no man can follow another into these halls . 
And though , doubtless , some at least of the imaginative impressions about to be presented may have been shared by most men , yet few perhaps were entirely conscious of them at the time , and therefore may not be able to recall them now . 
Why to the man of untutored ideality , who happens to be but loosely acquainted with the peculiar character of the day , does the bare mention of Whitsuntide marshal in the fancy such long , dreary , speechless processions of slow-pacing pilgrims , down-cast and hooded with new-fallen snow ? 
Or to the unread , unsophisticated Protestant of the Middle American States , why does the passing mention of a White Friar or a White Nun , evoke such an eyeless statue in the soul ? 
Or what is there apart from the traditions of dungeoned warriors and kings -LRB- which will not wholly account for it -RRB- that makes the White Tower of London tell so much more strongly on the imagination of an untravelled American , than those other storied structures , its neighbors -- the Byward Tower , or even the Bloody ? 
And those sublimer towers , the White Mountains of New Hampshire , whence , in peculiar moods , comes that gigantic ghostliness over the soul at the bare mention of that name , while the thought of Virginia 's Blue Ridge is full of a soft , dewy , distant dreaminess ? 
Or why , irrespective of all latitudes and longitudes , does the name of the White Sea exert such a spectralness over the fancy , while that of the Yellow Sea lulls us with mortal thoughts of long lacquered mild afternoons on the waves , followed by the gaudiest and yet sleepiest of sunsets ? 
Or , to choose a wholly unsubstantial instance , purely addressed to the fancy , why , in reading the old fairy tales of Central Europe , does `` the tall pale man '' of the Hartz forests , whose changeless pallor unrestingly glides through the green of the groves -- why is this phantom more terrible than all the whooping imps of the Blocksburg ? 
Nor is it , altogether , the remembrance of her cathedral-toppling earthquakes ; nor the stampedoes of her frantic seas ; nor the tearlessness of arid skies that never rain ; nor the sight of her wide field of leaning spires , wrenched cope-stones , and crosses all adroop -LRB- like canted yards of anchored fleets -RRB- ; and her suburban avenues of house-walls lying over upon each other , as a tossed pack of cards ; -- it is not these things alone which make tearless Lima , the strangest , saddest city thou can ` st see . 
For Lima has taken the white veil ; and there is a higher horror in this whiteness of her woe . 
Old as Pizarro , this whiteness keeps her ruins for ever new ; admits not the cheerful greenness of complete decay ; spreads over her broken ramparts the rigid pallor of an apoplexy that fixes its own distortions . 
I know that , to the common apprehension , this phenomenon of whiteness is not confessed to be the prime agent in exaggerating the terror of objects otherwise terrible ; nor to the unimaginative mind is there aught of terror in those appearances whose awfulness to another mind almost solely consists in this one phenomenon , especially when exhibited under any form at all approaching to muteness or universality . 
What I mean by these two statements may perhaps be respectively elucidated by the following examples . 
First : The mariner , when drawing nigh the coasts of foreign lands , if by night he hear the roar of breakers , starts to vigilance , and feels just enough of trepidation to sharpen all his faculties ; but under precisely similar circumstances , let him be called from his hammock to view his ship sailing through a midnight sea of milky whiteness -- as if from encircling headlands shoals of combed white bears were swimming round him , then he feels a silent , superstitious dread ; the shrouded phantom of the whitened waters is horrible to him as a real ghost ; in vain the lead assures him he is still off soundings ; heart and helm they both go down ; he never rests till blue water is under him again . 
Yet where is the mariner who will tell thee , `` Sir , it was not so much the fear of striking hidden rocks , as the fear of that hideous whiteness that so stirred me ? '' 
Second : To the native Indian of Peru , the continual sight of the snowhowdahed Andes conveys naught of dread , except , perhaps , in the mere fancying of the eternal frosted desolateness reigning at such vast altitudes , and the natural conceit of what a fearfulness it would be to lose oneself in such inhuman solitudes . 
Much the same is it with the backwoodsman of the West , who with comparative indifference views an unbounded prairie sheeted with driven snow , no shadow of tree or twig to break the fixed trance of whiteness . 
Not so the sailor , beholding the scenery of the Antarctic seas ; where at times , by some infernal trick of legerdemain in the powers of frost and air , he , shivering and half shipwrecked , instead of rainbows speaking hope and solace to his misery , views what seems a boundless churchyard grinning upon him with its lean ice monuments and splintered crosses . 
But thou sayest , methinks this white-lead chapter about whiteness is but a white flag hung out from a craven soul ; thou surrenderest to a hypo , Ishmael . 
Tell me , why this strong young colt , foaled in some peaceful valley of Vermont , far removed from all beasts of prey -- why is it that upon the sunniest day , if you but shake a fresh buffalo robe behind him , so that he can not even see it , but only smells its wild animal muskiness -- why will he start , snort , and with bursting eyes paw the ground in phrensies of affright ? 
There is no remembrance in him of any gorings of wild creatures in his green northern home , so that the strange muskiness he smells can not recall to him anything associated with the experience of former perils ; for what knows he , this New England colt , of the black bisons of distant Oregon ? 
No ; but here thou beholdest even in a dumb brute , the instinct of the knowledge of the demonism in the world . 
Though thousands of miles from Oregon , still when he smells that savage musk , the rending , goring bison herds are as present as to the deserted wild foal of the prairies , which this instant they may be trampling into dust . 
Thus , then , the muffled rollings of a milky sea ; the bleak rustlings of the festooned frosts of mountains ; the desolate shiftings of the windrowed snows of prairies ; all these , to Ishmael , are as the shaking of that buffalo robe to the frightened colt ! 
Though neither knows where lie the nameless things of which the mystic sign gives forth such hints ; yet with me , as with the colt , somewhere those things must exist . 
Though in many of its aspects this visible world seems formed in love , the invisible spheres were formed in fright . 
But not yet have we solved the incantation of this whiteness , and learned why it appeals with such power to the soul ; and more strange and far more portentous -- why , as we have seen , it is at once the most meaning symbol of spiritual things , nay , the very veil of the Christian 's Deity ; and yet should be as it is , the intensifying agent in things the most appalling to mankind . 
Is it that by its indefiniteness it shadows forth the heartless voids and immensities of the universe , and thus stabs us from behind with the thought of annihilation , when beholding the white depths of the milky way ? 
Or is it , that as in essence whiteness is not so much a color as the visible absence of color ; and at the same time the concrete of all colors ; is it for these reasons that there is such a dumb blankness , full of meaning , in a wide landscape of snows -- a colorless , all-color of atheism from which we shrink ? 
And when we consider that other theory of the natural philosophers , that all other earthly hues -- every stately or lovely emblazoning -- the sweet tinges of sunset skies and woods ; yea , and the gilded velvets of butterflies , and the butterfly cheeks of young girls ; all these are but subtile deceits , not actually inherent in substances , but only laid on from without ; so that all deified Nature absolutely paints like the harlot , whose allurements cover nothing but the charnel-house within ; and when we proceed further , and consider that the mystical cosmetic which produces every one of her hues , the great principle of light , for ever remains white or colorless in itself , and if operating without medium upon matter , would touch all objects , even tulips and roses , with its own blank tinge -- pondering all this , the palsied universe lies before us a leper ; and like wilful travellers in Lapland , who refuse to wear colored and coloring glasses upon their eyes , so the wretched infidel gazes himself blind at the monumental white shroud that wraps all the prospect around him . 
And of all these things the Albino whale was the symbol . 
Wonder ye then at the fiery hunt ? . . 
Hark ! 
`` HIST ! 
Did you hear that noise , Cabaco ? 
It was the middle-watch : a fair moonlight ; the seamen were standing in a cordon , extending from one of the fresh-water butts in the waist , to the scuttle-butt near the taffrail . 
In this manner , they passed the buckets to fill the scuttle-butt . 
Standing , for the most part , on the hallowed precincts of the quarter-deck , they were careful not to speak or rustle their feet . 
From hand to hand , the buckets went in the deepest silence , only broken by the occasional flap of a sail , and the steady hum of the unceasingly advancing keel . 
It was in the midst of this repose , that Archy , one of the cordon , whose post was near the after-hatches , whispered to his neighbor , a Cholo , the words above . 
`` Hist ! 
did you hear that noise , Cabaco ? '' 
`` Take the bucket , will ye , Archy ? 
what noise d'ye mean ? '' 
`` There it is again -- under the hatches -- do n't you hear it -- a cough -- it sounded like a cough . '' 
`` Cough be damned ! 
Pass along that return bucket . '' 
`` There again -- there it is ! 
-- it sounds like two or three sleepers turning over , now ! '' 
`` Caramba ! 
have done , shipmate , will ye ? 
It 's the three soaked biscuits ye eat for supper turning over inside of ye -- nothing else . 
Look to the bucket ! '' 
`` Say what ye will , shipmate ; I 've sharp ears . '' 
`` Aye , you are the chap , ai n't ye , that heard the hum of the old Quakeress 's knitting-needles fifty miles at sea from Nantucket ; you 're the chap . '' 
`` Grin away ; we 'll see what turns up . 
Hark ye , Cabaco , there is somebody down in the after-hold that has not yet been seen on deck ; and I suspect our old Mogul knows something of it too . 
I heard Stubb tell Flask , one morning watch , that there was something of that sort in the wind . '' 
`` Tish ! 
the bucket ! '' 
The Chart Had you followed Captain Ahab down into his cabin after the squall that took place on the night succeeding that wild ratification of his purpose with his crew , you would have seen him go to a locker in the transom , and bringing out a large wrinkled roll of yellowish sea charts , spread them before him on his screwed-down table . 
Then seating himself before it , you would have seen him intently study the various lines and shadings which there met his eye ; and with slow but steady pencil trace additional courses over spaces that before were blank . 
At intervals , he would refer to piles of old log-books beside him , wherein were set down the seasons and places in which , on various former voyages of various ships , sperm whales had been captured or seen . 
While thus employed , the heavy pewter lamp suspended in chains over his head , continually rocked with the motion of the ship , and for ever threw shifting gleams and shadows of lines upon his wrinkled brow , till it almost seemed that while he himself was marking out lines and courses on the wrinkled charts , some invisible pencil was also tracing lines and courses upon the deeply marked chart of his forehead . 
But it was not this night in particular that , in the solitude of his cabin , Ahab thus pondered over his charts . 
Almost every night they were brought out ; almost every night some pencil marks were effaced , and others were substituted . 
For with the charts of all four oceans before him , Ahab was threading a maze of currents and eddies , with a view to the more certain accomplishment of that monomaniac thought of his soul . 
Now , to any one not fully acquainted with the ways of the leviathans , it might seem an absurdly hopeless task thus to seek out one solitary creature in the unhooped oceans of this planet . 
But not so did it seem to Ahab , who knew the sets of all tides and currents ; and thereby calculating the driftings of the sperm whale 's food ; and , also calling to mind the regular , ascertained seasons for hunting him in particular latitudes ; could arrive at reasonable surmises , almost approaching to certainties , concerning the timeliest day to be upon this or that ground in search of his prey . 
So assured , indeed , is the fact concerning the periodicalness of the sperm whale 's resorting to given waters , that many hunters believe that , could he be closely observed and studied throughout the world ; were the logs for one voyage of the entire whale fleet carefully collated , then the migrations of the sperm whale would be found to correspond in invariability to those of the herring-shoals or the flights of swallows . 
On this hint , attempts have been made to construct elaborate migratory charts of the sperm whale . 
* * Since the above was written , the statement is happily borne out by an official circular , issued by Lieutenant Maury , of the National Observatory , Washington , April 16th , 1851 . 
By that circular , it appears that precisely such a chart is in course of completion ; and portions of it are presented in the circular . 
`` This chart divides the ocean into districts of five degrees of latitude by five degrees of longitude ; perpendicularly through each of which districts are twelve columns for the twelve months ; and horizontally through each of which districts are three lines ; one to show the number of days that have been spent in each month in every district , and the two others to show the number of days in which whales , sperm or right , have been seen . '' 
Besides , when making a passage from one feeding-ground to another , the sperm whales , guided by some infallible instinct -- say , rather , secret intelligence from the Deity -- mostly swim in veins , as they are called ; continuing their way along a given ocean-line with such undeviating exactitude , that no ship ever sailed her course , by any chart , with one tithe of such marvellous precision . 
Though , in these cases , the direction taken by any one whale be straight as a surveyor 's parallel , and though the line of advance be strictly confined to its own unavoidable , straight wake , yet the arbitrary vein in which at these times he is said to swim , generally embraces some few miles in width -LRB- more or less , as the vein is presumed to expand or contract -RRB- ; but never exceeds the visual sweep from the whale-ship 's mast-heads , when circumspectly gliding along this magic zone . 
The sum is , that at particular seasons within that breadth and along that path , migrating whales may with great confidence be looked for . 
And hence not only at substantiated times , upon well known separate feeding-grounds , could Ahab hope to encounter his prey ; but in crossing the widest expanses of water between those grounds he could , by his art , so place and time himself on his way , as even then not to be wholly without prospect of a meeting . 
There was a circumstance which at first sight seemed to entangle his delirious but still methodical scheme . 
But not so in the reality , perhaps . 
Though the gregarious sperm whales have their regular seasons for particular grounds , yet in general you can not conclude that the herds which haunted such and such a latitude or longitude this year , say , will turn out to be identically the same with those that were found there the preceding season ; though there are peculiar and unquestionable instances where the contrary of this has proved true . 
In general , the same remark , only within a less wide limit , applies to the solitaries and hermits among the matured , aged sperm whales . 
