And even when recognized at last , their immense magnitude renders it very hard really to believe that such bulky masses of overgrowth can possibly be instinct , in all parts , with the same sort of life that lives in a dog or a horse . 
Indeed . 
in other respects , you can hardly regard any creatures of the deep with the same feelings that you do those of the shore . 
For though some old naturalists have maintained that all creatures of the land are of their kind in the sea ; and though taking a broad general view of the thing , this may very well be ; yet coming to specialties , where , for example , does the ocean furnish any fish that in disposition answers to the sagacious kindness of the dog ? 
The accursed shark alone can in any generic respect be said to bear comparative analogy to him . 
But though , to landsmen in general , the native inhabitants of the seas have ever been regarded with emotions unspeakably unsocial and repelling ; though we know the sea to be an everlasting terra incognita , so that Columbus sailed over numberless unknown worlds to discover his one superficial western one ; though , by vast odds , the most terrific of all mortal disasters have immemorially and indiscriminately befallen tens and hundreds of thousands of those who have gone upon the waters ; though but a moment 's consideration will teach that , however baby man may brag of his science and skill , and however much , in a flattering future , that science and skill may augment ; yet for ever and for ever , to the crack of doom , the sea will insult and murder him , and pulverize the stateliest , stiffest frigate he can make ; nevertheless , by the continual repetition of these very impressions , man has lost that sense of the full awfulness of the sea which aboriginally belongs to it . 
The first boat we read of , floated on an ocean , that with Portuguese vengeance had whelmed a whole world without leaving so much as a widow . 
That same ocean rolls now ; that same ocean destroyed the wrecked ships of last year . 
Yea , foolish mortals , Noah 's flood is not yet subsided ; two thirds of the fair world it yet covers . 
Wherein differ the sea and the land , that a miracle upon one is not a miracle upon the other ? 
Preternatural terrors rested upon the Hebrews , when under the feet of Korah and his company the live ground opened and swallowed them up for ever ; yet not a modern sun ever sets , but in precisely the same manner the live sea swallows up ships and crews . 
But not only is the sea such a foe to man who is an alien to it , but it is also a fiend to its own off-spring ; worse than the Persian host who murdered his own guests ; sparing not the creatures which itself hath spawned . 
Like a savage tigress that tossing in the jungle overlays her own cubs , so the sea dashes even the mightiest whales against the rocks , and leaves them there side by side with the split wrecks of ships . 
No mercy , no power but its own controls it . 
Panting and snorting like a mad battle steed that has lost its rider , the masterless ocean overruns the globe . 
Consider the subtleness of the sea ; how its most dreaded creatures glide under water , unapparent for the most part , and treacherously hidden beneath the loveliest tints of azure . 
Consider also the devilish brilliance and beauty of many of its most remorseless tribes , as the dainty embellished shape of many species of sharks . 
Consider once more , the universal cannibalism of the sea ; all whose creatures prey upon each other , carrying on eternal war since the world began . 
Consider all this ; and then turn to this green , gentle , and most docile earth ; consider them both , the sea and the land ; and do you not find a strange analogy to something in yourself ? 
For as this appalling ocean surrounds the verdant land , so in the soul of man there lies one insular Tahiti , full of peace and joy , but encompassed by all the horrors of the half known life . 
God keep thee ! 
Push not off from that isle , thou canst never return ! 
Squid Slowly wading through the meadows of brit , the Pequod still held on her way north-eastward towards the island of Java ; a gentle air impelling her keel , so that in the surrounding serenity her three tall tapering masts mildly waved to that languid breeze , as three mild palms on a plain . 
And still , at wide intervals in the silvery night , the lonely , alluring jet would be seen . 
But one transparent blue morning , when a stillness almost preternatural spread over the sea , however unattended with any stagnant calm ; when the long burnished sun-glade on the waters seemed a golden finger laid across them , enjoining some secrecy ; when the slippered waves whispered together as they softly ran on ; in this profound hush of the visible sphere a strange spectre was seen by Daggoo from the main-mast-head . 
In the distance , a great white mass lazily rose , and rising higher and higher , and disentangling itself from the azure , at last gleamed before our prow like a snow-slide , new slid from the hills . 
Thus glistening for a moment , as slowly it subsided , and sank . 
Then once more arose , and silently gleamed . 
It seemed not a whale ; and yet is this Moby Dick ? 
thought Daggoo . 
Again the phantom went down , but on re-appearing once more , with a stiletto-like cry that startled every man from his nod , the negro yelled out -- `` There ! 
there again ! 
there she breaches ! 
right ahead ! 
The White Whale , the White Whale ! '' 
Upon this , the seamen rushed to the yard-arms , as in swarming-time the bees rush to the boughs . 
Bare-headed in the sultry sun , Ahab stood on the bowsprit , and with one hand pushed far behind in readiness to wave his orders to the helmsman , cast his eager glance in the direction indicated aloft by the outstretched motionless arm of Daggoo . 
Whether the flitting attendance of the one still and solitary jet had gradually worked upon Ahab , so that he was now prepared to connect the ideas of mildness and repose with the first sight of the particular whale he pursued ; however this was , or whether his eagerness betrayed him ; whichever way it might have been , no sooner did he distinctly perceive the white mass , than with a quick intensity he instantly gave orders for lowering . 
The four boats were soon on the water ; Ahab 's in advance , and all swiftly pulling towards their prey . 
Soon it went down , and while , with oars suspended , we were awaiting its reappearance , lo ! 
in the same spot where it sank , once more it slowly rose . 
Almost forgetting for the moment all thoughts of Moby Dick , we now gazed at the most wondrous phenomenon which the secret seas have hitherto revealed to mankind . 
A vast pulpy mass , furlongs in length and breadth , of a glancing cream-color , lay floating on the water , innumerable long arms radiating from its centre , and curling and twisting like a nest of anacondas , as if blindly to clutch at any hapless object within reach . 
No perceptible face or front did it have ; no conceivable token of either sensation or instinct ; but undulated there on the billows , an unearthly , formless , chance-like apparition of life . 
As with a low sucking sound it slowly disappeared again , Starbuck still gazing at the agitated waters where it had sunk , with a wild voice exclaimed -- `` Almost rather had I seen Moby Dick and fought him , than to have seen thee , thou white ghost ! '' 
`` What was it , Sir ? '' 
said Flask . 
`` The great live squid , which , they say , few whale-ships ever beheld , and returned to their ports to tell of it . '' 
But Ahab said nothing ; turning his boat , he sailed back to the vessel ; the rest as silently following . 
Whatever superstitions the sperm whalemen in general have connected with the sight of this object , certain it is , that a glimpse of it being so very unusual , that circumstance has gone far to invest it with portentousness . 
So rarely is it beheld , that though one and all of them declare it to be the largest animated thing in the ocean , yet very few of them have any but the most vague ideas concerning its true nature and form ; notwithstanding , they believe it to furnish to the sperm whale his only food . 
For though other species of whales find their food above water , and may be seen by man in the act of feeding , the spermaceti whale obtains his whole food in unknown zones below the surface ; and only by inference is it that any one can tell of what , precisely , that food consists . 
At times , when closely pursued , he will disgorge what are supposed to be the detached arms of the squid ; some of them thus exhibited exceeding twenty and thirty feet in length . 
They fancy that the monster to which these arms belonged ordinarily clings by them to the bed of the ocean ; and that the sperm whale , unlike other species , is supplied with teeth in order to attack and tear it . 
There seems some ground to imagine that the great Kraken of Bishop Pontoppodan may ultimately resolve itself into Squid . 
The manner in which the Bishop describes it , as alternately rising and sinking , with some other particulars he narrates , in all this the two correspond . 
But much abatement is necessary with respect to the incredible bulk he assigns it . 
By some naturalists who have vaguely heard rumors of the mysterious creature , here spoken of , it is included among the class of cuttle-fish , to which , indeed , in certain external respects it would seem to belong , but only as the Anak of the tribe . 
The Line With reference to the whaling scene shortly to be described , as well as for the better understanding of all similar scenes elsewhere presented , I have here to speak of the magical , sometimes horrible whale-line . 
The line originally used in the fishery was of the best hemp , slightly vapored with tar , not impregnated with it , as in the case of ordinary ropes ; for while tar , as ordinarily used , makes the hemp more pliable to the rope-maker , and also renders the rope itself more convenient to the sailor for common ship use ; yet , not only would the ordinary quantity too much stiffen the whale-line for the close coiling to which it must be subjected ; but as most seamen are beginning to learn , tar in general by no means adds to the rope 's durability or strength , however much it may give it compactness and gloss . 
Of late years the Manilla rope has in the American fishery almost entirely superseded hemp as a material for whale-lines ; for , though not so durable as hemp , it is stronger , and far more soft and elastic ; and I will add -LRB- since there is an aesthetics in all things -RRB- , is much more handsome and becoming to the boat , than hemp . 
Hemp is a dusky , dark fellow , a sort of Indian ; but Manilla is as a golden-haired Circassian to behold . 
The whale-line is only two thirds of an inch in thickness . 
At first sight , you would not think it so strong as it really is . 
By experiment its one and fifty yarns will each suspend a weight of one hundred and twenty pounds ; so that the whole rope will bear a strain nearly equal to three tons . 
In length , the common sperm whale-line measures something over two hundred fathoms . 
Towards the stern of the boat it is spirally coiled away in the tub , not like the worm-pipe of a still though , but so as to form one round , cheese-shaped mass of densely bedded `` sheaves , '' or layers of concentric spiralizations , without any hollow but the `` heart , '' or minute vertical tube formed at the axis of the cheese . 
As the least tangle or kink in the coiling would , in running out , infallibly take somebody 's arm , leg , or entire body off , the utmost precaution is used in stowing the line in its tub . 
Some harpooneers will consume almost an entire morning in this business , carrying the line high aloft and then reeving it downwards through a block towards the tub , so as in the act of coiling to free it from all possible wrinkles and twists . 
In the English boats two tubs are used instead of one ; the same line being continuously coiled in both tubs . 
There is some advantage in this ; because these twin-tubs being so small they fit more readily into the boat , and do not strain it so much ; whereas , the American tub , nearly three feet in diameter and of proportionate depth , makes a rather bulky freight for a craft whose planks are but one-half inch in thickness ; for the bottom of the whale-boat is like critical ice , which will bear up a considerable distributed weight , but not very much of a concentrated one . 
When the painted canvas cover is clapped on the american line-tub , the boat looks as if it were pulling off with a prodigious great wedding-cake to present to the whales . 
Both ends of the line are exposed ; the lower end terminating in an eye-splice or loop coming up from the bottom against the side of the tub , and hanging over its edge completely disengaged from everything . 
This arrangement of the lower end is necessary on two accounts . 
First : In order to facilitate the fastening to it of an additional line from a neighboring boat , in case the stricken whale should sound so deep as to threaten to carry off the entire line originally attached to the harpoon . 
In these instances , the whale of course is shifted like a mug of ale , as it were , from the one boat to the other ; though the first boat always hovers at hand to assist its consort . 
Second : This arrangement is indispensable for common safety 's sake ; for were the lower end of the line in any way attached to the boat , and were the whale then to run the line out to the end almost in a single , smoking minute as he sometimes does , he would not stop there , for the doomed boat would infallibly be dragged down after him into the profundity of the sea ; and in that case no town-crier would ever find her again . 
Before lowering the boat for the chase , the upper end of the line is taken aft from the tub , and passing round the loggerhead there , is again carried forward the entire length of the boat , resting crosswise upon the loom or handle of every man 's oar , so that it jogs against his wrist in rowing ; and also passing between the men , as they alternately sit at the opposite gunwales , to the leaded chocks or grooves in the extreme pointed prow of the boat , where a wooden pin or skewer the size of a common quill , prevents it from slipping out . 
From the chocks it hangs in a slight festoon over the bows , and is then passed inside the boat again ; and some ten or twenty fathoms -LRB- called box-line -RRB- being coiled upon the box in the bows , it continues its way to the gunwale still a little further aft , and is then attached to the short-warp -- the rope which is immediately connected with the harpoon ; but previous to that connexion , the short-warp goes through sundry mystifications too tedious to detail . 
Thus the whale-line folds the whole boat in its complicated coils , twisting and writhing around it in almost every direction . 
All the oarsmen are involved in its perilous contortions ; so that to the timid eye of the landsman , they seem as Indian jugglers , with the deadliest snakes sportively festooning their limbs . 
Nor can any son of mortal woman , for the first time , seat himself amid those hempen intricacies , and while straining his utmost at the oar , bethink him that at any unknown instant the harpoon may be darted , and all these horrible contortions be put in play like ringed lightnings ; he can not be thus circumstanced without a shudder that makes the very marrow in his bones to quiver in him like a shaken jelly . 
Yet habit -- strange thing ! 
what can not habit accomplish ? 
-- Gayer sallies , more merry mirth , better jokes , and brighter repartees , you never heard over your mahogany , than you will hear over the half-inch white cedar of the whaleboat , when thus hung in hangman 's nooses ; and , like the six burghers of Calais before King Edward , the six men composing the crew pull into the jaws of death , with a halter around every neck , as you may say . 
Perhaps a very little thought will now enable you to account for those repeated whaling disasters -- some few of which are casually chronicled -- of this man or that man being taken out of the boat by the line , and lost . 
For , when the line is darting out , to be seated then in the boat , is like being seated in the midst of the manifold whizzings of a steam-engine in full play , when every flying beam , and shaft , and wheel , is grazing you . 
It is worse ; for you can not sit motionless in the heart of these perils , because the boat is rocking like a cradle , and you are pitched one way and the other , without the slightest warning ; and only by a certain self-adjusting buoyancy and simultaneousness of volition and action , can you escape being made a Mazeppa of , and run away with where the all-seeing sun himself could never pierce you out . 
Again : as the profound calm which only apparently precedes and prophesies of the storm , is perhaps more awful than the storm itself ; for , indeed , the calm is but the wrapper and envelope of the storm ; and contains it in itself , as the seemingly harmless rifle holds the fatal powder , and the ball , and the explosion ; so the graceful repose of the line , as it silently serpentines about the oarsmen before being brought into actual play -- this is a thing which carries more of true terror than any other aspect of this dangerous affair . 
But why say more ? 
All men live enveloped in whale-lines . 
All are born with halters round their necks ; but it is only when caught in the swift , sudden turn of death , that mortals realize the silent , subtle , everpresent perils of life . 
And if you be a philosopher , though seated in the whale-boat , you would not at heart feel one whit more of terror , than though seated before your evening fire with a poker , and not a harpoon , by your side . 
Stubb Kills a Whale If to Starbuck the apparition of the Squid was a thing of portents , to Queequeg it was quite a different object . 
`` When you see him ` quid , '' said the savage , honing his harpoon in the bow of his hoisted boat , `` then you quick see him ` parm whale . '' 
The next day was exceedingly still and sultry , and with nothing special to engage them , the Pequod 's crew could hardly resist the spell of sleep induced by such a vacant sea . 
For this part of the Indian Ocean through which we then were voyaging is not what whalemen call a lively ground ; that is , it affords fewer glimpses of porpoises , dolphins , flying-fish , and other vivacious denizens of more stirring waters , than those off the Rio de la Plata , or the in-shore ground off Peru . 
It was my turn to stand at the foremast-head ; and with my shoulders leaning against the slackened royal shrouds , to and fro I idly swayed in what seemed an enchanted air . 
No resolution could withstand it ; in that dreamy mood losing all consciousness , at last my soul went out of my body ; though my body still continued to sway as a pendulum will , long after the power which first moved it is withdrawn . 
Ere forgetfulness altogether came over me , I had noticed that the seamen at the main and mizzen mast-heads were already drowsy . 
