The white whale is their demigorgon . 
Hark ! 
the infernal orgies ! 
that revelry is forward ! 
mark the unfaltering silence aft ! 
Methinks it pictures life . 
Foremost through the sparkling sea shoots on the gay , embattled , bantering bow , but only to drag dark Ahab after it , where he broods within his sternward cabin , builded over the dead water of the wake , and further on , hunted by its wolfish gurglings . 
The long howl thrills me through ! 
Peace ! 
ye revellers , and set the watch ! 
Oh , life ! 
't is in an hour like this , with soul beat down and held to knowledge , -- as wild , untutored things are forced to feed -- Oh , life ! 
't is now that I do feel the latent horror in thee ! 
but 't is not me ! 
that horror 's out of me , and with the soft feeling of the human in me , yet will I try to fight ye , ye grim , phantom futures ! 
Stand by me , hold me , bind me , O ye blessed influences ! 
First Night Watch -LRB- Stubb solus , and mending a brace . -RRB- 
Ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! 
ha ! 
hem ! 
clear my throat ! 
-- I 've been thinking over it ever since , and that ha , ha 's the final consequence . 
Why so ? 
Because a laugh 's the wisest , easiest answer to all that 's queer ; and come what will , one comfort 's always left -- that unfailing comfort is , it 's all predestinated . 
I heard not all his talk with Starbuck ; but to my poor eye Starbuck then looked something as I the other evening felt . 
Be sure the old Mogul has fixed him , too . 
I twigged it , knew it ; had had the gift , might readily have prophesied it -- for when I clapped my eye upon his skull I saw it . 
Well , Stubb , wise Stubb -- that 's my title -- well , Stubb , what of it , Stubb ? 
Here 's a carcase . 
I know not all that may be coming , but be it what it will , I 'll go to it laughing . 
Such a waggish leering as lurks in all your horribles ! 
I feel funny . 
Fa , la ! 
lirra , skirra ! 
What 's my juicy little pear at home doing now ? 
Crying its eyes out ? 
-- Giving a party to the last arrived harpooneers , I dare say , gay as a frigate 's pennant , and so am I -- fa , la ! 
lirra , skirra ! 
Oh -- We 'll drink to-night with hearts as light , To love , as gay and fleeting As bubbles that swim , on the beaker 's brim , And break on the lips while meeting . 
A brave stave that -- who calls ? 
Mr. Starbuck ? 
Aye , aye , sir -- -LRB- Aside -RRB- he 's my superior , he has his too , if I 'm not mistaken . 
-- Aye , aye , sir , just through with this job -- coming . 
Midnight , Forecastle HARPOONEERS AND SAILORS -LRB- Foresail rises and discovers the watch standing , lounging , leaning , and lying in various attitudes , all singing in chorus . -RRB- 
Farewell and adieu to you , Spanish ladies ! 
Farewell and adieu to you , ladies of Spain ! 
Our captain 's commanded . 
-- 1ST NANTUCKET SAILOR Oh , boys , do n't be sentimental . 
it 's bad for the digestion ! 
Take a tonic , follow me ! 
-LRB- Sings , and all follow -RRB- Our captain stood upon the deck , A spy-glass in his hand , A viewing of those gallant whales That blew at every strand . 
Oh , your tubs in your boats , my boys , And by your braces stand , And we 'll have one of those fine whales , Hand , boys , over hand ! 
So , be cheery , my lads ! 
may your hearts never fail ! 
While the bold harpooneer is striking the whale ! 
MATE 'S VOICE FROM THE QUARTER-DECK Eight bells there , forward ! 
2ND NANTUCKET SAILOR Avast the chorus ! 
Eight bells there ! 
d'ye hear , bell-boy ? 
Strike the bell eight , thou Pip ! 
thou blackling ! 
and let me call the watch . 
I 've the sort of mouth for that -- the hogshead mouth . 
So , so , -LRB- thrusts his head down the scuttle , -RRB- Star-bo-l-e-e-n-s , a-h-o-y ! 
Eight bells there below ! 
Tumble up ! 
DUTCH SAILOR Grand snoozing to-night , maty ; fat night for that . 
I mark this in our old Mogul 's wine ; it 's quite as deadening to some as filliping to others . 
We sing ; they sleep -- aye , lie down there , like ground-tier butts . 
At 'em again ! 
There , take this copper-pump , and hail 'em through it . 
Tell 'em to avast dreaming of their lassies . 
Tell 'em it 's the resurrection ; they must kiss their last , and come to judgment . 
That 's the way -- that 's it ; thy throat ai n't spoiled with eating Amsterdam butter . 
FRENCH SAILOR Hist , boys ! 
let 's have a jig or two before we ride to anchor in Blanket Bay . 
What say ye ? 
There comes the other watch . 
Stand by all legs ! 
Pip ! 
little Pip ! 
hurrah with your tambourine ! 
PIP -LRB- Sulky and sleepy -RRB- Do n't know where it is . 
FRENCH SAILOR Beat thy belly , then , and wag thy ears . 
Jig it , men , I say ; merry 's the word ; hurrah ! 
Damn me , wo n't you dance ? 
Form , now , Indian-file , and gallop into the double-shuffle ? 
Throw yourselves ! 
Legs ! 
legs ! 
ICELAND SAILOR I do n't like your floor , maty ; it 's too springy to my taste . 
I 'm used to ice-floors . 
I 'm sorry to throw cold water on the subject ; but excuse me . 
MALTESE SAILOR Me too ; where 's your girls ? 
Who but a fool would take his left hand by his right , and say to himself , how d'ye do ? 
Partners ! 
I must have partners ! 
SICILIAN SAILOR Aye ; girls and a green ! 
