One of these little infants , that from certain queer tokens seemed hardly a day old , might have measured some fourteen feet in length , and some six feet in girth . 
He was a little frisky ; though as yet his body seemed scarce yet recovered from that irksome position it had so lately occupied in the maternal reticule ; where , tail to head , and all ready for the final spring , the unborn whale lies bent like a Tartar 's bow . 
The delicate side-fins , and the palms of his flukes , still freshly retained the plaited crumpled appearance of a baby 's ears newly arrived from foreign parts . 
`` Line ! 
line ! '' 
cried Queequeg , looking over the gunwale ; `` him fast ! 
him fast ! 
-- Who line him ! 
Who struck ? 
-- Two whale ; one big , one little ! '' 
`` What ails ye , man ? '' 
cried Starbuck . 
`` Look-e here , '' said Queequeg , pointing down . 
As when the stricken whale , that from the tub has reeled out hundreds of fathoms of rope ; as , after deep sounding , he floats up again , and shows the slackened curling line buoyantly rising and spiralling towards the air ; so now , Starbuck saw long coils of the umbilical cord of Madame Leviathan , by which the young cub seemed still tethered to its dam . 
Not seldom in the rapid vicissitudes of the chase , this natural line , with the maternal end loose , becomes entangled with the hempen one , so that the cub is thereby trapped . 
Some of the subtlest secrets of the seas seemed divulged to us in this enchanted pond . 
We saw young Leviathan amours in the deep . 
* * The sperm whale , as with all other species of the Leviathan , but unlike most other fish , breeds indifferently at all seasons ; after a gestation which may probably be set down at nine months , producing but one at a time ; though in some few known instances giving birth to an Esau and Jacob : -- a contingency provided for in suckling by two teats , curiously situated , one on each side of the anus ; but the breasts themselves extend upwards from that . 
When by chance these precious parts in a nursing whale are cut by the hunter 's lance , the mother 's pouring milk and blood rivallingly discolor the sea for rods . 
The milk is very sweet and rich ; it has been tasted by man ; it might do well with strawberries . 
When overflowing with mutual esteem , the whales salute more hominum . 
And thus , though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternations and affrights , did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freely and fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments ; yea , serenely revelled in dalliance and delight . 
But even so , amid the tornadoed Atlantic of my being , do I myself still for ever centrally disport in mute calm ; and while ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve round me , deep down and deep inland there I still bathe me in eternal mildness of joy . 
Meanwhile , as we thus lay entranced , the occasional sudden frantic spectacles in the distance evinced the activity of the other boats , still engaged in drugging the whales on the frontier of the host ; or possibly carrying on the war within the first circle , where abundance of room and some convenient retreats were afforded them . 
But the sight of the enraged drugged whales now and then blindly darting to and fro across the circles , was nothing to what at last met our eyes . 
It is sometimes the custom when fast to a whale more than commonly powerful and alert , to seek to hamstring him , as it were , by sundering or maiming his gigantic tail-tendon . 
It is done by darting a short-handled cutting-spade , to which is attached a rope for hauling it back again . 
A whale wounded -LRB- as we afterwards learned -RRB- in this part , but not effectually , as it seemed , had broken away from the boat , carrying along with him half of the harpoon line ; and in the extraordinary agony of the wound , he was now dashing among the revolving circles like the lone mounted desperado Arnold , at the battle of Saratoga , carrying dismay wherever he went . 
But agonizing as was the wound of this whale , and an appalling spectacle enough , any way ; yet the peculiar horror with which he seemed to inspire the rest of the herd , was owing to a cause which at first the intervening distance obscured from us . 
But at length we perceived that by one of the unimaginable accidents of the fishery , this whale had become entangled in the harpoon-line that he towed ; he had also run away with the cutting-spade in him ; and while the free end of the rope attached to that weapon , had permanently caught in the coils of the harpoon-line round his tail , the cutting-spade itself had worked loose from his flesh . 
So that tormented to madness , he was now churning through the water , violently flailing with his flexible tail , and tossing the keen spade about him , wounding and murdering his own comrades . 
This terrific object seemed to recall the whole herd from their stationary fright . 
First , the whales forming the margin of our lake began to crowd a little , and tumble against each other , as if lifted by half spent billows from afar ; then the lake itself began faintly to heave and swell ; the submarine bridal-chambers and nurseries vanished ; in more and more contracting orbits the whales in the more central circles began to swim in thickening clusters . 
Yes , the long calm was departing . 
A low advancing hum was soon heard ; and then like to the tumultuous masses of block-ice when the great river Hudson breaks up in Spring , the entire host of whales came tumbling upon their inner centre , as if to pile themselves up in one common mountain . 
Instantly Starbuck and Queequeg changed places ; Starbuck taking the stern . 
`` Oars ! 
Oars ! '' 
he intensely whispered , seizing the helm -- `` gripe your oars , and clutch your souls , now ! 
My God , men , stand by ! 
Shove him off , you Queequeg -- the whale there ! 
-- prick him ! 
-- hit him ! 
Stand up -- stand up , and stay so ! 
Spring men -- pull , men ; never mind their backs -- scrape them ! 
-- scrape away ! '' 
The boat was now all but jammed between two vast black bulks , leaving a narrow Dardanelles between their long lengths . 
But by desperate endeavor we at last shot into a temporary opening ; then giving way rapidly , and at the same time earnestly watching for another outlet . 
After many similar hair-breadth escapes , we at last swiftly glided into what had just been one of the outer circles , but now crossed by random whales , all violently making for one centre . 
This lucky salvation was cheaply purchased by the loss of Queequeg 's hat , who , while standing in the bows to prick the fugitive whales , had his hat taken clean from his head by the air-eddy made by the sudden tossing of a pair of broad flukes close by . 
Riotous and disordered as the universal commotion now was , it soon resolved itself into what seemed a systematic movement ; for having clumped together at last in one dense body , they then renewed their onward flight with augmented fleetness . 
Further pursuit was useless ; but the boats still lingered in their wake to pick up what drugged whales might be dropped astern , and likewise to secure one which Flask had killed and waited . 
The waif is a pennoned pole , two or three of which are carried by every boat ; and which , when additional game is at hand , are inserted upright into the floating body of a dead whale , both to mark its place on the sea , and also as token of prior possession , should the boats of any other ship draw near . 
The result of this lowering was somewhat illustrative of that sagacious saying in the Fishery , -- the more whales the less fish . 
Of all the drugged whales only one was captured . 
The rest contrived to escape for the time , but only to be taken , as will hereafter be seen , by some other craft than the Pequod . 
Schools and Schoolmasters The previous chapter gave account of an immense body or herd of Sperm Whales , and there was also then given the probable cause inducing those vast aggregations . 
Now , though such great bodies are at times encountered , yet , as must have been seen , even at the present day , small detached bands are occasionally observed , embracing from twenty to fifty individuals each . 
Such bands are known as schools . 
They generally are of two sorts ; those composed almost entirely of females , and those mustering none but young vigorous males , or bulls as they are familiarly designated . 
In cavalier attendance upon the school of females , you invariably see a male of full grown magnitude , but not old ; who , upon any alarm , evinces his gallantry by falling in the rear and covering the flight of his ladies . 
In truth , this gentleman is a luxurious Ottoman , swimming about over the watery world , surroundingly accompanied by all the solaces and endearments of the harem . 
The contrast between this Ottoman and his concubines is striking ; because , while he is always of the largest leviathanic proportions , the ladies , even at full growth , are not more than one-third of the bulk of an average-sized male . 
They are comparatively delicate , indeed ; I dare say , not to exceed half a dozen yards round the waist . 
Nevertheless , it can not be denied , that upon the whole they are hereditarily entitled to en bon point . 
It is very curious to watch this harem and its lord in their indolent ramblings . 
Like fashionables , they are for ever on the move in leisurely search of variety . 
You meet them on the Line in time for the full flower of the Equatorial feeding season , having just returned , perhaps , from spending the summer in the Northern seas , and so cheating summer of all unpleasant weariness and warmth . 
By the time they have lounged up and down the promenade of the Equator awhile , they start for the Oriental waters in anticipation of the cool season there , and so evade the other excessive temperature of the year . 
When serenely advancing on one of these journeys , if any strange suspicious sights are seen , my lord whale keeps a wary eye on his interesting family . 
Should any unwarrantably pert young Leviathan coming that way , presume to draw confidentially close to one of the ladies , with what prodigious fury the Bashaw assails him , and chases him away ! 
High times , indeed , if unprincipled young rakes like him are to be permitted to invade the sanctity of domestic bliss ; though do what the Bashaw will , he can not keep the most notorious Lothario out of his bed ; for alas ! 
all fish bed in common . 
As ashore , the ladies often cause the most terrible duels among their rival admirers ; just so with the whales , who sometimes come to deadly battle , and all for love . 
They fence with their long lower jaws , sometimes locking them together , and so striving for the supremacy like elks that warringly interweave their antlers . 
Not a few are captured having the deep scars of these encounters , -- furrowed heads , broken teeth , scolloped fins ; and in some instances , wrenched and dislocated mouths . 
But supposing the invader of domestic bliss to betake himself away at the first rush of the harem 's lord , then is it very diverting to watch that lord . 
Gently he insinuates his vast bulk among them again and revels there awhile , still in tantalizing vicinity to young Lothario , like pious Solomon devoutly worshipping among his thousand concubines . 
Granting other whales to be in sight , the fisherman will seldom give chase to one of these Grand Turks ; for these Grand Turks are too lavish of their strength , and hence their unctuousness is small . 
As for the sons and the daughters they beget , why , those sons and daughters must take care of themselves ; at least , with only the maternal help . 
For like certain other omnivorous roving lovers that might be named , my Lord Whale has no taste for the nursery , however much for the bower ; and so , being a great traveller , he leaves his anonymous babies all over the world ; every baby an exotic . 
In good time , nevertheless , as the ardor of youth declines ; as years and dumps increase ; as reflection lends her solemn pauses ; in short , as a general lassitude overtakes the sated Turk ; then a love of ease and virtue supplants the love for maidens ; our Ottoman enters upon the impotent , repentant , admonitory stage of life , forswears , disbands the harem , and grown to an exemplary , sulky old soul , goes about all alone among the meridians and parallels saying his prayers , and warning each young Leviathan from his amorous errors . 
Now , as the harem of whales is called by the fishermen a school , so is the lord and master of that school technically known as the schoolmaster . 
It is therefore not in strict character , however admirably satirical , that after going to school himself , he should then go abroad inculcating not what he learned there , but the folly of it . 
His title , schoolmaster , would very naturally seem derived from the name bestowed upon the harem itself , but some have surmised that the man who first thus entitled this sort of Ottoman whale , must have read the memoirs of Vidocq , and informed himself what sort of a country-schoolmaster that famous Frenchman was in his younger days , and what was the nature of those occult lessons he inculcated into some of his pupils . 
The same secludedness and isolation to which the schoolmaster whale betakes himself in his advancing years , is true of all aged Sperm Whales . 
Almost universally , a lone whale -- as a solitary Leviathan is called -- proves an ancient one . 
Like venerable moss-bearded Daniel Boone , he will have no one near him but Nature herself ; and her he takes to wife in the wilderness of waters , and the best of wives she is , though she keeps so many moody secrets . 
The schools composing none but young and vigorous males , previously mentioned , offer a strong contrast to the harem schools . 
For while those female whales are characteristically timid , the young males , or forty-barrel-bulls , as they call them , are by far the most pugnacious of all Leviathans , and proverbially the most dangerous to encounter ; excepting those wondrous grey-headed , grizzled whales , sometimes met , and these will fight you like grim fiends exasperated by a penal gout . 
The Forty-barrel-bull schools are larger than the harem schools . 
Like a mob of young collegians , they are full of fight , fun , and wickedness , tumbling round the world at such a reckless , rollicking rate , that no prudent underwriter would insure them any more than he would a riotous lad at Yale or Harvard . 
They soon relinquish this turbulence though , and when about three-fourths grown , break up , and separately go about in quest of settlements , that is , harems . 
Another point of difference between the male and female schools is still more characteristic of the sexes . 
Say you strike a Forty-barrel-bull -- poor devil ! 
all his comrades quit him . 
But strike a member of the harem school , and her companions swim around her with every token of concern , sometimes lingering so near her and so long , as themselves to fall a prey . 
Fast-Fish and Loose-Fish The allusion to the waifs and waif-poles in the last chapter but one , necessitates some account of the laws and regulations of the whale fishery , of which the waif may be deemed the grand symbol and badge . 
It frequently happens that when several ships are cruising in company , a whale may be struck by one vessel , then escape , and be finally killed and captured by another vessel ; and herein are indirectly comprised many minor contingencies , all partaking of this one grand feature . 
For example , -- after a weary and perilous chase and capture of a whale , the body may get loose from the ship by reason of a violent storm ; and drifting far away to leeward , be retaken by a second whaler , who , in a calm , snugly tows it alongside , without risk of life or line . 
