`` And what dost thou want of Captain Ahab ? 
It 's all right enough ; thou art shipped . '' 
`` Yes , but I should like to see him . '' 
`` But I do n't think thou wilt be able to at present . 
I do n't know exactly what 's the matter with him ; but he keeps close inside the house ; a sort of sick , and yet he do n't look so . 
In fact , he ai n't sick ; but no , he is n't well either . 
Any how , young man , he wo n't always see me , so I do n't suppose he will thee . 
He 's a queer man , Captain Ahab -- so some think -- but a good one . 
Oh , thou ` lt like him well enough ; no fear , no fear . 
He 's a grand , ungodly , god-like man , Captain Ahab ; does n't speak much ; but , when he does speak , then you may well listen . 
Mark ye , be forewarned ; Ahab 's above the common ; Ahab 's been in colleges , as well as ` mong the cannibals ; been used to deeper wonders than the waves ; fixed his fiery lance in mightier , stranger foes than whales . 
His lance ! 
aye , the keenest and the surest that out of all our isle ! 
Oh ! 
he ai n't Captain Bildad ; no , and he ai n't Captain Peleg ; he 's Ahab , boy ; and Ahab of old , thou knowest , was a crowned king ! '' 
`` And a very vile one . 
When that wicked king was slain , the dogs , did they not lick his blood ? '' 
`` Come hither to me -- hither , hither , '' said Peleg , with a significance in his eye that almost startled me . 
`` Look ye , lad ; never say that on board the Pequod . 
Never say it anywhere . 
Captain Ahab did not name himself . 
'T was a foolish , ignorant whim of his crazy , widowed mother , who died when he was only a twelvemonth old . 
And yet the old squaw Tistig , at Gayhead , said that the name would somehow prove prophetic . 
And , perhaps , other fools like her may tell thee the same . 
I wish to warn thee . 
It 's a lie . 
I know Captain Ahab well ; I 've sailed with him as mate years ago ; I know what he is -- a good man -- not a pious , good man , like Bildad , but a swearing good man -- something like me -- only there 's a good deal more of him . 
Aye , aye , I know that he was never very jolly ; and I know that on the passage home he was a little out of his mind for a spell ; but it was the sharp shooting pains in his bleeding stump that brought that about , as any one might see . 
I know , too , that ever since he lost his leg last voyage by that accursed whale , he 's been a kind of moody -- desperate moody , and savage sometimes ; but that will all pass off . 
And once for all , let me tell thee and assure thee , young man , it 's better to sail with a moody good captain than a laughing bad one . 
So good-bye to thee -- and wrong not Captain Ahab , because he happens to have a wicked name . 
Besides , my boy , he has a wife -- not three voyages wedded -- a sweet , resigned girl . 
Think of that ; by that sweet girl that old man had a child : hold ye then there can be any utter , hopeless harm in Ahab ? 
No , no , my lad ; stricken , blasted , if he be , Ahab has his humanities ! '' 
As I walked away , I was full of thoughtfulness ; what had been incidentally revealed to me of Captain Ahab , filled me with a certain wild vagueness of painfulness concerning him . 
And somehow , at the time , I felt a sympathy and a sorrow for him , but for I do n't know what , unless it was the cruel loss of his leg . 
And yet I also felt a strange awe of him ; but that sort of awe , which I can not at all describe , was not exactly awe ; I do not know what it was . 
But I felt it ; and it did not disincline me towards him ; though I felt impatience at what seemed like mystery in him , so imperfectly as he was known to me then . 
However , my thoughts were at length carried in other directions , so that for the present dark Ahab slipped my mind . 
The Ramadan As Queequeg 's Ramadan , or Fasting and Humiliation , was to continue all day , I did not choose to disturb him till towards night-fall ; for I cherish the greatest respect towards everybody 's religious obligations , never mind how comical , and could not find it in my heart to undervalue even a congregation of ants worshipping a toad-stool ; or those other creatures in certain parts of our earth , who with a degree of footmanism quite unprecedented in other planets , bow down before the torso of a deceased landed proprietor merely on account of the inordinate possessions yet owned and rented in his name . 
I say , we good Presbyterian Christians should be charitable in these things , and not fancy ourselves so vastly superior to other mortals , pagans and what not , because of their half-crazy conceits on these subjects . 
There was Queequeg , now , certainly entertaining the most absurd notions about Yojo and his Ramadan ; -- but what of that ? 
Queequeg thought he knew what he was about , I suppose ; he seemed to be content ; and there let him rest . 
All our arguing with him would not avail ; let him be , I say : and Heaven have mercy on us all -- Presbyterians and Pagans alike -- for we are all somehow dreadfully cracked about the head , and sadly need mending . 
Towards evening , when I felt assured that all his performances and rituals must be over , I went up to his room and knocked at the door ; but no answer . 
I tried to open it , but it was fastened inside . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I softly through the key-hole : -- all silent . 
`` I say , Queequeg ! 
why do n't you speak ? 
It 's I -- Ishmael . '' 
But all remained still as before . 
I began to grow alarmed . 
I had allowed him such abundant time ; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit . 
I looked through the key-hole ; but the door opening into an odd corner of the room , the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one . 
I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall , but nothing more . 
I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of Queequeg 's harpoon , which the landlady the evening previous had taken from him , before our mounting to the chamber . 
That 's strange , thought I ; but at any rate , since the harpoon stands yonder , and he seldom or never goes abroad without it , therefore he must be inside here , and no possible mistake . 
`` Queequeg ! 
-- Queequeg ! '' 
-- all still . 
Something must have happened . 
Apoplexy ! 
I tried to burst open the door ; but it stubbornly resisted . 
Running down stairs , I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met -- the chamber-maid . 
`` La ! 
la ! '' 
she cried , `` I thought something must be the matter . 
I went to make the bed after breakfast , and the door was locked ; and not a mouse to be heard ; and it 's been just so silent ever since . 
But I thought , may be , you had both gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping . 
La ! 
La , ma'am ! 
-- Mistress ! 
murder ! 
Mrs. Hussey ! 
apoplexy ! '' 
-- and with these cries she ran towards the kitchen , I following . 
Mrs. Hussey soon appeared , with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet in the other , having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the castors , and scolding her little black boy meantime . 
`` Wood-house ! '' 
cried I , `` which way to it ? 
Run for God 's sake , and fetch something to pry open the door -- the axe ! 
-- the axe ! 
he 's had a stroke ; depend upon it ! '' 
-- and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-handed , when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet , and the entire castor of her countenance . 
`` What 's the matter with you , young man ? '' 
`` Get the axe ! 
For God 's sake , run for the doctor , some one , while I pry it open ! '' 
`` Look here , '' said the landlady , quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet , so as to have one hand free ; `` look here ; are you talking about prying open any of my doors ? '' 
-- and with that she seized my arm . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? 
What 's the matter with you , shipmate ? '' 
In as calm , but rapid a manner as possible , I gave her to understand the whole case . 
Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose , she ruminated for an instant ; then exclaimed -- `` No ! 
I have n't seen it since I put it there . '' 
Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs , she glanced in , and returning , told me that Queequeg 's harpoon was missing . 
`` He 's killed himself , '' she cried . 
`` It 's unfort ` nate Stiggs done over again there goes another counterpane -- God pity his poor mother ! 
-- it will be the ruin of my house . 
Has the poor lad a sister ? 
Where 's that girl ? 
-- there , Betty , go to Snarles the Painter , and tell him to paint me a sign , with -- `` no suicides permitted here , and no smoking in the parlor ; '' -- might as well kill both birds at once . 
