`` Up helm , then ; pile on the sail again , ship keepers ! 
down the rest of the spare boats and rig them -- Mr. Starbuck away , and muster the boat 's crews . '' 
`` Let me first help thee towards the bulwarks , sir . '' 
`` Oh , oh , oh ! 
how this splinter gores me now ! 
Accursed fate ! 
that the unconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate ! '' 
`` Sir ? '' 
`` My body , man , not thee . 
Give me something for a cane -- there , that shivered lance will do . 
Muster the men . 
Surely I have not seen him yet . 
By heaven it can not be ! 
-- missing ? 
-- quick ! 
call them all . '' 
The old man 's hinted thought was true . 
Upon mustering the company , the Parsee was not there . 
`` The Parsee ! '' 
cried Stubb -- `` he must have been caught in - '' `` The black vomit wrench thee ! 
-- run all of ye above , alow , cabin , forecastle -- find him -- not gone -- not gone ! '' 
But quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the Parsee was nowhere to be found . 
`` Aye , sir , '' said Stubb -- `` caught among the tangles of your line -- I thought I saw him dragging under . '' 
`` My line ! 
my line ? 
Gone ? 
-- gone ? 
What means that little word ? 
-- What death-knell rings in it , that old Ahab shakes as if he were the belfry . 
The harpoon , too ! 
-- toss over the litter there , -- d'ye see it ? 
-- the forged iron , men , the white whale 's -- no , no , no , -- blistered fool ; this hand did dart it ! 
-- 't is in the fish ! 
-- Aloft there ! 
Keep him nailed-Quick ! 
-- all hands to the rigging of the boats -- collect the oars -- harpooneers ! 
the irons , the irons ! 
-- hoist the royals higher -- a pull on all the sheets ! 
-- helm there ! 
steady , steady for your life ! 
I 'll ten times girdle the unmeasured globe ; yea and dive straight through it , but I 'll slay him yet ! 
`` Great God ! 
but for one single instant show thyself , '' cried Starbuck ; `` never , never wilt thou capture him , old man -- In Jesus ' name no more of this , that 's worse than devil 's madness . 
Two days chased ; twice stove to splinters ; thy very leg once more snatched from under thee ; thy evil shadow gone -- all good angels mobbing thee with warnings : -- what more wouldst thou have ? 
-- Shall we keep chasing this murderous fish till he swamps the last man ? 
Shall we be dragged by him to the bottom of the sea ? 
Shall we be towed by him to the infernal world ? 
Oh , oh , -- Impiety and blasphemy to hunt him more ! '' 
`` Starbuck , of late I 've felt strangely moved to thee ; ever since that hour we both saw -- thou know ` st what , in one another 's eyes . 
But in this matter of the whale , be the front of thy face to me as the palm of this hand -- a lipless , unfeatured blank . 
Ahab is for ever Ahab , man . 
This whole act 's immutably decreed . 
'T was rehearsed by thee and me a billion years before this ocean rolled . 
Fool ! 
I am the Fates ' lieutenant ; I act under orders . 
Look thou , underling ! 
that thou obeyest mine . 
-- Stand round men , men . 
Ye see an old man cut down to the stump ; leaning on a shivered lance ; propped up on a lonely foot . 
'T is Ahab -- his body 's part ; but Ahab 's soul 's a centipede , that moves upon a hundred legs . 
I feel strained , half-stranded , as ropes that tow dismasted frigates in a gale ; and I may look so . 
But ere I break , yell hear me crack ; and till ye hear that , know that Ahab 's hawser tows his purpose yet . 
Believe ye , men , in the things called omens ? 
Then laugh aloud , and cry encore ! 
For ere they drown , drowning things will twice rise to the surface ; then rise again , to sink for evermore . 
So with Moby Dick -- two days he 's floated -- to-morrow will be the third . 
Aye , men , he 'll rise once more , -- but only to spout his last ! 
D'ye feel brave men , brave ? '' 
`` As fearless fire , '' cried Stubb . 
`` And as mechanical , '' muttered Ahab . 
Then as the men went forward , he muttered on : `` The things called omens ! 
And yesterday I talked the same to Starbuck there , concerning my broken boat . 
Oh ! 
how valiantly I seek to drive out of others ' hearts what 's clinched so fast in mine ! 
-- The Parsee -- the Parsee ! 
-- gone , gone ? 
and he was to go before : -- but still was to be seen again ere I could perish -- How 's that ? 
-- There 's a riddle now might baffle all the lawyers backed by the ghosts of the whole line of judges : -- like a hawk 's beak it pecks my brain . 
I 'll , I 'll solve it , though ! '' 
When dusk descended , the whale was still in sight to leeward . 
So once more the sail was shortened , and everything passed nearly as on the previous night ; only , the sound of hammers , and the hum of the grindstone was heard till nearly daylight , as the men toiled by lanterns in the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats and sharpening their fresh weapons for the morrow . 
Meantime , of the broken keel of Ahab 's wrecked craft the carpenter made him another leg ; while still as on the night before , slouched Ahab stood fixed within his scuttle ; his hid , heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone backward on its dial ; sat due eastward for the earliest sun . 
The Chase - Third Day The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh , and once more the solitary night-man at the fore-mast-head was relieved by crowds of the daylight look-outs , who dotted every mast and almost every spar . 
`` D'ye see him ? '' 
cried Ahab ; but the whale was not yet in sight . 
`` In his infallible wake , though ; but follow that wake , that 's all . 
Helm there ; steady , as thou goest , and hast been going . 
What a lovely day again ! 
were it a new-made world , and made for a summer-house to the angels , and this morning the first of its throwing open to them , a fairer day could not dawn upon that world . 
Here 's food for thought , had Ahab time to think ; but Ahab never thinks ; he only feels , feels , feels ; that 's tingling enough for mortal man ! 
to think 's audacity . 
God only has that right and privilege . 
Thinking is , or ought to be , a coolness and a calmness ; and our poor hearts throb , and our poor brains beat too much for that . 
And yet , I 've sometimes thought my brain was very calm -- frozen calm , this old skull cracks so , like a glass in which the contents turned to ice , and shiver it . 
And still this hair is growing now ; this moment growing , and heat must breed it ; but no , it 's like that sort of common grass that will grow anywhere , between the earthy clefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava . 
How the wild winds blow it ; they whip it about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash the tossed ship they cling to . 
A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere this through prison corridors and cells , and wards of hospitals , and ventilated them , and now comes blowing hither as innocent as fleeces . 
Out upon it ! 
-- it 's tainted . 
Were I the wind , I 'd blow no more on such a wicked , miserable world . 
