He 's all a magnet ! 
How long since thou saw ` st him last ? 
Which way heading ? '' 
`` Bless my soul , and curse the foul fiend 's , '' cried Bunger , stoopingly walking round Ahab , and like a dog , strangely snuffing ; `` this man 's blood -- bring the thermometer ! 
-- it 's at the boiling point ! 
-- his pulse makes these planks beat ! 
-- sir ! '' 
-- taking a lancet from his pocket , and drawing near to Ahab 's arm . 
`` Avast ! '' 
roared Ahab , dashing him against the bulwarks -- `` Man the boat ! 
Which way heading ? '' 
`` Good God ! '' 
cried the English Captain , to whom the question was put . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
He was heading east , I think . 
-- Is your Captain crazy ? '' 
whispering Fedallah . 
But Fedallah , putting a finger on his lip , slid over the bulwarks to take the boat 's steering oar , and Ahab , swinging the cutting-tackle towards him commanded the ship 's sailors to stand by to lower . 
In a moment he was standing in the boat 's stern , and the Manilla men were springing to their oars . 
In vain the English Captain hailed him . 
With back to the stranger ship , and face set like a flint to his own , Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod . 
The Decanter Ere the English ship fades from sight be it set down here , that she hailed from London , and was named after the late Samuel Enderby , merchant of that city , the original of the famous whaling house of enderby and sons ; a house which in my poor whaleman 's opinion , comes not far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons , in point of real historical interest . 
How long , prior to the year of our Lord 1775 , this great whaling house was in existence , my numerous fish-documents do not make plain ; but in that year -LRB- 1775 -RRB- it fitted out the first English ships that ever regularly hunted the Sperm Whale ; though for some score of years previous -LRB- ever since 1726 -RRB- our valiant Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket and the Vineyard had in large fleets pursued the Leviathan , but only in the North and South Atlantic : not elsewhere . 
Be it distinctly recorded here , that the Nantucketers were the first among mankind to harpoon with civilized steel the great Sperm Whale ; and that for half a century they were the only people of the whole globe who so harpooned him . 
In 1778 , a fine ship , the Amelia , fitted out for the express purpose , and at the sole charge of the vigorous Enderbys , boldly rounded Cape Horn , and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat of any sort in the great South Sea . 
The voyage was a skilful and lucky one ; and returning to her berth with her hold full of the precious sperm , the Amelia 's example was soon followed by other ships , English and American , and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the Pacific were thrown open . 
But not content with this good deed , the indefatigable house again bestirred itself : Samuel and all his Sons -- how many , their mother only knows -- and under their immediate auspices , and partly , I think , at their expense , the British government was induced to send the sloop-of-war Rattler on a whaling voyage of discovery into the South Sea . 
Commanded by a naval Post-Captain , the Rattler made a rattling voyage of it , and did some service ; how much does not appear . 
But this is not all . 
In 1819 , the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship of their own , to go on a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan . 
That ship -- well called the `` Syren '' -- made a noble experimental cruise ; and it was thus that the great Japanese Whaling Ground first became generally known . 
The Syren in this famous voyage was commanded by a Captain Coffin , a Nantucketer . 
All honor to the Enderbies , therefore , whose house , I think , exists to the present day ; though doubtless the original Samuel must long ago have slipped his cable for the great South Sea of the other world . 
The ship named after him was worthy of the honor , being a very fast sailer and a noble craft every way . 
I boarded her once at midnight somewhere off the Patagonian coast , and drank good flip down in the forecastle . 
It was a fine gam we had , and they were all trumps -- every soul on board . 
A short life to them , and a jolly death . 
And that fine gam I had -- long , very long after old Ahab touched her planks with his ivory heel -- it minds me of the noble , solid , Saxon hospitality of that ship ; and may my parson forget me , and the devil remember me , if I ever lose sight of it . 
Flip ? 
Did I say we had flip ? 
Yes , and we flipped it at the rate of ten gallons the hour ; and when the squall came -LRB- for it 's squally off there by Patagonia -RRB- , and all hands -- visitors and all -- were called to reef topsails , we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each other aloft in bowlines ; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of our jackets into the sails , so that we hung there , reefed fast in the howling gale , a warning example to all drunken tars . 
However , the masts did not go overboard ; and by and by we scrambled down , so sober , that we had to pass the flip again , though the savage salt spray bursting down the forecastle scuttle , rather too much diluted and pickled it for my taste . 
The beef was fine -- tough , but with body in it . 
They said it was bullbeef ; others , that it was dromedary beef ; but I do not know , for certain , how that was . 
They had dumplings too ; small , but substantial , symmetrically globular , and indestructible dumplings . 
I fancied that you could feel them , and roll them about in you after they were swallowed . 
If you stooped over too far forward , you risked their pitching out of you like billiard-balls . 
The bread -- but that could n't be helped ; besides , it was an anti-scorbutic , in short , the bread contained the only fresh fare they had . 
But the forecastle was not very light , and it was very easy to step over into a dark corner when you ate it . 
But all in all , taking her from truck to helm , considering the dimensions of the cook 's boilers , including his own live parchment boilers ; fore and aft , I say , the Samuel Enderby was a jolly ship ; of good fare and plenty ; fine flip and strong ; crack fellows all , and capital from boot heels to hat-band . 
But why was it , think ye , that the Samuel Enderby , and some other English whalers I know of -- not all though -- were such famous , hospitable ships ; that passed round the beef , and the bread , and the can , and the joke ; and were not soon weary of eating , and drinking , and laughing ? 
I will tell you . 
The abounding good cheer of these English whalers is matter for historical research . 
Nor have I been at all sparing of historical whale research , when it has seemed needed . 
The English were preceded in the whale fishery by the Hollanders , Zealanders , and Danes ; from whom they derived many terms still extant in the fishery ; and what is yet more , their fat old fashions , touching plenty to eat and drink . 
For , as a general thing , the English merchant-ship scrimps her crew ; but not so the English whaler . 
Hence , in the English , this thing of whaling good cheer is not normal and natural , but incidental and particular ; and , therefore , must have some special origin , which is here pointed out , and will be still further elucidated . 
During my researches in the Leviathanic histories , I stumbled upon an ancient Dutch volume , which , by the musty whaling smell of it , I knew must be about whalers . 
The title was , `` Dan Coopman , '' wherefore I concluded that this must be the invaluable memoirs of some Amsterdam cooper in the fishery , as every whale ship must carry its cooper . 
I was reinforced in this opinion by seeing that it was the production of one `` Fitz Swackhammer . '' 
But my friend Dr. Snodhead , a very learned man , professor of Low Dutch and High German in the college of Santa Claus and St. Potts , to whom I handed the work for translation , giving him a box of sperm candles for his trouble -- this same Dr. Snodhead , so soon as he spied the book , assured me that `` Dan Coopman '' did not mean `` The Cooper , '' but `` The Merchant . '' 
In short , this ancient and learned Low Dutch book treated of the commerce of Holland ; and , among other subjects , contained a very interesting account of its whale fishery . 
And in this chapter it was , headed , `` Smeer , '' or `` Fat , '' that I found a long detailed list of the outfits for the larders and cellars of 180 sail of Dutch whalemen ; from which list , as translated by Dr. Snodhead , I transcribe the following : 0084400,000 lbs . 
of beef . 
60,000 lbs . 
Friesland pork . 
150,000 lbs . 
of stock fish . 
550,000 lbs . 
of biscuit . 
72,000 lbs . 
of soft bread . 
2,800 firkins of butter . 
20,000 lbs . 
of Texel and Leyden cheese . 
144,000 lbs . 
cheese -LRB- probably an inferior article -RRB- . 
550 ankers of Geneva . 
10,800 barrels of beer . 
Most statistical tables are parchingly dry in the reading ; not so in the present case , however , where the reader is flooded with whole pipes , barrels , quarts , and gills of good gin and good cheer . 
At the time , I devoted three days to the studious digesting of all this beer , beef , and bread , during which many profound thoughts were incidentally suggested to me , capable of a transcendental and Platonic application ; and , furthermore , I compiled supplementary tables of my own , touching the probable quantity of stock-fish , & c. , consumed by every Low Dutch harpooneer in that ancient Greenland and Spitzbergen whale fishery . 
In the first place , the amount of butter , and Texel and Leyden cheese consumed , seems amazing . 
I impute it , though , to their naturally unctuous natures , being rendered still more unctuous by the nature of their vocation , and especially by their pursuing their game in those frigid Polar Seas , on the very coasts of that Esquimaux country where the convivial natives pledge each other in bumpers of train oil . 
The quantity of the beer , too , is very large , 10,800 barrels . 
Now , as those polar fisheries could only be prosecuted in the short summer of that climate , so that the whole cruise of one of these Dutch whalemen , including the short voyage to and from the Spitzbergen sea , did not much exceed three months , say , and reckoning 30 men to each of their fleet of 180 sail , we have 5,400 Low Dutch seamen in all ; therefore , I say , we have precisely two barrels of beer per man , for a twelve weeks ' allowance , exclusive of his fair proportion of that 550 ankers of gin . 
Now , whether these gin and beer harpooneers , so fuddled as one might fancy them to have been , were the right sort of men to stand up in a boat 's head , and take good aim at flying whales ; this would seem somewhat improbable . 
Yet they did aim at them , and hit them too . 
But this was very far North , be it remembered , where beer agrees well with the constitution ; upon the Equator , in our southern fishery , beer would be apt to make the harpooneer sleepy at the mast-head and boozy in his boat ; and grievous loss might ensue to Nantucket and New Bedford . 
But no more ; enough has been said to show that the old Dutch whalers of two or three centuries ago were high livers ; and that the English whalers have not neglected so excellent an example . 
For , say they , when cruising in an empty ship , if you can get nothing better out of the world , get a good dinner out of it , at least . 
And this empties the decanter . 
A Bower in the Arsacides Hitherto , in descriptively treating of the Sperm Whale , I have chiefly dwelt upon the marvels of his outer aspect ; or separately and in detail upon some few interior structural features . 
But to a large and thorough sweeping comprehension of him , it behoves me now to unbutton him still further , and untagging the points of his hose , unbuckling his garters , and casting loose the hooks and the eyes of the joints of his innermost bones , set him before you in his ultimatum ; that is to say , in his unconditional skeleton . 
But how now , Ishmael ? 
How is it , that you , a mere oarsman in the fishery , pretend to know aught about the subterranean parts of the whale ? 
Did erudite Stubb , mounted upon your capstan , deliver lectures on the anatomy of the Cetacea ; and by help of the windlass , hold up a specimen rib for exhibition ? 
Explain thyself , Ishmael . 
Can you land a full-grown whale on your deck for examination , as a cook dishes a roast-pig ? 
Surely not . 
A veritable witness have you hitherto been , Ishmael ; but have a care how you seize the privilege of Jonah alone ; the privilege of discoursing upon the joists and beams ; the rafters , ridge-pole , sleepers , and under-pinnings , making up the frame-work of leviathan ; and belike of the tallow-vats , dairy-rooms , butteries , and cheeseries in his bowels . 
