` Aye ? 
Well then , Don , refill my cup . 
Your chicha 's very fine ; and ere proceeding further I will tell ye what our Canallers are ; for such information may throw side-light upon my story . ' 
`` For three hundred and sixty miles , gentlemen , through the entire breadth of the state of New York ; through numerous populous cities and most thriving villages ; through long , dismal , uninhabited swamps , and affluent , cultivated fields , unrivalled for fertility ; by billiard-room and bar-room ; through the holy-of-holies of great forests ; on Roman arches over Indian rivers ; through sun and shade ; by happy hearts or broken ; through all the wide contrasting scenery of those noble Mohawk counties ; and especially , by rows of snow-white chapels , whose spires stand almost like milestones , flows one continual stream of Venetianly corrupt and often lawless life . 
There 's your true Ashantee , gentlemen ; there howl your pagans ; where you ever find them , next door to you ; under the long-flung shadow , and the snug patronizing lee of churches . 
For by some curious fatality , as it is often noted of your metropolitan freebooters that they ever encamp around the halls of justice , so sinners , gentlemen , most abound in holiest vicinities . '' 
` Is that a friar passing ? ' 
said Don Pedro , looking downwards into the crowded plazza , with humorous concern . '' 
` Well for our northern friend , Dame Isabella 's Inquisition wanes in Lima , ' laughed Don Sebastian . 
` Proceed , Senor . ' '' ' 
A moment ! 
Pardon ! ' 
cried another of the company . 
` In the name of all us Limeese , I but desire to express to you , sir sailor , that we have by no means overlooked your delicacy in not substituting present Lima for distant Venice in your corrupt comparison . 
Oh ! 
do not bow and look surprised : you know the proverb all along this coast -- `` Corrupt as Lima . '' 
It but bears out your saying , too ; churches more plentiful than billiard-tables , and for ever open-and `` Corrupt as Lima . '' 
So , too , Venice ; I have been there ; the holy city of the blessed evangelist , St. Mark ! 
-- St. Dominic , purge it ! 
Your cup ! 
Thanks : here I refill ; now , you pour out again . ' 
`` Freely depicted in his own vocation , gentlemen , the Canaller would make a fine dramatic hero , so abundantly and picturesquely wicked is he . 
Like Mark Antony , for days and days along his green-turfed , flowery Nile , he indolently floats , openly toying with his red-cheeked Cleopatra , ripening his apricot thigh upon the sunny deck . 
But ashore , all this effeminacy is dashed . 
The brigandish guise which the Canaller so proudly sports ; his slouched and gaily-ribboned hat betoken his grand features . 
A terror to the smiling innocence of the villages through which he floats ; his swart visage and bold swagger are not unshunned in cities . 
Once a vagabond on his own canal , I have received good turns from one of these Canallers ; I thank him heartily ; would fain be not ungrateful ; but it is often one of the prime redeeming qualities of your man of violence , that at times he has as stiff an arm to back a poor stranger in a strait , as to plunder a wealthy one . 
In sum , gentlemen , what the wildness of this canal life is , is emphatically evinced by this ; that our wild whale-fishery contains so many of its most finished graduates , and that scarce any race of mankind , except Sydney men , are so much distrusted by our whaling captains . 
Nor does it at all diminish the curiousness of this matter , that to many thousands of our rural boys and young men born along its line , the probationary life of the Grand Canal furnishes the sole transition between quietly reaping in a Christian corn-field , and recklessly ploughing the waters of the most barbaric seas . '' ' 
I see ! 
I see ! ' 
impetuously exclaimed Don Pedro , spilling his chicha upon his silvery ruffles . 
` No need to travel ! 
The world 's one Lima . 
I had thought , now , that at your temperate North the generations were cold and holy as the hills . 
-- But the story . ' 
`` I had left off , gentlemen , where the Lakeman shook the backstay . 
Hardly had he done so , when he was surrounded by the three junior mates and the four harpooneers , who all crowded him to the deck . 
But sliding down the ropes like baleful comets , the two Canallers rushed into the uproar , and sought to drag their man out of it towards the forecastle . 
Others of the sailors joined with them in this attempt , and a twisted turmoil ensued ; while standing out of harm 's way , the valiant captain danced up and down with a whale-pike , calling upon his officers to manhandle that atrocious scoundrel , and smoke him along to the quarter-deck . 
At intervals , he ran close up to the revolving border of the confusion , and prying into the heart of it with his pike , sought to prick out the object of his resentment . 
But Steelkilt and his desperadoes were too much for them all ; they succeeded in gaining the forecastle deck , where , hastily slewing about three or four large casks in a line with the windlass , these sea-Parisians entrenched themselves behind the barricade . '' 
` Come out of that , ye pirates ! ' 
roared the captain , now menacing them with a pistol in each hand , just brought to him by the steward . 
` Come out of that , ye cut-throats ! ' 
`` Steelkilt leaped on the barricade , and striding up and down there , defied the worst the pistols could do ; but gave the captain to understand distinctly , that his -LRB- Steelkilt 's -RRB- death would be the signal for a murderous mutiny on the part of all hands . 
Fearing in his heart lest this might prove but too true , the captain a little desisted , but still commanded the insurgents instantly to return to their duty . '' 
` Will you promise not to touch us , if we do ? ' 
demanded their ringleader . '' 
` Turn to ! 
turn to ! 
-- I make no promise ; to your duty ! 
Do you want to sink the ship , by knocking off at a time like this ? 
Turn to ! ' 
and he once more raised a pistol . '' 
` Sink the ship ? ' 
cried Steelkilt . 
` Aye , let her sink . 
Not a man of us turns to , unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us . 
What say ye , men ? ' 
turning to his comrades . 
A fierce cheer was their response . 
`` The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade , all the while keeping his eye on the Captain , and jerking out such sentences as these : -- ` It 's not our fault ; we did n't want it ; I told him to take his hammer away ; it was boy 's business ; he might have known me before this ; I told him not to prick the buffalo ; I believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw ; ai n't those mincing knives down in the forecastle there , men ? 
look to those handspikes , my hearties . 
Captain , by God , look to yourself ; say the word ; do n't be a fool ; forget it all ; we are ready to turn to ; treat us decently , and we 're your men ; but we wo n't be flogged . ' '' 
` Turn to ! 
I make no promises , turn to , I say ! ' '' 
` Look ye , now , ' cried the Lakeman , flinging out his arm towards him , ` there are a few of us here -LRB- and I am one of them -RRB- who have shipped for the cruise , d'ye see ; now as you well know , sir , we can claim our discharge as soon as the anchor is down ; so we do n't want a row ; it 's not our interest ; we want to be peaceable ; we are ready to work , but we wo n't be flogged . ' '' 
` Turn to ! ' 
roared the Captain . 
`` Steelkilt glanced round him a moment , and then said : -- ' I tell you what it is now , Captain , rather than kill ye , and be hung for such a shabby rascal , we wo n't lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us ; but till you say the word about not flogging us , we do n't do a hand 's turn . ' '' 
` Down into the forecastle then , down with ye , I 'll keep ye there till ye 're sick of it . 
Down ye go . ' '' 
` Shall we ? ' 
cried the ringleader to his men . 
Most of them were against it ; but at length , in obedience to Steelkilt , they preceded him down into their dark den , growlingly disappearing , like bears into a cave . 
`` As the Lakeman 's bare head was just level with the planks , the Captain and his posse leaped the barricade , and rapidly drawing over the slide of the scuttle , planted their group of hands upon it , and loudly called for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway . 
Then opening the slide a little , the Captain whispered something down the crack , closed it , and turned the key upon them -- ten in number -- leaving on deck some twenty or more , who thus far had remained neutral . 
`` All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers , forward and aft , especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway ; at which last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge , after breaking through the bulkhead below . 
But the hours of darkness passed in peace ; the men who still remained at their duty toiling hard at the pumps , whose clinking and clanking at intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship . 
`` At sunrise the Captain went forward , and knocking on the deck , summoned the prisoners to work ; but with a yell they refused . 
Water was then lowered down to them , and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it ; when again turning the key upon them and pocketing it , the Captain returned to the quarter-deck . 
Twice every day for three days this was repeated ; but on the fourth morning a confused wrangling , and then a scuffling was heard , as the customary summons was delivered ; and suddenly four men burst up from the forecastle , saying they were ready to turn to . 
The fetid closeness of the air , and a famishing diet , united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution , had constrained them to surrender at discretion . 
Emboldened by this , the Captain reiterated his demand to the rest , but Steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged . 
On the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them . 
Only three were left . '' 
` Better turn to , now ? ' 
said the Captain with a heartless jeer . '' 
` Shut us up again , will ye ! ' 
cried Steelkilt . 
`` Oh ! 
certainly , '' said the Captain , and the key clicked . 
`` It was at this point , gentlemen , that enraged by the defection of seven of his former associates , and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed him , and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of despair ; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers , thus far apparently of one mind with him , to burst out of their hole at the next summoning of the garrison ; and armed with their keen mincing knives -LRB- long , crescentic , heavy implements with a handle at each end -RRB- run amuck from the bowsprit to the taffrail ; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible , seize the ship . 
For himself , he would do this , he said , whether they joined him or not . 
That was the last night he should spend in that den . 
But the scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two ; they swore they were ready for that , or for any other mad thing , for anything in short but a surrender . 
And what was more , they each insisted upon being the first man on deck , when the time to make the rush should come . 
But to this their leader as fiercely objected , reserving that priority for himself ; particularly as his two comrades would not yield , the one to the other , in the matter ; and both of them could not be first , for the ladder would but admit one man at a time . 
And here , gentlemen , the foul play of these miscreants must come out . 
