-- then I 'll hop with ye ; yea , turn grasshopper ! 
LONG-ISLAND SAILOR Well , well , ye sulkies , there 's plenty more of us . 
Hoe corn when you may , say I. All legs go to harvest soon . 
Ah ! 
here comes the music ; now for it ! 
AZORE SAILOR -LRB- Ascending , and pitching the tambourine up the scuttle . -RRB- 
Here you are , Pip ; and there 's the windlass-bits ; up you mount ! 
Now , boys ! 
-LRB- The half of them dance to the tambourine ; some go below ; some sleep or lie among the coils of rigging . 
Oaths a-plenty . -RRB- 
AZORE SAILOR -LRB- Dancing -RRB- Go it , Pip ! 
Bang it , bell-boy ! 
Rig it , dig it , stig it , quig it , bell-boy ! 
Make fire-flies ; break the jinglers ! 
PIP Jinglers , you say ? 
-- there goes another , dropped off ; I pound it so . 
CHINA SAILOR Rattle thy teeth , then , and pound away ; make a pagoda of thyself . 
FRENCH SAILOR Merry-mad ! 
Hold up thy hoop , Pip , till I jump through it ! 
Split jibs ! 
tear yourselves ! 
Tashtego -LRB- Quietly smoking . -RRB- 
That 's a white man ; he calls that fun : humph ! 
I save my sweat . 
OLD MANX SAILOR I wonder whether those jolly lads bethink them of what they are dancing over . 
I 'll dance over your grave , I will -- that 's the bitterest threat of your night-women , that beat head-winds round corners . 
O Christ ! 
to think of the green navies and the green-skulled crews ! 
Well , well ; belike the whole world 's a ball , as you scholars have it ; and so 't is right to make one ballroom of it . 
Dance on , lads , you 're young ; I was once . 
3D NANTUCKET SAILOR Spell oh ! 
-- whew ! 
this is worse than pulling after whales in a calm -- give us a whiff , Tash . 
-LRB- They cease dancing , and gather in clusters . 
Meantime the sky darkens -- the wind rises . -RRB- 
LASCAR SAILOR By Brahma ! 
boys , it 'll be douse sail soon . 
The sky-born , high-tide Ganges turned to wind ! 
Thou showest thy black brow , Seeva ! 
MALTESE SAILOR -LRB- Reclining and shaking his cap -RRB- It 's the waves -- the snow 's caps turn to jig it now . 
They 'll shake their tassels soon . 
Now would all the waves were women , then I 'd go drown , and chassee with them evermore ! 
There 's naught so sweet on earth -- heaven may not match it ! 
-- as those swift glances of warm , wild bosoms in the dance , when the over-arboring arms hide such ripe , bursting grapes . 
SICILIAN SAILOR -LRB- Reclining -RRB- Tell me not of it ! 
Hark ye , lad -- fleet interlacings of the limbs -- lithe swayings -- coyings -- flutterings ! 
lip ! 
heart ! 
hip ! 
all graze : unceasing touch and go ! 
not taste , observe ye , else come satiety . 
Eh , Pagan ? 
-LRB- Nudging . -RRB- 
TAHITAN SAILOR -LRB- Reclining on a mat -RRB- Hail , holy nakedness of our dancing girls ! 
-- the Heeva-Heeva ! 
Ah ! 
low veiled , high palmed Tahiti ! 
I still rest me on thy mat , but the soft soil has slid ! 
I saw thee woven in the wood , my mat ! 
green the first day I brought ye thence ; now worn and wilted quite . 
Ah me ! 
-- not thou nor I can bear the change ! 
How then , if so be transplanted to yon sky ? 
Hear I the roaring streams from Pirohitee 's peak of spears , when they leap down the crags and drown the villages ? 
-- The blast , the blast ! 
Up , spine , and meet it ! 
-LRB- Leaps to his feet . -RRB- 
PORTUGUESE SAILOR How the sea rolls swashing ` gainst the side ! 
Stand by for reefing , hearties ! 
the winds are just crossing swords , pell-mell they 'll go lunging presently . 
DANISH SAILOR Crack , crack , old ship ! 
so long as thou crackest , thou holdest ! 
Well done ! 
The mate there holds ye to it stiffly . 
He 's no more afraid than the isle fort at Cattegat , put there to fight the Baltic with storm-lashed guns , on which the sea-salt cakes ! 
4TH NANTUCKET SAILOR He has his orders , mind ye that . 
I heard old Ahab tell him he must always kill a squall , something as they burst a waterspout with a pistol -- fire your ship right into it ! 
ENGLISH SAILOR Blood ! 
but that old man 's a grand old cove ! 
We are the lads to hunt him up his whale ! 
ALL Aye ! 
aye ! 
OLD MANX SAILOR How the three pines shake ! 
Pines are the hardest sort of tree to live when shifted to any other soil , and here there 's none but the crew 's cursed clay . 
Steady , helmsman ! 
steady . 
This is the sort of weather when brave hearts snap ashore , and keeled hulls split at sea . 
Our captain has his birthmark ; look yonder , boys , there 's another in the sky lurid -- like , ye see , all else pitch black . 
DAGGOO What of that ? 
Who 's afraid of black 's afraid of me ! 
I 'm quarried out of it ! 
SPANISH SAILOR -LRB- Aside . -RRB- 
He wants to bully , ah ! 
-- the old grudge makes me touchy -LRB- Advancing . -RRB- 
Aye , harpooneer , thy race is the undeniable dark side of mankind -- devilish dark at that . 
No offence . 
DAGGOO -LRB- Grimly -RRB- None . 
ST. JAGO 'S SAILOR That Spaniard 's mad or drunk . 
But that ca n't be , or else in his one case our old Mogul 's fire-waters are somewhat long in working . 
5TH NANTUCKET SAILOR What 's that I saw -- lightning ? 
