come to help ; eh , Pip ? '' 
`` Pip ? 
whom call ye Pip ? 
Pip jumped from the whaleboat . 
Pip 's missing . 
Let 's see now if ye have n't fished him up here , fisherman . 
It drags hard ; I guess he 's holding on . 
Jerk him , Tahiti ! 
Jerk him off we haul in no cowards here . 
Ho ! 
there 's his arm just breaking water . 
A hatchet ! 
a hatchet ! 
cut it off -- we haul in no cowards here . 
Captain Ahab ! 
sir , sir ! 
here 's Pip , trying to get on board again . '' 
`` Peace , thou crazy loon , '' cried the Manxman , seizing him by the arm . 
`` Away from the quarter-deck ! '' 
`` The greater idiot ever scolds the lesser , '' muttered Ahab , advancing . 
`` Hands off from that holiness ! 
Where sayest thou Pip was , boy ? 
`` Astern there , sir , astern ! 
Lo ! 
lo ! '' 
`` And who art thou , boy ? 
I see not my reflection in the vacant pupils of thy eyes . 
Oh God ! 
that man should be a thing for immortal souls to sieve through ! 
Who art thou , boy ? '' 
`` Bell-boy , sir ; ship 's - crier ; ding , dong , ding ! 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
Pip ! 
One hundred pounds of clay reward for Pip ; five feet high -- looks cowardly -- quickest known by that ! 
Ding , dong , ding ! 
Who 's seen Pip the coward ? '' 
`` There can be no hearts above the snow-line . 
Oh , ye frozen heavens ! 
look down here . 
Ye did beget this luckless child , and have abandoned him , ye creative libertines . 
Here , boy ; Ahab 's cabin shall be Pip 's home henceforth , while Ahab lives . 
Thou touchest my inmost centre , boy ; thou art tied to me by cords woven of my heart-strings . 
Come , let 's down . '' 
`` What 's this ? 
here 's velvet shark-skin , '' intently gazing at Ahab 's hand , and feeling it . 
`` Ah , now , had poor Pip but felt so kind a thing as this , perhaps he had ne'er been lost ! 
This seems to me , sir , as a man-rope ; something that weak souls may hold by . 
Oh , sir , let old Perth now come and rivet these two hands together ; the black one with the white , for I will not let this go . '' 
`` Oh , boy , nor will I thee , unless I should thereby drag thee to worse horrors than are here . 
Come , then , to my cabin . 
Lo ! 
ye believers in gods all goodness , and in man all ill , lo you ! 
see the omniscient gods oblivious of suffering man ; and man , though idiotic , and knowing not what he does , yet full of the sweet things of love and gratitude . 
Come ! 
I feel prouder leading thee by thy black hand , than though I grasped an Emperor 's ! '' 
`` There go two daft ones now , '' muttered the old Manxman . 
`` One daft with strength , the other daft with weakness . 
But here 's the end of the rotten line -- all dripping , too . 
Mend it , eh ? 
I think we had best have a new line altogether . 
I 'll see Mr. Stubb about it . '' 
The Life-Buoy Steering now south-eastward by Ahab 's levelled steel , and her progress solely determined by Ahab 's level log and line ; the Pequod held on her path towards the Equator . 
Making so long a passage through such unfrequented waters , descrying no ships , and ere long , sideways impelled by unvarying trade winds , over waves monotonously mild ; all these seemed the strange calm things preluding some riotous and desperate scene . 
At last , when the ship drew near to the outskirts , as it were , of the Equatorial fishing-ground , and in the deep darkness that goes before the dawn , was sailing by a cluster of rocky islets ; the watch -- then headed by Flask -- was startled by a cry so plaintively wild and unearthly -- like half-articulated wailings of the ghosts of all Herod 's murdered Innocents -- that one and all , they started from their reveries , and for the space of some moments stood , or sat , or leaned all transfixed by listening , like the carved Roman slave , while that wild cry remained within hearing . 
The Christian or civilized part of the crew said it was mermaids , and shuddered ; but the pagan harpooneers remained unappalled . 
Yet the grey Manxman -- the oldest mariner of all -- declared that the wild thrilling sounds that were heard , were the voices of newly drowned men in the sea . 
Below in his hammock , Ahab did not hear of this till grey dawn , when he came to the deck ; it was then recounted to him by Flask , not unaccompanied with hinted dark meanings . 
He hollowly laughed , and thus explained the wonder . 
Those rocky islands the ship had passed were the resort of great numbers of seals , and some young seals that had lost their dams , or some dams that had lost their cubs , must have risen nigh the ship and kept company with her , crying and sobbing with their human sort of wail . 
But this only the more affected some of them , because most mariners cherish a very superstitious feeling about seals , arising not only from their peculiar tones when in distress , but also from the human look of their round heads and semi-intelligent faces , seen peeringly uprising from the water alongside . 
In the sea , under certain circumstances , seals have more than once been mistaken for men . 
But the bodings of the crew were destined to receive a most plausible confirmation in the fate of one of their number that morning . 
At sun-rise this man went from his hammock to his mast-head at the fore ; and whether it was that he was not yet half waked from his sleep -LRB- for sailors sometimes go aloft in a transition state -RRB- , whether it was thus with the man , there is now no telling ; but , be that as it may , he had not been long at his perch , when a cry was heard -- a cry and a rushing -- and looking up , they saw a falling phantom in the air ; and looking down , a little tossed heap of white bubbles in the blue of the sea . 
The life-buoy -- a long slender cask -- was dropped from the stern , where it always hung obedient to a cunning spring ; but no hand rose to seize it , and the sun having long beat upon this cask it had shrunken , so that it slowly filled , and the parched wood also filled at its every pore ; and the studded iron-bound cask followed the sailor to the bottom , as if to yield him his pillow , though in sooth but a hard one . 
And thus the first man of the Pequod that mounted the mast to look out for the White Whale , on the White Whale 's own peculiar ground ; that man was swallowed up in the deep . 
But few , perhaps , thought of that at the time . 
Indeed , in some sort , they were not grieved at this event , at least as a portent ; for they regarded it , not as a fore-shadowing of evil in the future , but as the fulfilment of an evil already presaged . 
They declared that now they knew the reason of those wild shrieks they had heard the night before . 
But again the old Manxman said nay . 
The lost life-buoy was now to be replaced ; Starbuck was directed to see to it ; but as no cask of sufficient lightness could be found , and as in the feverish eagerness of what seemed the approaching crisis of the voyage , all hands were impatient of any toil but what was directly connected with its final end , whatever that might prove to be ; therefore , they were going to leave the ship 's stern unprovided with a buoy , when by certain strange signs and inuendoes Queequeg hinted a hint concerning his coffin . 
`` A life-buoy of a coffin ! '' 
cried Starbuck , starting . 
`` Rather queer , that , I should say , '' said Stubb . 
`` It will make a good enough one , '' said Flask , `` the carpenter here can arrange it easily . '' 
`` Bring it up ; there 's nothing else for it , '' said Starbuck , after a melancholy pause . 
`` Rig it , carpenter ; do not look at me so -- the coffin , I mean . 
Dost thou hear me ? 
Rig it . '' 
`` And shall I nail down the lid , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a hammer . 
`` Aye . '' 
`` And shall I caulk the seams , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a caulking-iron . 
`` Aye . '' 
`` And shall I then pay over the same with pitch , sir ? '' 
moving his hand as with a pitch-pot . 
Away ! 
What possesses thee to this ? 
Make a life-buoy of the coffin , and no more . 
