Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols . 
I thought , sir , that you spoke to carpenter . 
Carpenter ? 
why that 's -- but no ; -- a very tidy , and , I may say , an extremely gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here , carpenter ; -- or would ` st thou rather work in clay ? 
Sir ? 
-- Clay ? 
clay , sir ? 
That 's mud ; we leave clay to ditchers , sir . 
The fellow 's impious ! 
What art thou sneezing about ? 
Bone is rather dusty , sir . 
Take the hint , then ; and when thou art dead , never bury thyself under living people 's noses . 
Sir ? 
-- oh ! 
ah ! 
-- I guess so ; so ; -- yes , yes -- oh dear ! 
Look ye , carpenter , I dare say thou callest thyself a right good workmanlike workman , eh ? 
Well , then , will it speak thoroughly well for thy work , if , when I come to mount this leg thou makest , I shall nevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it ; that is , carpenter , my old lost leg ; the flesh and blood one , I mean . 
Canst thou not drive that old Adam away ? 
Truly , sir , I begin to understand somewhat now . 
Yes , I have heard something curious on that score , sir ; how that a dismasted man never entirely loses the feeling of his old spar , but it will be still pricking him at times . 
May I humbly ask if it be really so , sir ? 
It is , man . 
Look , put thy live leg here in the place where mine once was ; so , now , here is only one distinct leg to the eye , yet two to the soul . 
Where thou feelest tingling life ; there , exactly there , there to a hair , do I. Is ' t a riddle ? 
I should humbly call it a poser , sir . 
Hist , then . 
How dost thou know that some entire , living , thinking thing may not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing precisely where thou now standest ; aye , and standing there in thy spite ? 
In thy most solitary hours , then , dost thou not fear eavesdroppers ? 
Hold , do n't speak ! 
And if I still feel the smart of my crushed leg , though it be now so long dissolved ; then , why mayest not thou , carpenter , feel the fiery pains of hell for ever , and without a body ? 
Hah ! 
Good Lord ! 
Truly , sir , if it comes to that , I must calculate over again ; I think I did n't carry a small figure , sir . 
Look ye , pudding-heads should never grant premises . 
-- How long before this leg is done ? 
Perhaps an hour , sir . 
Bungle away at it then , and bring it to me -LRB- turns to go -RRB- . 
Oh , Life . 
Here I am , proud as Greek god , and yet standing debtor to this blockhead for a bone to stand on ! 
Cursed be that mortal inter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers . 
I would be free as air ; and I 'm down in the whole world 's books . 
I am so rich , I could have given bid for bid with the wealthiest Praetorians at the auction of the Roman empire -LRB- which was the world 's -RRB- ; and yet I owe for the flesh in the tongue I brag with . 
By heavens ! 
I 'll get a crucible , and into it , and dissolve myself down to one small , compendious vertebra . 
So . 
Carpenter -LRB- resuming his work -RRB- . 
Well , well , well ! 
Stubb knows him best of all , and Stubb always says he 's queer ; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer ; he 's queer , says Stubb ; he 's queer -- queer , queer ; and keeps dinning it into Mr. Starbuck all the time -- queer -- sir -- queer , queer , very queer . 
And here 's his leg . 
Yes , now that I think of it , here 's his bed-fellow ! 
has a stick of whale 's jaw-bone for a wife ! 
And this is his leg ; he 'll stand on this . 
What was that now about one leg standing in three places , and all three places standing in one hell -- how was that ? 
Oh ! 
I do n't wonder he looked so scornful at me ! 
I 'm a sort of strange-thoughted sometimes , they say ; but that 's only haphazard-like . 
Then , a short , little old body like me , should never undertake to wade out into deep waters with tall , heron-built captains ; the water chucks you under the chin pretty quick , and there 's a great cry for life-boats . 
And here 's the heron 's leg ! 
long and slim , sure enough ! 
Now , for most folks one pair of legs lasts a lifetime , and that must be because they use them mercifully , as a tender-hearted old lady uses her roly-poly old coach-horses . 
But Ahab ; oh he 's a hard driver . 
Look , driven one leg to death , and spavined the other for life , and now wears out bone legs by the cord . 
Halloa , there , you Smut ! 
bear a hand there with those screws , and let 's finish it before the resurrection fellow comes a-calling with his horn for all legs , true or false , as brewery men go round collecting old beer barrels , to fill 'em up again . 
What a leg this is ! 
It looks like a real live leg , filed down to nothing but the core ; he 'll be standing on this to-morrow ; he 'll be taking altitudes on it . 
Halloa ! 
I almost forgot the little oval slate , smoothed ivory , where he figures up the latitude . 
So , so ; chisel , file , and sand-paper , now ! 
Ahab and Starbuck in the Cabin According to usage they were pumping the ship next morning ; and lo ! 
no inconsiderable oil came up with the water ; the casks below must have sprung a bad leak . 
Much concern was shown ; and Starbuck went down into the cabin to report this unfavorable affair . 
* * In Sperm-whalemen with any considerable quantity of oil on board , it is a regular semiweekly duty to conduct a hose into the hold , and drench the casks with sea-water ; which afterwards , at varying intervals , is removed by the ship 's pumps . 
Hereby the casks are sought to be kept damply tight ; while by the changed character of the withdrawn water , the mariners readily detect any serious leakage in the precious cargo . 
Now , from the South and West the Pequod was drawing nigh to Formosa and the Bashee Isles , between which lies one of the tropical outlets from the China waters into the Pacific . 
And so Starbuck found Ahab with a general chart of the oriental archipelagoes spread before him ; and another separate one representing the long eastern coasts of the Japanese islands -- Niphon , Matsmai , and Sikoke . 
With his snow-white new ivory leg braced against the screwed leg of his table , and with a long pruning-hook of a jack-knife in his hand , the wondrous old man , with his back to the gangway door , was wrinkling his brow , and tracing his old courses again . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
hearing the footstep at the door , but not turning round to it . 
`` On deck ! 
Begone ! '' 
`` Captain Ahab mistakes ; it is I . 
The oil in the hold is leaking , sir . 
We must up Burtons and break out . '' 
`` Up Burtons and break out ? 
Now that we are nearing Japan ; heave-to here for a week to tinker a parcel of old hoops ? '' 
`` Either do that , sir , or waste in one day more oil than we may make good in a year . 
What we come twenty thousand miles to get is worth saving , sir . '' 
`` So it is , so it is ; if we get it . '' 
`` I was speaking of the oil in the hold , sir . '' 
`` And I was not speaking or thinking of that at all . 
Begone ! 
Let it leak ! 
I 'm all aleak myself . 
Aye ! 
leaks in leaks ! 
not only full of leaky casks , but those leaky casks are in a leaky ship ; and that 's a far worse plight than the Pequod 's , man . 
Yet I do n't stop to plug my leak ; for who can find it in the deep-loaded hull ; or how hope to plug it , even if found , in this life 's howling gale ? 
Starbuck ! 
