What the devil 's the matter with me ? 
I do n't stand right on my legs . 
Coming afoul of that old man has a sort of turned me wrong side out . 
By the Lord , I must have been dreaming , though -- How ? 
how ? 
how ? 
-- but the only way 's to stash it ; so here goes to hammock again ; and in the morning , I 'll see how this plaguey juggling thinks over by daylight . '' 
The Pipe When Stubb had departed , Ahab stood for a while leaning over the bulwarks ; and then , as had been usual with him of late , calling a sailor of the watch , he sent him below for his ivory stool , and also his pipe . 
Lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the stool on the weather side of the deck , he sat and smoked . 
In old Norse times , the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings were fabricated , saith tradition , of the tusks of the narwhale . 
How could one look at Ahab then , seated on that tripod of bones , without bethinking him of the royalty it symbolized ? 
For a Khan of the plank , and a king of the sea and a great lord of Leviathans was Ahab . 
Some moments passed , during which the thick vapor came from his mouth in quick and constant puffs , which blew back again into his face . 
`` How now , '' he soliloquized at last , withdrawing the tube , `` this smoking no longer soothes . 
Oh , my pipe ! 
hard must it go with me if thy charm be gone ! 
Here have I been unconsciously toiling , not pleasuring -- aye , and ignorantly smoking to windward all the while ; to windward , and with such nervous whiffs , as if , like the dying whale , my final jets were the strongest and fullest of trouble . 
What business have I with this pipe ? 
This thing that is meant for sereneness , to send up mild white vapors among mild white hairs , not among torn iron-grey locks like mine . 
I 'll smoke no more - '' He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea . 
The fire hissed in the waves ; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinking pipe made . 
With slouched hat , Ahab lurchingly paced the planks . 
Queen Mab Next morning Stubb accosted Flask . 
`` Such a queer dream , King-Post , I never had . 
You know the old man 's ivory leg , well I dreamed he kicked me with it ; and when I tried to kick back , upon my soul , my little man , I kicked my leg right off ! 
And then , presto ! 
Ahab seemed a pyramid , and I like a blazing fool , kept kicking at it . 
But what was still more curious , Flask -- you know how curious all dreams are -- through all this rage that I was in , I somehow seemed to be thinking to myself , that after all , it was not much of an insult , that kick from Ahab . 
` Why , ' thinks I , ` what 's the row ? 
It 's not a real leg , only a false one . ' 
And there 's a mighty difference between a living thump and a dead thump . 
That 's what makes a blow from the hand , Flask , fifty times more savage to bear than a blow from a cane . 
The living member -- that makes the living insult , my little man . 
And thinks I to myself all the while , mind , while I was stubbing my silly toes against that cursed pyramid -- so confoundedly contradictory was it all , all the while , I say , I was thinking to myself , ` what 's his leg now , but a cane - . 
a whale-bone cane . 
Yes , ' thinks I , ` it was only a playful cudgelling -- in fact , only a whaleboning that he gave me -- not a base kick . 
Besides , ' thinks I , ` look at it once ; why , the end of it -- the foot part -- what a small sort of end it is ; whereas , if a broad footed farmer kicked me , there 's a devilish broad insult . 
But this insult is whittled down to a point only . ' 
But now comes the greatest joke of the dream , Flask . 
While I was battering away at the pyramid , a sort of badger-haired old merman , with a hump on his back , takes me by the shoulders , and slews me round . 
` What are you ` bout ? ' 
says he . 
Slid ! 
man , but I was frightened . 
Such a phiz ! 
But , somehow , next moment I was over the fright . 
` What am I about ? ' 
says I at last . 
` And what business is that of yours , I should like to know , Mr. Humpback ? 
Do you want a kick ? ' 
By the lord , Flask , I had no sooner said that , than he turned round his stern to me , bent over , and dragging up a lot of seaweed he had for a clout -- what do you think , I saw ? 
-- why thunder alive , man , his stern was stuck full of marlinspikes , with the points out . 
Says I on second thought , ' I guess I wo n't kick you , old fellow . ' 
` Wise Stubb , ' said he , ` wise Stubb ; ' and kept muttering it all the time , a sort of eating of his own gums like a chimney hag . 
Seeing he was n't going to stop saying over his ` wise Stubb , wise Stubb , ' I thought I might as well fall to kicking the pyramid again . 
But I had only just lifted my foot for it , when he roared out , ` Stop that kicking ! ' 
` Halloa , ' says I , ` what 's the matter now , old fellow ? ' 
` Look ye here , ' says he ; ` let 's argue the insult . 
Captain Ahab kicked ye , did n't he ? ' 
` Yes , he did , ' says I -- ` right here it was . ' 
` Very good , ' says he -- ` he used his ivory leg , did n't he ? ' 
` Yes , he did , ' says I. ` Well then , ' says he , ` wise Stubb , what have you to complain of ? 
Did n't he kick with right good will ? 
it was n't a common pitch pine leg he kicked with , was it ? 
No , you were kicked by a great man , and with a beautiful ivory leg , Stubb . 
It 's an honor ; I consider it an honor . 
Listen , wise Stubb . 
In old England the greatest lords think it great glory to be slapped by a queen , and made garter-knights of ; but , be your boast , Stubb , that ye were kicked by old Ahab , and made a wise man of . 
Remember what I say ; be kicked by him ; account his kicks honors ; and on no account kick back ; for you ca n't help yourself , wise Stubb . 
Do n't you see that pyramid ? ' 
With that , he all of a sudden seemed somehow , in some queer fashion , to swim off into the air . 
I snored ; rolled over ; and there I was in my hammock ! 
Now , what do you think of that dream , Flask ? '' 
`` I do n't know ; it seems a sort of foolish to me , tho . ' '' 
`` May be ; may be . 
But it 's made a wise man of me , Flask . 
D'ye see Ahab standing there , sideways looking over the stern ? 
Well , the best thing you can do , Flask , is to let the old man alone ; never speak to him , whatever he says . 
Halloa ! 
What 's that he shouts ? 
Hark ! '' 
`` Mast-head , there ! 
Look sharp , all of ye ! 
There are whales hereabouts ! 
If ye see a white one , split your lungs for him ! 
`` What do you think of that now , Flask ? 
ai n't there a small drop of something queer about that , eh ? 
A white whale -- did ye mark that , man ? 
Look ye -- there 's something special in the wind . 
Stand by for it , Flask . 
Ahab has that that 's bloody on his mind . 
But , mum ; he comes this way . '' 
Cetology Already we are boldly launched upon the deep ; but soon we shall be lost in its unshored harborless immensities . 
Ere that come to pass ; ere the Pequod 's weedy hull rolls side by side with the barnacled hulls of the leviathan ; at the outset it is but well to attend to a matter almost indispensable to a thorough appreciative understanding of the more special leviathanic revelations and allusions of all sorts which are to follow . 
It is some systematized exhibition of the whale in his broad genera , that I would now fain put before you . 
Yet is it no easy task . 
The classification of the constituents of a chaos , nothing less is here essayed . 
Listen to what the best and latest authorities have laid down . 
`` No branch of Zoology is so much involved as that which is entitled Cetology , '' says Captain Scoresby , A.D. 1820 . 
`` It is not my intention , were it in my power , to enter into the inquiry as to the true method of dividing the cetacea into groups and families ... . 
