For you see no one point precisely ; not one distinct feature is revealed ; no nose , eyes , ears , or mouth ; no face ; he has none , proper ; nothing but that one broad firmament of a forehead , pleated with riddles ; dumbly lowering with the doom of boats , and ships , and men . 
Nor , in profile , does this wondrous brow diminish ; though that way viewed its grandeur does not domineer upon you so . 
In profile , you plainly perceive that horizontal , semi-crescentic depression in the forehead 's middle , which , in a man , is Lavater 's mark of genius . 
But how ? 
Genius in the Sperm Whale ? 
Has the Sperm Whale ever written a book , spoken a speech ? 
No , his great genius is declared in his doing nothing particular to prove it . 
It is moreover declared in his pyramidical silence . 
And this reminds me that had the great Sperm Whale been known to the young Orient World , he would have been deified by their child-magian thoughts . 
They deified the crocodile of the Nile , because the crocodile is tongueless ; and the Sperm Whale has no tongue , or at least it is so exceedingly small , as to be incapable of protrusion . 
If hereafter any highly cultured , poetical nation shall lure back to their birth-right , the merry May-day gods of old ; and livingly enthrone them again in the now egotistical sky ; in the now unhaunted hill ; then be sure , exalted to Jove 's high seat , the great Sperm Whale shall lord it . 
Champollion deciphered the wrinkled granite hieroglyphics . 
But there is no Champollion to decipher the Egypt of every man 's and every being 's face . 
Physiognomy , like every other human science , is but a passing fable . 
If then , Sir William Jones , who read in thirty languages , could not read the simplest peasant 's face in its profounder and more subtle meanings , how may unlettered Ishmael hope to read the awful Chaldee of the Sperm Whale 's brow ? 
I but put that brow before you . 
Read if it if you can . 
The Nut If the Sperm Whale be physiognomically a Sphinx , to the phrenologist his brain seems that geometrical circle which it is impossible to square . 
In the full-grown creature the skull will measure at least twenty feet in length . 
Unhinge the lower jaw , and the side view of this skull is as the side view of a moderately inclined plane resting throughout on a level base . 
But in life -- as we have elsewhere seen -- this inclined plane is angularly filled up , and almost squared by the enormous superincumbent mass of the junk and sperm . 
At the high end the skull forms a crater to bed that part of the mass ; while under the long floor of this crater -- in another cavity seldom exceeding ten inches in length and as many in depth reposes the mere handful of this monster 's brain . 
The brain is at least twenty feet from his apparent forehead in life ; it is hidden away behind its vast outworks , like the innermost citadel within the amplified fortifications of Quebec . 
So like a choice casket is it secreted in him , that I have known some whalemen who peremptorily deny that the Sperm Whale has any other brain than that palpable semblance of one formed by the cubic-yards of his sperm magazine . 
Lying in strange folds , courses , and convolutions , to their apprehensions , it seems more in keeping with the idea of his general might to regard that mystic part of him as the seat of his intelligence . 
It is plain , then , that phrenologically the head of this Leviathan , in the creature 's living intact state , is an entire delusion . 
As for his true brain , you can then see no indications of it , nor feel any . 
The whale , like all things that are mighty , wears a false brow to the common world . 
If you unload his skull of its spermy heaps and then take a rear view of its rear end , which is the high end , you will be struck by its resemblance to the human skull , beheld in the same situation , and from the same point of view . 
Indeed , place this reversed skull -LRB- scaled down to the human magnitude -RRB- among a plate of men 's skulls , and you would involuntarily confound it with them ; and remarking the depressions on one part of its summit , in phrenological phrase you would say -- This man had no self-esteem , and no veneration . 
And by those negations , considered along with the affirmative fact of his prodigious bulk and power , you can best form to yourself the truest , though not the most exhilarating conception of what the most exalted potency is . 
But if from the comparative dimensions of the whale 's proper brain , you deem it incapable of being adequately charted , then I have another idea for you . 
If you attentively regard almost any quadruped 's spine , you will be struck with the resemblance of its vertebrae to a strung necklace of dwarfed skulls , all bearing rudimental resemblance to the skull proper . 
It is a German conceit , that the vertebrae are absolutely undeveloped skulls . 
But the curious external resemblance , I take it the Germans were not the first men to perceive . 
A foreign friend once pointed it out to me , in the skeleton of a foe he had slain , and with the vertebrae of which he was inlaying , in a sort of basso-relieve , the beaked prow of his canoe . 
Now , I consider that the phrenologists have omitted an important thing in not pushing their investigations from the cerebellum through the spinal canal . 
For I believe that much of a man 's character will be found betokened in his backbone . 
I would rather feel your spine than your skull , whoever you are . 
A thin joist of a spine never yet upheld a full and noble soul . 
I rejoice in my spine , as in the firm audacious staff of that flag which I fling half out to the world . 
Apply this spinal branch of phrenology to the Sperm Whale . 
His cranial cavity is continuous with the first neck-vertebra ; and in that vertebra the bottom of the spinal canal will measure ten inches across , being eight in height , and of a triangular figure with the base downwards . 
As it passes through the remaining vertebrae the canal tapers in size , but for a considerable distance remains of large capacity . 
Now , of course , this canal is filled with much the same strangely fibrous substance -- the spinal cord -- as the brain ; and directly communicates with the brain . 
And what is still more , for many feet after emerging from the brain 's cavity , the spinal cord remains of an undecreasing girth , almost equal to that of the brain . 
Under all these circumstances , would it be unreasonable to survey and map out the whale 's spine phrenologically ? 
For , viewed in this light , the wonderful comparative smallness of his brain proper is more than compensated by the wonderful comparative magnitude of his spinal cord . 
But leaving this hint to operate as it may with the phrenologists , I would merely assume the spinal theory for a moment , in reference to the Sperm Whale 's hump . 
This august hump , if I mistake not , rises over one of the larger vertebrae , and is , therefore , in some sort , the outer convex mould of it . 
From its relative situation then , I should call this high hump the organ of firmness or indomitableness in the Sperm Whale . 
And that the great monster is indomitable , you will yet have reason to know . 
The Pequod Meets The Virgin The predestinated day arrived , and we duly met the ship Jungfrau , Derick De Deer , master , of Bremen . 
At one time the greatest whaling people in the world , the Dutch and Germans are now among the least ; but here and there at very wide intervals of latitude and longitude , you still occasionally meet with their flag in the Pacific . 
For some reason , the Jungfrau seemed quite eager to pay her respects . 
While yet some distance from the Pequod , she rounded to , and dropping a boat , her captain was impelled towards us , impatiently standing in the bows instead of the stern . 
`` What has he in his hand there ? '' 
cried Starbuck , pointing to something wavingly held by the German . 
`` Impossible ! 
-- a lamp-feeder ! '' 
`` Not that , '' said Stubb , `` no , no , it 's a coffee-pot , Mr. Starbuck ; he 's coming off to make us our coffee , is the Yarman ; do n't you see that big tin can there alongside of him ? 
-- that 's his boiling water . 
Oh ! 
he 's all right , is the Yarman . '' 
`` Go along with you , '' cried Flask , `` it 's a lamp-feeder and an oil-can . 
He 's out of oil , and has come a-begging . '' 
However curious it may seem for an oil-ship to be borrowing oil on the whale-ground , and however much it may invertedly contradict the old proverb about carrying coals to Newcastle , yet sometimes such a thing really happens ; and in the present case Captain Derick De Deer did indubitably conduct a lamp-feeder as Flask did declare . 
As he mounted the deck , Ahab abruptly accosted him , without at all heeding what he had in his hand ; but in his broken lingo , the German soon evinced his complete ignorance of the White Whale ; immediately turning the conversation to his lamp-feeder and oil can , with some remarks touching his having to turn into his hammock at night in profound darkness -- his last drop of Bremen oil being gone , and not a single flying-fish yet captured to supply the deficiency ; concluding by hinting that his ship was indeed what in the Fishery is technically called a clean one -LRB- that is , an empty one -RRB- , well deserving the name of Jungfrau or the Virgin . 
His necessities supplied , Derick departed ; but he had not gained his ship 's side , when whales were almost simultaneously raised from the mast-heads of both vessels ; and so eager for the chase was Derick , that without pausing to put his oil-can and lamp-feeder aboard , he slewed round his boat and made after the leviathan lamp-feeders . 
Now , the game having risen to leeward , he and the other three German boats that soon followed him , had considerably the start of the Pequod 's keels . 
There were eight whales , an average pod . 
Aware of their danger , they were going all abreast with great speed straight before the wind , rubbing their flanks as closely as so many spans of horses in harness . 
They left a great , wide wake , as though continually unrolling a great wide parchment upon the sea . 
Full in this rapid wake , and many fathoms in the rear , swam a huge , humped old bull , which by his comparatively slow progress , as well as by the unusual yellowish incrustations over-growing him , seemed afflicted with the jaundice , or some other infirmity . 
Whether this whale belonged to the pod in advance , seemed questionable ; for it is not customary for such venerable leviathans to be at all social . 
Nevertheless , he stuck to their wake , though indeed their back water must have retarded him , because the white-bone or swell at his broad muzzle was a dashed one , like the swell formed when two hostile currents meet . 
His spout was short , slow , and laborious ; coming forth with a choking sort of gush , and spending itself in torn shreds , followed by strange subterranean commotions in him , which seemed to have egress at his other buried extremity , causing the waters behind him to upbubble . 
`` Who 's got some paregoric ? '' 
said Stubb , `` he has the stomach-ache , I 'm afraid . 
Lord , think of having half an acre of stomach-ache ! 
Adverse winds are holding mad Christmas in him , boys . 
It 's the first foul wind I ever knew to blow from astern ; but look , did ever whale yaw so before ? 
it must be , he 's lost his tiller . '' 
As an overladen Indiaman bearing down the Hindostan coast with a deck load of frightened horses , careens , buries , rolls , and wallows on her way ; so did this old whale heave his aged bulk , and now and then partly turning over on his cumbrous rib-ends , expose the cause of his devious wake in the unnatural stump of his starboard fin . 
Whether he had lost that fin in battle , or had been born without it , it were hard to say . 
`` Only wait a bit , old chap , and I 'll give ye a sling for that wounded arm , '' cried cruel Flask , pointing to the whale-line near him . 
`` Mind he do n't sling thee with it , '' cried Starbuck . 
`` Give way , or the German will have him . '' 
With one intent all the combined rival boats were pointed for this one fish , because not only was he the largest , and therefore the most valuable whale , but he was nearest to them , and the other whales were going with such great velocity , moreover , as almost to defy pursuit for the time . 
At this juncture , the Pequod 's keels had shot by the three German boats last lowered ; but from the great start he had had , Derick 's boat still led the chase , though every moment neared by his foreign rivals . 
The only thing they feared , was , that from being already so nigh to his mark , he would be enabled to dart his iron before they could completely overtake and pass him . 
As for Derick , he seemed quite confident that this would be the case , and occasionally with a deriding gesture shook his lamp-feeder at the other boats . 
`` The ungracious and ungrateful dog ! '' 
cried Starbuck ; `` he mocks and dares me with the very poor-box I filled for him not five minutes ago ! '' 
-- Then in his old intense whisper -- `` give way , greyhounds ! 
Dog to it ! '' 
`` I tell ye what it is , men '' -- cried Stubb to his crew -- It 's against my religion to get mad ; but I 'd like to eat that villainous Yarman -- Pull -- wo n't ye ? 
Are ye going to let that rascal beat ye ? 
Do ye love brandy ? 
A hogshead of brandy , then , to the best man . 
