She was happy ; above all she was stupefied . 
Such magnificent and beautiful things did not appear real . 
The doll frightened her , the gold piece frightened her . 
She trembled vaguely in the presence of this magnificence . 
The stranger alone did not frighten her . 
On the contrary , he reassured her . 
Ever since the preceding evening , amid all her amazement , even in her sleep , she had been thinking in her little childish mind of that man who seemed to be so poor and so sad , and who was so rich and so kind . 
Everything had changed for her since she had met that good man in the forest . 
Cosette , less happy than the most insignificant swallow of heaven , had never known what it was to take refuge under a mother 's shadow and under a wing . 
For the last five years , that is to say , as far back as her memory ran , the poor child had shivered and trembled . 
She had always been exposed completely naked to the sharp wind of adversity ; now it seemed to her she was clothed . 
Formerly her soul had seemed cold , now it was warm . 
Cosette was no longer afraid of the Thenardier . 
She was no longer alone ; there was some one there . 
She hastily set about her regular morning duties . 
That louis , which she had about her , in the very apron pocket whence the fifteen-sou piece had fallen on the night before , distracted her thoughts . 
She dared not touch it , but she spent five minutes in gazing at it , with her tongue hanging out , if the truth must be told . 
As she swept the staircase , she paused , remained standing there motionless , forgetful of her broom and of the entire universe , occupied in gazing at that star which was blazing at the bottom of her pocket . 
It was during one of these periods of contemplation that the Thenardier joined her . 
She had gone in search of Cosette at her husband 's orders . 
What was quite unprecedented , she neither struck her nor said an insulting word to her . 
`` Cosette , '' she said , almost gently , `` come immediately . '' 
An instant later Cosette entered the public room . 
The stranger took up the bundle which he had brought and untied it . 
This bundle contained a little woollen gown , an apron , a fustian bodice , a kerchief , a petticoat , woollen stockings , shoes -- a complete outfit for a girl of seven years . 
All was black . 
`` My child , '' said the man , `` take these , and go and dress yourself quickly . '' 
Daylight was appearing when those of the inhabitants of Montfermeil who had begun to open their doors beheld a poorly clad old man leading a little girl dressed in mourning , and carrying a pink doll in her arms , pass along the road to Paris . 
They were going in the direction of Livry . 
It was our man and Cosette . 
No one knew the man ; as Cosette was no longer in rags , many did not recognize her . 
Cosette was going away . 
With whom ? 
She did not know . 
Whither ? 
She knew not . 
All that she understood was that she was leaving the Thenardier tavern behind her . 
No one had thought of bidding her farewell , nor had she thought of taking leave of any one . 
She was leaving that hated and hating house . 
Poor , gentle creature , whose heart had been repressed up to that hour ! 
Cosette walked along gravely , with her large eyes wide open , and gazing at the sky . 
She had put her louis in the pocket of her new apron . 
From time to time , she bent down and glanced at it ; then she looked at the good man . 
She felt something as though she were beside the good God . 
HE WHO SEEKS TO BETTER HIMSELF MAY RENDER HIS SITUATION WORSE Madame Thenardier had allowed her husband to have his own way , as was her wont . 
She had expected great results . 
When the man and Cosette had taken their departure , Thenardier allowed a full quarter of an hour to elapse ; then he took her aside and showed her the fifteen hundred francs . 
`` Is that all ? '' 
said she . 
It was the first time since they had set up housekeeping that she had dared to criticise one of the master 's acts . 
The blow told . 
`` You are right , in sooth , '' said he ; `` I am a fool . 
Give me my hat . '' 
He folded up the three bank-bills , thrust them into his pocket , and ran out in all haste ; but he made a mistake and turned to the right first . 
Some neighbors , of whom he made inquiries , put him on the track again ; the Lark and the man had been seen going in the direction of Livry . 
He followed these hints , walking with great strides , and talking to himself the while : -- `` That man is evidently a million dressed in yellow , and I am an animal . 
First he gave twenty sous , then five francs , then fifty francs , then fifteen hundred francs , all with equal readiness . 
He would have given fifteen thousand francs . 
But I shall overtake him . '' 
And then , that bundle of clothes prepared beforehand for the child ; all that was singular ; many mysteries lay concealed under it . 
One does not let mysteries out of one 's hand when one has once grasped them . 
The secrets of the wealthy are sponges of gold ; one must know how to subject them to pressure . 
All these thoughts whirled through his brain . 
`` I am an animal , '' said he . 
When one leaves Montfermeil and reaches the turn which the road takes that runs to Livry , it can be seen stretching out before one to a great distance across the plateau . 
On arriving there , he calculated that he ought to be able to see the old man and the child . 
He looked as far as his vision reached , and saw nothing . 
He made fresh inquiries , but he had wasted time . 
Some passers-by informed him that the man and child of whom he was in search had gone towards the forest in the direction of Gagny . 
He hastened in that direction . 
They were far in advance of him ; but a child walks slowly , and he walked fast ; and then , he was well acquainted with the country . 
All at once he paused and dealt himself a blow on his forehead like a man who has forgotten some essential point and who is ready to retrace his steps . 
`` I ought to have taken my gun , '' said he to himself . 
Thenardier was one of those double natures which sometimes pass through our midst without our being aware of the fact , and who disappear without our finding them out , because destiny has only exhibited one side of them . 
It is the fate of many men to live thus half submerged . 
In a calm and even situation , Thenardier possessed all that is required to make -- we will not say to be -- what people have agreed to call an honest trader , a good bourgeois . 
At the same time certain circumstances being given , certain shocks arriving to bring his under-nature to the surface , he had all the requisites for a blackguard . 
He was a shopkeeper in whom there was some taint of the monster . 
Satan must have occasionally crouched down in some corner of the hovel in which Thenardier dwelt , and have fallen a-dreaming in the presence of this hideous masterpiece . 
After a momentary hesitation : -- `` Bah ! '' 
he thought ; `` they will have time to make their escape . '' 
And he pursued his road , walking rapidly straight ahead , and with almost an air of certainty , with the sagacity of a fox scenting a covey of partridges . 
In truth , when he had passed the ponds and had traversed in an oblique direction the large clearing which lies on the right of the Avenue de Bellevue , and reached that turf alley which nearly makes the circuit of the hill , and covers the arch of the ancient aqueduct of the Abbey of Chelles , he caught sight , over the top of the brushwood , of the hat on which he had already erected so many conjectures ; it was that man 's hat . 
The brushwood was not high . 
Thenardier recognized the fact that the man and Cosette were sitting there . 
The child could not be seen on account of her small size , but the head of her doll was visible . 
Thenardier was not mistaken . 
The man was sitting there , and letting Cosette get somewhat rested . 
The inn-keeper walked round the brushwood and presented himself abruptly to the eyes of those whom he was in search of . 
`` Pardon , excuse me , sir , '' he said , quite breathless , `` but here are your fifteen hundred francs . '' 
So saying , he handed the stranger the three bank-bills . 
The man raised his eyes . 
`` What is the meaning of this ? '' 
Thenardier replied respectfully : -- `` It means , sir , that I shall take back Cosette . '' 
Cosette shuddered , and pressed close to the old man . 
He replied , gazing to the very bottom of Thenardier 's eyes the while , and enunciating every syllable distinctly : -- `` You are go-ing to take back Co-sette ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , I am . 
I will tell you ; I have considered the matter . 
In fact , I have not the right to give her to you . 
I am an honest man , you see ; this child does not belong to me ; she belongs to her mother . 
It was her mother who confided her to me ; I can only resign her to her mother . 
You will say to me , ` But her mother is dead . ' 
Good ; in that case I can only give the child up to the person who shall bring me a writing , signed by her mother , to the effect that I am to hand the child over to the person therein mentioned ; that is clear . '' 
The man , without making any reply , fumbled in his pocket , and Thenardier beheld the pocket-book of bank-bills make its appearance once more . 
The tavern-keeper shivered with joy . 
`` Good ! '' 
thought he ; `` let us hold firm ; he is going to bribe me ! '' 
Before opening the pocket-book , the traveller cast a glance about him : the spot was absolutely deserted ; there was not a soul either in the woods or in the valley . 
The man opened his pocket-book once more and drew from it , not the handful of bills which Thenardier expected , but a simple little paper , which he unfolded and presented fully open to the inn-keeper , saying : -- `` You are right ; read ! '' 
Thenardier took the paper and read : -- `` M. SUR M. , March 25 , 1823 . 
`` MONSIEUR THENARDIER : -- You will deliver Cosette to this person . 
You will be paid for all the little things . 
I have the honor to salute you with respect , FANTINE . '' 
`` You know that signature ? '' 
resumed the man . 
It certainly was Fantine 's signature ; Thenardier recognized it . 
There was no reply to make ; he experienced two violent vexations , the vexation of renouncing the bribery which he had hoped for , and the vexation of being beaten ; the man added : -- `` You may keep this paper as your receipt . '' 
Thenardier retreated in tolerably good order . 
`` This signature is fairly well imitated , '' he growled between his teeth ; `` however , let it go ! '' 
Then he essayed a desperate effort . 
`` It is well , sir , '' he said , `` since you are the person , but I must be paid for all those little things . 
A great deal is owing to me . '' 
The man rose to his feet , filliping the dust from his thread-bare sleeve : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier , in January last , the mother reckoned that she owed you one hundred and twenty francs . 
In February , you sent her a bill of five hundred francs ; you received three hundred francs at the end of February , and three hundred francs at the beginning of March . 
Since then nine months have elapsed , at fifteen francs a month , the price agreed upon , which makes one hundred and thirty-five francs . 
You had received one hundred francs too much ; that makes thirty-five still owing you . 
I have just given you fifteen hundred francs . '' 
Thenardier 's sensations were those of the wolf at the moment when he feels himself nipped and seized by the steel jaw of the trap . 
`` Who is this devil of a man ? '' 
he thought . 
He did what the wolf does : he shook himself . 
Audacity had succeeded with him once . 
`` Monsieur-I-don ` t-know-your-name , '' he said resolutely , and this time casting aside all respectful ceremony , `` I shall take back Cosette if you do not give me a thousand crowns . '' 
The stranger said tranquilly : -- `` Come , Cosette . '' 
He took Cosette by his left hand , and with his right he picked up his cudgel , which was lying on the ground . 
Thenardier noted the enormous size of the cudgel and the solitude of the spot . 
The man plunged into the forest with the child , leaving the inn-keeper motionless and speechless . 
While they were walking away , Thenardier scrutinized his huge shoulders , which were a little rounded , and his great fists . 
Then , bringing his eyes back to his own person , they fell upon his feeble arms and his thin hands . 
`` I really must have been exceedingly stupid not to have thought to bring my gun , '' he said to himself , `` since I was going hunting ! '' 
However , the inn-keeper did not give up . 
`` I want to know where he is going , '' said he , and he set out to follow them at a distance . 
Two things were left on his hands , an irony in the shape of the paper signed Fantine , and a consolation , the fifteen hundred francs . 
The man led Cosette off in the direction of Livry and Bondy . 
He walked slowly , with drooping head , in an attitude of reflection and sadness . 
The winter had thinned out the forest , so that Thenardier did not lose them from sight , although he kept at a good distance . 
The man turned round from time to time , and looked to see if he was being followed . 
All at once he caught sight of Thenardier . 
He plunged suddenly into the brushwood with Cosette , where they could both hide themselves . 
`` The deuce ! '' 
said Thenardier , and he redoubled his pace . 
The thickness of the undergrowth forced him to draw nearer to them . 
When the man had reached the densest part of the thicket , he wheeled round . 
It was in vain that Thenardier sought to conceal himself in the branches ; he could not prevent the man seeing him . 
The man cast upon him an uneasy glance , then elevated his head and continued his course . 
The inn-keeper set out again in pursuit . 
Thus they continued for two or three hundred paces . 
All at once the man turned round once more ; he saw the inn-keeper . 
This time he gazed at him with so sombre an air that Thenardier decided that it was `` useless '' to proceed further . 
Thenardier retraced his steps . 
NUMBER 9,430 REAPPEARS , AND COSETTE WINS IT IN THE LOTTERY Jean Valjean was not dead . 
When he fell into the sea , or rather , when he threw himself into it , he was not ironed , as we have seen . 
He swam under water until he reached a vessel at anchor , to which a boat was moored . 
He found means of hiding himself in this boat until night . 
At night he swam off again , and reached the shore a little way from Cape Brun . 
There , as he did not lack money , he procured clothing . 
A small country-house in the neighborhood of Balaguier was at that time the dressing-room of escaped convicts , -- a lucrative specialty . 
Then Jean Valjean , like all the sorry fugitives who are seeking to evade the vigilance of the law and social fatality , pursued an obscure and undulating itinerary . 
He found his first refuge at Pradeaux , near Beausset . 
Then he directed his course towards Grand-Villard , near Briancon , in the Hautes-Alpes . 
It was a fumbling and uneasy flight , -- a mole 's track , whose branchings are untraceable . 
Later on , some trace of his passage into Ain , in the territory of Civrieux , was discovered ; in the Pyrenees , at Accons ; at the spot called Grange-de-Doumec , near the market of Chavailles , and in the environs of Perigueux at Brunies , canton of La Chapelle-Gonaguet . 
He reached Paris . 
We have just seen him at Montfermeil . 
His first care on arriving in Paris had been to buy mourning clothes for a little girl of from seven to eight years of age ; then to procure a lodging . 
That done , he had betaken himself to Montfermeil . 
It will be remembered that already , during his preceding escape , he had made a mysterious trip thither , or somewhere in that neighborhood , of which the law had gathered an inkling . 
However , he was thought to be dead , and this still further increased the obscurity which had gathered about him . 
At Paris , one of the journals which chronicled the fact fell into his hands . 
He felt reassured and almost at peace , as though he had really been dead . 
On the evening of the day when Jean Valjean rescued Cosette from the claws of the Thenardiers , he returned to Paris . 
He re-entered it at nightfall , with the child , by way of the Barrier Monceaux . 
There he entered a cabriolet , which took him to the esplanade of the Observatoire . 
There he got out , paid the coachman , took Cosette by the hand , and together they directed their steps through the darkness , -- through the deserted streets which adjoin the Ourcine and the Glaciere , towards the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
The day had been strange and filled with emotions for Cosette . 
They had eaten some bread and cheese purchased in isolated taverns , behind hedges ; they had changed carriages frequently ; they had travelled short distances on foot . 
She made no complaint , but she was weary , and Jean Valjean perceived it by the way she dragged more and more on his hand as she walked . 
He took her on his back . 
Cosette , without letting go of Catherine , laid her head on Jean Valjean 's shoulder , and there fell asleep . 
MASTER GORBEAU Forty years ago , a rambler who had ventured into that unknown country of the Salpetriere , and who had mounted to the Barriere d'Italie by way of the boulevard , reached a point where it might be said that Paris disappeared . 
It was no longer solitude , for there were passers-by ; it was not the country , for there were houses and streets ; it was not the city , for the streets had ruts like highways , and the grass grew in them ; it was not a village , the houses were too lofty . 
What was it , then ? 
It was an inhabited spot where there was no one ; it was a desert place where there was some one ; it was a boulevard of the great city , a street of Paris ; more wild at night than the forest , more gloomy by day than a cemetery . 
It was the old quarter of the Marche-aux-Chevaux . 
The rambler , if he risked himself outside the four decrepit walls of this Marche-aux-Chevaux ; if he consented even to pass beyond the Rue du Petit-Banquier , after leaving on his right a garden protected by high walls ; then a field in which tan-bark mills rose like gigantic beaver huts ; then an enclosure encumbered with timber , with a heap of stumps , sawdust , and shavings , on which stood a large dog , barking ; then a long , low , utterly dilapidated wall , with a little black door in mourning , laden with mosses , which were covered with flowers in the spring ; then , in the most deserted spot , a frightful and decrepit building , on which ran the inscription in large letters : POST NO BILLS , -- this daring rambler would have reached little known latitudes at the corner of the Rue des Vignes-Saint-Marcel . 
There , near a factory , and between two garden walls , there could be seen , at that epoch , a mean building , which , at the first glance , seemed as small as a thatched hovel , and which was , in reality , as large as a cathedral . 
It presented its side and gable to the public road ; hence its apparent diminutiveness . 
Nearly the whole of the house was hidden . 
Only the door and one window could be seen . 
This hovel was only one story high . 
The first detail that struck the observer was , that the door could never have been anything but the door of a hovel , while the window , if it had been carved out of dressed stone instead of being in rough masonry , might have been the lattice of a lordly mansion . 
The door was nothing but a collection of worm-eaten planks roughly bound together by cross-beams which resembled roughly hewn logs . 
It opened directly on a steep staircase of lofty steps , muddy , chalky , plaster-stained , dusty steps , of the same width as itself , which could be seen from the street , running straight up like a ladder and disappearing in the darkness between two walls . 
The top of the shapeless bay into which this door shut was masked by a narrow scantling in the centre of which a triangular hole had been sawed , which served both as wicket and air-hole when the door was closed . 
On the inside of the door the figures 52 had been traced with a couple of strokes of a brush dipped in ink , and above the scantling the same hand had daubed the number 50 , so that one hesitated . 
Where was one ? 
Above the door it said , `` Number 50 '' ; the inside replied , `` no , Number 52 . '' 
No one knows what dust-colored figures were suspended like draperies from the triangular opening . 
The window was large , sufficiently elevated , garnished with Venetian blinds , and with a frame in large square panes ; only these large panes were suffering from various wounds , which were both concealed and betrayed by an ingenious paper bandage . 
And the blinds , dislocated and unpasted , threatened passers-by rather than screened the occupants . 
The horizontal slats were missing here and there and had been naively replaced with boards nailed on perpendicularly ; so that what began as a blind ended as a shutter . 
This door with an unclean , and this window with an honest though dilapidated air , thus beheld on the same house , produced the effect of two incomplete beggars walking side by side , with different miens beneath the same rags , the one having always been a mendicant , and the other having once been a gentleman . 
The staircase led to a very vast edifice which resembled a shed which had been converted into a house . 
This edifice had , for its intestinal tube , a long corridor , on which opened to right and left sorts of compartments of varied dimensions which were inhabitable under stress of circumstances , and rather more like stalls than cells . 
These chambers received their light from the vague waste grounds in the neighborhood . 
All this was dark , disagreeable , wan , melancholy , sepulchral ; traversed according as the crevices lay in the roof or in the door , by cold rays or by icy winds . 
An interesting and picturesque peculiarity of this sort of dwelling is the enormous size of the spiders . 
To the left of the entrance door , on the boulevard side , at about the height of a man from the ground , a small window which had been walled up formed a square niche full of stones which the children had thrown there as they passed by . 
A portion of this building has recently been demolished . 
From what still remains of it one can form a judgment as to what it was in former days . 
As a whole , it was not over a hundred years old . 
A hundred years is youth in a church and age in a house . 
It seems as though man 's lodging partook of his ephemeral character , and God 's house of his eternity . 
The postmen called the house Number 50-52 ; but it was known in the neighborhood as the Gorbeau house . 
Let us explain whence this appellation was derived . 
Collectors of petty details , who become herbalists of anecdotes , and prick slippery dates into their memories with a pin , know that there was in Paris , during the last century , about 1770 , two attorneys at the Chatelet named , one Corbeau -LRB- Raven -RRB- , the other Renard -LRB- Fox -RRB- . 
The two names had been forestalled by La Fontaine . 
The opportunity was too fine for the lawyers ; they made the most of it . 
A parody was immediately put in circulation in the galleries of the court-house , in verses that limped a little : -- Maitre Corbeau , sur un dossier perche , -LSB- 13 -RSB- Tenait dans son bee une saisie executoire ; Maitre Renard , par l'odeur alleche , Lui fit a peu pres cette histoire : He ! 
bonjour . 
Etc. -LSB- 13 -RSB- Lawyer Corbeau , perched on a docket , held in his beak a writ of execution ; Lawyer Renard , attracted by the smell , addressed him nearly as follows , etc. . 
The two honest practitioners , embarrassed by the jests , and finding the bearing of their heads interfered with by the shouts of laughter which followed them , resolved to get rid of their names , and hit upon the expedient of applying to the king . 
Their petition was presented to Louis XV . 
on the same day when the Papal Nuncio , on the one hand , and the Cardinal de la Roche-Aymon on the other , both devoutly kneeling , were each engaged in putting on , in his Majesty 's presence , a slipper on the bare feet of Madame du Barry , who had just got out of bed . 
The king , who was laughing , continued to laugh , passed gayly from the two bishops to the two lawyers , and bestowed on these limbs of the law their former names , or nearly so . 
By the kings command , Maitre Corbeau was permitted to add a tail to his initial letter and to call himself Gorbeau . 
Maitre Renard was less lucky ; all he obtained was leave to place a P in front of his R , and to call himself Prenard ; so that the second name bore almost as much resemblance as the first . 
Now , according to local tradition , this Maitre Gorbeau had been the proprietor of the building numbered 50-52 on the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
He was even the author of the monumental window . 
Hence the edifice bore the name of the Gorbeau house . 
Opposite this house , among the trees of the boulevard , rose a great elm which was three-quarters dead ; almost directly facing it opens the Rue de la Barriere des Gobelins , a street then without houses , unpaved , planted with unhealthy trees , which was green or muddy according to the season , and which ended squarely in the exterior wall of Paris . 
An odor of copperas issued in puffs from the roofs of the neighboring factory . 
The barrier was close at hand . 
In 1823 the city wall was still in existence . 
This barrier itself evoked gloomy fancies in the mind . 
It was the road to Bicetre . 
It was through it that , under the Empire and the Restoration , prisoners condemned to death re-entered Paris on the day of their execution . 
It was there , that , about 1829 , was committed that mysterious assassination , called `` The assassination of the Fontainebleau barrier , '' whose authors justice was never able to discover ; a melancholy problem which has never been elucidated , a frightful enigma which has never been unriddled . 
Take a few steps , and you come upon that fatal Rue Croulebarbe , where Ulbach stabbed the goat-girl of Ivry to the sound of thunder , as in the melodramas . 
A few paces more , and you arrive at the abominable pollarded elms of the Barriere Saint-Jacques , that expedient of the philanthropist to conceal the scaffold , that miserable and shameful Place de Grove of a shop-keeping and bourgeois society , which recoiled before the death penalty , neither daring to abolish it with grandeur , nor to uphold it with authority . 
Leaving aside this Place Saint-Jacques , which was , as it were , predestined , and which has always been horrible , probably the most mournful spot on that mournful boulevard , seven and thirty years ago , was the spot which even to-day is so unattractive , where stood the building Number 50-52 . 
Bourgeois houses only began to spring up there twenty-five years later . 
The place was unpleasant . 
In addition to the gloomy thoughts which assailed one there , one was conscious of being between the Salpetriere , a glimpse of whose dome could be seen , and Bicetre , whose outskirts one was fairly touching ; that is to say , between the madness of women and the madness of men . 
As far as the eye could see , one could perceive nothing but the abattoirs , the city wall , and the fronts of a few factories , resembling barracks or monasteries ; everywhere about stood hovels , rubbish , ancient walls blackened like cerecloths , new white walls like winding-sheets ; everywhere parallel rows of trees , buildings erected on a line , flat constructions , long , cold rows , and the melancholy sadness of right angles . 
Not an unevenness of the ground , not a caprice in the architecture , not a fold . 
The ensemble was glacial , regular , hideous . 
Nothing oppresses the heart like symmetry . 
It is because symmetry is ennui , and ennui is at the very foundation of grief . 
Despair yawns . 
Something more terrible than a hell where one suffers may be imagined , and that is a hell where one is bored . 
If such a hell existed , that bit of the Boulevard de l'Hopital might have formed the entrance to it . 
Nevertheless , at nightfall , at the moment when the daylight is vanishing , especially in winter , at the hour when the twilight breeze tears from the elms their last russet leaves , when the darkness is deep and starless , or when the moon and the wind are making openings in the clouds and losing themselves in the shadows , this boulevard suddenly becomes frightful . 
The black lines sink inwards and are lost in the shades , like morsels of the infinite . 
The passer-by can not refrain from recalling the innumerable traditions of the place which are connected with the gibbet . 
The solitude of this spot , where so many crimes have been committed , had something terrible about it . 
One almost had a presentiment of meeting with traps in that darkness ; all the confused forms of the darkness seemed suspicious , and the long , hollow square , of which one caught a glimpse between each tree , seemed graves : by day it was ugly ; in the evening melancholy ; by night it was sinister . 
In summer , at twilight , one saw , here and there , a few old women seated at the foot of the elm , on benches mouldy with rain . 
These good old women were fond of begging . 
However , this quarter , which had a superannuated rather than an antique air , was tending even then to transformation . 
Even at that time any one who was desirous of seeing it had to make haste . 
Each day some detail of the whole effect was disappearing . 
For the last twenty years the station of the Orleans railway has stood beside the old faubourg and distracted it , as it does to-day . 
Wherever it is placed on the borders of a capital , a railway station is the death of a suburb and the birth of a city . 
It seems as though , around these great centres of the movements of a people , the earth , full of germs , trembled and yawned , to engulf the ancient dwellings of men and to allow new ones to spring forth , at the rattle of these powerful machines , at the breath of these monstrous horses of civilization which devour coal and vomit fire . 
The old houses crumble and new ones rise . 
Since the Orleans railway has invaded the region of the Salpetriere , the ancient , narrow streets which adjoin the moats Saint-Victor and the Jardin des Plantes tremble , as they are violently traversed three or four times each day by those currents of coach fiacres and omnibuses which , in a given time , crowd back the houses to the right and the left ; for there are things which are odd when said that are rigorously exact ; and just as it is true to say that in large cities the sun makes the southern fronts of houses to vegetate and grow , it is certain that the frequent passage of vehicles enlarges streets . 
The symptoms of a new life are evident . 
In this old provincial quarter , in the wildest nooks , the pavement shows itself , the sidewalks begin to crawl and to grow longer , even where there are as yet no pedestrians . 
One morning , -- a memorable morning in July , 1845 , -- black pots of bitumen were seen smoking there ; on that day it might be said that civilization had arrived in the Rue de l'Ourcine , and that Paris had entered the suburb of Saint-Marceau . 
A NEST FOR OWL AND A WARBLER It was in front of this Gorbeau house that Jean Valjean halted . 
Like wild birds , he had chosen this desert place to construct his nest . 
He fumbled in his waistcoat pocket , drew out a sort of a pass-key , opened the door , entered , closed it again carefully , and ascended the staircase , still carrying Cosette . 
At the top of the stairs he drew from his pocket another key , with which he opened another door . 
The chamber which he entered , and which he closed again instantly , was a kind of moderately spacious attic , furnished with a mattress laid on the floor , a table , and several chairs ; a stove in which a fire was burning , and whose embers were visible , stood in one corner . 
A lantern on the boulevard cast a vague light into this poor room . 
At the extreme end there was a dressing-room with a folding bed ; Jean Valjean carried the child to this bed and laid her down there without waking her . 
He struck a match and lighted a candle . 
All this was prepared beforehand on the table , and , as he had done on the previous evening , he began to scrutinize Cosette 's face with a gaze full of ecstasy , in which the expression of kindness and tenderness almost amounted to aberration . 
The little girl , with that tranquil confidence which belongs only to extreme strength and extreme weakness , had fallen asleep without knowing with whom she was , and continued to sleep without knowing where she was . 
Jean Valjean bent down and kissed that child 's hand . 
Nine months before he had kissed the hand of the mother , who had also just fallen asleep . 
The same sad , piercing , religious sentiment filled his heart . 
He knelt beside Cosette 's bed . 
lt was broad daylight , and the child still slept . 
A wan ray of the December sun penetrated the window of the attic and lay upon the ceiling in long threads of light and shade . 
All at once a heavily laden carrier 's cart , which was passing along the boulevard , shook the frail bed , like a clap of thunder , and made it quiver from top to bottom . 
`` Yes , madame ! '' 
cried Cosette , waking with a start , `` here I am ! 
here I am ! '' 
And she sprang out of bed , her eyes still half shut with the heaviness of sleep , extending her arms towards the corner of the wall . 
`` Ah ! 
mon Dieu , my broom ! '' 
said she . 
She opened her eyes wide now , and beheld the smiling countenance of Jean Valjean . 
`` Ah ! 
so it is true ! '' 
said the child . 
`` Good morning , Monsieur . '' 
Children accept joy and happiness instantly and familiarly , being themselves by nature joy and happiness . 
Cosette caught sight of Catherine at the foot of her bed , and took possession of her , and , as she played , she put a hundred questions to Jean Valjean . 
Where was she ? 
Was Paris very large ? 
Was Madame Thenardier very far away ? 
Was she to go back ? 
etc. , etc. . 
All at once she exclaimed , `` How pretty it is here ! '' 
It was a frightful hole , but she felt free . 
`` Must I sweep ? '' 
she resumed at last . 
`` Play ! '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
The day passed thus . 
Cosette , without troubling herself to understand anything , was inexpressibly happy with that doll and that kind man . 
TWO MISFORTUNES MAKE ONE PIECE OF GOOD FORTUNE On the following morning , at daybreak , Jean Valjean was still by Cosette 's bedside ; he watched there motionless , waiting for her to wake . 
Some new thing had come into his soul . 
Jean Valjean had never loved anything ; for twenty-five years he had been alone in the world . 
He had never been father , lover , husband , friend . 
In the prison he had been vicious , gloomy , chaste , ignorant , and shy . 
The heart of that ex-convict was full of virginity . 
His sister and his sister 's children had left him only a vague and far-off memory which had finally almost completely vanished ; he had made every effort to find them , and not having been able to find them , he had forgotten them . 
Human nature is made thus ; the other tender emotions of his youth , if he had ever had any , had fallen into an abyss . 
When he saw Cosette , when he had taken possession of her , carried her off , and delivered her , he felt his heart moved within him . 
All the passion and affection within him awoke , and rushed towards that child . 
He approached the bed , where she lay sleeping , and trembled with joy . 
He suffered all the pangs of a mother , and he knew not what it meant ; for that great and singular movement of a heart which begins to love is a very obscure and a very sweet thing . 
Poor old man , with a perfectly new heart ! 
Only , as he was five and fifty , and Cosette eight years of age , all that might have been love in the whole course of his life flowed together into a sort of ineffable light . 
It was the second white apparition which he had encountered . 
The Bishop had caused the dawn of virtue to rise on his horizon ; Cosette caused the dawn of love to rise . 
The early days passed in this dazzled state . 
Cosette , on her side , had also , unknown to herself , become another being , poor little thing ! 
She was so little when her mother left her , that she no longer remembered her . 
Like all children , who resemble young shoots of the vine , which cling to everything , she had tried to love ; she had not succeeded . 
All had repulsed her , -- the Thenardiers , their children , other children . 
She had loved the dog , and he had died , after which nothing and nobody would have anything to do with her . 
It is a sad thing to say , and we have already intimated it , that , at eight years of age , her heart was cold . 
It was not her fault ; it was not the faculty of loving that she lacked ; alas ! 
it was the possibility . 
Thus , from the very first day , all her sentient and thinking powers loved this kind man . 
She felt that which she had never felt before -- a sensation of expansion . 
The man no longer produced on her the effect of being old or poor ; she thought Jean Valjean handsome , just as she thought the hovel pretty . 
These are the effects of the dawn , of childhood , of joy . 
The novelty of the earth and of life counts for something here . 
Nothing is so charming as the coloring reflection of happiness on a garret . 
We all have in our past a delightful garret . 
Nature , a difference of fifty years , had set a profound gulf between Jean Valjean and Cosette ; destiny filled in this gulf . 
Destiny suddenly united and wedded with its irresistible power these two uprooted existences , differing in age , alike in sorrow . 
One , in fact , completed the other . 
Cosette 's instinct sought a father , as Jean Valjean 's instinct sought a child . 
To meet was to find each other . 
At the mysterious moment when their hands touched , they were welded together . 
When these two souls perceived each other , they recognized each other as necessary to each other , and embraced each other closely . 
Taking the words in their most comprehensive and absolute sense , we may say that , separated from every one by the walls of the tomb , Jean Valjean was the widower , and Cosette was the orphan : this situation caused Jean Valjean to become Cosette 's father after a celestial fashion . 
And in truth , the mysterious impression produced on Cosette in the depths of the forest of Chelles by the hand of Jean Valjean grasping hers in the dark was not an illusion , but a reality . 
The entrance of that man into the destiny of that child had been the advent of God . 
Moreover , Jean Valjean had chosen his refuge well . 
There he seemed perfectly secure . 
The chamber with a dressing-room , which he occupied with Cosette , was the one whose window opened on the boulevard . 
This being the only window in the house , no neighbors ' glances were to be feared from across the way or at the side . 
The ground-floor of Number 50-52 , a sort of dilapidated penthouse , served as a wagon-house for market-gardeners , and no communication existed between it and the first story . 
It was separated by the flooring , which had neither traps nor stairs , and which formed the diaphragm of the building , as it were . 
The first story contained , as we have said , numerous chambers and several attics , only one of which was occupied by the old woman who took charge of Jean Valjean 's housekeeping ; all the rest was uninhabited . 
It was this old woman , ornamented with the name of the principal lodger , and in reality intrusted with the functions of portress , who had let him the lodging on Christmas eve . 
He had represented himself to her as a gentleman of means who had been ruined by Spanish bonds , who was coming there to live with his little daughter . 
He had paid her six months in advance , and had commissioned the old woman to furnish the chamber and dressing-room , as we have seen . 
It was this good woman who had lighted the fire in the stove , and prepared everything on the evening of their arrival . 
Week followed week ; these two beings led a happy life in that hovel . 
Cosette laughed , chattered , and sang from daybreak . 
Children have their morning song as well as birds . 
It sometimes happened that Jean Valjean clasped her tiny red hand , all cracked with chilblains , and kissed it . 
The poor child , who was used to being beaten , did not know the meaning of this , and ran away in confusion . 
At times she became serious and stared at her little black gown . 
Cosette was no longer in rags ; she was in mourning . 
She had emerged from misery , and she was entering into life . 
Jean Valjean had undertaken to teach her to read . 
Sometimes , as he made the child spell , he remembered that it was with the idea of doing evil that he had learned to read in prison . 
This idea had ended in teaching a child to read . 
Then the ex-convict smiled with the pensive smile of the angels . 
He felt in it a premeditation from on high , the will of some one who was not man , and he became absorbed in revery . 
Good thoughts have their abysses as well as evil ones . 
To teach Cosette to read , and to let her play , this constituted nearly the whole of Jean Valjean 's existence . 
And then he talked of her mother , and he made her pray . 
She called him father , and knew no other name for him . 
He passed hours in watching her dressing and undressing her doll , and in listening to her prattle . 
Life , henceforth , appeared to him to be full of interest ; men seemed to him good and just ; he no longer reproached any one in thought ; he saw no reason why he should not live to be a very old man , now that this child loved him . 
He saw a whole future stretching out before him , illuminated by Cosette as by a charming light . 
The best of us are not exempt from egotistical thoughts . 
At times , he reflected with a sort of joy that she would be ugly . 
This is only a personal opinion ; but , to utter our whole thought , at the point where Jean Valjean had arrived when he began to love Cosette , it is by no means clear to us that he did not need this encouragement in order that he might persevere in well-doing . 
He had just viewed the malice of men and the misery of society under a new aspect -- incomplete aspects , which unfortunately only exhibited one side of the truth , the fate of woman as summed up in Fantine , and public authority as personified in Javert . 
He had returned to prison , this time for having done right ; he had quaffed fresh bitterness ; disgust and lassitude were overpowering him ; even the memory of the Bishop probably suffered a temporary eclipse , though sure to reappear later on luminous and triumphant ; but , after all , that sacred memory was growing dim . 
Who knows whether Jean Valjean had not been on the eve of growing discouraged and of falling once more ? 
He loved and grew strong again . 
Alas ! 
he walked with no less indecision than Cosette . 
He protected her , and she strengthened him . 
Thanks to him , she could walk through life ; thanks to her , he could continue in virtue . 
He was that child 's stay , and she was his prop . 
Oh , unfathomable and divine mystery of the balances of destiny ! 
THE REMARKS OF THE PRINCIPAL TENANT Jean Valjean was prudent enough never to go out by day . 
Every evening , at twilight , he walked for an hour or two , sometimes alone , often with Cosette , seeking the most deserted side alleys of the boulevard , and entering churches at nightfall . 
He liked to go to Saint-Medard , which is the nearest church . 
When he did not take Cosette with him , she remained with the old woman ; but the child 's delight was to go out with the good man . 
She preferred an hour with him to all her rapturous tete-a-tetes with Catherine . 
He held her hand as they walked , and said sweet things to her . 
It turned out that Cosette was a very gay little person . 
The old woman attended to the housekeeping and cooking and went to market . 
They lived soberly , always having a little fire , but like people in very moderate circumstances . 
Jean Valjean had made no alterations in the furniture as it was the first day ; he had merely had the glass door leading to Cosette 's dressing-room replaced by a solid door . 
He still wore his yellow coat , his black breeches , and his old hat . 
In the street , he was taken for a poor man . 
It sometimes happened that kind-hearted women turned back to bestow a sou on him . 
Jean Valjean accepted the sou with a deep bow . 
It also happened occasionally that he encountered some poor wretch asking alms ; then he looked behind him to make sure that no one was observing him , stealthily approached the unfortunate man , put a piece of money into his hand , often a silver coin , and walked rapidly away . 
This had its disadvantages . 
He began to be known in the neighborhood under the name of the beggar who gives alms . 
The old principal lodger , a cross-looking creature , who was thoroughly permeated , so far as her neighbors were concerned , with the inquisitiveness peculiar to envious persons , scrutinized Jean Valjean a great deal , without his suspecting the fact . 
She was a little deaf , which rendered her talkative . 
There remained to her from her past , two teeth , -- one above , the other below , -- which she was continually knocking against each other . 
She had questioned Cosette , who had not been able to tell her anything , since she knew nothing herself except that she had come from Montfermeil . 
One morning , this spy saw Jean Valjean , with an air which struck the old gossip as peculiar , entering one of the uninhabited compartments of the hovel . 
She followed him with the step of an old cat , and was able to observe him without being seen , through a crack in the door , which was directly opposite him . 
Jean Valjean had his back turned towards this door , by way of greater security , no doubt . 
The old woman saw him fumble in his pocket and draw thence a case , scissors , and thread ; then he began to rip the lining of one of the skirts of his coat , and from the opening he took a bit of yellowish paper , which he unfolded . 
The old woman recognized , with terror , the fact that it was a bank-bill for a thousand francs . 
It was the second or third only that she had seen in the course of her existence . 
She fled in alarm . 
A moment later , Jean Valjean accosted her , and asked her to go and get this thousand-franc bill changed for him , adding that it was his quarterly income , which he had received the day before . 
`` Where ? '' 
thought the old woman . 
`` He did not go out until six o'clock in the evening , and the government bank certainly is not open at that hour . '' 
The old woman went to get the bill changed , and mentioned her surmises . 
That thousand-franc note , commented on and multiplied , produced a vast amount of terrified discussion among the gossips of the Rue des Vignes Saint-Marcel . 
A few days later , it chanced that Jean Valjean was sawing some wood , in his shirt-sleeves , in the corridor . 
The old woman was in the chamber , putting things in order . 
She was alone . 
Cosette was occupied in admiring the wood as it was sawed . 
The old woman caught sight of the coat hanging on a nail , and examined it . 
The lining had been sewed up again . 
The good woman felt of it carefully , and thought she observed in the skirts and revers thicknesses of paper . 
More thousand-franc bank-bills , no doubt ! 
She also noticed that there were all sorts of things in the pockets . 
Not only the needles , thread , and scissors which she had seen , but a big pocket-book , a very large knife , and -- a suspicious circumstance -- several wigs of various colors . 
Each pocket of this coat had the air of being in a manner provided against unexpected accidents . 
Thus the inhabitants of the house reached the last days of winter . 
A FIVE-FRANC PIECE FALLS ON THE GROUND AND PRODUCES A TUMULT Near Saint-Medard 's church there was a poor man who was in the habit of crouching on the brink of a public well which had been condemned , and on whom Jean Valjean was fond of bestowing charity . 
He never passed this man without giving him a few sous . 
Sometimes he spoke to him . 
Those who envied this mendicant said that he belonged to the police . 
He was an ex-beadle of seventy-five , who was constantly mumbling his prayers . 
One evening , as Jean Valjean was passing by , when he had not Cosette with him , he saw the beggar in his usual place , beneath the lantern which had just been lighted . 
The man seemed engaged in prayer , according to his custom , and was much bent over . 
Jean Valjean stepped up to him and placed his customary alms in his hand . 
The mendicant raised his eyes suddenly , stared intently at Jean Valjean , then dropped his head quickly . 
This movement was like a flash of lightning . 
Jean Valjean was seized with a shudder . 
It seemed to him that he had just caught sight , by the light of the street lantern , not of the placid and beaming visage of the old beadle , but of a well-known and startling face . 
He experienced the same impression that one would have on finding one 's self , all of a sudden , face to face , in the dark , with a tiger . 
He recoiled , terrified , petrified , daring neither to breathe , to speak , to remain , nor to flee , staring at the beggar who had dropped his head , which was enveloped in a rag , and no longer appeared to know that he was there . 
At this strange moment , an instinct -- possibly the mysterious instinct of self-preservation , -- restrained Jean Valjean from uttering a word . 
The beggar had the same figure , the same rags , the same appearance as he had every day . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , `` I am mad ! 
I am dreaming ! 
Impossible ! '' 
And he returned profoundly troubled . 
He hardly dared to confess , even to himself , that the face which he thought he had seen was the face of Javert . 
That night , on thinking the matter over , he regretted not having questioned the man , in order to force him to raise his head a second time . 
On the following day , at nightfall , he went back . 
The beggar was at his post . 
`` Good day , my good man , '' said Jean Valjean , resolutely , handing him a sou . 
The beggar raised his head , and replied in a whining voice , `` Thanks , my good sir . '' 
It was unmistakably the ex-beadle . 
Jean Valjean felt completely reassured . 
He began to laugh . 
`` How the deuce could I have thought that I saw Javert there ? '' 
he thought . 
`` Am I going to lose my eyesight now ? '' 
And he thought no more about it . 
A few days afterwards , -- it might have been at eight o'clock in the evening , -- he was in his room , and engaged in making Cosette spell aloud , when he heard the house door open and then shut again . 
This struck him as singular . 
The old woman , who was the only inhabitant of the house except himself , always went to bed at nightfall , so that she might not burn out her candles . 
Jean Valjean made a sign to Cosette to be quiet . 
He heard some one ascending the stairs . 
It might possibly be the old woman , who might have fallen ill and have been out to the apothecary 's . 
Jean Valjean listened . 
The step was heavy , and sounded like that of a man ; but the old woman wore stout shoes , and there is nothing which so strongly resembles the step of a man as that of an old woman . 
Nevertheless , Jean Valjean blew out his candle . 
He had sent Cosette to bed , saying to her in a low voice , `` Get into bed very softly '' ; and as he kissed her brow , the steps paused . 
Jean Valjean remained silent , motionless , with his back towards the door , seated on the chair from which he had not stirred , and holding his breath in the dark . 
After the expiration of a rather long interval , he turned round , as he heard nothing more , and , as he raised his eyes towards the door of his chamber , he saw a light through the keyhole . 
This light formed a sort of sinister star in the blackness of the door and the wall . 
There was evidently some one there , who was holding a candle in his hand and listening . 
Several minutes elapsed thus , and the light retreated . 
But he heard no sound of footsteps , which seemed to indicate that the person who had been listening at the door had removed his shoes . 
Jean Valjean threw himself , all dressed as he was , on his bed , and could not close his eyes all night . 
At daybreak , just as he was falling into a doze through fatigue , he was awakened by the creaking of a door which opened on some attic at the end of the corridor , then he heard the same masculine footstep which had ascended the stairs on the preceding evening . 
The step was approaching . 
He sprang off the bed and applied his eye to the keyhole , which was tolerably large , hoping to see the person who had made his way by night into the house and had listened at his door , as he passed . 
It was a man , in fact , who passed , this time without pausing , in front of Jean Valjean 's chamber . 
The corridor was too dark to allow of the person 's face being distinguished ; but when the man reached the staircase , a ray of light from without made it stand out like a silhouette , and Jean Valjean had a complete view of his back . 
The man was of lofty stature , clad in a long frock-coat , with a cudgel under his arm . 
The formidable neck and shoulders belonged to Javert . 
Jean Valjean might have attempted to catch another glimpse of him through his window opening on the boulevard , but he would have been obliged to open the window : he dared not . 
It was evident that this man had entered with a key , and like himself . 
Who had given him that key ? 
What was the meaning of this ? 
When the old woman came to do the work , at seven o'clock in the morning , Jean Valjean cast a penetrating glance on her , but he did not question her . 
The good woman appeared as usual . 
As she swept up she remarked to him : -- `` Possibly Monsieur may have heard some one come in last night ? '' 
At that age , and on that boulevard , eight o'clock in the evening was the dead of the night . 
`` That is true , by the way , '' he replied , in the most natural tone possible . 
`` Who was it ? '' 
`` It was a new lodger who has come into the house , '' said the old woman . 
`` And what is his name ? '' 
`` I do n't know exactly ; Dumont , or Daumont , or some name of that sort . '' 
`` And who is this Monsieur Dumont ? '' 
The old woman gazed at him with her little polecat eyes , and answered : -- `` A gentleman of property , like yourself . '' 
Perhaps she had no ulterior meaning . 
Jean Valjean thought he perceived one . 
When the old woman had taken her departure , he did up a hundred francs which he had in a cupboard , into a roll , and put it in his pocket . 
In spite of all the precautions which he took in this operation so that he might not be heard rattling silver , a hundred-sou piece escaped from his hands and rolled noisily on the floor . 
When darkness came on , he descended and carefully scrutinized both sides of the boulevard . 
He saw no one . 
The boulevard appeared to be absolutely deserted . 
It is true that a person can conceal himself behind trees . 
He went up stairs again . 
`` Come . '' 
he said to Cosette . 
He took her by the hand , and they both went out . 
THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY An observation here becomes necessary , in view of the pages which the reader is about to peruse , and of others which will be met with further on . 
The author of this book , who regrets the necessity of mentioning himself , has been absent from Paris for many years . 
Paris has been transformed since he quitted it . 
A new city has arisen , which is , after a fashion , unknown to him . 
There is no need for him to say that he loves Paris : Paris is his mind 's natal city . 
In consequence of demolitions and reconstructions , the Paris of his youth , that Paris which he bore away religiously in his memory , is now a Paris of days gone by . 
He must be permitted to speak of that Paris as though it still existed . 
It is possible that when the author conducts his readers to a spot and says , `` In such a street there stands such and such a house , '' neither street nor house will any longer exist in that locality . 
Readers may verify the facts if they care to take the trouble . 
For his own part , he is unacquainted with the new Paris , and he writes with the old Paris before his eyes in an illusion which is precious to him . 
It is a delight to him to dream that there still lingers behind him something of that which he beheld when he was in his own country , and that all has not vanished . 
So long as you go and come in your native land , you imagine that those streets are a matter of indifference to you ; that those windows , those roofs , and those doors are nothing to you ; that those walls are strangers to you ; that those trees are merely the first encountered haphazard ; that those houses , which you do not enter , are useless to you ; that the pavements which you tread are merely stones . 
Later on , when you are no longer there , you perceive that the streets are dear to you ; that you miss those roofs , those doors ; and that those walls are necessary to you , those trees are well beloved by you ; that you entered those houses which you never entered , every day , and that you have left a part of your heart , of your blood , of your soul , in those pavements . 
All those places which you no longer behold , which you may never behold again , perchance , and whose memory you have cherished , take on a melancholy charm , recur to your mind with the melancholy of an apparition , make the holy land visible to you , and are , so to speak , the very form of France , and you love them ; and you call them up as they are , as they were , and you persist in this , and you will submit to no change : for you are attached to the figure of your fatherland as to the face of your mother . 
May we , then , be permitted to speak of the past in the present ? 
That said , we beg the reader to take note of it , and we continue . 
Jean Valjean instantly quitted the boulevard and plunged into the streets , taking the most intricate lines which he could devise , returning on his track at times , to make sure that he was not being followed . 
This manoeuvre is peculiar to the hunted stag . 
On soil where an imprint of the track may be left , this manoeuvre possesses , among other advantages , that of deceiving the huntsmen and the dogs , by throwing them on the wrong scent . 
In venery this is called false re-imbushment . 
The moon was full that night . 
Jean Valjean was not sorry for this . 
The moon , still very close to the horizon , cast great masses of light and shadow in the streets . 
Jean Valjean could glide along close to the houses on the dark side , and yet keep watch on the light side . 
He did not , perhaps , take sufficiently into consideration the fact that the dark side escaped him . 
Still , in the deserted lanes which lie near the Rue Poliveau , he thought he felt certain that no one was following him . 
Cosette walked on without asking any questions . 
The sufferings of the first six years of her life had instilled something passive into her nature . 
Moreover , -- and this is a remark to which we shall frequently have occasion to recur , -- she had grown used , without being herself aware of it , to the peculiarities of this good man and to the freaks of destiny . 
And then she was with him , and she felt safe . 
Jean Valjean knew no more where he was going than did Cosette . 
He trusted in God , as she trusted in him . 
It seemed as though he also were clinging to the hand of some one greater than himself ; he thought he felt a being leading him , though invisible . 
However , he had no settled idea , no plan , no project . 
He was not even absolutely sure that it was Javert , and then it might have been Javert , without Javert knowing that he was Jean Valjean . 
Was not he disguised ? 
Was not he believed to be dead ? 
Still , queer things had been going on for several days . 
He wanted no more of them . 
He was determined not to return to the Gorbeau house . 
Like the wild animal chased from its lair , he was seeking a hole in which he might hide until he could find one where he might dwell . 
Jean Valjean described many and varied labyrinths in the Mouffetard quarter , which was already asleep , as though the discipline of the Middle Ages and the yoke of the curfew still existed ; he combined in various manners , with cunning strategy , the Rue Censier and the Rue Copeau , the Rue du Battoir-Saint-Victor and the Rue du Puits l'Ermite . 
There are lodging houses in this locality , but he did not even enter one , finding nothing which suited him . 
He had no doubt that if any one had chanced to be upon his track , they would have lost it . 
As eleven o'clock struck from Saint-Etienne-du-Mont , he was traversing the Rue de Pontoise , in front of the office of the commissary of police , situated at No. 14 . 
A few moments later , the instinct of which we have spoken above made him turn round . 
At that moment he saw distinctly , thanks to the commissary 's lantern , which betrayed them , three men who were following him closely , pass , one after the other , under that lantern , on the dark side of the street . 
One of the three entered the alley leading to the commissary 's house . 
The one who marched at their head struck him as decidedly suspicious . 
`` Come , child , '' he said to Cosette ; and he made haste to quit the Rue Pontoise . 
He took a circuit , turned into the Passage des Patriarches , which was closed on account of the hour , strode along the Rue de l'Epee-de-Bois and the Rue de l'Arbalete , and plunged into the Rue des Postes . 
At that time there was a square formed by the intersection of streets , where the College Rollin stands to-day , and where the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve turns off . 
It is understood , of course , that the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve is an old street , and that a posting-chaise does not pass through the Rue des Postes once in ten years . 
In the thirteenth century this Rue des Postes was inhabited by potters , and its real name is Rue des Pots . 
The moon cast a livid light into this open space . 
Jean Valjean went into ambush in a doorway , calculating that if the men were still following him , he could not fail to get a good look at them , as they traversed this illuminated space . 
In point of fact , three minutes had not elapsed when the men made their appearance . 
There were four of them now . 
All were tall , dressed in long , brown coats , with round hats , and huge cudgels in their hands . 
Their great stature and their vast fists rendered them no less alarming than did their sinister stride through the darkness . 
One would have pronounced them four spectres disguised as bourgeois . 
They halted in the middle of the space and formed a group , like men in consultation . 
They had an air of indecision . 
The one who appeared to be their leader turned round and pointed hastily with his right hand in the direction which Jean Valjean had taken ; another seemed to indicate the contrary direction with considerable obstinacy . 
At the moment when the first man wheeled round , the moon fell full in his face . 
Jean Valjean recognized Javert perfectly . 
IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D'AUSTERLITZ BEARS CARRIAGES Uncertainty was at an end for Jean Valjean : fortunately it still lasted for the men . 
He took advantage of their hesitation . 
It was time lost for them , but gained for him . 
He slipped from under the gate where he had concealed himself , and went down the Rue des Postes , towards the region of the Jardin des Plantes . 
Cosette was beginning to be tired . 
He took her in his arms and carried her . 
There were no passers-by , and the street lanterns had not been lighted on account of there being a moon . 
He redoubled his pace . 
In a few strides he had reached the Goblet potteries , on the front of which the moonlight rendered distinctly legible the ancient inscription : -- De Goblet fils c'est ici la fabrique ; -LSB- 14 -RSB- Venez choisir des cruches et des broos , Des pots a fleurs , des tuyaux , de la brique . 
A tout venant le Coeur vend des Carreaux . 
-LSB- 14 -RSB- This is the factory of Goblet Junior : Come choose your jugs and crocks , Flower-pots , pipes , bricks . 
The Heart sells Diamonds to every comer . 
He left behind him the Rue de la Clef , then the Fountain Saint-Victor , skirted the Jardin des Plantes by the lower streets , and reached the quay . 
There he turned round . 
The quay was deserted . 
The streets were deserted . 
There was no one behind him . 
He drew a long breath . 
He gained the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Tolls were still collected there at that epoch . 
He presented himself at the toll office and handed over a sou . 
`` It is two sous , '' said the old soldier in charge of the bridge . 
`` You are carrying a child who can walk . 
Pay for two . '' 
He paid , vexed that his passage should have aroused remark . 
Every flight should be an imperceptible slipping away . 
A heavy cart was crossing the Seine at the same time as himself , and on its way , like him , to the right bank . 
This was of use to him . 
He could traverse the bridge in the shadow of the cart . 
Towards the middle of the Bridge , Cosette , whose feet were benumbed , wanted to walk . 
He set her on the ground and took her hand again . 
The bridge once crossed , he perceived some timber-yards on his right . 
He directed his course thither . 
In order to reach them , it was necessary to risk himself in a tolerably large unsheltered and illuminated space . 
He did not hesitate . 
Those who were on his track had evidently lost the scent , and Jean Valjean believed himself to be out of danger . 
Hunted , yes ; followed , no . 
A little street , the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , opened out between two timber-yards enclosed in walls . 
This street was dark and narrow and seemed made expressly for him . 
Before entering it he cast a glance behind him , From the point where he stood he could see the whole extent of the Pont d'Austerlitz . 
Four shadows were just entering on the bridge . 
These shadows had their backs turned to the Jardin des Plantes and were on their way to the right bank . 
These four shadows were the four men . 
Jean Valjean shuddered like the wild beast which is recaptured . 
One hope remained to him ; it was , that the men had not , perhaps , stepped on the bridge , and had not caught sight of him while he was crossing the large illuminated space , holding Cosette by the hand . 
In that case , by plunging into the little street before him , he might escape , if he could reach the timber-yards , the marshes , the market-gardens , the uninhabited ground which was not built upon . 
It seemed to him that he might commit himself to that silent little street . 
He entered it . 
TO WIT , THE PLAN OF PARIS IN 1727 Three hundred paces further on , he arrived at a point where the street forked . 
It separated into two streets , which ran in a slanting line , one to the right , and the other to the left . 
Jean Valjean had before him what resembled the two branches of a Y. Which should he choose ? 
He did not hesitate , but took the one on the right . 
Why ? 
Because that to the left ran towards a suburb , that is to say , towards inhabited regions , and the right branch towards the open country , that is to say , towards deserted regions . 
However , they no longer walked very fast . 
Cosette 's pace retarded Jean Valjean 's . 
He took her up and carried her again . 
Cosette laid her head on the shoulder of the good man and said not a word . 
He turned round from time to time and looked behind him . 
He took care to keep always on the dark side of the street . 
The street was straight in his rear . 
The first two or three times that he turned round he saw nothing ; the silence was profound , and he continued his march somewhat reassured . 
All at once , on turning round , he thought he perceived in the portion of the street which he had just passed through , far off in the obscurity , something which was moving . 
He rushed forward precipitately rather than walked , hoping to find some side-street , to make his escape through it , and thus to break his scent once more . 
He arrived at a wall . 
This wall , however , did not absolutely prevent further progress ; it was a wall which bordered a transverse street , in which the one he had taken ended . 
Here again , he was obliged to come to a decision ; should he go to the right or to the left . 
He glanced to the right . 
The fragmentary lane was prolonged between buildings which were either sheds or barns , then ended at a blind alley . 
The extremity of the cul-de-sac was distinctly visible , -- a lofty white wall . 
He glanced to the left . 
On that side the lane was open , and about two hundred paces further on , ran into a street of which it was the affluent . 
On that side lay safety . 
At the moment when Jean Valjean was meditating a turn to the left , in an effort to reach the street which he saw at the end of the lane , he perceived a sort of motionless , black statue at the corner of the lane and the street towards which he was on the point of directing his steps . 
It was some one , a man , who had evidently just been posted there , and who was barring the passage and waiting . 
Jean Valjean recoiled . 
The point of Paris where Jean Valjean found himself , situated between the Faubourg Saint-Antoine and la Rapee , is one of those which recent improvements have transformed from top to bottom , -- resulting in disfigurement according to some , and in a transfiguration according to others . 
The market-gardens , the timber-yards , and the old buildings have been effaced . 
To-day , there are brand-new , wide streets , arenas , circuses , hippodromes , railway stations , and a prison , Mazas , there ; progress , as the reader sees , with its antidote . 
Half a century ago , in that ordinary , popular tongue , which is all compounded of traditions , which persists in calling the Institut les Quatre-Nations , and the Opera-Comique Feydeau , the precise spot whither Jean Valjean had arrived was called le Petit Picpus . 
The Porte Saint-Jacques , the Porte Paris , the Barriere des Sergents , the Porcherons , la Galiote , les Celestins , les Capucins , le Mail , la Bourbe , l'Arbre de Cracovie , la Petite-Pologne -- these are the names of old Paris which survive amid the new . 
The memory of the populace hovers over these relics of the past . 
Le Petit-Picpus , which , moreover , hardly ever had any existence , and never was more than the outline of a quarter , had nearly the monkish aspect of a Spanish town . 
The roads were not much paved ; the streets were not much built up . 
With the exception of the two or three streets , of which we shall presently speak , all was wall and solitude there . 
Not a shop , not a vehicle , hardly a candle lighted here and there in the windows ; all lights extinguished after ten o'clock . 
Gardens , convents , timber-yards , marshes ; occasional lowly dwellings and great walls as high as the houses . 
Such was this quarter in the last century . 
The Revolution snubbed it soundly . 
The republican government demolished and cut through it . 
Rubbish shoots were established there . 
Thirty years ago , this quarter was disappearing under the erasing process of new buildings . 
To-day , it has been utterly blotted out . 
The Petit-Picpus , of which no existing plan has preserved a trace , is indicated with sufficient clearness in the plan of 1727 , published at Paris by Denis Thierry , Rue Saint-Jacques , opposite the Rue du Platre ; and at Lyons , by Jean Girin , Rue Merciere , at the sign of Prudence . 
Petit-Picpus had , as we have just mentioned , a Y of streets , formed by the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine , which spread out in two branches , taking on the left the name of Little Picpus Street , and on the right the name of the Rue Polonceau . 
The two limbs of the Y were connected at the apex as by a bar ; this bar was called Rue Droit-Mur . 
The Rue Polonceau ended there ; Rue Petit-Picpus passed on , and ascended towards the Lenoir market . 
A person coming from the Seine reached the extremity of the Rue Polonceau , and had on his right the Rue Droit-Mur , turning abruptly at a right angle , in front of him the wall of that street , and on his right a truncated prolongation of the Rue Droit-Mur , which had no issue and was called the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
It was here that Jean Valjean stood . 
As we have just said , on catching sight of that black silhouette standing on guard at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur and the Rue Petit-Picpus , he recoiled . 
There could be no doubt of it . 
That phantom was lying in wait for him . 
What was he to do ? 
The time for retreating was passed . 
That which he had perceived in movement an instant before , in the distant darkness , was Javert and his squad without a doubt . 
Javert was probably already at the commencement of the street at whose end Jean Valjean stood . 
Javert , to all appearances , was acquainted with this little labyrinth , and had taken his precautions by sending one of his men to guard the exit . 
These surmises , which so closely resembled proofs , whirled suddenly , like a handful of dust caught up by an unexpected gust of wind , through Jean Valjean 's mournful brain . 
He examined the Cul-de-Sac Genrot ; there he was cut off . 
He examined the Rue Petit-Picpus ; there stood a sentinel . 
He saw that black form standing out in relief against the white pavement , illuminated by the moon ; to advance was to fall into this man 's hands ; to retreat was to fling himself into Javert 's arms . 
Jean Valjean felt himself caught , as in a net , which was slowly contracting ; he gazed heavenward in despair . 
THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT In order to understand what follows , it is requisite to form an exact idea of the Droit-Mur lane , and , in particular , of the angle which one leaves on the left when one emerges from the Rue Polonceau into this lane . 
Droit-Mur lane was almost entirely bordered on the right , as far as the Rue Petit-Picpus , by houses of mean aspect ; on the left by a solitary building of severe outlines , composed of numerous parts which grew gradually higher by a story or two as they approached the Rue Petit-Picpus side ; so that this building , which was very lofty on the Rue Petit-Picpus side , was tolerably low on the side adjoining the Rue Polonceau . 
There , at the angle of which we have spoken , it descended to such a degree that it consisted of merely a wall . 
This wall did not abut directly on the Street ; it formed a deeply retreating niche , concealed by its two corners from two observers who might have been , one in the Rue Polonceau , the other in the Rue Droit-Mur . 
Beginning with these angles of the niche , the wall extended along the Rue Polonceau as far as a house which bore the number 49 , and along the Rue Droit-Mur , where the fragment was much shorter , as far as the gloomy building which we have mentioned and whose gable it intersected , thus forming another retreating angle in the street . 
This gable was sombre of aspect ; only one window was visible , or , to speak more correctly , two shutters covered with a sheet of zinc and kept constantly closed . 
The state of the places of which we are here giving a description is rigorously exact , and will certainly awaken a very precise memory in the mind of old inhabitants of the quarter . 
The niche was entirely filled by a thing which resembled a colossal and wretched door ; it was a vast , formless assemblage of perpendicular planks , the upper ones being broader than the lower , bound together by long transverse strips of iron . 
At one side there was a carriage gate of the ordinary dimensions , and which had evidently not been cut more than fifty years previously . 
A linden-tree showed its crest above the niche , and the wall was covered with ivy on the side of the Rue Polonceau . 
In the imminent peril in which Jean Valjean found himself , this sombre building had about it a solitary and uninhabited look which tempted him . 
He ran his eyes rapidly over it ; he said to himself , that if he could contrive to get inside it , he might save himself . 
First he conceived an idea , then a hope . 
In the central portion of the front of this building , on the Rue Droit-Mur side , there were at all the windows of the different stories ancient cistern pipes of lead . 
The various branches of the pipes which led from one central pipe to all these little basins sketched out a sort of tree on the front . 
These ramifications of pipes with their hundred elbows imitated those old leafless vine-stocks which writhe over the fronts of old farm-houses . 
This odd espalier , with its branches of lead and iron , was the first thing that struck Jean Valjean . 
He seated Cosette with her back against a stone post , with an injunction to be silent , and ran to the spot where the conduit touched the pavement . 
Perhaps there was some way of climbing up by it and entering the house . 
But the pipe was dilapidated and past service , and hardly hung to its fastenings . 
Moreover , all the windows of this silent dwelling were grated with heavy iron bars , even the attic windows in the roof . 
And then , the moon fell full upon that facade , and the man who was watching at the corner of the street would have seen Jean Valjean in the act of climbing . 
And finally , what was to be done with Cosette ? 
How was she to be drawn up to the top of a three-story house ? 
He gave up all idea of climbing by means of the drain-pipe , and crawled along the wall to get back into the Rue Polonceau . 
When he reached the slant of the wall where he had left Cosette , he noticed that no one could see him there . 
As we have just explained , he was concealed from all eyes , no matter from which direction they were approaching ; besides this , he was in the shadow . 
Finally , there were two doors ; perhaps they might be forced . 
The wall above which he saw the linden-tree and the ivy evidently abutted on a garden where he could , at least , hide himself , although there were as yet no leaves on the trees , and spend the remainder of the night . 
Time was passing ; he must act quickly . 
He felt over the carriage door , and immediately recognized the fact that it was impracticable outside and in . 
He approached the other door with more hope ; it was frightfully decrepit ; its very immensity rendered it less solid ; the planks were rotten ; the iron bands -- there were only three of them -- were rusted . 
It seemed as though it might be possible to pierce this worm-eaten barrier . 
On examining it he found that the door was not a door ; it had neither hinges , cross-bars , lock , nor fissure in the middle ; the iron bands traversed it from side to side without any break . 
Through the crevices in the planks he caught a view of unhewn slabs and blocks of stone roughly cemented together , which passers-by might still have seen there ten years ago . 
He was forced to acknowledge with consternation that this apparent door was simply the wooden decoration of a building against which it was placed . 
It was easy to tear off a plank ; but then , one found one 's self face to face with a wall . 
WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS At that moment a heavy and measured sound began to be audible at some distance . 
Jean Valjean risked a glance round the corner of the street . 
Seven or eight soldiers , drawn up in a platoon , had just debouched into the Rue Polonceau . 
He saw the gleam of their bayonets . 
They were advancing towards him ; these soldiers , at whose head he distinguished Javert 's tall figure , advanced slowly and cautiously . 
They halted frequently ; it was plain that they were searching all the nooks of the walls and all the embrasures of the doors and alleys . 
This was some patrol that Javert had encountered -- there could be no mistake as to this surmise -- and whose aid he had demanded . 
Javert 's two acolytes were marching in their ranks . 
At the rate at which they were marching , and in consideration of the halts which they were making , it would take them about a quarter of an hour to reach the spot where Jean Valjean stood . 
It was a frightful moment . 
A few minutes only separated Jean Valjean from that terrible precipice which yawned before him for the third time . 
And the galleys now meant not only the galleys , but Cosette lost to him forever ; that is to say , a life resembling the interior of a tomb . 
There was but one thing which was possible . 
Jean Valjean had this peculiarity , that he carried , as one might say , two beggar 's pouches : in one he kept his saintly thoughts ; in the other the redoubtable talents of a convict . 
He rummaged in the one or the other , according to circumstances . 
Among his other resources , thanks to his numerous escapes from the prison at Toulon , he was , as it will be remembered , a past master in the incredible art of crawling up without ladder or climbing-irons , by sheer muscular force , by leaning on the nape of his neck , his shoulders , his hips , and his knees , by helping himself on the rare projections of the stone , in the right angle of a wall , as high as the sixth story , if need be ; an art which has rendered so celebrated and so alarming that corner of the wall of the Conciergerie of Paris by which Battemolle , condemned to death , made his escape twenty years ago . 
Jean Valjean measured with his eyes the wall above which he espied the linden ; it was about eighteen feet in height . 
The angle which it formed with the gable of the large building was filled , at its lower extremity , by a mass of masonry of a triangular shape , probably intended to preserve that too convenient corner from the rubbish of those dirty creatures called the passers-by . 
This practice of filling up corners of the wall is much in use in Paris . 
This mass was about five feet in height ; the space above the summit of this mass which it was necessary to climb was not more than fourteen feet . 
The wall was surmounted by a flat stone without a coping . 
Cosette was the difficulty , for she did not know how to climb a wall . 
Should he abandon her ? 
Jean Valjean did not once think of that . 
It was impossible to carry her . 
A man 's whole strength is required to successfully carry out these singular ascents . 
The least burden would disturb his centre of gravity and pull him downwards . 
A rope would have been required ; Jean Valjean had none . 
Where was he to get a rope at midnight , in the Rue Polonceau ? 
Certainly , if Jean Valjean had had a kingdom , he would have given it for a rope at that moment . 
All extreme situations have their lightning flashes which sometimes dazzle , sometimes illuminate us . 
Jean Valjean 's despairing glance fell on the street lantern-post of the blind alley Genrot . 
At that epoch there were no gas-jets in the streets of Paris . 
At nightfall lanterns placed at regular distances were lighted ; they were ascended and descended by means of a rope , which traversed the street from side to side , and was adjusted in a groove of the post . 
The pulley over which this rope ran was fastened underneath the lantern in a little iron box , the key to which was kept by the lamp-lighter , and the rope itself was protected by a metal case . 
Jean Valjean , with the energy of a supreme struggle , crossed the street at one bound , entered the blind alley , broke the latch of the little box with the point of his knife , and an instant later he was beside Cosette once more . 
He had a rope . 
These gloomy inventors of expedients work rapidly when they are fighting against fatality . 
We have already explained that the lanterns had not been lighted that night . 
The lantern in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot was thus naturally extinct , like the rest ; and one could pass directly under it without even noticing that it was no longer in its place . 
Nevertheless , the hour , the place , the darkness , Jean Valjean 's absorption , his singular gestures , his goings and comings , all had begun to render Cosette uneasy . 
Any other child than she would have given vent to loud shrieks long before . 
She contented herself with plucking Jean Valjean by the skirt of his coat . 
They could hear the sound of the patrol 's approach ever more and more distinctly . 
`` Father , '' said she , in a very low voice , `` I am afraid . 
Who is coming yonder ? '' 
`` Hush ! '' 
replied the unhappy man ; `` it is Madame Thenardier . '' 
Cosette shuddered . 
He added : -- `` Say nothing . 
Do n't interfere with me . 
If you cry out , if you weep , the Thenardier is lying in wait for you . 
She is coming to take you back . '' 
Then , without haste , but without making a useless movement , with firm and curt precision , the more remarkable at a moment when the patrol and Javert might come upon him at any moment , he undid his cravat , passed it round Cosette 's body under the armpits , taking care that it should not hurt the child , fastened this cravat to one end of the rope , by means of that knot which seafaring men call a `` swallow knot , '' took the other end of the rope in his teeth , pulled off his shoes and stockings , which he threw over the wall , stepped upon the mass of masonry , and began to raise himself in the angle of the wall and the gable with as much solidity and certainty as though he had the rounds of a ladder under his feet and elbows . 
Half a minute had not elapsed when he was resting on his knees on the wall . 
Cosette gazed at him in stupid amazement , without uttering a word . 
Jean Valjean 's injunction , and the name of Madame Thenardier , had chilled her blood . 
All at once she heard Jean Valjean 's voice crying to her , though in a very low tone : -- `` Put your back against the wall . '' 
She obeyed . 
`` Do n't say a word , and do n't be alarmed , '' went on Jean Valjean . 
And she felt herself lifted from the ground . 
Before she had time to recover herself , she was on the top of the wall . 
Jean Valjean grasped her , put her on his back , took her two tiny hands in his large left hand , lay down flat on his stomach and crawled along on top of the wall as far as the cant . 
As he had guessed , there stood a building whose roof started from the top of the wooden barricade and descended to within a very short distance of the ground , with a gentle slope which grazed the linden-tree . 
A lucky circumstance , for the wall was much higher on this side than on the street side . 
Jean Valjean could only see the ground at a great depth below him . 
He had just reached the slope of the roof , and had not yet left the crest of the wall , when a violent uproar announced the arrival of the patrol . 
The thundering voice of Javert was audible : -- `` Search the blind alley ! 
The Rue Droit-Mur is guarded ! 
so is the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
I 'll answer for it that he is in the blind alley . '' 
The soldiers rushed into the Genrot alley . 
Jean Valjean allowed himself to slide down the roof , still holding fast to Cosette , reached the linden-tree , and leaped to the ground . 
Whether from terror or courage , Cosette had not breathed a sound , though her hands were a little abraded . 
THE BEGINNING OF AN ENIGMA Jean Valjean found himself in a sort of garden which was very vast and of singular aspect ; one of those melancholy gardens which seem made to be looked at in winter and at night . 
This garden was oblong in shape , with an alley of large poplars at the further end , tolerably tall forest trees in the corners , and an unshaded space in the centre , where could be seen a very large , solitary tree , then several fruit-trees , gnarled and bristling like bushes , beds of vegetables , a melon patch , whose glass frames sparkled in the moonlight , and an old well . 
Here and there stood stone benches which seemed black with moss . 
The alleys were bordered with gloomy and very erect little shrubs . 
The grass had half taken possession of them , and a green mould covered the rest . 
Jean Valjean had beside him the building whose roof had served him as a means of descent , a pile of fagots , and , behind the fagots , directly against the wall , a stone statue , whose mutilated face was no longer anything more than a shapeless mask which loomed vaguely through the gloom . 
The building was a sort of ruin , where dismantled chambers were distinguishable , one of which , much encumbered , seemed to serve as a shed . 
The large building of the Rue Droit-Mur , which had a wing on the Rue Petit-Picpus , turned two facades , at right angles , towards this garden . 
These interior facades were even more tragic than the exterior . 
All the windows were grated . 
Not a gleam of light was visible at any one of them . 
The upper story had scuttles like prisons . 
One of those facades cast its shadow on the other , which fell over the garden like an immense black pall . 
No other house was visible . 
The bottom of the garden was lost in mist and darkness . 
Nevertheless , walls could be confusedly made out , which intersected as though there were more cultivated land beyond , and the low roofs of the Rue Polonceau . 
Nothing more wild and solitary than this garden could be imagined . 
There was no one in it , which was quite natural in view of the hour ; but it did not seem as though this spot were made for any one to walk in , even in broad daylight . 
Jean Valjean 's first care had been to get hold of his shoes and put them on again , then to step under the shed with Cosette . 
A man who is fleeing never thinks himself sufficiently hidden . 
The child , whose thoughts were still on the Thenardier , shared his instinct for withdrawing from sight as much as possible . 
Cosette trembled and pressed close to him . 
They heard the tumultuous noise of the patrol searching the blind alley and the streets ; the blows of their gun-stocks against the stones ; Javert 's appeals to the police spies whom he had posted , and his imprecations mingled with words which could not be distinguished . 
At the expiration of a quarter of an hour it seemed as though that species of stormy roar were becoming more distant . 
Jean Valjean held his breath . 
He had laid his hand lightly on Cosette 's mouth . 
However , the solitude in which he stood was so strangely calm , that this frightful uproar , close and furious as it was , did not disturb him by so much as the shadow of a misgiving . 
It seemed as though those walls had been built of the deaf stones of which the Scriptures speak . 
All at once , in the midst of this profound calm , a fresh sound arose ; a sound as celestial , divine , ineffable , ravishing , as the other had been horrible . 
It was a hymn which issued from the gloom , a dazzling burst of prayer and harmony in the obscure and alarming silence of the night ; women 's voices , but voices composed at one and the same time of the pure accents of virgins and the innocent accents of children , -- voices which are not of the earth , and which resemble those that the newborn infant still hears , and which the dying man hears already . 
This song proceeded from the gloomy edifice which towered above the garden . 
At the moment when the hubbub of demons retreated , one would have said that a choir of angels was approaching through the gloom . 
Cosette and Jean Valjean fell on their knees . 
They knew not what it was , they knew not where they were ; but both of them , the man and the child , the penitent and the innocent , felt that they must kneel . 
These voices had this strange characteristic , that they did not prevent the building from seeming to be deserted . 
It was a supernatural chant in an uninhabited house . 
While these voices were singing , Jean Valjean thought of nothing . 
He no longer beheld the night ; he beheld a blue sky . 
It seemed to him that he felt those wings which we all have within us , unfolding . 
The song died away . 
It may have lasted a long time . 
Jean Valjean could not have told . 
Hours of ecstasy are never more than a moment . 
All fell silent again . 
There was no longer anything in the street ; there was nothing in the garden . 
That which had menaced , that which had reassured him , -- all had vanished . 
The breeze swayed a few dry weeds on the crest of the wall , and they gave out a faint , sweet , melancholy sound . 
CONTINUATION OF THE ENIGMA The night wind had risen , which indicated that it must be between one and two o'clock in the morning . 
Poor Cosette said nothing . 
As she had seated herself beside him and leaned her head against him , Jean Valjean had fancied that she was asleep . 
He bent down and looked at her . 
Cosette 's eyes were wide open , and her thoughtful air pained Jean Valjean . 
She was still trembling . 
`` Are you sleepy ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` I am very cold , '' she replied . 
A moment later she resumed : -- `` Is she still there ? '' 
`` Who ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
`` Madame Thenardier . '' 
Jean Valjean had already forgotten the means which he had employed to make Cosette keep silent . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said he , `` she is gone . 
You need fear nothing further . '' 
The child sighed as though a load had been lifted from her breast . 
The ground was damp , the shed open on all sides , the breeze grew more keen every instant . 
The goodman took off his coat and wrapped it round Cosette . 
`` Are you less cold now ? '' 
said he . 
`` Oh , yes , father . '' 
`` Well , wait for me a moment . 
I will soon be back . '' 
He quitted the ruin and crept along the large building , seeking a better shelter . 
He came across doors , but they were closed . 
There were bars at all the windows of the ground floor . 
Just after he had turned the inner angle of the edifice , he observed that he was coming to some arched windows , where he perceived a light . 
He stood on tiptoe and peeped through one of these windows . 
They all opened on a tolerably vast hall , paved with large flagstones , cut up by arcades and pillars , where only a tiny light and great shadows were visible . 
The light came from a taper which was burning in one corner . 
The apartment was deserted , and nothing was stirring in it . 
Nevertheless , by dint of gazing intently he thought he perceived on the ground something which appeared to be covered with a winding-sheet , and which resembled a human form . 
This form was lying face downward , flat on the pavement , with the arms extended in the form of a cross , in the immobility of death . 
One would have said , judging from a sort of serpent which undulated over the floor , that this sinister form had a rope round its neck . 
The whole chamber was bathed in that mist of places which are sparely illuminated , which adds to horror . 
Jean Valjean often said afterwards , that , although many funereal spectres had crossed his path in life , he had never beheld anything more blood-curdling and terrible than that enigmatical form accomplishing some inexplicable mystery in that gloomy place , and beheld thus at night . 
It was alarming to suppose that that thing was perhaps dead ; and still more alarming to think that it was perhaps alive . 
He had the courage to plaster his face to the glass , and to watch whether the thing would move . 
In spite of his remaining thus what seemed to him a very long time , the outstretched form made no movement . 
All at once he felt himself overpowered by an inexpressible terror , and he fled . 
He began to run towards the shed , not daring to look behind him . 
It seemed to him , that if he turned his head , he should see that form following him with great strides and waving its arms . 
He reached the ruin all out of breath . 
His knees were giving way beneath him ; the perspiration was pouring from him . 
Where was he ? 
Who could ever have imagined anything like that sort of sepulchre in the midst of Paris ! 
What was this strange house ? 
An edifice full of nocturnal mystery , calling to souls through the darkness with the voice of angels , and when they came , offering them abruptly that terrible vision ; promising to open the radiant portals of heaven , and then opening the horrible gates of the tomb ! 
And it actually was an edifice , a house , which bore a number on the street ! 
It was not a dream ! 
He had to touch the stones to convince himself that such was the fact . 
Cold , anxiety , uneasiness , the emotions of the night , had given him a genuine fever , and all these ideas were clashing together in his brain . 
He stepped up to Cosette . 
She was asleep . 
THE ENIGMA BECOMES DOUBLY MYSTERIOUS The child had laid her head on a stone and fallen asleep . 
He sat down beside her and began to think . 
Little by little , as he gazed at her , he grew calm and regained possession of his freedom of mind . 
He clearly perceived this truth , the foundation of his life henceforth , that so long as she was there , so long as he had her near him , he should need nothing except for her , he should fear nothing except for her . 
He was not even conscious that he was very cold , since he had taken off his coat to cover her . 
Nevertheless , athwart this revery into which he had fallen he had heard for some time a peculiar noise . 
It was like the tinkling of a bell . 
This sound proceeded from the garden . 
It could be heard distinctly though faintly . 
It resembled the faint , vague music produced by the bells of cattle at night in the pastures . 
This noise made Valjean turn round . 
He looked and saw that there was some one in the garden . 
A being resembling a man was walking amid the bell-glasses of the melon beds , rising , stooping , halting , with regular movements , as though he were dragging or spreading out something on the ground . 
This person appeared to limp . 
Jean Valjean shuddered with the continual tremor of the unhappy . 
For them everything is hostile and suspicious . 
They distrust the day because it enables people to see them , and the night because it aids in surprising them . 
A little while before he had shivered because the garden was deserted , and now he shivered because there was some one there . 
He fell back from chimerical terrors to real terrors . 
He said to himself that Javert and the spies had , perhaps , not taken their departure ; that they had , no doubt , left people on the watch in the street ; that if this man should discover him in the garden , he would cry out for help against thieves and deliver him up . 
He took the sleeping Cosette gently in his arms and carried her behind a heap of old furniture , which was out of use , in the most remote corner of the shed . 
Cosette did not stir . 
From that point he scrutinized the appearance of the being in the melon patch . 
The strange thing about it was , that the sound of the bell followed each of this man 's movements . 
When the man approached , the sound approached ; when the man retreated , the sound retreated ; if he made any hasty gesture , a tremolo accompanied the gesture ; when he halted , the sound ceased . 
It appeared evident that the bell was attached to that man ; but what could that signify ? 
Who was this man who had a bell suspended about him like a ram or an ox ? 
As he put these questions to himself , he touched Cosette 's hands . 
They were icy cold . 
`` Ah ! 
good God ! '' 
he cried . 
He spoke to her in a low voice : -- `` Cosette ! '' 
She did not open her eyes . 
He shook her vigorously . 
She did not wake . 
`` Is she dead ? '' 
he said to himself , and sprang to his feet , quivering from head to foot . 
The most frightful thoughts rushed pell-mell through his mind . 
There are moments when hideous surmises assail us like a cohort of furies , and violently force the partitions of our brains . 
When those we love are in question , our prudence invents every sort of madness . 
He remembered that sleep in the open air on a cold night may be fatal . 
Cosette was pale , and had fallen at full length on the ground at his feet , without a movement . 
He listened to her breathing : she still breathed , but with a respiration which seemed to him weak and on the point of extinction . 
How was he to warm her back to life ? 
How was he to rouse her ? 
All that was not connected with this vanished from his thoughts . 
He rushed wildly from the ruin . 
It was absolutely necessary that Cosette should be in bed and beside a fire in less than a quarter of an hour . 
THE MAN WITH THE BELL He walked straight up to the man whom he saw in the garden . 
He had taken in his hand the roll of silver which was in the pocket of his waistcoat . 
The man 's head was bent down , and he did not see him approaching . 
In a few strides Jean Valjean stood beside him . 
Jean Valjean accosted him with the cry : -- `` One hundred francs ! '' 
The man gave a start and raised his eyes . 
`` You can earn a hundred francs , '' went on Jean Valjean , `` if you will grant me shelter for this night . '' 
The moon shone full upon Jean Valjean 's terrified countenance . 
`` What ! 
so it is you , Father Madeleine ! '' 
said the man . 
That name , thus pronounced , at that obscure hour , in that unknown spot , by that strange man , made Jean Valjean start back . 
He had expected anything but that . 
The person who thus addressed him was a bent and lame old man , dressed almost like a peasant , who wore on his left knee a leather knee-cap , whence hung a moderately large bell . 
His face , which was in the shadow , was not distinguishable . 
However , the goodman had removed his cap , and exclaimed , trembling all over : -- `` Ah , good God ! 
How come you here , Father Madeleine ? 
Where did you enter ? 
Dieu-Jesus ! 
Did you fall from heaven ? 
There is no trouble about that : if ever you do fall , it will be from there . 
And what a state you are in ! 
You have no cravat ; you have no hat ; you have no coat ! 
Do you know , you would have frightened any one who did not know you ? 
No coat ! 
Lord God ! 
Are the saints going mad nowadays ? 
But how did you get in here ? '' 
His words tumbled over each other . 
The goodman talked with a rustic volubility , in which there was nothing alarming . 
All this was uttered with a mixture of stupefaction and naive kindliness . 
`` Who are you ? 
and what house is this ? '' 
demanded Jean Valjean . 
`` Ah ! 
pardieu , this is too much ! '' 
exclaimed the old man . 
`` I am the person for whom you got the place here , and this house is the one where you had me placed . 
What ! 
You do n't recognize me ? '' 
`` No , '' said Jean Valjean ; `` and how happens it that you know me ? '' 
`` You saved my life , '' said the man . 
He turned . 
A ray of moonlight outlined his profile , and Jean Valjean recognized old Fauchelevent . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Jean Valjean , `` so it is you ? 
Yes , I recollect you . '' 
`` That is very lucky , '' said the old man , in a reproachful tone . 
`` And what are you doing here ? '' 
resumed Jean Valjean . 
`` Why , I am covering my melons , of course ! '' 
In fact , at the moment when Jean Valjean accosted him , old Fauchelevent held in his hand the end of a straw mat which he was occupied in spreading over the melon bed . 
During the hour or thereabouts that he had been in the garden he had already spread out a number of them . 
It was this operation which had caused him to execute the peculiar movements observed from the shed by Jean Valjean . 
He continued : -- `` I said to myself , ` The moon is bright : it is going to freeze . 
What if I were to put my melons into their greatcoats ? ' 
And , '' he added , looking at Jean Valjean with a broad smile , -- `` pardieu ! 
you ought to have done the same ! 
But how do you come here ? '' 
Jean Valjean , finding himself known to this man , at least only under the name of Madeleine , thenceforth advanced only with caution . 
He multiplied his questions . 
Strange to say , their roles seemed to be reversed . 
It was he , the intruder , who interrogated . 
`` And what is this bell which you wear on your knee ? '' 
`` This , '' replied Fauchelevent , `` is so that I may be avoided . '' 
`` What ! 
so that you may be avoided ? '' 
Old Fauchelevent winked with an indescribable air . 
`` Ah , goodness ! 
there are only women in this house -- many young girls . 
It appears that I should be a dangerous person to meet . 
The bell gives them warning . 
When I come , they go . 
`` What house is this ? '' 
`` Come , you know well enough . '' 
`` But I do not . '' 
`` Not when you got me the place here as gardener ? '' 
`` Answer me as though I knew nothing . '' 
`` Well , then , this is the Petit-Picpus convent . '' 
Memories recurred to Jean Valjean . 
Chance , that is to say , Providence , had cast him into precisely that convent in the Quartier Saint-Antoine where old Fauchelevent , crippled by the fall from his cart , had been admitted on his recommendation two years previously . 
He repeated , as though talking to himself : -- `` The Petit-Picpus convent . '' 
`` Exactly , '' returned old Fauchelevent . 
`` But to come to the point , how the deuce did you manage to get in here , you , Father Madeleine ? 
No matter if you are a saint ; you are a man as well , and no man enters here . '' 
`` You certainly are here . '' 
`` There is no one but me . '' 
`` Still , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I must stay here . '' 
`` Ah , good God ! '' 
cried Fauchelevent . 
Jean Valjean drew near to the old man , and said to him in a grave voice : -- `` Father Fauchelevent , I saved your life . '' 
`` I was the first to recall it , '' returned Fauchelevent . 
`` Well , you can do to-day for me that which I did for you in the olden days . '' 
Fauchelevent took in his aged , trembling , and wrinkled hands Jean Valjean 's two robust hands , and stood for several minutes as though incapable of speaking . 
At length he exclaimed : -- `` Oh ! 
that would be a blessing from the good God , if I could make you some little return for that ! 
Save your life ! 
Monsieur le Maire , dispose of the old man ! '' 
A wonderful joy had transfigured this old man . 
His countenance seemed to emit a ray of light . 
`` What do you wish me to do ? '' 
he resumed . 
`` That I will explain to you . 
You have a chamber ? '' 
`` I have an isolated hovel yonder , behind the ruins of the old convent , in a corner which no one ever looks into . 
There are three rooms in it . '' 
The hut was , in fact , so well hidden behind the ruins , and so cleverly arranged to prevent it being seen , that Jean Valjean had not perceived it . 
`` Good , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` Now I am going to ask two things of you . '' 
`` What are they , Mr. Mayor ? '' 
`` In the first place , you are not to tell any one what you know about me . 
In the second , you are not to try to find out anything more . '' 
`` As you please . 
I know that you can do nothing that is not honest , that you have always been a man after the good God 's heart . 
And then , moreover , you it was who placed me here . 
That concerns you . 
I am at your service . '' 
`` That is settled then . 
Now , come with me . 
We will go and get the child . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` so there is a child ? '' 
He added not a word further , and followed Jean Valjean as a dog follows his master . 
Less than half an hour afterwards Cosette , who had grown rosy again before the flame of a good fire , was lying asleep in the old gardener 's bed . 
Jean Valjean had put on his cravat and coat once more ; his hat , which he had flung over the wall , had been found and picked up . 
While Jean Valjean was putting on his coat , Fauchelevent had removed the bell and kneecap , which now hung on a nail beside a vintage basket that adorned the wall . 
The two men were warming themselves with their elbows resting on a table upon which Fauchelevent had placed a bit of cheese , black bread , a bottle of wine , and two glasses , and the old man was saying to Jean Valjean , as he laid his hand on the latter 's knee : `` Ah ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
You did not recognize me immediately ; you save people 's lives , and then you forget them ! 
That is bad ! 
But they remember you ! 
You are an ingrate ! '' 
WHICH EXPLAINS HOW JAVERT GOT ON THE SCENT The events of which we have just beheld the reverse side , so to speak , had come about in the simplest possible manner . 
When Jean Valjean , on the evening of the very day when Javert had arrested him beside Fantine 's death-bed , had escaped from the town jail of M. sur M. , the police had supposed that he had betaken himself to Paris . 
Paris is a maelstrom where everything is lost , and everything disappears in this belly of the world , as in the belly of the sea . 
No forest hides a man as does that crowd . 
Fugitives of every sort know this . 
They go to Paris as to an abyss ; there are gulfs which save . 
The police know it also , and it is in Paris that they seek what they have lost elsewhere . 
They sought the ex-mayor of M. sur M. Javert was summoned to Paris to throw light on their researches . 
Javert had , in fact , rendered powerful assistance in the recapture of Jean Valjean . 
Javert 's zeal and intelligence on that occasion had been remarked by M. Chabouillet , secretary of the Prefecture under Comte Angles . 
M. Chabouillet , who had , moreover , already been Javert 's patron , had the inspector of M. sur M. attached to the police force of Paris . 
There Javert rendered himself useful in divers and , though the word may seem strange for such services , honorable manners . 
He no longer thought of Jean Valjean , -- the wolf of to-day causes these dogs who are always on the chase to forget the wolf of yesterday , -- when , in December , 1823 , he read a newspaper , he who never read newspapers ; but Javert , a monarchical man , had a desire to know the particulars of the triumphal entry of the `` Prince Generalissimo '' into Bayonne . 
Just as he was finishing the article , which interested him ; a name , the name of Jean Valjean , attracted his attention at the bottom of a page . 
The paper announced that the convict Jean Valjean was dead , and published the fact in such formal terms that Javert did not doubt it . 
He confined himself to the remark , `` That 's a good entry . '' 
Then he threw aside the paper , and thought no more about it . 
Some time afterwards , it chanced that a police report was transmitted from the prefecture of the Seine-et-Oise to the prefecture of police in Paris , concerning the abduction of a child , which had taken place , under peculiar circumstances , as it was said , in the commune of Montfermeil . 
A little girl of seven or eight years of age , the report said , who had been intrusted by her mother to an inn-keeper of that neighborhood , had been stolen by a stranger ; this child answered to the name of Cosette , and was the daughter of a girl named Fantine , who had died in the hospital , it was not known where or when . 
This report came under Javert 's eye and set him to thinking . 
The name of Fantine was well known to him . 
He remembered that Jean Valjean had made him , Javert , burst into laughter , by asking him for a respite of three days , for the purpose of going to fetch that creature 's child . 
He recalled the fact that Jean Valjean had been arrested in Paris at the very moment when he was stepping into the coach for Montfermeil . 
Some signs had made him suspect at the time that this was the second occasion of his entering that coach , and that he had already , on the previous day , made an excursion to the neighborhood of that village , for he had not been seen in the village itself . 
What had he been intending to do in that region of Montfermeil ? 
It could not even be surmised . 
Javert understood it now . 
Fantine 's daughter was there . 
Jean Valjean was going there in search of her . 
And now this child had been stolen by a stranger ! 
Who could that stranger be ? 
Could it be Jean Valjean ? 
But Jean Valjean was dead . 
Javert , without saying anything to anybody , took the coach from the Pewter Platter , Cul-de-Sac de la Planchette , and made a trip to Montfermeil . 
He expected to find a great deal of light on the subject there ; he found a great deal of obscurity . 
For the first few days the Thenardiers had chattered in their rage . 
The disappearance of the Lark had created a sensation in the village . 
He immediately obtained numerous versions of the story , which ended in the abduction of a child . 
Hence the police report . 
But their first vexation having passed off , Thenardier , with his wonderful instinct , had very quickly comprehended that it is never advisable to stir up the prosecutor of the Crown , and that his complaints with regard to the abduction of Cosette would have as their first result to fix upon himself , and upon many dark affairs which he had on hand , the glittering eye of justice . 
The last thing that owls desire is to have a candle brought to them . 
And in the first place , how explain the fifteen hundred francs which he had received ? 
He turned squarely round , put a gag on his wife 's mouth , and feigned astonishment when the stolen child was mentioned to him . 
He understood nothing about it ; no doubt he had grumbled for awhile at having that dear little creature `` taken from him '' so hastily ; he should have liked to keep her two or three days longer , out of tenderness ; but her `` grandfather '' had come for her in the most natural way in the world . 
He added the `` grandfather , '' which produced a good effect . 
This was the story that Javert hit upon when he arrived at Montfermeil . 
The grandfather caused Jean Valjean to vanish . 
Nevertheless , Javert dropped a few questions , like plummets , into Thenardier 's history . 
`` Who was that grandfather ? 
and what was his name ? '' 
Thenardier replied with simplicity : `` He is a wealthy farmer . 
I saw his passport . 
I think his name was M. Guillaume Lambert . '' 
Lambert is a respectable and extremely reassuring name . 
Thereupon Javert returned to Paris . 
`` Jean Valjean is certainly dead , '' said he , `` and I am a ninny . '' 
He had again begun to forget this history , when , in the course of March , 1824 , he heard of a singular personage who dwelt in the parish of Saint-Medard and who had been surnamed `` the mendicant who gives alms . '' 
This person , the story ran , was a man of means , whose name no one knew exactly , and who lived alone with a little girl of eight years , who knew nothing about herself , save that she had come from Montfermeil . 
Montfermeil ! 
that name was always coming up , and it made Javert prick up his ears . 
An old beggar police spy , an ex-beadle , to whom this person had given alms , added a few more details . 
This gentleman of property was very shy , -- never coming out except in the evening , speaking to no one , except , occasionally to the poor , and never allowing any one to approach him . 
He wore a horrible old yellow frock-coat , which was worth many millions , being all wadded with bank-bills . 
This piqued Javert 's curiosity in a decided manner . 
In order to get a close look at this fantastic gentleman without alarming him , he borrowed the beadle 's outfit for a day , and the place where the old spy was in the habit of crouching every evening , whining orisons through his nose , and playing the spy under cover of prayer . 
`` The suspected individual '' did indeed approach Javert thus disguised , and bestow alms on him . 
At that moment Javert raised his head , and the shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean . 
However , the darkness might have misled him ; Jean Valjean 's death was official ; Javert cherished very grave doubts ; and when in doubt , Javert , the man of scruples , never laid a finger on any one 's collar . 
He followed his man to the Gorbeau house , and got `` the old woman '' to talking , which was no difficult matter . 
The old woman confirmed the fact regarding the coat lined with millions , and narrated to him the episode of the thousand-franc bill . 
She had seen it ! 
She had handled it ! 
Javert hired a room ; that evening he installed himself in it . 
He came and listened at the mysterious lodger 's door , hoping to catch the sound of his voice , but Jean Valjean saw his candle through the key-hole , and foiled the spy by keeping silent . 
On the following day Jean Valjean decamped ; but the noise made by the fall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman , who , hearing the rattling of coin , suspected that he might be intending to leave , and made haste to warn Javert . 
At night , when Jean Valjean came out , Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with two men . 
Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture , but he had not mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize ; that was his secret , and he had kept it for three reasons : in the first place , because the slightest indiscretion might put Jean Valjean on the alert ; next , because , to lay hands on an ex-convict who had made his escape and was reputed dead , on a criminal whom justice had formerly classed forever as among malefactors of the most dangerous sort , was a magnificent success which the old members of the Parisian police would assuredly not leave to a new-comer like Javert , and he was afraid of being deprived of his convict ; and lastly , because Javert , being an artist , had a taste for the unforeseen . 
He hated those well-heralded successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom brushed off . 
He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and to unveil them suddenly at the last . 
Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree , then from corner to corner of the street , and had not lost sight of him for a single instant ; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be the most secure Javert 's eye had been on him . 
Why had not Javert arrested Jean Valjean ? 
Because he was still in doubt . 
It must be remembered that at that epoch the police was not precisely at its ease ; the free press embarrassed it ; several arbitrary arrests denounced by the newspapers , had echoed even as far as the Chambers , and had rendered the Prefecture timid . 
Interference with individual liberty was a grave matter . 
The police agents were afraid of making a mistake ; the prefect laid the blame on them ; a mistake meant dismissal . 
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph , reproduced by twenty newspapers , would have caused in Paris : `` Yesterday , an aged grandfather , with white hair , a respectable and well-to-do gentleman , who was walking with his grandchild , aged eight , was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an escaped convict ! '' 
Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own ; injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the prefect . 
He was really in doubt . 
Jean Valjean turned his back on him and walked in the dark . 
Sadness , uneasiness , anxiety , depression , this fresh misfortune of being forced to flee by night , to seek a chance refuge in Paris for Cosette and himself , the necessity of regulating his pace to the pace of the child -- all this , without his being aware of it , had altered Jean Valjean 's walk , and impressed on his bearing such senility , that the police themselves , incarnate in the person of Javert , might , and did in fact , make a mistake . 
The impossibility of approaching too close , his costume of an emigre preceptor , the declaration of Thenardier which made a grandfather of him , and , finally , the belief in his death in prison , added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in Javert 's mind . 
For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his papers ; but if the man was not Jean Valjean , and if this man was not a good , honest old fellow living on his income , he was probably some merry blade deeply and cunningly implicated in the obscure web of Parisian misdeeds , some chief of a dangerous band , who gave alms to conceal his other talents , which was an old dodge . 
He had trusty fellows , accomplices ' retreats in case of emergencies , in which he would , no doubt , take refuge . 
All these turns which he was making through the streets seemed to indicate that he was not a simple and honest man . 
To arrest him too hastily would be `` to kill the hen that laid the golden eggs . '' 
Where was the inconvenience in waiting ? 
Javert was very sure that he would not escape . 
Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind , putting to himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage . 
It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise , that , thanks to the brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop , he decidedly recognized Jean Valjean . 
There are in this world two beings who give a profound start , -- the mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey . 
Javert gave that profound start . 
As soon as he had positively recognized Jean Valjean , the formidable convict , he perceived that there were only three of them , and he asked for reinforcements at the police station of the Rue de Pontoise . 
One puts on gloves before grasping a thorn cudgel . 
This delay and the halt at the Carrefour Rollin to consult with his agents came near causing him to lose the trail . 
He speedily divined , however , that Jean Valjean would want to put the river between his pursuers and himself . 
He bent his head and reflected like a blood-hound who puts his nose to the ground to make sure that he is on the right scent . 
Javert , with his powerful rectitude of instinct , went straight to the bridge of Austerlitz . 
A word with the toll-keeper furnished him with the information which he required : `` Have you seen a man with a little girl ? '' 
`` I made him pay two sous , '' replied the toll-keeper . 
Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the small illuminated spot on the other side of the water , leading Cosette by the hand . 
He saw him enter the Rue du Chemin-Vert-Saint-Antoine ; he remembered the Cul-de-Sac Genrot arranged there like a trap , and of the sole exit of the Rue Droit-Mur into the Rue Petit-Picpus . 
He made sure of his back burrows , as huntsmen say ; he hastily despatched one of his agents , by a roundabout way , to guard that issue . 
A patrol which was returning to the Arsenal post having passed him , he made a requisition on it , and caused it to accompany him . 
In such games soldiers are aces . 
Moreover , the principle is , that in order to get the best of a wild boar , one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs . 
These combinations having been effected , feeling that Jean Valjean was caught between the blind alley Genrot on the right , his agent on the left , and himself , Javert , in the rear , he took a pinch of snuff . 
Then he began the game . 
He experienced one ecstatic and infernal moment ; he allowed his man to go on ahead , knowing that he had him safe , but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long as possible , happy at the thought that he was taken and yet at seeing him free , gloating over him with his gaze , with that voluptuousness of the spider which allows the fly to flutter , and of the cat which lets the mouse run . 
Claws and talons possess a monstrous sensuality , -- the obscure movements of the creature imprisoned in their pincers . 
What a delight this strangling is ! 
Javert was enjoying himself . 
The meshes of his net were stoutly knotted . 
He was sure of success ; all he had to do now was to close his hand . 
Accompanied as he was , the very idea of resistance was impossible , however vigorous , energetic , and desperate Jean Valjean might be . 
Javert advanced slowly , sounding , searching on his way all the nooks of the street like so many pockets of thieves . 
When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there . 
His exasperation can be imagined . 
He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus ; that agent , who had remained imperturbably at his post , had not seen the man pass . 
It sometimes happens that a stag is lost head and horns ; that is to say , he escapes although he has the pack on his very heels , and then the oldest huntsmen know not what to say . 
Duvivier , Ligniville , and Desprez halt short . 
In a discomfiture of this sort , Artonge exclaims , `` It was not a stag , but a sorcerer . '' 
Javert would have liked to utter the same cry . 
His disappointment bordered for a moment on despair and rage . 
It is certain that Napoleon made mistakes during the war with Russia , that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India , that Caesar made mistakes in the war in Africa , that Cyrus was at fault in the war in Scythia , and that Javert blundered in this campaign against Jean Valjean . 
He was wrong , perhaps , in hesitating in his recognition of the exconvict . 
The first glance should have sufficed him . 
He was wrong in not arresting him purely and simply in the old building ; he was wrong in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue de Pontoise . 
He was wrong in taking counsel with his auxiliaries in the full light of the moon in the Carrefour Rollin . 
Advice is certainly useful ; it is a good thing to know and to interrogate those of the dogs who deserve confidence ; but the hunter can not be too cautious when he is chasing uneasy animals like the wolf and the convict . 
Javert , by taking too much thought as to how he should set the bloodhounds of the pack on the trail , alarmed the beast by giving him wind of the dart , and so made him run . 
Above all , he was wrong in that after he had picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz , he played that formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a thread . 
He thought himself stronger than he was , and believed that he could play at the game of the mouse and the lion . 
At the same time , he reckoned himself as too weak , when he judged it necessary to obtain reinforcement . 
Fatal precaution , waste of precious time ! 
Javert committed all these blunders , and none the less was one of the cleverest and most correct spies that ever existed . 
He was , in the full force of the term , what is called in venery a knowing dog . 
But what is there that is perfect ? 
Great strategists have their eclipses . 
The greatest follies are often composed , like the largest ropes , of a multitude of strands . 
Take the cable thread by thread , take all the petty determining motives separately , and you can break them one after the other , and you say , `` That is all there is of it ! '' 
Braid them , twist them together ; the result is enormous : it is Attila hesitating between Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west ; it is Hannibal tarrying at Capua ; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube . 
However that may be , even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjean had escaped him , Javert did not lose his head . 
Sure that the convict who had broken his ban could not be far off , he established sentinels , he organized traps and ambuscades , and beat the quarter all that night . 
The first thing he saw was the disorder in the street lantern whose rope had been cut . 
A precious sign which , however , led him astray , since it caused him to turn all his researches in the direction of the Cul-de-Sac Genrot . 
In this blind alley there were tolerably low walls which abutted on gardens whose bounds adjoined the immense stretches of waste land . 
Jean Valjean evidently must have fled in that direction . 
The fact is , that had he penetrated a little further in the Cul-de-Sac Genrot , he would probably have done so and have been lost . 
Javert explored these gardens and these waste stretches as though he had been hunting for a needle . 
At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook , and returned to the Prefecture of Police , as much ashamed as a police spy who had been captured by a robber might have been . 
NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS Nothing , half a century ago , more resembled every other carriage gate than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus . 
This entrance , which usually stood ajar in the most inviting fashion , permitted a view of two things , neither of which have anything very funereal about them , -- a courtyard surrounded by walls hung with vines , and the face of a lounging porter . 
Above the wall , at the bottom of the court , tall trees were visible . 
When a ray of sunlight enlivened the courtyard , when a glass of wine cheered up the porter , it was difficult to pass Number 62 Little Picpus Street without carrying away a smiling impression of it . 
Nevertheless , it was a sombre place of which one had had a glimpse . 
The threshold smiled ; the house prayed and wept . 
If one succeeded in passing the porter , which was not easy , -- which was even nearly impossible for every one , for there was an open sesame ! 
which it was necessary to know , -- if , the porter once passed , one entered a little vestibule on the right , on which opened a staircase shut in between two walls and so narrow that only one person could ascend it at a time , if one did not allow one 's self to be alarmed by a daubing of canary yellow , with a dado of chocolate which clothed this staircase , if one ventured to ascend it , one crossed a first landing , then a second , and arrived on the first story at a corridor where the yellow wash and the chocolate-hued plinth pursued one with a peaceable persistency . 
Staircase and corridor were lighted by two beautiful windows . 
The corridor took a turn and became dark . 
If one doubled this cape , one arrived a few paces further on , in front of a door which was all the more mysterious because it was not fastened . 
If one opened it , one found one 's self in a little chamber about six feet square , tiled , well-scrubbed , clean , cold , and hung with nankin paper with green flowers , at fifteen sous the roll . 
A white , dull light fell from a large window , with tiny panes , on the left , which usurped the whole width of the room . 
One gazed about , but saw no one ; one listened , one heard neither a footstep nor a human murmur . 
The walls were bare , the chamber was not furnished ; there was not even a chair . 
One looked again , and beheld on the wall facing the door a quadrangular hole , about a foot square , with a grating of interlacing iron bars , black , knotted , solid , which formed squares -- I had almost said meshes -- of less than an inch and a half in diagonal length . 
The little green flowers of the nankin paper ran in a calm and orderly manner to those iron bars , without being startled or thrown into confusion by their funereal contact . 
Supposing that a living being had been so wonderfully thin as to essay an entrance or an exit through the square hole , this grating would have prevented it . 
It did not allow the passage of the body , but it did allow the passage of the eyes ; that is to say , of the mind . 
This seems to have occurred to them , for it had been re-enforced by a sheet of tin inserted in the wall a little in the rear , and pierced with a thousand holes more microscopic than the holes of a strainer . 
At the bottom of this plate , an aperture had been pierced exactly similar to the orifice of a letter box . 
A bit of tape attached to a bell-wire hung at the right of the grated opening . 
If the tape was pulled , a bell rang , and one heard a voice very near at hand , which made one start . 
`` Who is there ? '' 
the voice demanded . 
It was a woman 's voice , a gentle voice , so gentle that it was mournful . 
Here , again , there was a magical word which it was necessary to know . 
If one did not know it , the voice ceased , the wall became silent once more , as though the terrified obscurity of the sepulchre had been on the other side of it . 
If one knew the password , the voice resumed , `` Enter on the right . '' 
One then perceived on the right , facing the window , a glass door surmounted by a frame glazed and painted gray . 
On raising the latch and crossing the threshold , one experienced precisely the same impression as when one enters at the theatre into a grated baignoire , before the grating is lowered and the chandelier is lighted . 
One was , in fact , in a sort of theatre-box , narrow , furnished with two old chairs , and a much-frayed straw matting , sparely illuminated by the vague light from the glass door ; a regular box , with its front just of a height to lean upon , bearing a tablet of black wood . 
This box was grated , only the grating of it was not of gilded wood , as at the opera ; it was a monstrous lattice of iron bars , hideously interlaced and riveted to the wall by enormous fastenings which resembled clenched fists . 
The first minutes passed ; when one 's eyes began to grow used to this cellar-like half-twilight , one tried to pass the grating , but got no further than six inches beyond it . 
There he encountered a barrier of black shutters , re-enforced and fortified with transverse beams of wood painted a gingerbread yellow . 
These shutters were divided into long , narrow slats , and they masked the entire length of the grating . 
They were always closed . 
At the expiration of a few moments one heard a voice proceeding from behind these shutters , and saying : -- `` I am here . 
What do you wish with me ? '' 
It was a beloved , sometimes an adored , voice . 
No one was visible . 
Hardly the sound of a breath was audible . 
It seemed as though it were a spirit which had been evoked , that was speaking to you across the walls of the tomb . 
If one chanced to be within certain prescribed and very rare conditions , the slat of one of the shutters opened opposite you ; the evoked spirit became an apparition . 
Behind the grating , behind the shutter , one perceived so far as the grating permitted sight , a head , of which only the mouth and the chin were visible ; the rest was covered with a black veil . 
One caught a glimpse of a black guimpe , and a form that was barely defined , covered with a black shroud . 
That head spoke with you , but did not look at you and never smiled at you . 
The light which came from behind you was adjusted in such a manner that you saw her in the white , and she saw you in the black . 
This light was symbolical . 
Nevertheless , your eyes plunged eagerly through that opening which was made in that place shut off from all glances . 
A profound vagueness enveloped that form clad in mourning . 
Your eyes searched that vagueness , and sought to make out the surroundings of the apparition . 
At the expiration of a very short time you discovered that you could see nothing . 
What you beheld was night , emptiness , shadows , a wintry mist mingled with a vapor from the tomb , a sort of terrible peace , a silence from which you could gather nothing , not even sighs , a gloom in which you could distinguish nothing , not even phantoms . 
What you beheld was the interior of a cloister . 
It was the interior of that severe and gloomy edifice which was called the Convent of the Bernardines of the Perpetual Adoration . 
The box in which you stood was the parlor . 
The first voice which had addressed you was that of the portress who always sat motionless and silent , on the other side of the wall , near the square opening , screened by the iron grating and the plate with its thousand holes , as by a double visor . 
The obscurity which bathed the grated box arose from the fact that the parlor , which had a window on the side of the world , had none on the side of the convent . 
Profane eyes must see nothing of that sacred place . 
Nevertheless , there was something beyond that shadow ; there was a light ; there was life in the midst of that death . 
Although this was the most strictly walled of all convents , we shall endeavor to make our way into it , and to take the reader in , and to say , without transgressing the proper bounds , things which story-tellers have never seen , and have , therefore , never described . 
THE OBEDIENCE OF MARTIN VERGA This convent , which in 1824 had already existed for many a long year in the Rue Petit-Picpus , was a community of Bernardines of the obedience of Martin Verga . 
These Bernardines were attached , in consequence , not to Clairvaux , like the Bernardine monks , but to Citeaux , like the Benedictine monks . 
In other words , they were the subjects , not of Saint Bernard , but of Saint Benoit . 
Any one who has turned over old folios to any extent knows that Martin Verga founded in 1425 a congregation of Bernardines-Benedictines , with Salamanca for the head of the order , and Alcala as the branch establishment . 
This congregation had sent out branches throughout all the Catholic countries of Europe . 
There is nothing unusual in the Latin Church in these grafts of one order on another . 
To mention only a single order of Saint-Benoit , which is here in question : there are attached to this order , without counting the obedience of Martin Verga , four congregations , -- two in Italy , Mont-Cassin and Sainte-Justine of Padua ; two in France , Cluny and Saint-Maur ; and nine orders , -- Vallombrosa , Granmont , the Celestins , the Camaldules , the Carthusians , the Humilies , the Olivateurs , the Silvestrins , and lastly , Citeaux ; for Citeaux itself , a trunk for other orders , is only an offshoot of Saint-Benoit . 
Citeaux dates from Saint Robert , Abbe de Molesme , in the diocese of Langres , in 1098 . 
Now it was in 529 that the devil , having retired to the desert of Subiaco -- he was old -- had he turned hermit ? 
-- was chased from the ancient temple of Apollo , where he dwelt , by Saint-Benoit , then aged seventeen . 
After the rule of the Carmelites , who go barefoot , wear a bit of willow on their throats , and never sit down , the harshest rule is that of the Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
They are clothed in black , with a guimpe , which , in accordance with the express command of Saint-Benoit , mounts to the chin . 
A robe of serge with large sleeves , a large woollen veil , the guimpe which mounts to the chin cut square on the breast , the band which descends over their brow to their eyes , -- this is their dress . 
All is black except the band , which is white . 
The novices wear the same habit , but all in white . 
The professed nuns also wear a rosary at their side . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga practise the Perpetual Adoration , like the Benedictines called Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , who , at the beginning of this century , had two houses in Paris , -- one at the Temple , the other in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve . 
However , the Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus , of whom we are speaking , were a totally different order from the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament , cloistered in the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve and at the Temple . 
There were numerous differences in their rule ; there were some in their costume . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Petit-Picpus wore the black guimpe , and the Benedictines of the Holy Sacrament and of the Rue Neuve-Sainte-Genevieve wore a white one , and had , besides , on their breasts , a Holy Sacrament about three inches long , in silver gilt or gilded copper . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus did not wear this Holy Sacrament . 
The Perpetual Adoration , which was common to the house of the Petit-Picpus and to the house of the Temple , leaves those two orders perfectly distinct . 
Their only resemblance lies in this practice of the Ladies of the Holy Sacrament and the Bernardines of Martin Verga , just as there existed a similarity in the study and the glorification of all the mysteries relating to the infancy , the life , and death of Jesus Christ and the Virgin , between the two orders , which were , nevertheless , widely separated , and on occasion even hostile . 
The Oratory of Italy , established at Florence by Philip de Neri , and the Oratory of France , established by Pierre de Berulle . 
The Oratory of France claimed the precedence , since Philip de Neri was only a saint , while Berulle was a cardinal . 
Let us return to the harsh Spanish rule of Martin Verga . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of this obedience fast all the year round , abstain from meat , fast in Lent and on many other days which are peculiar to them , rise from their first sleep , from one to three o'clock in the morning , to read their breviary and chant matins , sleep in all seasons between serge sheets and on straw , make no use of the bath , never light a fire , scourge themselves every Friday , observe the rule of silence , speak to each other only during the recreation hours , which are very brief , and wear drugget chemises for six months in the year , from September 14th , which is the Exaltation of the Holy Cross , until Easter . 
These six months are a modification : the rule says all the year , but this drugget chemise , intolerable in the heat of summer , produced fevers and nervous spasms . 
The use of it had to be restricted . 
Even with this palliation , when the nuns put on this chemise on the 14th of September , they suffer from fever for three or four days . 
Obedience , poverty , chastity , perseverance in their seclusion , -- these are their vows , which the rule greatly aggravates . 
The prioress is elected for three years by the mothers , who are called meres vocales because they have a voice in the chapter . 
A prioress can only be re-elected twice , which fixes the longest possible reign of a prioress at nine years . 
They never see the officiating priest , who is always hidden from them by a serge curtain nine feet in height . 
During the sermon , when the preacher is in the chapel , they drop their veils over their faces . 
They must always speak low , walk with their eyes on the ground and their heads bowed . 
One man only is allowed to enter the convent , -- the archbishop of the diocese . 
There is really one other , -- the gardener . 
But he is always an old man , and , in order that he may always be alone in the garden , and that the nuns may be warned to avoid him , a bell is attached to his knee . 
Their submission to the prioress is absolute and passive . 
It is the canonical subjection in the full force of its abnegation . 
As at the voice of Christ , ut voci Christi , at a gesture , at the first sign , ad nutum , ad primum signum , immediately , with cheerfulness , with perseverance , with a certain blind obedience , prompte , hilariter , perseveranter et caeca quadam obedientia , as the file in the hand of the workman , quasi limam in manibus fabri , without power to read or to write without express permission , legere vel scribere non addiscerit sine expressa superioris licentia . 
Each one of them in turn makes what they call reparation . 
The reparation is the prayer for all the sins , for all the faults , for all the dissensions , for all the violations , for all the iniquities , for all the crimes committed on earth . 
For the space of twelve consecutive hours , from four o'clock in the afternoon till four o'clock in the morning , or from four o'clock in the morning until four o'clock in the afternoon , the sister who is making reparation remains on her knees on the stone before the Holy Sacrament , with hands clasped , a rope around her neck . 
When her fatigue becomes unendurable , she prostrates herself flat on her face against the earth , with her arms outstretched in the form of a cross ; this is her only relief . 
In this attitude she prays for all the guilty in the universe . 
This is great to sublimity . 
As this act is performed in front of a post on which burns a candle , it is called without distinction , to make reparation or to be at the post . 
The nuns even prefer , out of humility , this last expression , which contains an idea of torture and abasement . 
To make reparation is a function in which the whole soul is absorbed . 
The sister at the post would not turn round were a thunderbolt to fall directly behind her . 
Besides this , there is always a sister kneeling before the Holy Sacrament . 
This station lasts an hour . 
They relieve each other like soldiers on guard . 
This is the Perpetual Adoration . 
The prioresses and the mothers almost always bear names stamped with peculiar solemnity , recalling , not the saints and martyrs , but moments in the life of Jesus Christ : as Mother Nativity , Mother Conception , Mother Presentation , Mother Passion . 
But the names of saints are not interdicted . 
When one sees them , one never sees anything but their mouths . 
All their teeth are yellow . 
No tooth-brush ever entered that convent . 
Brushing one 's teeth is at the top of a ladder at whose bottom is the loss of one 's soul . 
They never say my . 
They possess nothing of their own , and they must not attach themselves to anything . 
They call everything our ; thus : our veil , our chaplet ; if they were speaking of their chemise , they would say our chemise . 
Sometimes they grow attached to some petty object , -- to a book of hours , a relic , a medal that has been blessed . 
As soon as they become aware that they are growing attached to this object , they must give it up . 
They recall the words of Saint Therese , to whom a great lady said , as she was on the point of entering her order , `` Permit me , mother , to send for a Bible to which I am greatly attached . '' 
`` Ah , you are attached to something ! 
In that case , do not enter our order ! '' 
Every person whatever is forbidden to shut herself up , to have a place of her own , a chamber . 
They live with their cells open . 
When they meet , one says , `` Blessed and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
The other responds , `` Forever . '' 
The same ceremony when one taps at the other 's door . 
Hardly has she touched the door when a soft voice on the other side is heard to say hastily , `` Forever ! '' 
Like all practices , this becomes mechanical by force of habit ; and one sometimes says forever before the other has had time to say the rather long sentence , `` Praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar . '' 
Among the Visitandines the one who enters says : `` Ave Maria , '' and the one whose cell is entered says , `` Gratia plena . '' 
It is their way of saying good day , which is in fact full of grace . 
At each hour of the day three supplementary strokes sound from the church bell of the convent . 
At this signal prioress , vocal mothers , professed nuns , lay-sisters , novices , postulants , interrupt what they are saying , what they are doing , or what they are thinking , and all say in unison if it is five o'clock , for instance , `` At five o'clock and at all hours praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar ! '' 
If it is eight o'clock , `` At eight o'clock and at all hours ! '' 
and so on , according to the hour . 
This custom , the object of which is to break the thread of thought and to lead it back constantly to God , exists in many communities ; the formula alone varies . 
Thus at The Infant Jesus they say , `` At this hour and at every hour may the love of Jesus kindle my heart ! '' 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga , cloistered fifty years ago at Petit-Picpus , chant the offices to a solemn psalmody , a pure Gregorian chant , and always with full voice during the whole course of the office . 
Everywhere in the missal where an asterisk occurs they pause , and say in a low voice , `` Jesus-Marie-Joseph . '' 
For the office of the dead they adopt a tone so low that the voices of women can hardly descend to such a depth . 
The effect produced is striking and tragic . 
The nuns of the Petit-Picpus had made a vault under their grand altar for the burial of their community . 
The Government , as they say , does not permit this vault to receive coffins so they leave the convent when they die . 
This is an affliction to them , and causes them consternation as an infraction of the rules . 
They had obtained a mediocre consolation at best , -- permission to be interred at a special hour and in a special corner in the ancient Vaugirard cemetery , which was made of land which had formerly belonged to their community . 
On Fridays the nuns hear high mass , vespers , and all the offices , as on Sunday . 
They scrupulously observe in addition all the little festivals unknown to people of the world , of which the Church of France was so prodigal in the olden days , and of which it is still prodigal in Spain and Italy . 
Their stations in the chapel are interminable . 
As for the number and duration of their prayers we can convey no better idea of them than by quoting the ingenuous remark of one of them : `` The prayers of the postulants are frightful , the prayers of the novices are still worse , and the prayers of the professed nuns are still worse . '' 
Once a week the chapter assembles : the prioress presides ; the vocal mothers assist . 
Each sister kneels in turn on the stones , and confesses aloud , in the presence of all , the faults and sins which she has committed during the week . 
The vocal mothers consult after each confession and inflict the penance aloud . 
Besides this confession in a loud tone , for which all faults in the least serious are reserved , they have for their venial offences what they call the coulpe . 
To make one 's coulpe means to prostrate one 's self flat on one 's face during the office in front of the prioress until the latter , who is never called anything but our mother , notifies the culprit by a slight tap of her foot against the wood of her stall that she can rise . 
The coulpe or peccavi , is made for a very small matter -- a broken glass , a torn veil , an involuntary delay of a few seconds at an office , a false note in church , etc. ; this suffices , and the coulpe is made . 
The coulpe is entirely spontaneous ; it is the culpable person herself -LRB- the word is etymologically in its place here -RRB- who judges herself and inflicts it on herself . 
On festival days and Sundays four mother precentors intone the offices before a large reading-desk with four places . 
One day one of the mother precentors intoned a psalm beginning with Ecce , and instead of Ecce she uttered aloud the three notes do si sol ; for this piece of absent-mindedness she underwent a coulpe which lasted during the whole service : what rendered the fault enormous was the fact that the chapter had laughed . 
When a nun is summoned to the parlor , even were it the prioress herself , she drops her veil , as will be remembered , so that only her mouth is visible . 
The prioress alone can hold communication with strangers . 
The others can see only their immediate family , and that very rarely . 
If , by chance , an outsider presents herself to see a nun , or one whom she has known and loved in the outer world , a regular series of negotiations is required . 
If it is a woman , the authorization may sometimes be granted ; the nun comes , and they talk to her through the shutters , which are opened only for a mother or sister . 
It is unnecessary to say that permission is always refused to men . 
Such is the rule of Saint-Benoit , aggravated by Martin Verga . 
These nuns are not gay , rosy , and fresh , as the daughters of other orders often are . 
They are pale and grave . 
Between 1825 and 1830 three of them went mad . 
AUSTERITIES One is a postulant for two years at least , often for four ; a novice for four . 
It is rare that the definitive vows can be pronounced earlier than the age of twenty-three or twenty-four years . 
The Bernardines-Benedictines of Martin Verga do not admit widows to their order . 
In their cells , they deliver themselves up to many unknown macerations , of which they must never speak . 
On the day when a novice makes her profession , she is dressed in her handsomest attire , she is crowned with white roses , her hair is brushed until it shines , and curled . 
Then she prostrates herself ; a great black veil is thrown over her , and the office for the dead is sung . 
Then the nuns separate into two files ; one file passes close to her , saying in plaintive accents , `` Our sister is dead '' ; and the other file responds in a voice of ecstasy , `` Our sister is alive in Jesus Christ ! '' 
At the epoch when this story takes place , a boarding-school was attached to the convent -- a boarding-school for young girls of noble and mostly wealthy families , among whom could be remarked Mademoiselle de Saint-Aulaire and de Belissen , and an English girl bearing the illustrious Catholic name of Talbot . 
These young girls , reared by these nuns between four walls , grew up with a horror of the world and of the age . 
One of them said to us one day , `` The sight of the street pavement made me shudder from head to foot . '' 
They were dressed in blue , with a white cap and a Holy Spirit of silver gilt or of copper on their breast . 
On certain grand festival days , particularly Saint Martha 's day , they were permitted , as a high favor and a supreme happiness , to dress themselves as nuns and to carry out the offices and practice of Saint-Benoit for a whole day . 
In the early days the nuns were in the habit of lending them their black garments . 
This seemed profane , and the prioress forbade it . 
Only the novices were permitted to lend . 
It is remarkable that these performances , tolerated and encouraged , no doubt , in the convent out of a secret spirit of proselytism and in order to give these children a foretaste of the holy habit , were a genuine happiness and a real recreation for the scholars . 
They simply amused themselves with it . 
It was new ; it gave them a change . 
Candid reasons of childhood , which do not , however , succeed in making us worldlings comprehend the felicity of holding a holy water sprinkler in one 's hand and standing for hours together singing hard enough for four in front of a reading-desk . 
The pupils conformed , with the exception of the austerities , to all the practices of the convent . 
There was a certain young woman who entered the world , and who after many years of married life had not succeeded in breaking herself of the habit of saying in great haste whenever any one knocked at her door , `` forever ! '' 
Like the nuns , the pupils saw their relatives only in the parlor . 
Their very mothers did not obtain permission to embrace them . 
The following illustrates to what a degree severity on that point was carried . 
One day a young girl received a visit from her mother , who was accompanied by a little sister three years of age . 
The young girl wept , for she wished greatly to embrace her sister . 
Impossible . 
She begged that , at least , the child might be permitted to pass her little hand through the bars so that she could kiss it . 
This was almost indignantly refused . 
GAYETIES None the less , these young girls filled this grave house with charming souvenirs . 
At certain hours childhood sparkled in that cloister . 
The recreation hour struck . 
A door swung on its hinges . 
The birds said , `` Good ; here come the children ! '' 
An irruption of youth inundated that garden intersected with a cross like a shroud . 
Radiant faces , white foreheads , innocent eyes , full of merry light , all sorts of auroras , were scattered about amid these shadows . 
After the psalmodies , the bells , the peals , and knells and offices , the sound of these little girls burst forth on a sudden more sweetly than the noise of bees . 
The hive of joy was opened , and each one brought her honey . 
They played , they called to each other , they formed into groups , they ran about ; pretty little white teeth chattered in the corners ; the veils superintended the laughs from a distance , shades kept watch of the sunbeams , but what mattered it ? 
Still they beamed and laughed . 
Those four lugubrious walls had their moment of dazzling brilliancy . 
They looked on , vaguely blanched with the reflection of so much joy at this sweet swarming of the hives . 
It was like a shower of roses falling athwart this house of mourning . 
The young girls frolicked beneath the eyes of the nuns ; the gaze of impeccability does not embarrass innocence . 
Thanks to these children , there was , among so many austere hours , one hour of ingenuousness . 
The little ones skipped about ; the elder ones danced . 
In this cloister play was mingled with heaven . 
Nothing is so delightful and so august as all these fresh , expanding young souls . 
Homer would have come thither to laugh with Perrault ; and there was in that black garden , youth , health , noise , cries , giddiness , pleasure , happiness enough to smooth out the wrinkles of all their ancestresses , those of the epic as well as those of the fairy-tale , those of the throne as well as those of the thatched cottage from Hecuba to la Mere-Grand . 
In that house more than anywhere else , perhaps , arise those children 's sayings which are so graceful and which evoke a smile that is full of thoughtfulness . 
It was between those four gloomy walls that a child of five years exclaimed one day : `` Mother ! 
one of the big girls has just told me that I have only nine years and ten months longer to remain here . 
What happiness ! '' 
It was here , too , that this memorable dialogue took place : -- A Vocal Mother . 
Why are you weeping , my child ? 
The child -LRB- aged six -RRB- . 
I told Alix that I knew my French history . 
She says that I do not know it , but I do . 
Alix , the big girl -LRB- aged nine -RRB- . 
No ; she does not know it . 
The Mother . 
How is that , my child ? 
Alix . 
She told me to open the book at random and to ask her any question in the book , and she would answer it . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` She did not answer it . '' 
`` Let us see about it . 
What did you ask her ? '' 
`` I opened the book at random , as she proposed , and I put the first question that I came across . '' 
`` And what was the question ? '' 
`` It was , ` What happened after that ? ' '' 
It was there that that profound remark was made anent a rather greedy paroquet which belonged to a lady boarder : -- `` How well bred ! 
it eats the top of the slice of bread and butter just like a person ! '' 
It was on one of the flagstones of this cloister that there was once picked up a confession which had been written out in advance , in order that she might not forget it , by a sinner of seven years : -- `` Father , I accuse myself of having been avaricious . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having been an adulteress . 
`` Father , I accuse myself of having raised my eyes to the gentlemen . '' 
It was on one of the turf benches of this garden that a rosy mouth six years of age improvised the following tale , which was listened to by blue eyes aged four and five years : -- `` There were three little cocks who owned a country where there were a great many flowers . 
They plucked the flowers and put them in their pockets . 
After that they plucked the leaves and put them in their playthings . 
There was a wolf in that country ; there was a great deal of forest ; and the wolf was in the forest ; and he ate the little cocks . '' 
And this other poem : -- `` There came a blow with a stick . 
`` It was Punchinello who bestowed it on the cat . 
`` It was not good for her ; it hurt her . 
`` Then a lady put Punchinello in prison . '' 
It was there that a little abandoned child , a foundling whom the convent was bringing up out of charity , uttered this sweet and heart-breaking saying . 
She heard the others talking of their mothers , and she murmured in her corner : -- `` As for me , my mother was not there when I was born ! '' 
There was a stout portress who could always be seen hurrying through the corridors with her bunch of keys , and whose name was Sister Agatha . 
The big big girls -- those over ten years of age -- called her Agathocles . 
The refectory , a large apartment of an oblong square form , which received no light except through a vaulted cloister on a level with the garden , was dark and damp , and , as the children say , full of beasts . 
All the places round about furnished their contingent of insects . 
Each of its four corners had received , in the language of the pupils , a special and expressive name . 
There was Spider corner , Caterpillar corner , Wood-louse corner , and Cricket corner . 
Cricket corner was near the kitchen and was highly esteemed . 
It was not so cold there as elsewhere . 
From the refectory the names had passed to the boarding-school , and there served as in the old College Mazarin to distinguish four nations . 
Every pupil belonged to one of these four nations according to the corner of the refectory in which she sat at meals . 
One day Monseigneur the Archbishop while making his pastoral visit saw a pretty little rosy girl with beautiful golden hair enter the class-room through which he was passing . 
He inquired of another pupil , a charming brunette with rosy cheeks , who stood near him : -- `` Who is that ? '' 
`` She is a spider , Monseigneur . '' 
`` Bah ! 
And that one yonder ? '' 
`` She is a cricket . '' 
`` And that one ? '' 
`` She is a caterpillar . '' 
`` Really ! 
and yourself ? '' 
`` I am a wood-louse , Monseigneur . '' 
Every house of this sort has its own peculiarities . 
At the beginning of this century Ecouen was one of those strict and graceful places where young girls pass their childhood in a shadow that is almost august . 
At Ecouen , in order to take rank in the procession of the Holy Sacrament , a distinction was made between virgins and florists . 
There were also the `` dais '' and the `` censors , '' -- the first who held the cords of the dais , and the others who carried incense before the Holy Sacrament . 
The flowers belonged by right to the florists . 
Four `` virgins '' walked in advance . 
On the morning of that great day it was no rare thing to hear the question put in the dormitory , `` Who is a virgin ? '' 
Madame Campan used to quote this saying of a `` little one '' of seven years , to a `` big girl '' of sixteen , who took the head of the procession , while she , the little one , remained at the rear , `` You are a virgin , but I am not . '' 
DISTRACTIONS Above the door of the refectory this prayer , which was called the white Paternoster , and which possessed the property of bearing people straight to paradise , was inscribed in large black letters : -- `` Little white Paternoster , which God made , which God said , which God placed in paradise . 
In the evening , when I went to bed , I found three angels sitting on my bed , one at the foot , two at the head , the good Virgin Mary in the middle , who told me to lie down without hesitation . 
The good God is my father , the good Virgin is my mother , the three apostles are my brothers , the three virgins are my sisters . 
The shirt in which God was born envelopes my body ; Saint Margaret 's cross is written on my breast . 
Madame the Virgin was walking through the meadows , weeping for God , when she met M. Saint John . 
` Monsieur Saint John , whence come you ? ' 
` I come from Ave Salus . ' 
` You have not seen the good God ; where is he ? ' 
` He is on the tree of the Cross , his feet hanging , his hands nailed , a little cap of white thorns on his head . ' 
Whoever shall say this thrice at eventide , thrice in the morning , shall win paradise at the last . '' 
In 1827 this characteristic orison had disappeared from the wall under a triple coating of daubing paint . 
At the present time it is finally disappearing from the memories of several who were young girls then , and who are old women now . 
A large crucifix fastened to the wall completed the decoration of this refectory , whose only door , as we think we have mentioned , opened on the garden . 
Two narrow tables , each flanked by two wooden benches , formed two long parallel lines from one end to the other of the refectory . 
The walls were white , the tables were black ; these two mourning colors constitute the only variety in convents . 
The meals were plain , and the food of the children themselves severe . 
A single dish of meat and vegetables combined , or salt fish -- such was their luxury . 
This meagre fare , which was reserved for the pupils alone , was , nevertheless , an exception . 
The children ate in silence , under the eye of the mother whose turn it was , who , if a fly took a notion to fly or to hum against the rule , opened and shut a wooden book from time to time . 
This silence was seasoned with the lives of the saints , read aloud from a little pulpit with a desk , which was situated at the foot of the crucifix . 
The reader was one of the big girls , in weekly turn . 
At regular distances , on the bare tables , there were large , varnished bowls in which the pupils washed their own silver cups and knives and forks , and into which they sometimes threw some scrap of tough meat or spoiled fish ; this was punished . 
These bowls were called ronds d'eau . 
The child who broke the silence `` made a cross with her tongue . '' 
Where ? 
On the ground . 
She licked the pavement . 
The dust , that end of all joys , was charged with the chastisement of those poor little rose-leaves which had been guilty of chirping . 
There was in the convent a book which has never been printed except as a unique copy , and which it is forbidden to read . 
It is the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
An arcanum which no profane eye must penetrate . 
Nemo regulas , seu constitutiones nostras , externis communicabit . 
The pupils one day succeeded in getting possession of this book , and set to reading it with avidity , a reading which was often interrupted by the fear of being caught , which caused them to close the volume precipitately . 
From the great danger thus incurred they derived but a very moderate amount of pleasure . 
The most `` interesting thing '' they found were some unintelligible pages about the sins of young boys . 
They played in an alley of the garden bordered with a few shabby fruit-trees . 
In spite of the extreme surveillance and the severity of the punishments administered , when the wind had shaken the trees , they sometimes succeeded in picking up a green apple or a spoiled apricot or an inhabited pear on the sly . 
I will now cede the privilege of speech to a letter which lies before me , a letter written five and twenty years ago by an old pupil , now Madame la Duchesse de -- one of the most elegant women in Paris . 
I quote literally : `` One hides one 's pear or one 's apple as best one may . 
When one goes up stairs to put the veil on the bed before supper , one stuffs them under one 's pillow and at night one eats them in bed , and when one can not do that , one eats them in the closet . '' 
That was one of their greatest luxuries . 
Once -- it was at the epoch of the visit from the archbishop to the convent -- one of the young girls , Mademoiselle Bouchard , who was connected with the Montmorency family , laid a wager that she would ask for a day 's leave of absence -- an enormity in so austere a community . 
The wager was accepted , but not one of those who bet believed that she would do it . 
When the moment came , as the archbishop was passing in front of the pupils , Mademoiselle Bouchard , to the indescribable terror of her companions , stepped out of the ranks , and said , `` Monseigneur , a day 's leave of absence . '' 
Mademoiselle Bouchard was tall , blooming , with the prettiest little rosy face in the world . 
M. de Quelen smiled and said , `` What , my dear child , a day 's leave of absence ! 
Three days if you like . 
I grant you three days . '' 
The prioress could do nothing ; the archbishop had spoken . 
Horror of the convent , but joy of the pupil . 
The effect may be imagined . 
This stern cloister was not so well walled off , however , but that the life of the passions of the outside world , drama , and even romance , did not make their way in . 
To prove this , we will confine ourselves to recording here and to briefly mentioning a real and incontestable fact , which , however , bears no reference in itself to , and is not connected by any thread whatever with the story which we are relating . 
We mention the fact for the sake of completing the physiognomy of the convent in the reader 's mind . 
About this time there was in the convent a mysterious person who was not a nun , who was treated with great respect , and who was addressed as Madame Albertine . 
Nothing was known about her , save that she was mad , and that in the world she passed for dead . 
Beneath this history it was said there lay the arrangements of fortune necessary for a great marriage . 
This woman , hardly thirty years of age , of dark complexion and tolerably pretty , had a vague look in her large black eyes . 
Could she see ? 
There was some doubt about this . 
She glided rather than walked , she never spoke ; it was not quite known whether she breathed . 
Her nostrils were livid and pinched as after yielding up their last sigh . 
To touch her hand was like touching snow . 
She possessed a strange spectral grace . 
Wherever she entered , people felt cold . 
One day a sister , on seeing her pass , said to another sister , `` She passes for a dead woman . '' 
`` Perhaps she is one , '' replied the other . 
A hundred tales were told of Madame Albertine . 
This arose from the eternal curiosity of the pupils . 
In the chapel there was a gallery called L'OEil de Boeuf . 
It was in this gallery , which had only a circular bay , an oeil de boeuf , that Madame Albertine listened to the offices . 
She always occupied it alone because this gallery , being on the level of the first story , the preacher or the officiating priest could be seen , which was interdicted to the nuns . 
One day the pulpit was occupied by a young priest of high rank , M. Le Duc de Rohan , peer of France , officer of the Red Musketeers in 1815 when he was Prince de Leon , and who died afterward , in 1830 , as cardinal and Archbishop of Besancon . 
It was the first time that M. de Rohan had preached at the Petit-Picpus convent . 
Madame Albertine usually preserved perfect calmness and complete immobility during the sermons and services . 
That day , as soon as she caught sight of M. de Rohan , she half rose , and said , in a loud voice , amid the silence of the chapel , `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
The whole community turned their heads in amazement , the preacher raised his eyes , but Madame Albertine had relapsed into her immobility . 
A breath from the outer world , a flash of life , had passed for an instant across that cold and lifeless face and had then vanished , and the mad woman had become a corpse again . 
Those two words , however , had set every one in the convent who had the privilege of speech to chattering . 
How many things were contained in that `` Ah ! 
Auguste ! '' 
what revelations ! 
M. de Rohan 's name really was Auguste . 
It was evident that Madame Albertine belonged to the very highest society , since she knew M. de Rohan , and that her own rank there was of the highest , since she spoke thus familiarly of so great a lord , and that there existed between them some connection , of relationship , perhaps , but a very close one in any case , since she knew his `` pet name . '' 
Two very severe duchesses , Mesdames de Choiseul and de Serent , often visited the community , whither they penetrated , no doubt , in virtue of the privilege Magnates mulieres , and caused great consternation in the boarding-school . 
When these two old ladies passed by , all the poor young girls trembled and dropped their eyes . 
Moreover , M. de Rohan , quite unknown to himself , was an object of attention to the school-girls . 
At that epoch he had just been made , while waiting for the episcopate , vicar-general of the Archbishop of Paris . 
It was one of his habits to come tolerably often to celebrate the offices in the chapel of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus . 
Not one of the young recluses could see him , because of the serge curtain , but he had a sweet and rather shrill voice , which they had come to know and to distinguish . 
He had been a mousquetaire , and then , he was said to be very coquettish , that his handsome brown hair was very well dressed in a roll around his head , and that he had a broad girdle of magnificent moire , and that his black cassock was of the most elegant cut in the world . 
He held a great place in all these imaginations of sixteen years . 
Not a sound from without made its way into the convent . 
But there was one year when the sound of a flute penetrated thither . 
This was an event , and the girls who were at school there at the time still recall it . 
It was a flute which was played in the neighborhood . 
This flute always played the same air , an air which is very far away nowadays , -- `` My Zetulbe , come reign o'er my soul , '' -- and it was heard two or three times a day . 
The young girls passed hours in listening to it , the vocal mothers were upset by it , brains were busy , punishments descended in showers . 
This lasted for several months . 
The girls were all more or less in love with the unknown musician . 
Each one dreamed that she was Zetulbe . 
The sound of the flute proceeded from the direction of the Rue Droit-Mur ; and they would have given anything , compromised everything , attempted anything for the sake of seeing , of catching a glance , if only for a second , of the `` young man '' who played that flute so deliciously , and who , no doubt , played on all these souls at the same time . 
There were some who made their escape by a back door , and ascended to the third story on the Rue Droit-Mur side , in order to attempt to catch a glimpse through the gaps . 
Impossible ! 
One even went so far as to thrust her arm through the grating , and to wave her white handkerchief . 
Two were still bolder . 
They found means to climb on a roof , and risked their lives there , and succeeded at last in seeing `` the young man . '' 
He was an old emigre gentleman , blind and penniless , who was playing his flute in his attic , in order to pass the time . 
THE LITTLE CONVENT In this enclosure of the Petit-Picpus there were three perfectly distinct buildings , -- the Great Convent , inhabited by the nuns , the Boarding-school , where the scholars were lodged ; and lastly , what was called the Little Convent . 
It was a building with a garden , in which lived all sorts of aged nuns of various orders , the relics of cloisters destroyed in the Revolution ; a reunion of all the black , gray , and white medleys of all communities and all possible varieties ; what might be called , if such a coupling of words is permissible , a sort of harlequin convent . 
When the Empire was established , all these poor old dispersed and exiled women had been accorded permission to come and take shelter under the wings of the Bernardines-Benedictines . 
The government paid them a small pension , the ladies of the Petit-Picpus received them cordially . 
It was a singular pell-mell . 
Each followed her own rule , Sometimes the pupils of the boarding-school were allowed , as a great recreation , to pay them a visit ; the result is , that all those young memories have retained among other souvenirs that of Mother Sainte-Bazile , Mother Sainte-Scolastique , and Mother Jacob . 
One of these refugees found herself almost at home . 
She was a nun of Sainte-Aure , the only one of her order who had survived . 
The ancient convent of the ladies of Sainte-Aure occupied , at the beginning of the eighteenth century , this very house of the Petit-Picpus , which belonged later to the Benedictines of Martin Verga . 
This holy woman , too poor to wear the magnificent habit of her order , which was a white robe with a scarlet scapulary , had piously put it on a little manikin , which she exhibited with complacency and which she bequeathed to the house at her death . 
In 1824 , only one nun of this order remained ; to-day , there remains only a doll . 
In addition to these worthy mothers , some old society women had obtained permission of the prioress , like Madame Albertine , to retire into the Little Convent . 
Among the number were Madame Beaufort d'Hautpoul and Marquise Dufresne . 
Another was never known in the convent except by the formidable noise which she made when she blew her nose . 
The pupils called her Madame Vacarmini -LRB- hubbub -RRB- . 
About 1820 or 1821 , Madame de Genlis , who was at that time editing a little periodical publication called l'Intrepide , asked to be allowed to enter the convent of the Petit-Picpus as lady resident . 
The Duc d'Orleans recommended her . 
Uproar in the hive ; the vocal-mothers were all in a flutter ; Madame de Genlis had made romances . 
But she declared that she was the first to detest them , and then , she had reached her fierce stage of devotion . 
With the aid of God , and of the Prince , she entered . 
She departed at the end of six or eight months , alleging as a reason , that there was no shade in the garden . 
The nuns were delighted . 
Although very old , she still played the harp , and did it very well . 
When she went away she left her mark in her cell . 
Madame de Genlis was superstitious and a Latinist . 
These two words furnish a tolerably good profile of her . 
A few years ago , there were still to be seen , pasted in the inside of a little cupboard in her cell in which she locked up her silverware and her jewels , these five lines in Latin , written with her own hand in red ink on yellow paper , and which , in her opinion , possessed the property of frightening away robbers : -- Imparibus meritis pendent tria corpora ramis : -LSB- 15 -RSB- Dismas et Gesmas , media est divina potestas ; Alta petit Dismas , infelix , infima , Gesmas ; Nos et res nostras conservet summa potestas . 
Hos versus dicas , ne tu furto tua perdas . 
-LSB- 15 -RSB- On the boughs hang three bodies of unequal merits : Dismas and Gesmas , between is the divine power . 
Dismas seeks the heights , Gesmas , unhappy man , the lowest regions ; the highest power will preserve us and our effects . 
If you repeat this verse , you will not lose your things by theft . 
These verses in sixth century Latin raise the question whether the two thieves of Calvary were named , as is commonly believed , Dismas and Gestas , or Dismas and Gesmas . 
This orthography might have confounded the pretensions put forward in the last century by the Vicomte de Gestas , of a descent from the wicked thief . 
However , the useful virtue attached to these verses forms an article of faith in the order of the Hospitallers . 
The church of the house , constructed in such a manner as to separate the Great Convent from the Boarding-school like a veritable intrenchment , was , of course , common to the Boarding-school , the Great Convent , and the Little Convent . 
The public was even admitted by a sort of lazaretto entrance on the street . 
But all was so arranged , that none of the inhabitants of the cloister could see a face from the outside world . 
Suppose a church whose choir is grasped in a gigantic hand , and folded in such a manner as to form , not , as in ordinary churches , a prolongation behind the altar , but a sort of hall , or obscure cellar , to the right of the officiating priest ; suppose this hall to be shut off by a curtain seven feet in height , of which we have already spoken ; in the shadow of that curtain , pile up on wooden stalls the nuns in the choir on the left , the school-girls on the right , the lay-sisters and the novices at the bottom , and you will have some idea of the nuns of the Petit-Picpus assisting at divine service . 
That cavern , which was called the choir , communicated with the cloister by a lobby . 
The church was lighted from the garden . 
When the nuns were present at services where their rule enjoined silence , the public was warned of their presence only by the folding seats of the stalls noisily rising and falling . 
SOME SILHOUETTES OF THIS DARKNESS During the six years which separate 1819 from 1825 , the prioress of the Petit-Picpus was Mademoiselle de Blemeur , whose name , in religion , was Mother Innocente . 
She came of the family of Marguerite de Blemeur , author of Lives of the Saints of the Order of Saint-Benoit . 
She had been re-elected . 
She was a woman about sixty years of age , short , thick , `` singing like a cracked pot , '' says the letter which we have already quoted ; an excellent woman , moreover , and the only merry one in the whole convent , and for that reason adored . 
She was learned , erudite , wise , competent , curiously proficient in history , crammed with Latin , stuffed with Greek , full of Hebrew , and more of a Benedictine monk than a Benedictine nun . 
The sub-prioress was an old Spanish nun , Mother Cineres , who was almost blind . 
The most esteemed among the vocal mothers were Mother Sainte-Honorine ; the treasurer , Mother Sainte-Gertrude , the chief mistress of the novices ; Mother-Saint-Ange , the assistant mistress ; Mother Annonciation , the sacristan ; Mother Saint-Augustin , the nurse , the only one in the convent who was malicious ; then Mother Sainte-Mechtilde -LRB- Mademoiselle Gauvain -RRB- , very young and with a beautiful voice ; Mother des Anges -LRB- Mademoiselle Drouet -RRB- , who had been in the convent of the Filles-Dieu , and in the convent du Tresor , between Gisors and Magny ; Mother Saint-Joseph -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cogolludo -RRB- , Mother Sainte-Adelaide -LRB- Mademoiselle d'Auverney -RRB- , Mother Misericorde -LRB- Mademoiselle de Cifuentes , who could not resist austerities -RRB- , Mother Compassion -LRB- Mademoiselle de la Miltiere , received at the age of sixty in defiance of the rule , and very wealthy -RRB- ; Mother Providence -LRB- Mademoiselle de Laudiniere -RRB- , Mother Presentation -LRB- Mademoiselle de Siguenza -RRB- , who was prioress in 1847 ; and finally , Mother Sainte-Celigne -LRB- sister of the sculptor Ceracchi -RRB- , who went mad ; Mother Sainte-Chantal -LRB- Mademoiselle de Suzon -RRB- , who went mad . 
There was also , among the prettiest of them , a charming girl of three and twenty , who was from the Isle de Bourbon , a descendant of the Chevalier Roze , whose name had been Mademoiselle Roze , and who was called Mother Assumption . 
Mother Sainte-Mechtilde , intrusted with the singing and the choir , was fond of making use of the pupils in this quarter . 
She usually took a complete scale of them , that is to say , seven , from ten to sixteen years of age , inclusive , of assorted voices and sizes , whom she made sing standing , drawn up in a line , side by side , according to age , from the smallest to the largest . 
This presented to the eye , something in the nature of a reed-pipe of young girls , a sort of living Pan-pipe made of angels . 
Those of the lay-sisters whom the scholars loved most were Sister Euphrasie , Sister Sainte-Marguerite , Sister Sainte-Marthe , who was in her dotage , and Sister Sainte-Michel , whose long nose made them laugh . 
All these women were gentle with the children . 
The nuns were severe only towards themselves . 
No fire was lighted except in the school , and the food was choice compared to that in the convent . 
Moreover , they lavished a thousand cares on their scholars . 
Only , when a child passed near a nun and addressed her , the nun never replied . 
This rule of silence had had this effect , that throughout the whole convent , speech had been withdrawn from human creatures , and bestowed on inanimate objects . 
Now it was the church-bell which spoke , now it was the gardener 's bell . 
A very sonorous bell , placed beside the portress , and which was audible throughout the house , indicated by its varied peals , which formed a sort of acoustic telegraph , all the actions of material life which were to be performed , and summoned to the parlor , in case of need , such or such an inhabitant of the house . 
Each person and each thing had its own peal . 
The prioress had one and one , the sub-prioress one and two . 
Six-five announced lessons , so that the pupils never said `` to go to lessons , '' but `` to go to six-five . '' 
Four-four was Madame de Genlis 's signal . 
It was very often heard . 
`` C'est le diable a quatre , -- it 's the very deuce -- said the uncharitable . 
Tennine strokes announced a great event . 
It was the opening of the door of seclusion , a frightful sheet of iron bristling with bolts which only turned on its hinges in the presence of the archbishop . 
With the exception of the archbishop and the gardener , no man entered the convent , as we have already said . 
The schoolgirls saw two others : one , the chaplain , the Abbe Banes , old and ugly , whom they were permitted to contemplate in the choir , through a grating ; the other the drawing-master , M. Ansiaux , whom the letter , of which we have perused a few lines , calls M. Anciot , and describes as a frightful old hunchback . 
It will be seen that all these men were carefully chosen . 
Such was this curious house . 
POST CORDA LAPIDES After having sketched its moral face , it will not prove unprofitable to point out , in a few words , its material configuration . 
The reader already has some idea of it . 
The convent of the Petit-Picpus-Sainte-Antoine filled almost the whole of the vast trapezium which resulted from the intersection of the Rue Polonceau , the Rue Droit-Mur , the Rue Petit-Picpus , and the unused lane , called Rue Aumarais on old plans . 
These four streets surrounded this trapezium like a moat . 
The convent was composed of several buildings and a garden . 
The principal building , taken in its entirety , was a juxtaposition of hybrid constructions which , viewed from a bird 's - eye view , outlined , with considerable exactness , a gibbet laid flat on the ground . 
The main arm of the gibbet occupied the whole of the fragment of the Rue Droit-Mur comprised between the Rue Petit-Picpus and the Rue Polonceau ; the lesser arm was a lofty , gray , severe grated facade which faced the Rue Petit-Picpus ; the carriage entrance No. 62 marked its extremity . 
Towards the centre of this facade was a low , arched door , whitened with dust and ashes , where the spiders wove their webs , and which was open only for an hour or two on Sundays , and on rare occasions , when the coffin of a nun left the convent . 
This was the public entrance of the church . 
The elbow of the gibbet was a square hall which was used as the servants ' hall , and which the nuns called the buttery . 
In the main arm were the cells of the mothers , the sisters , and the novices . 
In the lesser arm lay the kitchens , the refectory , backed up by the cloisters and the church . 
Between the door No. 62 and the corner of the closed lane Aumarais , was the school , which was not visible from without . 
The remainder of the trapezium formed the garden , which was much lower than the level of the Rue Polonceau , which caused the walls to be very much higher on the inside than on the outside . 
The garden , which was slightly arched , had in its centre , on the summit of a hillock , a fine pointed and conical fir-tree , whence ran , as from the peaked boss of a shield , four grand alleys , and , ranged by twos in between the branchings of these , eight small ones , so that , if the enclosure had been circular , the geometrical plan of the alleys would have resembled a cross superposed on a wheel . 
As the alleys all ended in the very irregular walls of the garden , they were of unequal length . 
They were bordered with currant bushes . 
At the bottom , an alley of tall poplars ran from the ruins of the old convent , which was at the angle of the Rue Droit-Mur to the house of the Little Convent , which was at the angle of the Aumarais lane . 
In front of the Little Convent was what was called the little garden . 
To this whole , let the reader add a courtyard , all sorts of varied angles formed by the interior buildings , prison walls , the long black line of roofs which bordered the other side of the Rue Polonceau for its sole perspective and neighborhood , and he will be able to form for himself a complete image of what the house of the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus was forty years ago . 
This holy house had been built on the precise site of a famous tennis-ground of the fourteenth to the sixteenth century , which was called the `` tennis-ground of the eleven thousand devils . '' 
All these streets , moreover , were more ancient than Paris . 
These names , Droit-Mur and Aumarais , are very ancient ; the streets which bear them are very much more ancient still . 
Aumarais Lane was called Maugout Lane ; the Rue Droit-Mur was called the Rue des Eglantiers , for God opened flowers before man cut stones . 
A CENTURY UNDER A GUIMPE Since we are engaged in giving details as to what the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in former times , and since we have ventured to open a window on that discreet retreat , the reader will permit us one other little digression , utterly foreign to this book , but characteristic and useful , since it shows that the cloister even has its original figures . 
In the Little Convent there was a centenarian who came from the Abbey of Fontevrault . 
She had even been in society before the Revolution . 
She talked a great deal of M. de Miromesnil , Keeper of the Seals under Louis XVI . 
and of a Presidentess Duplat , with whom she had been very intimate . 
It was her pleasure and her vanity to drag in these names on every pretext . 
She told wonders of the Abbey of Fontevrault , -- that it was like a city , and that there were streets in the monastery . 
She talked with a Picard accent which amused the pupils . 
Every year , she solemnly renewed her vows , and at the moment of taking the oath , she said to the priest , `` Monseigneur Saint-Francois gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Julien , Monseigneur Saint-Julien gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius , Monseigneur Saint-Eusebius gave it to Monseigneur Saint-Procopius , etc. , etc. ; and thus I give it to you , father . '' 
And the school-girls would begin to laugh , not in their sleeves , but under their veils ; charming little stifled laughs which made the vocal mothers frown . 
On another occasion , the centenarian was telling stories . 
She said that in her youth the Bernardine monks were every whit as good as the mousquetaires . 
It was a century which spoke through her , but it was the eighteenth century . 
She told about the custom of the four wines , which existed before the Revolution in Champagne and Bourgogne . 
When a great personage , a marshal of France , a prince , a duke , and a peer , traversed a town in Burgundy or Champagne , the city fathers came out to harangue him and presented him with four silver gondolas into which they had poured four different sorts of wine . 
On the first goblet this inscription could be read , monkey wine ; on the second , lion wine ; on the third , sheep wine ; on the fourth , hog wine . 
These four legends express the four stages descended by the drunkard ; the first , intoxication , which enlivens ; the second , that which irritates ; the third , that which dulls ; and the fourth , that which brutalizes . 
In a cupboard , under lock and key , she kept a mysterious object of which she thought a great deal . 
The rule of Fontevrault did not forbid this . 
She would not show this object to anyone . 
She shut herself up , which her rule allowed her to do , and hid herself , every time that she desired to contemplate it . 
If she heard a footstep in the corridor , she closed the cupboard again as hastily as it was possible with her aged hands . 
As soon as it was mentioned to her , she became silent , she who was so fond of talking . 
The most curious were baffled by her silence and the most tenacious by her obstinacy . 
Thus it furnished a subject of comment for all those who were unoccupied or bored in the convent . 
What could that treasure of the centenarian be , which was so precious and so secret ? 
Some holy book , no doubt ? 
Some unique chaplet ? 
Some authentic relic ? 
They lost themselves in conjectures . 
When the poor old woman died , they rushed to her cupboard more hastily than was fitting , perhaps , and opened it . 
They found the object beneath a triple linen cloth , like some consecrated paten . 
It was a Faenza platter representing little Loves flitting away pursued by apothecary lads armed with enormous syringes . 
The chase abounds in grimaces and in comical postures . 
One of the charming little Loves is already fairly spitted . 
He is resisting , fluttering his tiny wings , and still making an effort to fly , but the dancer is laughing with a satanical air . 
Moral : Love conquered by the colic . 
This platter , which is very curious , and which had , possibly , the honor of furnishing Moliere with an idea , was still in existence in September , 1845 ; it was for sale by a bric-a-brac merchant in the Boulevard Beaumarchais . 
This good old woman would not receive any visits from outside because , said she , the parlor is too gloomy . 
ORIGIN OF THE PERPETUAL ADORATION However , this almost sepulchral parlor , of which we have sought to convey an idea , is a purely local trait which is not reproduced with the same severity in other convents . 
At the convent of the Rue du Temple , in particular , which belonged , in truth , to another order , the black shutters were replaced by brown curtains , and the parlor itself was a salon with a polished wood floor , whose windows were draped in white muslin curtains and whose walls admitted all sorts of frames , a portrait of a Benedictine nun with unveiled face , painted bouquets , and even the head of a Turk . 
It is in that garden of the Temple convent , that stood that famous chestnut-tree which was renowned as the finest and the largest in France , and which bore the reputation among the good people of the eighteenth century of being the father of all the chestnut trees of the realm . 
As we have said , this convent of the Temple was occupied by Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration , Benedictines quite different from those who depended on Citeaux . 
This order of the Perpetual Adoration is not very ancient and does not go back more than two hundred years . 
In 1649 the holy sacrament was profaned on two occasions a few days apart , in two churches in Paris , at Saint-Sulpice and at Saint-Jean en Greve , a rare and frightful sacrilege which set the whole town in an uproar . 
M. the Prior and Vicar-General of Saint-Germain des Pres ordered a solemn procession of all his clergy , in which the Pope 's Nuncio officiated . 
But this expiation did not satisfy two sainted women , Madame Courtin , Marquise de Boucs , and the Comtesse de Chateauvieux . 
This outrage committed on `` the most holy sacrament of the altar , '' though but temporary , would not depart from these holy souls , and it seemed to them that it could only be extenuated by a `` Perpetual Adoration '' in some female monastery . 
Both of them , one in 1652 , the other in 1653 , made donations of notable sums to Mother Catherine de Bar , called of the Holy Sacrament , a Benedictine nun , for the purpose of founding , to this pious end , a monastery of the order of Saint-Benoit ; the first permission for this foundation was given to Mother Catherine de Bar by M. de Metz , Abbe of Saint-Germain , `` on condition that no woman could be received unless she contributed three hundred livres income , which amounts to six thousand livres , to the principal . '' 
After the Abbe of Saint-Germain , the king accorded letters-patent ; and all the rest , abbatial charter , and royal letters , was confirmed in 1654 by the Chamber of Accounts and the Parliament . 
Such is the origin of the legal consecration of the establishment of the Benedictines of the Perpetual Adoration of the Holy Sacrament at Paris . 
Their first convent was `` a new building '' in the Rue Cassette , out of the contributions of Mesdames de Boucs and de Chateauvieux . 
This order , as it will be seen , was not to be confounded with the Benedictine nuns of Citeaux . 
It mounted back to the Abbe of Saint-Germain des Pres , in the same manner that the ladies of the Sacred Heart go back to the general of the Jesuits , and the sisters of charity to the general of the Lazarists . 
It was also totally different from the Bernardines of the Petit-Picpus , whose interior we have just shown . 
In 1657 , Pope Alexander VII . 
had authorized , by a special brief , the Bernardines of the Rue Petit-Picpus , to practise the Perpetual Adoration like the Benedictine nuns of the Holy Sacrament . 
But the two orders remained distinct none the less . 
END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS At the beginning of the Restoration , the convent of the Petit-Picpus was in its decay ; this forms a part of the general death of the order , which , after the eighteenth century , has been disappearing like all the religious orders . 
Contemplation is , like prayer , one of humanity 's needs ; but , like everything which the Revolution touched , it will be transformed , and from being hostile to social progress , it will become favorable to it . 
The house of the Petit-Picpus was becoming rapidly depopulated . 
In 1840 , the Little Convent had disappeared , the school had disappeared . 
There were no longer any old women , nor young girls ; the first were dead , the latter had taken their departure . 
Volaverunt . 
The rule of the Perpetual Adoration is so rigid in its nature that it alarms , vocations recoil before it , the order receives no recruits . 
In 1845 , it still obtained lay-sisters here and there . 
But of professed nuns , none at all . 
Forty years ago , the nuns numbered nearly a hundred ; fifteen years ago there were not more than twenty-eight of them . 
How many are there to-day ? 
In 1847 , the prioress was young , a sign that the circle of choice was restricted . 
She was not forty years old . 
In proportion as the number diminishes , the fatigue increases , the service of each becomes more painful ; the moment could then be seen drawing near when there would be but a dozen bent and aching shoulders to bear the heavy rule of Saint-Benoit . 
The burden is implacable , and remains the same for the few as for the many . 
It weighs down , it crushes . 
Thus they die . 
At the period when the author of this book still lived in Paris , two died . 
One was twenty-five years old , the other twenty-three . 
This latter can say , like Julia Alpinula : `` Hic jaceo . 
Vixi annos viginti et tres . '' 
It is in consequence of this decay that the convent gave up the education of girls . 
We have not felt able to pass before this extraordinary house without entering it , and without introducing the minds which accompany us , and which are listening to our tale , to the profit of some , perchance , of the melancholy history of Jean Valjean . 
We have penetrated into this community , full of those old practices which seem so novel to-day . 
It is the closed garden , hortus conclusus . 
We have spoken of this singular place in detail , but with respect , in so far , at least , as detail and respect are compatible . 
We do not understand all , but we insult nothing . 
We are equally far removed from the hosanna of Joseph de Maistre , who wound up by anointing the executioner , and from the sneer of Voltaire , who even goes so far as to ridicule the cross . 
An illogical act on Voltaire 's part , we may remark , by the way ; for Voltaire would have defended Jesus as he defended Calas ; and even for those who deny superhuman incarnations , what does the crucifix represent ? 
The assassinated sage . 
In this nineteenth century , the religious idea is undergoing a crisis . 
People are unlearning certain things , and they do well , provided that , while unlearning them they learn this : There is no vacuum in the human heart . 
Certain demolitions take place , and it is well that they do , but on condition that they are followed by reconstructions . 
In the meantime , let us study things which are no more . 
It is necessary to know them , if only for the purpose of avoiding them . 
The counterfeits of the past assume false names , and gladly call themselves the future . 
This spectre , this past , is given to falsifying its own passport . 
Let us inform ourselves of the trap . 
Let us be on our guard . 
The past has a visage , superstition , and a mask , hypocrisy . 
Let us denounce the visage and let us tear off the mask . 
As for convents , they present a complex problem , -- a question of civilization , which condemns them ; a question of liberty , which protects them . 
THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA This book is a drama , whose leading personage is the Infinite . 
Man is the second . 
Such being the case , and a convent having happened to be on our road , it has been our duty to enter it . 
Why ? 
Because the convent , which is common to the Orient as well as to the Occident , to antiquity as well as to modern times , to paganism , to Buddhism , to Mahometanism , as well as to Christianity , is one of the optical apparatuses applied by man to the Infinite . 
This is not the place for enlarging disproportionately on certain ideas ; nevertheless , while absolutely maintaining our reserves , our restrictions , and even our indignations , we must say that every time we encounter man in the Infinite , either well or ill understood , we feel ourselves overpowered with respect . 
There is , in the synagogue , in the mosque , in the pagoda , in the wigwam , a hideous side which we execrate , and a sublime side , which we adore . 
What a contemplation for the mind , and what endless food for thought , is the reverberation of God upon the human wall ! 
THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT From the point of view of history , of reason , and of truth , monasticism is condemned . 
Monasteries , when they abound in a nation , are clogs in its circulation , cumbrous establishments , centres of idleness where centres of labor should exist . 
Monastic communities are to the great social community what the mistletoe is to the oak , what the wart is to the human body . 
Their prosperity and their fatness mean the impoverishment of the country . 
The monastic regime , good at the beginning of civilization , useful in the reduction of the brutal by the spiritual , is bad when peoples have reached their manhood . 
Moreover , when it becomes relaxed , and when it enters into its period of disorder , it becomes bad for the very reasons which rendered it salutary in its period of purity , because it still continues to set the example . 
Claustration has had its day . 
Cloisters , useful in the early education of modern civilization , have embarrassed its growth , and are injurious to its development . 
So far as institution and formation with relation to man are concerned , monasteries , which were good in the tenth century , questionable in the fifteenth , are detestable in the nineteenth . 
The leprosy of monasticism has gnawed nearly to a skeleton two wonderful nations , Italy and Spain ; the one the light , the other the splendor of Europe for centuries ; and , at the present day , these two illustrious peoples are but just beginning to convalesce , thanks to the healthy and vigorous hygiene of 1789 alone . 
The convent -- the ancient female convent in particular , such as it still presents itself on the threshold of this century , in Italy , in Austria , in Spain -- is one of the most sombre concretions of the Middle Ages . 
The cloister , that cloister , is the point of intersection of horrors . 
The Catholic cloister , properly speaking , is wholly filled with the black radiance of death . 
The Spanish convent is the most funereal of all . 
There rise , in obscurity , beneath vaults filled with gloom , beneath domes vague with shadow , massive altars of Babel , as high as cathedrals ; there immense white crucifixes hang from chains in the dark ; there are extended , all nude on the ebony , great Christs of ivory ; more than bleeding , -- bloody ; hideous and magnificent , with their elbows displaying the bones , their knee-pans showing their integuments , their wounds showing their flesh , crowned with silver thorns , nailed with nails of gold , with blood drops of rubies on their brows , and diamond tears in their eyes . 
The diamonds and rubies seem wet , and make veiled beings in the shadow below weep , their sides bruised with the hair shirt and their iron-tipped scourges , their breasts crushed with wicker hurdles , their knees excoriated with prayer ; women who think themselves wives , spectres who think themselves seraphim . 
Do these women think ? 
No . 
Have they any will ? 
No . 
Do they love ? 
No . 
Do they live ? 
No . 
Their nerves have turned to bone ; their bones have turned to stone . 
Their veil is of woven night . 
Their breath under their veil resembles the indescribably tragic respiration of death . 
The abbess , a spectre , sanctifies them and terrifies them . 
The immaculate one is there , and very fierce . 
Such are the ancient monasteries of Spain . 
Liars of terrible devotion , caverns of virgins , ferocious places . 
Catholic Spain is more Roman than Rome herself . 
The Spanish convent was , above all others , the Catholic convent . 
There was a flavor of the Orient about it . 
The archbishop , the kislar-aga of heaven , locked up and kept watch over this seraglio of souls reserved for God . 
The nun was the odalisque , the priest was the eunuch . 
The fervent were chosen in dreams and possessed Christ . 
At night , the beautiful , nude young man descended from the cross and became the ecstasy of the cloistered one . 
Lofty walls guarded the mystic sultana , who had the crucified for her sultan , from all living distraction . 
A glance on the outer world was infidelity . 
The in pace replaced the leather sack . 
That which was cast into the sea in the East was thrown into the ground in the West . 
In both quarters , women wrung their hands ; the waves for the first , the grave for the last ; here the drowned , there the buried . 
Monstrous parallel . 
To-day the upholders of the past , unable to deny these things , have adopted the expedient of smiling at them . 
There has come into fashion a strange and easy manner of suppressing the revelations of history , of invalidating the commentaries of philosophy , of eliding all embarrassing facts and all gloomy questions . 
A matter for declamations , say the clever . 
Declamations , repeat the foolish . 
Jean-Jacques a declaimer ; Diderot a declaimer ; Voltaire on Calas , Labarre , and Sirven , declaimers . 
I know not who has recently discovered that Tacitus was a declaimer , that Nero was a victim , and that pity is decidedly due to `` that poor Holofernes . '' 
Facts , however , are awkward things to disconcert , and they are obstinate . 
The author of this book has seen , with his own eyes , eight leagues distant from Brussels , -- there are relics of the Middle Ages there which are attainable for everybody , -- at the Abbey of Villers , the hole of the oubliettes , in the middle of the field which was formerly the courtyard of the cloister , and on the banks of the Thil , four stone dungeons , half under ground , half under the water . 
They were in pace . 
Each of these dungeons has the remains of an iron door , a vault , and a grated opening which , on the outside , is two feet above the level of the river , and on the inside , six feet above the level of the ground . 
Four feet of river flow past along the outside wall . 
The ground is always soaked . 
The occupant of the in pace had this wet soil for his bed . 
In one of these dungeons , there is a fragment of an iron necklet riveted to the wall ; in another , there can be seen a square box made of four slabs of granite , too short for a person to lie down in , too low for him to stand upright in . 
A human being was put inside , with a coverlid of stone on top . 
This exists . 
It can be seen . 
It can be touched . 
These in pace , these dungeons , these iron hinges , these necklets , that lofty peep-hole on a level with the river 's current , that box of stone closed with a lid of granite like a tomb , with this difference , that the dead man here was a living being , that soil which is but mud , that vault hole , those oozing walls , -- what declaimers ! 
ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST Monasticism , such as it existed in Spain , and such as it still exists in Thibet , is a sort of phthisis for civilization . 
It stops life short . 
It simply depopulates . 
Claustration , castration . 
It has been the scourge of Europe . 
Add to this the violence so often done to the conscience , the forced vocations , feudalism bolstered up by the cloister , the right of the first-born pouring the excess of the family into monasticism , the ferocities of which we have just spoken , the in pace , the closed mouths , the walled-up brains , so many unfortunate minds placed in the dungeon of eternal vows , the taking of the habit , the interment of living souls . 
Add individual tortures to national degradations , and , whoever you may be , you will shudder before the frock and the veil , -- those two winding-sheets of human devising . 
Nevertheless , at certain points and in certain places , in spite of philosophy , in spite of progress , the spirit of the cloister persists in the midst of the nineteenth century , and a singular ascetic recrudescence is , at this moment , astonishing the civilized world . 
The obstinacy of antiquated institutions in perpetuating themselves resembles the stubbornness of the rancid perfume which should claim our hair , the pretensions of the spoiled fish which should persist in being eaten , the persecution of the child 's garment which should insist on clothing the man , the tenderness of corpses which should return to embrace the living . 
`` Ingrates ! '' 
says the garment , `` I protected you in inclement weather . 
Why will you have nothing to do with me ? '' 
`` I have just come from the deep sea , '' says the fish . 
`` I have been a rose , '' says the perfume . 
`` I have loved you , '' says the corpse . 
`` I have civilized you , '' says the convent . 
To this there is but one reply : `` In former days . '' 
To dream of the indefinite prolongation of defunct things , and of the government of men by embalming , to restore dogmas in a bad condition , to regild shrines , to patch up cloisters , to rebless reliquaries , to refurnish superstitions , to revictual fanaticisms , to put new handles on holy water brushes and militarism , to reconstitute monasticism and militarism , to believe in the salvation of society by the multiplication of parasites , to force the past on the present , -- this seems strange . 
Still , there are theorists who hold such theories . 
These theorists , who are in other respects people of intelligence , have a very simple process ; they apply to the past a glazing which they call social order , divine right , morality , family , the respect of elders , antique authority , sacred tradition , legitimacy , religion ; and they go about shouting , `` Look ! 
take this , honest people . '' 
This logic was known to the ancients . 
The soothsayers practise it . 
They rubbed a black heifer over with chalk , and said , `` She is white , Bos cretatus . '' 
As for us , we respect the past here and there , and we spare it , above all , provided that it consents to be dead . 
If it insists on being alive , we attack it , and we try to kill it . 
Superstitions , bigotries , affected devotion , prejudices , those forms all forms as they are , are tenacious of life ; they have teeth and nails in their smoke , and they must be clasped close , body to body , and war must be made on them , and that without truce ; for it is one of the fatalities of humanity to be condemned to eternal combat with phantoms . 
It is difficult to seize darkness by the throat , and to hurl it to the earth . 
A convent in France , in the broad daylight of the nineteenth century , is a college of owls facing the light . 
A cloister , caught in the very act of asceticism , in the very heart of the city of '89 and of 1830 and of 1848 , Rome blossoming out in Paris , is an anachronism . 
In ordinary times , in order to dissolve an anachronism and to cause it to vanish , one has only to make it spell out the date . 
But we are not in ordinary times . 
Let us fight . 
Let us fight , but let us make a distinction . 
The peculiar property of truth is never to commit excesses . 
What need has it of exaggeration ? 
There is that which it is necessary to destroy , and there is that which it is simply necessary to elucidate and examine . 
What a force is kindly and serious examination ! 
Let us not apply a flame where only a light is required . 
So , given the nineteenth century , we are opposed , as a general proposition , and among all peoples , in Asia as well as in Europe , in India as well as in Turkey , to ascetic claustration . 
Whoever says cloister , says marsh . 
Their putrescence is evident , their stagnation is unhealthy , their fermentation infects people with fever , and etiolates them ; their multiplication becomes a plague of Egypt . 
We can not think without affright of those lands where fakirs , bonzes , santons , Greek monks , marabouts , talapoins , and dervishes multiply even like swarms of vermin . 
This said , the religious question remains . 
This question has certain mysterious , almost formidable sides ; may we be permitted to look at it fixedly . 
THE CONVENT FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF PRINCIPLES Men unite themselves and dwell in communities . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right of association . 
They shut themselves up at home . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right which every man has to open or shut his door . 
They do not come forth . 
By virtue of what right ? 
By virtue of the right to go and come , which implies the right to remain at home . 
There , at home , what do they do ? 
They speak in low tones ; they drop their eyes ; they toil . 
They renounce the world , towns , sensualities , pleasures , vanities , pride , interests . 
They are clothed in coarse woollen or coarse linen . 
Not one of them possesses in his own right anything whatever . 
On entering there , each one who was rich makes himself poor . 
What he has , he gives to all . 
He who was what is called noble , a gentleman and a lord , is the equal of him who was a peasant . 
The cell is identical for all . 
All undergo the same tonsure , wear the same frock , eat the same black bread , sleep on the same straw , die on the same ashes . 
The same sack on their backs , the same rope around their loins . 
If the decision has been to go barefoot , all go barefoot . 
There may be a prince among them ; that prince is the same shadow as the rest . 
No titles . 
Even family names have disappeared . 
They bear only first names . 
All are bowed beneath the equality of baptismal names . 
They have dissolved the carnal family , and constituted in their community a spiritual family . 
They have no other relatives than all men . 
They succor the poor , they care for the sick . 
They elect those whom they obey . 
They call each other `` my brother . '' 
You stop me and exclaim , `` But that is the ideal convent ! '' 
It is sufficient that it may be the possible convent , that I should take notice of it . 
Thence it results that , in the preceding book , I have spoken of a convent with respectful accents . 
The Middle Ages cast aside , Asia cast aside , the historical and political question held in reserve , from the purely philosophical point of view , outside the requirements of militant policy , on condition that the monastery shall be absolutely a voluntary matter and shall contain only consenting parties , I shall always consider a cloistered community with a certain attentive , and , in some respects , a deferential gravity . 
Wherever there is a community , there is a commune ; where there is a commune , there is right . 
The monastery is the product of the formula : Equality , Fraternity . 
Oh ! 
how grand is liberty ! 
And what a splendid transfiguration ! 
Liberty suffices to transform the monastery into a republic . 
Let us continue . 
But these men , or these women who are behind these four walls . 
They dress themselves in coarse woollen , they are equals , they call each other brothers , that is well ; but they do something else ? 
Yes . 
What ? 
They gaze on the darkness , they kneel , and they clasp their hands . 
What does this signify ? 
PRAYER They pray . 
To whom ? 
To God . 
To pray to God , -- what is the meaning of these words ? 
Is there an infinite beyond us ? 
Is that infinite there , inherent , permanent ; necessarily substantial , since it is infinite ; and because , if it lacked matter it would be bounded ; necessarily intelligent , since it is infinite , and because , if it lacked intelligence , it would end there ? 
Does this infinite awaken in us the idea of essence , while we can attribute to ourselves only the idea of existence ? 
In other terms , is it not the absolute , of which we are only the relative ? 
At the same time that there is an infinite without us , is there not an infinite within us ? 
Are not these two infinites -LRB- what an alarming plural ! -RRB- 
superposed , the one upon the other ? 
Is not this second infinite , so to speak , subjacent to the first ? 
Is it not the latter 's mirror , reflection , echo , an abyss which is concentric with another abyss ? 
Is this second infinity intelligent also ? 
Does it think ? 
Does it love ? 
Does it will ? 
If these two infinities are intelligent , each of them has a will principle , and there is an I in the upper infinity as there is an I in the lower infinity . 
The I below is the soul ; the I on high is God . 
To place the infinity here below in contact , by the medium of thought , with the infinity on high , is called praying . 
Let us take nothing from the human mind ; to suppress is bad . 
We must reform and transform . 
Certain faculties in man are directed towards the Unknown ; thought , revery , prayer . 
The Unknown is an ocean . 
What is conscience ? 
It is the compass of the Unknown . 
Thought , revery , prayer , -- these are great and mysterious radiations . 
Let us respect them . 
Whither go these majestic irradiations of the soul ? 
Into the shadow ; that is to say , to the light . 
The grandeur of democracy is to disown nothing and to deny nothing of humanity . 
Close to the right of the man , beside it , at the least , there exists the right of the soul . 
To crush fanaticism and to venerate the infinite , such is the law . 
Let us not confine ourselves to prostrating ourselves before the tree of creation , and to the contemplation of its branches full of stars . 
We have a duty to labor over the human soul , to defend the mystery against the miracle , to adore the incomprehensible and reject the absurd , to admit , as an inexplicable fact , only what is necessary , to purify belief , to remove superstitions from above religion ; to clear God of caterpillars . 
THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER With regard to the modes of prayer , all are good , provided that they are sincere . 
Turn your book upside down and be in the infinite . 
There is , as we know , a philosophy which denies the infinite . 
There is also a philosophy , pathologically classified , which denies the sun ; this philosophy is called blindness . 
To erect a sense which we lack into a source of truth , is a fine blind man 's self-sufficiency . 
The curious thing is the haughty , superior , and compassionate airs which this groping philosophy assumes towards the philosophy which beholds God . 
One fancies he hears a mole crying , `` I pity them with their sun ! '' 
There are , as we know , powerful and illustrious atheists . 
At bottom , led back to the truth by their very force , they are not absolutely sure that they are atheists ; it is with them only a question of definition , and in any case , if they do not believe in God , being great minds , they prove God . 
We salute them as philosophers , while inexorably denouncing their philosophy . 
Let us go on . 
The remarkable thing about it is , also , their facility in paying themselves off with words . 
A metaphysical school of the North , impregnated to some extent with fog , has fancied that it has worked a revolution in human understanding by replacing the word Force with the word Will . 
To say : `` the plant wills , '' instead of : `` the plant grows '' : this would be fecund in results , indeed , if we were to add : `` the universe wills . '' 
Why ? 
Because it would come to this : the plant wills , therefore it has an _ I _ ; the universe wills , therefore it has a God . 
As for us , who , however , in contradistinction to this school , reject nothing a priori , a will in the plant , accepted by this school , appears to us more difficult to admit than a will in the universe denied by it . 
To deny the will of the infinite , that is to say , God , is impossible on any other conditions than a denial of the infinite . 
We have demonstrated this . 
The negation of the infinite leads straight to nihilism . 
Everything becomes `` a mental conception . '' 
With nihilism , no discussion is possible ; for the nihilist logic doubts the existence of its interlocutor , and is not quite sure that it exists itself . 
From its point of view , it is possible that it may be for itself , only `` a mental conception . '' 
Only , it does not perceive that all which it has denied it admits in the lump , simply by the utterance of the word , mind . 
In short , no way is open to the thought by a philosophy which makes all end in the monosyllable , No . 
To No there is only one reply , Yes . 
Nihilism has no point . 
There is no such thing as nothingness . 
Zero does not exist . 
Everything is something . 
Nothing is nothing . 
Man lives by affirmation even more than by bread . 
Even to see and to show does not suffice . 
Philosophy should be an energy ; it should have for effort and effect to ameliorate the condition of man . 
Socrates should enter into Adam and produce Marcus Aurelius ; in other words , the man of wisdom should be made to emerge from the man of felicity . 
Eden should be changed into a Lyceum . 
Science should be a cordial . 
To enjoy , -- what a sad aim , and what a paltry ambition ! 
The brute enjoys . 
To offer thought to the thirst of men , to give them all as an elixir the notion of God , to make conscience and science fraternize in them , to render them just by this mysterious confrontation ; such is the function of real philosophy . 
Morality is a blossoming out of truths . 
Contemplation leads to action . 
The absolute should be practicable . 
It is necessary that the ideal should be breathable , drinkable , and eatable to the human mind . 
It is the ideal which has the right to say : Take , this is my body , this is my blood . 
Wisdom is a holy communion . 
It is on this condition that it ceases to be a sterile love of science and becomes the one and sovereign mode of human rallying , and that philosophy herself is promoted to religion . 
Philosophy should not be a corbel erected on mystery to gaze upon it at its ease , without any other result than that of being convenient to curiosity . 
For our part , adjourning the development of our thought to another occasion , we will confine ourselves to saying that we neither understand man as a point of departure nor progress as an end , without those two forces which are their two motors : faith and love . 
Progress is the goal , the ideal is the type . 
What is this ideal ? 
It is God . 
Ideal , absolute , perfection , infinity : identical words . 
PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME History and philosophy have eternal duties , which are , at the same time , simple duties ; to combat Caiphas the High-priest , Draco the Lawgiver , Trimalcion the Legislator , Tiberius the Emperor ; this is clear , direct , and limpid , and offers no obscurity . 
But the right to live apart , even with its inconveniences and its abuses , insists on being stated and taken into account . 
Cenobitism is a human problem . 
When one speaks of convents , those abodes of error , but of innocence , of aberration but of good-will , of ignorance but of devotion , of torture but of martyrdom , it always becomes necessary to say either yes or no . 
A convent is a contradiction . 
Its object , salvation ; its means thereto , sacrifice . 
The convent is supreme egoism having for its result supreme abnegation . 
To abdicate with the object of reigning seems to be the device of monasticism . 
In the cloister , one suffers in order to enjoy . 
One draws a bill of exchange on death . 
One discounts in terrestrial gloom celestial light . 
In the cloister , hell is accepted in advance as a post obit on paradise . 
The taking of the veil or the frock is a suicide paid for with eternity . 
It does not seem to us , that on such a subject mockery is permissible . 
All about it is serious , the good as well as the bad . 
The just man frowns , but never smiles with a malicious sneer . 
We understand wrath , but not malice . 
FAITH , LAW A few words more . 
We blame the church when she is saturated with intrigues , we despise the spiritual which is harsh toward the temporal ; but we everywhere honor the thoughtful man . 
We salute the man who kneels . 
A faith ; this is a necessity for man . 
Woe to him who believes nothing . 
One is not unoccupied because one is absorbed . 
There is visible labor and invisible labor . 
To contemplate is to labor , to think is to act . 
Folded arms toil , clasped hands work . 
A gaze fixed on heaven is a work . 
Thales remained motionless for four years . 
He founded philosophy . 
In our opinion , cenobites are not lazy men , and recluses are not idlers . 
To meditate on the Shadow is a serious thing . 
Without invalidating anything that we have just said , we believe that a perpetual memory of the tomb is proper for the living . 
On this point , the priest and the philosopher agree . 
We must die . 
The Abbe de la Trappe replies to Horace . 
To mingle with one 's life a certain presence of the sepulchre , -- this is the law of the sage ; and it is the law of the ascetic . 
In this respect , the ascetic and the sage converge . 
There is a material growth ; we admit it . 
There is a moral grandeur ; we hold to that . 
Thoughtless and vivacious spirits say : -- `` What is the good of those motionless figures on the side of mystery ? 
What purpose do they serve ? 
What do they do ? '' 
Alas ! 
In the presence of the darkness which environs us , and which awaits us , in our ignorance of what the immense dispersion will make of us , we reply : `` There is probably no work more divine than that performed by these souls . '' 
And we add : `` There is probably no work which is more useful . '' 
There certainly must be some who pray constantly for those who never pray at all . 
In our opinion the whole question lies in the amount of thought that is mingled with prayer . 
Leibnitz praying is grand , Voltaire adoring is fine . 
Deo erexit Voltaire . 
We are for religion as against religions . 
We are of the number who believe in the wretchedness of orisons , and the sublimity of prayer . 
Moreover , at this minute which we are now traversing , -- a minute which will not , fortunately , leave its impress on the nineteenth century , -- at this hour , when so many men have low brows and souls but little elevated , among so many mortals whose morality consists in enjoyment , and who are busied with the brief and misshapen things of matter , whoever exiles himself seems worthy of veneration to us . 
The monastery is a renunciation . 
Sacrifice wrongly directed is still sacrifice . 
To mistake a grave error for a duty has a grandeur of its own . 
Taken by itself , and ideally , and in order to examine the truth on all sides until all aspects have been impartially exhausted , the monastery , the female convent in particular , -- for in our century it is woman who suffers the most , and in this exile of the cloister there is something of protestation , -- the female convent has incontestably a certain majesty . 
This cloistered existence which is so austere , so depressing , a few of whose features we have just traced , is not life , for it is not liberty ; it is not the tomb , for it is not plenitude ; it is the strange place whence one beholds , as from the crest of a lofty mountain , on one side the abyss where we are , on the other , the abyss whither we shall go ; it is the narrow and misty frontier separating two worlds , illuminated and obscured by both at the same time , where the ray of life which has become enfeebled is mingled with the vague ray of death ; it is the half obscurity of the tomb . 
We , who do not believe what these women believe , but who , like them , live by faith , -- we have never been able to think without a sort of tender and religious terror , without a sort of pity , that is full of envy , of those devoted , trembling and trusting creatures , of these humble and august souls , who dare to dwell on the very brink of the mystery , waiting between the world which is closed and heaven which is not yet open , turned towards the light which one can not see , possessing the sole happiness of thinking that they know where it is , aspiring towards the gulf , and the unknown , their eyes fixed motionless on the darkness , kneeling , bewildered , stupefied , shuddering , half lifted , at times , by the deep breaths of eternity . 
BOOK EIGHTH . 
-- CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM WHICH TREATS OF THE MANNER OF ENTERING A CONVENT It was into this house that Jean Valjean had , as Fauchelevent expressed it , `` fallen from the sky . '' 
He had scaled the wall of the garden which formed the angle of the Rue Polonceau . 
That hymn of the angels which he had heard in the middle of the night , was the nuns chanting matins ; that hall , of which he had caught a glimpse in the gloom , was the chapel . 
That phantom which he had seen stretched on the ground was the sister who was making reparation ; that bell , the sound of which had so strangely surprised him , was the gardener 's bell attached to the knee of Father Fauchelevent . 
Cosette once put to bed , Jean Valjean and Fauchelevent had , as we have already seen , supped on a glass of wine and a bit of cheese before a good , crackling fire ; then , the only bed in the hut being occupied by Cosette , each threw himself on a truss of straw . 
Before he shut his eyes , Jean Valjean said : `` I must remain here henceforth . '' 
This remark trotted through Fauchelevent 's head all night long . 
To tell the truth , neither of them slept . 
Jean Valjean , feeling that he was discovered and that Javert was on his scent , understood that he and Cosette were lost if they returned to Paris . 
Then the new storm which had just burst upon him had stranded him in this cloister . 
Jean Valjean had , henceforth , but one thought , -- to remain there . 
Now , for an unfortunate man in his position , this convent was both the safest and the most dangerous of places ; the most dangerous , because , as no men might enter there , if he were discovered , it was a flagrant offence , and Jean Valjean would find but one step intervening between the convent and prison ; the safest , because , if he could manage to get himself accepted there and remain there , who would ever seek him in such a place ? 
To dwell in an impossible place was safety . 
On his side , Fauchelevent was cudgelling his brains . 
He began by declaring to himself that he understood nothing of the matter . 
How had M. Madeleine got there , when the walls were what they were ? 
Cloister walls are not to be stepped over . 
How did he get there with a child ? 
One can not scale a perpendicular wall with a child in one 's arms . 
Who was that child ? 
Where did they both come from ? 
Since Fauchelevent had lived in the convent , he had heard nothing of M. sur M. , and he knew nothing of what had taken place there . 
Father Madeleine had an air which discouraged questions ; and besides , Fauchelevent said to himself : `` One does not question a saint . '' 
M. Madeleine had preserved all his prestige in Fauchelevent 's eyes . 
Only , from some words which Jean Valjean had let fall , the gardener thought he could draw the inference that M. Madeleine had probably become bankrupt through the hard times , and that he was pursued by his creditors ; or that he had compromised himself in some political affair , and was in hiding ; which last did not displease Fauchelevent , who , like many of our peasants of the North , had an old fund of Bonapartism about him . 
While in hiding , M. Madeleine had selected the convent as a refuge , and it was quite simple that he should wish to remain there . 
But the inexplicable point , to which Fauchelevent returned constantly and over which he wearied his brain , was that M. Madeleine should be there , and that he should have that little girl with him . 
Fauchelevent saw them , touched them , spoke to them , and still did not believe it possible . 
The incomprehensible had just made its entrance into Fauchelevent 's hut . 
Fauchelevent groped about amid conjectures , and could see nothing clearly but this : `` M. Madeleine saved my life . '' 
This certainty alone was sufficient and decided his course . 
He said to himself : `` It is my turn now . '' 
He added in his conscience : `` M. Madeleine did not stop to deliberate when it was a question of thrusting himself under the cart for the purpose of dragging me out . '' 
He made up his mind to save M. Madeleine . 
Nevertheless , he put many questions to himself and made himself divers replies : `` After what he did for me , would I save him if he were a thief ? 
Just the same . 
If he were an assassin , would I save him ? 
Just the same . 
Since he is a saint , shall I save him ? 
Just the same . '' 
But what a problem it was to manage to have him remain in the convent ! 
Fauchelevent did not recoil in the face of this almost chimerical undertaking ; this poor peasant of Picardy without any other ladder than his self-devotion , his good will , and a little of that old rustic cunning , on this occasion enlisted in the service of a generous enterprise , undertook to scale the difficulties of the cloister , and the steep escarpments of the rule of Saint-Benoit . 
Father Fauchelevent was an old man who had been an egoist all his life , and who , towards the end of his days , halt , infirm , with no interest left to him in the world , found it sweet to be grateful , and perceiving a generous action to be performed , flung himself upon it like a man , who at the moment when he is dying , should find close to his hand a glass of good wine which he had never tasted , and should swallow it with avidity . 
We may add , that the air which he had breathed for many years in this convent had destroyed all personality in him , and had ended by rendering a good action of some kind absolutely necessary to him . 
So he took his resolve : to devote himself to M. Madeleine . 
We have just called him a poor peasant of Picardy . 
That description is just , but incomplete . 
At the point of this story which we have now reached , a little of Father Fauchelevent 's physiology becomes useful . 
He was a peasant , but he had been a notary , which added trickery to his cunning , and penetration to his ingenuousness . 
Having , through various causes , failed in his business , he had descended to the calling of a carter and a laborer . 
But , in spite of oaths and lashings , which horses seem to require , something of the notary had lingered in him . 
He had some natural wit ; he talked good grammar ; he conversed , which is a rare thing in a village ; and the other peasants said of him : `` He talks almost like a gentleman with a hat . '' 
Fauchelevent belonged , in fact , to that species , which the impertinent and flippant vocabulary of the last century qualified as demi-bourgeois , demi-lout , and which the metaphors showered by the chateau upon the thatched cottage ticketed in the pigeon-hole of the plebeian : rather rustic , rather citified ; pepper and salt . 
Fauchelevent , though sorely tried and harshly used by fate , worn out , a sort of poor , threadbare old soul , was , nevertheless , an impulsive man , and extremely spontaneous in his actions ; a precious quality which prevents one from ever being wicked . 
His defects and his vices , for he had some , were all superficial ; in short , his physiognomy was of the kind which succeeds with an observer . 
His aged face had none of those disagreeable wrinkles at the top of the forehead , which signify malice or stupidity . 
At daybreak , Father Fauchelevent opened his eyes , after having done an enormous deal of thinking , and beheld M. Madeleine seated on his truss of straw , and watching Cosette 's slumbers . 
Fauchelevent sat up and said : -- `` Now that you are here , how are you going to contrive to enter ? '' 
This remark summed up the situation and aroused Jean Valjean from his revery . 
The two men took counsel together . 
`` In the first place , '' ' said Fauchelevent , `` you will begin by not setting foot outside of this chamber , either you or the child . 
One step in the garden and we are done for . '' 
`` That is true . '' 
`` Monsieur Madeleine , '' resumed Fauchelevent , `` you have arrived at a very auspicious moment , I mean to say a very inauspicious moment ; one of the ladies is very ill . 
This will prevent them from looking much in our direction . 
It seems that she is dying . 
The prayers of the forty hours are being said . 
The whole community is in confusion . 
That occupies them . 
The one who is on the point of departure is a saint . 
In fact , we are all saints here ; all the difference between them and me is that they say ` our cell , ' and that I say ` my cabin . ' 
The prayers for the dying are to be said , and then the prayers for the dead . 
We shall be at peace here for to-day ; but I will not answer for to-morrow . '' 
`` Still , '' observed Jean Valjean , `` this cottage is in the niche of the wall , it is hidden by a sort of ruin , there are trees , it is not visible from the convent . '' 
`` And I add that the nuns never come near it . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
The interrogation mark which accentuated this `` well '' signified : `` it seems to me that one may remain concealed here ? '' 
It was to this interrogation point that Fauchelevent responded : -- `` There are the little girls . '' 
`` What little girls ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Just as Fauchelevent opened his mouth to explain the words which he had uttered , a bell emitted one stroke . 
`` The nun is dead , '' said he . 
`` There is the knell . '' 
And he made a sign to Jean Valjean to listen . 
The bell struck a second time . 
`` It is the knell , Monsieur Madeleine . 
The bell will continue to strike once a minute for twenty-four hours , until the body is taken from the church . 
-- You see , they play . 
At recreation hours it suffices to have a ball roll aside , to send them all hither , in spite of prohibitions , to hunt and rummage for it all about here . 
Those cherubs are devils . '' 
`` Who ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
`` The little girls . 
You would be very quickly discovered . 
They would shriek : ` Oh ! 
a man ! ' 
There is no danger to-day . 
There will be no recreation hour . 
The day will be entirely devoted to prayers . 
You hear the bell . 
As I told you , a stroke each minute . 
It is the death knell . '' 
`` I understand , Father Fauchelevent . 
There are pupils . '' 
And Jean Valjean thought to himself : -- `` Here is Cosette 's education already provided . '' 
Fauchelevent exclaimed : -- `` Pardine ! 
There are little girls indeed ! 
And they would bawl around you ! 
And they would rush off ! 
To be a man here is to have the plague . 
You see how they fasten a bell to my paw as though I were a wild beast . '' 
Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought . 
-- `` This convent would be our salvation , '' he murmured . 
Then he raised his voice : -- `` Yes , the difficulty is to remain here . '' 
`` No , '' said Fauchelevent , `` the difficulty is to get out . '' 
Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart . 
`` To get out ! '' 
`` Yes , Monsieur Madeleine . 
In order to return here it is first necessary to get out . '' 
And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded , Fauchelevent went on : -- `` You must not be found here in this fashion . 
Whence come you ? 
For me , you fall from heaven , because I know you ; but the nuns require one to enter by the door . '' 
All at once they heard a rather complicated pealing from another bell . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Fauchelevent , `` they are ringing up the vocal mothers . 
They are going to the chapter . 
They always hold a chapter when any one dies . 
She died at daybreak . 
People generally do die at daybreak . 
But can not you get out by the way in which you entered ? 
Come , I do not ask for the sake of questioning you , but how did you get in ? '' 
Jean Valjean turned pale ; the very thought of descending again into that terrible street made him shudder . 
You make your way out of a forest filled with tigers , and once out of it , imagine a friendly counsel that shall advise you to return thither ! 
Jean Valjean pictured to himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in that quarter , agents on the watch , sentinels everywhere , frightful fists extended towards his collar , Javert at the corner of the intersection of the streets perhaps . 
`` Impossible ! '' 
said he . 
`` Father Fauchelevent , say that I fell from the sky . '' 
`` But I believe it , I believe it , '' retorted Fauchelevent . 
`` You have no need to tell me that . 
The good God must have taken you in his hand for the purpose of getting a good look at you close to , and then dropped you . 
Only , he meant to place you in a man 's convent ; he made a mistake . 
Come , there goes another peal , that is to order the porter to go and inform the municipality that the dead-doctor is to come here and view a corpse . 
All that is the ceremony of dying . 
These good ladies are not at all fond of that visit . 
A doctor is a man who does not believe in anything . 
He lifts the veil . 
Sometimes he lifts something else too . 
How quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time ! 
What is the matter ? 
Your little one is still asleep . 
What is her name ? '' 
`` Cosette . '' 
`` She is your daughter ? 
You are her grandfather , that is ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It will be easy enough for her to get out of here . 
I have my service door which opens on the courtyard . 
I knock . 
The porter opens ; I have my vintage basket on my back , the child is in it , I go out . 
Father Fauchelevent goes out with his basket -- that is perfectly natural . 
You will tell the child to keep very quiet . 
She will be under the cover . 
I will leave her for whatever time is required with a good old friend , a fruit-seller whom I know in the Rue Chemin-Vert , who is deaf , and who has a little bed . 
I will shout in the fruit-seller 's ear , that she is a niece of mine , and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow . 
Then the little one will re-enter with you ; for I will contrive to have you re-enter . 
It must be done . 
But how will you manage to get out ? '' 
Jean Valjean shook his head . 
`` No one must see me , the whole point lies there , Father Fauchelevent . 
Find some means of getting me out in a basket , under cover , like Cosette . '' 
Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of his left hand , a sign of serious embarrassment . 
A third peal created a diversion . 
`` That is the dead-doctor taking his departure , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` He has taken a look and said : ` She is dead , that is well . ' 
When the doctor has signed the passport for paradise , the undertaker 's company sends a coffin . 
If it is a mother , the mothers lay her out ; if she is a sister , the sisters lay her out . 
After which , I nail her up . 
That forms a part of my gardener 's duty . 
A gardener is a bit of a grave-digger . 
She is placed in a lower hall of the church which communicates with the street , and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead . 
I do n't count the undertaker 's men and myself as men . 
It is in that hall that I nail up the coffin . 
The undertaker 's men come and get it , and whip up , coachman ! 
that 's the way one goes to heaven . 
They fetch a box with nothing in it , they take it away again with something in it . 
That 's what a burial is like . 
De profundis . '' 
A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping Cosette , who lay with her mouth vaguely open , and had the air of an angel drinking in the light . 
Jean Valjean had fallen to gazing at her . 
He was no longer listening to Fauchelevent . 
That one is not listened to is no reason for preserving silence . 
The good old gardener went on tranquilly with his babble : -- `` The grave is dug in the Vaugirard cemetery . 
They declare that they are going to suppress that Vaugirard cemetery . 
It is an ancient cemetery which is outside the regulations , which has no uniform , and which is going to retire . 
It is a shame , for it is convenient . 
I have a friend there , Father Mestienne , the grave-digger . 
The nuns here possess one privilege , it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall . 
There is a special permission from the Prefecture on their behalf . 
But how many events have happened since yesterday ! 
Mother Crucifixion is dead , and Father Madeleine -- '' `` Is buried , '' said Jean Valjean , smiling sadly . 
Fauchelevent caught the word . 
`` Goodness ! 
if you were here for good , it would be a real burial . '' 
A fourth peal burst out . 
Fauchelevent hastily detached the belled knee-cap from its nail and buckled it on his knee again . 
`` This time it is for me . 
The Mother Prioress wants me . 
Good , now I am pricking myself on the tongue of my buckle . 
Monsieur Madeleine , do n't stir from here , and wait for me . 
Something new has come up . 
If you are hungry , there is wine , bread and cheese . '' 
And he hastened out of the hut , crying : `` Coming ! 
coming ! '' 
Jean Valjean watched him hurrying across the garden as fast as his crooked leg would permit , casting a sidelong glance by the way on his melon patch . 
Less than ten minutes later , Father Fauchelevent , whose bell put the nuns in his road to flight , tapped gently at a door , and a gentle voice replied : `` Forever ! 
Forever ! '' 
that is to say : `` Enter . '' 
The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing the gardener on business . 
This parlor adjoined the chapter hall . 
The prioress , seated on the only chair in the parlor , was waiting for Fauchelevent . 
FAUCHELEVENT IN THE PRESENCE OF A DIFFICULTY It is the peculiarity of certain persons and certain professions , notably priests and nuns , to wear a grave and agitated air on critical occasions . 
At the moment when Fauchelevent entered , this double form of preoccupation was imprinted on the countenance of the prioress , who was that wise and charming Mademoiselle de Blemeur , Mother Innocente , who was ordinarily cheerful . 
The gardener made a timid bow , and remained at the door of the cell . 
The prioress , who was telling her beads , raised her eyes and said : -- `` Ah ! 
it is you , Father Fauvent . '' 
This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent . 
Fauchelevent bowed again . 
`` Father Fauvent , I have sent for you . '' 
`` Here I am , reverend Mother . '' 
`` I have something to say to you . '' 
`` And so have I , '' said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused him inward terror , `` I have something to say to the very reverend Mother . '' 
The prioress stared at him . 
`` Ah ! 
you have a communication to make to me . '' 
`` A request . '' 
`` Very well , speak . '' 
Goodman Fauchelevent , the ex-notary , belonged to the category of peasants who have assurance . 
A certain clever ignorance constitutes a force ; you do not distrust it , and you are caught by it . 
Fauchelevent had been a success during the something more than two years which he had passed in the convent . 
Always solitary and busied about his gardening , he had nothing else to do than to indulge his curiosity . 
As he was at a distance from all those veiled women passing to and fro , he saw before him only an agitation of shadows . 
By dint of attention and sharpness he had succeeded in clothing all those phantoms with flesh , and those corpses were alive for him . 
He was like a deaf man whose sight grows keener , and like a blind man whose hearing becomes more acute . 
He had applied himself to riddling out the significance of the different peals , and he had succeeded , so that this taciturn and enigmatical cloister possessed no secrets for him ; the sphinx babbled all her secrets in his ear . 
Fauchelevent knew all and concealed all ; that constituted his art . 
The whole convent thought him stupid . 
A great merit in religion . 
The vocal mothers made much of Fauchelevent . 
He was a curious mute . 
He inspired confidence . 
Moreover , he was regular , and never went out except for well-demonstrated requirements of the orchard and vegetable garden . 
This discretion of conduct had inured to his credit . 
None the less , he had set two men to chattering : the porter , in the convent , and he knew the singularities of their parlor , and the grave-digger , at the cemetery , and he was acquainted with the peculiarities of their sepulture ; in this way , he possessed a double light on the subject of these nuns , one as to their life , the other as to their death . 
But he did not abuse his knowledge . 
The congregation thought a great deal of him . 
Old , lame , blind to everything , probably a little deaf into the bargain , -- what qualities ! 
They would have found it difficult to replace him . 
The goodman , with the assurance of a person who feels that he is appreciated , entered into a rather diffuse and very deep rustic harangue to the reverend prioress . 
He talked a long time about his age , his infirmities , the surcharge of years counting double for him henceforth , of the increasing demands of his work , of the great size of the garden , of nights which must be passed , like the last , for instance , when he had been obliged to put straw mats over the melon beds , because of the moon , and he wound up as follows : `` That he had a brother '' -- -LRB- the prioress made a movement -RRB- , -- `` a brother no longer young '' -- -LRB- a second movement on the part of the prioress , but one expressive of reassurance -RRB- , -- `` that , if he might be permitted , this brother would come and live with him and help him , that he was an excellent gardener , that the community would receive from him good service , better than his own ; that , otherwise , if his brother were not admitted , as he , the elder , felt that his health was broken and that he was insufficient for the work , he should be obliged , greatly to his regret , to go away ; and that his brother had a little daughter whom he would bring with him , who might be reared for God in the house , and who might , who knows , become a nun some day . '' 
When he had finished speaking , the prioress stayed the slipping of her rosary between her fingers , and said to him : -- `` Could you procure a stout iron bar between now and this evening ? '' 
`` For what purpose ? '' 
`` To serve as a lever . '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother , '' replied Fauchelevent . 
The prioress , without adding a word , rose and entered the adjoining room , which was the hall of the chapter , and where the vocal mothers were probably assembled . 
Fauchelevent was left alone . 
MOTHER INNOCENTE About a quarter of an hour elapsed . 
The prioress returned and seated herself once more on her chair . 
The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied . 
We will present a stenographic report of the dialogue which then ensued , to the best of our ability . 
`` Father Fauvent ! '' 
`` Reverend Mother ! '' 
`` Do you know the chapel ? '' 
`` I have a little cage there , where I hear the mass and the offices . '' 
`` And you have been in the choir in pursuance of your duties ? '' 
`` Two or three times . '' 
`` There is a stone to be raised . '' 
`` Heavy ? '' 
`` The slab of the pavement which is at the side of the altar . '' 
`` The slab which closes the vault ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` It would be a good thing to have two men for it . '' 
`` Mother Ascension , who is as strong as a man , will help you . '' 
`` A woman is never a man . '' 
`` We have only a woman here to help you . 
Each one does what he can . 
Because Dom Mabillon gives four hundred and seventeen epistles of Saint Bernard , while Merlonus Horstius only gives three hundred and sixty-seven , I do not despise Merlonus Horstius . '' 
`` Neither do I. '' `` Merit consists in working according to one 's strength . 
A cloister is not a dock-yard . '' 
`` And a woman is not a man . 
But my brother is the strong one , though ! '' 
`` And can you get a lever ? '' 
`` That is the only sort of key that fits that sort of door . '' 
`` There is a ring in the stone . '' 
`` I will put the lever through it . '' 
`` And the stone is so arranged that it swings on a pivot . '' 
`` That is good , reverend Mother . 
I will open the vault . '' 
`` And the four Mother Precentors will help you . '' 
`` And when the vault is open ? '' 
`` It must be closed again . '' 
`` Will that be all ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Give me your orders , very reverend Mother . '' 
`` Fauvent , we have confidence in you . '' 
`` I am here to do anything you wish . '' 
`` And to hold your peace about everything ! '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother . '' 
`` When the vault is open -- '' `` I will close it again . '' 
`` But before that -- '' `` What , reverend Mother ? '' 
`` Something must be lowered into it . '' 
A silence ensued . 
The prioress , after a pout of the under lip which resembled hesitation , broke it . 
`` Father Fauvent ! '' 
`` Reverend Mother ! '' 
`` You know that a mother died this morning ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Did you not hear the bell ? '' 
`` Nothing can be heard at the bottom of the garden . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
`` I can hardly distinguish my own signal . '' 
`` She died at daybreak . '' 
`` And then , the wind is not blowing in my direction this morning . '' 
`` It was Mother Crucifixion . 
A blessed woman . '' 
The prioress paused , moved her lips , as though in mental prayer , and resumed : -- `` Three years ago , Madame de Bethune , a Jansenist , turned orthodox , merely from having seen Mother Crucifixion at prayer . '' 
`` Ah ! 
yes , now I hear the knell , reverend Mother . '' 
`` The mothers have taken her to the dead-room , which opens on the church . '' 
`` I know . '' 
`` No other man than you can or must enter that chamber . 
See to that . 
A fine sight it would be , to see a man enter the dead-room ! '' 
`` More often ! '' 
`` Hey ? '' 
`` More often ! '' 
`` What do you say ? '' 
`` I say more often . '' 
`` More often than what ? '' 
`` Reverend Mother , I did not say more often than what , I said more often . '' 
`` I do n't understand you . 
Why do you say more often ? '' 
`` In order to speak like you , reverend Mother . '' 
`` But I did not say ` more often . ' '' 
At that moment , nine o'clock struck . 
`` At nine o'clock in the morning and at all hours , praised and adored be the most Holy Sacrament of the altar , '' said the prioress . 
`` Amen , '' said Fauchelevent . 
The clock struck opportunely . 
It cut `` more often '' short . 
It is probable , that had it not been for this , the prioress and Fauchelevent would never have unravelled that skein . 
Fauchelevent mopped his forehead . 
The prioress indulged in another little inward murmur , probably sacred , then raised her voice : -- `` In her lifetime , Mother Crucifixion made converts ; after her death , she will perform miracles . '' 
`` She will ! '' 
replied Father Fauchelevent , falling into step , and striving not to flinch again . 
`` Father Fauvent , the community has been blessed in Mother Crucifixion . 
No doubt , it is not granted to every one to die , like Cardinal de Berulle , while saying the holy mass , and to breathe forth their souls to God , while pronouncing these words : Hanc igitur oblationem . 
But without attaining to such happiness , Mother Crucifixion 's death was very precious . 
She retained her consciousness to the very last moment . 
She spoke to us , then she spoke to the angels . 
She gave us her last commands . 
If you had a little more faith , and if you could have been in her cell , she would have cured your leg merely by touching it . 
She smiled . 
We felt that she was regaining her life in God . 
There was something of paradise in that death . '' 
Fauchelevent thought that it was an orison which she was finishing . 
`` Amen , '' said he . 
`` Father Fauvent , what the dead wish must be done . '' 
The prioress took off several beads of her chaplet . 
Fauchelevent held his peace . 
She went on : -- `` I have consulted upon this point many ecclesiastics laboring in Our Lord , who occupy themselves in the exercises of the clerical life , and who bear wonderful fruit . '' 
`` Reverend Mother , you can hear the knell much better here than in the garden . '' 
`` Besides , she is more than a dead woman , she is a saint . '' 
`` Like yourself , reverend Mother . '' 
`` She slept in her coffin for twenty years , by express permission of our Holy Father , Pius VII . 
-- '' `` The one who crowned the Emp -- Buonaparte . '' 
For a clever man like Fauchelevent , this allusion was an awkward one . 
Fortunately , the prioress , completely absorbed in her own thoughts , did not hear it . 
She continued : -- `` Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` Reverend Mother ? '' 
`` Saint Didorus , Archbishop of Cappadocia , desired that this single word might be inscribed on his tomb : Acarus , which signifies , a worm of the earth ; this was done . 
Is this true ? '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother . '' 
`` The blessed Mezzocane , Abbot of Aquila , wished to be buried beneath the gallows ; this was done . '' 
`` That is true . '' 
`` Saint Terentius , Bishop of Port , where the mouth of the Tiber empties into the sea , requested that on his tomb might be engraved the sign which was placed on the graves of parricides , in the hope that passers-by would spit on his tomb . 
This was done . 
The dead must be obeyed . '' 
`` So be it . '' 
`` The body of Bernard Guidonis , born in France near Roche-Abeille , was , as he had ordered , and in spite of the king of Castile , borne to the church of the Dominicans in Limoges , although Bernard Guidonis was Bishop of Tuy in Spain . 
Can the contrary be affirmed ? '' 
`` For that matter , no , reverend Mother . '' 
`` The fact is attested by Plantavit de la Fosse . '' 
Several beads of the chaplet were told off , still in silence . 
The prioress resumed : -- `` Father Fauvent , Mother Crucifixion will be interred in the coffin in which she has slept for the last twenty years . '' 
`` That is just . '' 
`` It is a continuation of her slumber . '' 
`` So I shall have to nail up that coffin ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And we are to reject the undertaker 's coffin ? '' 
`` Precisely . '' 
`` I am at the orders of the very reverend community . '' 
`` The four Mother Precentors will assist you . '' 
`` In nailing up the coffin ? 
I do not need them . '' 
`` No . 
In lowering the coffin . '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` Into the vault . '' 
`` What vault ? '' 
`` Under the altar . '' 
Fauchelevent started . 
`` The vault under the altar ? '' 
`` Under the altar . '' 
`` But -- '' `` You will have an iron bar . '' 
`` Yes , but -- '' `` You will raise the stone with the bar by means of the ring . '' 
`` But -- '' `` The dead must be obeyed . 
To be buried in the vault under the altar of the chapel , not to go to profane earth ; to remain there in death where she prayed while living ; such was the last wish of Mother Crucifixion . 
She asked it of us ; that is to say , commanded us . '' 
`` But it is forbidden . '' 
`` Forbidden by men , enjoined by God . '' 
`` What if it became known ? '' 
`` We have confidence in you . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I am a stone in your walls . '' 
`` The chapter assembled . 
The vocal mothers , whom I have just consulted again , and who are now deliberating , have decided that Mother Crucifixion shall be buried , according to her wish , in her own coffin , under our altar . 
Think , Father Fauvent , if she were to work miracles here ! 
What a glory of God for the community ! 
And miracles issue from tombs . '' 
`` But , reverend Mother , if the agent of the sanitary commission -- '' `` Saint Benoit II. , in the matter of sepulture , resisted Constantine Pogonatus . '' 
`` But the commissary of police -- '' `` Chonodemaire , one of the seven German kings who entered among the Gauls under the Empire of Constantius , expressly recognized the right of nuns to be buried in religion , that is to say , beneath the altar . '' 
`` But the inspector from the Prefecture -- '' `` The world is nothing in the presence of the cross . 
Martin , the eleventh general of the Carthusians , gave to his order this device : Stat crux dum volvitur orbis . '' 
`` Amen , '' said Fauchelevent , who imperturbably extricated himself in this manner from the dilemma , whenever he heard Latin . 
Any audience suffices for a person who has held his peace too long . 
On the day when the rhetorician Gymnastoras left his prison , bearing in his body many dilemmas and numerous syllogisms which had struck in , he halted in front of the first tree which he came to , harangued it and made very great efforts to convince it . 
The prioress , who was usually subjected to the barrier of silence , and whose reservoir was overfull , rose and exclaimed with the loquacity of a dam which has broken away : -- `` I have on my right Benoit and on my left Bernard . 
Who was Bernard ? 
The first abbot of Clairvaux . 
Fontaines in Burgundy is a country that is blest because it gave him birth . 
His father was named Tecelin , and his mother Alethe . 
He began at Citeaux , to end in Clairvaux ; he was ordained abbot by the bishop of Chalon-sur-Saone , Guillaume de Champeaux ; he had seven hundred novices , and founded a hundred and sixty monasteries ; he overthrew Abeilard at the council of Sens in 1140 , and Pierre de Bruys and Henry his disciple , and another sort of erring spirits who were called the Apostolics ; he confounded Arnauld de Brescia , darted lightning at the monk Raoul , the murderer of the Jews , dominated the council of Reims in 1148 , caused the condemnation of Gilbert de Porea , Bishop of Poitiers , caused the condemnation of Eon de l'Etoile , arranged the disputes of princes , enlightened King Louis the Young , advised Pope Eugene III. , regulated the Temple , preached the crusade , performed two hundred and fifty miracles during his lifetime , and as many as thirty-nine in one day . 
Who was Benoit ? 
He was the patriarch of Mont-Cassin ; he was the second founder of the Saintete Claustrale , he was the Basil of the West . 
His order has produced forty popes , two hundred cardinals , fifty patriarchs , sixteen hundred archbishops , four thousand six hundred bishops , four emperors , twelve empresses , forty-six kings , forty-one queens , three thousand six hundred canonized saints , and has been in existence for fourteen hundred years . 
On one side Saint Bernard , on the other the agent of the sanitary department ! 
On one side Saint Benoit , on the other the inspector of public ways ! 
The state , the road commissioners , the public undertaker , regulations , the administration , what do we know of all that ? 
There is not a chance passer-by who would not be indignant to see how we are treated . 
We have not even the right to give our dust to Jesus Christ ! 
Your sanitary department is a revolutionary invention . 
God subordinated to the commissary of police ; such is the age . 
Silence , Fauvent ! '' 
Fauchelevent was but ill at ease under this shower bath . 
The prioress continued : -- `` No one doubts the right of the monastery to sepulture . 
Only fanatics and those in error deny it . 
We live in times of terrible confusion . 
We do not know that which it is necessary to know , and we know that which we should ignore . 
We are ignorant and impious . 
In this age there exist people who do not distinguish between the very great Saint Bernard and the Saint Bernard denominated of the poor Catholics , a certain good ecclesiastic who lived in the thirteenth century . 
Others are so blasphemous as to compare the scaffold of Louis XVI . 
to the cross of Jesus Christ . 
Louis XVI . 
was merely a king . 
Let us beware of God ! 
There is no longer just nor unjust . 
The name of Voltaire is known , but not the name of Cesar de Bus . 
Nevertheless , Cesar de Bus is a man of blessed memory , and Voltaire one of unblessed memory . 
The last arch-bishop , the Cardinal de Perigord , did not even know that Charles de Gondren succeeded to Berulle , and Francois Bourgoin to Gondren , and Jean-Francois Senault to Bourgoin , and Father Sainte-Marthe to Jean-Francois Senault . 
The name of Father Coton is known , not because he was one of the three who urged the foundation of the Oratorie , but because he furnished Henri IV. , the Huguenot king , with the material for an oath . 
That which pleases people of the world in Saint Francois de Sales , is that he cheated at play . 
And then , religion is attacked . 
Why ? 
Because there have been bad priests , because Sagittaire , Bishop of Gap , was the brother of Salone , Bishop of Embrun , and because both of them followed Mommol . 
What has that to do with the question ? 
Does that prevent Martin de Tours from being a saint , and giving half of his cloak to a beggar ? 
They persecute the saints . 
They shut their eyes to the truth . 
Darkness is the rule . 
The most ferocious beasts are beasts which are blind . 
No one thinks of hell as a reality . 
Oh ! 
how wicked people are ! 
By order of the king signifies to-day , by order of the revolution . 
One no longer knows what is due to the living or to the dead . 
A holy death is prohibited . 
Burial is a civil matter . 
This is horrible . 
Saint Leo II . 
wrote two special letters , one to Pierre Notaire , the other to the king of the Visigoths , for the purpose of combating and rejecting , in questions touching the dead , the authority of the exarch and the supremacy of the Emperor . 
Gauthier , Bishop of Chalons , held his own in this matter against Otho , Duke of Burgundy . 
The ancient magistracy agreed with him . 
In former times we had voices in the chapter , even on matters of the day . 
The Abbot of Citeaux , the general of the order , was councillor by right of birth to the parliament of Burgundy . 
We do what we please with our dead . 
Is not the body of Saint Benoit himself in France , in the abbey of Fleury , called Saint Benoit-sur-Loire , although he died in Italy at Mont-Cassin , on Saturday , the 21st of the month of March , of the year 543 ? 
All this is incontestable . 
I abhor psalm-singers , I hate priors , I execrate heretics , but I should detest yet more any one who should maintain the contrary . 
One has only to read Arnoul Wion , Gabriel Bucelin , Trithemus , Maurolics , and Dom Luc d'Achery . '' 
The prioress took breath , then turned to Fauchelevent . 
`` Is it settled , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` It is settled , reverend Mother . '' 
`` We may depend on you ? '' 
`` I will obey . '' 
`` That is well . '' 
`` I am entirely devoted to the convent . '' 
`` That is understood . 
You will close the coffin . 
The sisters will carry it to the chapel . 
The office for the dead will then be said . 
Then we shall return to the cloister . 
Between eleven o'clock and midnight , you will come with your iron bar . 
All will be done in the most profound secrecy . 
There will be in the chapel only the four Mother Precentors , Mother Ascension and yourself . '' 
`` And the sister at the post ? '' 
`` She will not turn round . '' 
`` But she will hear . '' 
`` She will not listen . 
Besides , what the cloister knows the world learns not . '' 
A pause ensued . 
The prioress went on : -- `` You will remove your bell . 
It is not necessary that the sister at the post should perceive your presence . '' 
`` Reverend Mother ? '' 
`` What , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` Has the doctor for the dead paid his visit ? '' 
`` He will pay it at four o'clock to-day . 
The peal which orders the doctor for the dead to be summoned has already been rung . 
But you do not understand any of the peals ? '' 
`` I pay no attention to any but my own . '' 
`` That is well , Father Fauvent . '' 
`` Reverend Mother , a lever at least six feet long will be required . '' 
`` Where will you obtain it ? '' 
`` Where gratings are not lacking , iron bars are not lacking . 
I have my heap of old iron at the bottom of the garden . '' 
`` About three-quarters of an hour before midnight ; do not forget . '' 
`` Reverend Mother ? '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` If you were ever to have any other jobs of this sort , my brother is the strong man for you . 
A perfect Turk ! '' 
`` You will do it as speedily as possible . '' 
`` I can not work very fast . 
I am infirm ; that is why I require an assistant . 
I limp . '' 
`` To limp is no sin , and perhaps it is a blessing . 
The Emperor Henry II. , who combated Antipope Gregory and re-established Benoit VIII. , has two surnames , the Saint and the Lame . '' 
`` Two surtouts are a good thing , '' murmured Fauchelevent , who really was a little hard of hearing . 
`` Now that I think of it , Father Fauvent , let us give a whole hour to it . 
That is not too much . 
Be near the principal altar , with your iron bar , at eleven o'clock . 
The office begins at midnight . 
Everything must have been completed a good quarter of an hour before that . '' 
`` I will do anything to prove my zeal towards the community . 
These are my orders . 
I am to nail up the coffin . 
At eleven o'clock exactly , I am to be in the chapel . 
The Mother Precentors will be there . 
Mother Ascension will be there . 
Two men would be better . 
However , never mind ! 
I shall have my lever . 
We will open the vault , we will lower the coffin , and we will close the vault again . 
After which , there will be no trace of anything . 
The government will have no suspicion . 
Thus all has been arranged , reverend Mother ? '' 
`` No ! '' 
`` What else remains ? '' 
`` The empty coffin remains . '' 
This produced a pause . 
Fauchelevent meditated . 
The prioress meditated . 
`` What is to be done with that coffin , Father Fauvent ? '' 
`` It will be given to the earth . '' 
`` Empty ? '' 
Another silence . 
Fauchelevent made , with his left hand , that sort of a gesture which dismisses a troublesome subject . 
`` Reverend Mother , I am the one who is to nail up the coffin in the basement of the church , and no one can enter there but myself , and I will cover the coffin with the pall . '' 
`` Yes , but the bearers , when they place it in the hearse and lower it into the grave , will be sure to feel that there is nothing in it . '' 
`` Ah ! 
the de -- ! '' 
exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
The prioress began to make the sign of the cross , and looked fixedly at the gardener . 
The vil stuck fast in his throat . 
He made haste to improvise an expedient to make her forget the oath . 
`` I will put earth in the coffin , reverend Mother . 
That will produce the effect of a corpse . '' 
`` You are right . 
Earth , that is the same thing as man . 
So you will manage the empty coffin ? '' 
`` I will make that my special business . '' 
The prioress 's face , up to that moment troubled and clouded , grew serene once more . 
She made the sign of a superior dismissing an inferior to him . 
Fauchelevent went towards the door . 
As he was on the point of passing out , the prioress raised her voice gently : -- `` I am pleased with you , Father Fauvent ; bring your brother to me to-morrow , after the burial , and tell him to fetch his daughter . '' 
IN WHICH JEAN VALJEAN HAS QUITE THE AIR OF HAVING READ AUSTIN CASTILLEJO The strides of a lame man are like the ogling glances of a one-eyed man ; they do not reach their goal very promptly . 
Moreover , Fauchelevent was in a dilemma . 
He took nearly a quarter of an hour to return to his cottage in the garden . 
Cosette had waked up . 
Jean Valjean had placed her near the fire . 
At the moment when Fauchelevent entered , Jean Valjean was pointing out to her the vintner 's basket on the wall , and saying to her , `` Listen attentively to me , my little Cosette . 
We must go away from this house , but we shall return to it , and we shall be very happy here . 
The good man who lives here is going to carry you off on his back in that . 
You will wait for me at a lady 's house . 
I shall come to fetch you . 
Obey , and say nothing , above all things , unless you want Madame Thenardier to get you again ! '' 
Cosette nodded gravely . 
Jean Valjean turned round at the noise made by Fauchelevent opening the door . 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Everything is arranged , and nothing is , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` I have permission to bring you in ; but before bringing you in you must be got out . 
That 's where the difficulty lies . 
It is easy enough with the child . '' 
`` You will carry her out ? '' 
`` And she will hold her tongue ? '' 
`` I answer for that . '' 
`` But you , Father Madeleine ? '' 
And , after a silence , fraught with anxiety , Fauchelevent exclaimed : -- `` Why , get out as you came in ! '' 
Jean Valjean , as in the first instance , contented himself with saying , `` Impossible . '' 
Fauchelevent grumbled , more to himself than to Jean Valjean : -- `` There is another thing which bothers me . 
I have said that I would put earth in it . 
When I come to think it over , the earth instead of the corpse will not seem like the real thing , it wo n't do , it will get displaced , it will move about . 
The men will bear it . 
You understand , Father Madeleine , the government will notice it . '' 
Jean Valjean stared him straight in the eye and thought that he was raving . 
Fauchelevent went on : -- `` How the de -- uce are you going to get out ? 
It must all be done by to-morrow morning . 
It is to-morrow that I am to bring you in . 
The prioress expects you . '' 
Then he explained to Jean Valjean that this was his recompense for a service which he , Fauchelevent , was to render to the community . 
That it fell among his duties to take part in their burials , that he nailed up the coffins and helped the grave-digger at the cemetery . 
That the nun who had died that morning had requested to be buried in the coffin which had served her for a bed , and interred in the vault under the altar of the chapel . 
That the police regulations forbade this , but that she was one of those dead to whom nothing is refused . 
That the prioress and the vocal mothers intended to fulfil the wish of the deceased . 
That it was so much the worse for the government . 
That he , Fauchelevent , was to nail up the coffin in the cell , raise the stone in the chapel , and lower the corpse into the vault . 
And that , by way of thanks , the prioress was to admit his brother to the house as a gardener , and his niece as a pupil . 
That his brother was M. Madeleine , and that his niece was Cosette . 
That the prioress had told him to bring his brother on the following evening , after the counterfeit interment in the cemetery . 
But that he could not bring M. Madeleine in from the outside if M. Madeleine was not outside . 
That that was the first problem . 
And then , that there was another : the empty coffin . '' 
`` What is that empty coffin ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` The coffin of the administration . '' 
`` What coffin ? 
What administration ? '' 
`` A nun dies . 
The municipal doctor comes and says , ` A nun has died . ' 
The government sends a coffin . 
The next day it sends a hearse and undertaker 's men to get the coffin and carry it to the cemetery . 
The undertaker 's men will come and lift the coffin ; there will be nothing in it . '' 
`` Put something in it . '' 
`` A corpse ? 
I have none . '' 
`` No . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` A living person . '' 
`` What person ? '' 
`` Me ! '' 
said Jean Valjean . 
Fauchelevent , who was seated , sprang up as though a bomb had burst under his chair . 
`` You ! '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
Jean Valjean gave way to one of those rare smiles which lighted up his face like a flash from heaven in the winter . 
`` You know , Fauchelevent , what you have said : ` Mother Crucifixion is dead . ' 
and I add : ` and Father Madeleine is buried . ' 
`` Ah ! 
good , you can laugh , you are not speaking seriously . '' 
`` Very seriously , I must get out of this place . '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
`` l have told you to find a basket , and a cover for me also , '' `` Well ? '' 
`` The basket will be of pine , and the cover a black cloth . '' 
`` In the first place , it will be a white cloth . 
Nuns are buried in white . '' 
`` Let it be a white cloth , then . '' 
`` You are not like other men , Father Madeleine . '' 
To behold such devices , which are nothing else than the savage and daring inventions of the galleys , spring forth from the peaceable things which surrounded him , and mingle with what he called the `` petty course of life in the convent , '' caused Fauchelevent as much amazement as a gull fishing in the gutter of the Rue Saint-Denis would inspire in a passer-by . 
Jean Valjean went on : -- `` The problem is to get out of here without being seen . 
This offers the means . 
But give me some information , in the first place . 
How is it managed ? 
Where is this coffin ? '' 
`` The empty one ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Down stairs , in what is called the dead-room . 
It stands on two trestles , under the pall . '' 
`` How long is the coffin ? '' 
`` Six feet . '' 
`` What is this dead-room ? '' 
`` It is a chamber on the ground floor which has a grated window opening on the garden , which is closed on the outside by a shutter , and two doors ; one leads into the convent , the other into the church . '' 
`` What church ? '' 
`` The church in the street , the church which any one can enter . '' 
`` Have you the keys to those two doors ? '' 
`` No ; I have the key to the door which communicates with the convent ; the porter has the key to the door which communicates with the church . '' 
`` When does the porter open that door ? '' 
`` Only to allow the undertaker 's men to enter , when they come to get the coffin . 
When the coffin has been taken out , the door is closed again . '' 
`` Who nails up the coffin ? '' 
`` I do . '' 
`` Who spreads the pall over it ? '' 
`` I do . '' 
`` Are you alone ? '' 
`` Not another man , except the police doctor , can enter the dead-room . 
That is even written on the wall . '' 
`` Could you hide me in that room to-night when every one is asleep ? '' 
`` No . 
But I could hide you in a small , dark nook which opens on the dead-room , where I keep my tools to use for burials , and of which I have the key . '' 
`` At what time will the hearse come for the coffin to-morrow ? '' 
`` About three o'clock in the afternoon . 
The burial will take place at the Vaugirard cemetery a little before nightfall . 
It is not very near . '' 
`` I will remain concealed in your tool-closet all night and all the morning . 
And how about food ? 
I shall be hungry . '' 
`` I will bring you something . '' 
`` You can come and nail me up in the coffin at two o'clock . '' 
Fauchelevent recoiled and cracked his finger-joints . 
`` But that is impossible ! '' 
`` Bah ! 
Impossible to take a hammer and drive some nails in a plank ? '' 
What seemed unprecedented to Fauchelevent was , we repeat , a simple matter to Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had been in worse straits than this . 
Any man who has been a prisoner understands how to contract himself to fit the diameter of the escape . 
The prisoner is subject to flight as the sick man is subject to a crisis which saves or kills him . 
An escape is a cure . 
What does not a man undergo for the sake of a cure ? 
To have himself nailed up in a case and carried off like a bale of goods , to live for a long time in a box , to find air where there is none , to economize his breath for hours , to know how to stifle without dying -- this was one of Jean Valjean 's gloomy talents . 
Moreover , a coffin containing a living being , -- that convict 's expedient , -- is also an imperial expedient . 
If we are to credit the monk Austin Castillejo , this was the means employed by Charles the Fifth , desirous of seeing the Plombes for the last time after his abdication . 
He had her brought into and carried out of the monastery of Saint-Yuste in this manner . 
Fauchelevent , who had recovered himself a little , exclaimed : -- `` But how will you manage to breathe ? '' 
`` I will breathe . '' 
`` In that box ! 
The mere thought of it suffocates me . '' 
`` You surely must have a gimlet , you will make a few holes here and there , around my mouth , and you will nail the top plank on loosely . '' 
`` Good ! 
And what if you should happen to cough or to sneeze ? '' 
`` A man who is making his escape does not cough or sneeze . '' 
And Jean Valjean added : -- `` Father Fauchelevent , we must come to a decision : I must either be caught here , or accept this escape through the hearse . '' 
Every one has noticed the taste which cats have for pausing and lounging between the two leaves of a half-shut door . 
Who is there who has not said to a cat , `` Do come in ! '' 
There are men who , when an incident stands half-open before them , have the same tendency to halt in indecision between two resolutions , at the risk of getting crushed through the abrupt closing of the adventure by fate . 
The over-prudent , cats as they are , and because they are cats , sometimes incur more danger than the audacious . 
Fauchelevent was of this hesitating nature . 
But Jean Valjean 's coolness prevailed over him in spite of himself . 
He grumbled : -- `` Well , since there is no other means . '' 
Jean Valjean resumed : -- `` The only thing which troubles me is what will take place at the cemetery . '' 
`` That is the very point that is not troublesome , '' exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
`` If you are sure of coming out of the coffin all right , I am sure of getting you out of the grave . 
The grave-digger is a drunkard , and a friend of mine . 
He is Father Mestienne . 
An old fellow of the old school . 
The grave-digger puts the corpses in the grave , and I put the grave-digger in my pocket . 
I will tell you what will take place . 
They will arrive a little before dusk , three-quarters of an hour before the gates of the cemetery are closed . 
The hearse will drive directly up to the grave . 
I shall follow ; that is my business . 
I shall have a hammer , a chisel , and some pincers in my pocket . 
The hearse halts , the undertaker 's men knot a rope around your coffin and lower you down . 
The priest says the prayers , makes the sign of the cross , sprinkles the holy water , and takes his departure . 
I am left alone with Father Mestienne . 
He is my friend , I tell you . 
One of two things will happen , he will either be sober , or he will not be sober . 
If he is not drunk , I shall say to him : ` Come and drink a bout while the Bon Coing -LSB- the Good Quince -RSB- is open . ' 
I carry him off , I get him drunk , -- it does not take long to make Father Mestienne drunk , he always has the beginning of it about him , -- I lay him under the table , I take his card , so that I can get into the cemetery again , and I return without him . 
Then you have no longer any one but me to deal with . 
If he is drunk , I shall say to him : ` Be off ; I will do your work for you . ' 
Off he goes , and I drag you out of the hole . '' 
Jean Valjean held out his hand , and Fauchelevent precipitated himself upon it with the touching effusion of a peasant . 
`` That is settled , Father Fauchelevent . 
All will go well . '' 
`` Provided nothing goes wrong , '' thought Fauchelevent . 
`` In that case , it would be terrible . '' 
IT IS NOT NECESSARY TO BE DRUNK IN ORDER TO BE IMMORTAL On the following day , as the sun was declining , the very rare passers-by on the Boulevard du Maine pulled off their hats to an old-fashioned hearse , ornamented with skulls , cross-bones , and tears . 
This hearse contained a coffin covered with a white cloth over which spread a large black cross , like a huge corpse with drooping arms . 
A mourning-coach , in which could be seen a priest in his surplice , and a choir boy in his red cap , followed . 
Two undertaker 's men in gray uniforms trimmed with black walked on the right and the left of the hearse . 
Behind it came an old man in the garments of a laborer , who limped along . 
The procession was going in the direction of the Vaugirard cemetery . 
The handle of a hammer , the blade of a cold chisel , and the antennae of a pair of pincers were visible , protruding from the man 's pocket . 
The Vaugirard cemetery formed an exception among the cemeteries of Paris . 
It had its peculiar usages , just as it had its carriage entrance and its house door , which old people in the quarter , who clung tenaciously to ancient words , still called the porte cavaliere and the porte pietonne . 
-LSB- 16 -RSB- The Bernardines-Benedictines of the Rue Petit-Picpus had obtained permission , as we have already stated , to be buried there in a corner apart , and at night , the plot of land having formerly belonged to their community . 
The grave-diggers being thus bound to service in the evening in summer and at night in winter , in this cemetery , they were subjected to a special discipline . 
The gates of the Paris cemeteries closed , at that epoch , at sundown , and this being a municipal regulation , the Vaugirard cemetery was bound by it like the rest . 
The carriage gate and the house door were two contiguous grated gates , adjoining a pavilion built by the architect Perronet , and inhabited by the door-keeper of the cemetery . 
These gates , therefore , swung inexorably on their hinges at the instant when the sun disappeared behind the dome of the Invalides . 
If any grave-digger were delayed after that moment in the cemetery , there was but one way for him to get out -- his grave-digger 's card furnished by the department of public funerals . 
A sort of letter-box was constructed in the porter 's window . 
The grave-digger dropped his card into this box , the porter heard it fall , pulled the rope , and the small door opened . 
If the man had not his card , he mentioned his name , the porter , who was sometimes in bed and asleep , rose , came out and identified the man , and opened the gate with his key ; the grave-digger stepped out , but had to pay a fine of fifteen francs . 
-LSB- 16 -RSB- Instead of porte cochere and porte batarde . 
This cemetery , with its peculiarities outside the regulations , embarrassed the symmetry of the administration . 
It was suppressed a little later than 1830 . 
The cemetery of Mont-Parnasse , called the Eastern cemetery , succeeded to it , and inherited that famous dram-shop next to the Vaugirard cemetery , which was surmounted by a quince painted on a board , and which formed an angle , one side on the drinkers ' tables , and the other on the tombs , with this sign : Au Bon Coing . 
The Vaugirard cemetery was what may be called a faded cemetery . 
It was falling into disuse . 
Dampness was invading it , the flowers were deserting it . 
The bourgeois did not care much about being buried in the Vaugirard ; it hinted at poverty . 
Pere-Lachaise if you please ! 
to be buried in Pere-Lachaise is equivalent to having furniture of mahogany . 
It is recognized as elegant . 
The Vaugirard cemetery was a venerable enclosure , planted like an old-fashioned French garden . 
Straight alleys , box , thuya-trees , holly , ancient tombs beneath aged cypress-trees , and very tall grass . 
In the evening it was tragic there . 
There were very lugubrious lines about it . 
The sun had not yet set when the hearse with the white pall and the black cross entered the avenue of the Vaugirard cemetery . 
The lame man who followed it was no other than Fauchelevent . 
The interment of Mother Crucifixion in the vault under the altar , the exit of Cosette , the introduction of Jean Valjean to the dead-room , -- all had been executed without difficulty , and there had been no hitch . 
Let us remark in passing , that the burial of Mother Crucifixion under the altar of the convent is a perfectly venial offence in our sight . 
It is one of the faults which resemble a duty . 
The nuns had committed it , not only without difficulty , but even with the applause of their own consciences . 
In the cloister , what is called the `` government '' is only an intermeddling with authority , an interference which is always questionable . 
In the first place , the rule ; as for the code , we shall see . 
Make as many laws as you please , men ; but keep them for yourselves . 
The tribute to Caesar is never anything but the remnants of the tribute to God . 
A prince is nothing in the presence of a principle . 
Fauchelevent limped along behind the hearse in a very contented frame of mind . 
His twin plots , the one with the nuns , the one for the convent , the other against it , the other with M. Madeleine , had succeeded , to all appearance . 
Jean Valjean 's composure was one of those powerful tranquillities which are contagious . 
Fauchelevent no longer felt doubtful as to his success . 
What remained to be done was a mere nothing . 
Within the last two years , he had made good Father Mestienne , a chubby-cheeked person , drunk at least ten times . 
He played with Father Mestienne . 
He did what he liked with him . 
He made him dance according to his whim . 
Mestienne 's head adjusted itself to the cap of Fauchelevent 's will . 
Fauchelevent 's confidence was perfect . 
At the moment when the convoy entered the avenue leading to the cemetery , Fauchelevent glanced cheerfully at the hearse , and said half aloud , as he rubbed his big hands : -- `` Here 's a fine farce ! '' 
All at once the hearse halted ; it had reached the gate . 
The permission for interment must be exhibited . 
The undertaker 's man addressed himself to the porter of the cemetery . 
During this colloquy , which always is productive of a delay of from one to two minutes , some one , a stranger , came and placed himself behind the hearse , beside Fauchelevent . 
He was a sort of laboring man , who wore a waistcoat with large pockets and carried a mattock under his arm . 
Fauchelevent surveyed this stranger . 
`` Who are you ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` The man replied : -- `` The grave-digger . '' 
If a man could survive the blow of a cannon-ball full in the breast , he would make the same face that Fauchelevent made . 
`` The grave-digger ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` You ? '' 
`` I. '' `` Father Mestienne is the grave-digger . '' 
`` He was . '' 
`` What ! 
He was ? '' 
`` He is dead . '' 
Fauchelevent had expected anything but this , that a grave-digger could die . 
It is true , nevertheless , that grave-diggers do die themselves . 
By dint of excavating graves for other people , one hollows out one 's own . 
Fauchelevent stood there with his mouth wide open . 
He had hardly the strength to stammer : -- `` But it is not possible ! '' 
`` It is so . '' 
`` But , '' he persisted feebly , `` Father Mestienne is the grave-digger . '' 
`` After Napoleon , Louis XVIII . 
After Mestienne , Gribier . 
Peasant , my name is Gribier . '' 
Fauchelevent , who was deadly pale , stared at this Gribier . 
He was a tall , thin , livid , utterly funereal man . 
He had the air of an unsuccessful doctor who had turned grave-digger . 
Fauchelevent burst out laughing . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said he , `` what queer things do happen ! 
Father Mestienne is dead , but long live little Father Lenoir ! 
Do you know who little Father Lenoir is ? 
He is a jug of red wine . 
It is a jug of Surene , morbigou ! 
of real Paris Surene ? 
Ah ! 
So old Mestienne is dead ! 
I am sorry for it ; he was a jolly fellow . 
But you are a jolly fellow , too . 
Are you not , comrade ? 
We 'll go and have a drink together presently . '' 
The man replied : -- `` I have been a student . 
I passed my fourth examination . 
I never drink . '' 
The hearse had set out again , and was rolling up the grand alley of the cemetery . 
Fauchelevent had slackened his pace . 
He limped more out of anxiety than from infirmity . 
The grave-digger walked on in front of him . 
Fauchelevent passed the unexpected Gribier once more in review . 
He was one of those men who , though very young , have the air of age , and who , though slender , are extremely strong . 
`` Comrade ! '' 
cried Fauchelevent . 
The man turned round . 
`` I am the convent grave-digger . '' 
`` My colleague , '' said the man . 
Fauchelevent , who was illiterate but very sharp , understood that he had to deal with a formidable species of man , with a fine talker . 
He muttered : `` So Father Mestienne is dead . '' 
The man replied : -- `` Completely . 
The good God consulted his note-book which shows when the time is up . 
It was Father Mestienne 's turn . 
Father Mestienne died . '' 
Fauchelevent repeated mechanically : `` The good God -- '' `` The good God , '' said the man authoritatively . 
`` According to the philosophers , the Eternal Father ; according to the Jacobins , the Supreme Being . '' 
`` Shall we not make each other 's acquaintance ? '' 
stammered Fauchelevent . 
`` It is made . 
You are a peasant , I am a Parisian . '' 
`` People do not know each other until they have drunk together . 
He who empties his glass empties his heart . 
You must come and have a drink with me . 
Such a thing can not be refused . '' 
`` Business first . '' 
Fauchelevent thought : `` I am lost . '' 
They were only a few turns of the wheel distant from the small alley leading to the nuns ' corner . 
The grave-digger resumed : -- `` Peasant , I have seven small children who must be fed . 
As they must eat , I can not drink . '' 
And he added , with the satisfaction of a serious man who is turning a phrase well : -- `` Their hunger is the enemy of my thirst . '' 
The hearse skirted a clump of cypress-trees , quitted the grand alley , turned into a narrow one , entered the waste land , and plunged into a thicket . 
This indicated the immediate proximity of the place of sepulture . 
Fauchelevent slackened his pace , but he could not detain the hearse . 
Fortunately , the soil , which was light and wet with the winter rains , clogged the wheels and retarded its speed . 
He approached the grave-digger . 
`` They have such a nice little Argenteuil wine , '' murmured Fauchelevent . 
`` Villager , '' retorted the man , `` I ought not be a grave-digger . 
My father was a porter at the Prytaneum -LSB- Town-Hall -RSB- . 
He destined me for literature . 
But he had reverses . 
He had losses on ` change . 
I was obliged to renounce the profession of author . 
But I am still a public writer . '' 
`` So you are not a grave-digger , then ? '' 
returned Fauchelevent , clutching at this branch , feeble as it was . 
`` The one does not hinder the other . 
I cumulate . '' 
Fauchelevent did not understand this last word . 
`` Come have a drink , '' said he . 
Here a remark becomes necessary . 
Fauchelevent , whatever his anguish , offered a drink , but he did not explain himself on one point ; who was to pay ? 
Generally , Fauchelevent offered and Father Mestienne paid . 
An offer of a drink was the evident result of the novel situation created by the new grave-digger , and it was necessary to make this offer , but the old gardener left the proverbial quarter of an hour named after Rabelais in the dark , and that not unintentionally . 
As for himself , Fauchelevent did not wish to pay , troubled as he was . 
The grave-digger went on with a superior smile : -- `` One must eat . 
I have accepted Father Mestienne 's reversion . 
One gets to be a philosopher when one has nearly completed his classes . 
To the labor of the hand I join the labor of the arm . 
I have my scrivener 's stall in the market of the Rue de Sevres . 
You know ? 
the Umbrella Market . 
All the cooks of the Red Cross apply to me . 
I scribble their declarations of love to the raw soldiers . 
In the morning I write love letters ; in the evening I dig graves . 
Such is life , rustic . '' 
The hearse was still advancing . 
Fauchelevent , uneasy to the last degree , was gazing about him on all sides . 
Great drops of perspiration trickled down from his brow . 
`` But , '' continued the grave-digger , `` a man can not serve two mistresses . 
I must choose between the pen and the mattock . 
The mattock is ruining my hand . '' 
The hearse halted . 
The choir boy alighted from the mourning-coach , then the priest . 
One of the small front wheels of the hearse had run up a little on a pile of earth , beyond which an open grave was visible . 
`` What a farce this is ! '' 
repeated Fauchelevent in consternation . 
BETWEEN FOUR PLANKS Who was in the coffin ? 
The reader knows . 
Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean had arranged things so that he could exist there , and he could almost breathe . 
It is a strange thing to what a degree security of conscience confers security of the rest . 
Every combination thought out by Jean Valjean had been progressing , and progressing favorably , since the preceding day . 
He , like Fauchelevent , counted on Father Mestienne . 
He had no doubt as to the end . 
Never was there a more critical situation , never more complete composure . 
The four planks of the coffin breathe out a kind of terrible peace . 
It seemed as though something of the repose of the dead entered into Jean Valjean 's tranquillity . 
From the depths of that coffin he had been able to follow , and he had followed , all the phases of the terrible drama which he was playing with death . 
Shortly after Fauchelevent had finished nailing on the upper plank , Jean Valjean had felt himself carried out , then driven off . 
He knew , from the diminution in the jolting , when they left the pavements and reached the earth road . 
He had divined , from a dull noise , that they were crossing the bridge of Austerlitz . 
At the first halt , he had understood that they were entering the cemetery ; at the second halt , he said to himself : -- `` Here is the grave . '' 
Suddenly , he felt hands seize the coffin , then a harsh grating against the planks ; he explained it to himself as the rope which was being fastened round the casket in order to lower it into the cavity . 
Then he experienced a giddiness . 
The undertaker 's man and the grave-digger had probably allowed the coffin to lose its balance , and had lowered the head before the foot . 
He recovered himself fully when he felt himself horizontal and motionless . 
He had just touched the bottom . 
He had a certain sensation of cold . 
A voice rose above him , glacial and solemn . 
He heard Latin words , which he did not understand , pass over him , so slowly that he was able to catch them one by one : -- `` Qui dormiunt in terrae pulvere , evigilabunt ; alii in vitam aeternam , et alii in approbrium , ut videant semper . '' 
A child 's voice said : -- `` De profundis . '' 
The grave voice began again : -- `` Requiem aeternam dona ei , Domine . '' 
The child 's voice responded : -- `` Et lux perpetua luceat ei . '' 
He heard something like the gentle patter of several drops of rain on the plank which covered him . 
It was probably the holy water . 
He thought : `` This will be over soon now . 
Patience for a little while longer . 
The priest will take his departure . 
Fauchelevent will take Mestienne off to drink . 
I shall be left . 
Then Fauchelevent will return alone , and I shall get out . 
That will be the work of a good hour . '' 
The grave voice resumed `` Requiescat in pace . '' 
And the child 's voice said : -- `` Amen . '' 
Jean Valjean strained his ears , and heard something like retreating footsteps . 
`` There , they are going now , '' thought he . 
`` I am alone . '' 
All at once , he heard over his head a sound which seemed to him to be a clap of thunder . 
It was a shovelful of earth falling on the coffin . 
A second shovelful fell . 
One of the holes through which he breathed had just been stopped up . 
A third shovelful of earth fell . 
Then a fourth . 
There are things which are too strong for the strongest man . 
Jean Valjean lost consciousness . 
IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE ORIGIN OF THE SAYING : DO N'T LOSE THE CARD This is what had taken place above the coffin in which lay Jean Valjean . 
When the hearse had driven off , when the priest and the choir boy had entered the carriage again and taken their departure , Fauchelevent , who had not taken his eyes from the grave-digger , saw the latter bend over and grasp his shovel , which was sticking upright in the heap of dirt . 
Then Fauchelevent took a supreme resolve . 
He placed himself between the grave and the grave-digger , crossed his arms and said : -- `` I am the one to pay ! '' 
The grave-digger stared at him in amazement , and replied : -- `` What 's that , peasant ? '' 
Fauchelevent repeated : -- `` I am the one who pays ! '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` For the wine . '' 
`` What wine ? '' 
`` That Argenteuil wine . '' 
`` Where is the Argenteuil ? '' 
`` At the Bon Coing . '' 
`` Go to the devil ! '' 
said the grave-digger . 
And he flung a shovelful of earth on the coffin . 
The coffin gave back a hollow sound . 
Fauchelevent felt himself stagger and on the point of falling headlong into the grave himself . 
He shouted in a voice in which the strangling sound of the death rattle began to mingle : -- `` Comrade ! 
Before the Bon Coing is shut ! '' 
The grave-digger took some more earth on his shovel . 
Fauchelevent continued . 
`` I will pay . '' 
And he seized the man 's arm . 
`` Listen to me , comrade . 
I am the convent grave-digger , I have come to help you . 
It is a business which can be performed at night . 
Let us begin , then , by going for a drink . '' 
And as he spoke , and clung to this desperate insistence , this melancholy reflection occurred to him : `` And if he drinks , will he get drunk ? '' 
`` Provincial , '' said the man , `` if you positively insist upon it , I consent . 
We will drink . 
After work , never before . '' 
And he flourished his shovel briskly . 
Fauchelevent held him back . 
`` It is Argenteuil wine , at six . '' 
`` Oh , come , '' said the grave-digger , `` you are a bell-ringer . 
Ding dong , ding dong , that 's all you know how to say . 
Go hang yourself . '' 
And he threw in a second shovelful . 
Fauchelevent had reached a point where he no longer knew what he was saying . 
`` Come along and drink , '' he cried , `` since it is I who pays the bill . '' 
`` When we have put the child to bed , '' said the grave-digger . 
He flung in a third shovelful . 
Then he thrust his shovel into the earth and added : -- `` It 's cold to-night , you see , and the corpse would shriek out after us if we were to plant her there without a coverlet . '' 
At that moment , as he loaded his shovel , the grave-digger bent over , and the pocket of his waistcoat gaped . 
Fauchelevent 's wild gaze fell mechanically into that pocket , and there it stopped . 
The sun was not yet hidden behind the horizon ; there was still light enough to enable him to distinguish something white at the bottom of that yawning pocket . 
The sum total of lightning that the eye of a Picard peasant can contain , traversed Fauchelevent 's pupils . 
An idea had just occurred to him . 
He thrust his hand into the pocket from behind , without the grave-digger , who was wholly absorbed in his shovelful of earth , observing it , and pulled out the white object which lay at the bottom of it . 
The man sent a fourth shovelful tumbling into the grave . 
Just as he turned round to get the fifth , Fauchelevent looked calmly at him and said : -- `` By the way , you new man , have you your card ? '' 
The grave-digger paused . 
`` What card ? '' 
`` The sun is on the point of setting . '' 
`` That 's good , it is going to put on its nightcap . '' 
`` The gate of the cemetery will close immediately . '' 
`` Well , what then ? '' 
`` Have you your card ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
my card ? '' 
said the grave-digger . 
And he fumbled in his pocket . 
Having searched one pocket , he proceeded to search the other . 
He passed on to his fobs , explored the first , returned to the second . 
`` Why , no , '' said he , `` I have not my card . 
I must have forgotten it . '' 
`` Fifteen francs fine , '' said Fauchelevent . 
The grave-digger turned green . 
Green is the pallor of livid people . 
`` Ah ! 
Jesus-mon-Dieu-bancroche-a-bas-la-lune ! '' 
-LSB- 17 -RSB- he exclaimed . 
`` Fifteen francs fine ! '' 
-LSB- 17 -RSB- Jesus-my-God-bandy-leg -- down with the moon ! 
`` Three pieces of a hundred sous , '' said Fauchelevent . 
The grave-digger dropped his shovel . 
Fauchelevent 's turn had come . 
`` Ah , come now , conscript , '' said Fauchelevent , `` none of this despair . 
There is no question of committing suicide and benefiting the grave . 
Fifteen francs is fifteen francs , and besides , you may not be able to pay it . 
I am an old hand , you are a new one . 
I know all the ropes and the devices . 
I will give you some friendly advice . 
One thing is clear , the sun is on the point of setting , it is touching the dome now , the cemetery will be closed in five minutes more . '' 
`` That is true , '' replied the man . 
`` Five minutes more and you will not have time to fill the grave , it is as hollow as the devil , this grave , and to reach the gate in season to pass it before it is shut . '' 
`` That is true . '' 
`` In that case , a fine of fifteen francs . '' 
`` Fifteen francs . '' 
`` But you have time . 
Where do you live ? '' 
`` A couple of steps from the barrier , a quarter of an hour from here . 
No. 87 Rue de Vaugirard . '' 
`` You have just time to get out by taking to your heels at your best speed . '' 
`` That is exactly so . '' 
`` Once outside the gate , you gallop home , you get your card , you return , the cemetery porter admits you . 
As you have your card , there will be nothing to pay . 
And you will bury your corpse . 
I 'll watch it for you in the meantime , so that it shall not run away . '' 
`` I am indebted to you for my life , peasant . '' 
`` Decamp ! '' 
said Fauchelevent . 
The grave-digger , overwhelmed with gratitude , shook his hand and set off on a run . 
When the man had disappeared in the thicket , Fauchelevent listened until he heard his footsteps die away in the distance , then he leaned over the grave , and said in a low tone : -- `` Father Madeleine ! '' 
There was no reply . 
Fauchelevent was seized with a shudder . 
He tumbled rather than climbed into the grave , flung himself on the head of the coffin and cried : -- `` Are you there ? '' 
Silence in the coffin . 
Fauchelevent , hardly able to draw his breath for trembling , seized his cold chisel and his hammer , and pried up the coffin lid . 
Jean Valjean 's face appeared in the twilight ; it was pale and his eyes were closed . 
Fauchelevent 's hair rose upright on his head , he sprang to his feet , then fell back against the side of the grave , ready to swoon on the coffin . 
He stared at Jean Valjean . 
Jean Valjean lay there pallid and motionless . 
Fauchelevent murmured in a voice as faint as a sigh : -- `` He is dead ! '' 
And , drawing himself up , and folding his arms with such violence that his clenched fists came in contact with his shoulders , he cried : -- `` And this is the way I save his life ! '' 
Then the poor man fell to sobbing . 
He soliloquized the while , for it is an error to suppose that the soliloquy is unnatural . 
Powerful emotion often talks aloud . 
`` It is Father Mestienne 's fault . 
Why did that fool die ? 
What need was there for him to give up the ghost at the very moment when no one was expecting it ? 
It is he who has killed M. Madeleine . 
Father Madeleine ! 
He is in the coffin . 
It is quite handy . 
All is over . 
Now , is there any sense in these things ? 
Ah ! 
my God ! 
he is dead ! 
Well ! 
and his little girl , what am I to do with her ? 
What will the fruit-seller say ? 
The idea of its being possible for a man like that to die like this ! 
When I think how he put himself under that cart ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Pardine ! 
He was suffocated , I said so . 
He would n't believe me . 
Well ! 
Here 's a pretty trick to play ! 
He is dead , that good man , the very best man out of all the good God 's good folks ! 
And his little girl ! 
Ah ! 
In the first place , I wo n't go back there myself . 
I shall stay here . 
After having done such a thing as that ! 
What 's the use of being two old men , if we are two old fools ! 
But , in the first place , how did he manage to enter the convent ? 
That was the beginning of it all . 
One should not do such things . 
Father Madeleine ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Father Madeleine ! 
Madeleine ! 
Monsieur Madeleine ! 
Monsieur le Maire ! 
He does not hear me . 
Now get out of this scrape if you can ! '' 
And he tore his hair . 
A grating sound became audible through the trees in the distance . 
It was the cemetery gate closing . 
Fauchelevent bent over Jean Valjean , and all at once he bounded back and recoiled so far as the limits of a grave permit . 
Jean Valjean 's eyes were open and gazing at him . 
To see a corpse is alarming , to behold a resurrection is almost as much so . 
Fauchelevent became like stone , pale , haggard , overwhelmed by all these excesses of emotion , not knowing whether he had to do with a living man or a dead one , and staring at Jean Valjean , who was gazing at him . 
`` I fell asleep , '' said Jean Valjean . 
And he raised himself to a sitting posture . 
Fauchelevent fell on his knees . 
`` Just , good Virgin ! 
How you frightened me ! '' 
Then he sprang to his feet and cried : -- `` Thanks , Father Madeleine ! '' 
Jean Valjean had merely fainted . 
The fresh air had revived him . 
Joy is the ebb of terror . 
Fauchelevent found almost as much difficulty in recovering himself as Jean Valjean had . 
`` So you are not dead ! 
Oh ! 
How wise you are ! 
I called you so much that you came back . 
When I saw your eyes shut , I said : ` Good ! 
there he is , stifled , ' I should have gone raving mad , mad enough for a strait jacket . 
They would have put me in Bicetre . 
What do you suppose I should have done if you had been dead ? 
And your little girl ? 
There 's that fruit-seller , -- she would never have understood it ! 
The child is thrust into your arms , and then -- the grandfather is dead ! 
What a story ! 
good saints of paradise , what a tale ! 
Ah ! 
you are alive , that 's the best of it ! '' 
`` I am cold , '' said Jean Valjean . 
This remark recalled Fauchelevent thoroughly to reality , and there was pressing need of it . 
The souls of these two men were troubled even when they had recovered themselves , although they did not realize it , and there was about them something uncanny , which was the sinister bewilderment inspired by the place . 
`` Let us get out of here quickly , '' exclaimed Fauchelevent . 
He fumbled in his pocket , and pulled out a gourd with which he had provided himself . 
`` But first , take a drop , '' said he . 
The flask finished what the fresh air had begun , Jean Valjean swallowed a mouthful of brandy , and regained full possession of his faculties . 
He got out of the coffin , and helped Fauchelevent to nail on the lid again . 
Three minutes later they were out of the grave . 
Moreover , Fauchelevent was perfectly composed . 
He took his time . 
The cemetery was closed . 
The arrival of the grave-digger Gribier was not to be apprehended . 
That `` conscript '' was at home busily engaged in looking for his card , and at some difficulty in finding it in his lodgings , since it was in Fauchelevent 's pocket . 
Without a card , he could not get back into the cemetery . 
Fauchelevent took the shovel , and Jean Valjean the pick-axe , and together they buried the empty coffin . 
When the grave was full , Fauchelevent said to Jean Valjean : -- `` Let us go . 
I will keep the shovel ; do you carry off the mattock . '' 
Night was falling . 
Jean Valjean experienced rome difficulty in moving and in walking . 
He had stiffened himself in that coffin , and had become a little like a corpse . 
The rigidity of death had seized upon him between those four planks . 
He had , in a manner , to thaw out , from the tomb . 
`` You are benumbed , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` It is a pity that I have a game leg , for otherwise we might step out briskly . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
replied Jean Valjean , `` four paces will put life into my legs once more . '' 
They set off by the alleys through which the hearse had passed . 
On arriving before the closed gate and the porter 's pavilion Fauchelevent , who held the grave-digger 's card in his hand , dropped it into the box , the porter pulled the rope , the gate opened , and they went out . 
`` How well everything is going ! '' 
said Fauchelevent ; `` what a capital idea that was of yours , Father Madeleine ! '' 
They passed the Vaugirard barrier in the simplest manner in the world . 
In the neighborhood of the cemetery , a shovel and pick are equal to two passports . 
The Rue Vaugirard was deserted . 
`` Father Madeleine , '' said Fauchelevent as they went along , and raising his eyes to the houses , `` Your eyes are better than mine . 
Show me No. 87 . '' 
`` Here it is , '' said Jean Valjean . 
`` There is no one in the street , '' said Fauchelevent . 
`` Give me your mattock and wait a couple of minutes for me . '' 
Fauchelevent entered No. 87 , ascended to the very top , guided by the instinct which always leads the poor man to the garret , and knocked in the dark , at the door of an attic . 
A voice replied : `` Come in . '' 
It was Gribier 's voice . 
Fauchelevent opened the door . 
The grave-digger 's dwelling was , like all such wretched habitations , an unfurnished and encumbered garret . 
A packing-case -- a coffin , perhaps -- took the place of a commode , a butter-pot served for a drinking-fountain , a straw mattress served for a bed , the floor served instead of tables and chairs . 
In a corner , on a tattered fragment which had been a piece of an old carpet , a thin woman and a number of children were piled in a heap . 
The whole of this poverty-stricken interior bore traces of having been overturned . 
One would have said that there had been an earthquake `` for one . '' 
The covers were displaced , the rags scattered about , the jug broken , the mother had been crying , the children had probably been beaten ; traces of a vigorous and ill-tempered search . 
It was plain that the grave-digger had made a desperate search for his card , and had made everybody in the garret , from the jug to his wife , responsible for its loss . 
He wore an air of desperation . 
But Fauchelevent was in too great a hurry to terminate this adventure to take any notice of this sad side of his success . 
He entered and said : -- `` I have brought you back your shovel and pick . '' 
Gribier gazed at him in stupefaction . 
`` Is it you , peasant ? '' 
`` And to-morrow morning you will find your card with the porter of the cemetery . '' 
And he laid the shovel and mattock on the floor . 
`` What is the meaning of this ? '' 
demanded Gribier . 
`` The meaning of it is , that you dropped your card out of your pocket , that I found it on the ground after you were gone , that I have buried the corpse , that I have filled the grave , that I have done your work , that the porter will return your card to you , and that you will not have to pay fifteen francs . 
There you have it , conscript . '' 
`` Thanks , villager ! '' 
exclaimed Gribier , radiant . 
`` The next time I will pay for the drinks . '' 
A SUCCESSFUL INTERROGATORY An hour later , in the darkness of night , two men and a child presented themselves at No. 62 Rue Petit-Picpus . 
The elder of the men lifted the knocker and rapped . 
They were Fauchelevent , Jean Valjean , and Cosette . 
The two old men had gone to fetch Cosette from the fruiterer 's in the Rue du Chemin-Vert , where Fauchelevent had deposited her on the preceding day . 
Cosette had passed these twenty-four hours trembling silently and understanding nothing . 
She trembled to such a degree that she wept . 
She had neither eaten nor slept . 
The worthy fruit-seller had plied her with a hundred questions , without obtaining any other reply than a melancholy and unvarying gaze . 
Cosette had betrayed nothing of what she had seen and heard during the last two days . 
She divined that they were passing through a crisis . 
She was deeply conscious that it was necessary to `` be good . '' 
Who has not experienced the sovereign power of those two words , pronounced with a certain accent in the ear of a terrified little being : Say nothing ! 
Fear is mute . 
Moreover , no one guards a secret like a child . 
But when , at the expiration of these lugubrious twenty-four hours , she beheld Jean Valjean again , she gave vent to such a cry of joy , that any thoughtful person who had chanced to hear that cry , would have guessed that it issued from an abyss . 
Fauchelevent belonged to the convent and knew the pass-words . 
All the doors opened . 
Thus was solved the double and alarming problem of how to get out and how to get in . 
The porter , who had received his instructions , opened the little servant 's door which connected the courtyard with the garden , and which could still be seen from the street twenty years ago , in the wall at the bottom of the court , which faced the carriage entrance . 
The porter admitted all three of them through this door , and from that point they reached the inner , reserved parlor where Fauchelevent , on the preceding day , had received his orders from the prioress . 
The prioress , rosary in hand , was waiting for them . 
A vocal mother , with her veil lowered , stood beside her . 
A discreet candle lighted , one might almost say , made a show of lighting the parlor . 
The prioress passed Jean Valjean in review . 
There is nothing which examines like a downcast eye . 
Then she questioned him : -- `` You are the brother ? '' 
`` Yes , reverend Mother , '' replied Fauchelevent . 
`` What is your name ? '' 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` Ultime Fauchelevent . '' 
He really had had a brother named Ultime , who was dead . 
`` Where do you come from ? '' 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` From Picquigny , near Amiens . '' 
`` What is your age ? '' 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` Fifty . '' 
`` What is your profession ? '' 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` Gardener . '' 
`` Are you a good Christian ? '' 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` Every one is in the family . '' 
`` Is this your little girl ? '' 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` Yes , reverend Mother . '' 
`` You are her father ? '' 
Fauchelevent replied : -- `` Her grandfather . '' 
The vocal mother said to the prioress in a low voice `` He answers well . '' 
Jean Valjean had not uttered a single word . 
The prioress looked attentively at Cosette , and said half aloud to the vocal mother : -- `` She will grow up ugly . '' 
The two mothers consulted for a few moments in very low tones in the corner of the parlor , then the prioress turned round and said : -- `` Father Fauvent , you will get another knee-cap with a bell . 
Two will be required now . '' 
On the following day , therefore , two bells were audible in the garden , and the nuns could not resist the temptation to raise the corner of their veils . 
At the extreme end of the garden , under the trees , two men , Fauvent and another man , were visible as they dug side by side . 
An enormous event . 
Their silence was broken to the extent of saying to each other : `` He is an assistant gardener . '' 
The vocal mothers added : `` He is a brother of Father Fauvent . '' 
Jean Valjean was , in fact , regularly installed ; he had his belled knee-cap ; henceforth he was official . 
His name was Ultime Fauchelevent . 
The most powerful determining cause of his admission had been the prioress 's observation upon Cosette : `` She will grow up ugly . '' 
The prioress , that pronounced prognosticator , immediately took a fancy to Cosette and gave her a place in the school as a charity pupil . 
There is nothing that is not strictly logical about this . 
It is in vain that mirrors are banished from the convent , women are conscious of their faces ; now , girls who are conscious of their beauty do not easily become nuns ; the vocation being voluntary in inverse proportion to their good looks , more is to be hoped from the ugly than from the pretty . 
Hence a lively taste for plain girls . 
The whole of this adventure increased the importance of good , old Fauchelevent ; he won a triple success ; in the eyes of Jean Valjean , whom he had saved and sheltered ; in those of grave-digger Gribier , who said to himself : `` He spared me that fine '' ; with the convent , which , being enabled , thanks to him , to retain the coffin of Mother Crucifixion under the altar , eluded Caesar and satisfied God . 
There was a coffin containing a body in the Petit-Picpus , and a coffin without a body in the Vaugirard cemetery , public order had no doubt been deeply disturbed thereby , but no one was aware of it . 
As for the convent , its gratitude to Fauchelevent was very great . 
Fauchelevent became the best of servitors and the most precious of gardeners . 
Upon the occasion of the archbishop 's next visit , the prioress recounted the affair to his Grace , making something of a confession at the same time , and yet boasting of her deed . 
On leaving the convent , the archbishop mentioned it with approval , and in a whisper to M. de Latil , Monsieur 's confessor , afterwards Archbishop of Reims and Cardinal . 
This admiration for Fauchelevent became widespread , for it made its way to Rome . 
We have seen a note addressed by the then reigning Pope , Leo XII. , to one of his relatives , a Monsignor in the Nuncio 's establishment in Paris , and bearing , like himself , the name of Della Genga ; it contained these lines : `` It appears that there is in a convent in Paris an excellent gardener , who is also a holy man , named Fauvent . '' 
Nothing of this triumph reached Fauchelevent in his hut ; he went on grafting , weeding , and covering up his melon beds , without in the least suspecting his excellences and his sanctity . 
Neither did he suspect his glory , any more than a Durham or Surrey bull whose portrait is published in the London Illustrated News , with this inscription : `` Bull which carried off the prize at the Cattle Show . '' 
CLOISTERED Cosette continued to hold her tongue in the convent . 
It was quite natural that Cosette should think herself Jean Valjean 's daughter . 
Moreover , as she knew nothing , she could say nothing , and then , she would not have said anything in any case . 
As we have just observed , nothing trains children to silence like unhappiness . 
Cosette had suffered so much , that she feared everything , even to speak or to breathe . 
A single word had so often brought down an avalanche upon her . 
She had hardly begun to regain her confidence since she had been with Jean Valjean . 
She speedily became accustomed to the convent . 
Only she regretted Catherine , but she dared not say so . 
Once , however , she did say to Jean Valjean : `` Father , if I had known , I would have brought her away with me . '' 
Cosette had been obliged , on becoming a scholar in the convent , to don the garb of the pupils of the house . 
Jean Valjean succeeded in getting them to restore to him the garments which she laid aside . 
This was the same mourning suit which he had made her put on when she had quitted the Thenardiers ' inn . 
It was not very threadbare even now . 
Jean Valjean locked up these garments , plus the stockings and the shoes , with a quantity of camphor and all the aromatics in which convents abound , in a little valise which he found means of procuring . 
He set this valise on a chair near his bed , and he always carried the key about his person . 
`` Father , '' Cosette asked him one day , `` what is there in that box which smells so good ? '' 
Father Fauchelevent received other recompense for his good action , in addition to the glory which we just mentioned , and of which he knew nothing ; in the first place it made him happy ; next , he had much less work , since it was shared . 
Lastly , as he was very fond of snuff , he found the presence of M. Madeleine an advantage , in that he used three times as much as he had done previously , and that in an infinitely more luxurious manner , seeing that M. Madeleine paid for it . 
The nuns did not adopt the name of Ultime ; they called Jean Valjean the other Fauvent . 
If these holy women had possessed anything of Javert 's glance , they would eventually have noticed that when there was any errand to be done outside in the behalf of the garden , it was always the elder Fauchelevent , the old , the infirm , the lame man , who went , and never the other ; but whether it is that eyes constantly fixed on God know not how to spy , or whether they were , by preference , occupied in keeping watch on each other , they paid no heed to this . 
Moreover , it was well for Jean Valjean that he kept close and did not stir out . 
Javert watched the quarter for more than a month . 
This convent was for Jean Valjean like an island surrounded by gulfs . 
Henceforth , those four walls constituted his world . 
He saw enough of the sky there to enable him to preserve his serenity , and Cosette enough to remain happy . 
A very sweet life began for him . 
He inhabited the old hut at the end of the garden , in company with Fauchelevent . 
This hovel , built of old rubbish , which was still in existence in 1845 , was composed , as the reader already knows , of three chambers , all of which were utterly bare and had nothing beyond the walls . 
The principal one had been given up , by force , for Jean Valjean had opposed it in vain , to M. Madeleine , by Father Fauchelevent . 
The walls of this chamber had for ornament , in addition to the two nails whereon to hang the knee-cap and the basket , a Royalist bank-note of ' 93 , applied to the wall over the chimney-piece , and of which the following is an exact facsimile : -- -LCB- GRAPHIC HERE -RCB- This specimen of Vendean paper money had been nailed to the wall by the preceding gardener , an old Chouan , who had died in the convent , and whose place Fauchelevent had taken . 
Jean Valjean worked in the garden every day and made himself very useful . 
He had formerly been a pruner of trees , and he gladly found himself a gardener once more . 
It will be remembered that he knew all sorts of secrets and receipts for agriculture . 
He turned these to advantage . 
Almost all the trees in the orchard were ungrafted , and wild . 
He budded them and made them produce excellent fruit . 
Cosette had permission to pass an hour with him every day . 
As the sisters were melancholy and he was kind , the child made comparisons and adored him . 
At the appointed hour she flew to the hut . 
When she entered the lowly cabin , she filled it with paradise . 
Jean Valjean blossomed out and felt his happiness increase with the happiness which he afforded Cosette . 
The joy which we inspire has this charming property , that , far from growing meagre , like all reflections , it returns to us more radiant than ever . 
At recreation hours , Jean Valjean watched her running and playing in the distance , and he distinguished her laugh from that of the rest . 
For Cosette laughed now . 
Cosette 's face had even undergone a change , to a certain extent . 
The gloom had disappeared from it . 
A smile is the same as sunshine ; it banishes winter from the human countenance . 
Recreation over , when Cosette went into the house again , Jean Valjean gazed at the windows of her class-room , and at night he rose to look at the windows of her dormitory . 
God has his own ways , moreover ; the convent contributed , like Cosette , to uphold and complete the Bishop 's work in Jean Valjean . 
It is certain that virtue adjoins pride on one side . 
A bridge built by the devil exists there . 
Jean Valjean had been , unconsciously , perhaps , tolerably near that side and that bridge , when Providence cast his lot in the convent of the Petit-Picpus ; so long as he had compared himself only to the Bishop , he had regarded himself as unworthy and had remained humble ; but for some time past he had been comparing himself to men in general , and pride was beginning to spring up . 
Who knows ? 
He might have ended by returning very gradually to hatred . 
The convent stopped him on that downward path . 
This was the second place of captivity which he had seen . 
In his youth , in what had been for him the beginning of his life , and later on , quite recently again , he had beheld another , -- a frightful place , a terrible place , whose severities had always appeared to him the iniquity of justice , and the crime of the law . 
Now , after the galleys , he saw the cloister ; and when he meditated how he had formed a part of the galleys , and that he now , so to speak , was a spectator of the cloister , he confronted the two in his own mind with anxiety . 
Sometimes he crossed his arms and leaned on his hoe , and slowly descended the endless spirals of revery . 
He recalled his former companions : how wretched they were ; they rose at dawn , and toiled until night ; hardly were they permitted to sleep ; they lay on camp beds , where nothing was tolerated but mattresses two inches thick , in rooms which were heated only in the very harshest months of the year ; they were clothed in frightful red blouses ; they were allowed , as a great favor , linen trousers in the hottest weather , and a woollen carter 's blouse on their backs when it was very cold ; they drank no wine , and ate no meat , except when they went on `` fatigue duty . '' 
They lived nameless , designated only by numbers , and converted , after a manner , into ciphers themselves , with downcast eyes , with lowered voices , with shorn heads , beneath the cudgel and in disgrace . 
Then his mind reverted to the beings whom he had under his eyes . 
These beings also lived with shorn heads , with downcast eyes , with lowered voices , not in disgrace , but amid the scoffs of the world , not with their backs bruised with the cudgel , but with their shoulders lacerated with their discipline . 
Their names , also , had vanished from among men ; they no longer existed except under austere appellations . 
They never ate meat and they never drank wine ; they often remained until evening without food ; they were attired , not in a red blouse , but in a black shroud , of woollen , which was heavy in summer and thin in winter , without the power to add or subtract anything from it ; without having even , according to the season , the resource of the linen garment or the woollen cloak ; and for six months in the year they wore serge chemises which gave them fever . 
They dwelt , not in rooms warmed only during rigorous cold , but in cells where no fire was ever lighted ; they slept , not on mattresses two inches thick , but on straw . 
And finally , they were not even allowed their sleep ; every night , after a day of toil , they were obliged , in the weariness of their first slumber , at the moment when they were falling sound asleep and beginning to get warm , to rouse themselves , to rise and to go and pray in an ice-cold and gloomy chapel , with their knees on the stones . 
On certain days each of these beings in turn had to remain for twelve successive hours in a kneeling posture , or prostrate , with face upon the pavement , and arms outstretched in the form of a cross . 
The others were men ; these were women . 
What had those men done ? 
They had stolen , violated , pillaged , murdered , assassinated . 
They were bandits , counterfeiters , poisoners , incendiaries , murderers , parricides . 
What had these women done ? 
They had done nothing whatever . 
On the one hand , highway robbery , fraud , deceit , violence , sensuality , homicide , all sorts of sacrilege , every variety of crime ; on the other , one thing only , innocence . 
Perfect innocence , almost caught up into heaven in a mysterious assumption , attached to the earth by virtue , already possessing something of heaven through holiness . 
On the one hand , confidences over crimes , which are exchanged in whispers ; on the other , the confession of faults made aloud . 
And what crimes ! 
And what faults ! 
On the one hand , miasms ; on the other , an ineffable perfume . 
On the one hand , a moral pest , guarded from sight , penned up under the range of cannon , and literally devouring its plague-stricken victims ; on the other , the chaste flame of all souls on the same hearth . 
There , darkness ; here , the shadow ; but a shadow filled with gleams of light , and of gleams full of radiance . 
Two strongholds of slavery ; but in the first , deliverance possible , a legal limit always in sight , and then , escape . 
In the second , perpetuity ; the sole hope , at the distant extremity of the future , that faint light of liberty which men call death . 
In the first , men are bound only with chains ; in the other , chained by faith . 
What flowed from the first ? 
An immense curse , the gnashing of teeth , hatred , desperate viciousness , a cry of rage against human society , a sarcasm against heaven . 
What results flowed from the second ? 
Blessings and love . 
And in these two places , so similar yet so unlike , these two species of beings who were so very unlike , were undergoing the same work , expiation . 
Jean Valjean understood thoroughly the expiation of the former ; that personal expiation , the expiation for one 's self . 
But he did not understand that of these last , that of creatures without reproach and without stain , and he trembled as he asked himself : The expiation of what ? 
What expiation ? 
A voice within his conscience replied : `` The most divine of human generosities , the expiation for others . '' 
Here all personal theory is withheld ; we are only the narrator ; we place ourselves at Jean Valjean 's point of view , and we translate his impressions . 
Before his eyes he had the sublime summit of abnegation , the highest possible pitch of virtue ; the innocence which pardons men their faults , and which expiates in their stead ; servitude submitted to , torture accepted , punishment claimed by souls which have not sinned , for the sake of sparing it to souls which have fallen ; the love of humanity swallowed up in the love of God , but even there preserving its distinct and mediatorial character ; sweet and feeble beings possessing the misery of those who are punished and the smile of those who are recompensed . 
And he remembered that he had dared to murmur ! 
Often , in the middle of the night , he rose to listen to the grateful song of those innocent creatures weighed down with severities , and the blood ran cold in his veins at the thought that those who were justly chastised raised their voices heavenward only in blasphemy , and that he , wretch that he was , had shaken his fist at God . 
There was one striking thing which caused him to meditate deeply , like a warning whisper from Providence itself : the scaling of that wall , the passing of those barriers , the adventure accepted even at the risk of death , the painful and difficult ascent , all those efforts even , which he had made to escape from that other place of expiation , he had made in order to gain entrance into this one . 
Was this a symbol of his destiny ? 
This house was a prison likewise and bore a melancholy resemblance to that other one whence he had fled , and yet he had never conceived an idea of anything similar . 
Again he beheld gratings , bolts , iron bars -- to guard whom ? 
Angels . 
These lofty walls which he had seen around tigers , he now beheld once more around lambs . 
This was a place of expiation , and not of punishment ; and yet , it was still more austere , more gloomy , and more pitiless than the other . 
These virgins were even more heavily burdened than the convicts . 
A cold , harsh wind , that wind which had chilled his youth , traversed the barred and padlocked grating of the vultures ; a still harsher and more biting breeze blew in the cage of these doves . 
Why ? 
When he thought on these things , all that was within him was lost in amazement before this mystery of sublimity . 
In these meditations , his pride vanished . 
He scrutinized his own heart in all manner of ways ; he felt his pettiness , and many a time he wept . 
All that had entered into his life for the last six months had led him back towards the Bishop 's holy injunctions ; Cosette through love , the convent through humility . 
Sometimes at eventide , in the twilight , at an hour when the garden was deserted , he could be seen on his knees in the middle of the walk which skirted the chapel , in front of the window through which he had gazed on the night of his arrival , and turned towards the spot where , as he knew , the sister was making reparation , prostrated in prayer . 
Thus he prayed as he knelt before the sister . 
It seemed as though he dared not kneel directly before God . 
Everything that surrounded him , that peaceful garden , those fragrant flowers , those children who uttered joyous cries , those grave and simple women , that silent cloister , slowly permeated him , and little by little , his soul became compounded of silence like the cloister , of perfume like the flowers , of simplicity like the women , of joy like the children . 
And then he reflected that these had been two houses of God which had received him in succession at two critical moments in his life : the first , when all doors were closed and when human society rejected him ; the second , at a moment when human society had again set out in pursuit of him , and when the galleys were again yawning ; and that , had it not been for the first , he should have relapsed into crime , and had it not been for the second , into torment . 
His whole heart melted in gratitude , and he loved more and more . 
Many years passed in this manner ; Cosette was growing up . 
-LSB- The end of Volume II . 
`` Cosette '' -RSB- MARIUS . 
PARVULUS Paris has a child , and the forest has a bird ; the bird is called the sparrow ; the child is called the gamin . 
Couple these two ideas which contain , the one all the furnace , the other all the dawn ; strike these two sparks together , Paris , childhood ; there leaps out from them a little being . 
Homuncio , Plautus would say . 
This little being is joyous . 
He has not food every day , and he goes to the play every evening , if he sees good . 
He has no shirt on his body , no shoes on his feet , no roof over his head ; he is like the flies of heaven , who have none of these things . 
He is from seven to thirteen years of age , he lives in bands , roams the streets , lodges in the open air , wears an old pair of trousers of his father 's , which descend below his heels , an old hat of some other father , which descends below his ears , a single suspender of yellow listing ; he runs , lies in wait , rummages about , wastes time , blackens pipes , swears like a convict , haunts the wine-shop , knows thieves , calls gay women thou , talks slang , sings obscene songs , and has no evil in his heart . 
This is because he has in his heart a pearl , innocence ; and pearls are not to be dissolved in mud . 
So long as man is in his childhood , God wills that he shall be innocent . 
If one were to ask that enormous city : `` What is this ? '' 
she would reply : `` It is my little one . '' 
SOME OF HIS PARTICULAR CHARACTERISTICS The gamin -- the street Arab -- of Paris is the dwarf of the giant . 
Let us not exaggerate , this cherub of the gutter sometimes has a shirt , but , in that case , he owns but one ; he sometimes has shoes , but then they have no soles ; he sometimes has a lodging , and he loves it , for he finds his mother there ; but he prefers the street , because there he finds liberty . 
He has his own games , his own bits of mischief , whose foundation consists of hatred for the bourgeois ; his peculiar metaphors : to be dead is to eat dandelions by the root ; his own occupations , calling hackney-coaches , letting down carriage-steps , establishing means of transit between the two sides of a street in heavy rains , which he calls making the bridge of arts , crying discourses pronounced by the authorities in favor of the French people , cleaning out the cracks in the pavement ; he has his own coinage , which is composed of all the little morsels of worked copper which are found on the public streets . 
This curious money , which receives the name of loques -- rags -- has an invariable and well-regulated currency in this little Bohemia of children . 
Lastly , he has his own fauna , which he observes attentively in the corners ; the lady-bird , the death 's - head plant-louse , the daddy-long-legs , `` the devil , '' a black insect , which menaces by twisting about its tail armed with two horns . 
He has his fabulous monster , which has scales under its belly , but is not a lizard , which has pustules on its back , but is not a toad , which inhabits the nooks of old lime-kilns and wells that have run dry , which is black , hairy , sticky , which crawls sometimes slowly , sometimes rapidly , which has no cry , but which has a look , and is so terrible that no one has ever beheld it ; he calls this monster `` the deaf thing . '' 
The search for these `` deaf things '' among the stones is a joy of formidable nature . 
Another pleasure consists in suddenly prying up a paving-stone , and taking a look at the wood-lice . 
Each region of Paris is celebrated for the interesting treasures which are to be found there . 
There are ear-wigs in the timber-yards of the Ursulines , there are millepeds in the Pantheon , there are tadpoles in the ditches of the Champs-de-Mars . 
As far as sayings are concerned , this child has as many of them as Talleyrand . 
He is no less cynical , but he is more honest . 
He is endowed with a certain indescribable , unexpected joviality ; he upsets the composure of the shopkeeper with his wild laughter . 
He ranges boldly from high comedy to farce . 
A funeral passes by . 
Among those who accompany the dead there is a doctor . 
`` Hey there ! '' 
shouts some street Arab , `` how long has it been customary for doctors to carry home their own work ? '' 
Another is in a crowd . 
A grave man , adorned with spectacles and trinkets , turns round indignantly : `` You good-for-nothing , you have seized my wife 's waist ! '' 
-- `` I , sir ? 
Search me ! '' 
HE IS AGREEABLE In the evening , thanks to a few sous , which he always finds means to procure , the homuncio enters a theatre . 
On crossing that magic threshold , he becomes transfigured ; he was the street Arab , he becomes the titi . 
-LSB- 18 -RSB- Theatres are a sort of ship turned upside down with the keel in the air . 
It is in that keel that the titi huddle together . 
The titi is to the gamin what the moth is to the larva ; the same being endowed with wings and soaring . 
It suffices for him to be there , with his radiance of happiness , with his power of enthusiasm and joy , with his hand-clapping , which resembles a clapping of wings , to confer on that narrow , dark , fetid , sordid , unhealthy , hideous , abominable keel , the name of Paradise . 
-LSB- 18 -RSB- Chicken : slang allusion to the noise made in calling poultry . 
Bestow on an individual the useless and deprive him of the necessary , and you have the gamin . 
The gamin is not devoid of literary intuition . 
His tendency , and we say it with the proper amount of regret , would not constitute classic taste . 
He is not very academic by nature . 
Thus , to give an example , the popularity of Mademoiselle Mars among that little audience of stormy children was seasoned with a touch of irony . 
The gamin called her Mademoiselle Muche -- `` hide yourself . '' 
This being bawls and scoffs and ridicules and fights , has rags like a baby and tatters like a philosopher , fishes in the sewer , hunts in the cesspool , extracts mirth from foulness , whips up the squares with his wit , grins and bites , whistles and sings , shouts , and shrieks , tempers Alleluia with Matantur-lurette , chants every rhythm from the De Profundis to the Jack-pudding , finds without seeking , knows what he is ignorant of , is a Spartan to the point of thieving , is mad to wisdom , is lyrical to filth , would crouch down on Olympus , wallows in the dunghill and emerges from it covered with stars . 
The gamin of Paris is Rabelais in this youth . 
He is not content with his trousers unless they have a watch-pocket . 
He is not easily astonished , he is still less easily terrified , he makes songs on superstitions , he takes the wind out of exaggerations , he twits mysteries , he thrusts out his tongue at ghosts , he takes the poetry out of stilted things , he introduces caricature into epic extravaganzas . 
It is not that he is prosaic ; far from that ; but he replaces the solemn vision by the farcical phantasmagoria . 
If Adamastor were to appear to him , the street Arab would say : `` Hi there ! 
The bugaboo ! '' 
HE MAY BE OF USE Paris begins with the lounger and ends with the street Arab , two beings of which no other city is capable ; the passive acceptance , which contents itself with gazing , and the inexhaustible initiative ; Prudhomme and Fouillou . 
Paris alone has this in its natural history . 
The whole of the monarchy is contained in the lounger ; the whole of anarchy in the gamin . 
This pale child of the Parisian faubourgs lives and develops , makes connections , `` grows supple '' in suffering , in the presence of social realities and of human things , a thoughtful witness . 
He thinks himself heedless ; and he is not . 
He looks and is on the verge of laughter ; he is on the verge of something else also . 
Whoever you may be , if your name is Prejudice , Abuse , Ignorance , Oppression , Iniquity , Despotism , Injustice , Fanaticism , Tyranny , beware of the gaping gamin . 
The little fellow will grow up . 
Of what clay is he made ? 
Of the first mud that comes to hand . 
A handful of dirt , a breath , and behold Adam . 
It suffices for a God to pass by . 
A God has always passed over the street Arab . 
Fortune labors at this tiny being . 
By the word `` fortune '' we mean chance , to some extent . 
That pigmy kneaded out of common earth , ignorant , unlettered , giddy , vulgar , low . 
Will that become an Ionian or a Boeotian ? 
Wait , currit rota , the Spirit of Paris , that demon which creates the children of chance and the men of destiny , reversing the process of the Latin potter , makes of a jug an amphora . 
HIS FRONTIERS The gamin loves the city , he also loves solitude , since he has something of the sage in him . 
Urbis amator , like Fuscus ; ruris amator , like Flaccus . 
To roam thoughtfully about , that is to say , to lounge , is a fine employment of time in the eyes of the philosopher ; particularly in that rather illegitimate species of campaign , which is tolerably ugly but odd and composed of two natures , which surrounds certain great cities , notably Paris . 
To study the suburbs is to study the amphibious animal . 
End of the trees , beginning of the roofs ; end of the grass , beginning of the pavements ; end of the furrows , beginning of the shops , end of the wheel-ruts , beginning of the passions ; end of the divine murmur , beginning of the human uproar ; hence an extraordinary interest . 
Hence , in these not very attractive places , indelibly stamped by the passing stroller with the epithet : melancholy , the apparently objectless promenades of the dreamer . 
He who writes these lines has long been a prowler about the barriers of Paris , and it is for him a source of profound souvenirs . 
That close-shaven turf , those pebbly paths , that chalk , those pools , those harsh monotonies of waste and fallow lands , the plants of early market-garden suddenly springing into sight in a bottom , that mixture of the savage and the citizen , those vast desert nooks where the garrison drums practise noisily , and produce a sort of lisping of battle , those hermits by day and cut-throats by night , that clumsy mill which turns in the wind , the hoisting-wheels of the quarries , the tea-gardens at the corners of the cemeteries ; the mysterious charm of great , sombre walls squarely intersecting immense , vague stretches of land inundated with sunshine and full of butterflies , -- all this attracted him . 
There is hardly any one on earth who is not acquainted with those singular spots , the Glaciere , the Cunette , the hideous wall of Grenelle all speckled with balls , Mont-Parnasse , the Fosse-aux-Loups , Aubiers on the bank of the Marne , Mont-Souris , the Tombe-Issoire , the Pierre-Plate de Chatillon , where there is an old , exhausted quarry which no longer serves any purpose except to raise mushrooms , and which is closed , on a level with the ground , by a trap-door of rotten planks . 
The campagna of Rome is one idea , the banlieue of Paris is another ; to behold nothing but fields , houses , or trees in what a stretch of country offers us , is to remain on the surface ; all aspects of things are thoughts of God . 
The spot where a plain effects its junction with a city is always stamped with a certain piercing melancholy . 
Nature and humanity both appeal to you at the same time there . 
Local originalities there make their appearance . 
Any one who , like ourselves , has wandered about in these solitudes contiguous to our faubourgs , which may be designated as the limbos of Paris , has seen here and there , in the most desert spot , at the most unexpected moment , behind a meagre hedge , or in the corner of a lugubrious wall , children grouped tumultuously , fetid , muddy , dusty , ragged , dishevelled , playing hide-and-seek , and crowned with corn-flowers . 
All of them are little ones who have made their escape from poor families . 
The outer boulevard is their breathing space ; the suburbs belong to them . 
There they are eternally playing truant . 
There they innocently sing their repertory of dirty songs . 
There they are , or rather , there they exist , far from every eye , in the sweet light of May or June , kneeling round a hole in the ground , snapping marbles with their thumbs , quarrelling over half-farthings , irresponsible , volatile , free and happy ; and , no sooner do they catch sight of you than they recollect that they have an industry , and that they must earn their living , and they offer to sell you an old woollen stocking filled with cockchafers , or a bunch of lilacs . 
These encounters with strange children are one of the charming and at the same time poignant graces of the environs of Paris . 
Sometimes there are little girls among the throng of boys , -- are they their sisters ? 
-- who are almost young maidens , thin , feverish , with sunburnt hands , covered with freckles , crowned with poppies and ears of rye , gay , haggard , barefooted . 
They can be seen devouring cherries among the wheat . 
In the evening they can be heard laughing . 
These groups , warmly illuminated by the full glow of midday , or indistinctly seen in the twilight , occupy the thoughtful man for a very long time , and these visions mingle with his dreams . 
Paris , centre , banlieue , circumference ; this constitutes all the earth to those children . 
They never venture beyond this . 
They can no more escape from the Parisian atmosphere than fish can escape from the water . 
For them , nothing exists two leagues beyond the barriers : Ivry , Gentilly , Arcueil , Belleville , Aubervilliers , Menilmontant , Choisy-le-Roi , Billancourt , Mendon , Issy , Vanvre , Sevres , Puteaux , Neuilly , Gennevilliers , Colombes , Romainville , Chatou , Asnieres , Bougival , Nanterre , Enghien , Noisy-le-Sec , Nogent , Gournay , Drancy , Gonesse ; the universe ends there . 
A BIT OF HISTORY At the epoch , nearly contemporary by the way , when the action of this book takes place , there was not , as there is to-day , a policeman at the corner of every street -LRB- a benefit which there is no time to discuss here -RRB- ; stray children abounded in Paris . 
The statistics give an average of two hundred and sixty homeless children picked up annually at that period , by the police patrols , in unenclosed lands , in houses in process of construction , and under the arches of the bridges . 
One of these nests , which has become famous , produced `` the swallows of the bridge of Arcola . '' 
This is , moreover , the most disastrous of social symptoms . 
All crimes of the man begin in the vagabondage of the child . 
Let us make an exception in favor of Paris , nevertheless . 
In a relative measure , and in spite of the souvenir which we have just recalled , the exception is just . 
While in any other great city the vagabond child is a lost man , while nearly everywhere the child left to itself is , in some sort , sacrificed and abandoned to a kind of fatal immersion in the public vices which devour in him honesty and conscience , the street boy of Paris , we insist on this point , however defaced and injured on the surface , is almost intact on the interior . 
It is a magnificent thing to put on record , and one which shines forth in the splendid probity of our popular revolutions , that a certain incorruptibility results from the idea which exists in the air of Paris , as salt exists in the water of the ocean . 
To breathe Paris preserves the soul . 
What we have just said takes away nothing of the anguish of heart which one experiences every time that one meets one of these children around whom one fancies that he beholds floating the threads of a broken family . 
In the civilization of the present day , incomplete as it still is , it is not a very abnormal thing to behold these fractured families pouring themselves out into the darkness , not knowing clearly what has become of their children , and allowing their own entrails to fall on the public highway . 
Hence these obscure destinies . 
This is called , for this sad thing has given rise to an expression , `` to be cast on the pavements of Paris . '' 
Let it be said by the way , that this abandonment of children was not discouraged by the ancient monarchy . 
A little of Egypt and Bohemia in the lower regions suited the upper spheres , and compassed the aims of the powerful . 
The hatred of instruction for the children of the people was a dogma . 
What is the use of `` half-lights '' ? 
Such was the countersign . 
Now , the erring child is the corollary of the ignorant child . 
Besides this , the monarchy sometimes was in need of children , and in that case it skimmed the streets . 
Under Louis XIV. , not to go any further back , the king rightly desired to create a fleet . 
The idea was a good one . 
But let us consider the means . 
There can be no fleet , if , beside the sailing ship , that plaything of the winds , and for the purpose of towing it , in case of necessity , there is not the vessel which goes where it pleases , either by means of oars or of steam ; the galleys were then to the marine what steamers are to-day . 
Therefore , galleys were necessary ; but the galley is moved only by the galley-slave ; hence , galley-slaves were required . 
Colbert had the commissioners of provinces and the parliaments make as many convicts as possible . 
The magistracy showed a great deal of complaisance in the matter . 
A man kept his hat on in the presence of a procession -- it was a Huguenot attitude ; he was sent to the galleys . 
A child was encountered in the streets ; provided that he was fifteen years of age and did not know where he was to sleep , he was sent to the galleys . 
Grand reign ; grand century . 
Under Louis XV . 
children disappeared in Paris ; the police carried them off , for what mysterious purpose no one knew . 
People whispered with terror monstrous conjectures as to the king 's baths of purple . 
Barbier speaks ingenuously of these things . 
It sometimes happened that the exempts of the guard , when they ran short of children , took those who had fathers . 
The fathers , in despair , attacked the exempts . 
In that case , the parliament intervened and had some one hung . 
Who ? 
The exempts ? 
No , the fathers . 
THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OF INDIA The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste . 
One might almost say : Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so . 
This word gamin was printed for the first time , and reached popular speech through the literary tongue , in 1834 . 
It is in a little work entitled Claude Gueux that this word made its appearance . 
The horror was lively . 
The word passed into circulation . 
The elements which constitute the consideration of the gamins for each other are very various . 
We have known and associated with one who was greatly respected and vastly admired because he had seen a man fall from the top of the tower of Notre-Dame ; another , because he had succeeded in making his way into the rear courtyard where the statues of the dome of the Invalides had been temporarily deposited , and had `` prigged '' some lead from them ; a third , because he had seen a diligence tip over ; still another , because he `` knew '' a soldier who came near putting out the eye of a citizen . 
This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin , a profound epiphonema , which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending , -- Dieu de Dieu ! 
What ill-luck I do have ! 
to think that I have never yet seen anybody tumble from a fifth-story window ! 
-LRB- I have pronounced I ` ave and fifth pronounced fift ' . -RRB- 
Surely , this saying of a peasant is a fine one : `` Father So-and-So , your wife has died of her malady ; why did you not send for the doctor ? '' 
`` What would you have , sir , we poor folks die of ourselves . '' 
But if the peasant 's whole passivity lies in this saying , the whole of the free-thinking anarchy of the brat of the faubourgs is , assuredly , contained in this other saying . 
A man condemned to death is listening to his confessor in the tumbrel . 
The child of Paris exclaims : `` He is talking to his black cap ! 
Oh , the sneak ! '' 
A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin . 
To be strong-minded is an important item . 
To be present at executions constitutes a duty . 
He shows himself at the guillotine , and he laughs . 
He calls it by all sorts of pet names : The End of the Soup , The Growler , The Mother in the Blue -LRB- the sky -RRB- , The Last Mouthful , etc. , etc. . 
In order not to lose anything of the affair , he scales the walls , he hoists himself to balconies , he ascends trees , he suspends himself to gratings , he clings fast to chimneys . 
The gamin is born a tiler as he is born a mariner . 
A roof inspires him with no more fear than a mast . 
There is no festival which comes up to an execution on the Place de Greve . 
Samson and the Abbe Montes are the truly popular names . 
They hoot at the victim in order to encourage him . 
They sometimes admire him . 
Lacenaire , when a gamin , on seeing the hideous Dautin die bravely , uttered these words which contain a future : `` I was jealous of him . '' 
In the brotherhood of gamins Voltaire is not known , but Papavoine is . 
`` Politicians '' are confused with assassins in the same legend . 
They have a tradition as to everybody 's last garment . 
It is known that Tolleron had a fireman 's cap , Avril an otter cap , Losvel a round hat , that old Delaporte was bald and bare-headed , that Castaing was all ruddy and very handsome , that Bories had a romantic small beard , that Jean Martin kept on his suspenders , that Lecouffe and his mother quarrelled . 
`` Do n't reproach each other for your basket , '' shouted a gamin to them . 
Another , in order to get a look at Debacker as he passed , and being too small in the crowd , caught sight of the lantern on the quay and climbed it . 
A gendarme stationed opposite frowned . 
`` Let me climb up , m ` sieu le gendarme , '' said the gamin . 
And , to soften the heart of the authorities he added : `` I will not fall . '' 
`` I do n't care if you do , '' retorted the gendarme . 
In the brotherhood of gamins , a memorable accident counts for a great deal . 
One reaches the height of consideration if one chances to cut one 's self very deeply , `` to the very bone . '' 
The fist is no mediocre element of respect . 
One of the things that the gamin is fondest of saying is : `` I am fine and strong , come now ! '' 
To be left-handed renders you very enviable . 
A squint is highly esteemed . 
IN WHICH THE READER WILL FIND A CHARMING SAYING OF THE LAST KING In summer , he metamorphoses himself into a frog ; and in the evening , when night is falling , in front of the bridges of Austerlitz and Jena , from the tops of coal wagons , and the washerwomen 's boats , he hurls himself headlong into the Seine , and into all possible infractions of the laws of modesty and of the police . 
Nevertheless the police keep an eye on him , and the result is a highly dramatic situation which once gave rise to a fraternal and memorable cry ; that cry which was celebrated about 1830 , is a strategic warning from gamin to gamin ; it scans like a verse from Homer , with a notation as inexpressible as the eleusiac chant of the Panathenaea , and in it one encounters again the ancient Evohe . 
Here it is : `` Ohe , Titi , oheee ! 
Here comes the bobby , here comes the p ` lice , pick up your duds and be off , through the sewer with you ! '' 
Sometimes this gnat -- that is what he calls himself -- knows how to read ; sometimes he knows how to write ; he always knows how to daub . 
He does not hesitate to acquire , by no one knows what mysterious mutual instruction , all the talents which can be of use to the public ; from 1815 to 1830 , he imitated the cry of the turkey ; from 1830 to 1848 , he scrawled pears on the walls . 
One summer evening , when Louis Philippe was returning home on foot , he saw a little fellow , no higher than his knee , perspiring and climbing up to draw a gigantic pear in charcoal on one of the pillars of the gate of Neuilly ; the King , with that good-nature which came to him from Henry IV. , helped the gamin , finished the pear , and gave the child a louis , saying : `` The pear is on that also . '' 
-LSB- 19 -RSB- The gamin loves uproar . 
A certain state of violence pleases him . 
He execrates `` the cures . '' 
One day , in the Rue de l'Universite , one of these scamps was putting his thumb to his nose at the carriage gate of No. 69 . 
`` Why are you doing that at the gate ? '' 
a passer-by asked . 
The boy replied : `` There is a cure there . '' 
It was there , in fact , that the Papal Nuncio lived . 
-LSB- 19 -RSB- Louis XVIII . 
is represented in comic pictures of that day as having a pear-shaped head . 
Nevertheless , whatever may be the Voltairianism of the small gamin , if the occasion to become a chorister presents itself , it is quite possible that he will accept , and in that case he serves the mass civilly . 
There are two things to which he plays Tantalus , and which he always desires without ever attaining them : to overthrow the government , and to get his trousers sewed up again . 
The gamin in his perfect state possesses all the policemen of Paris , and can always put the name to the face of any one which he chances to meet . 
He can tell them off on the tips of his fingers . 
He studies their habits , and he has special notes on each one of them . 
He reads the souls of the police like an open book . 
He will tell you fluently and without flinching : `` Such an one is a traitor ; such another is very malicious ; such another is great ; such another is ridiculous . '' 
-LRB- All these words : traitor , malicious , great , ridiculous , have a particular meaning in his mouth . -RRB- 
That one imagines that he owns the Pont-Neuf , and he prevents people from walking on the cornice outside the parapet ; that other has a mania for pulling person 's ears ; etc. , etc. . 
THE OLD SOUL OF GAUL There was something of that boy in Poquelin , the son of the fish-market ; Beaumarchais had something of it . 
Gaminerie is a shade of the Gallic spirit . 
Mingled with good sense , it sometimes adds force to the latter , as alcohol does to wine . 
Sometimes it is a defect . 
Homer repeats himself eternally , granted ; one may say that Voltaire plays the gamin . 
Camille Desmoulins was a native of the faubourgs . 
Championnet , who treated miracles brutally , rose from the pavements of Paris ; he had , when a small lad , inundated the porticos of Saint-Jean de Beauvais , and of Saint-Etienne du Mont ; he had addressed the shrine of Sainte-Genevieve familiarly to give orders to the phial of Saint Januarius . 
The gamin of Paris is respectful , ironical , and insolent . 
He has villainous teeth , because he is badly fed and his stomach suffers , and handsome eyes because he has wit . 
If Jehovah himself were present , he would go hopping up the steps of paradise on one foot . 
He is strong on boxing . 
All beliefs are possible to him . 
He plays in the gutter , and straightens himself up with a revolt ; his effrontery persists even in the presence of grape-shot ; he was a scapegrace , he is a hero ; like the little Theban , he shakes the skin from the lion ; Barra the drummer-boy was a gamin of Paris ; he Shouts : `` Forward ! '' 
as the horse of Scripture says `` Vah ! '' 
and in a moment he has passed from the small brat to the giant . 
This child of the puddle is also the child of the ideal . 
Measure that spread of wings which reaches from Moliere to Barra . 
To sum up the whole , and in one word , the gamin is a being who amuses himself , because he is unhappy . 
ECCE PARIS , ECCE HOMO To sum it all up once more , the Paris gamin of to-day , like the graeculus of Rome in days gone by , is the infant populace with the wrinkle of the old world on his brow . 
The gamin is a grace to the nation , and at the same time a disease ; a disease which must be cured , how ? 
By light . 
Light renders healthy . 
Light kindles . 
All generous social irradiations spring from science , letters , arts , education . 
Make men , make men . 
Give them light that they may warm you . 
Sooner or later the splendid question of universal education will present itself with the irresistible authority of the absolute truth ; and then , those who govern under the superintendence of the French idea will have to make this choice ; the children of France or the gamins of Paris ; flames in the light or will-o ' - the-wisps in the gloom . 
The gamin expresses Paris , and Paris expresses the world . 
For Paris is a total . 
Paris is the ceiling of the human race . 
The whole of this prodigious city is a foreshortening of dead manners and living manners . 
He who sees Paris thinks he sees the bottom of all history with heaven and constellations in the intervals . 
Paris has a capital , the Town-Hall , a Parthenon , Notre-Dame , a Mount Aventine , the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , an Asinarium , the Sorbonne , a Pantheon , the Pantheon , a Via Sacra , the Boulevard des Italiens , a temple of the winds , opinion ; and it replaces the Gemoniae by ridicule . 
Its majo is called `` faraud , '' its Transteverin is the man of the faubourgs , its hammal is the market-porter , its lazzarone is the pegre , its cockney is the native of Ghent . 
Everything that exists elsewhere exists at Paris . 
The fishwoman of Dumarsais can retort on the herb-seller of Euripides , the discobols Vejanus lives again in the Forioso , the tight-rope dancer . 
Therapontigonus Miles could walk arm in arm with Vadeboncoeur the grenadier , Damasippus the second-hand dealer would be happy among bric-a-brac merchants , Vincennes could grasp Socrates in its fist as just as Agora could imprison Diderot , Grimod de la Reyniere discovered larded roast beef , as Curtillus invented roast hedgehog , we see the trapeze which figures in Plautus reappear under the vault of the Arc of l'Etoile , the sword-eater of Poecilus encountered by Apuleius is a sword-swallower on the PontNeuf , the nephew of Rameau and Curculio the parasite make a pair , Ergasilus could get himself presented to Cambaceres by d'Aigrefeuille ; the four dandies of Rome : Alcesimarchus , Phoedromus , Diabolus , and Argyrippus , descend from Courtille in Labatut 's posting-chaise ; Aulus Gellius would halt no longer in front of Congrio than would Charles Nodier in front of Punchinello ; Marto is not a tigress , but Pardalisca was not a dragon ; Pantolabus the wag jeers in the Cafe Anglais at Nomentanus the fast liver , Hermogenus is a tenor in the Champs-Elysees , and round him , Thracius the beggar , clad like Bobeche , takes up a collection ; the bore who stops you by the button of your coat in the Tuileries makes you repeat after a lapse of two thousand years Thesprion 's apostrophe : Quis properantem me prehendit pallio ? 
The wine on Surene is a parody of the wine of Alba , the red border of Desaugiers forms a balance to the great cutting of Balatro , Pere Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains same gleams as the Esquiliae , and the grave of the poor bought for five years , is certainly the equivalent of the slave 's hived coffin . 
Seek something that Paris has not . 
The vat of Trophonius contains nothing that is not in Mesmer 's tub ; Ergaphilas lives again in Cagliostro ; the Brahmin Vasaphanta become incarnate in the Comte de Saint-Germain ; the cemetery of Saint-Medard works quite as good miracles as the Mosque of Oumoumie at Damascus . 
Paris has an AEsop-Mayeux , and a Canidia , Mademoiselle Lenormand . 
It is terrified , like Delphos at the fulgurating realities of the vision ; it makes tables turn as Dodona did tripods . 
It places the grisette on the throne , as Rome placed the courtesan there ; and , taking it altogether , if Louis XV . 
is worse than Claudian , Madame Dubarry is better than Messalina . 
Paris combines in an unprecedented type , which has existed and which we have elbowed , Grecian nudity , the Hebraic ulcer , and the Gascon pun . 
It mingles Diogenes , Job , and Jack-pudding , dresses up a spectre in old numbers of the Constitutional , and makes Chodruc Duclos . 
Although Plutarch says : the tyrant never grows old , Rome , under Sylla as under Domitian , resigned itself and willingly put water in its wine . 
The Tiber was a Lethe , if the rather doctrinary eulogium made of it by Varus Vibiscus is to be credited : Contra Gracchos Tiberim habemus , Bibere Tiberim , id est seditionem oblivisci . 
Paris drinks a million litres of water a day , but that does not prevent it from occasionally beating the general alarm and ringing the tocsin . 
With that exception , Paris is amiable . 
It accepts everything royally ; it is not too particular about its Venus ; its Callipyge is Hottentot ; provided that it is made to laugh , it condones ; ugliness cheers it , deformity provokes it to laughter , vice diverts it ; be eccentric and you may be an eccentric ; even hypocrisy , that supreme cynicism , does not disgust it ; it is so literary that it does not hold its nose before Basile , and is no more scandalized by the prayer of Tartuffe than Horace was repelled by the `` hiccup '' of Priapus . 
No trait of the universal face is lacking in the profile of Paris . 
The bal Mabile is not the polymnia dance of the Janiculum , but the dealer in ladies ' wearing apparel there devours the lorette with her eyes , exactly as the procuress Staphyla lay in wait for the virgin Planesium . 
The Barriere du Combat is not the Coliseum , but people are as ferocious there as though Caesar were looking on . 
The Syrian hostess has more grace than Mother Saguet , but , if Virgil haunted the Roman wine-shop , David d'Angers , Balzac and Charlet have sat at the tables of Parisian taverns . 
Paris reigns . 
Geniuses flash forth there , the red tails prosper there . 
Adonai passes on his chariot with its twelve wheels of thunder and lightning ; Silenus makes his entry there on his ass . 
For Silenus read Ramponneau . 
Paris is the synonym of Cosmos , Paris is Athens , Sybaris , Jerusalem , Pantin . 
All civilizations are there in an abridged form , all barbarisms also . 
Paris would greatly regret it if it had not a guillotine . 
A little of the Place de Greve is a good thing . 
What would all that eternal festival be without this seasoning ? 
Our laws are wisely provided , and thanks to them , this blade drips on this Shrove Tuesday . 
TO SCOFF , TO REIGN There is no limit to Paris . 
No city has had that domination which sometimes derides those whom it subjugates . 
To please you , O Athenians ! 
exclaimed Alexander . 
Paris makes more than the law , it makes the fashion ; Paris sets more than the fashion , it sets the routine . 
Paris may be stupid , if it sees fit ; it sometimes allows itself this luxury ; then the universe is stupid in company with it ; then Paris awakes , rubs its eyes , says : `` How stupid I am ! '' 
and bursts out laughing in the face of the human race . 
What a marvel is such a city ! 
it is a strange thing that this grandioseness and this burlesque should be amicable neighbors , that all this majesty should not be thrown into disorder by all this parody , and that the same mouth can to-day blow into the trump of the Judgment Day , and to-morrow into the reed-flute ! 
Paris has a sovereign joviality . 
Its gayety is of the thunder and its farce holds a sceptre . 
Its tempest sometimes proceeds from a grimace . 
Its explosions , its days , its masterpieces , its prodigies , its epics , go forth to the bounds of the universe , and so also do its cock-and-bull stories . 
Its laugh is the mouth of a volcano which spatters the whole earth . 
Its jests are sparks . 
It imposes its caricatures as well as its ideal on people ; the highest monuments of human civilization accept its ironies and lend their eternity to its mischievous pranks . 
It is superb ; it has a prodigious 14th of July , which delivers the globe ; it forces all nations to take the oath of tennis ; its night of the 4th of August dissolves in three hours a thousand years of feudalism ; it makes of its logic the muscle of unanimous will ; it multiplies itself under all sorts of forms of the sublime ; it fills with its light Washington , Kosciusko , Bolivar , Bozzaris , Riego , Bem , Manin , Lopez , John Brown , Garibaldi ; it is everywhere where the future is being lighted up , at Boston in 1779 , at the Isle de Leon in 1820 , at Pesth in 1848 , at Palermo in 1860 , it whispers the mighty countersign : Liberty , in the ear of the American abolitionists grouped about the boat at Harper 's Ferry , and in the ear of the patriots of Ancona assembled in the shadow , to the Archi before the Gozzi inn on the seashore ; it creates Canaris ; it creates Quiroga ; it creates Pisacane ; it irradiates the great on earth ; it was while proceeding whither its breath urge them , that Byron perished at Missolonghi , and that Mazet died at Barcelona ; it is the tribune under the feet of Mirabeau , and a crater under the feet of Robespierre ; its books , its theatre , its art , its science , its literature , its philosophy , are the manuals of the human race ; it has Pascal , Regnier , Corneille , Descartes , Jean-Jacques : Voltaire for all moments , Moliere for all centuries ; it makes its language to be talked by the universal mouth , and that language becomes the word ; it constructs in all minds the idea of progress , the liberating dogmas which it forges are for the generations trusty friends , and it is with the soul of its thinkers and its poets that all heroes of all nations have been made since 1789 ; this does not prevent vagabondism , and that enormous genius which is called Paris , while transfiguring the world by its light , sketches in charcoal Bouginier 's nose on the wall of the temple of Theseus and writes Credeville the thief on the Pyramids . 
Paris is always showing its teeth ; when it is not scolding it is laughing . 
Such is Paris . 
The smoke of its roofs forms the ideas of the universe . 
A heap of mud and stone , if you will , but , above all , a moral being . 
It is more than great , it is immense . 
Why ? 
Because it is daring . 
To dare ; that is the price of progress . 
All sublime conquests are , more or less , the prizes of daring . 
In order that the Revolution should take place , it does not suffice that Montesquieu should foresee it , that Diderot should preach it , that Beaumarchais should announce it , that Condorcet should calculate it , that Arouet should prepare it , that Rousseau should premeditate it ; it is necessary that Danton should dare it . 
The cry : Audacity ! 
is a Fiat lux . 
It is necessary , for the sake of the forward march of the human race , that there should be proud lessons of courage permanently on the heights . 
Daring deeds dazzle history and are one of man 's great sources of light . 
The dawn dares when it rises . 
To attempt , to brave , to persist , to persevere , to be faithful to one 's self , to grasp fate bodily , to astound catastrophe by the small amount of fear that it occasions us , now to affront unjust power , again to insult drunken victory , to hold one 's position , to stand one 's ground ; that is the example which nations need , that is the light which electrifies them . 
The same formidable lightning proceeds from the torch of Prometheus to Cambronne 's short pipe . 
THE FUTURE LATENT IN THE PEOPLE As for the Parisian populace , even when a man grown , it is always the street Arab ; to paint the child is to paint the city ; and it is for that reason that we have studied this eagle in this arrant sparrow . 
It is in the faubourgs , above all , we maintain , that the Parisian race appears ; there is the pure blood ; there is the true physiognomy ; there this people toils and suffers , and suffering and toil are the two faces of man . 
There exist there immense numbers of unknown beings , among whom swarm types of the strangest , from the porter of la Rapee to the knacker of Montfaucon . 
Fex urbis , exclaims Cicero ; mob , adds Burke , indignantly ; rabble , multitude , populace . 
These are words and quickly uttered . 
But so be it . 
What does it matter ? 
What is it to me if they do go barefoot ! 
They do not know how to read ; so much the worse . 
Would you abandon them for that ? 
Would you turn their distress into a malediction ? 
Can not the light penetrate these masses ? 
Let us return to that cry : Light ! 
and let us obstinately persist therein ! 
Light ! 
Light ! 
Who knows whether these opacities will not become transparent ? 
Are not revolutions transfigurations ? 
Come , philosophers , teach , enlighten , light up , think aloud , speak aloud , hasten joyously to the great sun , fraternize with the public place , announce the good news , spend your alphabets lavishly , proclaim rights , sing the Marseillaises , sow enthusiasms , tear green boughs from the oaks . 
Make a whirlwind of the idea . 
This crowd may be rendered sublime . 
Let us learn how to make use of that vast conflagration of principles and virtues , which sparkles , bursts forth and quivers at certain hours . 
These bare feet , these bare arms , these rags , these ignorances , these abjectnesses , these darknesses , may be employed in the conquest of the ideal . 
Gaze past the people , and you will perceive truth . 
Let that vile sand which you trample under foot be cast into the furnace , let it melt and seethe there , it will become a splendid crystal , and it is thanks to it that Galileo and Newton will discover stars . 
LITTLE GAVROCHE Eight or nine years after the events narrated in the second part of this story , people noticed on the Boulevard du Temple , and in the regions of the Chateau-d'Eau , a little boy eleven or twelve years of age , who would have realized with tolerable accuracy that ideal of the gamin sketched out above , if , with the laugh of his age on his lips , he had not had a heart absolutely sombre and empty . 
This child was well muffled up in a pair of man 's trousers , but he did not get them from his father , and a woman 's chemise , but he did not get it from his mother . 
Some people or other had clothed him in rags out of charity . 
Still , he had a father and a mother . 
But his father did not think of him , and his mother did not love him . 
He was one of those children most deserving of pity , among all , one of those who have father and mother , and who are orphans nevertheless . 
This child never felt so well as when he was in the street . 
The pavements were less hard to him than his mother 's heart . 
His parents had despatched him into life with a kick . 
He simply took flight . 
He was a boisterous , pallid , nimble , wide-awake , jeering , lad , with a vivacious but sickly air . 
He went and came , sang , played at hopscotch , scraped the gutters , stole a little , but , like cats and sparrows , gayly laughed when he was called a rogue , and got angry when called a thief . 
He had no shelter , no bread , no fire , no love ; but he was merry because he was free . 
When these poor creatures grow to be men , the millstones of the social order meet them and crush them , but so long as they are children , they escape because of their smallness . 
The tiniest hole saves them . 
Nevertheless , abandoned as this child was , it sometimes happened , every two or three months , that he said , `` Come , I 'll go and see mamma ! '' 
Then he quitted the boulevard , the Cirque , the Porte Saint-Martin , descended to the quays , crossed the bridges , reached the suburbs , arrived at the Salpetriere , and came to a halt , where ? 
Precisely at that double number 50-52 with which the reader is acquainted -- at the Gorbeau hovel . 
At that epoch , the hovel 50-52 generally deserted and eternally decorated with the placard : `` Chambers to let , '' chanced to be , a rare thing , inhabited by numerous individuals who , however , as is always the case in Paris , had no connection with each other . 
All belonged to that indigent class which begins to separate from the lowest of petty bourgeoisie in straitened circumstances , and which extends from misery to misery into the lowest depths of society down to those two beings in whom all the material things of civilization end , the sewer-man who sweeps up the mud , and the ragpicker who collects scraps . 
The `` principal lodger '' of Jean Valjean 's day was dead and had been replaced by another exactly like her . 
I know not what philosopher has said : `` Old women are never lacking . '' 
This new old woman was named Madame Bourgon , and had nothing remarkable about her life except a dynasty of three paroquets , who had reigned in succession over her soul . 
The most miserable of those who inhabited the hovel were a family of four persons , consisting of father , mother , and two daughters , already well grown , all four of whom were lodged in the same attic , one of the cells which we have already mentioned . 
At first sight , this family presented no very special feature except its extreme destitution ; the father , when he hired the chamber , had stated that his name was Jondrette . 
Some time after his moving in , which had borne a singular resemblance to the entrance of nothing at all , to borrow the memorable expression of the principal tenant , this Jondrette had said to the woman , who , like her predecessor , was at the same time portress and stair-sweeper : `` Mother So-and-So , if any one should chance to come and inquire for a Pole or an Italian , or even a Spaniard , perchance , it is I. '' This family was that of the merry barefoot boy . 
He arrived there and found distress , and , what is still sadder , no smile ; a cold hearth and cold hearts . 
When he entered , he was asked : `` Whence come you ? '' 
He replied : `` From the street . '' 
When he went away , they asked him : `` Whither are you going ? '' 
He replied : `` Into the streets . '' 
His mother said to him : `` What did you come here for ? '' 
This child lived , in this absence of affection , like the pale plants which spring up in cellars . 
It did not cause him suffering , and he blamed no one . 
He did not know exactly how a father and mother should be . 
Nevertheless , his mother loved his sisters . 
We have forgotten to mention , that on the Boulevard du Temple this child was called Little Gavroche . 
Why was he called Little Gavroche ? 
Probably because his father 's name was Jondrette . 
It seems to be the instinct of certain wretched families to break the thread . 
The chamber which the Jondrettes inhabited in the Gorbeau hovel was the last at the end of the corridor . 
The cell next to it was occupied by a very poor young man who was called M. Marius . 
Let us explain who this M. Marius was . 
NINETY YEARS AND THIRTY-TWO TEETH In the Rue Boucherat , Rue de Normandie and the Rue de Saintonge there still exist a few ancient inhabitants who have preserved the memory of a worthy man named M. Gillenormand , and who mention him with complaisance . 
This good man was old when they were young . 
This silhouette has not yet entirely disappeared -- for those who regard with melancholy that vague swarm of shadows which is called the past -- from the labyrinth of streets in the vicinity of the Temple to which , under Louis XIV. , the names of all the provinces of France were appended exactly as in our day , the streets of the new Tivoli quarter have received the names of all the capitals of Europe ; a progression , by the way , in which progress is visible . 
M.Gillenormand , who was as much alive as possible in 1831 , was one of those men who had become curiosities to be viewed , simply because they have lived a long time , and who are strange because they formerly resembled everybody , and now resemble nobody . 
He was a peculiar old man , and in very truth , a man of another age , the real , complete and rather haughty bourgeois of the eighteenth century , who wore his good , old bourgeoisie with the air with which marquises wear their marquisates . 
He was over ninety years of age , his walk was erect , he talked loudly , saw clearly , drank neat , ate , slept , and snored . 
He had all thirty-two of his teeth . 
He only wore spectacles when he read . 
He was of an amorous disposition , but declared that , for the last ten years , he had wholly and decidedly renounced women . 
He could no longer please , he said ; he did not add : `` I am too old , '' but : `` I am too poor . '' 
He said : `` If I were not ruined -- Heee ! '' 
All he had left , in fact , was an income of about fifteen thousand francs . 
His dream was to come into an inheritance and to have a hundred thousand livres income for mistresses . 
He did not belong , as the reader will perceive , to that puny variety of octogenaries who , like M. de Voltaire , have been dying all their life ; his was no longevity of a cracked pot ; this jovial old man had always had good health . 
He was superficial , rapid , easily angered . 
He flew into a passion at everything , generally quite contrary to all reason . 
When contradicted , he raised his cane ; he beat people as he had done in the great century . 
He had a daughter over fifty years of age , and unmarried , whom he chastised severely with his tongue , when in a rage , and whom he would have liked to whip . 
She seemed to him to be eight years old . 
He boxed his servants ' ears soundly , and said : `` Ah ! 
carogne ! '' 
One of his oaths was : `` By the pantoufloche of the pantouflochade ! '' 
He had singular freaks of tranquillity ; he had himself shaved every day by a barber who had been mad and who detested him , being jealous of M. Gillenormand on account of his wife , a pretty and coquettish barberess . 
M. Gillenormand admired his own discernment in all things , and declared that he was extremely sagacious ; here is one of his sayings : `` I have , in truth , some penetration ; I am able to say when a flea bites me , from what woman it came . '' 
The words which he uttered the most frequently were : the sensible man , and nature . 
He did not give to this last word the grand acceptation which our epoch has accorded to it , but he made it enter , after his own fashion , into his little chimney-corner satires : `` Nature , '' he said , `` in order that civilization may have a little of everything , gives it even specimens of its amusing barbarism . 
Europe possesses specimens of Asia and Africa on a small scale . 
The cat is a drawing-room tiger , the lizard is a pocket crocodile . 
The dancers at the opera are pink female savages . 
They do not eat men , they crunch them ; or , magicians that they are , they transform them into oysters and swallow them . 
The Caribbeans leave only the bones , they leave only the shell . 
Such are our morals . 
We do not devour , we gnaw ; we do not exterminate , we claw . '' 
LIKE MASTER , LIKE HOUSE He lived in the Marais , Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , No. 6 . 
He owned the house . 
This house has since been demolished and rebuilt , and the number has probably been changed in those revolutions of numeration which the streets of Paris undergo . 
He occupied an ancient and vast apartment on the first floor , between street and gardens , furnished to the very ceilings with great Gobelins and Beauvais tapestries representing pastoral scenes ; the subjects of the ceilings and the panels were repeated in miniature on the arm-chairs . 
He enveloped his bed in a vast , nine-leaved screen of Coromandel lacquer . 
Long , full curtains hung from the windows , and formed great , broken folds that were very magnificent . 
The garden situated immediately under his windows was attached to that one of them which formed the angle , by means of a staircase twelve or fifteen steps long , which the old gentleman ascended and descended with great agility . 
In addition to a library adjoining his chamber , he had a boudoir of which he thought a great deal , a gallant and elegant retreat , with magnificent hangings of straw , with a pattern of flowers and fleurs-de-lys made on the galleys of Louis XIV . 
and ordered of his convicts by M. de Vivonne for his mistress . 
M. Gillenormand had inherited it from a grim maternal great-aunt , who had died a centenarian . 
He had had two wives . 
His manners were something between those of the courtier , which he had never been , and the lawyer , which he might have been . 
He was gay , and caressing when he had a mind . 
In his youth he had been one of those men who are always deceived by their wives and never by their mistresses , because they are , at the same time , the most sullen of husbands and the most charming of lovers in existence . 
He was a connoisseur of painting . 
He had in his chamber a marvellous portrait of no one knows whom , painted by Jordaens , executed with great dashes of the brush , with millions of details , in a confused and hap-hazard manner . 
M. Gillenormand 's attire was not the habit of Louis XIV . 
nor yet that of Louis XVI. ; it was that of the Incroyables of the Directory . 
He had thought himself young up to that period and had followed the fashions . 
His coat was of light-weight cloth with voluminous revers , a long swallow-tail and large steel buttons . 
With this he wore knee-breeches and buckle shoes . 
He always thrust his hands into his fobs . 
He said authoritatively : `` The French Revolution is a heap of blackguards . '' 
LUC-ESPRIT At the age of sixteen , one evening at the opera , he had had the honor to be stared at through opera-glasses by two beauties at the same time -- ripe and celebrated beauties then , and sung by Voltaire , the Camargo and the Salle . 
Caught between two fires , he had beaten a heroic retreat towards a little dancer , a young girl named Nahenry , who was sixteen like himself , obscure as a cat , and with whom he was in love . 
He abounded in memories . 
He was accustomed to exclaim : `` How pretty she was -- that Guimard-Guimardini-Guimardinette , the last time I saw her at Longchamps , her hair curled in sustained sentiments , with her come-and-see of turquoises , her gown of the color of persons newly arrived , and her little agitation muff ! '' 
He had worn in his young manhood a waistcoat of Nain-Londrin , which he was fond of talking about effusively . 
`` I was dressed like a Turk of the Levant Levantin , '' said he . 
Madame de Boufflers , having seen him by chance when he was twenty , had described him as `` a charming fool . '' 
He was horrified by all the names which he saw in politics and in power , regarding them as vulgar and bourgeois . 
He read the journals , the newspapers , the gazettes as he said , stifling outbursts of laughter the while . 
`` Oh ! '' 
he said , `` what people these are ! 
Corbiere ! 
Humann ! 
Casimir Perier ! 
There 's a minister for you ! 
I can imagine this in a journal : ` M. Gillenorman , minister ! ' 
that would be a farce . 
Well ! 
They are so stupid that it would pass '' ; he merrily called everything by its name , whether decent or indecent , and did not restrain himself in the least before ladies . 
He uttered coarse speeches , obscenities , and filth with a certain tranquillity and lack of astonishment which was elegant . 
It was in keeping with the unceremoniousness of his century . 
It is to be noted that the age of periphrase in verse was the age of crudities in prose . 
His god-father had predicted that he would turn out a man of genius , and had bestowed on him these two significant names : Luc-Esprit . 
A CENTENARIAN ASPIRANT He had taken prizes in his boyhood at the College of Moulins , where he was born , and he had been crowned by the hand of the Duc de Nivernais , whom he called the Duc de Nevers . 
Neither the Convention , nor the death of Louis XVI. , nor the Napoleon , nor the return of the Bourbons , nor anything else had been able to efface the memory of this crowning . 
The Duc de Nevers was , in his eyes , the great figure of the century . 
`` What a charming grand seigneur , '' he said , `` and what a fine air he had with his blue ribbon ! '' 
In the eyes of M. Gillenormand , Catherine the Second had made reparation for the crime of the partition of Poland by purchasing , for three thousand roubles , the secret of the elixir of gold , from Bestucheff . 
He grew animated on this subject : `` The elixir of gold , '' he exclaimed , `` the yellow dye of Bestucheff , General Lamotte 's drops , in the eighteenth century , -- this was the great remedy for the catastrophes of love , the panacea against Venus , at one louis the half-ounce phial . 
Louis XV . 
sent two hundred phials of it to the Pope . '' 
He would have been greatly irritated and thrown off his balance , had any one told him that the elixir of gold is nothing but the perchloride of iron . 
M. Gillenormand adored the Bourbons , and had a horror of 1789 ; he was forever narrating in what manner he had saved himself during the Terror , and how he had been obliged to display a vast deal of gayety and cleverness in order to escape having his head cut off . 
If any young man ventured to pronounce an eulogium on the Republic in his presence , he turned purple and grew so angry that he was on the point of swooning . 
He sometimes alluded to his ninety years , and said , `` I hope that I shall not see ninety-three twice . '' 
On these occasions , he hinted to people that he meant to live to be a hundred . 
BASQUE AND NICOLETTE He had theories . 
Here is one of them : `` When a man is passionately fond of women , and when he has himself a wife for whom he cares but little , who is homely , cross , legitimate , with plenty of rights , perched on the code , and jealous at need , there is but one way of extricating himself from the quandry and of procuring peace , and that is to let his wife control the purse-strings . 
This abdication sets him free . 
Then his wife busies herself , grows passionately fond of handling coin , gets her fingers covered with verdigris in the process , undertakes the education of half-share tenants and the training of farmers , convokes lawyers , presides over notaries , harangues scriveners , visits limbs of the law , follows lawsuits , draws up leases , dictates contracts , feels herself the sovereign , sells , buys , regulates , promises and compromises , binds fast and annuls , yields , concedes and retrocedes , arranges , disarranges , hoards , lavishes ; she commits follies , a supreme and personal delight , and that consoles her . 
While her husband disdains her , she has the satisfaction of ruining her husband . '' 
This theory M. Gillenormand had himself applied , and it had become his history . 
His wife -- the second one -- had administered his fortune in such a manner that , one fine day , when M. Gillenormand found himself a widower , there remained to him just sufficient to live on , by sinking nearly the whole of it in an annuity of fifteen thousand francs , three-quarters of which would expire with him . 
He had not hesitated on this point , not being anxious to leave a property behind him . 
Besides , he had noticed that patrimonies are subject to adventures , and , for instance , become national property ; he had been present at the avatars of consolidated three per cents , and he had no great faith in the Great Book of the Public Debt . 
`` All that 's the Rue Quincampois ! '' 
he said . 
His house in the Rue Filles-du-Clavaire belonged to him , as we have already stated . 
He had two servants , `` a male and a female . '' 
When a servant entered his establishment , M. Gillenormand re-baptized him . 
He bestowed on the men the name of their province : Nimois , Comtois , Poitevin , Picard . 
His last valet was a big , foundered , short-winded fellow of fifty-five , who was incapable of running twenty paces ; but , as he had been born at Bayonne , M. Gillenormand called him Basque . 
All the female servants in his house were called Nicolette -LRB- even the Magnon , of whom we shall hear more farther on -RRB- . 
One day , a haughty cook , a cordon bleu , of the lofty race of porters , presented herself . 
`` How much wages do you want a month ? '' 
asked M. Gillenormand . 
`` Thirty francs . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Olympie . '' 
`` You shall have fifty francs , and you shall be called Nicolette . '' 
IN WHICH MAGNON AND HER TWO CHILDREN ARE SEEN With M. Gillenormand , sorrow was converted into wrath ; he was furious at being in despair . 
He had all sorts of prejudices and took all sorts of liberties . 
One of the facts of which his exterior relief and his internal satisfaction was composed , was , as we have just hinted , that he had remained a brisk spark , and that he passed energetically for such . 
This he called having `` royal renown . '' 
This royal renown sometimes drew down upon him singular windfalls . 
One day , there was brought to him in a basket , as though it had been a basket of oysters , a stout , newly born boy , who was yelling like the deuce , and duly wrapped in swaddling-clothes , which a servant-maid , dismissed six months previously , attributed to him . 
M. Gillenormand had , at that time , fully completed his eighty-fourth year . 
Indignation and uproar in the establishment . 
And whom did that bold hussy think she could persuade to believe that ? 
What audacity ! 
What an abominable calumny ! 
M. Gillenormand himself was not at all enraged . 
He gazed at the brat with the amiable smile of a good man who is flattered by the calumny , and said in an aside : `` Well , what now ? 
What 's the matter ? 
You are finely taken aback , and really , you are excessively ignorant . 
M. le Duc d'Angouleme , the bastard of his Majesty Charles IX. , married a silly jade of fifteen when he was eighty-five ; M. Virginal , Marquis d'Alluye , brother to the Cardinal de Sourdis , Archbishop of Bordeaux , had , at the age of eighty-three , by the maid of Madame la Presidente Jacquin , a son , a real child of love , who became a Chevalier of Malta and a counsellor of state ; one of the great men of this century , the Abbe Tabaraud , is the son of a man of eighty-seven . 
There is nothing out of the ordinary in these things . 
And then , the Bible ! 
Upon that I declare that this little gentleman is none of mine . 
Let him be taken care of . 
It is not his fault . '' 
This manner of procedure was good-tempered . 
The woman , whose name was Magnon , sent him another parcel in the following year . 
It was a boy again . 
Thereupon , M. Gillenormand capitulated . 
He sent the two brats back to their mother , promising to pay eighty francs a month for their maintenance , on the condition that the said mother would not do so any more . 
He added : `` I insist upon it that the mother shall treat them well . 
I shall go to see them from time to time . '' 
And this he did . 
He had had a brother who was a priest , and who had been rector of the Academy of Poitiers for three and thirty years , and had died at seventy-nine . 
`` I lost him young , '' said he . 
This brother , of whom but little memory remains , was a peaceable miser , who , being a priest , thought himself bound to bestow alms on the poor whom he met , but he never gave them anything except bad or demonetized sous , thereby discovering a means of going to hell by way of paradise . 
As for M. Gillenormand the elder , he never haggled over his alms-giving , but gave gladly and nobly . 
He was kindly , abrupt , charitable , and if he had been rich , his turn of mind would have been magnificent . 
He desired that all which concerned him should be done in a grand manner , even his rogueries . 
One day , having been cheated by a business man in a matter of inheritance , in a gross and apparent manner , he uttered this solemn exclamation : `` That was indecently done ! 
I am really ashamed of this pilfering . 
Everything has degenerated in this century , even the rascals . 
Morbleu ! 
this is not the way to rob a man of my standing . 
I am robbed as though in a forest , but badly robbed . 
Silva , sint consule dignae ! '' 
He had had two wives , as we have already mentioned ; by the first he had had a daughter , who had remained unmarried , and by the second another daughter , who had died at about the age of thirty , who had wedded , through love , or chance , or otherwise , a soldier of fortune who had served in the armies of the Republic and of the Empire , who had won the cross at Austerlitz and had been made colonel at Waterloo . 
`` He is the disgrace of my family , '' said the old bourgeois . 
He took an immense amount of snuff , and had a particularly graceful manner of plucking at his lace ruffle with the back of one hand . 
He believed very little in God . 
RULE : RECEIVE NO ONE EXCEPT IN THE EVENING Such was M. Luc-Esprit Gillenormand , who had not lost his hair , -- which was gray rather than white , -- and which was always dressed in `` dog 's ears . '' 
To sum up , he was venerable in spite of all this . 
He had something of the eighteenth century about him ; frivolous and great . 
In 1814 and during the early years of the Restoration , M. Gillenormand , who was still young , -- he was only seventy-four , -- lived in the Faubourg Saint Germain , Rue Servandoni , near Saint-Sulpice . 
He had only retired to the Marais when he quitted society , long after attaining the age of eighty . 
And , on abandoning society , he had immured himself in his habits . 
The principal one , and that which was invariable , was to keep his door absolutely closed during the day , and never to receive any one whatever except in the evening . 
He dined at five o'clock , and after that his door was open . 
That had been the fashion of his century , and he would not swerve from it . 
`` The day is vulgar , '' said he , `` and deserves only a closed shutter . 
Fashionable people only light up their minds when the zenith lights up its stars . '' 
And he barricaded himself against every one , even had it been the king himself . 
This was the antiquated elegance of his day . 
TWO DO NOT MAKE A PAIR We have just spoken of M. Gillenormand 's two daughters . 
They had come into the world ten years apart . 
In their youth they had borne very little resemblance to each other , either in character or countenance , and had also been as little like sisters to each other as possible . 
The youngest had a charming soul , which turned towards all that belongs to the light , was occupied with flowers , with verses , with music , which fluttered away into glorious space , enthusiastic , ethereal , and was wedded from her very youth , in ideal , to a vague and heroic figure . 
The elder had also her chimera ; she espied in the azure some very wealthy purveyor , a contractor , a splendidly stupid husband , a million made man , or even a prefect ; the receptions of the Prefecture , an usher in the antechamber with a chain on his neck , official balls , the harangues of the town-hall , to be `` Madame la Prefete , '' -- all this had created a whirlwind in her imagination . 
Thus the two sisters strayed , each in her own dream , at the epoch when they were young girls . 
Both had wings , the one like an angel , the other like a goose . 
No ambition is ever fully realized , here below at least . 
No paradise becomes terrestrial in our day . 
The younger wedded the man of her dreams , but she died . 
The elder did not marry at all . 
At the moment when she makes her entrance into this history which we are relating , she was an antique virtue , an incombustible prude , with one of the sharpest noses , and one of the most obtuse minds that it is possible to see . 
A characteristic detail ; outside of her immediate family , no one had ever known her first name . 
She was called Mademoiselle Gillenormand , the elder . 
In the matter of cant , Mademoiselle Gillenormand could have given points to a miss . 
Her modesty was carried to the other extreme of blackness . 
She cherished a frightful memory of her life ; one day , a man had beheld her garter . 
Age had only served to accentuate this pitiless modesty . 
Her guimpe was never sufficiently opaque , and never ascended sufficiently high . 
She multiplied clasps and pins where no one would have dreamed of looking . 
The peculiarity of prudery is to place all the more sentinels in proportion as the fortress is the less menaced . 
Nevertheless , let him who can explain these antique mysteries of innocence , she allowed an officer of the Lancers , her grand nephew , named Theodule , to embrace her without displeasure . 
In spite of this favored Lancer , the label : Prude , under which we have classed her , suited her to absolute perfection . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand was a sort of twilight soul . 
Prudery is a demi-virtue and a demi-vice . 
To prudery she added bigotry , a well-assorted lining . 
She belonged to the society of the Virgin , wore a white veil on certain festivals , mumbled special orisons , revered `` the holy blood , '' venerated `` the sacred heart , '' remained for hours in contemplation before a rococo-jesuit altar in a chapel which was inaccessible to the rank and file of the faithful , and there allowed her soul to soar among little clouds of marble , and through great rays of gilded wood . 
She had a chapel friend , an ancient virgin like herself , named Mademoiselle Vaubois , who was a positive blockhead , and beside whom Mademoiselle Gillenormand had the pleasure of being an eagle . 
Beyond the Agnus Dei and Ave Maria , Mademoiselle Vaubois had no knowledge of anything except of the different ways of making preserves . 
Mademoiselle Vaubois , perfect in her style , was the ermine of stupidity without a single spot of intelligence . 
Let us say it plainly , Mademoiselle Gillenormand had gained rather than lost as she grew older . 
This is the case with passive natures . 
She had never been malicious , which is relative kindness ; and then , years wear away the angles , and the softening which comes with time had come to her . 
She was melancholy with an obscure sadness of which she did not herself know the secret . 
There breathed from her whole person the stupor of a life that was finished , and which had never had a beginning . 
She kept house for her father . 
M. Gillenormand had his daughter near him , as we have seen that Monseigneur Bienvenu had his sister with him . 
These households comprised of an old man and an old spinster are not rare , and always have the touching aspect of two weaknesses leaning on each other for support . 
There was also in this house , between this elderly spinster and this old man , a child , a little boy , who was always trembling and mute in the presence of M. Gillenormand . 
M. Gillenormand never addressed this child except in a severe voice , and sometimes , with uplifted cane : `` Here , sir ! 
rascal , scoundrel , come here ! 
-- Answer me , you scamp ! 
Just let me see you , you good-for-nothing ! '' 
etc. , etc. . 
He idolized him . 
This was his grandson . 
We shall meet with this child again later on . 
BOOK THIRD . 
-- THE GRANDFATHER AND THE GRANDSON AN ANCIENT SALON When M. Gillenormand lived in the Rue Servandoni , he had frequented many very good and very aristocratic salons . 
Although a bourgeois , M. Gillenormand was received in society . 
As he had a double measure of wit , in the first place , that which was born with him , and secondly , that which was attributed to him , he was even sought out and made much of . 
He never went anywhere except on condition of being the chief person there . 
There are people who will have influence at any price , and who will have other people busy themselves over them ; when they can not be oracles , they turn wags . 
M. Gillenormand was not of this nature ; his domination in the Royalist salons which he frequented cost his self-respect nothing . 
He was an oracle everywhere . 
It had happened to him to hold his own against M. de Bonald , and even against M. Bengy-Puy-Vallee . 
About 1817 , he invariably passed two afternoons a week in a house in his own neighborhood , in the Rue Ferou , with Madame la Baronne de T. , a worthy and respectable person , whose husband had been Ambassador of France to Berlin under Louis XVI . 
Baron de T. , who , during his lifetime , had gone very passionately into ecstasies and magnetic visions , had died bankrupt , during the emigration , leaving , as his entire fortune , some very curious Memoirs about Mesmer and his tub , in ten manuscript volumes , bound in red morocco and gilded on the edges . 
Madame de T. had not published the memoirs , out of pride , and maintained herself on a meagre income which had survived no one knew how . 
Madame de T. lived far from the Court ; `` a very mixed society , '' as she said , in a noble isolation , proud and poor . 
A few friends assembled twice a week about her widowed hearth , and these constituted a purely Royalist salon . 
They sipped tea there , and uttered groans or cries of horror at the century , the charter , the Bonapartists , the prostitution of the blue ribbon , or the Jacobinism of Louis XVIII. , according as the wind veered towards elegy or dithyrambs ; and they spoke in low tones of the hopes which were presented by Monsieur , afterwards Charles X . 
The songs of the fishwomen , in which Napoleon was called Nicolas , were received there with transports of joy . 
Duchesses , the most delicate and charming women in the world , went into ecstasies over couplets like the following , addressed to `` the federates '' : -- Refoncez dans vos culottes -LSB- 20 -RSB- Le bout d' chemis ' qui vous pend . 
Qu'on n ' dis ' pas qu ' les patriotes Ont arbore l' drapeau blanc ? 
-LSB- 20 -RSB- Tuck into your trousers the shirt-tail that is hanging out . 
Let it not be said that patriots have hoisted the white flag . 
There they amused themselves with puns which were considered terrible , with innocent plays upon words which they supposed to be venomous , with quatrains , with distiches even ; thus , upon the Dessolles ministry , a moderate cabinet , of which MM . 
Decazes and Deserre were members : -- Pour raffermir le trone ebranle sur sa base , -LSB- 21 -RSB- Il faut changer de sol , et de serre et de case . 
-LSB- 21 -RSB- In order to re-establish the shaken throne firmly on its base , soil -LRB- Des solles -RRB- , greenhouse and house -LRB- Decazes -RRB- must be changed . 
Or they drew up a list of the chamber of peers , `` an abominably Jacobin chamber , '' and from this list they combined alliances of names , in such a manner as to form , for example , phrases like the following : Damas . 
Sabran . 
Gouvion-Saint-Cyr . 
-- All this was done merrily . 
In that society , they parodied the Revolution . 
They used I know not what desires to give point to the same wrath in inverse sense . 
They sang their little Ca ira : -- Ah ! 
ca ira ca ira ca ira ! 
Les Bonapartistes a la lanterne ! 
Songs are like the guillotine ; they chop away indifferently , to-day this head , to-morrow that . 
It is only a variation . 
In the Fualdes affair , which belongs to this epoch , 1816 , they took part for Bastide and Jausion , because Fualdes was `` a Buonapartist . '' 
They designated the liberals as friends and brothers ; this constituted the most deadly insult . 
Like certain church towers , Madame de T. 's salon had two cocks . 
One of them was M. Gillenormand , the other was Comte de Lamothe-Valois , of whom it was whispered about , with a sort of respect : `` Do you know ? 
That is the Lamothe of the affair of the necklace . '' 
These singular amnesties do occur in parties . 
Let us add the following : in the bourgeoisie , honored situations decay through too easy relations ; one must beware whom one admits ; in the same way that there is a loss of caloric in the vicinity of those who are cold , there is a diminution of consideration in the approach of despised persons . 
The ancient society of the upper classes held themselves above this law , as above every other . 
Marigny , the brother of the Pompadour , had his entry with M. le Prince de Soubise . 
In spite of ? 
No , because . 
Du Barry , the god-father of the Vaubernier , was very welcome at the house of M. le Marechal de Richelieu . 
This society is Olympus . 
Mercury and the Prince de Guemenee are at home there . 
A thief is admitted there , provided he be a god . 
The Comte de Lamothe , who , in 1815 , was an old man seventy-five years of age , had nothing remarkable about him except his silent and sententious air , his cold and angular face , his perfectly polished manners , his coat buttoned up to his cravat , and his long legs always crossed in long , flabby trousers of the hue of burnt sienna . 
His face was the same color as his trousers . 
This M. de Lamothe was `` held in consideration '' in this salon on account of his `` celebrity '' and , strange to say , though true , because of his name of Valois . 
As for M. Gillenormand , his consideration was of absolutely first-rate quality . 
He had , in spite of his levity , and without its interfering in any way with his dignity , a certain manner about him which was imposing , dignified , honest , and lofty , in a bourgeois fashion ; and his great age added to it . 
One is not a century with impunity . 
The years finally produce around a head a venerable dishevelment . 
In addition to this , he said things which had the genuine sparkle of the old rock . 
Thus , when the King of Prussia , after having restored Louis XVIII. , came to pay the latter a visit under the name of the Count de Ruppin , he was received by the descendant of Louis XIV . 
somewhat as though he had been the Marquis de Brandebourg , and with the most delicate impertinence . 
M. Gillenormand approved : `` All kings who are not the King of France , '' said he , `` are provincial kings . '' 
One day , the following question was put and the following answer returned in his presence : `` To what was the editor of the Courrier Francais condemned ? '' 
`` To be suspended . '' 
`` Sus is superfluous , '' observed M. Gillenormand . 
-LSB- 22 -RSB- Remarks of this nature found a situation . 
-LSB- 22 -RSB- Suspendu , suspended ; pendu , hung . 
At the Te Deum on the anniversary of the return of the Bourbons , he said , on seeing M. de Talleyrand pass by : `` There goes his Excellency the Evil One . '' 
M. Gillenormand was always accompanied by his daughter , that tall mademoiselle , who was over forty and looked fifty , and by a handsome little boy of seven years , white , rosy , fresh , with happy and trusting eyes , who never appeared in that salon without hearing voices murmur around him : `` How handsome he is ! 
What a pity ! 
Poor child ! '' 
This child was the one of whom we dropped a word a while ago . 
He was called `` poor child , '' because he had for a father `` a brigand of the Loire . '' 
This brigand of the Loire was M. Gillenormand 's son-in-law , who has already been mentioned , and whom M. Gillenormand called `` the disgrace of his family . '' 
ONE OF THE RED SPECTRES OF THAT EPOCH Any one who had chanced to pass through the little town of Vernon at this epoch , and who had happened to walk across that fine monumental bridge , which will soon be succeeded , let us hope , by some hideous iron cable bridge , might have observed , had he dropped his eyes over the parapet , a man about fifty years of age wearing a leather cap , and trousers and a waistcoat of coarse gray cloth , to which something yellow which had been a red ribbon , was sewn , shod with wooden sabots , tanned by the sun , his face nearly black and his hair nearly white , a large scar on his forehead which ran down upon his cheek , bowed , bent , prematurely aged , who walked nearly every day , hoe and sickle in hand , in one of those compartments surrounded by walls which abut on the bridge , and border the left bank of the Seine like a chain of terraces , charming enclosures full of flowers of which one could say , were they much larger : `` these are gardens , '' and were they a little smaller : `` these are bouquets . '' 
All these enclosures abut upon the river at one end , and on a house at the other . 
The man in the waistcoat and the wooden shoes of whom we have just spoken , inhabited the smallest of these enclosures and the most humble of these houses about 1817 . 
He lived there alone and solitary , silently and poorly , with a woman who was neither young nor old , neither homely nor pretty , neither a peasant nor a bourgeoise , who served him . 
The plot of earth which he called his garden was celebrated in the town for the beauty of the flowers which he cultivated there . 
These flowers were his occupation . 
By dint of labor , of perseverance , of attention , and of buckets of water , he had succeeded in creating after the Creator , and he had invented certain tulips and certain dahlias which seemed to have been forgotten by nature . 
He was ingenious ; he had forestalled Soulange Bodin in the formation of little clumps of earth of heath mould , for the cultivation of rare and precious shrubs from America and China . 
He was in his alleys from the break of day , in summer , planting , cutting , hoeing , watering , walking amid his flowers with an air of kindness , sadness , and sweetness , sometimes standing motionless and thoughtful for hours , listening to the song of a bird in the trees , the babble of a child in a house , or with his eyes fixed on a drop of dew at the tip of a spear of grass , of which the sun made a carbuncle . 
His table was very plain , and he drank more milk than wine . 
A child could make him give way , and his servant scolded him . 
He was so timid that be seemed shy , he rarely went out , and he saw no one but the poor people who tapped at his pane and his cure , the Abbe Mabeuf , a good old man . 
Nevertheless , if the inhabitants of the town , or strangers , or any chance comers , curious to see his tulips , rang at his little cottage , he opened his door with a smile . 
He was the `` brigand of the Loire . '' 
Any one who had , at the same time , read military memoirs , biographies , the Moniteur , and the bulletins of the grand army , would have been struck by a name which occurs there with tolerable frequency , the name of Georges Pontmercy . 
When very young , this Georges Pontmercy had been a soldier in Saintonge 's regiment . 
The revolution broke out . 
Saintonge 's regiment formed a part of the army of the Rhine ; for the old regiments of the monarchy preserved their names of provinces even after the fall of the monarchy , and were only divided into brigades in 1794 . 
Pontmercy fought at Spire , at Worms , at Neustadt , at Turkheim , at Alzey , at Mayence , where he was one of the two hundred who formed Houchard 's rearguard . 
It was the twelfth to hold its ground against the corps of the Prince of Hesse , behind the old rampart of Andernach , and only rejoined the main body of the army when the enemy 's cannon had opened a breach from the cord of the parapet to the foot of the glacis . 
He was under Kleber at Marchiennes and at the battle of Mont-Palissel , where a ball from a biscaien broke his arm . 
Then he passed to the frontier of Italy , and was one of the thirty grenadiers who defended the Col de Tende with Joubert . 
Joubert was appointed its adjutant-general , and Pontmercy sub-lieutenant . 
Pontmercy was by Berthier 's side in the midst of the grape-shot of that day at Lodi which caused Bonaparte to say : `` Berthier has been cannoneer , cavalier , and grenadier . '' 
He beheld his old general , Joubert , fall at Novi , at the moment when , with uplifted sabre , he was shouting : `` Forward ! '' 
Having been embarked with his company in the exigencies of the campaign , on board a pinnace which was proceeding from Genoa to some obscure port on the coast , he fell into a wasps ' - nest of seven or eight English vessels . 
The Genoese commander wanted to throw his cannon into the sea , to hide the soldiers between decks , and to slip along in the dark as a merchant vessel . 
Pontmercy had the colors hoisted to the peak , and sailed proudly past under the guns of the British frigates . 
Twenty leagues further on , his audacity having increased , he attacked with his pinnace , and captured a large English transport which was carrying troops to Sicily , and which was so loaded down with men and horses that the vessel was sunk to the level of the sea . 
In 1805 he was in that Malher division which took Gunzberg from the Archduke Ferdinand . 
At Weltingen he received into his arms , beneath a storm of bullets , Colonel Maupetit , mortally wounded at the head of the 9th Dragoons . 
He distinguished himself at Austerlitz in that admirable march in echelons effected under the enemy 's fire . 
When the cavalry of the Imperial Russian Guard crushed a battalion of the 4th of the line , Pontmercy was one of those who took their revenge and overthrew the Guard . 
The Emperor gave him the cross . 
Pontmercy saw Wurmser at Mantua , Melas , and Alexandria , Mack at Ulm , made prisoners in succession . 
He formed a part of the eighth corps of the grand army which Mortier commanded , and which captured Hamburg . 
Then he was transferred to the 55th of the line , which was the old regiment of Flanders . 
At Eylau he was in the cemetery where , for the space of two hours , the heroic Captain Louis Hugo , the uncle of the author of this book , sustained alone with his company of eighty-three men every effort of the hostile army . 
Pontmercy was one of the three who emerged alive from that cemetery . 
He was at Friedland . 
Then he saw Moscow . 
Then La Beresina , then Lutzen , Bautzen , Dresden , Wachau , Leipzig , and the defiles of Gelenhausen ; then Montmirail , Chateau-Thierry , Craon , the banks of the Marne , the banks of the Aisne , and the redoubtable position of Laon . 
At Arnay-Le-Duc , being then a captain , he put ten Cossacks to the sword , and saved , not his general , but his corporal . 
He was well slashed up on this occasion , and twenty-seven splinters were extracted from his left arm alone . 
Eight days before the capitulation of Paris he had just exchanged with a comrade and entered the cavalry . 
He had what was called under the old regime , the double hand , that is to say , an equal aptitude for handling the sabre or the musket as a soldier , or a squadron or a battalion as an officer . 
It is from this aptitude , perfected by a military education , which certain special branches of the service arise , the dragoons , for example , who are both cavalry-men and infantry at one and the same time . 
He accompanied Napoleon to the Island of Elba . 
At Waterloo , he was chief of a squadron of cuirassiers , in Dubois ' brigade . 
It was he who captured the standard of the Lunenburg battalion . 
He came and cast the flag at the Emperor 's feet . 
He was covered with blood . 
While tearing down the banner he had received a sword-cut across his face . 
The Emperor , greatly pleased , shouted to him : `` You are a colonel , you are a baron , you are an officer of the Legion of Honor ! '' 
Pontmercy replied : `` Sire , I thank you for my widow . '' 
An hour later , he fell in the ravine of Ohain . 
Now , who was this Georges Pontmercy ? 
He was this same `` brigand of the Loire . '' 
We have already seen something of his history . 
After Waterloo , Pontmercy , who had been pulled out of the hollow road of Ohain , as it will be remembered , had succeeded in joining the army , and had dragged himself from ambulance to ambulance as far as the cantonments of the Loire . 
The Restoration had placed him on half-pay , then had sent him into residence , that is to say , under surveillance , at Vernon . 
King Louis XVIII. , regarding all that which had taken place during the Hundred Days as not having occurred at all , did not recognize his quality as an officer of the Legion of Honor , nor his grade of colonel , nor his title of baron . 
He , on his side , neglected no occasion of signing himself `` Colonel Baron Pontmercy . '' 
He had only an old blue coat , and he never went out without fastening to it his rosette as an officer of the Legion of Honor . 
The Attorney for the Crown had him warned that the authorities would prosecute him for `` illegal '' wearing of this decoration . 
When this notice was conveyed to him through an officious intermediary , Pontmercy retorted with a bitter smile : `` I do not know whether I no longer understand French , or whether you no longer speak it ; but the fact is that I do not understand . '' 
Then he went out for eight successive days with his rosette . 
They dared not interfere with him . 
Two or three times the Minister of War and the general in command of the department wrote to him with the following address : A Monsieur le Commandant Pontmercy . '' 
He sent back the letters with the seals unbroken . 
At the same moment , Napoleon at Saint Helena was treating in the same fashion the missives of Sir Hudson Lowe addressed to General Bonaparte . 
Pontmercy had ended , may we be pardoned the expression , by having in his mouth the same saliva as his Emperor . 
In the same way , there were at Rome Carthaginian prisoners who refused to salute Flaminius , and who had a little of Hannibal 's spirit . 
One day he encountered the district-attorney in one of the streets of Vernon , stepped up to him , and said : `` Mr. Crown Attorney , am I permitted to wear my scar ? '' 
He had nothing save his meagre half-pay as chief of squadron . 
He had hired the smallest house which he could find at Vernon . 
He lived there alone , we have just seen how . 
Under the Empire , between two wars , he had found time to marry Mademoiselle Gillenormand . 
The old bourgeois , thoroughly indignant at bottom , had given his consent with a sigh , saying : `` The greatest families are forced into it . '' 
In 1815 , Madame Pontmercy , an admirable woman in every sense , by the way , lofty in sentiment and rare , and worthy of her husband , died , leaving a child . 
This child had been the colonel 's joy in his solitude ; but the grandfather had imperatively claimed his grandson , declaring that if the child were not given to him he would disinherit him . 
The father had yielded in the little one 's interest , and had transferred his love to flowers . 
Moreover , he had renounced everything , and neither stirred up mischief nor conspired . 
He shared his thoughts between the innocent things which he was then doing and the great things which he had done . 
He passed his time in expecting a pink or in recalling Austerlitz . 
M. Gillenormand kept up no relations with his son-in-law . 
The colonel was `` a bandit '' to him . 
M. Gillenormand never mentioned the colonel , except when he occasionally made mocking allusions to `` his Baronship . '' 
It had been expressly agreed that Pontmercy should never attempt to see his son nor to speak to him , under penalty of having the latter handed over to him disowned and disinherited . 
For the Gillenormands , Pontmercy was a man afflicted with the plague . 
They intended to bring up the child in their own way . 
Perhaps the colonel was wrong to accept these conditions , but he submitted to them , thinking that he was doing right and sacrificing no one but himself . 
The inheritance of Father Gillenormand did not amount to much ; but the inheritance of Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder was considerable . 
This aunt , who had remained unmarried , was very rich on the maternal side , and her sister 's son was her natural heir . 
The boy , whose name was Marius , knew that he had a father , but nothing more . 
No one opened his mouth to him about it . 
Nevertheless , in the society into which his grandfather took him , whispers , innuendoes , and winks , had eventually enlightened the little boy 's mind ; he had finally understood something of the case , and as he naturally took in the ideas and opinions which were , so to speak , the air he breathed , by a sort of infiltration and slow penetration , he gradually came to think of his father only with shame and with a pain at his heart . 
While he was growing up in this fashion , the colonel slipped away every two or three months , came to Paris on the sly , like a criminal breaking his ban , and went and posted himself at Saint-Sulpice , at the hour when Aunt Gillenormand led Marius to the mass . 
There , trembling lest the aunt should turn round , concealed behind a pillar , motionless , not daring to breathe , he gazed at his child . 
The scarred veteran was afraid of that old spinster . 
From this had arisen his connection with the cure of Vernon , M. l'Abbe Mabeuf . 
That worthy priest was the brother of a warden of Saint-Sulpice , who had often observed this man gazing at his child , and the scar on his cheek , and the large tears in his eyes . 
That man , who had so manly an air , yet who was weeping like a woman , had struck the warden . 
That face had clung to his mind . 
One day , having gone to Vernon to see his brother , he had encountered Colonel Pontmercy on the bridge , and had recognized the man of Saint-Sulpice . 
The warden had mentioned the circumstance to the cure , and both had paid the colonel a visit , on some pretext or other . 
This visit led to others . 
The colonel , who had been extremely reserved at first , ended by opening his heart , and the cure and the warden finally came to know the whole history , and how Pontmercy was sacrificing his happiness to his child 's future . 
This caused the cure to regard him with veneration and tenderness , and the colonel , on his side , became fond of the cure . 
And moreover , when both are sincere and good , no men so penetrate each other , and so amalgamate with each other , as an old priest and an old soldier . 
At bottom , the man is the same . 
The one has devoted his life to his country here below , the other to his country on high ; that is the only difference . 
Twice a year , on the first of January and on St. George 's day , Marius wrote duty letters to his father , which were dictated by his aunt , and which one would have pronounced to be copied from some formula ; this was all that M. Gillenormand tolerated ; and the father answered them with very tender letters which the grandfather thrust into his pocket unread . 
REQUIESCANT Madame de T. 's salon was all that Marius Pontmercy knew of the world . 
It was the only opening through which he could get a glimpse of life . 
This opening was sombre , and more cold than warmth , more night than day , came to him through this skylight . 
This child , who had been all joy and light on entering this strange world , soon became melancholy , and , what is still more contrary to his age , grave . 
Surrounded by all those singular and imposing personages , he gazed about him with serious amazement . 
Everything conspired to increase this astonishment in him . 
There were in Madame de T. 's salon some very noble ladies named Mathan , Noe , Levis , -- which was pronounced Levi , -- Cambis , pronounced Cambyse . 
These antique visages and these Biblical names mingled in the child 's mind with the Old Testament which he was learning by heart , and when they were all there , seated in a circle around a dying fire , sparely lighted by a lamp shaded with green , with their severe profiles , their gray or white hair , their long gowns of another age , whose lugubrious colors could not be distinguished , dropping , at rare intervals , words which were both majestic and severe , little Marius stared at them with frightened eyes , in the conviction that he beheld not women , but patriarchs and magi , not real beings , but phantoms . 
With these phantoms , priests were sometimes mingled , frequenters of this ancient salon , and some gentlemen ; the Marquis de Sass **** , private secretary to Madame de Berry , the Vicomte de Val *** , who published , under the pseudonyme of Charles-Antoine , monorhymed odes , the Prince de Beauff ******* , who , though very young , had a gray head and a pretty and witty wife , whose very low-necked toilettes of scarlet velvet with gold torsades alarmed these shadows , the Marquis de C ***** d' E ****** , the man in all France who best understood `` proportioned politeness , '' the Comte d'Am ***** , the kindly man with the amiable chin , and the Chevalier de Port-de-Guy , a pillar of the library of the Louvre , called the King 's cabinet , M. de Port-de-Guy , bald , and rather aged than old , was wont to relate that in 1793 , at the age of sixteen , he had been put in the galleys as refractory and chained with an octogenarian , the Bishop of Mirepoix , also refractory , but as a priest , while he was so in the capacity of a soldier . 
This was at Toulon . 
Their business was to go at night and gather up on the scaffold the heads and bodies of the persons who had been guillotined during the day ; they bore away on their backs these dripping corpses , and their red galley-slave blouses had a clot of blood at the back of the neck , which was dry in the morning and wet at night . 
These tragic tales abounded in Madame de T. 's salon , and by dint of cursing Marat , they applauded Trestaillon . 
Some deputies of the undiscoverable variety played their whist there ; M. Thibord du Chalard , M. Lemarchant de Gomicourt , and the celebrated scoffer of the right , M. Cornet-Dincourt . 
The bailiff de Ferrette , with his short breeches and his thin legs , sometimes traversed this salon on his way to M. de Talleyrand . 
He had been M. le Comte d'Artois ' companion in pleasures and unlike Aristotle crouching under Campaspe , he had made the Guimard crawl on all fours , and in that way he had exhibited to the ages a philosopher avenged by a bailiff . 
As for the priests , there was the Abbe Halma , the same to whom M. Larose , his collaborator on la Foudre , said : `` Bah ! 
Who is there who is not fifty years old ? 
a few greenhorns perhaps ? '' 
The Abbe Letourneur , preacher to the King , the Abbe Frayssinous , who was not , as yet , either count , or bishop , or minister , or peer , and who wore an old cassock whose buttons were missing , and the Abbe Keravenant , Cure of Saint-Germain-des-Pres ; also the Pope 's Nuncio , then Monsignor Macchi , Archbishop of Nisibi , later on Cardinal , remarkable for his long , pensive nose , and another Monsignor , entitled thus : Abbate Palmieri , domestic prelate , one of the seven participant prothonotaries of the Holy See , Canon of the illustrious Liberian basilica , Advocate of the saints , Postulatore dei Santi , which refers to matters of canonization , and signifies very nearly : Master of Requests of the section of Paradise . 
Lastly , two cardinals , M. de la Luzerne , and M. de Cl ****** T ******* . 
The Cardinal of Luzerne was a writer and was destined to have , a few years later , the honor of signing in the Conservateur articles side by side with Chateaubriand ; M. de Cl ****** T ******* was Archbishop of Toul **** , and often made trips to Paris , to his nephew , the Marquis de T ******* , who was Minister of Marine and War . 
The Cardinal of Cl ****** T ******* was a merry little man , who displayed his red stockings beneath his tucked-up cassock ; his specialty was a hatred of the Encyclopaedia , and his desperate play at billiards , and persons who , at that epoch , passed through the Rue M ***** on summer evenings , where the hotel de Cl ****** T ******* then stood , halted to listen to the shock of the balls and the piercing voice of the Cardinal shouting to his conclavist , Monseigneur Cotiret , Bishop in partibus of Caryste : `` Mark , Abbe , I make a cannon . '' 
The Cardinal de Cl ****** T ******* had been brought to Madame de T. 's by his most intimate friend , M. de Roquelaure , former Bishop of Senlis , and one of the Forty . 
M. de Roquelaure was notable for his lofty figure and his assiduity at the Academy ; through the glass door of the neighboring hall of the library where the French Academy then held its meetings , the curious could , on every Tuesday , contemplate the Ex-Bishop of Senlis , usually standing erect , freshly powdered , in violet hose , with his back turned to the door , apparently for the purpose of allowing a better view of his little collar . 
All these ecclesiastics , though for the most part as much courtiers as churchmen , added to the gravity of the T. salon , whose seigniorial aspect was accentuated by five peers of France , the Marquis de Vib **** , the Marquis de Tal *** , the Marquis de Herb ******* , the Vicomte Damb *** , and the Duc de Val ******** . 
This Duc de Val ******** , although Prince de Mon *** , that is to say a reigning prince abroad , had so high an idea of France and its peerage , that he viewed everything through their medium . 
It was he who said : `` The Cardinals are the peers of France of Rome ; the lords are the peers of France of England . '' 
Moreover , as it is indispensable that the Revolution should be everywhere in this century , this feudal salon was , as we have said , dominated by a bourgeois . 
M. Gillenormand reigned there . 
There lay the essence and quintessence of the Parisian white society . 
There reputations , even Royalist reputations , were held in quarantine . 
There is always a trace of anarchy in renown . 
Chateaubriand , had he entered there , would have produced the effect of Pere Duchene . 
Some of the scoffed-at did , nevertheless , penetrate thither on sufferance . 
Comte Beug *** was received there , subject to correction . 
The `` noble '' salons of the present day no longer resemble those salons . 
The Faubourg Saint-Germain reeks of the fagot even now . 
The Royalists of to-day are demagogues , let us record it to their credit . 
At Madame de T. 's the society was superior , taste was exquisite and haughty , under the cover of a great show of politeness . 
Manners there admitted of all sorts of involuntary refinements which were the old regime itself , buried but still alive . 
Some of these habits , especially in the matter of language , seem eccentric . 
Persons but superficially acquainted with them would have taken for provincial that which was only antique . 
A woman was called Madame la Generale . 
Madame la Colonelle was not entirely disused . 
The charming Madame de Leon , in memory , no doubt , of the Duchesses de Longueville and de Chevreuse , preferred this appellation to her title of Princesse . 
The Marquise de Crequy was also called Madame la Colonelle . 
It was this little high society which invented at the Tuileries the refinement of speaking to the King in private as the King , in the third person , and never as Your Majesty , the designation of Your Majesty having been `` soiled by the usurper . '' 
Men and deeds were brought to judgment there . 
They jeered at the age , which released them from the necessity of understanding it . 
They abetted each other in amazement . 
They communicated to each other that modicum of light which they possessed . 
Methuselah bestowed information on Epimenides . 
The deaf man made the blind man acquainted with the course of things . 
They declared that the time which had elasped since Coblentz had not existed . 
In the same manner that Louis XVIII . 
was by the grace of God , in the five and twentieth year of his reign , the emigrants were , by rights , in the five and twentieth year of their adolescence . 
All was harmonious ; nothing was too much alive ; speech hardly amounted to a breath ; the newspapers , agreeing with the salons , seemed a papyrus . 
There were some young people , but they were rather dead . 
The liveries in the antechamber were antiquated . 
These utterly obsolete personages were served by domestics of the same stamp . 
They all had the air of having lived a long time ago , and of obstinately resisting the sepulchre . 
Nearly the whole dictionary consisted of Conserver , Conservation , Conservateur ; to be in good odor , -- that was the point . 
There are , in fact , aromatics in the opinions of these venerable groups , and their ideas smelled of it . 
It was a mummified society . 
The masters were embalmed , the servants were stuffed with straw . 
A worthy old marquise , an emigree and ruined , who had but a solitary maid , continued to say : `` My people . '' 
What did they do in Madame de T. 's salon ? 
They were ultra . 
To be ultra ; this word , although what it represents may not have disappeared , has no longer any meaning at the present day . 
Let us explain it . 
To be ultra is to go beyond . 
It is to attack the sceptre in the name of the throne , and the mitre in the name of the attar ; it is to ill-treat the thing which one is dragging , it is to kick over the traces ; it is to cavil at the fagot on the score of the amount of cooking received by heretics ; it is to reproach the idol with its small amount of idolatry ; it is to insult through excess of respect ; it is to discover that the Pope is not sufficiently papish , that the King is not sufficiently royal , and that the night has too much light ; it is to be discontented with alabaster , with snow , with the swan and the lily in the name of whiteness ; it is to be a partisan of things to the point of becoming their enemy ; it is to be so strongly for , as to be against . 
The ultra spirit especially characterizes the first phase of the Restoration . 
Nothing in history resembles that quarter of an hour which begins in 1814 and terminates about 1820 , with the advent of M. de Villele , the practical man of the Right . 
These six years were an extraordinary moment ; at one and the same time brilliant and gloomy , smiling and sombre , illuminated as by the radiance of dawn and entirely covered , at the same time , with the shadows of the great catastrophes which still filled the horizon and were slowly sinking into the past . 
There existed in that light and that shadow , a complete little new and old world , comic and sad , juvenile and senile , which was rubbing its eyes ; nothing resembles an awakening like a return ; a group which regarded France with ill-temper , and which France regarded with irony ; good old owls of marquises by the streetful , who had returned , and of ghosts , the `` former '' subjects of amazement at everything , brave and noble gentlemen who smiled at being in France but wept also , delighted to behold their country once more , in despair at not finding their monarchy ; the nobility of the Crusades treating the nobility of the Empire , that is to say , the nobility of the sword , with scorn ; historic races who had lost the sense of history ; the sons of the companions of Charlemagne disdaining the companions of Napoleon . 
The swords , as we have just remarked , returned the insult ; the sword of Fontenoy was laughable and nothing but a scrap of rusty iron ; the sword of Marengo was odious and was only a sabre . 
Former days did not recognize Yesterday . 
People no longer had the feeling for what was grand . 
There was some one who called Bonaparte Scapin . 
This Society no longer exists . 
Nothing of it , we repeat , exists to-day . 
When we select from it some one figure at random , and attempt to make it live again in thought , it seems as strange to us as the world before the Deluge . 
It is because it , too , as a matter of fact , has been engulfed in a deluge . 
It has disappeared beneath two Revolutions . 
What billows are ideas ! 
How quickly they cover all that it is their mission to destroy and to bury , and how promptly they create frightful gulfs ! 
Such was the physiognomy of the salons of those distant and candid times when M. Martainville had more wit than Voltaire . 
These salons had a literature and politics of their own . 
They believed in Fievee . 
M. Agier laid down the law in them . 
They commentated M. Colnet , the old bookseller and publicist of the Quay Malaquais . 
Napoleon was to them thoroughly the Corsican Ogre . 
Later on the introduction into history of M. le Marquis de Bonaparte , Lieutenant-General of the King 's armies , was a concession to the spirit of the age . 
These salons did not long preserve their purity . 
Beginning with 1818 , doctrinarians began to spring up in them , a disturbing shade . 
Their way was to be Royalists and to excuse themselves for being so . 
Where the ultras were very proud , the doctrinarians were rather ashamed . 
They had wit ; they had silence ; their political dogma was suitably impregnated with arrogance ; they should have succeeded . 
They indulged , and usefully too , in excesses in the matter of white neckties and tightly buttoned coats . 
The mistake or the misfortune of the doctrinarian party was to create aged youth . 
They assumed the poses of wise men . 
They dreamed of engrafting a temperate power on the absolute and excessive principle . 
They opposed , and sometimes with rare intelligence , conservative liberalism to the liberalism which demolishes . 
They were heard to say : `` Thanks for Royalism ! 
It has rendered more than one service . 
It has brought back tradition , worship , religion , respect . 
It is faithful , brave , chivalric , loving , devoted . 
It has mingled , though with regret , the secular grandeurs of the monarchy with the new grandeurs of the nation . 
Its mistake is not to understand the Revolution , the Empire , glory , liberty , young ideas , young generations , the age . 
But this mistake which it makes with regard to us , -- have we not sometimes been guilty of it towards them ? 
The Revolution , whose heirs we are , ought to be intelligent on all points . 
To attack Royalism is a misconstruction of liberalism . 
What an error ! 
And what blindness ! 
Revolutionary France is wanting in respect towards historic France , that is to say , towards its mother , that is to say , towards itself . 
After the 5th of September , the nobility of the monarchy is treated as the nobility of the Empire was treated after the 5th of July . 
They were unjust to the eagle , we are unjust to the fleur-de-lys . 
It seems that we must always have something to proscribe ! 
Does it serve any purpose to ungild the crown of Louis XIV. , to scrape the coat of arms of Henry IV . ? 
We scoff at M. de Vaublanc for erasing the N 's from the bridge of Jena ! 
What was it that he did ? 
What are we doing ? 
Bouvines belongs to us as well as Marengo . 
The fleurs-de-lys are ours as well as the N 's . 
That is our patrimony . 
To what purpose shall we diminish it ? 
We must not deny our country in the past any more than in the present . 
Why not accept the whole of history ? 
Why not love the whole of France ? 
It is thus that doctrinarians criticised and protected Royalism , which was displeased at criticism and furious at protection . 
The ultras marked the first epoch of Royalism , congregation characterized the second . 
Skill follows ardor . 
Let us confine ourselves here to this sketch . 
In the course of this narrative , the author of this book has encountered in his path this curious moment of contemporary history ; he has been forced to cast a passing glance upon it , and to trace once more some of the singular features of this society which is unknown to-day . 
But he does it rapidly and without any bitter or derisive idea . 
Souvenirs both respectful and affectionate , for they touch his mother , attach him to this past . 
Moreover , let us remark , this same petty world had a grandeur of its own . 
One may smile at it , but one can neither despise nor hate it . 
It was the France of former days . 
Marius Pontmercy pursued some studies , as all children do . 
When he emerged from the hands of Aunt Gillenormand , his grandfather confided him to a worthy professor of the most purely classic innocence . 
This young soul which was expanding passed from a prude to a vulgar pedant . 
Marius went through his years of college , then he entered the law school . 
He was a Royalist , fanatical and severe . 
He did not love his grandfather much , as the latter 's gayety and cynicism repelled him , and his feelings towards his father were gloomy . 
He was , on the whole , a cold and ardent , noble , generous , proud , religious , enthusiastic lad ; dignified to harshness , pure to shyness . 
END OF THE BRIGAND The conclusion of Marius ' classical studies coincided with M. Gillenormand 's departure from society . 
The old man bade farewell to the Faubourg Saint-Germain and to Madame de T. 's salon , and established himself in the Mardis , in his house of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
There he had for servants , in addition to the porter , that chambermaid , Nicolette , who had succeeded to Magnon , and that short-breathed and pursy Basque , who have been mentioned above . 
In 1827 , Marius had just attained his seventeenth year . 
One evening , on his return home , he saw his grandfather holding a letter in his hand . 
`` Marius , '' said M. Gillenormand , `` you will set out for Vernon to-morrow . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` To see your father . '' 
Marius was seized with a trembling fit . 
He had thought of everything except this -- that he should one day be called upon to see his father . 
Nothing could be more unexpected , more surprising , and , let us admit it , more disagreeable to him . 
It was forcing estrangement into reconciliation . 
It was not an affliction , but it was an unpleasant duty . 
Marius , in addition to his motives of political antipathy , was convinced that his father , the slasher , as M. Gillenormand called him on his amiable days , did not love him ; this was evident , since he had abandoned him to others . 
Feeling that he was not beloved , he did not love . 
`` Nothing is more simple , '' he said to himself . 
He was so astounded that he did not question M. Gillenormand . 
The grandfather resumed : -- `` It appears that he is ill . 
He demands your presence . '' 
And after a pause , he added : -- `` Set out to-morrow morning . 
I think there is a coach which leaves the Cour des Fontaines at six o'clock , and which arrives in the evening . 
Take it . 
He says that here is haste . '' 
Then he crushed the letter in his hand and thrust it into his pocket . 
Marius might have set out that very evening and have been with his father on the following morning . 
A diligence from the Rue du Bouloi took the trip to Rouen by night at that date , and passed through Vernon . 
Neither Marius nor M.Gillenormand thought of making inquiries about it . 
The next day , at twilight , Marius reached Vernon . 
People were just beginning to light their candles . 
He asked the first person whom be met for `` M. Pontmercy 's house . '' 
For in his own mind , he agreed with the Restoration , and like it , did not recognize his father 's claim to the title of either colonel or baron . 
The house was pointed out to him . 
He rang ; a woman with a little lamp in her hand opened the door . 
`` M. Pontmercy ? '' 
said Marius . 
The woman remained motionless . 
`` Is this his house ? '' 
demanded Marius . 
The woman nodded affirmatively . 
`` Can I speak with him ? '' 
The woman shook her head . 
`` But I am his son ! '' 
persisted Marius . 
`` He is expecting me . '' 
`` He no longer expects you , '' said the woman . 
Then he perceived that she was weeping . 
She pointed to the door of a room on the ground-floor ; he entered . 
In that room , which was lighted by a tallow candle standing on the chimney-piece , there were three men , one standing erect , another kneeling , and one lying at full length , on the floor in his shirt . 
The one on the floor was the colonel . 
The other two were the doctor , and the priest , who was engaged in prayer . 
The colonel had been attacked by brain fever three days previously . 
As he had a foreboding of evil at the very beginning of his illness , he had written to M. Gillenormand to demand his son . 
The malady had grown worse . 
On the very evening of Marius ' arrival at Vernon , the colonel had had an attack of delirium ; he had risen from his bed , in spite of the servant 's efforts to prevent him , crying : `` My son is not coming ! 
I shall go to meet him ! '' 
Then he ran out of his room and fell prostrate on the floor of the antechamber . 
He had just expired . 
The doctor had been summoned , and the cure . 
The doctor had arrived too late . 
The son had also arrived too late . 
By the dim light of the candle , a large tear could be distinguished on the pale and prostrate colonel 's cheek , where it had trickled from his dead eye . 
The eye was extinguished , but the tear was not yet dry . 
That tear was his son 's delay . 
Marius gazed upon that man whom he beheld for the first time , on that venerable and manly face , on those open eyes which saw not , on those white locks , those robust limbs , on which , here and there , brown lines , marking sword-thrusts , and a sort of red stars , which indicated bullet-holes , were visible . 
He contemplated that gigantic sear which stamped heroism on that countenance upon which God had imprinted goodness . 
He reflected that this man was his father , and that this man was dead , and a chill ran over him . 
The sorrow which he felt was the sorrow which he would have felt in the presence of any other man whom he had chanced to behold stretched out in death . 
Anguish , poignant anguish , was in that chamber . 
The servant-woman was lamenting in a corner , the cure was praying , and his sobs were audible , the doctor was wiping his eyes ; the corpse itself was weeping . 
The doctor , the priest , and the woman gazed at Marius in the midst of their affliction without uttering a word ; he was the stranger there . 
Marius , who was far too little affected , felt ashamed and embarrassed at his own attitude ; he held his hat in his hand ; and he dropped it on the floor , in order to produce the impression that grief had deprived him of the strength to hold it . 
At the same time , he experienced remorse , and he despised himself for behaving in this manner . 
But was it his fault ? 
He did not love his father ? 
Why should he ! 
The colonel had left nothing . 
The sale of big furniture barely paid the expenses of his burial . 
The servant found a scrap of paper , which she handed to Marius . 
It contained the following , in the colonel 's handwriting : -- `` For my son . 
-- The Emperor made me a Baron on the battle-field of Waterloo . 
Since the Restoration disputes my right to this title which I purchased with my blood , my son shall take it and bear it . 
That he will be worthy of it is a matter of course . '' 
Below , the colonel had added : `` At that same battle of Waterloo , a sergeant saved my life . 
The man 's name was Thenardier . 
I think that he has recently been keeping a little inn , in a village in the neighborhood of Paris , at Chelles or Montfermeil . 
If my son meets him , he will do all the good he can to Thenardier . '' 
Marius took this paper and preserved it , not out of duty to his father , but because of that vague respect for death which is always imperious in the heart of man . 
Nothing remained of the colonel . 
M. Gillenormand had his sword and uniform sold to an old-clothes dealer . 
The neighbors devastated the garden and pillaged the rare flowers . 
The other plants turned to nettles and weeds , and died . 
Marius remained only forty-eight hours at Vernon . 
After the interment he returned to Paris , and applied himself again to his law studies , with no more thought of his father than if the latter had never lived . 
In two days the colonel was buried , and in three forgotten . 
Marius wore crape on his hat . 
That was all . 
THE UTILITY OF GOING TO MASS , IN ORDER TO BECOME A REVOLUTIONIST Marius had preserved the religious habits of his childhood . 
One Sunday , when he went to hear mass at Saint-Sulpice , at that same chapel of the Virgin whither his aunt had led him when a small lad , he placed himself behind a pillar , being more absent-minded and thoughtful than usual on that occasion , and knelt down , without paying any special heed , upon a chair of Utrecht velvet , on the back of which was inscribed this name : Monsieur Mabeuf , warden . 
Mass had hardly begun when an old man presented himself and said to Marius : -- `` This is my place , sir . '' 
Marius stepped aside promptly , and the old man took possession of his chair . 
The mass concluded , Marius still stood thoughtfully a few paces distant ; the old man approached him again and said : -- `` I beg your pardon , sir , for having disturbed you a while ago , and for again disturbing you at this moment ; you must have thought me intrusive , and I will explain myself . '' 
`` There is no need of that , Sir , '' said Marius . 
`` Yes ! '' 
went on the old man , `` I do not wish you to have a bad opinion of me . 
You see , I am attached to this place . 
It seems to me that the mass is better from here . 
Why ? 
I will tell you . 
It is from this place , that I have watched a poor , brave father come regularly , every two or three months , for the last ten years , since he had no other opportunity and no other way of seeing his child , because he was prevented by family arrangements . 
He came at the hour when he knew that his son would be brought to mass . 
The little one never suspected that his father was there . 
Perhaps he did not even know that he had a father , poor innocent ! 
The father kept behind a pillar , so that he might not be seen . 
He gazed at his child and he wept . 
He adored that little fellow , poor man ! 
I could see that . 
This spot has become sanctified in my sight , and I have contracted a habit of coming hither to listen to the mass . 
I prefer it to the stall to which I have a right , in my capacity of warden . 
I knew that unhappy gentleman a little , too . 
He had a father-in-law , a wealthy aunt , relatives , I do n't know exactly what all , who threatened to disinherit the child if he , the father , saw him . 
He sacrificed himself in order that his son might be rich and happy some day . 
He was separated from him because of political opinions . 
Certainly , I approve of political opinions , but there are people who do not know where to stop . 
Mon Dieu ! 
a man is not a monster because he was at Waterloo ; a father is not separated from his child for such a reason as that . 
He was one of Bonaparte 's colonels . 
He is dead , I believe . 
He lived at Vernon , where I have a brother who is a cure , and his name was something like Pontmarie or Montpercy . 
He had a fine sword-cut , on my honor . '' 
`` Pontmercy , '' suggested Marius , turning pale . 
`` Precisely , Pontmercy . 
Did you know him ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Marius , `` he was my father . '' 
The old warden clasped his hands and exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
you are the child ! 
Yes , that 's true , he must be a man by this time . 
Well ! 
poor child , you may say that you had a father who loved you dearly ! '' 
Marius offered his arm to the old man and conducted him to his lodgings . 
On the following day , he said to M. Gillenormand : -- `` I have arranged a hunting-party with some friends . 
Will you permit me to be absent for three days ? '' 
`` Four ! '' 
replied his grandfather . 
`` Go and amuse yourself . '' 
And he said to his daughter in a low tone , and with a wink , `` Some love affair ! '' 
THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN Where it was that Marius went will be disclosed a little further on . 
Marius was absent for three days , then he returned to Paris , went straight to the library of the law-school and asked for the files of the Moniteur . 
He read the Moniteur , he read all the histories of the Republic and the Empire , the Memorial de Sainte-Helene , all the memoirs , all the newspapers , the bulletins , the proclamations ; he devoured everything . 
The first time that he came across his father 's name in the bulletins of the grand army , he had a fever for a week . 
He went to see the generals under whom Georges Pontmercy had served , among others , Comte H. Church-warden Mabeuf , whom he went to see again , told him about the life at Vernon , the colonel 's retreat , his flowers , his solitude . 
Marius came to a full knowledge of that rare , sweet , and sublime man , that species of lion-lamb who had been his father . 
In the meanwhile , occupied as he was with this study which absorbed all his moments as well as his thoughts , he hardly saw the Gillenormands at all . 
He made his appearance at meals ; then they searched for him , and he was not to be found . 
Father Gillenormand smiled . 
`` Bah ! 
bah ! 
He is just of the age for the girls ! '' 
Sometimes the old man added : `` The deuce ! 
I thought it was only an affair of gallantry , It seems that it is an affair of passion ! '' 
It was a passion , in fact . 
Marius was on the high road to adoring his father . 
At the same time , his ideas underwent an extraordinary change . 
The phases of this change were numerous and successive . 
As this is the history of many minds of our day , we think it will prove useful to follow these phases step by step and to indicate them all . 
That history upon which he had just cast his eyes appalled him . 
The first effect was to dazzle him . 
Up to that time , the Republic , the Empire , had been to him only monstrous words . 
The Republic , a guillotine in the twilight ; the Empire , a sword in the night . 
He had just taken a look at it , and where he had expected to find only a chaos of shadows , he had beheld , with a sort of unprecedented surprise , mingled with fear and joy , stars sparkling , Mirabeau , Vergniaud , Saint-Just , Robespierre , Camille , Desmoulins , Danton , and a sun arise , Napoleon . 
He did not know where he stood . 
He recoiled , blinded by the brilliant lights . 
Little by little , when his astonishment had passed off , he grew accustomed to this radiance , he contemplated these deeds without dizziness , he examined these personages without terror ; the Revolution and the Empire presented themselves luminously , in perspective , before his mind 's eye ; he beheld each of these groups of events and of men summed up in two tremendous facts : the Republic in the sovereignty of civil right restored to the masses , the Empire in the sovereignty of the French idea imposed on Europe ; he beheld the grand figure of the people emerge from the Revolution , and the grand figure of France spring forth from the Empire . 
He asserted in his conscience , that all this had been good . 
What his dazzled state neglected in this , his first far too synthetic estimation , we do not think it necessary to point out here . 
It is the state of a mind on the march that we are recording . 
Progress is not accomplished in one stage . 
That stated , once for all , in connection with what precedes as well as with what is to follow , we continue . 
He then perceived that , up to that moment , he had comprehended his country no more than he had comprehended his father . 
He had not known either the one or the other , and a sort of voluntary night had obscured his eyes . 
Now he saw , and on the one hand he admired , while on the other he adored . 
He was filled with regret and remorse , and he reflected in despair that all he had in his soul could now be said only to the tomb . 
Oh ! 
if his father had still been in existence , if he had still had him , if God , in his compassion and his goodness , had permitted his father to be still among the living , how he would have run , how he would have precipitated himself , how he would have cried to his father : `` Father ! 
Here I am ! 
It is I ! 
I have the same heart as thou ! 
I am thy son ! '' 
How he would have embraced that white head , bathed his hair in tears , gazed upon his scar , pressed his hands , adored his garment , kissed his feet ! 
Oh ! 
Why had his father died so early , before his time , before the justice , the love of his son had come to him ? 
Marius had a continual sob in his heart , which said to him every moment : `` Alas ! '' 
At the same time , he became more truly serious , more truly grave , more sure of his thought and his faith . 
At each instant , gleams of the true came to complete his reason . 
An inward growth seemed to be in progress within him . 
He was conscious of a sort of natural enlargement , which gave him two things that were new to him -- his father and his country . 
As everything opens when one has a key , so he explained to himself that which he had hated , he penetrated that which he had abhorred ; henceforth he plainly perceived the providential , divine and human sense of the great things which he had been taught to detest , and of the great men whom he had been instructed to curse . 
When he reflected on his former opinions , which were but those of yesterday , and which , nevertheless , seemed to him already so very ancient , he grew indignant , yet he smiled . 
From the rehabilitation of his father , he naturally passed to the rehabilitation of Napoleon . 
But the latter , we will confess , was not effected without labor . 
From his infancy , he had been imbued with the judgments of the party of 1814 , on Bonaparte . 
Now , all the prejudices of the Restoration , all its interests , all its instincts tended to disfigure Napoleon . 
It execrated him even more than it did Robespierre . 
It had very cleverly turned to sufficiently good account the fatigue of the nation , and the hatred of mothers . 
Bonaparte had become an almost fabulous monster , and in order to paint him to the imagination of the people , which , as we lately pointed out , resembles the imagination of children , the party of 1814 made him appear under all sorts of terrifying masks in succession , from that which is terrible though it remains grandiose to that which is terrible and becomes grotesque , from Tiberius to the bugaboo . 
Thus , in speaking of Bonaparte , one was free to sob or to puff up with laughter , provided that hatred lay at the bottom . 
Marius had never entertained -- about that man , as he was called -- any other ideas in his mind . 
They had combined with the tenacity which existed in his nature . 
There was in him a headstrong little man who hated Napoleon . 
On reading history , on studying him , especially in the documents and materials for history , the veil which concealed Napoleon from the eyes of Marius was gradually rent . 
He caught a glimpse of something immense , and he suspected that he had been deceived up to that moment , on the score of Bonaparte as about all the rest ; each day he saw more distinctly ; and he set about mounting , slowly , step by step , almost regretfully in the beginning , then with intoxication and as though attracted by an irresistible fascination , first the sombre steps , then the vaguely illuminated steps , at last the luminous and splendid steps of enthusiasm . 
One night , he was alone in his little chamber near the roof . 
His candle was burning ; he was reading , with his elbows resting on his table close to the open window . 
All sorts of reveries reached him from space , and mingled with his thoughts . 
What a spectacle is the night ! 
One hears dull sounds , without knowing whence they proceed ; one beholds Jupiter , which is twelve hundred times larger than the earth , glowing like a firebrand , the azure is black , the stars shine ; it is formidable . 
He was perusing the bulletins of the grand army , those heroic strophes penned on the field of battle ; there , at intervals , he beheld his father 's name , always the name of the Emperor ; the whole of that great Empire presented itself to him ; he felt a flood swelling and rising within him ; it seemed to him at moments that his father passed close to him like a breath , and whispered in his ear ; he gradually got into a singular state ; he thought that he heard drums , cannon , trumpets , the measured tread of battalions , the dull and distant gallop of the cavalry ; from time to time , his eyes were raised heavenward , and gazed upon the colossal constellations as they gleamed in the measureless depths of space , then they fell upon his book once more , and there they beheld other colossal things moving confusedly . 
His heart contracted within him . 
He was in a transport , trembling , panting . 
All at once , without himself knowing what was in him , and what impulse he was obeying , he sprang to his feet , stretched both arms out of the window , gazed intently into the gloom , the silence , the infinite darkness , the eternal immensity , and exclaimed : `` Long live the Emperor ! '' 
From that moment forth , all was over ; the Ogre of Corsica , -- the usurper , -- the tyrant , -- the monster who was the lover of his own sisters , -- the actor who took lessons of Talma , -- the poisoner of Jaffa , -- the tiger , -- Buonaparte , -- all this vanished , and gave place in his mind to a vague and brilliant radiance in which shone , at an inaccessible height , the pale marble phantom of Caesar . 
The Emperor had been for his father only the well-beloved captain whom one admires , for whom one sacrifices one 's self ; he was something more to Marius . 
He was the predestined constructor of the French group , succeeding the Roman group in the domination of the universe . 
He was a prodigious architect , of a destruction , the continuer of Charlemagne , of Louis XI. , of Henry IV. , of Richelieu , of Louis XIV. , and of the Committee of Public Safety , having his spots , no doubt , his faults , his crimes even , being a man , that is to say ; but august in his faults , brilliant in his spots , powerful in his crime . 
He was the predestined man , who had forced all nations to say : `` The great nation ! '' 
He was better than that , he was the very incarnation of France , conquering Europe by the sword which he grasped , and the world by the light which he shed . 
Marius saw in Bonaparte the dazzling spectre which will always rise upon the frontier , and which will guard the future . 
Despot but dictator ; a despot resulting from a republic and summing up a revolution . 
Napoleon became for him the man-people as Jesus Christ is the man-God . 
It will be perceived , that like all new converts to a religion , his conversion intoxicated him , he hurled himself headlong into adhesion and he went too far . 
His nature was so constructed ; once on the downward slope , it was almost impossible for him to put on the drag . 
Fanaticism for the sword took possession of him , and complicated in his mind his enthusiasm for the idea . 
He did not perceive that , along with genius , and pell-mell , he was admitting force , that is to say , that he was installing in two compartments of his idolatry , on the one hand that which is divine , on the other that which is brutal . 
In many respects , he had set about deceiving himself otherwise . 
He admitted everything . 
There is a way of encountering error while on one 's way to the truth . 
He had a violent sort of good faith which took everything in the lump . 
In the new path which he had entered on , in judging the mistakes of the old regime , as in measuring the glory of Napoleon , he neglected the attenuating circumstances . 
At all events , a tremendous step had been taken . 
Where he had formerly beheld the fall of the monarchy , he now saw the advent of France . 
His orientation had changed . 
What had been his East became the West . 
He had turned squarely round . 
All these revolutions were accomplished within him , without his family obtaining an inkling of the case . 
When , during this mysterious labor , he had entirely shed his old Bourbon and ultra skin , when he had cast off the aristocrat , the Jacobite and the Royalist , when he had become thoroughly a revolutionist , profoundly democratic and republican , he went to an engraver on the Quai des Orfevres and ordered a hundred cards bearing this name : Le Baron Marius Pontmercy . 
This was only the strictly logical consequence of the change which had taken place in him , a change in which everything gravitated round his father . 
Only , as he did not know any one and could not sow his cards with any porter , he put them in his pocket . 
By another natural consequence , in proportion as he drew nearer to his father , to the latter 's memory , and to the things for which the colonel had fought five and twenty years before , he receded from his grandfather . 
We have long ago said , that M. Gillenormand 's temper did not please him . 
There already existed between them all the dissonances of the grave young man and the frivolous old man . 
The gayety of Geronte shocks and exasperates the melancholy of Werther . 
So long as the same political opinions and the same ideas had been common to them both , Marius had met M. Gillenormand there as on a bridge . 
When the bridge fell , an abyss was formed . 
And then , over and above all , Marius experienced unutterable impulses to revolt , when he reflected that it was M. Gillenormand who had , from stupid motives , torn him ruthlessly from the colonel , thus depriving the father of the child , and the child of the father . 
By dint of pity for his father , Marius had nearly arrived at aversion for his grandfather . 
Nothing of this sort , however , was betrayed on the exterior , as we have already said . 
Only he grew colder and colder ; laconic at meals , and rare in the house . 
When his aunt scolded him for it , he was very gentle and alleged his studies , his lectures , the examinations , etc. , as a pretext . 
His grandfather never departed from his infallible diagnosis : `` In love ! 
I know all about it . '' 
From time to time Marius absented himself . 
`` Where is it that he goes off like this ? '' 
said his aunt . 
On one of these trips , which were always very brief , he went to Montfermeil , in order to obey the injunction which his father had left him , and he sought the old sergeant to Waterloo , the inn-keeper Thenardier . 
Thenardier had failed , the inn was closed , and no one knew what had become of him . 
Marius was away from the house for four days on this quest . 
`` He is getting decidedly wild , '' said his grandfather . 
They thought they had noticed that he wore something on his breast , under his shirt , which was attached to his neck by a black ribbon . 
SOME PETTICOAT We have mentioned a lancer . 
He was a great-grand-nephew of M. Gillenormand , on the paternal side , who led a garrison life , outside the family and far from the domestic hearth . 
Lieutenant Theodule Gillenormand fulfilled all the conditions required to make what is called a fine officer . 
He had `` a lady 's waist , '' a victorious manner of trailing his sword and of twirling his mustache in a hook . 
He visited Paris very rarely , and so rarely that Marius had never seen him . 
The cousins knew each other only by name . 
We think we have said that Theodule was the favorite of Aunt Gillenormand , who preferred him because she did not see him . 
Not seeing people permits one to attribute to them all possible perfections . 
One morning , Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder returned to her apartment as much disturbed as her placidity was capable of allowing . 
Marius had just asked his grandfather 's permission to take a little trip , adding that he meant to set out that very evening . 
`` Go ! '' 
had been his grandfather 's reply , and M. Gillenormand had added in an aside , as he raised his eyebrows to the top of his forehead : `` Here he is passing the night out again . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand had ascended to her chamber greatly puzzled , and on the staircase had dropped this exclamation : `` This is too much ! '' 
-- and this interrogation : `` But where is it that he goes ? '' 
She espied some adventure of the heart , more or less illicit , a woman in the shadow , a rendezvous , a mystery , and she would not have been sorry to thrust her spectacles into the affair . 
Tasting a mystery resembles getting the first flavor of a scandal ; sainted souls do not detest this . 
There is some curiosity about scandal in the secret compartments of bigotry . 
So she was the prey of a vague appetite for learning a history . 
In order to get rid of this curiosity which agitated her a little beyond her wont , she took refuge in her talents , and set about scalloping , with one layer of cotton after another , one of those embroideries of the Empire and the Restoration , in which there are numerous cart-wheels . 
The work was clumsy , the worker cross . 
She had been seated at this for several hours when the door opened . 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand raised her nose . 
Lieutenant Theodule stood before her , making the regulation salute . 
She uttered a cry of delight . 
One may be old , one may be a prude , one may be pious , one may be an aunt , but it is always agreeable to see a lancer enter one 's chamber . 
`` You here , Theodule ! '' 
she exclaimed . 
`` On my way through town , aunt . '' 
`` Embrace me . '' 
`` Here goes ! '' 
said Theodule . 
And he kissed her . 
Aunt Gillenormand went to her writing-desk and opened it . 
`` You will remain with us a week at least ? '' 
`` I leave this very evening , aunt . '' 
`` It is not possible ! '' 
`` Mathematically ! '' 
`` Remain , my little Theodule , I beseech you . '' 
`` My heart says ` yes , ' but my orders say ` no . ' 
The matter is simple . 
They are changing our garrison ; we have been at Melun , we are being transferred to Gaillon . 
It is necessary to pass through Paris in order to get from the old post to the new one . 
I said : ` I am going to see my aunt . ' '' 
`` Here is something for your trouble . '' 
And she put ten louis into his hand . 
`` For my pleasure , you mean to say , my dear aunt . '' 
Theodule kissed her again , and she experienced the joy of having some of the skin scratched from her neck by the braidings on his uniform . 
`` Are you making the journey on horseback , with your regiment ? '' 
she asked him . 
`` No , aunt . 
I wanted to see you . 
I have special permission . 
My servant is taking my horse ; I am travelling by diligence . 
And , by the way , I want to ask you something . '' 
`` What is it ? '' 
`` Is my cousin Marius Pontmercy travelling so , too ? '' 
`` How do you know that ? '' 
said his aunt , suddenly pricked to the quick with a lively curiosity . 
`` On my arrival , I went to the diligence to engage my seat in the coupe . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` A traveller had already come to engage a seat in the imperial . 
I saw his name on the card . '' 
`` What name ? '' 
`` Marius Pontmercy . '' 
`` The wicked fellow ! '' 
exclaimed his aunt . 
`` Ah ! 
your cousin is not a steady lad like yourself . 
To think that he is to pass the night in a diligence ! '' 
`` Just as I am going to do . '' 
`` But you -- it is your duty ; in his case , it is wildness . '' 
`` Bosh ! '' 
said Theodule . 
Here an event occurred to Mademoiselle Gillenormand the elder , -- an idea struck her . 
If she had been a man , she would have slapped her brow . 
She apostrophized Theodule : -- `` Are you aware whether your cousin knows you ? '' 
`` No . 
I have seen him ; but he has never deigned to notice me . '' 
`` So you are going to travel together ? '' 
`` He in the imperial , I in the coupe . '' 
`` Where does this diligence run ? '' 
`` To Andelys . '' 
`` Then that is where Marius is going ? '' 
`` Unless , like myself , he should stop on the way . 
I get down at Vernon , in order to take the branch coach for Gaillon . 
I know nothing of Marius ' plan of travel . '' 
`` Marius ! 
what an ugly name ! 
what possessed them to name him Marius ? 
While you , at least , are called Theodule . '' 
`` I would rather be called Alfred , '' said the officer . 
`` Listen , Theodule . '' 
`` I am listening , aunt . '' 
`` Pay attention . '' 
`` I am paying attention . '' 
`` You understand ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Well , Marius absents himself ! '' 
`` Eh ! 
eh ! '' 
`` He travels . '' 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! '' 
`` He spends the night out . '' 
`` Oh ! 
oh ! '' 
`` We should like to know what there is behind all this . '' 
Theodule replied with the composure of a man of bronze : -- `` Some petticoat or other . '' 
And with that inward laugh which denotes certainty , he added : -- `` A lass . '' 
`` That is evident , '' exclaimed his aunt , who thought she heard M. Gillenormand speaking , and who felt her conviction become irresistible at that word fillette , accentuated in almost the very same fashion by the granduncle and the grandnephew . 
She resumed : -- `` Do us a favor . 
Follow Marius a little . 
He does not know you , it will be easy . 
Since a lass there is , try to get a sight of her . 
You must write us the tale . 
It will amuse his grandfather . '' 
Theodule had no excessive taste for this sort of spying ; but he was much touched by the ten louis , and he thought he saw a chance for a possible sequel . 
He accepted the commission and said : `` As you please , aunt . '' 
And he added in an aside , to himself : `` Here I am a duenna . '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand embraced him . 
`` You are not the man to play such pranks , Theodule . 
You obey discipline , you are the slave of orders , you are a man of scruples and duty , and you would not quit your family to go and see a creature . '' 
The lancer made the pleased grimace of Cartouche when praised for his probity . 
Marius , on the evening following this dialogue , mounted the diligence without suspecting that he was watched . 
As for the watcher , the first thing he did was to fall asleep . 
His slumber was complete and conscientious . 
Argus snored all night long . 
At daybreak , the conductor of the diligence shouted : `` Vernon ! 
relay of Vernon ! 
Travellers for Vernon ! '' 
And Lieutenant Theodule woke . 
`` Good , '' he growled , still half asleep , `` this is where I get out . '' 
Then , as his memory cleared by degrees , the effect of waking , he recalled his aunt , the ten louis , and the account which he had undertaken to render of the deeds and proceedings of Marius . 
This set him to laughing . 
`` Perhaps he is no longer in the coach , '' he thought , as he rebuttoned the waistcoat of his undress uniform . 
`` He may have stopped at Poissy ; he may have stopped at Triel ; if he did not get out at Meulan , he may have got out at Mantes , unless he got out at Rolleboise , or if he did not go on as far as Pacy , with the choice of turning to the left at Evreus , or to the right at Laroche-Guyon . 
Run after him , aunty . 
What the devil am I to write to that good old soul ? '' 
At that moment a pair of black trousers descending from the imperial , made its appearance at the window of the coupe . 
`` Can that be Marius ? '' 
said the lieutenant . 
It was Marius . 
A little peasant girl , all entangled with the horses and the postilions at the end of the vehicle , was offering flowers to the travellers . 
`` Give your ladies flowers ! '' 
she cried . 
Marius approached her and purchased the finest flowers in her flat basket . 
`` Come now , '' said Theodule , leaping down from the coupe , `` this piques my curiosity . 
Who the deuce is he going to carry those flowers to ? 
She must be a splendidly handsome woman for so fine a bouquet . 
I want to see her . '' 
And no longer in pursuance of orders , but from personal curiosity , like dogs who hunt on their own account , he set out to follow Marius . 
Marius paid no attention to Theodule . 
Elegant women descended from the diligence ; he did not glance at them . 
He seemed to see nothing around him . 
`` He is pretty deeply in love ! '' 
thought Theodule . 
Marius directed his steps towards the church . 
`` Capital , '' said Theodule to himself . 
`` Rendezvous seasoned with a bit of mass are the best sort . 
Nothing is so exquisite as an ogle which passes over the good God 's head . '' 
On arriving at the church , Marius did not enter it , but skirted the apse . 
He disappeared behind one of the angles of the apse . 
