After his first depression , Passepartout became calmer , and began to study his situation . 
It was certainly not an enviable one . 
He found himself on the way to Japan , and what should he do when he got there ? 
His pocket was empty ; he had not a solitary shilling , not so much as a penny . 
His passage had fortunately been paid for in advance ; and he had five or six days in which to decide upon his future course . 
He fell to at meals with an appetite , and ate for Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and himself . 
He helped himself as generously as if Japan were a desert , where nothing to eat was to be looked for . 
At dawn on the 13th the Carnatic entered the port of Yokohama . 
This is an important port of call in the Pacific , where all the mail-steamers , and those carrying travellers between North America , China , Japan , and the Oriental islands put in . 
It is situated in the bay of Yeddo , and at but a short distance from that second capital of the Japanese Empire , and the residence of the Tycoon , the civil Emperor , before the Mikado , the spiritual Emperor , absorbed his office in his own . 
The Carnatic anchored at the quay near the custom-house , in the midst of a crowd of ships bearing the flags of all nations . 
Passepartout went timidly ashore on this so curious territory of the Sons of the Sun . 
He had nothing better to do than , taking chance for his guide , to wander aimlessly through the streets of Yokohama . 
He found himself at first in a thoroughly European quarter , the houses having low fronts , and being adorned with verandas , beneath which he caught glimpses of neat peristyles . 
This quarter occupied , with its streets , squares , docks , and warehouses , all the space between the `` promontory of the Treaty '' and the river . 
Here , as at Hong Kong and Calcutta , were mixed crowds of all races , Americans and English , Chinamen and Dutchmen , mostly merchants ready to buy or sell anything . 
The Frenchman felt himself as much alone among them as if he had dropped down in the midst of Hottentots . 
He had , at least , one resource to call on the French and English consuls at Yokohama for assistance . 
But he shrank from telling the story of his adventures , intimately connected as it was with that of his master ; and , before doing so , he determined to exhaust all other means of aid . 
As chance did not favour him in the European quarter , he penetrated that inhabited by the native Japanese , determined , if necessary , to push on to Yeddo . 
The Japanese quarter of Yokohama is called Benten , after the goddess of the sea , who is worshipped on the islands round about . 
There Passepartout beheld beautiful fir and cedar groves , sacred gates of a singular architecture , bridges half hid in the midst of bamboos and reeds , temples shaded by immense cedar-trees , holy retreats where were sheltered Buddhist priests and sectaries of Confucius , and interminable streets , where a perfect harvest of rose-tinted and red-cheeked children , who looked as if they had been cut out of Japanese screens , and who were playing in the midst of short-legged poodles and yellowish cats , might have been gathered . 
The streets were crowded with people . 
Priests were passing in processions , beating their dreary tambourines ; police and custom-house officers with pointed hats encrusted with lac and carrying two sabres hung to their waists ; soldiers , clad in blue cotton with white stripes , and bearing guns ; the Mikado 's guards , enveloped in silken doubles , hauberks and coats of mail ; and numbers of military folk of all ranks -- for the military profession is as much respected in Japan as it is despised in China -- went hither and thither in groups and pairs . 
Passepartout saw , too , begging friars , long-robed pilgrims , and simple civilians , with their warped and jet-black hair , big heads , long busts , slender legs , short stature , and complexions varying from copper-colour to a dead white , but never yellow , like the Chinese , from whom the Japanese widely differ . 
He did not fail to observe the curious equipages -- carriages and palanquins , barrows supplied with sails , and litters made of bamboo ; nor the women -- whom he thought not especially handsome -- who took little steps with their little feet , whereon they wore canvas shoes , straw sandals , and clogs of worked wood , and who displayed tight-looking eyes , flat chests , teeth fashionably blackened , and gowns crossed with silken scarfs , tied in an enormous knot behind an ornament which the modern Parisian ladies seem to have borrowed from the dames of Japan . 
Passepartout wandered for several hours in the midst of this motley crowd , looking in at the windows of the rich and curious shops , the jewellery establishments glittering with quaint Japanese ornaments , the restaurants decked with streamers and banners , the tea-houses , where the odorous beverage was being drunk with saki , a liquor concocted from the fermentation of rice , and the comfortable smoking-houses , where they were puffing , not opium , which is almost unknown in Japan , but a very fine , stringy tobacco . 
He went on till he found himself in the fields , in the midst of vast rice plantations . 
There he saw dazzling camellias expanding themselves , with flowers which were giving forth their last colours and perfumes , not on bushes , but on trees , and within bamboo enclosures , cherry , plum , and apple trees , which the Japanese cultivate rather for their blossoms than their fruit , and which queerly-fashioned , grinning scarecrows protected from the sparrows , pigeons , ravens , and other voracious birds . 
On the branches of the cedars were perched large eagles ; amid the foliage of the weeping willows were herons , solemnly standing on one leg ; and on every hand were crows , ducks , hawks , wild birds , and a multitude of cranes , which the Japanese consider sacred , and which to their minds symbolise long life and prosperity . 
As he was strolling along , Passepartout espied some violets among the shrubs . 
`` Good ! '' 
said he ; `` I 'll have some supper . '' 
But , on smelling them , he found that they were odourless . 
`` No chance there , '' thought he . 
The worthy fellow had certainly taken good care to eat as hearty a breakfast as possible before leaving the Carnatic ; but , as he had been walking about all day , the demands of hunger were becoming importunate . 
He observed that the butchers stalls contained neither mutton , goat , nor pork ; and , knowing also that it is a sacrilege to kill cattle , which are preserved solely for farming , he made up his mind that meat was far from plentiful in Yokohama -- nor was he mistaken ; and , in default of butcher 's meat , he could have wished for a quarter of wild boar or deer , a partridge , or some quails , some game or fish , which , with rice , the Japanese eat almost exclusively . 
But he found it necessary to keep up a stout heart , and to postpone the meal he craved till the following morning . 
Night came , and Passepartout re-entered the native quarter , where he wandered through the streets , lit by vari-coloured lanterns , looking on at the dancers , who were executing skilful steps and boundings , and the astrologers who stood in the open air with their telescopes . 
Then he came to the harbour , which was lit up by the resin torches of the fishermen , who were fishing from their boats . 
The streets at last became quiet , and the patrol , the officers of which , in their splendid costumes , and surrounded by their suites , Passepartout thought seemed like ambassadors , succeeded the bustling crowd . 
Each time a company passed , Passepartout chuckled , and said to himself : `` Good ! 
another Japanese embassy departing for Europe ! '' 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT 'S NOSE BECOMES OUTRAGEOUSLY LONG The next morning poor , jaded , famished Passepartout said to himself that he must get something to eat at all hazards , and the sooner he did so the better . 
He might , indeed , sell his watch ; but he would have starved first . 
Now or never he must use the strong , if not melodious voice which nature had bestowed upon him . 
He knew several French and English songs , and resolved to try them upon the Japanese , who must be lovers of music , since they were for ever pounding on their cymbals , tam-tams , and tambourines , and could not but appreciate European talent . 
It was , perhaps , rather early in the morning to get up a concert , and the audience prematurely aroused from their slumbers , might not possibly pay their entertainer with coin bearing the Mikado 's features . 
Passepartout therefore decided to wait several hours ; and , as he was sauntering along , it occurred to him that he would seem rather too well dressed for a wandering artist . 
The idea struck him to change his garments for clothes more in harmony with his project ; by which he might also get a little money to satisfy the immediate cravings of hunger . 
The resolution taken , it remained to carry it out . 
It was only after a long search that Passepartout discovered a native dealer in old clothes , to whom he applied for an exchange . 
The man liked the European costume , and ere long Passepartout issued from his shop accoutred in an old Japanese coat , and a sort of one-sided turban , faded with long use . 
A few small pieces of silver , moreover , jingled in his pocket . 
Good ! '' 
thought he . 
`` I will imagine I am at the Carnival ! '' 
His first care , after being thus `` Japanesed , '' was to enter a tea-house of modest appearance , and , upon half a bird and a little rice , to breakfast like a man for whom dinner was as yet a problem to be solved . 
`` Now , '' thought he , when he had eaten heartily , `` I must n't lose my head . 
I ca n't sell this costume again for one still more Japanese . 
I must consider how to leave this country of the Sun , of which I shall not retain the most delightful of memories , as quickly as possible . '' 
It occurred to him to visit the steamers which were about to leave for America . 
He would offer himself as a cook or servant , in payment of his passage and meals . 
Once at San Francisco , he would find some means of going on . 
The difficulty was , how to traverse the four thousand seven hundred miles of the Pacific which lay between Japan and the New World . 
Passepartout was not the man to let an idea go begging , and directed his steps towards the docks . 
But , as he approached them , his project , which at first had seemed so simple , began to grow more and more formidable to his mind . 
What need would they have of a cook or servant on an American steamer , and what confidence would they put in him , dressed as he was ? 
What references could he give ? 
As he was reflecting in this wise , his eyes fell upon an immense placard which a sort of clown was carrying through the streets . 
This placard , which was in English , read as follows : ACROBATIC JAPANESE TROUPE , HONOURABLE WILLIAM BATULCAR , PROPRIETOR , LAST REPRESENTATIONS , PRIOR TO THEIR DEPARTURE TO THE UNITED STATES , OF THE LONG NOSES ! 
LONG NOSES ! 
UNDER THE DIRECT PATRONAGE OF THE GOD TINGOU ! 
GREAT ATTRACTION ! 
`` The United States ! '' 
said Passepartout ; `` that 's just what I want ! '' 
He followed the clown , and soon found himself once more in the Japanese quarter . 
A quarter of an hour later he stopped before a large cabin , adorned with several clusters of streamers , the exterior walls of which were designed to represent , in violent colours and without perspective , a company of jugglers . 
This was the Honourable William Batulcar 's establishment . 
That gentleman was a sort of Barnum , the director of a troupe of mountebanks , jugglers , clowns , acrobats , equilibrists , and gymnasts , who , according to the placard , was giving his last performances before leaving the Empire of the Sun for the States of the Union . 
Passepartout entered and asked for Mr. Batulcar , who straightway appeared in person . 
`` What do you want ? '' 
said he to Passepartout , whom he at first took for a native . 
`` Would you like a servant , sir ? '' 
asked Passepartout . 
`` A servant ! '' 
cried Mr. Batulcar , caressing the thick grey beard which hung from his chin . 
`` I already have two who are obedient and faithful , have never left me , and serve me for their nourishment and here they are , '' added he , holding out his two robust arms , furrowed with veins as large as the strings of a bass-viol . 
`` So I can be of no use to you ? '' 
`` None . '' 
`` The devil ! 
I should so like to cross the Pacific with you ! '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the Honourable Mr. Batulcar . 
`` You are no more a Japanese than I am a monkey ! 
Who are you dressed up in that way ? '' 
`` A man dresses as he can . '' 
`` That 's true . 
You are a Frenchman , are n't you ? '' 
`` Yes ; a Parisian of Paris . '' 
`` Then you ought to know how to make grimaces ? '' 
`` Why , '' replied Passepartout , a little vexed that his nationality should cause this question , `` we Frenchmen know how to make grimaces , it is true but not any better than the Americans do . '' 
`` True . 
Well , if I ca n't take you as a servant , I can as a clown . 
You see , my friend , in France they exhibit foreign clowns , and in foreign parts French clowns . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
`` You are pretty strong , eh ? '' 
`` Especially after a good meal . '' 
`` And you can sing ? '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Passepartout , who had formerly been wont to sing in the streets . 
`` But can you sing standing on your head , with a top spinning on your left foot , and a sabre balanced on your right ? '' 
`` Humph ! 
I think so , '' replied Passepartout , recalling the exercises of his younger days . 
`` Well , that 's enough , '' said the Honourable William Batulcar . 
The engagement was concluded there and then . 
Passepartout had at last found something to do . 
He was engaged to act in the celebrated Japanese troupe . 
It was not a very dignified position , but within a week he would be on his way to San Francisco . 
The performance , so noisily announced by the Honourable Mr. Batulcar , was to commence at three o'clock , and soon the deafening instruments of a Japanese orchestra resounded at the door . 
Passepartout , though he had not been able to study or rehearse a part , was designated to lend the aid of his sturdy shoulders in the great exhibition of the `` human pyramid , '' executed by the Long Noses of the god Tingou . 
This `` great attraction '' was to close the performance . 
Before three o'clock the large shed was invaded by the spectators , comprising Europeans and natives , Chinese and Japanese , men , women and children , who precipitated themselves upon the narrow benches and into the boxes opposite the stage . 
The musicians took up a position inside , and were vigorously performing on their gongs , tam-tams , flutes , bones , tambourines , and immense drums . 
The performance was much like all acrobatic displays ; but it must be confessed that the Japanese are the first equilibrists in the world . 
One , with a fan and some bits of paper , performed the graceful trick of the butterflies and the flowers ; another traced in the air , with the odorous smoke of his pipe , a series of blue words , which composed a compliment to the audience ; while a third juggled with some lighted candles , which he extinguished successively as they passed his lips , and relit again without interrupting for an instant his juggling . 
Another reproduced the most singular combinations with a spinning-top ; in his hands the revolving tops seemed to be animated with a life of their own in their interminable whirling ; they ran over pipe-stems , the edges of sabres , wires and even hairs stretched across the stage ; they turned around on the edges of large glasses , crossed bamboo ladders , dispersed into all the corners , and produced strange musical effects by the combination of their various pitches of tone . 
The jugglers tossed them in the air , threw them like shuttlecocks with wooden battledores , and yet they kept on spinning ; they put them into their pockets , and took them out still whirling as before . 
It is useless to describe the astonishing performances of the acrobats and gymnasts . 
The turning on ladders , poles , balls , barrels , & c. , was executed with wonderful precision . 
But the principal attraction was the exhibition of the Long Noses , a show to which Europe is as yet a stranger . 
The Long Noses form a peculiar company , under the direct patronage of the god Tingou . 
Attired after the fashion of the Middle Ages , they bore upon their shoulders a splendid pair of wings ; but what especially distinguished them was the long noses which were fastened to their faces , and the uses which they made of them . 
These noses were made of bamboo , and were five , six , and even ten feet long , some straight , others curved , some ribboned , and some having imitation warts upon them . 
It was upon these appendages , fixed tightly on their real noses , that they performed their gymnastic exercises . 
A dozen of these sectaries of Tingou lay flat upon their backs , while others , dressed to represent lightning-rods , came and frolicked on their noses , jumping from one to another , and performing the most skilful leapings and somersaults . 
As a last scene , a `` human pyramid '' had been announced , in which fifty Long Noses were to represent the Car of Juggernaut . 
But , instead of forming a pyramid by mounting each other 's shoulders , the artists were to group themselves on top of the noses . 
It happened that the performer who had hitherto formed the base of the Car had quitted the troupe , and as , to fill this part , only strength and adroitness were necessary , Passepartout had been chosen to take his place . 
The poor fellow really felt sad when -- melancholy reminiscence of his youth ! 
-- he donned his costume , adorned with vari-coloured wings , and fastened to his natural feature a false nose six feet long . 
But he cheered up when he thought that this nose was winning him something to eat . 
He went upon the stage , and took his place beside the rest who were to compose the base of the Car of Juggernaut . 
They all stretched themselves on the floor , their noses pointing to the ceiling . 
A second group of artists disposed themselves on these long appendages , then a third above these , then a fourth , until a human monument reaching to the very cornices of the theatre soon arose on top of the noses . 
This elicited loud applause , in the midst of which the orchestra was just striking up a deafening air , when the pyramid tottered , the balance was lost , one of the lower noses vanished from the pyramid , and the human monument was shattered like a castle built of cards ! 
It was Passepartout 's fault . 
Abandoning his position , clearing the footlights without the aid of his wings , and , clambering up to the right-hand gallery , he fell at the feet of one of the spectators , crying , `` Ah , my master ! 
my master ! '' 
`` You here ? '' 
`` Myself . '' 
`` Very well ; then let us go to the steamer , young man ! '' 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout passed through the lobby of the theatre to the outside , where they encountered the Honourable Mr. Batulcar , furious with rage . 
He demanded damages for the `` breakage '' of the pyramid ; and Phileas Fogg appeased him by giving him a handful of banknotes . 
At half-past six , the very hour of departure , Mr. Fogg and Aouda , followed by Passepartout , who in his hurry had retained his wings , and nose six feet long , stepped upon the American steamer . 
DURING WHICH MR. FOGG AND PARTY CROSS THE PACIFIC OCEAN What happened when the pilot-boat came in sight of Shanghai will be easily guessed . 
The signals made by the Tankadere had been seen by the captain of the Yokohama steamer , who , espying the flag at half-mast , had directed his course towards the little craft . 
Phileas Fogg , after paying the stipulated price of his passage to John Busby , and rewarding that worthy with the additional sum of five hundred and fifty pounds , ascended the steamer with Aouda and Fix ; and they started at once for Nagasaki and Yokohama . 
They reached their destination on the morning of the 14th of November . 
Phileas Fogg lost no time in going on board the Carnatic , where he learned , to Aouda 's great delight -- and perhaps to his own , though he betrayed no emotion -- that Passepartout , a Frenchman , had really arrived on her the day before . 
The San Francisco steamer was announced to leave that very evening , and it became necessary to find Passepartout , if possible , without delay . 
Mr. Fogg applied in vain to the French and English consuls , and , after wandering through the streets a long time , began to despair of finding his missing servant . 
Chance , or perhaps a kind of presentiment , at last led him into the Honourable Mr. Batulcar 's theatre . 
He certainly would not have recognised Passepartout in the eccentric mountebank 's costume ; but the latter , lying on his back , perceived his master in the gallery . 
He could not help starting , which so changed the position of his nose as to bring the `` pyramid '' pell-mell upon the stage . 
All this Passepartout learned from Aouda , who recounted to him what had taken place on the voyage from Hong Kong to Shanghai on the Tankadere , in company with one Mr. Fix . 
Passepartout did not change countenance on hearing this name . 
He thought that the time had not yet arrived to divulge to his master what had taken place between the detective and himself ; and , in the account he gave of his absence , he simply excused himself for having been overtaken by drunkenness , in smoking opium at a tavern in Hong Kong . 
Mr. Fogg heard this narrative coldly , without a word ; and then furnished his man with funds necessary to obtain clothing more in harmony with his position . 
Within an hour the Frenchman had cut off his nose and parted with his wings , and retained nothing about him which recalled the sectary of the god Tingou . 
The steamer which was about to depart from Yokohama to San Francisco belonged to the Pacific Mail Steamship Company , and was named the General Grant . 
She was a large paddle-wheel steamer of two thousand five hundred tons ; well equipped and very fast . 
The massive walking-beam rose and fell above the deck ; at one end a piston-rod worked up and down ; and at the other was a connecting-rod which , in changing the rectilinear motion to a circular one , was directly connected with the shaft of the paddles . 
The General Grant was rigged with three masts , giving a large capacity for sails , and thus materially aiding the steam power . 
By making twelve miles an hour , she would cross the ocean in twenty-one days . 
Phileas Fogg was therefore justified in hoping that he would reach San Francisco by the 2nd of December , New York by the 11th , and London on the 20th -- thus gaining several hours on the fatal date of the 21st of December . 
There was a full complement of passengers on board , among them English , many Americans , a large number of coolies on their way to California , and several East Indian officers , who were spending their vacation in making the tour of the world . 
Nothing of moment happened on the voyage ; the steamer , sustained on its large paddles , rolled but little , and the Pacific almost justified its name . 
Mr. Fogg was as calm and taciturn as ever . 
His young companion felt herself more and more attached to him by other ties than gratitude ; his silent but generous nature impressed her more than she thought ; and it was almost unconsciously that she yielded to emotions which did not seem to have the least effect upon her protector . 
Aouda took the keenest interest in his plans , and became impatient at any incident which seemed likely to retard his journey . 
She often chatted with Passepartout , who did not fail to perceive the state of the lady 's heart ; and , being the most faithful of domestics , he never exhausted his eulogies of Phileas Fogg 's honesty , generosity , and devotion . 
He took pains to calm Aouda 's doubts of a successful termination of the journey , telling her that the most difficult part of it had passed , that now they were beyond the fantastic countries of Japan and China , and were fairly on their way to civilised places again . 
A railway train from San Francisco to New York , and a transatlantic steamer from New York to Liverpool , would doubtless bring them to the end of this impossible journey round the world within the period agreed upon . 
On the ninth day after leaving Yokohama , Phileas Fogg had traversed exactly one half of the terrestrial globe . 
The General Grant passed , on the 23rd of November , the one hundred and eightieth meridian , and was at the very antipodes of London . 
Mr. Fogg had , it is true , exhausted fifty-two of the eighty days in which he was to complete the tour , and there were only twenty-eight left . 
But , though he was only half-way by the difference of meridians , he had really gone over two-thirds of the whole journey ; for he had been obliged to make long circuits from London to Aden , from Aden to Bombay , from Calcutta to Singapore , and from Singapore to Yokohama . 
Could he have followed without deviation the fiftieth parallel , which is that of London , the whole distance would only have been about twelve thousand miles ; whereas he would be forced , by the irregular methods of locomotion , to traverse twenty-six thousand , of which he had , on the 23rd of November , accomplished seventeen thousand five hundred . 
And now the course was a straight one , and Fix was no longer there to put obstacles in their way ! 
It happened also , on the 23rd of November , that Passepartout made a joyful discovery . 
It will be remembered that the obstinate fellow had insisted on keeping his famous family watch at London time , and on regarding that of the countries he had passed through as quite false and unreliable . 
Now , on this day , though he had not changed the hands , he found that his watch exactly agreed with the ship 's chronometers . 
His triumph was hilarious . 
He would have liked to know what Fix would say if he were aboard ! 
`` The rogue told me a lot of stories , '' repeated Passepartout , `` about the meridians , the sun , and the moon ! 
Moon , indeed ! 
moonshine more likely ! 
If one listened to that sort of people , a pretty sort of time one would keep ! 
I was sure that the sun would some day regulate itself by my watch ! '' 
Passepartout was ignorant that , if the face of his watch had been divided into twenty-four hours , like the Italian clocks , he would have no reason for exultation ; for the hands of his watch would then , instead of as now indicating nine o'clock in the morning , indicate nine o'clock in the evening , that is , the twenty-first hour after midnight precisely the difference between London time and that of the one hundred and eightieth meridian . 
But if Fix had been able to explain this purely physical effect , Passepartout would not have admitted , even if he had comprehended it . 
Moreover , if the detective had been on board at that moment , Passepartout would have joined issue with him on a quite different subject , and in an entirely different manner . 
Where was Fix at that moment ? 
He was actually on board the General Grant . 
On reaching Yokohama , the detective , leaving Mr. Fogg , whom he expected to meet again during the day , had repaired at once to the English consulate , where he at last found the warrant of arrest . 
It had followed him from Bombay , and had come by the Carnatic , on which steamer he himself was supposed to be . 
Fix 's disappointment may be imagined when he reflected that the warrant was now useless . 
Mr. Fogg had left English ground , and it was now necessary to procure his extradition ! 
`` Well , '' thought Fix , after a moment of anger , `` my warrant is not good here , but it will be in England . 
The rogue evidently intends to return to his own country , thinking he has thrown the police off his track . 
Good ! 
I will follow him across the Atlantic . 
As for the money , heaven grant there may be some left ! 
But the fellow has already spent in travelling , rewards , trials , bail , elephants , and all sorts of charges , more than five thousand pounds . 
Yet , after all , the Bank is rich ! '' 
His course decided on , he went on board the General Grant , and was there when Mr. Fogg and Aouda arrived . 
To his utter amazement , he recognised Passepartout , despite his theatrical disguise . 
He quickly concealed himself in his cabin , to avoid an awkward explanation , and hoped -- thanks to the number of passengers -- to remain unperceived by Mr. Fogg 's servant . 
On that very day , however , he met Passepartout face to face on the forward deck . 
The latter , without a word , made a rush for him , grasped him by the throat , and , much to the amusement of a group of Americans , who immediately began to bet on him , administered to the detective a perfect volley of blows , which proved the great superiority of French over English pugilistic skill . 
When Passepartout had finished , he found himself relieved and comforted . 
Fix got up in a somewhat rumpled condition , and , looking at his adversary , coldly said , `` Have you done ? '' 
`` For this time -- yes . '' 
`` Then let me have a word with you . '' 
`` But I -- '' `` In your master 's interests . '' 
Passepartout seemed to be vanquished by Fix 's coolness , for he quietly followed him , and they sat down aside from the rest of the passengers . 
`` You have given me a thrashing , '' said Fix . 
`` Good , I expected it . 
Now , listen to me . 
Up to this time I have been Mr. Fogg 's adversary . 
I am now in his game . '' 
`` Aha ! '' 
cried Passepartout ; `` you are convinced he is an honest man ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Fix coldly , `` I think him a rascal . 
Sh ! 
do n't budge , and let me speak . 
As long as Mr. Fogg was on English ground , it was for my interest to detain him there until my warrant of arrest arrived . 
I did everything I could to keep him back . 
I sent the Bombay priests after him , I got you intoxicated at Hong Kong , I separated you from him , and I made him miss the Yokohama steamer . '' 
Passepartout listened , with closed fists . 
`` Now , '' resumed Fix , `` Mr. Fogg seems to be going back to England . 
Well , I will follow him there . 
But hereafter I will do as much to keep obstacles out of his way as I have done up to this time to put them in his path . 
I 've changed my game , you see , and simply because it was for my interest to change it . 
Your interest is the same as mine ; for it is only in England that you will ascertain whether you are in the service of a criminal or an honest man . '' 
Passepartout listened very attentively to Fix , and was convinced that he spoke with entire good faith . 
`` Are we friends ? '' 
asked the detective . 
`` Friends ? 
-- no , '' replied Passepartout ; `` but allies , perhaps . 
At the least sign of treason , however , I 'll twist your neck for you . '' 
`` Agreed , '' said the detective quietly . 
Eleven days later , on the 3rd of December , the General Grant entered the bay of the Golden Gate , and reached San Francisco . 
Mr. Fogg had neither gained nor lost a single day . 
IN WHICH A SLIGHT GLIMPSE IS HAD OF SAN FRANCISCO It was seven in the morning when Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout set foot upon the American continent , if this name can be given to the floating quay upon which they disembarked . 
These quays , rising and falling with the tide , thus facilitate the loading and unloading of vessels . 
Alongside them were clippers of all sizes , steamers of all nationalities , and the steamboats , with several decks rising one above the other , which ply on the Sacramento and its tributaries . 
There were also heaped up the products of a commerce which extends to Mexico , Chili , Peru , Brazil , Europe , Asia , and all the Pacific islands . 
Passepartout , in his joy on reaching at last the American continent , thought he would manifest it by executing a perilous vault in fine style ; but , tumbling upon some worm-eaten planks , he fell through them . 
Put out of countenance by the manner in which he thus `` set foot '' upon the New World , he uttered a loud cry , which so frightened the innumerable cormorants and pelicans that are always perched upon these movable quays , that they flew noisily away . 
Mr. Fogg , on reaching shore , proceeded to find out at what hour the first train left for New York , and learned that this was at six o'clock p.m. ; he had , therefore , an entire day to spend in the Californian capital . 
Taking a carriage at a charge of three dollars , he and Aouda entered it , while Passepartout mounted the box beside the driver , and they set out for the International Hotel . 
From his exalted position Passepartout observed with much curiosity the wide streets , the low , evenly ranged houses , the Anglo-Saxon Gothic churches , the great docks , the palatial wooden and brick warehouses , the numerous conveyances , omnibuses , horse-cars , and upon the side-walks , not only Americans and Europeans , but Chinese and Indians . 
Passepartout was surprised at all he saw . 
San Francisco was no longer the legendary city of 1849 -- a city of banditti , assassins , and incendiaries , who had flocked hither in crowds in pursuit of plunder ; a paradise of outlaws , where they gambled with gold-dust , a revolver in one hand and a bowie-knife in the other : it was now a great commercial emporium . 
The lofty tower of its City Hall overlooked the whole panorama of the streets and avenues , which cut each other at right-angles , and in the midst of which appeared pleasant , verdant squares , while beyond appeared the Chinese quarter , seemingly imported from the Celestial Empire in a toy-box . 
Sombreros and red shirts and plumed Indians were rarely to be seen ; but there were silk hats and black coats everywhere worn by a multitude of nervously active , gentlemanly-looking men . 
Some of the streets -- especially Montgomery Street , which is to San Francisco what Regent Street is to London , the Boulevard des Italiens to Paris , and Broadway to New York -- were lined with splendid and spacious stores , which exposed in their windows the products of the entire world . 
When Passepartout reached the International Hotel , it did not seem to him as if he had left England at all . 
The ground floor of the hotel was occupied by a large bar , a sort of restaurant freely open to all passers-by , who might partake of dried beef , oyster soup , biscuits , and cheese , without taking out their purses . 
Payment was made only for the ale , porter , or sherry which was drunk . 
This seemed `` very American '' to Passepartout . 
The hotel refreshment-rooms were comfortable , and Mr. Fogg and Aouda , installing themselves at a table , were abundantly served on diminutive plates by negroes of darkest hue . 
After breakfast , Mr. Fogg , accompanied by Aouda , started for the English consulate to have his passport visaed . 
As he was going out , he met Passepartout , who asked him if it would not be well , before taking the train , to purchase some dozens of Enfield rifles and Colt 's revolvers . 
He had been listening to stories of attacks upon the trains by the Sioux and Pawnees . 
Mr. Fogg thought it a useless precaution , but told him to do as he thought best , and went on to the consulate . 
He had not proceeded two hundred steps , however , when , `` by the greatest chance in the world , '' he met Fix . 
The detective seemed wholly taken by surprise . 
What ! 
Had Mr. Fogg and himself crossed the Pacific together , and not met on the steamer ! 
At least Fix felt honoured to behold once more the gentleman to whom he owed so much , and , as his business recalled him to Europe , he should be delighted to continue the journey in such pleasant company . 
Mr. Fogg replied that the honour would be his ; and the detective -- who was determined not to lose sight of him -- begged permission to accompany them in their walk about San Francisco -- a request which Mr. Fogg readily granted . 
They soon found themselves in Montgomery Street , where a great crowd was collected ; the side-walks , street , horsecar rails , the shop-doors , the windows of the houses , and even the roofs , were full of people . 
Men were going about carrying large posters , and flags and streamers were floating in the wind ; while loud cries were heard on every hand . 
`` Hurrah for Camerfield ! '' 
`` Hurrah for Mandiboy ! '' 
It was a political meeting ; at least so Fix conjectured , who said to Mr. Fogg , `` Perhaps we had better not mingle with the crowd . 
There may be danger in it . '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Mr. Fogg ; `` and blows , even if they are political are still blows . '' 
Fix smiled at this remark ; and , in order to be able to see without being jostled about , the party took up a position on the top of a flight of steps situated at the upper end of Montgomery Street . 
Opposite them , on the other side of the street , between a coal wharf and a petroleum warehouse , a large platform had been erected in the open air , towards which the current of the crowd seemed to be directed . 
For what purpose was this meeting ? 
What was the occasion of this excited assemblage ? 
Phileas Fogg could not imagine . 
Was it to nominate some high official -- a governor or member of Congress ? 
It was not improbable , so agitated was the multitude before them . 
Just at this moment there was an unusual stir in the human mass . 
All the hands were raised in the air . 
Some , tightly closed , seemed to disappear suddenly in the midst of the cries -- an energetic way , no doubt , of casting a vote . 
The crowd swayed back , the banners and flags wavered , disappeared an instant , then reappeared in tatters . 
The undulations of the human surge reached the steps , while all the heads floundered on the surface like a sea agitated by a squall . 
Many of the black hats disappeared , and the greater part of the crowd seemed to have diminished in height . 
`` It is evidently a meeting , '' said Fix , `` and its object must be an exciting one . 
I should not wonder if it were about the Alabama , despite the fact that that question is settled . '' 
`` Perhaps , '' replied Mr. Fogg , simply . 
`` At least , there are two champions in presence of each other , the Honourable Mr. Camerfield and the Honourable Mr. Mandiboy . '' 
Aouda , leaning upon Mr. Fogg 's arm , observed the tumultuous scene with surprise , while Fix asked a man near him what the cause of it all was . 
Before the man could reply , a fresh agitation arose ; hurrahs and excited shouts were heard ; the staffs of the banners began to be used as offensive weapons ; and fists flew about in every direction . 
Thumps were exchanged from the tops of the carriages and omnibuses which had been blocked up in the crowd . 
Boots and shoes went whirling through the air , and Mr. Fogg thought he even heard the crack of revolvers mingling in the din , the rout approached the stairway , and flowed over the lower step . 
One of the parties had evidently been repulsed ; but the mere lookers-on could not tell whether Mandiboy or Camerfield had gained the upper hand . 
`` It would be prudent for us to retire , '' said Fix , who was anxious that Mr. Fogg should not receive any injury , at least until they got back to London . 
`` If there is any question about England in all this , and we were recognised , I fear it would go hard with us . '' 
`` An English subject -- '' began Mr. Fogg . 
He did not finish his sentence ; for a terrific hubbub now arose on the terrace behind the flight of steps where they stood , and there were frantic shouts of , `` Hurrah for Mandiboy ! 
Hip , hip , hurrah ! '' 
It was a band of voters coming to the rescue of their allies , and taking the Camerfield forces in flank . 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Fix found themselves between two fires ; it was too late to escape . 
The torrent of men , armed with loaded canes and sticks , was irresistible . 
Phileas Fogg and Fix were roughly hustled in their attempts to protect their fair companion ; the former , as cool as ever , tried to defend himself with the weapons which nature has placed at the end of every Englishman 's arm , but in vain . 
A big brawny fellow with a red beard , flushed face , and broad shoulders , who seemed to be the chief of the band , raised his clenched fist to strike Mr. Fogg , whom he would have given a crushing blow , had not Fix rushed in and received it in his stead . 
An enormous bruise immediately made its appearance under the detective 's silk hat , which was completely smashed in . 
`` Yankee ! '' 
exclaimed Mr. Fogg , darting a contemptuous look at the ruffian . 
`` Englishman ! '' 
returned the other . 
`` We will meet again ! '' 
`` When you please . '' 
`` What is your name ? '' 
`` Phileas Fogg . 
And yours ? '' 
`` Colonel Stamp Proctor . '' 
The human tide now swept by , after overturning Fix , who speedily got upon his feet again , though with tattered clothes . 
Happily , he was not seriously hurt . 
His travelling overcoat was divided into two unequal parts , and his trousers resembled those of certain Indians , which fit less compactly than they are easy to put on . 
Aouda had escaped unharmed , and Fix alone bore marks of the fray in his black and blue bruise . 
`` Thanks , '' said Mr. Fogg to the detective , as soon as they were out of the crowd . 
`` No thanks are necessary , '' replied . 
Fix ; `` but let us go . '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` To a tailor 's . '' 
Such a visit was , indeed , opportune . 
The clothing of both Mr. Fogg and Fix was in rags , as if they had themselves been actively engaged in the contest between Camerfield and Mandiboy . 
An hour after , they were once more suitably attired , and with Aouda returned to the International Hotel . 
Passepartout was waiting for his master , armed with half a dozen six-barrelled revolvers . 
When he perceived Fix , he knit his brows ; but Aouda having , in a few words , told him of their adventure , his countenance resumed its placid expression . 
Fix evidently was no longer an enemy , but an ally ; he was faithfully keeping his word . 
Dinner over , the coach which was to convey the passengers and their luggage to the station drew up to the door . 
As he was getting in , Mr. Fogg said to Fix , `` You have not seen this Colonel Proctor again ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` I will come back to America to find him , '' said Phileas Fogg calmly . 
`` It would not be right for an Englishman to permit himself to be treated in that way , without retaliating . '' 
The detective smiled , but did not reply . 
It was clear that Mr. Fogg was one of those Englishmen who , while they do not tolerate duelling at home , fight abroad when their honour is attacked . 
At a quarter before six the travellers reached the station , and found the train ready to depart . 
As he was about to enter it , Mr. Fogg called a porter , and said to him : `` My friend , was there not some trouble to-day in San Francisco ? '' 
`` It was a political meeting , sir , '' replied the porter . 
`` But I thought there was a great deal of disturbance in the streets . '' 
`` It was only a meeting assembled for an election . '' 
`` The election of a general-in-chief , no doubt ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` No , sir ; of a justice of the peace . '' 
Phileas Fogg got into the train , which started off at full speed . 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG AND PARTY TRAVEL BY THE PACIFIC RAILROAD `` From ocean to ocean '' -- so say the Americans ; and these four words compose the general designation of the `` great trunk line '' which crosses the entire width of the United States . 
The Pacific Railroad is , however , really divided into two distinct lines : the Central Pacific , between San Francisco and Ogden , and the Union Pacific , between Ogden and Omaha . 
Five main lines connect Omaha with New York . 
New York and San Francisco are thus united by an uninterrupted metal ribbon , which measures no less than three thousand seven hundred and eighty-six miles . 
Between Omaha and the Pacific the railway crosses a territory which is still infested by Indians and wild beasts , and a large tract which the Mormons , after they were driven from Illinois in 1845 , began to colonise . 
The journey from New York to San Francisco consumed , formerly , under the most favourable conditions , at least six months . 
It is now accomplished in seven days . 
It was in 1862 that , in spite of the Southern Members of Congress , who wished a more southerly route , it was decided to lay the road between the forty-first and forty-second parallels . 
President Lincoln himself fixed the end of the line at Omaha , in Nebraska . 
The work was at once commenced , and pursued with true American energy ; nor did the rapidity with which it went on injuriously affect its good execution . 
The road grew , on the prairies , a mile and a half a day . 
A locomotive , running on the rails laid down the evening before , brought the rails to be laid on the morrow , and advanced upon them as fast as they were put in position . 
The Pacific Railroad is joined by several branches in Iowa , Kansas , Colorado , and Oregon . 
On leaving Omaha , it passes along the left bank of the Platte River as far as the junction of its northern branch , follows its southern branch , crosses the Laramie territory and the Wahsatch Mountains , turns the Great Salt Lake , and reaches Salt Lake City , the Mormon capital , plunges into the Tuilla Valley , across the American Desert , Cedar and Humboldt Mountains , the Sierra Nevada , and descends , via Sacramento , to the Pacific -- its grade , even on the Rocky Mountains , never exceeding one hundred and twelve feet to the mile . 
Such was the road to be traversed in seven days , which would enable Phileas Fogg -- at least , so he hoped -- to take the Atlantic steamer at New York on the 11th for Liverpool . 
The car which he occupied was a sort of long omnibus on eight wheels , and with no compartments in the interior . 
It was supplied with two rows of seats , perpendicular to the direction of the train on either side of an aisle which conducted to the front and rear platforms . 
These platforms were found throughout the train , and the passengers were able to pass from one end of the train to the other . 
It was supplied with saloon cars , balcony cars , restaurants , and smoking-cars ; theatre cars alone were wanting , and they will have these some day . 
The train left Oakland station at six o'clock . 
It was already night , cold and cheerless , the heavens being overcast with clouds which seemed to threaten snow . 
The train did not proceed rapidly ; counting the stoppages , it did not run more than twenty miles an hour , which was a sufficient speed , however , to enable it to reach Omaha within its designated time . 
There was but little conversation in the car , and soon many of the passengers were overcome with sleep . 
Passepartout found himself beside the detective ; but he did not talk to him . 
After recent events , their relations with each other had grown somewhat cold ; there could no longer be mutual sympathy or intimacy between them . 
Fix 's manner had not changed ; but Passepartout was very reserved , and ready to strangle his former friend on the slightest provocation . 
Snow began to fall an hour after they started , a fine snow , however , which happily could not obstruct the train ; nothing could be seen from the windows but a vast , white sheet , against which the smoke of the locomotive had a greyish aspect . 
At eight o'clock a steward entered the car and announced that the time for going to bed had arrived ; and in a few minutes the car was transformed into a dormitory . 
The backs of the seats were thrown back , bedsteads carefully packed were rolled out by an ingenious system , berths were suddenly improvised , and each traveller had soon at his disposition a comfortable bed , protected from curious eyes by thick curtains . 
The sheets were clean and the pillows soft . 
It only remained to go to bed and sleep which everybody did -- while the train sped on across the State of California . 
The country between San Francisco and Sacramento is not very hilly . 
The Central Pacific , taking Sacramento for its starting-point , extends eastward to meet the road from Omaha . 
The line from San Francisco to Sacramento runs in a north-easterly direction , along the American River , which empties into San Pablo Bay . 
The one hundred and twenty miles between these cities were accomplished in six hours , and towards midnight , while fast asleep , the travellers passed through Sacramento ; so that they saw nothing of that important place , the seat of the State government , with its fine quays , its broad streets , its noble hotels , squares , and churches . 
The train , on leaving Sacramento , and passing the junction , Roclin , Auburn , and Colfax , entered the range of the Sierra Nevada . 
` Cisco was reached at seven in the morning ; and an hour later the dormitory was transformed into an ordinary car , and the travellers could observe the picturesque beauties of the mountain region through which they were steaming . 
The railway track wound in and out among the passes , now approaching the mountain-sides , now suspended over precipices , avoiding abrupt angles by bold curves , plunging into narrow defiles , which seemed to have no outlet . 
The locomotive , its great funnel emitting a weird light , with its sharp bell , and its cow-catcher extended like a spur , mingled its shrieks and bellowings with the noise of torrents and cascades , and twined its smoke among the branches of the gigantic pines . 
There were few or no bridges or tunnels on the route . 
The railway turned around the sides of the mountains , and did not attempt to violate nature by taking the shortest cut from one point to another . 
The train entered the State of Nevada through the Carson Valley about nine o'clock , going always northeasterly ; and at midday reached Reno , where there was a delay of twenty minutes for breakfast . 
From this point the road , running along Humboldt River , passed northward for several miles by its banks ; then it turned eastward , and kept by the river until it reached the Humboldt Range , nearly at the extreme eastern limit of Nevada . 
Having breakfasted , Mr. Fogg and his companions resumed their places in the car , and observed the varied landscape which unfolded itself as they passed along the vast prairies , the mountains lining the horizon , and the creeks , with their frothy , foaming streams . 
Sometimes a great herd of buffaloes , massing together in the distance , seemed like a moveable dam . 
These innumerable multitudes of ruminating beasts often form an insurmountable obstacle to the passage of the trains ; thousands of them have been seen passing over the track for hours together , in compact ranks . 
The locomotive is then forced to stop and wait till the road is once more clear . 
This happened , indeed , to the train in which Mr. Fogg was travelling . 
About twelve o'clock a troop of ten or twelve thousand head of buffalo encumbered the track . 
The locomotive , slackening its speed , tried to clear the way with its cow-catcher ; but the mass of animals was too great . 
The buffaloes marched along with a tranquil gait , uttering now and then deafening bellowings . 
There was no use of interrupting them , for , having taken a particular direction , nothing can moderate and change their course ; it is a torrent of living flesh which no dam could contain . 
The travellers gazed on this curious spectacle from the platforms ; but Phileas Fogg , who had the most reason of all to be in a hurry , remained in his seat , and waited philosophically until it should please the buffaloes to get out of the way . 
Passepartout was furious at the delay they occasioned , and longed to discharge his arsenal of revolvers upon them . 
`` What a country ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Mere cattle stop the trains , and go by in a procession , just as if they were not impeding travel ! 
Parbleu ! 
I should like to know if Mr. Fogg foresaw this mishap in his programme ! 
And here 's an engineer who does n't dare to run the locomotive into this herd of beasts ! '' 
The engineer did not try to overcome the obstacle , and he was wise . 
He would have crushed the first buffaloes , no doubt , with the cow-catcher ; but the locomotive , however powerful , would soon have been checked , the train would inevitably have been thrown off the track , and would then have been helpless . 
The best course was to wait patiently , and regain the lost time by greater speed when the obstacle was removed . 
The procession of buffaloes lasted three full hours , and it was night before the track was clear . 
The last ranks of the herd were now passing over the rails , while the first had already disappeared below the southern horizon . 
It was eight o'clock when the train passed through the defiles of the Humboldt Range , and half-past nine when it penetrated Utah , the region of the Great Salt Lake , the singular colony of the Mormons . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT UNDERGOES , AT A SPEED OF TWENTY MILES AN HOUR , A COURSE OF MORMON HISTORY During the night of the 5th of December , the train ran south-easterly for about fifty miles ; then rose an equal distance in a north-easterly direction , towards the Great Salt Lake . 
Passepartout , about nine o'clock , went out upon the platform to take the air . 
The weather was cold , the heavens grey , but it was not snowing . 
The sun 's disc , enlarged by the mist , seemed an enormous ring of gold , and Passepartout was amusing himself by calculating its value in pounds sterling , when he was diverted from this interesting study by a strange-looking personage who made his appearance on the platform . 
This personage , who had taken the train at Elko , was tall and dark , with black moustache , black stockings , a black silk hat , a black waistcoat , black trousers , a white cravat , and dogskin gloves . 
He might have been taken for a clergyman . 
He went from one end of the train to the other , and affixed to the door of each car a notice written in manuscript . 
Passepartout approached and read one of these notices , which stated that Elder William Hitch , Mormon missionary , taking advantage of his presence on train No. 48 , would deliver a lecture on Mormonism in car No. 117 , from eleven to twelve o'clock ; and that he invited all who were desirous of being instructed concerning the mysteries of the religion of the `` Latter Day Saints '' to attend . 
`` I 'll go , '' said Passepartout to himself . 
He knew nothing of Mormonism except the custom of polygamy , which is its foundation . 
The news quickly spread through the train , which contained about one hundred passengers , thirty of whom , at most , attracted by the notice , ensconced themselves in car No. 117 . 
Passepartout took one of the front seats . 
Neither Mr. Fogg nor Fix cared to attend . 
At the appointed hour Elder William Hitch rose , and , in an irritated voice , as if he had already been contradicted , said , `` I tell you that Joe Smith is a martyr , that his brother Hiram is a martyr , and that the persecutions of the United States Government against the prophets will also make a martyr of Brigham Young . 
Who dares to say the contrary ? '' 
No one ventured to gainsay the missionary , whose excited tone contrasted curiously with his naturally calm visage . 
No doubt his anger arose from the hardships to which the Mormons were actually subjected . 
The government had just succeeded , with some difficulty , in reducing these independent fanatics to its rule . 
It had made itself master of Utah , and subjected that territory to the laws of the Union , after imprisoning Brigham Young on a charge of rebellion and polygamy . 
The disciples of the prophet had since redoubled their efforts , and resisted , by words at least , the authority of Congress . 
Elder Hitch , as is seen , was trying to make proselytes on the very railway trains . 
Then , emphasising his words with his loud voice and frequent gestures , he related the history of the Mormons from Biblical times : how that , in Israel , a Mormon prophet of the tribe of Joseph published the annals of the new religion , and bequeathed them to his son Mormon ; how , many centuries later , a translation of this precious book , which was written in Egyptian , was made by Joseph Smith , junior , a Vermont farmer , who revealed himself as a mystical prophet in 1825 ; and how , in short , the celestial messenger appeared to him in an illuminated forest , and gave him the annals of the Lord . 
Several of the audience , not being much interested in the missionary 's narrative , here left the car ; but Elder Hitch , continuing his lecture , related how Smith , junior , with his father , two brothers , and a few disciples , founded the church of the `` Latter Day Saints , '' which , adopted not only in America , but in England , Norway and Sweden , and Germany , counts many artisans , as well as men engaged in the liberal professions , among its members ; how a colony was established in Ohio , a temple erected there at a cost of two hundred thousand dollars , and a town built at Kirkland ; how Smith became an enterprising banker , and received from a simple mummy showman a papyrus scroll written by Abraham and several famous Egyptians . 
The Elder 's story became somewhat wearisome , and his audience grew gradually less , until it was reduced to twenty passengers . 
But this did not disconcert the enthusiast , who proceeded with the story of Joseph Smith 's bankruptcy in 1837 , and how his ruined creditors gave him a coat of tar and feathers ; his reappearance some years afterwards , more honourable and honoured than ever , at Independence , Missouri , the chief of a flourishing colony of three thousand disciples , and his pursuit thence by outraged Gentiles , and retirement into the Far West . 
Ten hearers only were now left , among them honest Passepartout , who was listening with all his ears . 
Thus he learned that , after long persecutions , Smith reappeared in Illinois , and in 1839 founded a community at Nauvoo , on the Mississippi , numbering twenty-five thousand souls , of which he became mayor , chief justice , and general-in-chief ; that he announced himself , in 1843 , as a candidate for the Presidency of the United States ; and that finally , being drawn into ambuscade at Carthage , he was thrown into prison , and assassinated by a band of men disguised in masks . 
Passepartout was now the only person left in the car , and the Elder , looking him full in the face , reminded him that , two years after the assassination of Joseph Smith , the inspired prophet , Brigham Young , his successor , left Nauvoo for the banks of the Great Salt Lake , where , in the midst of that fertile region , directly on the route of the emigrants who crossed Utah on their way to California , the new colony , thanks to the polygamy practised by the Mormons , had flourished beyond expectations . 
`` And this , '' added Elder William Hitch , `` this is why the jealousy of Congress has been aroused against us ! 
Why have the soldiers of the Union invaded the soil of Utah ? 
Why has Brigham Young , our chief , been imprisoned , in contempt of all justice ? 
Shall we yield to force ? 
Never ! 
Driven from Vermont , driven from Illinois , driven from Ohio , driven from Missouri , driven from Utah , we shall yet find some independent territory on which to plant our tents . 
And you , my brother , '' continued the Elder , fixing his angry eyes upon his single auditor , `` will you not plant yours there , too , under the shadow of our flag ? '' 
`` No ! '' 
replied Passepartout courageously , in his turn retiring from the car , and leaving the Elder to preach to vacancy . 
During the lecture the train had been making good progress , and towards half-past twelve it reached the northwest border of the Great Salt Lake . 
Thence the passengers could observe the vast extent of this interior sea , which is also called the Dead Sea , and into which flows an American Jordan . 
It is a picturesque expanse , framed in lofty crags in large strata , encrusted with white salt -- a superb sheet of water , which was formerly of larger extent than now , its shores having encroached with the lapse of time , and thus at once reduced its breadth and increased its depth . 
The Salt Lake , seventy miles long and thirty-five wide , is situated three miles eight hundred feet above the sea . 
Quite different from Lake Asphaltite , whose depression is twelve hundred feet below the sea , it contains considerable salt , and one quarter of the weight of its water is solid matter , its specific weight being 1,170 , and , after being distilled , 1,000 . 
Fishes are , of course , unable to live in it , and those which descend through the Jordan , the Weber , and other streams soon perish . 
The country around the lake was well cultivated , for the Mormons are mostly farmers ; while ranches and pens for domesticated animals , fields of wheat , corn , and other cereals , luxuriant prairies , hedges of wild rose , clumps of acacias and milk-wort , would have been seen six months later . 
Now the ground was covered with a thin powdering of snow . 
The train reached Ogden at two o'clock , where it rested for six hours , Mr. Fogg and his party had time to pay a visit to Salt Lake City , connected with Ogden by a branch road ; and they spent two hours in this strikingly American town , built on the pattern of other cities of the Union , like a checker-board , `` with the sombre sadness of right-angles , '' as Victor Hugo expresses it . 
The founder of the City of the Saints could not escape from the taste for symmetry which distinguishes the Anglo-Saxons . 
In this strange country , where the people are certainly not up to the level of their institutions , everything is done `` squarely '' -- cities , houses , and follies . 
The travellers , then , were promenading , at three o'clock , about the streets of the town built between the banks of the Jordan and the spurs of the Wahsatch Range . 
They saw few or no churches , but the prophet 's mansion , the court-house , and the arsenal , blue-brick houses with verandas and porches , surrounded by gardens bordered with acacias , palms , and locusts . 
A clay and pebble wall , built in 1853 , surrounded the town ; and in the principal street were the market and several hotels adorned with pavilions . 
The place did not seem thickly populated . 
The streets were almost deserted , except in the vicinity of the temple , which they only reached after having traversed several quarters surrounded by palisades . 
There were many women , which was easily accounted for by the `` peculiar institution '' of the Mormons ; but it must not be supposed that all the Mormons are polygamists . 
They are free to marry or not , as they please ; but it is worth noting that it is mainly the female citizens of Utah who are anxious to marry , as , according to the Mormon religion , maiden ladies are not admitted to the possession of its highest joys . 
These poor creatures seemed to be neither well off nor happy . 
Some -- the more well-to-do , no doubt -- wore short , open , black silk dresses , under a hood or modest shawl ; others were habited in Indian fashion . 
Passepartout could not behold without a certain fright these women , charged , in groups , with conferring happiness on a single Mormon . 
His common sense pitied , above all , the husband . 
It seemed to him a terrible thing to have to guide so many wives at once across the vicissitudes of life , and to conduct them , as it were , in a body to the Mormon paradise with the prospect of seeing them in the company of the glorious Smith , who doubtless was the chief ornament of that delightful place , to all eternity . 
He felt decidedly repelled from such a vocation , and he imagined -- perhaps he was mistaken -- that the fair ones of Salt Lake City cast rather alarming glances on his person . 
Happily , his stay there was but brief . 
At four the party found themselves again at the station , took their places in the train , and the whistle sounded for starting . 
Just at the moment , however , that the locomotive wheels began to move , cries of `` Stop ! 
stop ! '' 
were heard . 
Trains , like time and tide , stop for no one . 
The gentleman who uttered the cries was evidently a belated Mormon . 
He was breathless with running . 
Happily for him , the station had neither gates nor barriers . 
He rushed along the track , jumped on the rear platform of the train , and fell , exhausted , into one of the seats . 
Passepartout , who had been anxiously watching this amateur gymnast , approached him with lively interest , and learned that he had taken flight after an unpleasant domestic scene . 
When the Mormon had recovered his breath , Passepartout ventured to ask him politely how many wives he had ; for , from the manner in which he had decamped , it might be thought that he had twenty at least . 
`` One , sir , '' replied the Mormon , raising his arms heavenward -- `` one , and that was enough ! '' 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT DOES NOT SUCCEED IN MAKING ANYBODY LISTEN TO REASON The train , on leaving Great Salt Lake at Ogden , passed northward for an hour as far as Weber River , having completed nearly nine hundred miles from San Francisco . 
From this point it took an easterly direction towards the jagged Wahsatch Mountains . 
It was in the section included between this range and the Rocky Mountains that the American engineers found the most formidable difficulties in laying the road , and that the government granted a subsidy of forty-eight thousand dollars per mile , instead of sixteen thousand allowed for the work done on the plains . 
But the engineers , instead of violating nature , avoided its difficulties by winding around , instead of penetrating the rocks . 
One tunnel only , fourteen thousand feet in length , was pierced in order to arrive at the great basin . 
The track up to this time had reached its highest elevation at the Great Salt Lake . 
From this point it described a long curve , descending towards Bitter Creek Valley , to rise again to the dividing ridge of the waters between the Atlantic and the Pacific . 
There were many creeks in this mountainous region , and it was necessary to cross Muddy Creek , Green Creek , and others , upon culverts . 
Passepartout grew more and more impatient as they went on , while Fix longed to get out of this difficult region , and was more anxious than Phileas Fogg himself to be beyond the danger of delays and accidents , and set foot on English soil . 
At ten o'clock at night the train stopped at Fort Bridger station , and twenty minutes later entered Wyoming Territory , following the valley of Bitter Creek throughout . 
The next day , 7th December , they stopped for a quarter of an hour at Green River station . 
Snow had fallen abundantly during the night , but , being mixed with rain , it had half melted , and did not interrupt their progress . 
The bad weather , however , annoyed Passepartout ; for the accumulation of snow , by blocking the wheels of the cars , would certainly have been fatal to Mr. Fogg 's tour . 
`` What an idea ! '' 
he said to himself . 
`` Why did my master make this journey in winter ? 
Could n't he have waited for the good season to increase his chances ? '' 
While the worthy Frenchman was absorbed in the state of the sky and the depression of the temperature , Aouda was experiencing fears from a totally different cause . 
Several passengers had got off at Green River , and were walking up and down the platforms ; and among these Aouda recognised Colonel Stamp Proctor , the same who had so grossly insulted Phileas Fogg at the San Francisco meeting . 
Not wishing to be recognised , the young woman drew back from the window , feeling much alarm at her discovery . 
She was attached to the man who , however coldly , gave her daily evidences of the most absolute devotion . 
She did not comprehend , perhaps , the depth of the sentiment with which her protector inspired her , which she called gratitude , but which , though she was unconscious of it , was really more than that . 
Her heart sank within her when she recognised the man whom Mr. Fogg desired , sooner or later , to call to account for his conduct . 
Chance alone , it was clear , had brought Colonel Proctor on this train ; but there he was , and it was necessary , at all hazards , that Phileas Fogg should not perceive his adversary . 
Aouda seized a moment when Mr. Fogg was asleep to tell Fix and Passepartout whom she had seen . 
`` That Proctor on this train ! '' 
cried Fix . 
`` Well , reassure yourself , madam ; before he settles with Mr. Fogg ; he has got to deal with me ! 
It seems to me that I was the more insulted of the two . '' 
`` And , besides , '' added Passepartout , `` I 'll take charge of him , colonel as he is . '' 
`` Mr. Fix , '' resumed Aouda , `` Mr. Fogg will allow no one to avenge him . 
He said that he would come back to America to find this man . 
Should he perceive Colonel Proctor , we could not prevent a collision which might have terrible results . 
He must not see him . '' 
`` You are right , madam , '' replied Fix ; `` a meeting between them might ruin all . 
Whether he were victorious or beaten , Mr. Fogg would be delayed , and -- '' `` And , '' added Passepartout , `` that would play the game of the gentlemen of the Reform Club . 
In four days we shall be in New York . 
Well , if my master does not leave this car during those four days , we may hope that chance will not bring him face to face with this confounded American . 
We must , if possible , prevent his stirring out of it . '' 
The conversation dropped . 
Mr. Fogg had just woke up , and was looking out of the window . 
Soon after Passepartout , without being heard by his master or Aouda , whispered to the detective , `` Would you really fight for him ? '' 
`` I would do anything , '' replied Fix , in a tone which betrayed determined will , `` to get him back living to Europe ! '' 
Passepartout felt something like a shudder shoot through his frame , but his confidence in his master remained unbroken . 
Was there any means of detaining Mr. Fogg in the car , to avoid a meeting between him and the colonel ? 
It ought not to be a difficult task , since that gentleman was naturally sedentary and little curious . 
The detective , at least , seemed to have found a way ; for , after a few moments , he said to Mr. Fogg , `` These are long and slow hours , sir , that we are passing on the railway . '' 
`` Yes , '' replied Mr. Fogg ; `` but they pass . '' 
`` You were in the habit of playing whist , '' resumed Fix , `` on the steamers . '' 
`` Yes ; but it would be difficult to do so here . 
I have neither cards nor partners . '' 
`` Oh , but we can easily buy some cards , for they are sold on all the American trains . 
And as for partners , if madam plays -- '' `` Certainly , sir , '' Aouda quickly replied ; `` I understand whist . 
It is part of an English education . '' 
`` I myself have some pretensions to playing a good game . 
Well , here are three of us , and a dummy -- '' `` As you please , sir , '' replied Phileas Fogg , heartily glad to resume his favourite pastime even on the railway . 
Passepartout was dispatched in search of the steward , and soon returned with two packs of cards , some pins , counters , and a shelf covered with cloth . 
The game commenced . 
Aouda understood whist sufficiently well , and even received some compliments on her playing from Mr. Fogg . 
As for the detective , he was simply an adept , and worthy of being matched against his present opponent . 
`` Now , '' thought Passepartout , `` we 've got him . 
He wo n't budge . '' 
At eleven in the morning the train had reached the dividing ridge of the waters at Bridger Pass , seven thousand five hundred and twenty-four feet above the level of the sea , one of the highest points attained by the track in crossing the Rocky Mountains . 
After going about two hundred miles , the travellers at last found themselves on one of those vast plains which extend to the Atlantic , and which nature has made so propitious for laying the iron road . 
On the declivity of the Atlantic basin the first streams , branches of the North Platte River , already appeared . 
The whole northern and eastern horizon was bounded by the immense semi-circular curtain which is formed by the southern portion of the Rocky Mountains , the highest being Laramie Peak . 
Between this and the railway extended vast plains , plentifully irrigated . 
On the right rose the lower spurs of the mountainous mass which extends southward to the sources of the Arkansas River , one of the great tributaries of the Missouri . 
At half-past twelve the travellers caught sight for an instant of Fort Halleck , which commands that section ; and in a few more hours the Rocky Mountains were crossed . 
There was reason to hope , then , that no accident would mark the journey through this difficult country . 
The snow had ceased falling , and the air became crisp and cold . 
Large birds , frightened by the locomotive , rose and flew off in the distance . 
No wild beast appeared on the plain . 
It was a desert in its vast nakedness . 
After a comfortable breakfast , served in the car , Mr. Fogg and his partners had just resumed whist , when a violent whistling was heard , and the train stopped . 
Passepartout put his head out of the door , but saw nothing to cause the delay ; no station was in view . 
Aouda and Fix feared that Mr. Fogg might take it into his head to get out ; but that gentleman contented himself with saying to his servant , `` See what is the matter . '' 
Passepartout rushed out of the car . 
Thirty or forty passengers had already descended , amongst them Colonel Stamp Proctor . 
The train had stopped before a red signal which blocked the way . 
The engineer and conductor were talking excitedly with a signal-man , whom the station-master at Medicine Bow , the next stopping place , had sent on before . 
The passengers drew around and took part in the discussion , in which Colonel Proctor , with his insolent manner , was conspicuous . 
Passepartout , joining the group , heard the signal-man say , `` No ! 
you ca n't pass . 
The bridge at Medicine Bow is shaky , and would not bear the weight of the train . '' 
This was a suspension-bridge thrown over some rapids , about a mile from the place where they now were . 
According to the signal-man , it was in a ruinous condition , several of the iron wires being broken ; and it was impossible to risk the passage . 
He did not in any way exaggerate the condition of the bridge . 
It may be taken for granted that , rash as the Americans usually are , when they are prudent there is good reason for it . 
Passepartout , not daring to apprise his master of what he heard , listened with set teeth , immovable as a statue . 
`` Hum ! '' 
cried Colonel Proctor ; `` but we are not going to stay here , I imagine , and take root in the snow ? '' 
`` Colonel , '' replied the conductor , `` we have telegraphed to Omaha for a train , but it is not likely that it will reach Medicine Bow is less than six hours . '' 
`` Six hours ! '' 
cried Passepartout . 
`` Certainly , '' returned the conductor , `` besides , it will take us as long as that to reach Medicine Bow on foot . '' 
`` But it is only a mile from here , '' said one of the passengers . 
`` Yes , but it 's on the other side of the river . '' 
`` And ca n't we cross that in a boat ? '' 
asked the colonel . 
`` That 's impossible . 
The creek is swelled by the rains . 
It is a rapid , and we shall have to make a circuit of ten miles to the north to find a ford . '' 
The colonel launched a volley of oaths , denouncing the railway company and the conductor ; and Passepartout , who was furious , was not disinclined to make common cause with him . 
Here was an obstacle , indeed , which all his master 's banknotes could not remove . 
There was a general disappointment among the passengers , who , without reckoning the delay , saw themselves compelled to trudge fifteen miles over a plain covered with snow . 
They grumbled and protested , and would certainly have thus attracted Phileas Fogg 's attention if he had not been completely absorbed in his game . 
Passepartout found that he could not avoid telling his master what had occurred , and , with hanging head , he was turning towards the car , when the engineer , a true Yankee , named Forster called out , `` Gentlemen , perhaps there is a way , after all , to get over . '' 
`` On the bridge ? '' 
asked a passenger . 
`` On the bridge . '' 
`` With our train ? '' 
`` With our train . '' 
Passepartout stopped short , and eagerly listened to the engineer . 
`` But the bridge is unsafe , '' urged the conductor . 
`` No matter , '' replied Forster ; `` I think that by putting on the very highest speed we might have a chance of getting over . '' 
`` The devil ! '' 
muttered Passepartout . 
But a number of the passengers were at once attracted by the engineer 's proposal , and Colonel Proctor was especially delighted , and found the plan a very feasible one . 
He told stories about engineers leaping their trains over rivers without bridges , by putting on full steam ; and many of those present avowed themselves of the engineer 's mind . 
`` We have fifty chances out of a hundred of getting over , '' said one . 
`` Eighty ! 
ninety ! '' 
Passepartout was astounded , and , though ready to attempt anything to get over Medicine Creek , thought the experiment proposed a little too American . 
`` Besides , '' thought he , `` there 's a still more simple way , and it does not even occur to any of these people ! 
Sir , '' said he aloud to one of the passengers , `` the engineer 's plan seems to me a little dangerous , but -- '' `` Eighty chances ! '' 
replied the passenger , turning his back on him . 
`` I know it , '' said Passepartout , turning to another passenger , `` but a simple idea -- '' `` Ideas are no use , '' returned the American , shrugging his shoulders , `` as the engineer assures us that we can pass . '' 
`` Doubtless , '' urged Passepartout , `` we can pass , but perhaps it would be more prudent -- '' `` What ! 
Prudent ! '' 
cried Colonel Proctor , whom this word seemed to excite prodigiously . 
`` At full speed , do n't you see , at full speed ! '' 
`` I know -- I see , '' repeated Passepartout ; `` but it would be , if not more prudent , since that word displeases you , at least more natural -- '' `` Who ! 
What ! 
What 's the matter with this fellow ? '' 
cried several . 
The poor fellow did not know to whom to address himself . 
`` Are you afraid ? '' 
asked Colonel Proctor . 
`` I afraid ? 
Very well ; I will show these people that a Frenchman can be as American as they ! '' 
`` All aboard ! '' 
cried the conductor . 
`` Yes , all aboard ! '' 
repeated Passepartout , and immediately . 
`` But they ca n't prevent me from thinking that it would be more natural for us to cross the bridge on foot , and let the train come after ! '' 
But no one heard this sage reflection , nor would anyone have acknowledged its justice . 
The passengers resumed their places in the cars . 
Passepartout took his seat without telling what had passed . 
The whist-players were quite absorbed in their game . 
The locomotive whistled vigorously ; the engineer , reversing the steam , backed the train for nearly a mile -- retiring , like a jumper , in order to take a longer leap . 
Then , with another whistle , he began to move forward ; the train increased its speed , and soon its rapidity became frightful ; a prolonged screech issued from the locomotive ; the piston worked up and down twenty strokes to the second . 
They perceived that the whole train , rushing on at the rate of a hundred miles an hour , hardly bore upon the rails at all . 
And they passed over ! 
It was like a flash . 
No one saw the bridge . 
The train leaped , so to speak , from one bank to the other , and the engineer could not stop it until it had gone five miles beyond the station . 
But scarcely had the train passed the river , when the bridge , completely ruined , fell with a crash into the rapids of Medicine Bow . 
IN WHICH CERTAIN INCIDENTS ARE NARRATED WHICH ARE ONLY TO BE MET WITH ON AMERICAN RAILROADS The train pursued its course , that evening , without interruption , passing Fort Saunders , crossing Cheyne Pass , and reaching Evans Pass . 
The road here attained the highest elevation of the journey , eight thousand and ninety-two feet above the level of the sea . 
The travellers had now only to descend to the Atlantic by limitless plains , levelled by nature . 
A branch of the `` grand trunk '' led off southward to Denver , the capital of Colorado . 
The country round about is rich in gold and silver , and more than fifty thousand inhabitants are already settled there . 
Thirteen hundred and eighty-two miles had been passed over from San Francisco , in three days and three nights ; four days and nights more would probably bring them to New York . 
Phileas Fogg was not as yet behind-hand . 
During the night Camp Walbach was passed on the left ; Lodge Pole Creek ran parallel with the road , marking the boundary between the territories of Wyoming and Colorado . 
They entered Nebraska at eleven , passed near Sedgwick , and touched at Julesburg , on the southern branch of the Platte River . 
It was here that the Union Pacific Railroad was inaugurated on the 23rd of October , 1867 , by the chief engineer , General Dodge . 
Two powerful locomotives , carrying nine cars of invited guests , amongst whom was Thomas C. Durant , vice-president of the road , stopped at this point ; cheers were given , the Sioux and Pawnees performed an imitation Indian battle , fireworks were let off , and the first number of the Railway Pioneer was printed by a press brought on the train . 
Thus was celebrated the inauguration of this great railroad , a mighty instrument of progress and civilisation , thrown across the desert , and destined to link together cities and towns which do not yet exist . 
The whistle of the locomotive , more powerful than Amphion 's lyre , was about to bid them rise from American soil . 
Fort McPherson was left behind at eight in the morning , and three hundred and fifty-seven miles had yet to be traversed before reaching Omaha . 
The road followed the capricious windings of the southern branch of the Platte River , on its left bank . 
At nine the train stopped at the important town of North Platte , built between the two arms of the river , which rejoin each other around it and form a single artery , a large tributary , whose waters empty into the Missouri a little above Omaha . 
The one hundred and first meridian was passed . 
Mr. Fogg and his partners had resumed their game ; no one -- not even the dummy -- complained of the length of the trip . 
Fix had begun by winning several guineas , which he seemed likely to lose ; but he showed himself a not less eager whist-player than Mr. Fogg . 
During the morning , chance distinctly favoured that gentleman . 
Trumps and honours were showered upon his hands . 
Once , having resolved on a bold stroke , he was on the point of playing a spade , when a voice behind him said , `` I should play a diamond . '' 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Fix raised their heads , and beheld Colonel Proctor . 
Stamp Proctor and Phileas Fogg recognised each other at once . 
`` Ah ! 
it 's you , is it , Englishman ? '' 
cried the colonel ; `` it 's you who are going to play a spade ! '' 
`` And who plays it , '' replied Phileas Fogg coolly , throwing down the ten of spades . 
`` Well , it pleases me to have it diamonds , '' replied Colonel Proctor , in an insolent tone . 
He made a movement as if to seize the card which had just been played , adding , `` You do n't understand anything about whist . '' 
`` Perhaps I do , as well as another , '' said Phileas Fogg , rising . 
`` You have only to try , son of John Bull , '' replied the colonel . 
Aouda turned pale , and her blood ran cold . 
She seized Mr. Fogg 's arm and gently pulled him back . 
Passepartout was ready to pounce upon the American , who was staring insolently at his opponent . 
But Fix got up , and , going to Colonel Proctor said , `` You forget that it is I with whom you have to deal , sir ; for it was I whom you not only insulted , but struck ! '' 
`` Mr. Fix , '' said Mr. Fogg , `` pardon me , but this affair is mine , and mine only . 
The colonel has again insulted me , by insisting that I should not play a spade , and he shall give me satisfaction for it . '' 
`` When and where you will , '' replied the American , `` and with whatever weapon you choose . '' 
Aouda in vain attempted to retain Mr. Fogg ; as vainly did the detective endeavour to make the quarrel his . 
Passepartout wished to throw the colonel out of the window , but a sign from his master checked him . 
Phileas Fogg left the car , and the American followed him upon the platform . 
`` Sir , '' said Mr. Fogg to his adversary , `` I am in a great hurry to get back to Europe , and any delay whatever will be greatly to my disadvantage . '' 
`` Well , what 's that to me ? '' 
replied Colonel Proctor . 
`` Sir , '' said Mr. Fogg , very politely , `` after our meeting at San Francisco , I determined to return to America and find you as soon as I had completed the business which called me to England . '' 
`` Really ! '' 
`` Will you appoint a meeting for six months hence ? '' 
`` Why not ten years hence ? '' 
`` I say six months , '' returned Phileas Fogg ; `` and I shall be at the place of meeting promptly . '' 
`` All this is an evasion , '' cried Stamp Proctor . 
`` Now or never ! '' 
`` Very good . 
You are going to New York ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` To Chicago ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` To Omaha ? '' 
`` What difference is it to you ? 
Do you know Plum Creek ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` It 's the next station . 
The train will be there in an hour , and will stop there ten minutes . 
In ten minutes several revolver-shots could be exchanged . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
`` I will stop at Plum Creek . '' 
`` And I guess you 'll stay there too , '' added the American insolently . 
`` Who knows ? '' 
replied Mr. Fogg , returning to the car as coolly as usual . 
He began to reassure Aouda , telling her that blusterers were never to be feared , and begged Fix to be his second at the approaching duel , a request which the detective could not refuse . 
Mr. Fogg resumed the interrupted game with perfect calmness . 
At eleven o'clock the locomotive 's whistle announced that they were approaching Plum Creek station . 
Mr. Fogg rose , and , followed by Fix , went out upon the platform . 
Passepartout accompanied him , carrying a pair of revolvers . 
Aouda remained in the car , as pale as death . 
The door of the next car opened , and Colonel Proctor appeared on the platform , attended by a Yankee of his own stamp as his second . 
But just as the combatants were about to step from the train , the conductor hurried up , and shouted , `` You ca n't get off , gentlemen ! '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
asked the colonel . 
`` We are twenty minutes late , and we shall not stop . '' 
`` But I am going to fight a duel with this gentleman . '' 
`` I am sorry , '' said the conductor ; `` but we shall be off at once . 
There 's the bell ringing now . '' 
The train started . 
`` I 'm really very sorry , gentlemen , '' said the conductor . 
`` Under any other circumstances I should have been happy to oblige you . 
But , after all , as you have not had time to fight here , why not fight as we go along ? 
`` That would n't be convenient , perhaps , for this gentleman , '' said the colonel , in a jeering tone . 
`` It would be perfectly so , '' replied Phileas Fogg . 
`` Well , we are really in America , '' thought Passepartout , `` and the conductor is a gentleman of the first order ! '' 
So muttering , he followed his master . 
The two combatants , their seconds , and the conductor passed through the cars to the rear of the train . 
The last car was only occupied by a dozen passengers , whom the conductor politely asked if they would not be so kind as to leave it vacant for a few moments , as two gentlemen had an affair of honour to settle . 
The passengers granted the request with alacrity , and straightway disappeared on the platform . 
The car , which was some fifty feet long , was very convenient for their purpose . 
The adversaries might march on each other in the aisle , and fire at their ease . 
Never was duel more easily arranged . 
Mr. Fogg and Colonel Proctor , each provided with two six-barrelled revolvers , entered the car . 
The seconds , remaining outside , shut them in . 
They were to begin firing at the first whistle of the locomotive . 
After an interval of two minutes , what remained of the two gentlemen would be taken from the car . 
Nothing could be more simple . 
Indeed , it was all so simple that Fix and Passepartout felt their hearts beating as if they would crack . 
They were listening for the whistle agreed upon , when suddenly savage cries resounded in the air , accompanied by reports which certainly did not issue from the car where the duellists were . 
The reports continued in front and the whole length of the train . 
Cries of terror proceeded from the interior of the cars . 
Colonel Proctor and Mr. Fogg , revolvers in hand , hastily quitted their prison , and rushed forward where the noise was most clamorous . 
They then perceived that the train was attacked by a band of Sioux . 
This was not the first attempt of these daring Indians , for more than once they had waylaid trains on the road . 
A hundred of them had , according to their habit , jumped upon the steps without stopping the train , with the ease of a clown mounting a horse at full gallop . 
The Sioux were armed with guns , from which came the reports , to which the passengers , who were almost all armed , responded by revolver-shots . 
The Indians had first mounted the engine , and half stunned the engineer and stoker with blows from their muskets . 
A Sioux chief , wishing to stop the train , but not knowing how to work the regulator , had opened wide instead of closing the steam-valve , and the locomotive was plunging forward with terrific velocity . 
The Sioux had at the same time invaded the cars , skipping like enraged monkeys over the roofs , thrusting open the doors , and fighting hand to hand with the passengers . 
Penetrating the baggage-car , they pillaged it , throwing the trunks out of the train . 
The cries and shots were constant . 
The travellers defended themselves bravely ; some of the cars were barricaded , and sustained a siege , like moving forts , carried along at a speed of a hundred miles an hour . 
Aouda behaved courageously from the first . 
She defended herself like a true heroine with a revolver , which she shot through the broken windows whenever a savage made his appearance . 
Twenty Sioux had fallen mortally wounded to the ground , and the wheels crushed those who fell upon the rails as if they had been worms . 
Several passengers , shot or stunned , lay on the seats . 
It was necessary to put an end to the struggle , which had lasted for ten minutes , and which would result in the triumph of the Sioux if the train was not stopped . 
Fort Kearney station , where there was a garrison , was only two miles distant ; but , that once passed , the Sioux would be masters of the train between Fort Kearney and the station beyond . 
The conductor was fighting beside Mr. Fogg , when he was shot and fell . 
At the same moment he cried , `` Unless the train is stopped in five minutes , we are lost ! '' 
`` It shall be stopped , '' said Phileas Fogg , preparing to rush from the car . 
`` Stay , monsieur , '' cried Passepartout ; `` I will go . '' 
Mr. Fogg had not time to stop the brave fellow , who , opening a door unperceived by the Indians , succeeded in slipping under the car ; and while the struggle continued and the balls whizzed across each other over his head , he made use of his old acrobatic experience , and with amazing agility worked his way under the cars , holding on to the chains , aiding himself by the brakes and edges of the sashes , creeping from one car to another with marvellous skill , and thus gaining the forward end of the train . 
There , suspended by one hand between the baggage-car and the tender , with the other he loosened the safety chains ; but , owing to the traction , he would never have succeeded in unscrewing the yoking-bar , had not a violent concussion jolted this bar out . 
The train , now detached from the engine , remained a little behind , whilst the locomotive rushed forward with increased speed . 
Carried on by the force already acquired , the train still moved for several minutes ; but the brakes were worked and at last they stopped , less than a hundred feet from Kearney station . 
The soldiers of the fort , attracted by the shots , hurried up ; the Sioux had not expected them , and decamped in a body before the train entirely stopped . 
But when the passengers counted each other on the station platform several were found missing ; among others the courageous Frenchman , whose devotion had just saved them . 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG SIMPLY DOES HIS DUTY Three passengers including Passepartout had disappeared . 
Had they been killed in the struggle ? 
Were they taken prisoners by the Sioux ? 
It was impossible to tell . 
There were many wounded , but none mortally . 
Colonel Proctor was one of the most seriously hurt ; he had fought bravely , and a ball had entered his groin . 
He was carried into the station with the other wounded passengers , to receive such attention as could be of avail . 
Aouda was safe ; and Phileas Fogg , who had been in the thickest of the fight , had not received a scratch . 
Fix was slightly wounded in the arm . 
But Passepartout was not to be found , and tears coursed down Aouda 's cheeks . 
All the passengers had got out of the train , the wheels of which were stained with blood . 
From the tyres and spokes hung ragged pieces of flesh . 
As far as the eye could reach on the white plain behind , red trails were visible . 
The last Sioux were disappearing in the south , along the banks of Republican River . 
Mr. Fogg , with folded arms , remained motionless . 
He had a serious decision to make . 
Aouda , standing near him , looked at him without speaking , and he understood her look . 
If his servant was a prisoner , ought he not to risk everything to rescue him from the Indians ? 
`` I will find him , living or dead , '' said he quietly to Aouda . 
`` Ah , Mr. -- Mr. Fogg ! '' 
cried she , clasping his hands and covering them with tears . 
`` Living , '' added Mr. Fogg , `` if we do not lose a moment . '' 
Phileas Fogg , by this resolution , inevitably sacrificed himself ; he pronounced his own doom . 
The delay of a single day would make him lose the steamer at New York , and his bet would be certainly lost . 
But as he thought , `` It is my duty , '' he did not hesitate . 
The commanding officer of Fort Kearney was there . 
A hundred of his soldiers had placed themselves in a position to defend the station , should the Sioux attack it . 
`` Sir , '' said Mr. Fogg to the captain , `` three passengers have disappeared . '' 
`` Dead ? '' 
asked the captain . 
`` Dead or prisoners ; that is the uncertainty which must be solved . 
Do you propose to pursue the Sioux ? '' 
`` That 's a serious thing to do , sir , '' returned the captain . 
`` These Indians may retreat beyond the Arkansas , and I can not leave the fort unprotected . '' 
`` The lives of three men are in question , sir , '' said Phileas Fogg . 
`` Doubtless ; but can I risk the lives of fifty men to save three ? '' 
`` I do n't know whether you can , sir ; but you ought to do so . '' 
`` Nobody here , '' returned the other , `` has a right to teach me my duty . '' 
`` Very well , '' said Mr. Fogg , coldly . 
`` I will go alone . '' 
`` You , sir ! '' 
cried Fix , coming up ; `` you go alone in pursuit of the Indians ? '' 
`` Would you have me leave this poor fellow to perish -- him to whom every one present owes his life ? 
I shall go . '' 
`` No , sir , you shall not go alone , '' cried the captain , touched in spite of himself . 
`` No ! 
you are a brave man . 
Thirty volunteers ! '' 
he added , turning to the soldiers . 
The whole company started forward at once . 
The captain had only to pick his men . 
Thirty were chosen , and an old sergeant placed at their head . 
`` Thanks , captain , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
`` Will you let me go with you ? '' 
asked Fix . 
`` Do as you please , sir . 
But if you wish to do me a favour , you will remain with Aouda . 
In case anything should happen to me -- '' A sudden pallor overspread the detective 's face . 
Separate himself from the man whom he had so persistently followed step by step ! 
Leave him to wander about in this desert ! 
Fix gazed attentively at Mr. Fogg , and , despite his suspicions and of the struggle which was going on within him , he lowered his eyes before that calm and frank look . 
`` I will stay , '' said he . 
A few moments after , Mr. Fogg pressed the young woman 's hand , and , having confided to her his precious carpet-bag , went off with the sergeant and his little squad . 
But , before going , he had said to the soldiers , `` My friends , I will divide five thousand dollars among you , if we save the prisoners . '' 
It was then a little past noon . 
Aouda retired to a waiting-room , and there she waited alone , thinking of the simple and noble generosity , the tranquil courage of Phileas Fogg . 
He had sacrificed his fortune , and was now risking his life , all without hesitation , from duty , in silence . 
Fix did not have the same thoughts , and could scarcely conceal his agitation . 
He walked feverishly up and down the platform , but soon resumed his outward composure . 
He now saw the folly of which he had been guilty in letting Fogg go alone . 
What ! 
This man , whom he had just followed around the world , was permitted now to separate himself from him ! 
He began to accuse and abuse himself , and , as if he were director of police , administered to himself a sound lecture for his greenness . 
`` I have been an idiot ! '' 
he thought , `` and this man will see it . 
He has gone , and wo n't come back ! 
But how is it that I , Fix , who have in my pocket a warrant for his arrest , have been so fascinated by him ? 
Decidedly , I am nothing but an ass ! '' 
So reasoned the detective , while the hours crept by all too slowly . 
He did not know what to do . 
Sometimes he was tempted to tell Aouda all ; but he could not doubt how the young woman would receive his confidences . 
What course should he take ? 
He thought of pursuing Fogg across the vast white plains ; it did not seem impossible that he might overtake him . 
Footsteps were easily printed on the snow ! 
But soon , under a new sheet , every imprint would be effaced . 
Fix became discouraged . 
He felt a sort of insurmountable longing to abandon the game altogether . 
He could now leave Fort Kearney station , and pursue his journey homeward in peace . 
Towards two o'clock in the afternoon , while it was snowing hard , long whistles were heard approaching from the east . 
A great shadow , preceded by a wild light , slowly advanced , appearing still larger through the mist , which gave it a fantastic aspect . 
No train was expected from the east , neither had there been time for the succour asked for by telegraph to arrive ; the train from Omaha to San Francisco was not due till the next day . 
The mystery was soon explained . 
The locomotive , which was slowly approaching with deafening whistles , was that which , having been detached from the train , had continued its route with such terrific rapidity , carrying off the unconscious engineer and stoker . 
It had run several miles , when , the fire becoming low for want of fuel , the steam had slackened ; and it had finally stopped an hour after , some twenty miles beyond Fort Kearney . 
Neither the engineer nor the stoker was dead , and , after remaining for some time in their swoon , had come to themselves . 
The train had then stopped . 
The engineer , when he found himself in the desert , and the locomotive without cars , understood what had happened . 
He could not imagine how the locomotive had become separated from the train ; but he did not doubt that the train left behind was in distress . 
He did not hesitate what to do . 
It would be prudent to continue on to Omaha , for it would be dangerous to return to the train , which the Indians might still be engaged in pillaging . 
Nevertheless , he began to rebuild the fire in the furnace ; the pressure again mounted , and the locomotive returned , running backwards to Fort Kearney . 
This it was which was whistling in the mist . 
The travellers were glad to see the locomotive resume its place at the head of the train . 
They could now continue the journey so terribly interrupted . 
Aouda , on seeing the locomotive come up , hurried out of the station , and asked the conductor , `` Are you going to start ? '' 
`` At once , madam . '' 
`` But the prisoners , our unfortunate fellow-travellers -- '' `` I can not interrupt the trip , '' replied the conductor . 
`` We are already three hours behind time . '' 
`` And when will another train pass here from San Francisco ? '' 
`` To-morrow evening , madam . '' 
`` To-morrow evening ! 
But then it will be too late ! 
We must wait -- '' `` It is impossible , '' responded the conductor . 
`` If you wish to go , please get in . '' 
`` I will not go , '' said Aouda . 
Fix had heard this conversation . 
A little while before , when there was no prospect of proceeding on the journey , he had made up his mind to leave Fort Kearney ; but now that the train was there , ready to start , and he had only to take his seat in the car , an irresistible influence held him back . 
The station platform burned his feet , and he could not stir . 
The conflict in his mind again began ; anger and failure stifled him . 
He wished to struggle on to the end . 
Meanwhile the passengers and some of the wounded , among them Colonel Proctor , whose injuries were serious , had taken their places in the train . 
The buzzing of the over-heated boiler was heard , and the steam was escaping from the valves . 
The engineer whistled , the train started , and soon disappeared , mingling its white smoke with the eddies of the densely falling snow . 
The detective had remained behind . 
Several hours passed . 
The weather was dismal , and it was very cold . 
Fix sat motionless on a bench in the station ; he might have been thought asleep . 
Aouda , despite the storm , kept coming out of the waiting-room , going to the end of the platform , and peering through the tempest of snow , as if to pierce the mist which narrowed the horizon around her , and to hear , if possible , some welcome sound . 
She heard and saw nothing . 
Then she would return , chilled through , to issue out again after the lapse of a few moments , but always in vain . 
Evening came , and the little band had not returned . 
Where could they be ? 
Had they found the Indians , and were they having a conflict with them , or were they still wandering amid the mist ? 
The commander of the fort was anxious , though he tried to conceal his apprehensions . 
As night approached , the snow fell less plentifully , but it became intensely cold . 
Absolute silence rested on the plains . 
Neither flight of bird nor passing of beast troubled the perfect calm . 
Throughout the night Aouda , full of sad forebodings , her heart stifled with anguish , wandered about on the verge of the plains . 
Her imagination carried her far off , and showed her innumerable dangers . 
What she suffered through the long hours it would be impossible to describe . 
Fix remained stationary in the same place , but did not sleep . 
Once a man approached and spoke to him , and the detective merely replied by shaking his head . 
Thus the night passed . 
At dawn , the half-extinguished disc of the sun rose above a misty horizon ; but it was now possible to recognise objects two miles off . 
Phileas Fogg and the squad had gone southward ; in the south all was still vacancy . 
It was then seven o'clock . 
The captain , who was really alarmed , did not know what course to take . 
Should he send another detachment to the rescue of the first ? 
Should he sacrifice more men , with so few chances of saving those already sacrificed ? 
His hesitation did not last long , however . 
Calling one of his lieutenants , he was on the point of ordering a reconnaissance , when gunshots were heard . 
Was it a signal ? 
The soldiers rushed out of the fort , and half a mile off they perceived a little band returning in good order . 
Mr. Fogg was marching at their head , and just behind him were Passepartout and the other two travellers , rescued from the Sioux . 
They had met and fought the Indians ten miles south of Fort Kearney . 
Shortly before the detachment arrived , Passepartout and his companions had begun to struggle with their captors , three of whom the Frenchman had felled with his fists , when his master and the soldiers hastened up to their relief . 
All were welcomed with joyful cries . 
Phileas Fogg distributed the reward he had promised to the soldiers , while Passepartout , not without reason , muttered to himself , `` It must certainly be confessed that I cost my master dear ! '' 
Fix , without saying a word , looked at Mr. Fogg , and it would have been difficult to analyse the thoughts which struggled within him . 
As for Aouda , she took her protector 's hand and pressed it in her own , too much moved to speak . 
Meanwhile , Passepartout was looking about for the train ; he thought he should find it there , ready to start for Omaha , and he hoped that the time lost might be regained . 
`` The train ! 
the train ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Gone , '' replied Fix . 
`` And when does the next train pass here ? '' 
said Phileas Fogg . 
`` Not till this evening . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
returned the impassible gentleman quietly . 
IN WHICH FIX , THE DETECTIVE , CONSIDERABLY FURTHERS THE INTERESTS OF PHILEAS FOGG Phileas Fogg found himself twenty hours behind time . 
Passepartout , the involuntary cause of this delay , was desperate . 
He had ruined his master ! 
At this moment the detective approached Mr. Fogg , and , looking him intently in the face , said : `` Seriously , sir , are you in great haste ? '' 
`` Quite seriously . '' 
`` I have a purpose in asking , '' resumed Fix . 
`` Is it absolutely necessary that you should be in New York on the 11th , before nine o'clock in the evening , the time that the steamer leaves for Liverpool ? '' 
`` It is absolutely necessary . '' 
`` And , if your journey had not been interrupted by these Indians , you would have reached New York on the morning of the 11th ? '' 
`` Yes ; with eleven hours to spare before the steamer left . '' 
`` Good ! 
you are therefore twenty hours behind . 
Twelve from twenty leaves eight . 
You must regain eight hours . 
Do you wish to try to do so ? '' 
`` On foot ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` No ; on a sledge , '' replied Fix . 
`` On a sledge with sails . 
A man has proposed such a method to me . '' 
It was the man who had spoken to Fix during the night , and whose offer he had refused . 
Phileas Fogg did not reply at once ; but Fix , having pointed out the man , who was walking up and down in front of the station , Mr. Fogg went up to him . 
An instant after , Mr. Fogg and the American , whose name was Mudge , entered a hut built just below the fort . 
There Mr. Fogg examined a curious vehicle , a kind of frame on two long beams , a little raised in front like the runners of a sledge , and upon which there was room for five or six persons . 
A high mast was fixed on the frame , held firmly by metallic lashings , to which was attached a large brigantine sail . 
This mast held an iron stay upon which to hoist a jib-sail . 
Behind , a sort of rudder served to guide the vehicle . 
It was , in short , a sledge rigged like a sloop . 
During the winter , when the trains are blocked up by the snow , these sledges make extremely rapid journeys across the frozen plains from one station to another . 
Provided with more sails than a cutter , and with the wind behind them , they slip over the surface of the prairies with a speed equal if not superior to that of the express trains . 
Mr. Fogg readily made a bargain with the owner of this land-craft . 
The wind was favourable , being fresh , and blowing from the west . 
The snow had hardened , and Mudge was very confident of being able to transport Mr. Fogg in a few hours to Omaha . 
Thence the trains eastward run frequently to Chicago and New York . 
It was not impossible that the lost time might yet be recovered ; and such an opportunity was not to be rejected . 
