Happily the temple walls were built of brick and wood , which could be penetrated with little difficulty ; after one brick had been taken out , the rest would yield easily . 
They set noiselessly to work , and the Parsee on one side and Passepartout on the other began to loosen the bricks so as to make an aperture two feet wide . 
They were getting on rapidly , when suddenly a cry was heard in the interior of the temple , followed almost instantly by other cries replying from the outside . 
Passepartout and the guide stopped . 
Had they been heard ? 
Was the alarm being given ? 
Common prudence urged them to retire , and they did so , followed by Phileas Fogg and Sir Francis . 
They again hid themselves in the wood , and waited till the disturbance , whatever it might be , ceased , holding themselves ready to resume their attempt without delay . 
But , awkwardly enough , the guards now appeared at the rear of the temple , and there installed themselves , in readiness to prevent a surprise . 
It would be difficult to describe the disappointment of the party , thus interrupted in their work . 
They could not now reach the victim ; how , then , could they save her ? 
Sir Francis shook his fists , Passepartout was beside himself , and the guide gnashed his teeth with rage . 
The tranquil Fogg waited , without betraying any emotion . 
`` We have nothing to do but to go away , '' whispered Sir Francis . 
`` Nothing but to go away , '' echoed the guide . 
`` Stop , '' said Fogg . 
`` I am only due at Allahabad tomorrow before noon . '' 
`` But what can you hope to do ? '' 
asked Sir Francis . 
`` In a few hours it will be daylight , and -- '' `` The chance which now seems lost may present itself at the last moment . '' 
Sir Francis would have liked to read Phileas Fogg 's eyes . 
What was this cool Englishman thinking of ? 
Was he planning to make a rush for the young woman at the very moment of the sacrifice , and boldly snatch her from her executioners ? 
This would be utter folly , and it was hard to admit that Fogg was such a fool . 
Sir Francis consented , however , to remain to the end of this terrible drama . 
The guide led them to the rear of the glade , where they were able to observe the sleeping groups . 
Meanwhile Passepartout , who had perched himself on the lower branches of a tree , was resolving an idea which had at first struck him like a flash , and which was now firmly lodged in his brain . 
He had commenced by saying to himself , `` What folly ! '' 
and then he repeated , `` Why not , after all ? 
It 's a chance perhaps the only one ; and with such sots ! '' 
Thinking thus , he slipped , with the suppleness of a serpent , to the lowest branches , the ends of which bent almost to the ground . 
The hours passed , and the lighter shades now announced the approach of day , though it was not yet light . 
This was the moment . 
The slumbering multitude became animated , the tambourines sounded , songs and cries arose ; the hour of the sacrifice had come . 
The doors of the pagoda swung open , and a bright light escaped from its interior , in the midst of which Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis espied the victim . 
She seemed , having shaken off the stupor of intoxication , to be striving to escape from her executioner . 
Sir Francis 's heart throbbed ; and , convulsively seizing Mr. Fogg 's hand , found in it an open knife . 
Just at this moment the crowd began to move . 
The young woman had again fallen into a stupor caused by the fumes of hemp , and passed among the fakirs , who escorted her with their wild , religious cries . 
Phileas Fogg and his companions , mingling in the rear ranks of the crowd , followed ; and in two minutes they reached the banks of the stream , and stopped fifty paces from the pyre , upon which still lay the rajah 's corpse . 
In the semi-obscurity they saw the victim , quite senseless , stretched out beside her husband 's body . 
Then a torch was brought , and the wood , heavily soaked with oil , instantly took fire . 
At this moment Sir Francis and the guide seized Phileas Fogg , who , in an instant of mad generosity , was about to rush upon the pyre . 
But he had quickly pushed them aside , when the whole scene suddenly changed . 
A cry of terror arose . 
The whole multitude prostrated themselves , terror-stricken , on the ground . 
The old rajah was not dead , then , since he rose of a sudden , like a spectre , took up his wife in his arms , and descended from the pyre in the midst of the clouds of smoke , which only heightened his ghostly appearance . 
Fakirs and soldiers and priests , seized with instant terror , lay there , with their faces on the ground , not daring to lift their eyes and behold such a prodigy . 
The inanimate victim was borne along by the vigorous arms which supported her , and which she did not seem in the least to burden . 
Mr. Fogg and Sir Francis stood erect , the Parsee bowed his head , and Passepartout was , no doubt , scarcely less stupefied . 
The resuscitated rajah approached Sir Francis and Mr. Fogg , and , in an abrupt tone , said , `` Let us be off ! '' 
It was Passepartout himself , who had slipped upon the pyre in the midst of the smoke and , profiting by the still overhanging darkness , had delivered the young woman from death ! 
It was Passepartout who , playing his part with a happy audacity , had passed through the crowd amid the general terror . 
A moment after all four of the party had disappeared in the woods , and the elephant was bearing them away at a rapid pace . 
But the cries and noise , and a ball which whizzed through Phileas Fogg 's hat , apprised them that the trick had been discovered . 
The old rajah 's body , indeed , now appeared upon the burning pyre ; and the priests , recovered from their terror , perceived that an abduction had taken place . 
They hastened into the forest , followed by the soldiers , who fired a volley after the fugitives ; but the latter rapidly increased the distance between them , and ere long found themselves beyond the reach of the bullets and arrows . 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG DESCENDS THE WHOLE LENGTH OF THE BEAUTIFUL VALLEY OF THE GANGES WITHOUT EVER THINKING OF SEEING IT The rash exploit had been accomplished ; and for an hour Passepartout laughed gaily at his success . 
Sir Francis pressed the worthy fellow 's hand , and his master said , `` Well done ! '' 
which , from him , was high commendation ; to which Passepartout replied that all the credit of the affair belonged to Mr. Fogg . 
As for him , he had only been struck with a `` queer '' idea ; and he laughed to think that for a few moments he , Passepartout , the ex-gymnast , ex-sergeant fireman , had been the spouse of a charming woman , a venerable , embalmed rajah ! 
As for the young Indian woman , she had been unconscious throughout of what was passing , and now , wrapped up in a travelling-blanket , was reposing in one of the howdahs . 
The elephant , thanks to the skilful guidance of the Parsee , was advancing rapidly through the still darksome forest , and , an hour after leaving the pagoda , had crossed a vast plain . 
They made a halt at seven o'clock , the young woman being still in a state of complete prostration . 
The guide made her drink a little brandy and water , but the drowsiness which stupefied her could not yet be shaken off . 
Sir Francis , who was familiar with the effects of the intoxication produced by the fumes of hemp , reassured his companions on her account . 
But he was more disturbed at the prospect of her future fate . 
He told Phileas Fogg that , should Aouda remain in India , she would inevitably fall again into the hands of her executioners . 
These fanatics were scattered throughout the county , and would , despite the English police , recover their victim at Madras , Bombay , or Calcutta . 
She would only be safe by quitting India for ever . 
Phileas Fogg replied that he would reflect upon the matter . 
The station at Allahabad was reached about ten o'clock , and , the interrupted line of railway being resumed , would enable them to reach Calcutta in less than twenty-four hours . 
Phileas Fogg would thus be able to arrive in time to take the steamer which left Calcutta the next day , October 25th , at noon , for Hong Kong . 
The young woman was placed in one of the waiting-rooms of the station , whilst Passepartout was charged with purchasing for her various articles of toilet , a dress , shawl , and some furs ; for which his master gave him unlimited credit . 
Passepartout started off forthwith , and found himself in the streets of Allahabad , that is , the City of God , one of the most venerated in India , being built at the junction of the two sacred rivers , Ganges and Jumna , the waters of which attract pilgrims from every part of the peninsula . 
The Ganges , according to the legends of the Ramayana , rises in heaven , whence , owing to Brahma 's agency , it descends to the earth . 
Passepartout made it a point , as he made his purchases , to take a good look at the city . 
It was formerly defended by a noble fort , which has since become a state prison ; its commerce has dwindled away , and Passepartout in vain looked about him for such a bazaar as he used to frequent in Regent Street . 
At last he came upon an elderly , crusty Jew , who sold second-hand articles , and from whom he purchased a dress of Scotch stuff , a large mantle , and a fine otter-skin pelisse , for which he did not hesitate to pay seventy-five pounds . 
He then returned triumphantly to the station . 
The influence to which the priests of Pillaji had subjected Aouda began gradually to yield , and she became more herself , so that her fine eyes resumed all their soft Indian expression . 
When the poet-king , Ucaf Uddaul , celebrates the charms of the queen of Ahmehnagara , he speaks thus : `` Her shining tresses , divided in two parts , encircle the harmonious contour of her white and delicate cheeks , brilliant in their glow and freshness . 
Her ebony brows have the form and charm of the bow of Kama , the god of love , and beneath her long silken lashes the purest reflections and a celestial light swim , as in the sacred lakes of Himalaya , in the black pupils of her great clear eyes . 
Her teeth , fine , equal , and white , glitter between her smiling lips like dewdrops in a passion-flower 's half-enveloped breast . 
Her delicately formed ears , her vermilion hands , her little feet , curved and tender as the lotus-bud , glitter with the brilliancy of the loveliest pearls of Ceylon , the most dazzling diamonds of Golconda . 
Her narrow and supple waist , which a hand may clasp around , sets forth the outline of her rounded figure and the beauty of her bosom , where youth in its flower displays the wealth of its treasures ; and beneath the silken folds of her tunic she seems to have been modelled in pure silver by the godlike hand of Vicvarcarma , the immortal sculptor . '' 
It is enough to say , without applying this poetical rhapsody to Aouda , that she was a charming woman , in all the European acceptation of the phrase . 
She spoke English with great purity , and the guide had not exaggerated in saying that the young Parsee had been transformed by her bringing up . 
The train was about to start from Allahabad , and Mr. Fogg proceeded to pay the guide the price agreed upon for his service , and not a farthing more ; which astonished Passepartout , who remembered all that his master owed to the guide 's devotion . 
He had , indeed , risked his life in the adventure at Pillaji , and , if he should be caught afterwards by the Indians , he would with difficulty escape their vengeance . 
Kiouni , also , must be disposed of . 
What should be done with the elephant , which had been so dearly purchased ? 
Phileas Fogg had already determined this question . 
`` Parsee , '' said he to the guide , `` you have been serviceable and devoted . 
I have paid for your service , but not for your devotion . 
Would you like to have this elephant ? 
He is yours . '' 
The guide 's eyes glistened . 
`` Your honour is giving me a fortune ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Take him , guide , '' returned Mr. Fogg , `` and I shall still be your debtor . '' 
`` Good ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout . 
`` Take him , friend . 
Kiouni is a brave and faithful beast . '' 
And , going up to the elephant , he gave him several lumps of sugar , saying , `` Here , Kiouni , here , here . '' 
The elephant grunted out his satisfaction , and , clasping Passepartout around the waist with his trunk , lifted him as high as his head . 
Passepartout , not in the least alarmed , caressed the animal , which replaced him gently on the ground . 
Soon after , Phileas Fogg , Sir Francis Cromarty , and Passepartout , installed in a carriage with Aouda , who had the best seat , were whirling at full speed towards Benares . 
It was a run of eighty miles , and was accomplished in two hours . 
During the journey , the young woman fully recovered her senses . 
What was her astonishment to find herself in this carriage , on the railway , dressed in European habiliments , and with travellers who were quite strangers to her ! 
Her companions first set about fully reviving her with a little liquor , and then Sir Francis narrated to her what had passed , dwelling upon the courage with which Phileas Fogg had not hesitated to risk his life to save her , and recounting the happy sequel of the venture , the result of Passepartout 's rash idea . 
Mr. Fogg said nothing ; while Passepartout , abashed , kept repeating that `` it was n't worth telling . '' 
Aouda pathetically thanked her deliverers , rather with tears than words ; her fine eyes interpreted her gratitude better than her lips . 
Then , as her thoughts strayed back to the scene of the sacrifice , and recalled the dangers which still menaced her , she shuddered with terror . 
Phileas Fogg understood what was passing in Aouda 's mind , and offered , in order to reassure her , to escort her to Hong Kong , where she might remain safely until the affair was hushed up -- an offer which she eagerly and gratefully accepted . 
She had , it seems , a Parsee relation , who was one of the principal merchants of Hong Kong , which is wholly an English city , though on an island on the Chinese coast . 
At half-past twelve the train stopped at Benares . 
The Brahmin legends assert that this city is built on the site of the ancient Casi , which , like Mahomet 's tomb , was once suspended between heaven and earth ; though the Benares of to-day , which the Orientalists call the Athens of India , stands quite unpoetically on the solid earth , Passepartout caught glimpses of its brick houses and clay huts , giving an aspect of desolation to the place , as the train entered it . 
Benares was Sir Francis Cromarty 's destination , the troops he was rejoining being encamped some miles northward of the city . 
He bade adieu to Phileas Fogg , wishing him all success , and expressing the hope that he would come that way again in a less original but more profitable fashion . 
Mr. Fogg lightly pressed him by the hand . 
The parting of Aouda , who did not forget what she owed to Sir Francis , betrayed more warmth ; and , as for Passepartout , he received a hearty shake of the hand from the gallant general . 
The railway , on leaving Benares , passed for a while along the valley of the Ganges . 
Through the windows of their carriage the travellers had glimpses of the diversified landscape of Behar , with its mountains clothed in verdure , its fields of barley , wheat , and corn , its jungles peopled with green alligators , its neat villages , and its still thickly-leaved forests . 
Elephants were bathing in the waters of the sacred river , and groups of Indians , despite the advanced season and chilly air , were performing solemnly their pious ablutions . 
These were fervent Brahmins , the bitterest foes of Buddhism , their deities being Vishnu , the solar god , Shiva , the divine impersonation of natural forces , and Brahma , the supreme ruler of priests and legislators . 
What would these divinities think of India , anglicised as it is to-day , with steamers whistling and scudding along the Ganges , frightening the gulls which float upon its surface , the turtles swarming along its banks , and the faithful dwelling upon its borders ? 
The panorama passed before their eyes like a flash , save when the steam concealed it fitfully from the view ; the travellers could scarcely discern the fort of Chupenie , twenty miles south-westward from Benares , the ancient stronghold of the rajahs of Behar ; or Ghazipur and its famous rose-water factories ; or the tomb of Lord Cornwallis , rising on the left bank of the Ganges ; the fortified town of Buxar , or Patna , a large manufacturing and trading-place , where is held the principal opium market of India ; or Monghir , a more than European town , for it is as English as Manchester or Birmingham , with its iron foundries , edgetool factories , and high chimneys puffing clouds of black smoke heavenward . 
Night came on ; the train passed on at full speed , in the midst of the roaring of the tigers , bears , and wolves which fled before the locomotive ; and the marvels of Bengal , Golconda ruined Gour , Murshedabad , the ancient capital , Burdwan , Hugly , and the French town of Chandernagor , where Passepartout would have been proud to see his country 's flag flying , were hidden from their view in the darkness . 
Calcutta was reached at seven in the morning , and the packet left for Hong Kong at noon ; so that Phileas Fogg had five hours before him . 
According to his journal , he was due at Calcutta on the 25th of October , and that was the exact date of his actual arrival . 
He was therefore neither behind-hand nor ahead of time . 
The two days gained between London and Bombay had been lost , as has been seen , in the journey across India . 
But it is not to be supposed that Phileas Fogg regretted them . 
IN WHICH THE BAG OF BANKNOTES DISGORGES SOME THOUSANDS OF POUNDS MORE The train entered the station , and Passepartout jumping out first , was followed by Mr. Fogg , who assisted his fair companion to descend . 
Phileas Fogg intended to proceed at once to the Hong Kong steamer , in order to get Aouda comfortably settled for the voyage . 
He was unwilling to leave her while they were still on dangerous ground . 
Just as he was leaving the station a policeman came up to him , and said , `` Mr. Phileas Fogg ? '' 
`` I am he . '' 
`` Is this man your servant ? '' 
added the policeman , pointing to Passepartout . 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Be so good , both of you , as to follow me . '' 
Mr. Fogg betrayed no surprise whatever . 
The policeman was a representative of the law , and law is sacred to an Englishman . 
Passepartout tried to reason about the matter , but the policeman tapped him with his stick , and Mr. Fogg made him a signal to obey . 
`` May this young lady go with us ? '' 
asked he . 
`` She may , '' replied the policeman . 
Mr. Fogg , Aouda , and Passepartout were conducted to a palkigahri , a sort of four-wheeled carriage , drawn by two horses , in which they took their places and were driven away . 
No one spoke during the twenty minutes which elapsed before they reached their destination . 
They first passed through the `` black town , '' with its narrow streets , its miserable , dirty huts , and squalid population ; then through the `` European town , '' which presented a relief in its bright brick mansions , shaded by coconut-trees and bristling with masts , where , although it was early morning , elegantly dressed horsemen and handsome equipages were passing back and forth . 
The carriage stopped before a modest-looking house , which , however , did not have the appearance of a private mansion . 
The policeman having requested his prisoners for so , truly , they might be called-to descend , conducted them into a room with barred windows , and said : `` You will appear before Judge Obadiah at half-past eight . '' 
He then retired , and closed the door . 
`` Why , we are prisoners ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout , falling into a chair . 
Aouda , with an emotion she tried to conceal , said to Mr. Fogg : `` Sir , you must leave me to my fate ! 
It is on my account that you receive this treatment , it is for having saved me ! '' 
Phileas Fogg contented himself with saying that it was impossible . 
It was quite unlikely that he should be arrested for preventing a suttee . 
The complainants would not dare present themselves with such a charge . 
There was some mistake . 
Moreover , he would not , in any event , abandon Aouda , but would escort her to Hong Kong . 
`` But the steamer leaves at noon ! '' 
observed Passepartout , nervously . 
`` We shall be on board by noon , '' replied his master , placidly . 
It was said so positively that Passepartout could not help muttering to himself , `` Parbleu that 's certain ! 
Before noon we shall be on board . '' 
But he was by no means reassured . 
At half-past eight the door opened , the policeman appeared , and , requesting them to follow him , led the way to an adjoining hall . 
It was evidently a court-room , and a crowd of Europeans and natives already occupied the rear of the apartment . 
Mr. Fogg and his two companions took their places on a bench opposite the desks of the magistrate and his clerk . 
Immediately after , Judge Obadiah , a fat , round man , followed by the clerk , entered . 
He proceeded to take down a wig which was hanging on a nail , and put it hurriedly on his head . 
`` The first case , '' said he . 
Then , putting his hand to his head , he exclaimed , `` Heh ! 
This is not my wig ! '' 
`` No , your worship , '' returned the clerk , `` it is mine . '' 
`` My dear Mr. Oysterpuff , how can a judge give a wise sentence in a clerk 's wig ? '' 
The wigs were exchanged . 
Passepartout was getting nervous , for the hands on the face of the big clock over the judge seemed to go around with terrible rapidity . 
`` The first case , '' repeated Judge Obadiah . 
`` Phileas Fogg ? '' 
demanded Oysterpuff . 
`` I am here , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` Passepartout ? '' 
`` Present , '' responded Passepartout . 
`` Good , '' said the judge . 
`` You have been looked for , prisoners , for two days on the trains from Bombay . '' 
`` But of what are we accused ? '' 
asked Passepartout , impatiently . 
`` You are about to be informed . '' 
`` I am an English subject , sir , '' said Mr. Fogg , `` and I have the right -- '' `` Have you been ill-treated ? '' 
`` Not at all . '' 
`` Very well ; let the complainants come in . '' 
A door was swung open by order of the judge , and three Indian priests entered . 
`` That 's it , '' muttered Passepartout ; `` these are the rogues who were going to burn our young lady . '' 
The priests took their places in front of the judge , and the clerk proceeded to read in a loud voice a complaint of sacrilege against Phileas Fogg and his servant , who were accused of having violated a place held consecrated by the Brahmin religion . 
`` You hear the charge ? '' 
asked the judge . 
`` Yes , sir , '' replied Mr. Fogg , consulting his watch , `` and I admit it . '' 
`` You admit it ? '' 
`` I admit it , and I wish to hear these priests admit , in their turn , what they were going to do at the pagoda of Pillaji . '' 
The priests looked at each other ; they did not seem to understand what was said . 
`` Yes , '' cried Passepartout , warmly ; `` at the pagoda of Pillaji , where they were on the point of burning their victim . '' 
The judge stared with astonishment , and the priests were stupefied . 
`` What victim ? '' 
said Judge Obadiah . 
`` Burn whom ? 
In Bombay itself ? '' 
`` Bombay ? '' 
cried Passepartout . 
`` Certainly . 
We are not talking of the pagoda of Pillaji , but of the pagoda of Malabar Hill , at Bombay . '' 
`` And as a proof , '' added the clerk , `` here are the desecrator 's very shoes , which he left behind him . '' 
Whereupon he placed a pair of shoes on his desk . 
`` My shoes ! '' 
cried Passepartout , in his surprise permitting this imprudent exclamation to escape him . 
The confusion of master and man , who had quite forgotten the affair at Bombay , for which they were now detained at Calcutta , may be imagined . 
Fix the detective , had foreseen the advantage which Passepartout 's escapade gave him , and , delaying his departure for twelve hours , had consulted the priests of Malabar Hill . 
Knowing that the English authorities dealt very severely with this kind of misdemeanour , he promised them a goodly sum in damages , and sent them forward to Calcutta by the next train . 
Owing to the delay caused by the rescue of the young widow , Fix and the priests reached the Indian capital before Mr. Fogg and his servant , the magistrates having been already warned by a dispatch to arrest them should they arrive . 
Fix 's disappointment when he learned that Phileas Fogg had not made his appearance in Calcutta may be imagined . 
He made up his mind that the robber had stopped somewhere on the route and taken refuge in the southern provinces . 
For twenty-four hours Fix watched the station with feverish anxiety ; at last he was rewarded by seeing Mr. Fogg and Passepartout arrive , accompanied by a young woman , whose presence he was wholly at a loss to explain . 
He hastened for a policeman ; and this was how the party came to be arrested and brought before Judge Obadiah . 
Had Passepartout been a little less preoccupied , he would have espied the detective ensconced in a corner of the court-room , watching the proceedings with an interest easily understood ; for the warrant had failed to reach him at Calcutta , as it had done at Bombay and Suez . 
Judge Obadiah had unfortunately caught Passepartout 's rash exclamation , which the poor fellow would have given the world to recall . 
`` The facts are admitted ? '' 
asked the judge . 
`` Admitted , '' replied Mr. Fogg , coldly . 
`` Inasmuch , '' resumed the judge , `` as the English law protects equally and sternly the religions of the Indian people , and as the man Passepartout has admitted that he violated the sacred pagoda of Malabar Hill , at Bombay , on the 20th of October , I condemn the said Passepartout to imprisonment for fifteen days and a fine of three hundred pounds . '' 
`` Three hundred pounds ! '' 
cried Passepartout , startled at the largeness of the sum . 
`` Silence ! '' 
shouted the constable . 
`` And inasmuch , '' continued the judge , `` as it is not proved that the act was not done by the connivance of the master with the servant , and as the master in any case must be held responsible for the acts of his paid servant , I condemn Phileas Fogg to a week 's imprisonment and a fine of one hundred and fifty pounds . '' 
Fix rubbed his hands softly with satisfaction ; if Phileas Fogg could be detained in Calcutta a week , it would be more than time for the warrant to arrive . 
Passepartout was stupefied . 
This sentence ruined his master . 
A wager of twenty thousand pounds lost , because he , like a precious fool , had gone into that abominable pagoda ! 
Phileas Fogg , as self-composed as if the judgment did not in the least concern him , did not even lift his eyebrows while it was being pronounced . 
Just as the clerk was calling the next case , he rose , and said , `` I offer bail . '' 
`` You have that right , '' returned the judge . 
Fix 's blood ran cold , but he resumed his composure when he heard the judge announce that the bail required for each prisoner would be one thousand pounds . 
`` I will pay it at once , '' said Mr. Fogg , taking a roll of bank-bills from the carpet-bag , which Passepartout had by him , and placing them on the clerk 's desk . 
`` This sum will be restored to you upon your release from prison , '' said the judge . 
`` Meanwhile , you are liberated on bail . '' 
`` Come ! '' 
said Phileas Fogg to his servant . 
`` But let them at least give me back my shoes ! '' 
cried Passepartout angrily . 
`` Ah , these are pretty dear shoes ! '' 
he muttered , as they were handed to him . 
`` More than a thousand pounds apiece ; besides , they pinch my feet . '' 
Mr. Fogg , offering his arm to Aouda , then departed , followed by the crestfallen Passepartout . 
Fix still nourished hopes that the robber would not , after all , leave the two thousand pounds behind him , but would decide to serve out his week in jail , and issued forth on Mr. Fogg 's traces . 
That gentleman took a carriage , and the party were soon landed on one of the quays . 
The Rangoon was moored half a mile off in the harbour , its signal of departure hoisted at the mast-head . 
Eleven o'clock was striking ; Mr. Fogg was an hour in advance of time . 
Fix saw them leave the carriage and push off in a boat for the steamer , and stamped his feet with disappointment . 
`` The rascal is off , after all ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` Two thousand pounds sacrificed ! 
He 's as prodigal as a thief ! 
I 'll follow him to the end of the world if necessary ; but , at the rate he is going on , the stolen money will soon be exhausted . '' 
The detective was not far wrong in making this conjecture . 
Since leaving London , what with travelling expenses , bribes , the purchase of the elephant , bails , and fines , Mr. Fogg had already spent more than five thousand pounds on the way , and the percentage of the sum recovered from the bank robber promised to the detectives , was rapidly diminishing . 
IN WHICH FIX DOES NOT SEEM TO UNDERSTAND IN THE LEAST WHAT IS SAID TO HIM The Rangoon -- one of the Peninsular and Oriental Company 's boats plying in the Chinese and Japanese seas -- was a screw steamer , built of iron , weighing about seventeen hundred and seventy tons , and with engines of four hundred horse-power . 
She was as fast , but not as well fitted up , as the Mongolia , and Aouda was not as comfortably provided for on board of her as Phileas Fogg could have wished . 
However , the trip from Calcutta to Hong Kong only comprised some three thousand five hundred miles , occupying from ten to twelve days , and the young woman was not difficult to please . 
During the first days of the journey Aouda became better acquainted with her protector , and constantly gave evidence of her deep gratitude for what he had done . 
The phlegmatic gentleman listened to her , apparently at least , with coldness , neither his voice nor his manner betraying the slightest emotion ; but he seemed to be always on the watch that nothing should be wanting to Aouda 's comfort . 
He visited her regularly each day at certain hours , not so much to talk himself , as to sit and hear her talk . 
He treated her with the strictest politeness , but with the precision of an automaton , the movements of which had been arranged for this purpose . 
Aouda did not quite know what to make of him , though Passepartout had given her some hints of his master 's eccentricity , and made her smile by telling her of the wager which was sending him round the world . 
After all , she owed Phileas Fogg her life , and she always regarded him through the exalting medium of her gratitude . 
Aouda confirmed the Parsee guide 's narrative of her touching history . 
She did , indeed , belong to the highest of the native races of India . 
Many of the Parsee merchants have made great fortunes there by dealing in cotton ; and one of them , Sir Jametsee Jeejeebhoy , was made a baronet by the English government . 
Aouda was a relative of this great man , and it was his cousin , Jeejeeh , whom she hoped to join at Hong Kong . 
Whether she would find a protector in him she could not tell ; but Mr. Fogg essayed to calm her anxieties , and to assure her that everything would be mathematically -- he used the very word -- arranged . 
Aouda fastened her great eyes , `` clear as the sacred lakes of the Himalaya , '' upon him ; but the intractable Fogg , as reserved as ever , did not seem at all inclined to throw himself into this lake . 
The first few days of the voyage passed prosperously , amid favourable weather and propitious winds , and they soon came in sight of the great Andaman , the principal of the islands in the Bay of Bengal , with its picturesque Saddle Peak , two thousand four hundred feet high , looming above the waters . 
The steamer passed along near the shores , but the savage Papuans , who are in the lowest scale of humanity , but are not , as has been asserted , cannibals , did not make their appearance . 
The panorama of the islands , as they steamed by them , was superb . 
Vast forests of palms , arecs , bamboo , teakwood , of the gigantic mimosa , and tree-like ferns covered the foreground , while behind , the graceful outlines of the mountains were traced against the sky ; and along the coasts swarmed by thousands the precious swallows whose nests furnish a luxurious dish to the tables of the Celestial Empire . 
The varied landscape afforded by the Andaman Islands was soon passed , however , and the Rangoon rapidly approached the Straits of Malacca , which gave access to the China seas . 
What was detective Fix , so unluckily drawn on from country to country , doing all this while ? 
He had managed to embark on the Rangoon at Calcutta without being seen by Passepartout , after leaving orders that , if the warrant should arrive , it should be forwarded to him at Hong Kong ; and he hoped to conceal his presence to the end of the voyage . 
It would have been difficult to explain why he was on board without awakening Passepartout 's suspicions , who thought him still at Bombay . 
But necessity impelled him , nevertheless , to renew his acquaintance with the worthy servant , as will be seen . 
All the detective 's hopes and wishes were now centred on Hong Kong ; for the steamer 's stay at Singapore would be too brief to enable him to take any steps there . 
The arrest must be made at Hong Kong , or the robber would probably escape him for ever . 
Hong Kong was the last English ground on which he would set foot ; beyond , China , Japan , America offered to Fogg an almost certain refuge . 
If the warrant should at last make its appearance at Hong Kong , Fix could arrest him and give him into the hands of the local police , and there would be no further trouble . 
But beyond Hong Kong , a simple warrant would be of no avail ; an extradition warrant would be necessary , and that would result in delays and obstacles , of which the rascal would take advantage to elude justice . 
Fix thought over these probabilities during the long hours which he spent in his cabin , and kept repeating to himself , `` Now , either the warrant will be at Hong Kong , in which case I shall arrest my man , or it will not be there ; and this time it is absolutely necessary that I should delay his departure . 
I have failed at Bombay , and I have failed at Calcutta ; if I fail at Hong Kong , my reputation is lost : Cost what it may , I must succeed ! 
But how shall I prevent his departure , if that should turn out to be my last resource ? '' 
Fix made up his mind that , if worst came to worst , he would make a confidant of Passepartout , and tell him what kind of a fellow his master really was . 
That Passepartout was not Fogg 's accomplice , he was very certain . 
The servant , enlightened by his disclosure , and afraid of being himself implicated in the crime , would doubtless become an ally of the detective . 
But this method was a dangerous one , only to be employed when everything else had failed . 
A word from Passepartout to his master would ruin all . 
The detective was therefore in a sore strait . 
But suddenly a new idea struck him . 
The presence of Aouda on the Rangoon , in company with Phileas Fogg , gave him new material for reflection . 
Who was this woman ? 
What combination of events had made her Fogg 's travelling companion ? 
They had evidently met somewhere between Bombay and Calcutta ; but where ? 
Had they met accidentally , or had Fogg gone into the interior purposely in quest of this charming damsel ? 
Fix was fairly puzzled . 
He asked himself whether there had not been a wicked elopement ; and this idea so impressed itself upon his mind that he determined to make use of the supposed intrigue . 
Whether the young woman were married or not , he would be able to create such difficulties for Mr. Fogg at Hong Kong that he could not escape by paying any amount of money . 
But could he even wait till they reached Hong Kong ? 
Fogg had an abominable way of jumping from one boat to another , and , before anything could be effected , might get full under way again for Yokohama . 
Fix decided that he must warn the English authorities , and signal the Rangoon before her arrival . 
This was easy to do , since the steamer stopped at Singapore , whence there is a telegraphic wire to Hong Kong . 
He finally resolved , moreover , before acting more positively , to question Passepartout . 
It would not be difficult to make him talk ; and , as there was no time to lose , Fix prepared to make himself known . 
It was now the 30th of October , and on the following day the Rangoon was due at Singapore . 
Fix emerged from his cabin and went on deck . 
Passepartout was promenading up and down in the forward part of the steamer . 
The detective rushed forward with every appearance of extreme surprise , and exclaimed , `` You here , on the Rangoon ? '' 
`` What , Monsieur Fix , are you on board ? '' 
returned the really astonished Passepartout , recognising his crony of the Mongolia . 
`` Why , I left you at Bombay , and here you are , on the way to Hong Kong ! 
Are you going round the world too ? '' 
`` No , no , '' replied Fix ; `` I shall stop at Hong Kong -- at least for some days . '' 
`` Hum ! '' 
said Passepartout , who seemed for an instant perplexed . 
`` But how is it I have not seen you on board since we left Calcutta ? '' 
`` Oh , a trifle of sea-sickness -- I 've been staying in my berth . 
The Gulf of Bengal does not agree with me as well as the Indian Ocean . 
And how is Mr. Fogg ? '' 
`` As well and as punctual as ever , not a day behind time ! 
But , Monsieur Fix , you do n't know that we have a young lady with us . '' 
`` A young lady ? '' 
replied the detective , not seeming to comprehend what was said . 
Passepartout thereupon recounted Aouda 's history , the affair at the Bombay pagoda , the purchase of the elephant for two thousand pounds , the rescue , the arrest , and sentence of the Calcutta court , and the restoration of Mr. Fogg and himself to liberty on bail . 
Fix , who was familiar with the last events , seemed to be equally ignorant of all that Passepartout related ; and the later was charmed to find so interested a listener . 
`` But does your master propose to carry this young woman to Europe ? '' 
`` Not at all . 
We are simply going to place her under the protection of one of her relatives , a rich merchant at Hong Kong . '' 
`` Nothing to be done there , '' said Fix to himself , concealing his disappointment . 
`` A glass of gin , Mr. Passepartout ? '' 
`` Willingly , Monsieur Fix . 
We must at least have a friendly glass on board the Rangoon . '' 
SHOWING WHAT HAPPENED ON THE VOYAGE FROM SINGAPORE TO HONG KONG The detective and Passepartout met often on deck after this interview , though Fix was reserved , and did not attempt to induce his companion to divulge any more facts concerning Mr. Fogg . 
He caught a glimpse of that mysterious gentleman once or twice ; but Mr. Fogg usually confined himself to the cabin , where he kept Aouda company , or , according to his inveterate habit , took a hand at whist . 
Passepartout began very seriously to conjecture what strange chance kept Fix still on the route that his master was pursuing . 
It was really worth considering why this certainly very amiable and complacent person , whom he had first met at Suez , had then encountered on board the Mongolia , who disembarked at Bombay , which he announced as his destination , and now turned up so unexpectedly on the Rangoon , was following Mr. Fogg 's tracks step by step . 
What was Fix 's object ? 
Passepartout was ready to wager his Indian shoes -- which he religiously preserved -- that Fix would also leave Hong Kong at the same time with them , and probably on the same steamer . 
Passepartout might have cudgelled his brain for a century without hitting upon the real object which the detective had in view . 
He never could have imagined that Phileas Fogg was being tracked as a robber around the globe . 
But , as it is in human nature to attempt the solution of every mystery , Passepartout suddenly discovered an explanation of Fix 's movements , which was in truth far from unreasonable . 
Fix , he thought , could only be an agent of Mr. Fogg 's friends at the Reform Club , sent to follow him up , and to ascertain that he really went round the world as had been agreed upon . 
`` It 's clear ! '' 
repeated the worthy servant to himself , proud of his shrewdness . 
`` He 's a spy sent to keep us in view ! 
That is n't quite the thing , either , to be spying Mr. Fogg , who is so honourable a man ! 
Ah , gentlemen of the Reform , this shall cost you dear ! '' 
Passepartout , enchanted with his discovery , resolved to say nothing to his master , lest he should be justly offended at this mistrust on the part of his adversaries . 
But he determined to chaff Fix , when he had the chance , with mysterious allusions , which , however , need not betray his real suspicions . 
During the afternoon of Wednesday , 30th October , the Rangoon entered the Strait of Malacca , which separates the peninsula of that name from Sumatra . 
The mountainous and craggy islets intercepted the beauties of this noble island from the view of the travellers . 
The Rangoon weighed anchor at Singapore the next day at four a.m. , to receive coal , having gained half a day on the prescribed time of her arrival . 
Phileas Fogg noted this gain in his journal , and then , accompanied by Aouda , who betrayed a desire for a walk on shore , disembarked . 
Fix , who suspected Mr. Fogg 's every movement , followed them cautiously , without being himself perceived ; while Passepartout , laughing in his sleeve at Fix 's manoeuvres , went about his usual errands . 
The island of Singapore is not imposing in aspect , for there are no mountains ; yet its appearance is not without attractions . 
It is a park checkered by pleasant highways and avenues . 
A handsome carriage , drawn by a sleek pair of New Holland horses , carried Phileas Fogg and Aouda into the midst of rows of palms with brilliant foliage , and of clove-trees , whereof the cloves form the heart of a half-open flower . 
Pepper plants replaced the prickly hedges of European fields ; sago-bushes , large ferns with gorgeous branches , varied the aspect of this tropical clime ; while nutmeg-trees in full foliage filled the air with a penetrating perfume . 
Agile and grinning bands of monkeys skipped about in the trees , nor were tigers wanting in the jungles . 
After a drive of two hours through the country , Aouda and Mr. Fogg returned to the town , which is a vast collection of heavy-looking , irregular houses , surrounded by charming gardens rich in tropical fruits and plants ; and at ten o'clock they re-embarked , closely followed by the detective , who had kept them constantly in sight . 
Passepartout , who had been purchasing several dozen mangoes -- a fruit as large as good-sized apples , of a dark-brown colour outside and a bright red within , and whose white pulp , melting in the mouth , affords gourmands a delicious sensation -- was waiting for them on deck . 
He was only too glad to offer some mangoes to Aouda , who thanked him very gracefully for them . 
At eleven o'clock the Rangoon rode out of Singapore harbour , and in a few hours the high mountains of Malacca , with their forests , inhabited by the most beautifully-furred tigers in the world , were lost to view . 
Singapore is distant some thirteen hundred miles from the island of Hong Kong , which is a little English colony near the Chinese coast . 
Phileas Fogg hoped to accomplish the journey in six days , so as to be in time for the steamer which would leave on the 6th of November for Yokohama , the principal Japanese port . 
The Rangoon had a large quota of passengers , many of whom disembarked at Singapore , among them a number of Indians , Ceylonese , Chinamen , Malays , and Portuguese , mostly second-class travellers . 
The weather , which had hitherto been fine , changed with the last quarter of the moon . 
The sea rolled heavily , and the wind at intervals rose almost to a storm , but happily blew from the south-west , and thus aided the steamer 's progress . 
The captain as often as possible put up his sails , and under the double action of steam and sail the vessel made rapid progress along the coasts of Anam and Cochin China . 
Owing to the defective construction of the Rangoon , however , unusual precautions became necessary in unfavourable weather ; but the loss of time which resulted from this cause , while it nearly drove Passepartout out of his senses , did not seem to affect his master in the least . 
Passepartout blamed the captain , the engineer , and the crew , and consigned all who were connected with the ship to the land where the pepper grows . 
Perhaps the thought of the gas , which was remorselessly burning at his expense in Saville Row , had something to do with his hot impatience . 
`` You are in a great hurry , then , '' said Fix to him one day , `` to reach Hong Kong ? '' 
`` A very great hurry ! '' 
`` Mr. Fogg , I suppose , is anxious to catch the steamer for Yokohama ? '' 
`` Terribly anxious . '' 
`` You believe in this journey around the world , then ? '' 
`` Absolutely . 
Do n't you , Mr. Fix ? '' 
`` I ? 
I do n't believe a word of it . '' 
`` You 're a sly dog ! '' 
said Passepartout , winking at him . 
This expression rather disturbed Fix , without his knowing why . 
Had the Frenchman guessed his real purpose ? 
He knew not what to think . 
But how could Passepartout have discovered that he was a detective ? 
Yet , in speaking as he did , the man evidently meant more than he expressed . 
Passepartout went still further the next day ; he could not hold his tongue . 
`` Mr. Fix , '' said he , in a bantering tone , `` shall we be so unfortunate as to lose you when we get to Hong Kong ? '' 
`` Why , '' responded Fix , a little embarrassed , `` I do n't know ; perhaps -- '' `` Ah , if you would only go on with us ! 
An agent of the Peninsular Company , you know , ca n't stop on the way ! 
You were only going to Bombay , and here you are in China . 
America is not far off , and from America to Europe is only a step . '' 
Fix looked intently at his companion , whose countenance was as serene as possible , and laughed with him . 
But Passepartout persisted in chaffing him by asking him if he made much by his present occupation . 
`` Yes , and no , '' returned Fix ; `` there is good and bad luck in such things . 
But you must understand that I do n't travel at my own expense . '' 
`` Oh , I am quite sure of that ! '' 
cried Passepartout , laughing heartily . 
Fix , fairly puzzled , descended to his cabin and gave himself up to his reflections . 
He was evidently suspected ; somehow or other the Frenchman had found out that he was a detective . 
But had he told his master ? 
What part was he playing in all this : was he an accomplice or not ? 
Was the game , then , up ? 
Fix spent several hours turning these things over in his mind , sometimes thinking that all was lost , then persuading himself that Fogg was ignorant of his presence , and then undecided what course it was best to take . 
Nevertheless , he preserved his coolness of mind , and at last resolved to deal plainly with Passepartout . 
If he did not find it practicable to arrest Fogg at Hong Kong , and if Fogg made preparations to leave that last foothold of English territory , he , Fix , would tell Passepartout all . 
Either the servant was the accomplice of his master , and in this case the master knew of his operations , and he should fail ; or else the servant knew nothing about the robbery , and then his interest would be to abandon the robber . 
Such was the situation between Fix and Passepartout . 
Meanwhile Phileas Fogg moved about above them in the most majestic and unconscious indifference . 
He was passing methodically in his orbit around the world , regardless of the lesser stars which gravitated around him . 
Yet there was near by what the astronomers would call a disturbing star , which might have produced an agitation in this gentleman 's heart . 
But no ! 
the charms of Aouda failed to act , to Passepartout 's great surprise ; and the disturbances , if they existed , would have been more difficult to calculate than those of Uranus which led to the discovery of Neptune . 
It was every day an increasing wonder to Passepartout , who read in Aouda 's eyes the depths of her gratitude to his master . 
Phileas Fogg , though brave and gallant , must be , he thought , quite heartless . 
As to the sentiment which this journey might have awakened in him , there was clearly no trace of such a thing ; while poor Passepartout existed in perpetual reveries . 
One day he was leaning on the railing of the engine-room , and was observing the engine , when a sudden pitch of the steamer threw the screw out of the water . 
The steam came hissing out of the valves ; and this made Passepartout indignant . 
`` The valves are not sufficiently charged ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` We are not going . 
Oh , these English ! 
If this was an American craft , we should blow up , perhaps , but we should at all events go faster ! '' 
IN WHICH PHILEAS FOGG , PASSEPARTOUT , AND FIX GO EACH ABOUT HIS BUSINESS The weather was bad during the latter days of the voyage . 
The wind , obstinately remaining in the north-west , blew a gale , and retarded the steamer . 
The Rangoon rolled heavily and the passengers became impatient of the long , monstrous waves which the wind raised before their path . 
A sort of tempest arose on the 3rd of November , the squall knocking the vessel about with fury , and the waves running high . 
The Rangoon reefed all her sails , and even the rigging proved too much , whistling and shaking amid the squall . 
The steamer was forced to proceed slowly , and the captain estimated that she would reach Hong Kong twenty hours behind time , and more if the storm lasted . 
Phileas Fogg gazed at the tempestuous sea , which seemed to be struggling especially to delay him , with his habitual tranquillity . 
He never changed countenance for an instant , though a delay of twenty hours , by making him too late for the Yokohama boat , would almost inevitably cause the loss of the wager . 
But this man of nerve manifested neither impatience nor annoyance ; it seemed as if the storm were a part of his programme , and had been foreseen . 
Aouda was amazed to find him as calm as he had been from the first time she saw him . 
Fix did not look at the state of things in the same light . 
The storm greatly pleased him . 
His satisfaction would have been complete had the Rangoon been forced to retreat before the violence of wind and waves . 
Each delay filled him with hope , for it became more and more probable that Fogg would be obliged to remain some days at Hong Kong ; and now the heavens themselves became his allies , with the gusts and squalls . 
It mattered not that they made him sea-sick -- he made no account of this inconvenience ; and , whilst his body was writhing under their effects , his spirit bounded with hopeful exultation . 
Passepartout was enraged beyond expression by the unpropitious weather . 
Everything had gone so well till now ! 
Earth and sea had seemed to be at his master 's service ; steamers and railways obeyed him ; wind and steam united to speed his journey . 
Had the hour of adversity come ? 
Passepartout was as much excited as if the twenty thousand pounds were to come from his own pocket . 
The storm exasperated him , the gale made him furious , and he longed to lash the obstinate sea into obedience . 
Poor fellow ! 
Fix carefully concealed from him his own satisfaction , for , had he betrayed it , Passepartout could scarcely have restrained himself from personal violence . 
Passepartout remained on deck as long as the tempest lasted , being unable to remain quiet below , and taking it into his head to aid the progress of the ship by lending a hand with the crew . 
He overwhelmed the captain , officers , and sailors , who could not help laughing at his impatience , with all sorts of questions . 
He wanted to know exactly how long the storm was going to last ; whereupon he was referred to the barometer , which seemed to have no intention of rising . 
Passepartout shook it , but with no perceptible effect ; for neither shaking nor maledictions could prevail upon it to change its mind . 
On the 4th , however , the sea became more calm , and the storm lessened its violence ; the wind veered southward , and was once more favourable . 
Passepartout cleared up with the weather . 
Some of the sails were unfurled , and the Rangoon resumed its most rapid speed . 
The time lost could not , however , be regained . 
Land was not signalled until five o'clock on the morning of the 6th ; the steamer was due on the 5th . 
Phileas Fogg was twenty-four hours behind-hand , and the Yokohama steamer would , of course , be missed . 
The pilot went on board at six , and took his place on the bridge , to guide the Rangoon through the channels to the port of Hong Kong . 
Passepartout longed to ask him if the steamer had left for Yokohama ; but he dared not , for he wished to preserve the spark of hope , which still remained till the last moment . 
He had confided his anxiety to Fix who -- the sly rascal ! 
-- tried to console him by saying that Mr. Fogg would be in time if he took the next boat ; but this only put Passepartout in a passion . 
Mr. Fogg , bolder than his servant , did not hesitate to approach the pilot , and tranquilly ask him if he knew when a steamer would leave Hong Kong for Yokohama . 
`` At high tide to-morrow morning , '' answered the pilot . 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Mr. Fogg , without betraying any astonishment . 
Passepartout , who heard what passed , would willingly have embraced the pilot , while Fix would have been glad to twist his neck . 
`` What is the steamer 's name ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` The Carnatic . '' 
`` Ought she not to have gone yesterday ? '' 
`` Yes , sir ; but they had to repair one of her boilers , and so her departure was postponed till to-morrow . '' 
`` Thank you , '' returned Mr. Fogg , descending mathematically to the saloon . 
Passepartout clasped the pilot 's hand and shook it heartily in his delight , exclaiming , `` Pilot , you are the best of good fellows ! '' 
The pilot probably does not know to this day why his responses won him this enthusiastic greeting . 
He remounted the bridge , and guided the steamer through the flotilla of junks , tankas , and fishing boats which crowd the harbour of Hong Kong . 
At one o'clock the Rangoon was at the quay , and the passengers were going ashore . 
Chance had strangely favoured Phileas Fogg , for had not the Carnatic been forced to lie over for repairing her boilers , she would have left on the 6th of November , and the passengers for Japan would have been obliged to await for a week the sailing of the next steamer . 
Mr. Fogg was , it is true , twenty-four hours behind his time ; but this could not seriously imperil the remainder of his tour . 
The steamer which crossed the Pacific from Yokohama to San Francisco made a direct connection with that from Hong Kong , and it could not sail until the latter reached Yokohama ; and if Mr. Fogg was twenty-four hours late on reaching Yokohama , this time would no doubt be easily regained in the voyage of twenty-two days across the Pacific . 
He found himself , then , about twenty-four hours behind-hand , thirty-five days after leaving London . 
The Carnatic was announced to leave Hong Kong at five the next morning . 
Mr. Fogg had sixteen hours in which to attend to his business there , which was to deposit Aouda safely with her wealthy relative . 
On landing , he conducted her to a palanquin , in which they repaired to the Club Hotel . 
A room was engaged for the young woman , and Mr. Fogg , after seeing that she wanted for nothing , set out in search of her cousin Jeejeeh . 
He instructed Passepartout to remain at the hotel until his return , that Aouda might not be left entirely alone . 
Mr. Fogg repaired to the Exchange , where , he did not doubt , every one would know so wealthy and considerable a personage as the Parsee merchant . 
Meeting a broker , he made the inquiry , to learn that Jeejeeh had left China two years before , and , retiring from business with an immense fortune , had taken up his residence in Europe -- in Holland the broker thought , with the merchants of which country he had principally traded . 
Phileas Fogg returned to the hotel , begged a moment 's conversation with Aouda , and without more ado , apprised her that Jeejeeh was no longer at Hong Kong , but probably in Holland . 
Aouda at first said nothing . 
She passed her hand across her forehead , and reflected a few moments . 
Then , in her sweet , soft voice , she said : `` What ought I to do , Mr. Fogg ? '' 
`` It is very simple , '' responded the gentleman . 
`` Go on to Europe . '' 
`` But I can not intrude -- '' `` You do not intrude , nor do you in the least embarrass my project . 
Passepartout ! '' 
`` Monsieur . '' 
`` Go to the Carnatic , and engage three cabins . '' 
Passepartout , delighted that the young woman , who was very gracious to him , was going to continue the journey with them , went off at a brisk gait to obey his master 's order . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT TAKES A TOO GREAT INTEREST IN HIS MASTER , AND WHAT COMES OF IT Hong Kong is an island which came into the possession of the English by the Treaty of Nankin , after the war of 1842 ; and the colonising genius of the English has created upon it an important city and an excellent port . 
The island is situated at the mouth of the Canton River , and is separated by about sixty miles from the Portuguese town of Macao , on the opposite coast . 
Hong Kong has beaten Macao in the struggle for the Chinese trade , and now the greater part of the transportation of Chinese goods finds its depot at the former place . 
Docks , hospitals , wharves , a Gothic cathedral , a government house , macadamised streets , give to Hong Kong the appearance of a town in Kent or Surrey transferred by some strange magic to the antipodes . 
Passepartout wandered , with his hands in his pockets , towards the Victoria port , gazing as he went at the curious palanquins and other modes of conveyance , and the groups of Chinese , Japanese , and Europeans who passed to and fro in the streets . 
Hong Kong seemed to him not unlike Bombay , Calcutta , and Singapore , since , like them , it betrayed everywhere the evidence of English supremacy . 
At the Victoria port he found a confused mass of ships of all nations : English , French , American , and Dutch , men-of-war and trading vessels , Japanese and Chinese junks , sempas , tankas , and flower-boats , which formed so many floating parterres . 
Passepartout noticed in the crowd a number of the natives who seemed very old and were dressed in yellow . 
On going into a barber 's to get shaved he learned that these ancient men were all at least eighty years old , at which age they are permitted to wear yellow , which is the Imperial colour . 
Passepartout , without exactly knowing why , thought this very funny . 
On reaching the quay where they were to embark on the Carnatic , he was not astonished to find Fix walking up and down . 
The detective seemed very much disturbed and disappointed . 
`` This is bad , '' muttered Passepartout , `` for the gentlemen of the Reform Club ! '' 
He accosted Fix with a merry smile , as if he had not perceived that gentleman 's chagrin . 
The detective had , indeed , good reasons to inveigh against the bad luck which pursued him . 
The warrant had not come ! 
It was certainly on the way , but as certainly it could not now reach Hong Kong for several days ; and , this being the last English territory on Mr. Fogg 's route , the robber would escape , unless he could manage to detain him . 
`` Well , Monsieur Fix , '' said Passepartout , `` have you decided to go with us so far as America ? '' 
`` Yes , '' returned Fix , through his set teeth . 
`` Good ! '' 
exclaimed Passepartout , laughing heartily . 
`` I knew you could not persuade yourself to separate from us . 
Come and engage your berth . '' 
They entered the steamer office and secured cabins for four persons . 
The clerk , as he gave them the tickets , informed them that , the repairs on the Carnatic having been completed , the steamer would leave that very evening , and not next morning , as had been announced . 
`` That will suit my master all the better , '' said Passepartout . 
`` I will go and let him know . '' 
Fix now decided to make a bold move ; he resolved to tell Passepartout all . 
It seemed to be the only possible means of keeping Phileas Fogg several days longer at Hong Kong . 
He accordingly invited his companion into a tavern which caught his eye on the quay . 
On entering , they found themselves in a large room handsomely decorated , at the end of which was a large camp-bed furnished with cushions . 
Several persons lay upon this bed in a deep sleep . 
At the small tables which were arranged about the room some thirty customers were drinking English beer , porter , gin , and brandy ; smoking , the while , long red clay pipes stuffed with little balls of opium mingled with essence of rose . 
From time to time one of the smokers , overcome with the narcotic , would slip under the table , whereupon the waiters , taking him by the head and feet , carried and laid him upon the bed . 
The bed already supported twenty of these stupefied sots . 
Fix and Passepartout saw that they were in a smoking-house haunted by those wretched , cadaverous , idiotic creatures to whom the English merchants sell every year the miserable drug called opium , to the amount of one million four hundred thousand pounds -- thousands devoted to one of the most despicable vices which afflict humanity ! 
The Chinese government has in vain attempted to deal with the evil by stringent laws . 
It passed gradually from the rich , to whom it was at first exclusively reserved , to the lower classes , and then its ravages could not be arrested . 
Opium is smoked everywhere , at all times , by men and women , in the Celestial Empire ; and , once accustomed to it , the victims can not dispense with it , except by suffering horrible bodily contortions and agonies . 
A great smoker can smoke as many as eight pipes a day ; but he dies in five years . 
It was in one of these dens that Fix and Passepartout , in search of a friendly glass , found themselves . 
Passepartout had no money , but willingly accepted Fix 's invitation in the hope of returning the obligation at some future time . 
They ordered two bottles of port , to which the Frenchman did ample justice , whilst Fix observed him with close attention . 
They chatted about the journey , and Passepartout was especially merry at the idea that Fix was going to continue it with them . 
When the bottles were empty , however , he rose to go and tell his master of the change in the time of the sailing of the Carnatic . 
Fix caught him by the arm , and said , `` Wait a moment . '' 
`` What for , Mr. Fix ? '' 
`` I want to have a serious talk with you . '' 
`` A serious talk ! '' 
cried Passepartout , drinking up the little wine that was left in the bottom of his glass . 
`` Well , we 'll talk about it to-morrow ; I have n't time now . '' 
`` Stay ! 
What I have to say concerns your master . '' 
Passepartout , at this , looked attentively at his companion . 
Fix 's face seemed to have a singular expression . 
He resumed his seat . 
`` What is it that you have to say ? '' 
Fix placed his hand upon Passepartout 's arm , and , lowering his voice , said , `` You have guessed who I am ? '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
said Passepartout , smiling . 
`` Then I 'm going to tell you everything -- '' `` Now that I know everything , my friend ! 
Ah ! 
that 's very good . 
But go on , go on . 
First , though , let me tell you that those gentlemen have put themselves to a useless expense . '' 
`` Useless ! '' 
said Fix . 
`` You speak confidently . 
It 's clear that you do n't know how large the sum is . '' 
`` Of course I do , '' returned Passepartout . 
`` Twenty thousand pounds . '' 
`` Fifty-five thousand ! '' 
answered Fix , pressing his companion 's hand . 
`` What ! '' 
cried the Frenchman . 
`` Has Monsieur Fogg dared -- fifty-five thousand pounds ! 
Well , there 's all the more reason for not losing an instant , '' he continued , getting up hastily . 
Fix pushed Passepartout back in his chair , and resumed : `` Fifty-five thousand pounds ; and if I succeed , I get two thousand pounds . 
If you 'll help me , I 'll let you have five hundred of them . '' 
`` Help you ? '' 
cried Passepartout , whose eyes were standing wide open . 
`` Yes ; help me keep Mr. Fogg here for two or three days . '' 
`` Why , what are you saying ? 
Those gentlemen are not satisfied with following my master and suspecting his honour , but they must try to put obstacles in his way ! 
I blush for them ! '' 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
`` I mean that it is a piece of shameful trickery . 
They might as well waylay Mr. Fogg and put his money in their pockets ! '' 
`` That 's just what we count on doing . '' 
`` It 's a conspiracy , then , '' cried Passepartout , who became more and more excited as the liquor mounted in his head , for he drank without perceiving it . 
`` A real conspiracy ! 
And gentlemen , too . 
Bah ! '' 
Fix began to be puzzled . 
`` Members of the Reform Club ! '' 
continued Passepartout . 
`` You must know , Monsieur Fix , that my master is an honest man , and that , when he makes a wager , he tries to win it fairly ! '' 
`` But who do you think I am ? '' 
asked Fix , looking at him intently . 
`` Parbleu ! 
An agent of the members of the Reform Club , sent out here to interrupt my master 's journey . 
But , though I found you out some time ago , I 've taken good care to say nothing about it to Mr. Fogg . '' 
`` He knows nothing , then ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' replied Passepartout , again emptying his glass . 
The detective passed his hand across his forehead , hesitating before he spoke again . 
What should he do ? 
Passepartout 's mistake seemed sincere , but it made his design more difficult . 
It was evident that the servant was not the master 's accomplice , as Fix had been inclined to suspect . 
`` Well , '' said the detective to himself , `` as he is not an accomplice , he will help me . '' 
He had no time to lose : Fogg must be detained at Hong Kong , so he resolved to make a clean breast of it . 
`` Listen to me , '' said Fix abruptly . 
`` I am not , as you think , an agent of the members of the Reform Club -- '' `` Bah ! '' 
retorted Passepartout , with an air of raillery . 
`` I am a police detective , sent out here by the London office . '' 
`` You , a detective ? '' 
`` I will prove it . 
Here is my commission . '' 
Passepartout was speechless with astonishment when Fix displayed this document , the genuineness of which could not be doubted . 
`` Mr. Fogg 's wager , '' resumed Fix , `` is only a pretext , of which you and the gentlemen of the Reform are dupes . 
He had a motive for securing your innocent complicity . '' 
`` But why ? '' 
`` Listen . 
On the 28th of last September a robbery of fifty-five thousand pounds was committed at the Bank of England by a person whose description was fortunately secured . 
Here is his description ; it answers exactly to that of Mr. Phileas Fogg . '' 
`` What nonsense ! '' 
cried Passepartout , striking the table with his fist . 
`` My master is the most honourable of men ! '' 
`` How can you tell ? 
You know scarcely anything about him . 
You went into his service the day he came away ; and he came away on a foolish pretext , without trunks , and carrying a large amount in banknotes . 
And yet you are bold enough to assert that he is an honest man ! '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' repeated the poor fellow , mechanically . 
`` Would you like to be arrested as his accomplice ? '' 
Passepartout , overcome by what he had heard , held his head between his hands , and did not dare to look at the detective . 
Phileas Fogg , the saviour of Aouda , that brave and generous man , a robber ! 
And yet how many presumptions there were against him ! 
Passepartout essayed to reject the suspicions which forced themselves upon his mind ; he did not wish to believe that his master was guilty . 
`` Well , what do you want of me ? '' 
said he , at last , with an effort . 
`` See here , '' replied Fix ; `` I have tracked Mr. Fogg to this place , but as yet I have failed to receive the warrant of arrest for which I sent to London . 
You must help me to keep him here in Hong Kong -- '' `` I ! 
But I -- '' `` I will share with you the two thousand pounds reward offered by the Bank of England . '' 
`` Never ! '' 
replied Passepartout , who tried to rise , but fell back , exhausted in mind and body . 
`` Mr. Fix , '' he stammered , `` even should what you say be true -- if my master is really the robber you are seeking for -- which I deny -- I have been , am , in his service ; I have seen his generosity and goodness ; and I will never betray him -- not for all the gold in the world . 
I come from a village where they do n't eat that kind of bread ! '' 
`` You refuse ? '' 
`` I refuse . '' 
`` Consider that I 've said nothing , '' said Fix ; `` and let us drink . '' 
`` Yes ; let us drink ! '' 
Passepartout felt himself yielding more and more to the effects of the liquor . 
Fix , seeing that he must , at all hazards , be separated from his master , wished to entirely overcome him . 
Some pipes full of opium lay upon the table . 
Fix slipped one into Passepartout 's hand . 
He took it , put it between his lips , lit it , drew several puffs , and his head , becoming heavy under the influence of the narcotic , fell upon the table . 
`` At last ! '' 
said Fix , seeing Passepartout unconscious . 
`` Mr. Fogg will not be informed of the Carnatic 's departure ; and , if he is , he will have to go without this cursed Frenchman ! '' 
And , after paying his bill , Fix left the tavern . 
IN WHICH FIX COMES FACE TO FACE WITH PHILEAS FOGG While these events were passing at the opium-house , Mr. Fogg , unconscious of the danger he was in of losing the steamer , was quietly escorting Aouda about the streets of the English quarter , making the necessary purchases for the long voyage before them . 
It was all very well for an Englishman like Mr. Fogg to make the tour of the world with a carpet-bag ; a lady could not be expected to travel comfortably under such conditions . 
He acquitted his task with characteristic serenity , and invariably replied to the remonstrances of his fair companion , who was confused by his patience and generosity : `` It is in the interest of my journey -- a part of my programme . '' 
The purchases made , they returned to the hotel , where they dined at a sumptuously served table-d'hote ; after which Aouda , shaking hands with her protector after the English fashion , retired to her room for rest . 
Mr. Fogg absorbed himself throughout the evening in the perusal of The Times and Illustrated London News . 
Had he been capable of being astonished at anything , it would have been not to see his servant return at bedtime . 
But , knowing that the steamer was not to leave for Yokohama until the next morning , he did not disturb himself about the matter . 
When Passepartout did not appear the next morning to answer his master 's bell , Mr. Fogg , not betraying the least vexation , contented himself with taking his carpet-bag , calling Aouda , and sending for a palanquin . 
It was then eight o'clock ; at half-past nine , it being then high tide , the Carnatic would leave the harbour . 
Mr. Fogg and Aouda got into the palanquin , their luggage being brought after on a wheelbarrow , and half an hour later stepped upon the quay whence they were to embark . 
Mr. Fogg then learned that the Carnatic had sailed the evening before . 
He had expected to find not only the steamer , but his domestic , and was forced to give up both ; but no sign of disappointment appeared on his face , and he merely remarked to Aouda , `` It is an accident , madam ; nothing more . '' 
At this moment a man who had been observing him attentively approached . 
It was Fix , who , bowing , addressed Mr. Fogg : `` Were you not , like me , sir , a passenger by the Rangoon , which arrived yesterday ? '' 
`` I was , sir , '' replied Mr. Fogg coldly . 
`` But I have not the honour -- '' `` Pardon me ; I thought I should find your servant here . '' 
`` Do you know where he is , sir ? '' 
asked Aouda anxiously . 
`` What ! '' 
responded Fix , feigning surprise . 
`` Is he not with you ? '' 
`` No , '' said Aouda . 
`` He has not made his appearance since yesterday . 
Could he have gone on board the Carnatic without us ? '' 
`` Without you , madam ? '' 
answered the detective . 
`` Excuse me , did you intend to sail in the Carnatic ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` So did I , madam , and I am excessively disappointed . 
The Carnatic , its repairs being completed , left Hong Kong twelve hours before the stated time , without any notice being given ; and we must now wait a week for another steamer . '' 
As he said `` a week '' Fix felt his heart leap for joy . 
Fogg detained at Hong Kong for a week ! 
There would be time for the warrant to arrive , and fortune at last favoured the representative of the law . 
His horror may be imagined when he heard Mr. Fogg say , in his placid voice , `` But there are other vessels besides the Carnatic , it seems to me , in the harbour of Hong Kong . '' 
And , offering his arm to Aouda , he directed his steps toward the docks in search of some craft about to start . 
Fix , stupefied , followed ; it seemed as if he were attached to Mr. Fogg by an invisible thread . 
Chance , however , appeared really to have abandoned the man it had hitherto served so well . 
For three hours Phileas Fogg wandered about the docks , with the determination , if necessary , to charter a vessel to carry him to Yokohama ; but he could only find vessels which were loading or unloading , and which could not therefore set sail . 
Fix began to hope again . 
But Mr. Fogg , far from being discouraged , was continuing his search , resolved not to stop if he had to resort to Macao , when he was accosted by a sailor on one of the wharves . 
`` Is your honour looking for a boat ? '' 
`` Have you a boat ready to sail ? '' 
`` Yes , your honour ; a pilot-boat -- No. 43 -- the best in the harbour . '' 
`` Does she go fast ? '' 
`` Between eight and nine knots the hour . 
Will you look at her ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` Your honour will be satisfied with her . 
Is it for a sea excursion ? '' 
`` No ; for a voyage . '' 
`` A voyage ? '' 
`` Yes , will you agree to take me to Yokohama ? '' 
The sailor leaned on the railing , opened his eyes wide , and said , `` Is your honour joking ? '' 
`` No . 
I have missed the Carnatic , and I must get to Yokohama by the 14th at the latest , to take the boat for San Francisco . '' 
`` I am sorry , '' said the sailor ; `` but it is impossible . '' 
`` I offer you a hundred pounds per day , and an additional reward of two hundred pounds if I reach Yokohama in time . '' 
`` Are you in earnest ? '' 
`` Very much so . '' 
The pilot walked away a little distance , and gazed out to sea , evidently struggling between the anxiety to gain a large sum and the fear of venturing so far . 
Fix was in mortal suspense . 
Mr. Fogg turned to Aouda and asked her , `` You would not be afraid , would you , madam ? '' 
`` Not with you , Mr. Fogg , '' was her answer . 
The pilot now returned , shuffling his hat in his hands . 
`` Well , pilot ? '' 
said Mr. Fogg . 
`` Well , your honour , '' replied he , `` I could not risk myself , my men , or my little boat of scarcely twenty tons on so long a voyage at this time of year . 
Besides , we could not reach Yokohama in time , for it is sixteen hundred and sixty miles from Hong Kong . '' 
`` Only sixteen hundred , '' said Mr. Fogg . 
`` It 's the same thing . '' 
Fix breathed more freely . 
`` But , '' added the pilot , `` it might be arranged another way . '' 
Fix ceased to breathe at all . 
`` How ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg . 
`` By going to Nagasaki , at the extreme south of Japan , or even to Shanghai , which is only eight hundred miles from here . 
In going to Shanghai we should not be forced to sail wide of the Chinese coast , which would be a great advantage , as the currents run northward , and would aid us . 
`` Pilot , '' said Mr. Fogg , `` I must take the American steamer at Yokohama , and not at Shanghai or Nagasaki . '' 
`` Why not ? '' 
returned the pilot . 
`` The San Francisco steamer does not start from Yokohama . 
It puts in at Yokohama and Nagasaki , but it starts from Shanghai . '' 
`` You are sure of that ? '' 
`` Perfectly . '' 
`` And when does the boat leave Shanghai ? '' 
`` On the 11th , at seven in the evening . 
We have , therefore , four days before us , that is ninety-six hours ; and in that time , if we had good luck and a south-west wind , and the sea was calm , we could make those eight hundred miles to Shanghai . '' 
`` And you could go -- '' `` In an hour ; as soon as provisions could be got aboard and the sails put up . '' 
`` It is a bargain . 
Are you the master of the boat ? '' 
`` Yes ; John Bunsby , master of the Tankadere . '' 
`` Would you like some earnest-money ? '' 
`` If it would not put your honour out -- '' `` Here are two hundred pounds on account sir , '' added Phileas Fogg , turning to Fix , `` if you would like to take advantage -- '' `` Thanks , sir ; I was about to ask the favour . '' 
`` Very well . 
In half an hour we shall go on board . '' 
`` But poor Passepartout ? '' 
urged Aouda , who was much disturbed by the servant 's disappearance . 
`` I shall do all I can to find him , '' replied Phileas Fogg . 
While Fix , in a feverish , nervous state , repaired to the pilot-boat , the others directed their course to the police-station at Hong Kong . 
Phileas Fogg there gave Passepartout 's description , and left a sum of money to be spent in the search for him . 
The same formalities having been gone through at the French consulate , and the palanquin having stopped at the hotel for the luggage , which had been sent back there , they returned to the wharf . 
It was now three o'clock ; and pilot-boat No. 43 , with its crew on board , and its provisions stored away , was ready for departure . 
The Tankadere was a neat little craft of twenty tons , as gracefully built as if she were a racing yacht . 
Her shining copper sheathing , her galvanised iron-work , her deck , white as ivory , betrayed the pride taken by John Bunsby in making her presentable . 
Her two masts leaned a trifle backward ; she carried brigantine , foresail , storm-jib , and standing-jib , and was well rigged for running before the wind ; and she seemed capable of brisk speed , which , indeed , she had already proved by gaining several prizes in pilot-boat races . 
The crew of the Tankadere was composed of John Bunsby , the master , and four hardy mariners , who were familiar with the Chinese seas . 
John Bunsby , himself , a man of forty-five or thereabouts , vigorous , sunburnt , with a sprightly expression of the eye , and energetic and self-reliant countenance , would have inspired confidence in the most timid . 
Phileas Fogg and Aouda went on board , where they found Fix already installed . 
Below deck was a square cabin , of which the walls bulged out in the form of cots , above a circular divan ; in the centre was a table provided with a swinging lamp . 
The accommodation was confined , but neat . 
`` I am sorry to have nothing better to offer you , '' said Mr. Fogg to Fix , who bowed without responding . 
The detective had a feeling akin to humiliation in profiting by the kindness of Mr. Fogg . 
`` It 's certain , '' thought he , `` though rascal as he is , he is a polite one ! '' 
The sails and the English flag were hoisted at ten minutes past three . 
Mr. Fogg and Aouda , who were seated on deck , cast a last glance at the quay , in the hope of espying Passepartout . 
Fix was not without his fears lest chance should direct the steps of the unfortunate servant , whom he had so badly treated , in this direction ; in which case an explanation the reverse of satisfactory to the detective must have ensued . 
But the Frenchman did not appear , and , without doubt , was still lying under the stupefying influence of the opium . 
John Bunsby , master , at length gave the order to start , and the Tankadere , taking the wind under her brigantine , foresail , and standing-jib , bounded briskly forward over the waves . 
IN WHICH THE MASTER OF THE `` TANKADERE '' RUNS GREAT RISK OF LOSING A REWARD OF TWO HUNDRED POUNDS This voyage of eight hundred miles was a perilous venture on a craft of twenty tons , and at that season of the year . 
The Chinese seas are usually boisterous , subject to terrible gales of wind , and especially during the equinoxes ; and it was now early November . 
It would clearly have been to the master 's advantage to carry his passengers to Yokohama , since he was paid a certain sum per day ; but he would have been rash to attempt such a voyage , and it was imprudent even to attempt to reach Shanghai . 
But John Bunsby believed in the Tankadere , which rode on the waves like a seagull ; and perhaps he was not wrong . 
Late in the day they passed through the capricious channels of Hong Kong , and the Tankadere , impelled by favourable winds , conducted herself admirably . 
`` I do not need , pilot , '' said Phileas Fogg , when they got into the open sea , `` to advise you to use all possible speed . '' 
`` Trust me , your honour . 
We are carrying all the sail the wind will let us . 
The poles would add nothing , and are only used when we are going into port . '' 
`` Its your trade , not mine , pilot , and I confide in you . '' 
Phileas Fogg , with body erect and legs wide apart , standing like a sailor , gazed without staggering at the swelling waters . 
The young woman , who was seated aft , was profoundly affected as she looked out upon the ocean , darkening now with the twilight , on which she had ventured in so frail a vessel . 
Above her head rustled the white sails , which seemed like great white wings . 
The boat , carried forward by the wind , seemed to be flying in the air . 
Night came . 
The moon was entering her first quarter , and her insufficient light would soon die out in the mist on the horizon . 
Clouds were rising from the east , and already overcast a part of the heavens . 
The pilot had hung out his lights , which was very necessary in these seas crowded with vessels bound landward ; for collisions are not uncommon occurrences , and , at the speed she was going , the least shock would shatter the gallant little craft . 
Fix , seated in the bow , gave himself up to meditation . 
He kept apart from his fellow-travellers , knowing Mr. Fogg 's taciturn tastes ; besides , he did not quite like to talk to the man whose favours he had accepted . 
He was thinking , too , of the future . 
It seemed certain that Fogg would not stop at Yokohama , but would at once take the boat for San Francisco ; and the vast extent of America would ensure him impunity and safety . 
Fogg 's plan appeared to him the simplest in the world . 
Instead of sailing directly from England to the United States , like a common villain , he had traversed three quarters of the globe , so as to gain the American continent more surely ; and there , after throwing the police off his track , he would quietly enjoy himself with the fortune stolen from the bank . 
But , once in the United States , what should he , Fix , do ? 
Should he abandon this man ? 
No , a hundred times no ! 
Until he had secured his extradition , he would not lose sight of him for an hour . 
It was his duty , and he would fulfil it to the end . 
At all events , there was one thing to be thankful for ; Passepartout was not with his master ; and it was above all important , after the confidences Fix had imparted to him , that the servant should never have speech with his master . 
Phileas Fogg was also thinking of Passepartout , who had so strangely disappeared . 
Looking at the matter from every point of view , it did not seem to him impossible that , by some mistake , the man might have embarked on the Carnatic at the last moment ; and this was also Aouda 's opinion , who regretted very much the loss of the worthy fellow to whom she owed so much . 
They might then find him at Yokohama ; for , if the Carnatic was carrying him thither , it would be easy to ascertain if he had been on board . 
A brisk breeze arose about ten o'clock ; but , though it might have been prudent to take in a reef , the pilot , after carefully examining the heavens , let the craft remain rigged as before . 
The Tankadere bore sail admirably , as she drew a great deal of water , and everything was prepared for high speed in case of a gale . 
Mr. Fogg and Aouda descended into the cabin at midnight , having been already preceded by Fix , who had lain down on one of the cots . 
The pilot and crew remained on deck all night . 
At sunrise the next day , which was 8th November , the boat had made more than one hundred miles . 
The log indicated a mean speed of between eight and nine miles . 
The Tankadere still carried all sail , and was accomplishing her greatest capacity of speed . 
If the wind held as it was , the chances would be in her favour . 
During the day she kept along the coast , where the currents were favourable ; the coast , irregular in profile , and visible sometimes across the clearings , was at most five miles distant . 
The sea was less boisterous , since the wind came off land -- a fortunate circumstance for the boat , which would suffer , owing to its small tonnage , by a heavy surge on the sea . 
The breeze subsided a little towards noon , and set in from the south-west . 
The pilot put up his poles , but took them down again within two hours , as the wind freshened up anew . 
Mr. Fogg and Aouda , happily unaffected by the roughness of the sea , ate with a good appetite , Fix being invited to share their repast , which he accepted with secret chagrin . 
To travel at this man 's expense and live upon his provisions was not palatable to him . 
Still , he was obliged to eat , and so he ate . 
When the meal was over , he took Mr. Fogg apart , and said , `` sir '' -- this `` sir '' scorched his lips , and he had to control himself to avoid collaring this `` gentleman '' -- `` sir , you have been very kind to give me a passage on this boat . 
But , though my means will not admit of my expending them as freely as you , I must ask to pay my share -- '' `` Let us not speak of that , sir , '' replied Mr. Fogg . 
`` But , if I insist -- '' `` No , sir , '' repeated Mr. Fogg , in a tone which did not admit of a reply . 
`` This enters into my general expenses . '' 
Fix , as he bowed , had a stifled feeling , and , going forward , where he ensconced himself , did not open his mouth for the rest of the day . 
Meanwhile they were progressing famously , and John Bunsby was in high hope . 
He several times assured Mr. Fogg that they would reach Shanghai in time ; to which that gentleman responded that he counted upon it . 
The crew set to work in good earnest , inspired by the reward to be gained . 
There was not a sheet which was not tightened not a sail which was not vigorously hoisted ; not a lurch could be charged to the man at the helm . 
They worked as desperately as if they were contesting in a Royal yacht regatta . 
By evening , the log showed that two hundred and twenty miles had been accomplished from Hong Kong , and Mr. Fogg might hope that he would be able to reach Yokohama without recording any delay in his journal ; in which case , the many misadventures which had overtaken him since he left London would not seriously affect his journey . 
The Tankadere entered the Straits of Fo-Kien , which separate the island of Formosa from the Chinese coast , in the small hours of the night , and crossed the Tropic of Cancer . 
The sea was very rough in the straits , full of eddies formed by the counter-currents , and the chopping waves broke her course , whilst it became very difficult to stand on deck . 
At daybreak the wind began to blow hard again , and the heavens seemed to predict a gale . 
The barometer announced a speedy change , the mercury rising and falling capriciously ; the sea also , in the south-east , raised long surges which indicated a tempest . 
The sun had set the evening before in a red mist , in the midst of the phosphorescent scintillations of the ocean . 
John Bunsby long examined the threatening aspect of the heavens , muttering indistinctly between his teeth . 
At last he said in a low voice to Mr. Fogg , `` Shall I speak out to your honour ? '' 
`` Of course . '' 
`` Well , we are going to have a squall . '' 
`` Is the wind north or south ? '' 
asked Mr. Fogg quietly . 
`` South . 
Look ! 
a typhoon is coming up . '' 
`` Glad it 's a typhoon from the south , for it will carry us forward . '' 
`` Oh , if you take it that way , '' said John Bunsby , `` I 've nothing more to say . '' 
John Bunsby 's suspicions were confirmed . 
At a less advanced season of the year the typhoon , according to a famous meteorologist , would have passed away like a luminous cascade of electric flame ; but in the winter equinox it was to be feared that it would burst upon them with great violence . 
The pilot took his precautions in advance . 
He reefed all sail , the pole-masts were dispensed with ; all hands went forward to the bows . 
A single triangular sail , of strong canvas , was hoisted as a storm-jib , so as to hold the wind from behind . 
Then they waited . 
John Bunsby had requested his passengers to go below ; but this imprisonment in so narrow a space , with little air , and the boat bouncing in the gale , was far from pleasant . 
Neither Mr. Fogg , Fix , nor Aouda consented to leave the deck . 
The storm of rain and wind descended upon them towards eight o'clock . 
With but its bit of sail , the Tankadere was lifted like a feather by a wind , an idea of whose violence can scarcely be given . 
To compare her speed to four times that of a locomotive going on full steam would be below the truth . 
The boat scudded thus northward during the whole day , borne on by monstrous waves , preserving always , fortunately , a speed equal to theirs . 
Twenty times she seemed almost to be submerged by these mountains of water which rose behind her ; but the adroit management of the pilot saved her . 
The passengers were often bathed in spray , but they submitted to it philosophically . 
Fix cursed it , no doubt ; but Aouda , with her eyes fastened upon her protector , whose coolness amazed her , showed herself worthy of him , and bravely weathered the storm . 
As for Phileas Fogg , it seemed just as if the typhoon were a part of his programme . 
Up to this time the Tankadere had always held her course to the north ; but towards evening the wind , veering three quarters , bore down from the north-west . 
The boat , now lying in the trough of the waves , shook and rolled terribly ; the sea struck her with fearful violence . 
At night the tempest increased in violence . 
John Bunsby saw the approach of darkness and the rising of the storm with dark misgivings . 
He thought awhile , and then asked his crew if it was not time to slacken speed . 
After a consultation he approached Mr. Fogg , and said , `` I think , your honour , that we should do well to make for one of the ports on the coast . '' 
`` I think so too . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the pilot . 
`` But which one ? '' 
`` I know of but one , '' returned Mr. Fogg tranquilly . 
`` And that is -- '' `` Shanghai . '' 
The pilot , at first , did not seem to comprehend ; he could scarcely realise so much determination and tenacity . 
Then he cried , `` Well -- yes ! 
Your honour is right . 
To Shanghai ! '' 
So the Tankadere kept steadily on her northward track . 
The night was really terrible ; it would be a miracle if the craft did not founder . 
Twice it could have been all over with her if the crew had not been constantly on the watch . 
Aouda was exhausted , but did not utter a complaint . 
More than once Mr. Fogg rushed to protect her from the violence of the waves . 
Day reappeared . 
The tempest still raged with undiminished fury ; but the wind now returned to the south-east . 
It was a favourable change , and the Tankadere again bounded forward on this mountainous sea , though the waves crossed each other , and imparted shocks and counter-shocks which would have crushed a craft less solidly built . 
From time to time the coast was visible through the broken mist , but no vessel was in sight . 
The Tankadere was alone upon the sea . 
There were some signs of a calm at noon , and these became more distinct as the sun descended toward the horizon . 
The tempest had been as brief as terrific . 
The passengers , thoroughly exhausted , could now eat a little , and take some repose . 
The night was comparatively quiet . 
Some of the sails were again hoisted , and the speed of the boat was very good . 
The next morning at dawn they espied the coast , and John Bunsby was able to assert that they were not one hundred miles from Shanghai . 
A hundred miles , and only one day to traverse them ! 
That very evening Mr. Fogg was due at Shanghai , if he did not wish to miss the steamer to Yokohama . 
Had there been no storm , during which several hours were lost , they would be at this moment within thirty miles of their destination . 
The wind grew decidedly calmer , and happily the sea fell with it . 
All sails were now hoisted , and at noon the Tankadere was within forty-five miles of Shanghai . 
There remained yet six hours in which to accomplish that distance . 
All on board feared that it could not be done , and every one -- Phileas Fogg , no doubt , excepted -- felt his heart beat with impatience . 
The boat must keep up an average of nine miles an hour , and the wind was becoming calmer every moment ! 
It was a capricious breeze , coming from the coast , and after it passed the sea became smooth . 
Still , the Tankadere was so light , and her fine sails caught the fickle zephyrs so well , that , with the aid of the currents John Bunsby found himself at six o'clock not more than ten miles from the mouth of Shanghai River . 
Shanghai itself is situated at least twelve miles up the stream . 
At seven they were still three miles from Shanghai . 
The pilot swore an angry oath ; the reward of two hundred pounds was evidently on the point of escaping him . 
He looked at Mr. Fogg . 
Mr. Fogg was perfectly tranquil ; and yet his whole fortune was at this moment at stake . 
At this moment , also , a long black funnel , crowned with wreaths of smoke , appeared on the edge of the waters . 
It was the American steamer , leaving for Yokohama at the appointed time . 
`` Confound her ! '' 
cried John Bunsby , pushing back the rudder with a desperate jerk . 
`` Signal her ! '' 
said Phileas Fogg quietly . 
A small brass cannon stood on the forward deck of the Tankadere , for making signals in the fogs . 
It was loaded to the muzzle ; but just as the pilot was about to apply a red-hot coal to the touchhole , Mr. Fogg said , `` Hoist your flag ! '' 
The flag was run up at half-mast , and , this being the signal of distress , it was hoped that the American steamer , perceiving it , would change her course a little , so as to succour the pilot-boat . 
`` Fire ! '' 
said Mr. Fogg . 
And the booming of the little cannon resounded in the air . 
IN WHICH PASSEPARTOUT FINDS OUT THAT , EVEN AT THE ANTIPODES , IT IS CONVENIENT TO HAVE SOME MONEY IN ONE 'S POCKET The Carnatic , setting sail from Hong Kong at half-past six on the 7th of November , directed her course at full steam towards Japan . 
She carried a large cargo and a well-filled cabin of passengers . 
Two state-rooms in the rear were , however , unoccupied -- those which had been engaged by Phileas Fogg . 
The next day a passenger with a half-stupefied eye , staggering gait , and disordered hair , was seen to emerge from the second cabin , and to totter to a seat on deck . 
It was Passepartout ; and what had happened to him was as follows : Shortly after Fix left the opium den , two waiters had lifted the unconscious Passepartout , and had carried him to the bed reserved for the smokers . 
Three hours later , pursued even in his dreams by a fixed idea , the poor fellow awoke , and struggled against the stupefying influence of the narcotic . 
The thought of a duty unfulfilled shook off his torpor , and he hurried from the abode of drunkenness . 
Staggering and holding himself up by keeping against the walls , falling down and creeping up again , and irresistibly impelled by a kind of instinct , he kept crying out , `` The Carnatic ! 
the Carnatic ! '' 
The steamer lay puffing alongside the quay , on the point of starting . 
Passepartout had but few steps to go ; and , rushing upon the plank , he crossed it , and fell unconscious on the deck , just as the Carnatic was moving off . 
Several sailors , who were evidently accustomed to this sort of scene , carried the poor Frenchman down into the second cabin , and Passepartout did not wake until they were one hundred and fifty miles away from China . 
Thus he found himself the next morning on the deck of the Carnatic , and eagerly inhaling the exhilarating sea-breeze . 
The pure air sobered him . 
He began to collect his sense , which he found a difficult task ; but at last he recalled the events of the evening before , Fix 's revelation , and the opium-house . 
`` It is evident , '' said he to himself , `` that I have been abominably drunk ! 
What will Mr. Fogg say ? 
At least I have not missed the steamer , which is the most important thing . '' 
Then , as Fix occurred to him : `` As for that rascal , I hope we are well rid of him , and that he has not dared , as he proposed , to follow us on board the Carnatic . 
A detective on the track of Mr. Fogg , accused of robbing the Bank of England ! 
Pshaw ! 
Mr. Fogg is no more a robber than I am a murderer . '' 
Should he divulge Fix 's real errand to his master ? 
Would it do to tell the part the detective was playing . 
Would it not be better to wait until Mr. Fogg reached London again , and then impart to him that an agent of the metropolitan police had been following him round the world , and have a good laugh over it ? 
No doubt ; at least , it was worth considering . 
The first thing to do was to find Mr. Fogg , and apologise for his singular behaviour . 
Passepartout got up and proceeded , as well as he could with the rolling of the steamer , to the after-deck . 
He saw no one who resembled either his master or Aouda . 
`` Good ! '' 
muttered he ; `` Aouda has not got up yet , and Mr. Fogg has probably found some partners at whist . '' 
He descended to the saloon . 
Mr. Fogg was not there . 
Passepartout had only , however , to ask the purser the number of his master 's state-room . 
The purser replied that he did not know any passenger by the name of Fogg . 
`` I beg your pardon , '' said Passepartout persistently . 
`` He is a tall gentleman , quiet , and not very talkative , and has with him a young lady -- '' `` There is no young lady on board , '' interrupted the purser . 
`` Here is a list of the passengers ; you may see for yourself . '' 
Passepartout scanned the list , but his master 's name was not upon it . 
All at once an idea struck him . 
`` Ah ! 
am I on the Carnatic ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` On the way to Yokohama ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
Passepartout had for an instant feared that he was on the wrong boat ; but , though he was really on the Carnatic , his master was not there . 
He fell thunderstruck on a seat . 
He saw it all now . 
He remembered that the time of sailing had been changed , that he should have informed his master of that fact , and that he had not done so . 
It was his fault , then , that Mr. Fogg and Aouda had missed the steamer . 
Yes , but it was still more the fault of the traitor who , in order to separate him from his master , and detain the latter at Hong Kong , had inveigled him into getting drunk ! 
He now saw the detective 's trick ; and at this moment Mr. Fogg was certainly ruined , his bet was lost , and he himself perhaps arrested and imprisoned ! 
At this thought Passepartout tore his hair . 
Ah , if Fix ever came within his reach , what a settling of accounts there would be ! 
