The worst of it all was that , as I learned then , the young landowner had been a long while betrothed to her , and I had met him indeed many times in her house , but blinded by my conceit I had noticed nothing . 
And this particularly mortified me ; almost everybody had known all about it , while I knew nothing . 
I was filled with sudden irrepressible fury . 
With flushed face I began recalling how often I had been on the point of declaring my love to her , and as she had not attempted to stop me or to warn me , she must , I concluded , have been laughing at me all the time . 
Later on , of course , I reflected and remembered that she had been very far from laughing at me ; on the contrary , she used to turn off any love-making on my part with a jest and begin talking of other subjects ; but at that moment I was incapable of reflecting and was all eagerness for revenge . 
I am surprised to remember that my wrath and revengeful feelings were extremely repugnant to my own nature , for being of an easy temper , I found it difficult to be angry with anyone for long , and so I had to work myself up artificially and became at last revolting and absurd . 
I waited for an opportunity and succeeded in insulting my `` rival '' in the presence of a large company . 
I insulted him on a perfectly extraneous pretext , jeering at his opinion upon an important public event - it was in the year 1826 - my jeer was , so people said , clever and effective . 
Then I forced him to ask for an explanation , and behaved so rudely that he accepted my challenge in spite of the vast inequality between us , as I was younger , a person of no consequence , and of inferior rank . 
I learned afterwards for a fact that it was from a jealous feeling on his side also that my challenge was accepted ; he had been rather jealous of me on his wife 's account before their marriage ; he fancied now that if he submitted to be insulted by me and refused to accept my challenge , and if she heard of it , she might begin to despise him and waver in her love for him . 
