Old Samsonov probably grasped all this in an instant , though his face remained cold and immovable as a statue 's . 
`` Most honoured sir , Kuzma Kuzmitch , you have no doubt heard more than once of my disputes with my father , Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , who robbed me of my inheritance from my mother ... seeing the whole town is gossiping about it ... for here everyone 's gossiping of what they should n't ... and besides , it might have reached you through Grushenka ... I beg your pardon , through Agrafena Alexandrovna ... Agrafena Alexandrovna , the lady of whom I have the highest respect and esteem ... '' So Mitya began , and broke down at the first sentence . 
We will not reproduce his speech word for word , but will only summarise the gist of it . 
Three months ago , he said , he had of express intention -LRB- Mitya purposely used these words instead of `` intentionally '' -RRB- consulted a lawyer in the chief town of the province , `` a distinguished lawyer , Kuzma Kuzmitch , Pavel Pavlovitch Korneplodov . 
You have perhaps heard of him ? 
A man of vast intellect , the mind of a statesman ... he knows you , too ... spoke of you in the highest terms ... '' Mitya broke down again . 
But these breaks did not deter him . 
He leapt instantly over the gaps , and struggled on and on . 
This Korneplodov , after questioning him minutely , and inspecting the documents he was able to bring him -LRB- Mitya alluded somewhat vaguely to these documents , and slurred over the subject with special haste -RRB- , reported that they certainly might take proceedings concerning the village of Tchermashnya , which ought , he said , to have come to him , Mitya , from his mother , and so checkmate the old villain , his father ... `` because every door was not closed and justice might still find a loophole . '' 
In fact , he might reckon on an additional sum of six or even seven thousand roubles from Fyodor Pavlovitch , as Tchermashnya was worth , at least , twenty-five thousand , he might say twenty-eight thousand , in fact , `` thirty , thirty , Kuzma Kuzmitch , and would you believe it , I did n't get seventeen from that heartless man ! '' 
