The Brothers Karamazov by Fyodor Mikhailovich Dostoevsky 1879 The History of a Family Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov ALEXEY Fyodorovitch Karamazov was the third son of Fyodor Pavlovitch Karamazov , a landowner well known in our district in his own day , and still remembered among us owing to his gloomy and tragic death , which happened thirteen years ago , and which I shall describe in its proper place . 
For the present I will only say that this `` landowner '' - for so we used to call him , although he hardly spent a day of his life on his own estate - was a strange type , yet one pretty frequently to be met with , a type abject and vicious and at the same time senseless . 
But he was one of those senseless persons who are very well capable of looking after their worldly affairs , and , apparently , after nothing else . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch , for instance , began with next to nothing ; his estate was of the smallest ; he ran to dine at other men 's tables , and fastened on them as a toady , yet at his death it appeared that he had a hundred thousand roubles in hard cash . 
At the same time , he was all his life one of the most senseless , fantastical fellows in the whole district . 
I repeat , it was not stupidity - the majority of these fantastical fellows are shrewd and intelligent enough - but just senselessness , and a peculiar national form of it . 
He was married twice , and had three sons , the eldest , Dmitri , by his first wife , and two , Ivan and Alexey , by his second . 
Fyodor Pavlovitch 's first wife , Adelaida Ivanovna , belonged to a fairly rich and distinguished noble family , also landowners in our district , the Miusovs . 
How it came to pass that an heiress , who was also a beauty , and moreover one of those vigorous intelligent girls , so common in this generation , but sometimes also to be found in the last , could have married such a worthless , puny weakling , as we all called him , I wo n't attempt to explain . 
I knew a young lady of the last `` romantic '' generation who after some years of an enigmatic passion for a gentleman , whom she might quite easily have married at any moment , invented insuperable obstacles to their union , and ended by throwing herself one stormy night into a rather deep and rapid river from a high bank , almost a precipice , and so perished , entirely to satisfy her own caprice , and to be like Shakespeare 's Ophelia . 
