But he dropped one very interesting observation , which would have done credit to a more intelligent observer , and that is , indeed , why I 've mentioned it : ` If there is one of the sons that is like Fyodor Pavlovitch in character , it is Ivan Fyodorovitch . ' 
`` With that remark I conclude my sketch of his character , feeling it indelicate to continue further . 
Oh , I do n't want to draw any further conclusions and croak like a raven over the young man 's future . 
We 've seen to-day in this court that there are still good impulses in his young heart , that family feeling has not been destroyed in him by lack of faith and cynicism , which have come to him rather by inheritance than by the exercise of independent thought . 
`` Then the third son . 
Oh , he is a devout and modest youth , who does not share his elder brother 's gloomy and destructive theory of life . 
He has sought to cling to the ` ideas of the people , ' or to what goes by that name in some circles of our intellectual classes . 
He clung to the monastery , and was within an ace of becoming a monk . 
He seems to me to have betrayed unconsciously , and so early , that timid despair which leads so many in our unhappy society , who dread cynicism and its corrupting influences , and mistakenly attribute all the mischief to European enlightenment , to return to their ` native soil , ' as they say , to the bosom , so to speak , of their mother earth , like frightened children , yearning to fall asleep on the withered bosom of their decrepit mother , and to sleep there for ever , only to escape the horrors that terrify them . 
`` For my part I wish the excellent and gifted young man every success ; I trust that youthful idealism and impulse towards the ideas of the people may never degenerate , as often happens , on the moral side into gloomy mysticism , and on the political into blind chauvinism - two elements which are even a greater menace to Russia than the premature decay , due to misunderstanding and gratuitous adoption of European ideas , from which his elder brother is suffering . '' 
