But neither Yefim Petrovitch nor this teacher was living when the young man finished at the gymnasium and entered the university . 
As Yefim Petrovitch had made no provision for the payment of the tyrannical old lady 's legacy , which had grown from one thousand to two , it was delayed , owing to formalities inevitable in Russia , and the young man was in great straits for the first two years at the university , as he was forced to keep himself all the time he was studying . 
It must be noted that he did not even attempt to communicate with his father , perhaps from pride , from contempt for him , or perhaps from his cool common sense , which told him that from such a father he would get no real assistance . 
However that may have been , the young man was by no means despondent and succeeded in getting work , at first giving sixpenny lessons and afterwards getting paragraphs on street incidents into the newspapers under the signature of `` Eye-Witness . '' 
These paragraphs , it was said , were so interesting and piquant that they were soon taken . 
This alone showed the young man 's practical and intellectual superiority over the masses of needy and unfortunate students of both sexes who hang about the offices of the newspapers and journals , unable to think of anything better than everlasting entreaties for copying and translations from the French . 
Having once got into touch with the editors Ivan Fyodorovitch always kept up his connection with them , and in his latter years at the university he published brilliant reviews of books upon various special subjects , so that he became well known in literary circles . 
But only in his last year he suddenly succeeded in attracting the attention of a far wider circle of readers , so that a great many people noticed and remembered him . 
It was rather a curious incident . 
When he had just left the university and was preparing to go abroad upon his two thousand roubles , Ivan Fyodorovitch published in one of the more important journals a strange article , which attracted general notice , on a subject of which he might have been supposed to know nothing , as he was a student of natural science . 
