They used to be brought to mass ; they would squeal and bark like a dog so that they were heard all over the church . 
But when the sacrament was carried in and they were led up to it , at once the `` possession '' ceased , and the sick women were always soothed for a time . 
I was greatly impressed and amazed at this as a child ; but then I heard from country neighbours and from my town teachers that the whole illness was simulated to avoid work , and that it could always be cured by suitable severity ; various anecdotes were told to confirm this . 
But later on I learnt with astonishment from medical specialists that there is no pretence about it , that it is a terrible illness to which women are subject , especially prevalent among us in Russia , and that it is due to the hard lot of the peasant women . 
It is a disease , I was told , arising from exhausting toil too soon after hard , abnormal and unassisted labour in childbirth , and from the hopeless misery , from beatings , and so on , which some women were not able to endure like others . 
The strange and instant healing of the frantic and struggling woman as soon as she was led up to the holy sacrament , which had been explained to me as due to malingering and the trickery of the `` clericals , '' arose probably in the most natural manner . 
Both the women who supported her and the invalid herself fully believed as a truth beyond question that the evil spirit in possession of her could not hold if the sick woman were brought to the sacrament and made to bow down before it . 
And so , with a nervous and psychically deranged woman , a sort of convulsion of the whole organism always took place , and was bound to take place , at the moment of bowing down to the sacrament , aroused by the expectation of the miracle of healing and the implicit belief that it would come to pass ; and it did come to pass , though only for a moment . 
It was exactly the same now as soon as the elder touched the sick woman with the stole . 
Many of the women in the crowd were moved to tears of ecstasy by the effect of the moment : some strove to kiss the hem of his garment , others cried out in sing-song voices . 
