In spite of his profound reverence for the memory of his deceased master , he yet bore witness that he had been unjust to Mitya and `` had n't brought up his children as he should . 
He 'd have been devoured by lice when he was little , if it had n't been for me , '' he added , describing Mitya 's early childhood . 
`` It was n't fair either of the father to wrong his son over his mother 's property , which was by right his . '' 
In reply to the prosecutor 's question what grounds he had for asserting that Fyodor Pavlovitch had wronged his son in their money relations , Grigory , to the surprise of everyone , had no proof at all to bring forward , but he still persisted that the arrangement with the son was `` unfair , '' and that he ought `` to have paid him several thousand roubles more . '' 
I must note , by the way , that the prosecutor asked this question -LRB- whether Fyodor Pavlovitch had really kept back part of Mitya 's inheritance -RRB- with marked persistence of all the witnesses who could be asked it , not excepting Alyosha and Ivan , but he obtained no exact information from anyone ; all alleged that it was so , but were unable to bring forward any distinct proof . 
Grigory 's description of the scene at the dinner-table , when Dmitri had burst in and beaten his father , threatening to come back to kill him , made a sinister impression on the court , especially as the old servant 's composure in telling it , his parsimony of words , and peculiar phraseology were as effective as eloquence . 
He observed that he was not angry with Mitya for having knocked him down and struck him on the face ; he had forgiven him long ago , he said . 
Of the deceased Smerdyakov he observed , crossing himself , that he was a lad of ability , but stupid and afflicted , and , worse still , an infidel , and that it was Fyodor Pavlovitch and his elder son who had taught him to be so . 
But he defended Smerdyakov 's honesty almost with warmth , and related how Smerdyakov had once found the master 's money in the yard , and , instead of concealing it , had taken it to his master , who had rewarded him with a `` gold piece '' for it , and trusted him implicitly from that time forward . 
He maintained obstinately that the door into the garden had been open . 
