Two extremes at the same moment , or they are miserable and dissatisfied and their existence is incomplete . 
They are wide , wide as mother Russia ; they include everything and put up with everything . 
`` By the way , gentlemen of the jury , we 've just touched upon that three thousand roubles , and I will venture to anticipate things a little . 
Can you conceive that a man like that , on receiving that sum and in such a way , at the price of such shame , such disgrace , such utter degradation , could have been capable that very day of setting apart half that sum , that very day , and sewing it up in a little bag , and would have had the firmness of character to carry it about with him for a whole month afterwards , in spite of every temptation and his extreme need of it ! 
Neither in drunken debauchery in taverns , nor when he was flying into the country , trying to get from God knows whom , the money so essential to him to remove the object of his affections from being tempted by his father , did he bring himself to touch that little bag ! 
Why , if only to avoid abandoning his mistress to the rival of whom he was so jealous , he would have been certain to have opened that bag and to have stayed at home to keep watch over her , and to await the moment when she would say to him at last ' I am yours , ' and to fly with her far from their fatal surroundings . 
`` But no , he did not touch his talisman , and what is the reason he gives for it ? 
The chief reason , as I have just said , was that when she would say ' I am yours , take me where you will , ' he might have the wherewithal to take her . 
But that first reason , in the prisoner 's own words , was of little weight beside the second . 
While I have that money on me , he said , I am a scoundrel , not a thief , for I can always go to my insulted betrothed , and , laying down half the sum I have fraudulently appropriated , I can always say to her , ` You see , I 've squandered half your money , and shown I am a weak and immoral man , and , if you like , a scoundrel ' -LRB- I use the prisoner 's own expressions -RRB- , ` but though I am a scoundrel , I am not a thief , for if I had been a thief , I should n't have brought you back this half of the money , but should have taken it as I did the other half ! ' 
