The Church is , in truth , a kingdom and ordained to rule , and in the end must undoubtedly become the kingdom ruling over all the earth . 
For that we have the divine promise . '' 
He ceased speaking suddenly , as though checking himself . 
After listening attentively and respectfully Ivan went on , addressing the elder with perfect composure and as before with ready cordiality : `` The whole point of my article lies in the fact that during the first three centuries Christianity only existed on earth in the Church and was nothing but the Church . 
When the pagan Roman Empire desired to become Christian , it inevitably happened that , by becoming Christian , it included the Church but remained a pagan State in very many of its departments . 
In reality this was bound to happen . 
But Rome as a State retained too much of the pagan civilisation and culture , as , for example , in the very objects and fundamental principles of the State . 
The Christian Church entering into the State could , of course , surrender no part of its fundamental principles - the rock on which it stands - and could pursue no other aims than those which have been ordained and revealed by God Himself , and among them that of drawing the whole world , and therefore the ancient pagan State itself , into the Church . 
In that way -LRB- that is , with a view to the future -RRB- it is not the Church that should seek a definite position in the State , like ` every social organisation , ' or as ` an organisation of men for religious purposes ' -LRB- as my opponent calls the Church -RRB- , but , on the contrary , every earthly State should be , in the end , completely transformed into the Church and should become nothing else but a Church , rejecting every purpose incongruous with the aims of the Church . 
All this will not degrade it in any way or take from its honour and glory as a great State , nor from the glory of its rulers , but only turns it from a false , still pagan , and mistaken path to the true and rightful path , which alone leads to the eternal goal . 
