Madame Ratignolle had not far to go , and Edna stood on the porch a while watching her walk down the street . 
Then in the afternoon Mrs. Merriman and Mrs. Highcamp had made their `` party call . '' 
Edna felt that they might have dispensed with the formality . 
They had also come to invite her to play vingt-et-un one evening at Mrs. Merriman 's . 
She was asked to go early , to dinner , and Mr. Merriman or Mr. Arobin would take her home . 
Edna accepted in a half-hearted way . 
She sometimes felt very tired of Mrs. Highcamp and Mrs. Merriman . 
Late in the afternoon she sought refuge with Mademoiselle Reisz , and stayed there alone , waiting for her , feeling a kind of repose invade her with the very atmosphere of the shabby , unpretentious little room . 
Edna sat at the window , which looked out over the house-tops and across the river . 
The window frame was filled with pots of flowers , and she sat and picked the dry leaves from a rose geranium . 
The day was warm , and the breeze which blew from the river was very pleasant . 
She removed her hat and laid it on the piano . 
She went on picking the leaves and digging around the plants with her hat pin . 
Once she thought she heard Mademoiselle Reisz approaching . 
But it was a young black girl , who came in , bringing a small bundle of laundry , which she deposited in the adjoining room , and went away . 
Edna seated herself at the piano , and softly picked out with one hand the bars of a piece of music which lay open before her . 
A half-hour went by . 
There was the occasional sound of people going and coming in the lower hall . 
She was growing interested in her occupation of picking out the aria , when there was a second rap at the door . 
She vaguely wondered what these people did when they found Mademoiselle 's door locked . 
`` Come in , '' she called , turning her face toward the door . 
And this time it was Robert Lebrun who presented himself . 
She attempted to rise ; she could not have done so without betraying the agitation which mastered her at sight of him , so she fell back upon the stool , only exclaiming , `` Why , Robert ! '' 
He came and clasped her hand , seemingly without knowing what he was saying or doing . 
`` Mrs. Pontellier ! 
How do you happen -- oh ! 
how well you look ! 
Is Mademoiselle Reisz not here ? 
I never expected to see you . '' 
`` When did you come back ? '' 
asked Edna in an unsteady voice , wiping her face with her handkerchief . 
She seemed ill at ease on the piano stool , and he begged her to take the chair by the window . 
She did so , mechanically , while he seated himself on the stool . 
`` I returned day before yesterday , '' he answered , while he leaned his arm on the keys , bringing forth a crash of discordant sound . 
`` Day before yesterday ! '' 
she repeated , aloud ; and went on thinking to herself , `` day before yesterday , '' in a sort of an uncomprehending way . 
She had pictured him seeking her at the very first hour , and he had lived under the same sky since day before yesterday ; while only by accident had he stumbled upon her . 
Mademoiselle must have lied when she said , `` Poor fool , he loves you . '' 
`` Day before yesterday , '' she repeated , breaking off a spray of Mademoiselle 's geranium ; `` then if you had not met me here to-day you would n't -- when -- that is , did n't you mean to come and see me ? '' 
`` Of course , I should have gone to see you . 
There have been so many things -- '' he turned the leaves of Mademoiselle 's music nervously . 
`` I started in at once yesterday with the old firm . 
After all there is as much chance for me here as there was there -- that is , I might find it profitable some day . 
The Mexicans were not very congenial . '' 
So he had come back because the Mexicans were not congenial ; because business was as profitable here as there ; because of any reason , and not because he cared to be near her . 
She remembered the day she sat on the floor , turning the pages of his letter , seeking the reason which was left untold . 
She had not noticed how he looked -- only feeling his presence ; but she turned deliberately and observed him . 
After all , he had been absent but a few months , and was not changed . 
His hair -- the color of hers -- waved back from his temples in the same way as before . 
His skin was not more burned than it had been at Grand Isle . 
She found in his eyes , when he looked at her for one silent moment , the same tender caress , with an added warmth and entreaty which had not been there before the same glance which had penetrated to the sleeping places of her soul and awakened them . 
A hundred times Edna had pictured Robert 's return , and imagined their first meeting . 
It was usually at her home , whither he had sought her out at once . 
She always fancied him expressing or betraying in some way his love for her . 
And here , the reality was that they sat ten feet apart , she at the window , crushing geranium leaves in her hand and smelling them , he twirling around on the piano stool , saying : `` I was very much surprised to hear of Mr. Pontellier 's absence ; it 's a wonder Mademoiselle Reisz did not tell me ; and your moving -- mother told me yesterday . 
I should think you would have gone to New York with him , or to Iberville with the children , rather than be bothered here with housekeeping . 
And you are going abroad , too , I hear . 
We sha n't have you at Grand Isle next summer ; it wo n't seem -- do you see much of Mademoiselle Reisz ? 
She often spoke of you in the few letters she wrote . '' 
`` Do you remember that you promised to write to me when you went away ? '' 
A flush overspread his whole face . 
`` I could n't believe that my letters would be of any interest to you . '' 
`` That is an excuse ; it is n't the truth . '' 
Edna reached for her hat on the piano . 
She adjusted it , sticking the hat pin through the heavy coil of hair with some deliberation . 
`` Are you not going to wait for Mademoiselle Reisz ? '' 
asked Robert . 
`` No ; I have found when she is absent this long , she is liable not to come back till late . '' 
She drew on her gloves , and Robert picked up his hat . 
`` Wo n't you wait for her ? '' 
asked Edna . 
`` Not if you think she will not be back till late , '' adding , as if suddenly aware of some discourtesy in his speech , `` and I should miss the pleasure of walking home with you . '' 
Edna locked the door and put the key back in its hiding-place . 
They went together , picking their way across muddy streets and sidewalks encumbered with the cheap display of small tradesmen . 
Part of the distance they rode in the car , and after disembarking , passed the Pontellier mansion , which looked broken and half torn asunder . 
Robert had never known the house , and looked at it with interest . 
`` I never knew you in your home , '' he remarked . 
`` I am glad you did not . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
She did not answer . 
They went on around the corner , and it seemed as if her dreams were coming true after all , when he followed her into the little house . 
`` You must stay and dine with me , Robert . 
You see I am all alone , and it is so long since I have seen you . 
There is so much I want to ask you . '' 
She took off her hat and gloves . 
He stood irresolute , making some excuse about his mother who expected him ; he even muttered something about an engagement . 
She struck a match and lit the lamp on the table ; it was growing dusk . 
When he saw her face in the lamp-light , looking pained , with all the soft lines gone out of it , he threw his hat aside and seated himself . 
`` Oh ! 
you know I want to stay if you will let me ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
All the softness came back . 
She laughed , and went and put her hand on his shoulder . 
`` This is the first moment you have seemed like the old Robert . 
I 'll go tell Celestine . '' 
She hurried away to tell Celestine to set an extra place . 
She even sent her off in search of some added delicacy which she had not thought of for herself . 
And she recommended great care in dripping the coffee and having the omelet done to a proper turn . 
When she reentered , Robert was turning over magazines , sketches , and things that lay upon the table in great disorder . 
He picked up a photograph , and exclaimed : `` Alcee Arobin ! 
What on earth is his picture doing here ? '' 
`` I tried to make a sketch of his head one day , '' answered Edna , `` and he thought the photograph might help me . 
It was at the other house . 
I thought it had been left there . 
I must have packed it up with my drawing materials . '' 
`` I should think you would give it back to him if you have finished with it . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I have a great many such photographs . 
I never think of returning them . 
They do n't amount to anything . '' 
Robert kept on looking at the picture . 
`` It seems to me -- do you think his head worth drawing ? 
Is he a friend of Mr. Pontellier 's ? 
You never said you knew him . '' 
`` He is n't a friend of Mr. Pontellier 's ; he 's a friend of mine . 
I always knew him -- that is , it is only of late that I know him pretty well . 
But I 'd rather talk about you , and know what you have been seeing and doing and feeling out there in Mexico . '' 
Robert threw aside the picture . 
`` I 've been seeing the waves and the white beach of Grand Isle ; the quiet , grassy street of the Cheniere ; the old fort at Grande Terre . 
I 've been working like a machine , and feeling like a lost soul . 
There was nothing interesting . '' 
She leaned her head upon her hand to shade her eyes from the light . 
`` And what have you been seeing and doing and feeling all these days ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I 've been seeing the waves and the white beach of Grand Isle ; the quiet , grassy street of the Cheniere Caminada ; the old sunny fort at Grande Terre . 
I 've been working with a little more comprehension than a machine , and still feeling like a lost soul . 
There was nothing interesting . '' 
`` Mrs. Pontellier , you are cruel , '' he said , with feeling , closing his eyes and resting his head back in his chair . 
They remained in silence till old Celestine announced dinner . 
The dining-room was very small . 
Edna 's round mahogany would have almost filled it . 
As it was there was but a step or two from the little table to the kitchen , to the mantel , the small buffet , and the side door that opened out on the narrow brick-paved yard . 
A certain degree of ceremony settled upon them with the announcement of dinner . 
There was no return to personalities . 
Robert related incidents of his sojourn in Mexico , and Edna talked of events likely to interest him , which had occurred during his absence . 
The dinner was of ordinary quality , except for the few delicacies which she had sent out to purchase . 
Old Celestine , with a bandana tignon twisted about her head , hobbled in and out , taking a personal interest in everything ; and she lingered occasionally to talk patois with Robert , whom she had known as a boy . 
He went out to a neighboring cigar stand to purchase cigarette papers , and when he came back he found that Celestine had served the black coffee in the parlor . 
`` Perhaps I should n't have come back , '' he said . 
`` When you are tired of me , tell me to go . '' 
`` You never tire me . 
You must have forgotten the hours and hours at Grand Isle in which we grew accustomed to each other and used to being together . '' 
`` I have forgotten nothing at Grand Isle , '' he said , not looking at her , but rolling a cigarette . 
His tobacco pouch , which he laid upon the table , was a fantastic embroidered silk affair , evidently the handiwork of a woman . 
`` You used to carry your tobacco in a rubber pouch , '' said Edna , picking up the pouch and examining the needlework . 
`` Yes ; it was lost . '' 
`` Where did you buy this one ? 
In Mexico ? '' 
`` It was given to me by a Vera Cruz girl ; they are very generous , '' he replied , striking a match and lighting his cigarette . 
`` They are very handsome , I suppose , those Mexican women ; very picturesque , with their black eyes and their lace scarfs . '' 
`` Some are ; others are hideous , just as you find women everywhere . '' 
`` What was she like -- the one who gave you the pouch ? 
You must have known her very well . '' 
`` She was very ordinary . 
She was n't of the slightest importance . 
I knew her well enough . '' 
`` Did you visit at her house ? 
Was it interesting ? 
I should like to know and hear about the people you met , and the impressions they made on you . '' 
`` There are some people who leave impressions not so lasting as the imprint of an oar upon the water . '' 
`` Was she such a one ? '' 
`` It would be ungenerous for me to admit that she was of that order and kind . '' 
He thrust the pouch back in his pocket , as if to put away the subject with the trifle which had brought it up . 
Arobin dropped in with a message from Mrs. Merriman , to say that the card party was postponed on account of the illness of one of her children . 
`` How do you do , Arobin ? '' 
said Robert , rising from the obscurity . 
`` Oh ! 
Lebrun . 
To be sure ! 
I heard yesterday you were back . 
How did they treat you down in Mexique ? '' 
`` Fairly well . '' 
`` But not well enough to keep you there . 
Stunning girls , though , in Mexico . 
I thought I should never get away from Vera Cruz when I was down there a couple of years ago . '' 
`` Did they embroider slippers and tobacco pouches and hat-bands and things for you ? '' 
asked Edna . 
`` Oh ! 
my ! 
no ! 
I did n't get so deep in their regard . 
I fear they made more impression on me than I made on them . '' 
`` You were less fortunate than Robert , then . '' 
`` I am always less fortunate than Robert . 
Has he been imparting tender confidences ? '' 
`` I 've been imposing myself long enough , '' said Robert , rising , and shaking hands with Edna . 
`` Please convey my regards to Mr. Pontellier when you write . '' 
He shook hands with Arobin and went away . 
`` Fine fellow , that Lebrun , '' said Arobin when Robert had gone . 
`` I never heard you speak of him . '' 
`` I knew him last summer at Grand Isle , '' she replied . 
`` Here is that photograph of yours . 
Do n't you want it ? '' 
`` What do I want with it ? 
Throw it away . '' 
She threw it back on the table . 
`` I 'm not going to Mrs. Merriman 's , '' she said . 
`` If you see her , tell her so . 
But perhaps I had better write . 
I think I shall write now , and say that I am sorry her child is sick , and tell her not to count on me . '' 
`` It would be a good scheme , '' acquiesced Arobin . 
`` I do n't blame you ; stupid lot ! '' 
Edna opened the blotter , and having procured paper and pen , began to write the note . 
Arobin lit a cigar and read the evening paper , which he had in his pocket . 
`` What is the date ? '' 
she asked . 
He told her . 
`` Will you mail this for me when you go out ? '' 
`` Certainly . '' 
He read to her little bits out of the newspaper , while she straightened things on the table . 
`` What do you want to do ? '' 
he asked , throwing aside the paper . 
`` Do you want to go out for a walk or a drive or anything ? 
It would be a fine night to drive . '' 
`` No ; I do n't want to do anything but just be quiet . 
You go away and amuse yourself . 
Do n't stay . '' 
`` I 'll go away if I must ; but I sha n't amuse myself . 
You know that I only live when I am near you . '' 
He stood up to bid her good night . 
`` Is that one of the things you always say to women ? '' 
`` I have said it before , but I do n't think I ever came so near meaning it , '' he answered with a smile . 
There were no warm lights in her eyes ; only a dreamy , absent look . 
`` Good night . 
I adore you . 
Sleep well , '' he said , and he kissed her hand and went away . 
She stayed alone in a kind of reverie -- a sort of stupor . 
Step by step she lived over every instant of the time she had been with Robert after he had entered Mademoiselle Reisz 's door . 
She recalled his words , his looks . 
How few and meager they had been for her hungry heart ! 
A vision -- a transcendently seductive vision of a Mexican girl arose before her . 
She writhed with a jealous pang . 
She wondered when he would come back . 
He had not said he would come back . 
She had been with him , had heard his voice and touched his hand . 
But some way he had seemed nearer to her off there in Mexico . 
The morning was full of sunlight and hope . 
Edna could see before her no denial -- only the promise of excessive joy . 
She lay in bed awake , with bright eyes full of speculation . 
`` He loves you , poor fool . '' 
If she could but get that conviction firmly fixed in her mind , what mattered about the rest ? 
She felt she had been childish and unwise the night before in giving herself over to despondency . 
She recapitulated the motives which no doubt explained Robert 's reserve . 
They were not insurmountable ; they would not hold if he really loved her ; they could not hold against her own passion , which he must come to realize in time . 
She pictured him going to his business that morning . 
She even saw how he was dressed ; how he walked down one street , and turned the corner of another ; saw him bending over his desk , talking to people who entered the office , going to his lunch , and perhaps watching for her on the street . 
He would come to her in the afternoon or evening , sit and roll his cigarette , talk a little , and go away as he had done the night before . 
But how delicious it would be to have him there with her ! 
She would have no regrets , nor seek to penetrate his reserve if he still chose to wear it . 
Edna ate her breakfast only half dressed . 
The maid brought her a delicious printed scrawl from Raoul , expressing his love , asking her to send him some bonbons , and telling her they had found that morning ten tiny white pigs all lying in a row beside Lidie 's big white pig . 
A letter also came from her husband , saying he hoped to be back early in March , and then they would get ready for that journey abroad which he had promised her so long , which he felt now fully able to afford ; he felt able to travel as people should , without any thought of small economies -- thanks to his recent speculations in Wall Street . 
Much to her surprise she received a note from Arobin , written at midnight from the club . 
It was to say good morning to her , to hope she had slept well , to assure her of his devotion , which he trusted she in some faintest manner returned . 
All these letters were pleasing to her . 
She answered the children in a cheerful frame of mind , promising them bonbons , and congratulating them upon their happy find of the little pigs . 
She answered her husband with friendly evasiveness , -- not with any fixed design to mislead him , only because all sense of reality had gone out of her life ; she had abandoned herself to Fate , and awaited the consequences with indifference . 
To Arobin 's note she made no reply . 
She put it under Celestine 's stove-lid . 
Edna worked several hours with much spirit . 
She saw no one but a picture dealer , who asked her if it were true that she was going abroad to study in Paris . 
She said possibly she might , and he negotiated with her for some Parisian studies to reach him in time for the holiday trade in December . 
Robert did not come that day . 
She was keenly disappointed . 
He did not come the following day , nor the next . 
Each morning she awoke with hope , and each night she was a prey to despondency . 
She was tempted to seek him out . 
But far from yielding to the impulse , she avoided any occasion which might throw her in his way . 
She did not go to Mademoiselle Reisz 's nor pass by Madame Lebrun 's , as she might have done if he had still been in Mexico . 
When Arobin , one night , urged her to drive with him , she went -- out to the lake , on the Shell Road . 
His horses were full of mettle , and even a little unmanageable . 
She liked the rapid gait at which they spun along , and the quick , sharp sound of the horses ' hoofs on the hard road . 
They did not stop anywhere to eat or to drink . 
Arobin was not needlessly imprudent . 
But they ate and they drank when they regained Edna 's little dining-room -- which was comparatively early in the evening . 
It was late when he left her . 
It was getting to be more than a passing whim with Arobin to see her and be with her . 
He had detected the latent sensuality , which unfolded under his delicate sense of her nature 's requirements like a torpid , torrid , sensitive blossom . 
There was no despondency when she fell asleep that night ; nor was there hope when she awoke in the morning . 
There was a garden out in the suburbs ; a small , leafy corner , with a few green tables under the orange trees . 
An old cat slept all day on the stone step in the sun , and an old mulatresse slept her idle hours away in her chair at the open window , till some one happened to knock on one of the green tables . 
She had milk and cream cheese to sell , and bread and butter . 
There was no one who could make such excellent coffee or fry a chicken so golden brown as she . 
The place was too modest to attract the attention of people of fashion , and so quiet as to have escaped the notice of those in search of pleasure and dissipation . 
Edna had discovered it accidentally one day when the high-board gate stood ajar . 
She caught sight of a little green table , blotched with the checkered sunlight that filtered through the quivering leaves overhead . 
Within she had found the slumbering mulatresse , the drowsy cat , and a glass of milk which reminded her of the milk she had tasted in Iberville . 
She often stopped there during her perambulations ; sometimes taking a book with her , and sitting an hour or two under the trees when she found the place deserted . 
Once or twice she took a quiet dinner there alone , having instructed Celestine beforehand to prepare no dinner at home . 
It was the last place in the city where she would have expected to meet any one she knew . 
Still she was not astonished when , as she was partaking of a modest dinner late in the afternoon , looking into an open book , stroking the cat , which had made friends with her -- she was not greatly astonished to see Robert come in at the tall garden gate . 
`` I am destined to see you only by accident , '' she said , shoving the cat off the chair beside her . 
He was surprised , ill at ease , almost embarrassed at meeting her thus so unexpectedly . 
`` Do you come here often ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I almost live here , '' she said . 
`` I used to drop in very often for a cup of Catiche 's good coffee . 
This is the first time since I came back . '' 
`` She 'll bring you a plate , and you will share my dinner . 
There 's always enough for two -- even three . '' 
Edna had intended to be indifferent and as reserved as he when she met him ; she had reached the determination by a laborious train of reasoning , incident to one of her despondent moods . 
But her resolve melted when she saw him before designing Providence had led him into her path . 
`` Why have you kept away from me , Robert ? '' 
she asked , closing the book that lay open upon the table . 
`` Why are you so personal , Mrs. Pontellier ? 
Why do you force me to idiotic subterfuges ? '' 
he exclaimed with sudden warmth . 
`` I suppose there 's no use telling you I 've been very busy , or that I 've been sick , or that I 've been to see you and not found you at home . 
Please let me off with any one of these excuses . '' 
`` You are the embodiment of selfishness , '' she said . 
`` You save yourself something -- I do n't know what -- but there is some selfish motive , and in sparing yourself you never consider for a moment what I think , or how I feel your neglect and indifference . 
I suppose this is what you would call unwomanly ; but I have got into a habit of expressing myself . 
It does n't matter to me , and you may think me unwomanly if you like . '' 
`` No ; I only think you cruel , as I said the other day . 
Maybe not intentionally cruel ; but you seem to be forcing me into disclosures which can result in nothing ; as if you would have me bare a wound for the pleasure of looking at it , without the intention or power of healing it . '' 
`` I 'm spoiling your dinner , Robert ; never mind what I say . 
You have n't eaten a morsel . '' 
`` I only came in for a cup of coffee . '' 
His sensitive face was all disfigured with excitement . 
`` Is n't this a delightful place ? '' 
she remarked . 
`` I am so glad it has never actually been discovered . 
It is so quiet , so sweet , here . 
Do you notice there is scarcely a sound to be heard ? 
It 's so out of the way ; and a good walk from the car . 
However , I do n't mind walking . 
I always feel so sorry for women who do n't like to walk ; they miss so much -- so many rare little glimpses of life ; and we women learn so little of life on the whole . 
`` Catiche 's coffee is always hot . 
I do n't know how she manages it , here in the open air . 
Celestine 's coffee gets cold bringing it from the kitchen to the dining-room . 
Three lumps ! 
How can you drink it so sweet ? 
Take some of the cress with your chop ; it 's so biting and crisp . 
Then there 's the advantage of being able to smoke with your coffee out here . 
Now , in the city -- are n't you going to smoke ? '' 
`` After a while , '' he said , laying a cigar on the table . 
`` Who gave it to you ? '' 
she laughed . 
`` I bought it . 
I suppose I 'm getting reckless ; I bought a whole box . '' 
She was determined not to be personal again and make him uncomfortable . 
The cat made friends with him , and climbed into his lap when he smoked his cigar . 
He stroked her silky fur , and talked a little about her . 
He looked at Edna 's book , which he had read ; and he told her the end , to save her the trouble of wading through it , he said . 
Again he accompanied her back to her home ; and it was after dusk when they reached the little `` pigeon-house . '' 
She did not ask him to remain , which he was grateful for , as it permitted him to stay without the discomfort of blundering through an excuse which he had no intention of considering . 
He helped her to light the lamp ; then she went into her room to take off her hat and to bathe her face and hands . 
When she came back Robert was not examining the pictures and magazines as before ; he sat off in the shadow , leaning his head back on the chair as if in a reverie . 
Edna lingered a moment beside the table , arranging the books there . 
Then she went across the room to where he sat . 
She bent over the arm of his chair and called his name . 
`` Robert , '' she said , `` are you asleep ? '' 
`` No , '' he answered , looking up at her . 
She leaned over and kissed him -- a soft , cool , delicate kiss , whose voluptuous sting penetrated his whole being-then she moved away from him . 
He followed , and took her in his arms , just holding her close to him . 
She put her hand up to his face and pressed his cheek against her own . 
The action was full of love and tenderness . 
He sought her lips again . 
Then he drew her down upon the sofa beside him and held her hand in both of his . 
`` Now you know , '' he said , `` now you know what I have been fighting against since last summer at Grand Isle ; what drove me away and drove me back again . '' 
`` Why have you been fighting against it ? '' 
she asked . 
Her face glowed with soft lights . 
`` Why ? 
Because you were not free ; you were Leonce Pontellier 's wife . 
I could n't help loving you if you were ten times his wife ; but so long as I went away from you and kept away I could help telling you so . '' 
She put her free hand up to his shoulder , and then against his cheek , rubbing it softly . 
He kissed her again . 
His face was warm and flushed . 
`` There in Mexico I was thinking of you all the time , and longing for you . '' 
`` But not writing to me , '' she interrupted . 
`` Something put into my head that you cared for me ; and I lost my senses . 
I forgot everything but a wild dream of your some way becoming my wife . '' 
`` Your wife ! '' 
`` Religion , loyalty , everything would give way if only you cared . '' 
`` Then you must have forgotten that I was Leonce Pontellier 's wife . '' 
`` Oh ! 
I was demented , dreaming of wild , impossible things , recalling men who had set their wives free , we have heard of such things . '' 
`` Yes , we have heard of such things . '' 
`` I came back full of vague , mad intentions . 
And when I got here -- '' `` When you got here you never came near me ! '' 
She was still caressing his cheek . 
`` I realized what a cur I was to dream of such a thing , even if you had been willing . '' 
She took his face between her hands and looked into it as if she would never withdraw her eyes more . 
She kissed him on the forehead , the eyes , the cheeks , and the lips . 
`` You have been a very , very foolish boy , wasting your time dreaming of impossible things when you speak of Mr. Pontellier setting me free ! 
I am no longer one of Mr. Pontellier 's possessions to dispose of or not . 
I give myself where I choose . 
If he were to say , ` Here , Robert , take her and be happy ; she is yours , ' I should laugh at you both . '' 
His face grew a little white . 
`` What do you mean ? '' 
he asked . 
There was a knock at the door . 
Old Celestine came in to say that Madame Ratignolle 's servant had come around the back way with a message that Madame had been taken sick and begged Mrs. Pontellier to go to her immediately . 
`` Yes , yes , '' said Edna , rising ; `` I promised . 
Tell her yes -- to wait for me . 
I 'll go back with her . '' 
`` Let me walk over with you , '' offered Robert . 
`` No , '' she said ; `` I will go with the servant . '' 
She went into her room to put on her hat , and when she came in again she sat once more upon the sofa beside him . 
