A green and yellow parrot , which hung in a cage outside the door , kept repeating over and over : `` Allez vous-en ! 
Allez vous-en ! 
Sapristi ! 
That 's all right ! '' 
He could speak a little Spanish , and also a language which nobody understood , unless it was the mocking-bird that hung on the other side of the door , whistling his fluty notes out upon the breeze with maddening persistence . 
Mr. Pontellier , unable to read his newspaper with any degree of comfort , arose with an expression and an exclamation of disgust . 
He walked down the gallery and across the narrow `` bridges '' which connected the Lebrun cottages one with the other . 
He had been seated before the door of the main house . 
The parrot and the mockingbird were the property of Madame Lebrun , and they had the right to make all the noise they wished . 
Mr. Pontellier had the privilege of quitting their society when they ceased to be entertaining . 
He stopped before the door of his own cottage , which was the fourth one from the main building and next to the last . 
Seating himself in a wicker rocker which was there , he once more applied himself to the task of reading the newspaper . 
The day was Sunday ; the paper was a day old . 
The Sunday papers had not yet reached Grand Isle . 
He was already acquainted with the market reports , and he glanced restlessly over the editorials and bits of news which he had not had time to read before quitting New Orleans the day before . 
Mr. Pontellier wore eye-glasses . 
He was a man of forty , of medium height and rather slender build ; he stooped a little . 
His hair was brown and straight , parted on one side . 
His beard was neatly and closely trimmed . 
Once in a while he withdrew his glance from the newspaper and looked about him . 
There was more noise than ever over at the house . 
The main building was called `` the house , '' to distinguish it from the cottages . 
The chattering and whistling birds were still at it . 
Two young girls , the Farival twins , were playing a duet from `` Zampa '' upon the piano . 
Madame Lebrun was bustling in and out , giving orders in a high key to a yard-boy whenever she got inside the house , and directions in an equally high voice to a dining-room servant whenever she got outside . 
She was a fresh , pretty woman , clad always in white with elbow sleeves . 
Her starched skirts crinkled as she came and went . 
Farther down , before one of the cottages , a lady in black was walking demurely up and down , telling her beads . 
A good many persons of the pension had gone over to the Cheniere Caminada in Beaudelet 's lugger to hear mass . 
Some young people were out under the wateroaks playing croquet . 
Mr. Pontellier 's two children were there -- sturdy little fellows of four and five . 
A quadroon nurse followed them about with a faraway , meditative air . 
Mr. Pontellier finally lit a cigar and began to smoke , letting the paper drag idly from his hand . 
He fixed his gaze upon a white sunshade that was advancing at snail 's pace from the beach . 
He could see it plainly between the gaunt trunks of the water-oaks and across the stretch of yellow camomile . 
The gulf looked far away , melting hazily into the blue of the horizon . 
The sunshade continued to approach slowly . 
Beneath its pink-lined shelter were his wife , Mrs. Pontellier , and young Robert Lebrun . 
When they reached the cottage , the two seated themselves with some appearance of fatigue upon the upper step of the porch , facing each other , each leaning against a supporting post . 
`` What folly ! 
to bathe at such an hour in such heat ! '' 
exclaimed Mr. Pontellier . 
He himself had taken a plunge at daylight . 
That was why the morning seemed long to him . 
`` You are burnt beyond recognition , '' he added , looking at his wife as one looks at a valuable piece of personal property which has suffered some damage . 
She held up her hands , strong , shapely hands , and surveyed them critically , drawing up her fawn sleeves above the wrists . 
Looking at them reminded her of her rings , which she had given to her husband before leaving for the beach . 
She silently reached out to him , and he , understanding , took the rings from his vest pocket and dropped them into her open palm . 
She slipped them upon her fingers ; then clasping her knees , she looked across at Robert and began to laugh . 
The rings sparkled upon her fingers . 
He sent back an answering smile . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked Pontellier , looking lazily and amused from one to the other . 
It was some utter nonsense ; some adventure out there in the water , and they both tried to relate it at once . 
It did not seem half so amusing when told . 
They realized this , and so did Mr. Pontellier . 
He yawned and stretched himself . 
Then he got up , saying he had half a mind to go over to Klein 's hotel and play a game of billiards . 
`` Come go along , Lebrun , '' he proposed to Robert . 
But Robert admitted quite frankly that he preferred to stay where he was and talk to Mrs. Pontellier . 
`` Well , send him about his business when he bores you , Edna , '' instructed her husband as he prepared to leave . 
`` Here , take the umbrella , '' she exclaimed , holding it out to him . 
He accepted the sunshade , and lifting it over his head descended the steps and walked away . 
`` Coming back to dinner ? '' 
his wife called after him . 
He halted a moment and shrugged his shoulders . 
He felt in his vest pocket ; there was a ten-dollar bill there . 
He did not know ; perhaps he would return for the early dinner and perhaps he would not . 
It all depended upon the company which he found over at Klein 's and the size of `` the game . '' 
He did not say this , but she understood it , and laughed , nodding good-by to him . 
Both children wanted to follow their father when they saw him starting out . 
He kissed them and promised to bring them back bonbons and peanuts . 
Mrs. Pontellier 's eyes were quick and bright ; they were a yellowish brown , about the color of her hair . 
She had a way of turning them swiftly upon an object and holding them there as if lost in some inward maze of contemplation or thought . 
Her eyebrows were a shade darker than her hair . 
They were thick and almost horizontal , emphasizing the depth of her eyes . 
She was rather handsome than beautiful . 
Her face was captivating by reason of a certain frankness of expression and a contradictory subtle play of features . 
Her manner was engaging . 
Robert rolled a cigarette . 
He smoked cigarettes because he could not afford cigars , he said . 
He had a cigar in his pocket which Mr. Pontellier had presented him with , and he was saving it for his after-dinner smoke . 
This seemed quite proper and natural on his part . 
In coloring he was not unlike his companion . 
A clean-shaved face made the resemblance more pronounced than it would otherwise have been . 
There rested no shadow of care upon his open countenance . 
His eyes gathered in and reflected the light and languor of the summer day . 
Mrs. Pontellier reached over for a palm-leaf fan that lay on the porch and began to fan herself , while Robert sent between his lips light puffs from his cigarette . 
They chatted incessantly : about the things around them ; their amusing adventure out in the water -- it had again assumed its entertaining aspect ; about the wind , the trees , the people who had gone to the Cheniere ; about the children playing croquet under the oaks , and the Farival twins , who were now performing the overture to `` The Poet and the Peasant . '' 
Robert talked a good deal about himself . 
He was very young , and did not know any better . 
Mrs. Pontellier talked a little about herself for the same reason . 
Each was interested in what the other said . 
Robert spoke of his intention to go to Mexico in the autumn , where fortune awaited him . 
He was always intending to go to Mexico , but some way never got there . 
Meanwhile he held on to his modest position in a mercantile house in New Orleans , where an equal familiarity with English , French and Spanish gave him no small value as a clerk and correspondent . 
He was spending his summer vacation , as he always did , with his mother at Grand Isle . 
In former times , before Robert could remember , `` the house '' had been a summer luxury of the Lebruns . 
Now , flanked by its dozen or more cottages , which were always filled with exclusive visitors from the `` Quartier Francais , '' it enabled Madame Lebrun to maintain the easy and comfortable existence which appeared to be her birthright . 
Mrs. Pontellier talked about her father 's Mississippi plantation and her girlhood home in the old Kentucky bluegrass country . 
She was an American woman , with a small infusion of French which seemed to have been lost in dilution . 
She read a letter from her sister , who was away in the East , and who had engaged herself to be married . 
Robert was interested , and wanted to know what manner of girls the sisters were , what the father was like , and how long the mother had been dead . 
When Mrs. Pontellier folded the letter it was time for her to dress for the early dinner . 
`` I see Leonce is n't coming back , '' she said , with a glance in the direction whence her husband had disappeared . 
Robert supposed he was not , as there were a good many New Orleans club men over at Klein 's . 
When Mrs. Pontellier left him to enter her room , the young man descended the steps and strolled over toward the croquet players , where , during the half-hour before dinner , he amused himself with the little Pontellier children , who were very fond of him . 
It was eleven o'clock that night when Mr. Pontellier returned from Klein 's hotel . 
He was in an excellent humor , in high spirits , and very talkative . 
His entrance awoke his wife , who was in bed and fast asleep when he came in . 
He talked to her while he undressed , telling her anecdotes and bits of news and gossip that he had gathered during the day . 
From his trousers pockets he took a fistful of crumpled bank notes and a good deal of silver coin , which he piled on the bureau indiscriminately with keys , knife , handkerchief , and whatever else happened to be in his pockets . 
She was overcome with sleep , and answered him with little half utterances . 
He thought it very discouraging that his wife , who was the sole object of his existence , evinced so little interest in things which concerned him , and valued so little his conversation . 
Mr. Pontellier had forgotten the bonbons and peanuts for the boys . 
Notwithstanding he loved them very much , and went into the adjoining room where they slept to take a look at them and make sure that they were resting comfortably . 
The result of his investigation was far from satisfactory . 
He turned and shifted the youngsters about in bed . 
One of them began to kick and talk about a basket full of crabs . 
Mr. Pontellier returned to his wife with the information that Raoul had a high fever and needed looking after . 
Then he lit a cigar and went and sat near the open door to smoke it . 
Mrs. Pontellier was quite sure Raoul had no fever . 
He had gone to bed perfectly well , she said , and nothing had ailed him all day . 
Mr. Pontellier was too well acquainted with fever symptoms to be mistaken . 
He assured her the child was consuming at that moment in the next room . 
He reproached his wife with her inattention , her habitual neglect of the children . 
If it was not a mother 's place to look after children , whose on earth was it ? 
He himself had his hands full with his brokerage business . 
He could not be in two places at once ; making a living for his family on the street , and staying at home to see that no harm befell them . 
He talked in a monotonous , insistent way . 
Mrs. Pontellier sprang out of bed and went into the next room . 
She soon came back and sat on the edge of the bed , leaning her head down on the pillow . 
She said nothing , and refused to answer her husband when he questioned her . 
When his cigar was smoked out he went to bed , and in half a minute he was fast asleep . 
Mrs. Pontellier was by that time thoroughly awake . 
She began to cry a little , and wiped her eyes on the sleeve of her peignoir . 
Blowing out the candle , which her husband had left burning , she slipped her bare feet into a pair of satin mules at the foot of the bed and went out on the porch , where she sat down in the wicker chair and began to rock gently to and fro . 
It was then past midnight . 
The cottages were all dark . 
A single faint light gleamed out from the hallway of the house . 
There was no sound abroad except the hooting of an old owl in the top of a water-oak , and the everlasting voice of the sea , that was not uplifted at that soft hour . 
It broke like a mournful lullaby upon the night . 
The tears came so fast to Mrs. Pontellier 's eyes that the damp sleeve of her peignoir no longer served to dry them . 
She was holding the back of her chair with one hand ; her loose sleeve had slipped almost to the shoulder of her uplifted arm . 
Turning , she thrust her face , steaming and wet , into the bend of her arm , and she went on crying there , not caring any longer to dry her face , her eyes , her arms . 
She could not have told why she was crying . 
Such experiences as the foregoing were not uncommon in her married life . 
They seemed never before to have weighed much against the abundance of her husband 's kindness and a uniform devotion which had come to be tacit and self-understood . 
An indescribable oppression , which seemed to generate in some unfamiliar part of her consciousness , filled her whole being with a vague anguish . 
It was like a shadow , like a mist passing across her soul 's summer day . 
It was strange and unfamiliar ; it was a mood . 
She did not sit there inwardly upbraiding her husband , lamenting at Fate , which had directed her footsteps to the path which they had taken . 
She was just having a good cry all to herself . 
The mosquitoes made merry over her , biting her firm , round arms and nipping at her bare insteps . 
The little stinging , buzzing imps succeeded in dispelling a mood which might have held her there in the darkness half a night longer . 
The following morning Mr. Pontellier was up in good time to take the rockaway which was to convey him to the steamer at the wharf . 
He was returning to the city to his business , and they would not see him again at the Island till the coming Saturday . 
He had regained his composure , which seemed to have been somewhat impaired the night before . 
He was eager to be gone , as he looked forward to a lively week in Carondelet Street . 
Mr. Pontellier gave his wife half of the money which he had brought away from Klein 's hotel the evening before . 
She liked money as well as most women , and accepted it with no little satisfaction . 
`` It will buy a handsome wedding present for Sister Janet ! '' 
she exclaimed , smoothing out the bills as she counted them one by one . 
`` Oh ! 
we 'll treat Sister Janet better than that , my dear , '' he laughed , as he prepared to kiss her good-by . 
The boys were tumbling about , clinging to his legs , imploring that numerous things be brought back to them . 
Mr. Pontellier was a great favorite , and ladies , men , children , even nurses , were always on hand to say goodby to him . 
His wife stood smiling and waving , the boys shouting , as he disappeared in the old rockaway down the sandy road . 
A few days later a box arrived for Mrs. Pontellier from New Orleans . 
It was from her husband . 
It was filled with friandises , with luscious and toothsome bits -- the finest of fruits , pates , a rare bottle or two , delicious syrups , and bonbons in abundance . 
Mrs. Pontellier was always very generous with the contents of such a box ; she was quite used to receiving them when away from home . 
The pates and fruit were brought to the dining-room ; the bonbons were passed around . 
And the ladies , selecting with dainty and discriminating fingers and a little greedily , all declared that Mr. Pontellier was the best husband in the world . 
Mrs. Pontellier was forced to admit that she knew of none better . 
It would have been a difficult matter for Mr. Pontellier to define to his own satisfaction or any one else 's wherein his wife failed in her duty toward their children . 
It was something which he felt rather than perceived , and he never voiced the feeling without subsequent regret and ample atonement . 
If one of the little Pontellier boys took a tumble whilst at play , he was not apt to rush crying to his mother 's arms for comfort ; he would more likely pick himself up , wipe the water out of his eyes and the sand out of his mouth , and go on playing . 
Tots as they were , they pulled together and stood their ground in childish battles with doubled fists and uplifted voices , which usually prevailed against the other mother-tots . 
The quadroon nurse was looked upon as a huge encumbrance , only good to button up waists and panties and to brush and part hair ; since it seemed to be a law of society that hair must be parted and brushed . 
In short , Mrs. Pontellier was not a mother-woman . 
The mother-women seemed to prevail that summer at Grand Isle . 
It was easy to know them , fluttering about with extended , protecting wings when any harm , real or imaginary , threatened their precious brood . 
They were women who idolized their children , worshiped their husbands , and esteemed it a holy privilege to efface themselves as individuals and grow wings as ministering angels . 
Many of them were delicious in the role ; one of them was the embodiment of every womanly grace and charm . 
If her husband did not adore her , he was a brute , deserving of death by slow torture . 
Her name was Adele Ratignolle . 
There are no words to describe her save the old ones that have served so often to picture the bygone heroine of romance and the fair lady of our dreams . 
There was nothing subtle or hidden about her charms ; her beauty was all there , flaming and apparent : the spun-gold hair that comb nor confining pin could restrain ; the blue eyes that were like nothing but sapphires ; two lips that pouted , that were so red one could only think of cherries or some other delicious crimson fruit in looking at them . 
She was growing a little stout , but it did not seem to detract an iota from the grace of every step , pose , gesture . 
One would not have wanted her white neck a mite less full or her beautiful arms more slender . 
Never were hands more exquisite than hers , and it was a joy to look at them when she threaded her needle or adjusted her gold thimble to her taper middle finger as she sewed away on the little night-drawers or fashioned a bodice or a bib . 
Madame Ratignolle was very fond of Mrs. Pontellier , and often she took her sewing and went over to sit with her in the afternoons . 
She was sitting there the afternoon of the day the box arrived from New Orleans . 
She had possession of the rocker , and she was busily engaged in sewing upon a diminutive pair of night-drawers . 
She had brought the pattern of the drawers for Mrs. Pontellier to cut out -- a marvel of construction , fashioned to enclose a baby 's body so effectually that only two small eyes might look out from the garment , like an Eskimo 's . 
They were designed for winter wear , when treacherous drafts came down chimneys and insidious currents of deadly cold found their way through key-holes . 
Mrs. Pontellier 's mind was quite at rest concerning the present material needs of her children , and she could not see the use of anticipating and making winter night garments the subject of her summer meditations . 
But she did not want to appear unamiable and uninterested , so she had brought forth newspapers , which she spread upon the floor of the gallery , and under Madame Ratignolle 's directions she had cut a pattern of the impervious garment . 
Robert was there , seated as he had been the Sunday before , and Mrs. Pontellier also occupied her former position on the upper step , leaning listlessly against the post . 
Beside her was a box of bonbons , which she held out at intervals to Madame Ratignolle . 
That lady seemed at a loss to make a selection , but finally settled upon a stick of nougat , wondering if it were not too rich ; whether it could possibly hurt her . 
Madame Ratignolle had been married seven years . 
About every two years she had a baby . 
At that time she had three babies , and was beginning to think of a fourth one . 
She was always talking about her `` condition . '' 
Her `` condition '' was in no way apparent , and no one would have known a thing about it but for her persistence in making it the subject of conversation . 
Robert started to reassure her , asserting that he had known a lady who had subsisted upon nougat during the entire -- but seeing the color mount into Mrs. Pontellier 's face he checked himself and changed the subject . 
Mrs. Pontellier , though she had married a Creole , was not thoroughly at home in the society of Creoles ; never before had she been thrown so intimately among them . 
There were only Creoles that summer at Lebrun 's . 
They all knew each other , and felt like one large family , among whom existed the most amicable relations . 
A characteristic which distinguished them and which impressed Mrs. Pontellier most forcibly was their entire absence of prudery . 
Their freedom of expression was at first incomprehensible to her , though she had no difficulty in reconciling it with a lofty chastity which in the Creole woman seems to be inborn and unmistakable . 
Never would Edna Pontellier forget the shock with which she heard Madame Ratignolle relating to old Monsieur Farival the harrowing story of one of her accouchements , withholding no intimate detail . 
She was growing accustomed to like shocks , but she could not keep the mounting color back from her cheeks . 
Oftener than once her coming had interrupted the droll story with which Robert was entertaining some amused group of married women . 
A book had gone the rounds of the pension . 
When it came her turn to read it , she did so with profound astonishment . 
She felt moved to read the book in secret and solitude , though none of the others had done so , -- to hide it from view at the sound of approaching footsteps . 
It was openly criticised and freely discussed at table . 
Mrs. Pontellier gave over being astonished , and concluded that wonders would never cease . 
They formed a congenial group sitting there that summer afternoon -- Madame Ratignolle sewing away , often stopping to relate a story or incident with much expressive gesture of her perfect hands ; Robert and Mrs. Pontellier sitting idle , exchanging occasional words , glances or smiles which indicated a certain advanced stage of intimacy and camaraderie . 
He had lived in her shadow during the past month . 
No one thought anything of it . 
Many had predicted that Robert would devote himself to Mrs. Pontellier when he arrived . 
Since the age of fifteen , which was eleven years before , Robert each summer at Grand Isle had constituted himself the devoted attendant of some fair dame or damsel . 
Sometimes it was a young girl , again a widow ; but as often as not it was some interesting married woman . 
For two consecutive seasons he lived in the sunlight of Mademoiselle Duvigne 's presence . 
But she died between summers ; then Robert posed as an inconsolable , prostrating himself at the feet of Madame Ratignolle for whatever crumbs of sympathy and comfort she might be pleased to vouchsafe . 
Mrs. Pontellier liked to sit and gaze at her fair companion as she might look upon a faultless Madonna . 
`` Could any one fathom the cruelty beneath that fair exterior ? '' 
murmured Robert . 
`` She knew that I adored her once , and she let me adore her . 
It was ` Robert , come ; go ; stand up ; sit down ; do this ; do that ; see if the baby sleeps ; my thimble , please , that I left God knows where . 
Come and read Daudet to me while I sew . ' '' 
`` Par exemple ! 
I never had to ask . 
You were always there under my feet , like a troublesome cat . '' 
`` You mean like an adoring dog . 
And just as soon as Ratignolle appeared on the scene , then it WAS like a dog . 
` Passez ! 
Adieu ! 
Allez vous-en ! ' '' 
`` Perhaps I feared to make Alphonse jealous , '' she interjoined , with excessive naivete . 
That made them all laugh . 
The right hand jealous of the left ! 
The heart jealous of the soul ! 
But for that matter , the Creole husband is never jealous ; with him the gangrene passion is one which has become dwarfed by disuse . 
Meanwhile Robert , addressing Mrs Pontellier , continued to tell of his one time hopeless passion for Madame Ratignolle ; of sleepless nights , of consuming flames till the very sea sizzled when he took his daily plunge . 
While the lady at the needle kept up a little running , contemptuous comment : `` Blagueur -- farceur -- gros bete , va ! '' 
He never assumed this seriocomic tone when alone with Mrs. Pontellier . 
She never knew precisely what to make of it ; at that moment it was impossible for her to guess how much of it was jest and what proportion was earnest . 
It was understood that he had often spoken words of love to Madame Ratignolle , without any thought of being taken seriously . 
Mrs. Pontellier was glad he had not assumed a similar role toward herself . 
It would have been unacceptable and annoying . 
Mrs. Pontellier had brought her sketching materials , which she sometimes dabbled with in an unprofessional way . 
She liked the dabbling . 
She felt in it satisfaction of a kind which no other employment afforded her . 
She had long wished to try herself on Madame Ratignolle . 
Never had that lady seemed a more tempting subject than at that moment , seated there like some sensuous Madonna , with the gleam of the fading day enriching her splendid color . 
Robert crossed over and seated himself upon the step below Mrs. Pontellier , that he might watch her work . 
She handled her brushes with a certain ease and freedom which came , not from long and close acquaintance with them , but from a natural aptitude . 
Robert followed her work with close attention , giving forth little ejaculatory expressions of appreciation in French , which he addressed to Madame Ratignolle . 
`` Mais ce n'est pas mal ! 
Elle s ' y connait , elle a de la force , oui . '' 
During his oblivious attention he once quietly rested his head against Mrs. Pontellier 's arm . 
As gently she repulsed him . 
Once again he repeated the offense . 
She could not but believe it to be thoughtlessness on his part ; yet that was no reason she should submit to it . 
She did not remonstrate , except again to repulse him quietly but firmly . 
He offered no apology . 
The picture completed bore no resemblance to Madame Ratignolle . 
She was greatly disappointed to find that it did not look like her . 
But it was a fair enough piece of work , and in many respects satisfying . 
Mrs. Pontellier evidently did not think so . 
After surveying the sketch critically she drew a broad smudge of paint across its surface , and crumpled the paper between her hands . 
The youngsters came tumbling up the steps , the quadroon following at the respectful distance which they required her to observe . 
Mrs. Pontellier made them carry her paints and things into the house . 
She sought to detain them for a little talk and some pleasantry . 
But they were greatly in earnest . 
They had only come to investigate the contents of the bonbon box . 
They accepted without murmuring what she chose to give them , each holding out two chubby hands scoop-like , in the vain hope that they might be filled ; and then away they went . 
The sun was low in the west , and the breeze soft and languorous that came up from the south , charged with the seductive odor of the sea . 
Children freshly befurbelowed , were gathering for their games under the oaks . 
Their voices were high and penetrating . 
Madame Ratignolle folded her sewing , placing thimble , scissors , and thread all neatly together in the roll , which she pinned securely . 
She complained of faintness . 
Mrs. Pontellier flew for the cologne water and a fan . 
She bathed Madame Ratignolle 's face with cologne , while Robert plied the fan with unnecessary vigor . 
The spell was soon over , and Mrs. Pontellier could not help wondering if there were not a little imagination responsible for its origin , for the rose tint had never faded from her friend 's face . 
She stood watching the fair woman walk down the long line of galleries with the grace and majesty which queens are sometimes supposed to possess . 
Her little ones ran to meet her . 
Two of them clung about her white skirts , the third she took from its nurse and with a thousand endearments bore it along in her own fond , encircling arms . 
Though , as everybody well knew , the doctor had forbidden her to lift so much as a pin ! 
`` Are you going bathing ? '' 
asked Robert of Mrs. Pontellier . 
It was not so much a question as a reminder . 
`` Oh , no , '' she answered , with a tone of indecision . 
`` I 'm tired ; I think not . '' 
Her glance wandered from his face away toward the Gulf , whose sonorous murmur reached her like a loving but imperative entreaty . 
`` Oh , come ! '' 
he insisted . 
`` You must n't miss your bath . 
Come on . 
The water must be delicious ; it will not hurt you . 
Come . '' 
He reached up for her big , rough straw hat that hung on a peg outside the door , and put it on her head . 
They descended the steps , and walked away together toward the beach . 
The sun was low in the west and the breeze was soft and warm . 
Edna Pontellier could not have told why , wishing to go to the beach with Robert , she should in the first place have declined , and in the second place have followed in obedience to one of the two contradictory impulses which impelled her . 
A certain light was beginning to dawn dimly within her , -- the light which , showing the way , forbids it . 
At that early period it served but to bewilder her . 
It moved her to dreams , to thoughtfulness , to the shadowy anguish which had overcome her the midnight when she had abandoned herself to tears . 
In short , Mrs. Pontellier was beginning to realize her position in the universe as a human being , and to recognize her relations as an individual to the world within and about her . 
This may seem like a ponderous weight of wisdom to descend upon the soul of a young woman of twenty-eight -- perhaps more wisdom than the Holy Ghost is usually pleased to vouchsafe to any woman . 
But the beginning of things , of a world especially , is necessarily vague , tangled , chaotic , and exceedingly disturbing . 
How few of us ever emerge from such beginning ! 
How many souls perish in its tumult ! 
The voice of the sea is seductive ; never ceasing , whispering , clamoring , murmuring , inviting the soul to wander for a spell in abysses of solitude ; to lose itself in mazes of inward contemplation . 
The voice of the sea speaks to the soul . 
The touch of the sea is sensuous , enfolding the body in its soft , close embrace . 
Mrs. Pontellier was not a woman given to confidences , a characteristic hitherto contrary to her nature . 
Even as a child she had lived her own small life all within herself . 
At a very early period she had apprehended instinctively the dual life -- that outward existence which conforms , the inward life which questions . 
That summer at Grand Isle she began to loosen a little the mantle of reserve that had always enveloped her . 
There may have been -- there must have been -- influences , both subtle and apparent , working in their several ways to induce her to do this ; but the most obvious was the influence of Adele Ratignolle . 
The excessive physical charm of the Creole had first attracted her , for Edna had a sensuous susceptibility to beauty . 
Then the candor of the woman 's whole existence , which every one might read , and which formed so striking a contrast to her own habitual reserve -- this might have furnished a link . 
Who can tell what metals the gods use in forging the subtle bond which we call sympathy , which we might as well call love . 
The two women went away one morning to the beach together , arm in arm , under the huge white sunshade . 
Edna had prevailed upon Madame Ratignolle to leave the children behind , though she could not induce her to relinquish a diminutive roll of needlework , which Adele begged to be allowed to slip into the depths of her pocket . 
In some unaccountable way they had escaped from Robert . 
The walk to the beach was no inconsiderable one , consisting as it did of a long , sandy path , upon which a sporadic and tangled growth that bordered it on either side made frequent and unexpected inroads . 
There were acres of yellow camomile reaching out on either hand . 
Further away still , vegetable gardens abounded , with frequent small plantations of orange or lemon trees intervening . 
The dark green clusters glistened from afar in the sun . 
The women were both of goodly height , Madame Ratignolle possessing the more feminine and matronly figure . 
The charm of Edna Pontellier 's physique stole insensibly upon you . 
The lines of her body were long , clean and symmetrical ; it was a body which occasionally fell into splendid poses ; there was no suggestion of the trim , stereotyped fashion-plate about it . 
A casual and indiscriminating observer , in passing , might not cast a second glance upon the figure . 
But with more feeling and discernment he would have recognized the noble beauty of its modeling , and the graceful severity of poise and movement , which made Edna Pontellier different from the crowd . 
She wore a cool muslin that morning -- white , with a waving vertical line of brown running through it ; also a white linen collar and the big straw hat which she had taken from the peg outside the door . 
The hat rested any way on her yellow-brown hair , that waved a little , was heavy , and clung close to her head . 
Madame Ratignolle , more careful of her complexion , had twined a gauze veil about her head . 
She wore dogskin gloves , with gauntlets that protected her wrists . 
She was dressed in pure white , with a fluffiness of ruffles that became her . 
The draperies and fluttering things which she wore suited her rich , luxuriant beauty as a greater severity of line could not have done . 
There were a number of bath-houses along the beach , of rough but solid construction , built with small , protecting galleries facing the water . 
Each house consisted of two compartments , and each family at Lebrun 's possessed a compartment for itself , fitted out with all the essential paraphernalia of the bath and whatever other conveniences the owners might desire . 
The two women had no intention of bathing ; they had just strolled down to the beach for a walk and to be alone and near the water . 
The Pontellier and Ratignolle compartments adjoined one another under the same roof . 
Mrs. Pontellier had brought down her key through force of habit . 
Unlocking the door of her bath-room she went inside , and soon emerged , bringing a rug , which she spread upon the floor of the gallery , and two huge hair pillows covered with crash , which she placed against the front of the building . 
The two seated themselves there in the shade of the porch , side by side , with their backs against the pillows and their feet extended . 
Madame Ratignolle removed her veil , wiped her face with a rather delicate handkerchief , and fanned herself with the fan which she always carried suspended somewhere about her person by a long , narrow ribbon . 
Edna removed her collar and opened her dress at the throat . 
She took the fan from Madame Ratignolle and began to fan both herself and her companion . 
It was very warm , and for a while they did nothing but exchange remarks about the heat , the sun , the glare . 
But there was a breeze blowing , a choppy , stiff wind that whipped the water into froth . 
It fluttered the skirts of the two women and kept them for a while engaged in adjusting , readjusting , tucking in , securing hair-pins and hat-pins . 
A few persons were sporting some distance away in the water . 
The beach was very still of human sound at that hour . 
The lady in black was reading her morning devotions on the porch of a neighboring bathhouse . 
Two young lovers were exchanging their hearts ' yearnings beneath the children 's tent , which they had found unoccupied . 
Edna Pontellier , casting her eyes about , had finally kept them at rest upon the sea . 
The day was clear and carried the gaze out as far as the blue sky went ; there were a few white clouds suspended idly over the horizon . 
A lateen sail was visible in the direction of Cat Island , and others to the south seemed almost motionless in the far distance . 
`` Of whom -- of what are you thinking ? '' 
asked Adele of her companion , whose countenance she had been watching with a little amused attention , arrested by the absorbed expression which seemed to have seized and fixed every feature into a statuesque repose . 
`` Nothing , '' returned Mrs. Pontellier , with a start , adding at once : `` How stupid ! 
But it seems to me it is the reply we make instinctively to such a question . 
Let me see , '' she went on , throwing back her head and narrowing her fine eyes till they shone like two vivid points of light . 
`` Let me see . 
I was really not conscious of thinking of anything ; but perhaps I can retrace my thoughts . '' 
`` Oh ! 
never mind ! '' 
laughed Madame Ratignolle . 
`` I am not quite so exacting . 
I will let you off this time . 
It is really too hot to think , especially to think about thinking . '' 
`` But for the fun of it , '' persisted Edna . 
`` First of all , the sight of the water stretching so far away , those motionless sails against the blue sky , made a delicious picture that I just wanted to sit and look at . 
The hot wind beating in my face made me think -- without any connection that I can trace of a summer day in Kentucky , of a meadow that seemed as big as the ocean to the very little girl walking through the grass , which was higher than her waist . 
She threw out her arms as if swimming when she walked , beating the tall grass as one strikes out in the water . 
Oh , I see the connection now ! '' 
`` Where were you going that day in Kentucky , walking through the grass ? '' 
`` I do n't remember now . 
I was just walking diagonally across a big field . 
My sun-bonnet obstructed the view . 
I could see only the stretch of green before me , and I felt as if I must walk on forever , without coming to the end of it . 
I do n't remember whether I was frightened or pleased . 
I must have been entertained . 
`` Likely as not it was Sunday , '' she laughed ; `` and I was running away from prayers , from the Presbyterian service , read in a spirit of gloom by my father that chills me yet to think of . '' 
`` And have you been running away from prayers ever since , ma chere ? '' 
asked Madame Ratignolle , amused . 
`` No ! 
oh , no ! '' 
Edna hastened to say . 
`` I was a little unthinking child in those days , just following a misleading impulse without question . 
On the contrary , during one period of my life religion took a firm hold upon me ; after I was twelve and until-until -- why , I suppose until now , though I never thought much about it -- just driven along by habit . 
