But do you know , '' she broke off , turning her quick eyes upon Madame Ratignolle and leaning forward a little so as to bring her face quite close to that of her companion , `` sometimes I feel this summer as if I were walking through the green meadow again ; idly , aimlessly , unthinking and unguided . '' 
Madame Ratignolle laid her hand over that of Mrs. Pontellier , which was near her . 
Seeing that the hand was not withdrawn , she clasped it firmly and warmly . 
She even stroked it a little , fondly , with the other hand , murmuring in an undertone , `` Pauvre cherie . '' 
The action was at first a little confusing to Edna , but she soon lent herself readily to the Creole 's gentle caress . 
She was not accustomed to an outward and spoken expression of affection , either in herself or in others . 
She and her younger sister , Janet , had quarreled a good deal through force of unfortunate habit . 
Her older sister , Margaret , was matronly and dignified , probably from having assumed matronly and housewifely responsibilities too early in life , their mother having died when they were quite young , Margaret was not effusive ; she was practical . 
Edna had had an occasional girl friend , but whether accidentally or not , they seemed to have been all of one type -- the self-contained . 
She never realized that the reserve of her own character had much , perhaps everything , to do with this . 
Her most intimate friend at school had been one of rather exceptional intellectual gifts , who wrote fine-sounding essays , which Edna admired and strove to imitate ; and with her she talked and glowed over the English classics , and sometimes held religious and political controversies . 
Edna often wondered at one propensity which sometimes had inwardly disturbed her without causing any outward show or manifestation on her part . 
At a very early age -- perhaps it was when she traversed the ocean of waving grass -- she remembered that she had been passionately enamored of a dignified and sad-eyed cavalry officer who visited her father in Kentucky . 
She could not leave his presence when he was there , nor remove her eyes from his face , which was something like Napoleon 's , with a lock of black hair failing across the forehead . 
But the cavalry officer melted imperceptibly out of her existence . 
At another time her affections were deeply engaged by a young gentleman who visited a lady on a neighboring plantation . 
It was after they went to Mississippi to live . 
The young man was engaged to be married to the young lady , and they sometimes called upon Margaret , driving over of afternoons in a buggy . 
Edna was a little miss , just merging into her teens ; and the realization that she herself was nothing , nothing , nothing to the engaged young man was a bitter affliction to her . 
But he , too , went the way of dreams . 
She was a grown young woman when she was overtaken by what she supposed to be the climax of her fate . 
It was when the face and figure of a great tragedian began to haunt her imagination and stir her senses . 
The persistence of the infatuation lent it an aspect of genuineness . 
The hopelessness of it colored it with the lofty tones of a great passion . 
The picture of the tragedian stood enframed upon her desk . 
Any one may possess the portrait of a tragedian without exciting suspicion or comment . 
-LRB- This was a sinister reflection which she cherished . -RRB- 
In the presence of others she expressed admiration for his exalted gifts , as she handed the photograph around and dwelt upon the fidelity of the likeness . 
When alone she sometimes picked it up and kissed the cold glass passionately . 
Her marriage to Leonce Pontellier was purely an accident , in this respect resembling many other marriages which masquerade as the decrees of Fate . 
It was in the midst of her secret great passion that she met him . 
He fell in love , as men are in the habit of doing , and pressed his suit with an earnestness and an ardor which left nothing to be desired . 
He pleased her ; his absolute devotion flattered her . 
She fancied there was a sympathy of thought and taste between them , in which fancy she was mistaken . 
Add to this the violent opposition of her father and her sister Margaret to her marriage with a Catholic , and we need seek no further for the motives which led her to accept Monsieur Pontellier for her husband . 
The acme of bliss , which would have been a marriage with the tragedian , was not for her in this world . 
As the devoted wife of a man who worshiped her , she felt she would take her place with a certain dignity in the world of reality , closing the portals forever behind her upon the realm of romance and dreams . 
But it was not long before the tragedian had gone to join the cavalry officer and the engaged young man and a few others ; and Edna found herself face to face with the realities . 
She grew fond of her husband , realizing with some unaccountable satisfaction that no trace of passion or excessive and fictitious warmth colored her affection , thereby threatening its dissolution . 
She was fond of her children in an uneven , impulsive way . 
She would sometimes gather them passionately to her heart ; she would sometimes forget them . 
The year before they had spent part of the summer with their grandmother Pontellier in Iberville . 
Feeling secure regarding their happiness and welfare , she did not miss them except with an occasional intense longing . 
Their absence was a sort of relief , though she did not admit this , even to herself . 
It seemed to free her of a responsibility which she had blindly assumed and for which Fate had not fitted her . 
Edna did not reveal so much as all this to Madame Ratignolle that summer day when they sat with faces turned to the sea . 
But a good part of it escaped her . 
She had put her head down on Madame Ratignolle 's shoulder . 
She was flushed and felt intoxicated with the sound of her own voice and the unaccustomed taste of candor . 
It muddled her like wine , or like a first breath of freedom . 
There was the sound of approaching voices . 
It was Robert , surrounded by a troop of children , searching for them . 
The two little Pontelliers were with him , and he carried Madame Ratignolle 's little girl in his arms . 
There were other children beside , and two nurse-maids followed , looking disagreeable and resigned . 
The women at once rose and began to shake out their draperies and relax their muscles . 
Mrs. Pontellier threw the cushions and rug into the bath-house . 
The children all scampered off to the awning , and they stood there in a line , gazing upon the intruding lovers , still exchanging their vows and sighs . 
The lovers got up , with only a silent protest , and walked slowly away somewhere else . 
The children possessed themselves of the tent , and Mrs. Pontellier went over to join them . 
Madame Ratignolle begged Robert to accompany her to the house ; she complained of cramp in her limbs and stiffness of the joints . 
She leaned draggingly upon his arm as they walked . 
`` Do me a favor , Robert , '' spoke the pretty woman at his side , almost as soon as she and Robert had started their slow , homeward way . 
She looked up in his face , leaning on his arm beneath the encircling shadow of the umbrella which he had lifted . 
`` Granted ; as many as you like , '' he returned , glancing down into her eyes that were full of thoughtfulness and some speculation . 
`` I only ask for one ; let Mrs. Pontellier alone . '' 
`` Tiens ! '' 
he exclaimed , with a sudden , boyish laugh . 
`` Voila que Madame Ratignolle est jalouse ! '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
I 'm in earnest ; I mean what I say . 
Let Mrs. Pontellier alone . '' 
`` Why ? '' 
he asked ; himself growing serious at his companion 's solicitation . 
`` She is not one of us ; she is not like us . 
She might make the unfortunate blunder of taking you seriously . '' 
His face flushed with annoyance , and taking off his soft hat he began to beat it impatiently against his leg as he walked . 
`` Why should n't she take me seriously ? '' 
he demanded sharply . 
`` Am I a comedian , a clown , a jack-in-the-box ? 
Why should n't she ? 
You Creoles ! 
I have no patience with you ! 
Am I always to be regarded as a feature of an amusing programme ? 
I hope Mrs. Pontellier does take me seriously . 
I hope she has discernment enough to find in me something besides the blagueur . 
If I thought there was any doubt -- '' `` Oh , enough , Robert ! '' 
she broke into his heated outburst . 
`` You are not thinking of what you are saying . 
You speak with about as little reflection as we might expect from one of those children down there playing in the sand . 
If your attentions to any married women here were ever offered with any intention of being convincing , you would not be the gentleman we all know you to be , and you would be unfit to associate with the wives and daughters of the people who trust you . '' 
Madame Ratignolle had spoken what she believed to be the law and the gospel . 
The young man shrugged his shoulders impatiently . 
`` Oh ! 
well ! 
That is n't it , '' slamming his hat down vehemently upon his head . 
`` You ought to feel that such things are not flattering to say to a fellow . '' 
`` Should our whole intercourse consist of an exchange of compliments ? 
Ma foi ! '' 
`` It is n't pleasant to have a woman tell you -- '' he went on , unheedingly , but breaking off suddenly : `` Now if I were like Arobin-you remember Alcee Arobin and that story of the consul 's wife at Biloxi ? '' 
And he related the story of Alcee Arobin and the consul 's wife ; and another about the tenor of the French Opera , who received letters which should never have been written ; and still other stories , grave and gay , till Mrs. Pontellier and her possible propensity for taking young men seriously was apparently forgotten . 
Madame Ratignolle , when they had regained her cottage , went in to take the hour 's rest which she considered helpful . 
Before leaving her , Robert begged her pardon for the impatience -- he called it rudeness -- with which he had received her well-meant caution . 
`` You made one mistake , Adele , '' he said , with a light smile ; `` there is no earthly possibility of Mrs. Pontellier ever taking me seriously . 
You should have warned me against taking myself seriously . 
Your advice might then have carried some weight and given me subject for some reflection . 
Au revoir . 
But you look tired , '' he added , solicitously . 
`` Would you like a cup of bouillon ? 
Shall I stir you a toddy ? 
Let me mix you a toddy with a drop of Angostura . '' 
She acceded to the suggestion of bouillon , which was grateful and acceptable . 
He went himself to the kitchen , which was a building apart from the cottages and lying to the rear of the house . 
And he himself brought her the golden-brown bouillon , in a dainty Sevres cup , with a flaky cracker or two on the saucer . 
She thrust a bare , white arm from the curtain which shielded her open door , and received the cup from his hands . 
She told him he was a bon garcon , and she meant it . 
Robert thanked her and turned away toward `` the house . '' 
The lovers were just entering the grounds of the pension . 
They were leaning toward each other as the wateroaks bent from the sea . 
There was not a particle of earth beneath their feet . 
Their heads might have been turned upside-down , so absolutely did they tread upon blue ether . 
The lady in black , creeping behind them , looked a trifle paler and more jaded than usual . 
There was no sign of Mrs. Pontellier and the children . 
Robert scanned the distance for any such apparition . 
They would doubtless remain away till the dinner hour . 
The young man ascended to his mother 's room . 
It was situated at the top of the house , made up of odd angles and a queer , sloping ceiling . 
Two broad dormer windows looked out toward the Gulf , and as far across it as a man 's eye might reach . 
The furnishings of the room were light , cool , and practical . 
Madame Lebrun was busily engaged at the sewing-machine . 
A little black girl sat on the floor , and with her hands worked the treadle of the machine . 
The Creole woman does not take any chances which may be avoided of imperiling her health . 
Robert went over and seated himself on the broad sill of one of the dormer windows . 
He took a book from his pocket and began energetically to read it , judging by the precision and frequency with which he turned the leaves . 
The sewing-machine made a resounding clatter in the room ; it was of a ponderous , by-gone make . 
In the lulls , Robert and his mother exchanged bits of desultory conversation . 
`` Where is Mrs. Pontellier ? '' 
`` Down at the beach with the children . '' 
`` I promised to lend her the Goncourt . 
Do n't forget to take it down when you go ; it 's there on the bookshelf over the small table . '' 
Clatter , clatter , clatter , bang ! 
for the next five or eight minutes . 
`` Where is Victor going with the rockaway ? '' 
`` The rockaway ? 
Victor ? '' 
`` Yes ; down there in front . 
He seems to be getting ready to drive away somewhere . '' 
`` Call him . '' 
Clatter , clatter ! 
Robert uttered a shrill , piercing whistle which might have been heard back at the wharf . 
`` He wo n't look up . '' 
Madame Lebrun flew to the window . 
She called `` Victor ! '' 
She waved a handkerchief and called again . 
The young fellow below got into the vehicle and started the horse off at a gallop . 
Madame Lebrun went back to the machine , crimson with annoyance . 
Victor was the younger son and brother -- a tete montee , with a temper which invited violence and a will which no ax could break . 
`` Whenever you say the word I 'm ready to thrash any amount of reason into him that he 's able to hold . '' 
`` If your father had only lived ! '' 
Clatter , clatter , clatter , clatter , bang ! 
It was a fixed belief with Madame Lebrun that the conduct of the universe and all things pertaining thereto would have been manifestly of a more intelligent and higher order had not Monsieur Lebrun been removed to other spheres during the early years of their married life . 
`` What do you hear from Montel ? '' 
Montel was a middle-aged gentleman whose vain ambition and desire for the past twenty years had been to fill the void which Monsieur Lebrun 's taking off had left in the Lebrun household . 
Clatter , clatter , bang , clatter ! 
`` I have a letter somewhere , '' looking in the machine drawer and finding the letter in the bottom of the workbasket . 
`` He says to tell you he will be in Vera Cruz the beginning of next month , '' -- clatter , clatter ! 
-- `` and if you still have the intention of joining him '' -- bang ! 
clatter , clatter , bang ! 
`` Why did n't you tell me so before , mother ? 
You know I wanted -- '' Clatter , clatter , clatter ! 
`` Do you see Mrs. Pontellier starting back with the children ? 
She will be in late to luncheon again . 
She never starts to get ready for luncheon till the last minute . '' 
Clatter , clatter ! 
`` Where are you going ? '' 
`` Where did you say the Goncourt was ? '' 
Every light in the hall was ablaze ; every lamp turned as high as it could be without smoking the chimney or threatening explosion . 
The lamps were fixed at intervals against the wall , encircling the whole room . 
Some one had gathered orange and lemon branches , and with these fashioned graceful festoons between . 
The dark green of the branches stood out and glistened against the white muslin curtains which draped the windows , and which puffed , floated , and flapped at the capricious will of a stiff breeze that swept up from the Gulf . 
It was Saturday night a few weeks after the intimate conversation held between Robert and Madame Ratignolle on their way from the beach . 
An unusual number of husbands , fathers , and friends had come down to stay over Sunday ; and they were being suitably entertained by their families , with the material help of Madame Lebrun . 
The dining tables had all been removed to one end of the hall , and the chairs ranged about in rows and in clusters . 
Each little family group had had its say and exchanged its domestic gossip earlier in the evening . 
There was now an apparent disposition to relax ; to widen the circle of confidences and give a more general tone to the conversation . 
Many of the children had been permitted to sit up beyond their usual bedtime . 
A small band of them were lying on their stomachs on the floor looking at the colored sheets of the comic papers which Mr. Pontellier had brought down . 
The little Pontellier boys were permitting them to do so , and making their authority felt . 
Music , dancing , and a recitation or two were the entertainments furnished , or rather , offered . 
But there was nothing systematic about the programme , no appearance of prearrangement nor even premeditation . 
At an early hour in the evening the Farival twins were prevailed upon to play the piano . 
They were girls of fourteen , always clad in the Virgin 's colors , blue and white , having been dedicated to the Blessed Virgin at their baptism . 
They played a duet from `` Zampa , '' and at the earnest solicitation of every one present followed it with the overture to `` The Poet and the Peasant . '' 
`` Allez vous-en ! 
Sapristi ! '' 
shrieked the parrot outside the door . 
He was the only being present who possessed sufficient candor to admit that he was not listening to these gracious performances for the first time that summer . 
Old Monsieur Farival , grandfather of the twins , grew indignant over the interruption , and insisted upon having the bird removed and consigned to regions of darkness . 
Victor Lebrun objected ; and his decrees were as immutable as those of Fate . 
The parrot fortunately offered no further interruption to the entertainment , the whole venom of his nature apparently having been cherished up and hurled against the twins in that one impetuous outburst . 
Later a young brother and sister gave recitations , which every one present had heard many times at winter evening entertainments in the city . 
A little girl performed a skirt dance in the center of the floor . 
The mother played her accompaniments and at the same time watched her daughter with greedy admiration and nervous apprehension . 
She need have had no apprehension . 
The child was mistress of the situation . 
She had been properly dressed for the occasion in black tulle and black silk tights . 
Her little neck and arms were bare , and her hair , artificially crimped , stood out like fluffy black plumes over her head . 
Her poses were full of grace , and her little black-shod toes twinkled as they shot out and upward with a rapidity and suddenness which were bewildering . 
But there was no reason why every one should not dance . 
Madame Ratignolle could not , so it was she who gaily consented to play for the others . 
She played very well , keeping excellent waltz time and infusing an expression into the strains which was indeed inspiring . 
She was keeping up her music on account of the children , she said ; because she and her husband both considered it a means of brightening the home and making it attractive . 
Almost every one danced but the twins , who could not be induced to separate during the brief period when one or the other should be whirling around the room in the arms of a man . 
They might have danced together , but they did not think of it . 
The children were sent to bed . 
Some went submissively ; others with shrieks and protests as they were dragged away . 
They had been permitted to sit up till after the ice-cream , which naturally marked the limit of human indulgence . 
The ice-cream was passed around with cake -- gold and silver cake arranged on platters in alternate slices ; it had been made and frozen during the afternoon back of the kitchen by two black women , under the supervision of Victor . 
It was pronounced a great success -- excellent if it had only contained a little less vanilla or a little more sugar , if it had been frozen a degree harder , and if the salt might have been kept out of portions of it . 
Victor was proud of his achievement , and went about recommending it and urging every one to partake of it to excess . 
After Mrs. Pontellier had danced twice with her husband , once with Robert , and once with Monsieur Ratignolle , who was thin and tall and swayed like a reed in the wind when he danced , she went out on the gallery and seated herself on the low window-sill , where she commanded a view of all that went on in the hall and could look out toward the Gulf . 
There was a soft effulgence in the east . 
The moon was coming up , and its mystic shimmer was casting a million lights across the distant , restless water . 
`` Would you like to hear Mademoiselle Reisz play ? '' 
asked Robert , coming out on the porch where she was . 
Of course Edna would like to hear Mademoiselle Reisz play ; but she feared it would be useless to entreat her . 
`` I 'll ask her , '' he said . 
`` I 'll tell her that you want to hear her . 
She likes you . 
She will come . '' 
He turned and hurried away to one of the far cottages , where Mademoiselle Reisz was shuffling away . 
She was dragging a chair in and out of her room , and at intervals objecting to the crying of a baby , which a nurse in the adjoining cottage was endeavoring to put to sleep . 
She was a disagreeable little woman , no longer young , who had quarreled with almost every one , owing to a temper which was self-assertive and a disposition to trample upon the rights of others . 
Robert prevailed upon her without any too great difficulty . 
She entered the hall with him during a lull in the dance . 
She made an awkward , imperious little bow as she went in . 
She was a homely woman , with a small weazened face and body and eyes that glowed . 
She had absolutely no taste in dress , and wore a batch of rusty black lace with a bunch of artificial violets pinned to the side of her hair . 
`` Ask Mrs. Pontellier what she would like to hear me play , '' she requested of Robert . 
She sat perfectly still before the piano , not touching the keys , while Robert carried her message to Edna at the window . 
A general air of surprise and genuine satisfaction fell upon every one as they saw the pianist enter . 
There was a settling down , and a prevailing air of expectancy everywhere . 
Edna was a trifle embarrassed at being thus signaled out for the imperious little woman 's favor . 
She would not dare to choose , and begged that Mademoiselle Reisz would please herself in her selections . 
Edna was what she herself called very fond of music . 
Musical strains , well rendered , had a way of evoking pictures in her mind . 
She sometimes liked to sit in the room of mornings when Madame Ratignolle played or practiced . 
One piece which that lady played Edna had entitled `` Solitude . '' 
It was a short , plaintive , minor strain . 
The name of the piece was something else , but she called it `` Solitude . '' 
When she heard it there came before her imagination the figure of a man standing beside a desolate rock on the seashore . 
He was naked . 
His attitude was one of hopeless resignation as he looked toward a distant bird winging its flight away from him . 
Another piece called to her mind a dainty young woman clad in an Empire gown , taking mincing dancing steps as she came down a long avenue between tall hedges . 
Again , another reminded her of children at play , and still another of nothing on earth but a demure lady stroking a cat . 
The very first chords which Mademoiselle Reisz struck upon the piano sent a keen tremor down Mrs. Pontellier 's spinal column . 
It was not the first time she had heard an artist at the piano . 
Perhaps it was the first time she was ready , perhaps the first time her being was tempered to take an impress of the abiding truth . 
She waited for the material pictures which she thought would gather and blaze before her imagination . 
She waited in vain . 
She saw no pictures of solitude , of hope , of longing , or of despair . 
But the very passions themselves were aroused within her soul , swaying it , lashing it , as the waves daily beat upon her splendid body . 
She trembled , she was choking , and the tears blinded her . 
Mademoiselle had finished . 
She arose , and bowing her stiff , lofty bow , she went away , stopping for neither thanks nor applause . 
As she passed along the gallery she patted Edna upon the shoulder . 
`` Well , how did you like my music ? '' 
she asked . 
The young woman was unable to answer ; she pressed the hand of the pianist convulsively . 
Mademoiselle Reisz perceived her agitation and even her tears . 
She patted her again upon the shoulder as she said : `` You are the only one worth playing for . 
Those others ? 
Bah ! '' 
and she went shuffling and sidling on down the gallery toward her room . 
But she was mistaken about `` those others . '' 
Her playing had aroused a fever of enthusiasm . 
`` What passion ! '' 
`` What an artist ! '' 
`` I have always said no one could play Chopin like Mademoiselle Reisz ! '' 
`` That last prelude ! 
Bon Dieu ! 
It shakes a man ! '' 
It was growing late , and there was a general disposition to disband . 
But some one , perhaps it was Robert , thought of a bath at that mystic hour and under that mystic moon . 
At all events Robert proposed it , and there was not a dissenting voice . 
There was not one but was ready to follow when he led the way . 
He did not lead the way , however , he directed the way ; and he himself loitered behind with the lovers , who had betrayed a disposition to linger and hold themselves apart . 
He walked between them , whether with malicious or mischievous intent was not wholly clear , even to himself . 
The Pontelliers and Ratignolles walked ahead ; the women leaning upon the arms of their husbands . 
Edna could hear Robert 's voice behind them , and could sometimes hear what he said . 
She wondered why he did not join them . 
It was unlike him not to . 
Of late he had sometimes held away from her for an entire day , redoubling his devotion upon the next and the next , as though to make up for hours that had been lost . 
She missed him the days when some pretext served to take him away from her , just as one misses the sun on a cloudy day without having thought much about the sun when it was shining . 
The people walked in little groups toward the beach . 
They talked and laughed ; some of them sang . 
There was a band playing down at Klein 's hotel , and the strains reached them faintly , tempered by the distance . 
There were strange , rare odors abroad -- a tangle of the sea smell and of weeds and damp , new-plowed earth , mingled with the heavy perfume of a field of white blossoms somewhere near . 
But the night sat lightly upon the sea and the land . 
There was no weight of darkness ; there were no shadows . 
The white light of the moon had fallen upon the world like the mystery and the softness of sleep . 
Most of them walked into the water as though into a native element . 
The sea was quiet now , and swelled lazily in broad billows that melted into one another and did not break except upon the beach in little foamy crests that coiled back like slow , white serpents . 
Edna had attempted all summer to learn to swim . 
She had received instructions from both the men and women ; in some instances from the children . 
Robert had pursued a system of lessons almost daily ; and he was nearly at the point of discouragement in realizing the futility of his efforts . 
A certain ungovernable dread hung about her when in the water , unless there was a hand near by that might reach out and reassure her . 
But that night she was like the little tottering , stumbling , clutching child , who of a sudden realizes its powers , and walks for the first time alone , boldly and with over-confidence . 
She could have shouted for joy . 
She did shout for joy , as with a sweeping stroke or two she lifted her body to the surface of the water . 
A feeling of exultation overtook her , as if some power of significant import had been given her to control the working of her body and her soul . 
She grew daring and reckless , overestimating her strength . 
She wanted to swim far out , where no woman had swum before . 
Her unlooked-for achievement was the subject of wonder , applause , and admiration . 
Each one congratulated himself that his special teachings had accomplished this desired end . 
`` How easy it is ! '' 
she thought . 
`` It is nothing , '' she said aloud ; `` why did I not discover before that it was nothing . 
Think of the time I have lost splashing about like a baby ! '' 
She would not join the groups in their sports and bouts , but intoxicated with her newly conquered power , she swam out alone . 
She turned her face seaward to gather in an impression of space and solitude , which the vast expanse of water , meeting and melting with the moonlit sky , conveyed to her excited fancy . 
As she swam she seemed to be reaching out for the unlimited in which to lose herself . 
Once she turned and looked toward the shore , toward the people she had left there . 
She had not gone any great distance -- that is , what would have been a great distance for an experienced swimmer . 
But to her unaccustomed vision the stretch of water behind her assumed the aspect of a barrier which her unaided strength would never be able to overcome . 
A quick vision of death smote her soul , and for a second of time appalled and enfeebled her senses . 
But by an effort she rallied her staggering faculties and managed to regain the land . 
She made no mention of her encounter with death and her flash of terror , except to say to her husband , `` I thought I should have perished out there alone . '' 
`` You were not so very far , my dear ; I was watching you , '' he told her . 
Edna went at once to the bath-house , and she had put on her dry clothes and was ready to return home before the others had left the water . 
She started to walk away alone . 
They all called to her and shouted to her . 
She waved a dissenting hand , and went on , paying no further heed to their renewed cries which sought to detain her . 
`` Sometimes I am tempted to think that Mrs. Pontellier is capricious , '' said Madame Lebrun , who was amusing herself immensely and feared that Edna 's abrupt departure might put an end to the pleasure . 
`` I know she is , '' assented Mr. Pontellier ; `` sometimes , not often . '' 
Edna had not traversed a quarter of the distance on her way home before she was overtaken by Robert . 
`` Did you think I was afraid ? '' 
she asked him , without a shade of annoyance . 
`` No ; I knew you were n't afraid . '' 
`` Then why did you come ? 
Why did n't you stay out there with the others ? '' 
`` I never thought of it . '' 
`` Thought of what ? '' 
`` Of anything . 
What difference does it make ? '' 
`` I 'm very tired , '' she uttered , complainingly . 
`` I know you are . '' 
`` You do n't know anything about it . 
Why should you know ? 
I never was so exhausted in my life . 
But it is n't unpleasant . 
A thousand emotions have swept through me to-night . 
I do n't comprehend half of them . 
Do n't mind what I 'm saying ; I am just thinking aloud . 
I wonder if I shall ever be stirred again as Mademoiselle Reisz 's playing moved me to-night . 
I wonder if any night on earth will ever again be like this one . 
It is like a night in a dream . 
The people about me are like some uncanny , half-human beings . 
There must be spirits abroad to-night . '' 
`` There are , '' whispered Robert , `` Did n't you know this was the twenty-eighth of August ? '' 
`` The twenty-eighth of August ? '' 
`` Yes . 
On the twenty-eighth of August , at the hour of midnight , and if the moon is shining -- the moon must be shining -- a spirit that has haunted these shores for ages rises up from the Gulf . 
With its own penetrating vision the spirit seeks some one mortal worthy to hold him company , worthy of being exalted for a few hours into realms of the semi-celestials . 
His search has always hitherto been fruitless , and he has sunk back , disheartened , into the sea . 
But to-night he found Mrs. Pontellier . 
Perhaps he will never wholly release her from the spell . 
Perhaps she will never again suffer a poor , unworthy earthling to walk in the shadow of her divine presence . '' 
`` Do n't banter me , '' she said , wounded at what appeared to be his flippancy . 
He did not mind the entreaty , but the tone with its delicate note of pathos was like a reproach . 
He could not explain ; he could not tell her that he had penetrated her mood and understood . 
He said nothing except to offer her his arm , for , by her own admission , she was exhausted . 
She had been walking alone with her arms hanging limp , letting her white skirts trail along the dewy path . 
She took his arm , but she did not lean upon it . 
She let her hand lie listlessly , as though her thoughts were elsewhere -- somewhere in advance of her body , and she was striving to overtake them . 
Robert assisted her into the hammock which swung from the post before her door out to the trunk of a tree . 
`` Will you stay out here and wait for Mr. Pontellier ? '' 
he asked . 
`` I 'll stay out here . 
Good-night . '' 
`` Shall I get you a pillow ? '' 
`` There 's one here , '' she said , feeling about , for they were in the shadow . 
`` It must be soiled ; the children have been tumbling it about . '' 
`` No matter . '' 
And having discovered the pillow , she adjusted it beneath her head . 
She extended herself in the hammock with a deep breath of relief . 
She was not a supercilious or an over-dainty woman . 
She was not much given to reclining in the hammock , and when she did so it was with no cat-like suggestion of voluptuous ease , but with a beneficent repose which seemed to invade her whole body . 
`` Shall I stay with you till Mr. Pontellier comes ? '' 
asked Robert , seating himself on the outer edge of one of the steps and taking hold of the hammock rope which was fastened to the post . 
`` If you wish . 
Do n't swing the hammock . 
Will you get my white shawl which I left on the window-sill over at the house ? '' 
`` Are you chilly ? '' 
`` No ; but I shall be presently . '' 
`` Presently ? '' 
he laughed . 
`` Do you know what time it is ? 
How long are you going to stay out here ? '' 
`` I do n't know . 
Will you get the shawl ? '' 
