`` Do ? 
Nothing , except feel glad and happy to be alive . '' 
She was already glad and happy to be alive at the mere thought of his return . 
The murky , lowering sky , which had depressed her a few hours before , seemed bracing and invigorating as she splashed through the streets on her way home . 
She stopped at a confectioner 's and ordered a huge box of bonbons for the children in Iberville . 
She slipped a card in the box , on which she scribbled a tender message and sent an abundance of kisses . 
Before dinner in the evening Edna wrote a charming letter to her husband , telling him of her intention to move for a while into the little house around the block , and to give a farewell dinner before leaving , regretting that he was not there to share it , to help out with the menu and assist her in entertaining the guests . 
Her letter was brilliant and brimming with cheerfulness . 
`` What is the matter with you ? '' 
asked Arobin that evening . 
`` I never found you in such a happy mood . '' 
Edna was tired by that time , and was reclining on the lounge before the fire . 
`` Do n't you know the weather prophet has told us we shall see the sun pretty soon ? '' 
`` Well , that ought to be reason enough , '' he acquiesced . 
`` You would n't give me another if I sat here all night imploring you . '' 
He sat close to her on a low tabouret , and as he spoke his fingers lightly touched the hair that fell a little over her forehead . 
She liked the touch of his fingers through her hair , and closed her eyes sensitively . 
`` One of these days , '' she said , `` I 'm going to pull myself together for a while and think -- try to determine what character of a woman I am ; for , candidly , I do n't know . 
By all the codes which I am acquainted with , I am a devilishly wicked specimen of the sex . 
But some way I ca n't convince myself that I am . 
I must think about it . '' 
`` Do n't . 
What 's the use ? 
Why should you bother thinking about it when I can tell you what manner of woman you are . '' 
His fingers strayed occasionally down to her warm , smooth cheeks and firm chin , which was growing a little full and double . 
`` Oh , yes ! 
You will tell me that I am adorable ; everything that is captivating . 
Spare yourself the effort . '' 
`` No ; I sha n't tell you anything of the sort , though I should n't be lying if I did . '' 
`` Do you know Mademoiselle Reisz ? '' 
she asked irrelevantly . 
`` The pianist ? 
I know her by sight . 
I 've heard her play . '' 
`` She says queer things sometimes in a bantering way that you do n't notice at the time and you find yourself thinking about afterward . '' 
`` For instance ? '' 
`` Well , for instance , when I left her to-day , she put her arms around me and felt my shoulder blades , to see if my wings were strong , she said . 
` The bird that would soar above the level plain of tradition and prejudice must have strong wings . 
It is a sad spectacle to see the weaklings bruised , exhausted , fluttering back to earth . ' 
Whither would you soar ? '' 
`` I 'm not thinking of any extraordinary flights . 
I only half comprehend her . '' 
`` I 've heard she 's partially demented , '' said Arobin . 
`` She seems to me wonderfully sane , '' Edna replied . 
`` I 'm told she 's extremely disagreeable and unpleasant . 
Why have you introduced her at a moment when I desired to talk of you ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
talk of me if you like , '' cried Edna , clasping her hands beneath her head ; `` but let me think of something else while you do . '' 
`` I 'm jealous of your thoughts tonight . 
They 're making you a little kinder than usual ; but some way I feel as if they were wandering , as if they were not here with me . '' 
She only looked at him and smiled . 
His eyes were very near . 
He leaned upon the lounge with an arm extended across her , while the other hand still rested upon her hair . 
They continued silently to look into each other 's eyes . 
When he leaned forward and kissed her , she clasped his head , holding his lips to hers . 
It was the first kiss of her life to which her nature had really responded . 
It was a flaming torch that kindled desire . 
Edna cried a little that night after Arobin left her . 
It was only one phase of the multitudinous emotions which had assailed her . 
There was with her an overwhelming feeling of irresponsibility . 
There was the shock of the unexpected and the unaccustomed . 
There was her husband 's reproach looking at her from the external things around her which he had provided for her external existence . 
There was Robert 's reproach making itself felt by a quicker , fiercer , more overpowering love , which had awakened within her toward him . 
Above all , there was understanding . 
She felt as if a mist had been lifted from her eyes , enabling her to took upon and comprehend the significance of life , that monster made up of beauty and brutality . 
But among the conflicting sensations which assailed her , there was neither shame nor remorse . 
There was a dull pang of regret because it was not the kiss of love which had inflamed her , because it was not love which had held this cup of life to her lips . 
Without even waiting for an answer from her husband regarding his opinion or wishes in the matter , Edna hastened her preparations for quitting her home on Esplanade Street and moving into the little house around the block . 
A feverish anxiety attended her every action in that direction . 
There was no moment of deliberation , no interval of repose between the thought and its fulfillment . 
Early upon the morning following those hours passed in Arobin 's society , Edna set about securing her new abode and hurrying her arrangements for occupying it . 
Within the precincts of her home she felt like one who has entered and lingered within the portals of some forbidden temple in which a thousand muffled voices bade her begone . 
Whatever was her own in the house , everything which she had acquired aside from her husband 's bounty , she caused to be transported to the other house , supplying simple and meager deficiencies from her own resources . 
Arobin found her with rolled sleeves , working in company with the house-maid when he looked in during the afternoon . 
She was splendid and robust , and had never appeared handsomer than in the old blue gown , with a red silk handkerchief knotted at random around her head to protect her hair from the dust . 
She was mounted upon a high stepladder , unhooking a picture from the wall when he entered . 
He had found the front door open , and had followed his ring by walking in unceremoniously . 
`` Come down ! '' 
he said . 
`` Do you want to kill yourself ? '' 
She greeted him with affected carelessness , and appeared absorbed in her occupation . 
If he had expected to find her languishing , reproachful , or indulging in sentimental tears , he must have been greatly surprised . 
He was no doubt prepared for any emergency , ready for any one of the foregoing attitudes , just as he bent himself easily and naturally to the situation which confronted him . 
`` Please come down , '' he insisted , holding the ladder and looking up at her . 
`` No , '' she answered ; `` Ellen is afraid to mount the ladder . 
Joe is working over at the ` pigeon house ' -- that 's the name Ellen gives it , because it 's so small and looks like a pigeon house -- and some one has to do this . '' 
Arobin pulled off his coat , and expressed himself ready and willing to tempt fate in her place . 
Ellen brought him one of her dust-caps , and went into contortions of mirth , which she found it impossible to control , when she saw him put it on before the mirror as grotesquely as he could . 
Edna herself could not refrain from smiling when she fastened it at his request . 
So it was he who in turn mounted the ladder , unhooking pictures and curtains , and dislodging ornaments as Edna directed . 
When he had finished he took off his dust-cap and went out to wash his hands . 
Edna was sitting on the tabouret , idly brushing the tips of a feather duster along the carpet when he came in again . 
`` Is there anything more you will let me do ? '' 
he asked . 
`` That is all , '' she answered . 
`` Ellen can manage the rest . '' 
She kept the young woman occupied in the drawing-room , unwilling to be left alone with Arobin . 
`` What about the dinner ? '' 
he asked ; `` the grand event , the coup d'etat ? '' 
`` It will be day after to-morrow . 
Why do you call it the ` coup d'etat ? ' 
Oh ! 
it will be very fine ; all my best of everything -- crystal , silver and gold , Sevres , flowers , music , and champagne to swim in . 
I 'll let Leonce pay the bills . 
I wonder what he 'll say when he sees the bills . 
`` And you ask me why I call it a coup d'etat ? '' 
Arobin had put on his coat , and he stood before her and asked if his cravat was plumb . 
She told him it was , looking no higher than the tip of his collar . 
`` When do you go to the ` pigeon house ? ' 
-- with all due acknowledgment to Ellen . '' 
`` Day after to-morrow , after the dinner . 
I shall sleep there . '' 
`` Ellen , will you very kindly get me a glass of water ? '' 
asked Arobin . 
`` The dust in the curtains , if you will pardon me for hinting such a thing , has parched my throat to a crisp . '' 
`` While Ellen gets the water , '' said Edna , rising , `` I will say good-by and let you go . 
I must get rid of this grime , and I have a million things to do and think of . '' 
`` When shall I see you ? '' 
asked Arobin , seeking to detain her , the maid having left the room . 
`` At the dinner , of course . 
You are invited . '' 
`` Not before ? 
-- not to-night or to-morrow morning or tomorrow noon or night ? 
or the day after morning or noon ? 
Ca n't you see yourself , without my telling you , what an eternity it is ? '' 
He had followed her into the hall and to the foot of the stairway , looking up at her as she mounted with her face half turned to him . 
`` Not an instant sooner , '' she said . 
But she laughed and looked at him with eyes that at once gave him courage to wait and made it torture to wait . 
Though Edna had spoken of the dinner as a very grand affair , it was in truth a very small affair and very select , in so much as the guests invited were few and were selected with discrimination . 
She had counted upon an even dozen seating themselves at her round mahogany board , forgetting for the moment that Madame Ratignolle was to the last degree souffrante and unpresentable , and not foreseeing that Madame Lebrun would send a thousand regrets at the last moment . 
So there were only ten , after all , which made a cozy , comfortable number . 
There were Mr. and Mrs. Merriman , a pretty , vivacious little woman in the thirties ; her husband , a jovial fellow , something of a shallow-pate , who laughed a good deal at other people 's witticisms , and had thereby made himself extremely popular . 
Mrs. Highcamp had accompanied them . 
Of course , there was Alcee Arobin ; and Mademoiselle Reisz had consented to come . 
Edna had sent her a fresh bunch of violets with black lace trimmings for her hair . 
Monsieur Ratignolle brought himself and his wife 's excuses . 
Victor Lebrun , who happened to be in the city , bent upon relaxation , had accepted with alacrity . 
There was a Miss Mayblunt , no longer in her teens , who looked at the world through lorgnettes and with the keenest interest . 
It was thought and said that she was intellectual ; it was suspected of her that she wrote under a nom de guerre . 
She had come with a gentleman by the name of Gouvernail , connected with one of the daily papers , of whom nothing special could be said , except that he was observant and seemed quiet and inoffensive . 
Edna herself made the tenth , and at half-past eight they seated themselves at table , Arobin and Monsieur Ratignolle on either side of their hostess . 
Mrs. Highcamp sat between Arobin and Victor Lebrun . 
Then came Mrs. Merriman , Mr. Gouvernail , Miss Mayblunt , Mr. Merriman , and Mademoiselle Reisz next to Monsieur Ratignolle . 
There was something extremely gorgeous about the appearance of the table , an effect of splendor conveyed by a cover of pale yellow satin under strips of lace-work . 
There were wax candles , in massive brass candelabra , burning softly under yellow silk shades ; full , fragrant roses , yellow and red , abounded . 
There were silver and gold , as she had said there would be , and crystal which glittered like the gems which the women wore . 
The ordinary stiff dining chairs had been discarded for the occasion and replaced by the most commodious and luxurious which could be collected throughout the house . 
Mademoiselle Reisz , being exceedingly diminutive , was elevated upon cushions , as small children are sometimes hoisted at table upon bulky volumes . 
`` Something new , Edna ? '' 
exclaimed Miss Mayblunt , with lorgnette directed toward a magnificent cluster of diamonds that sparkled , that almost sputtered , in Edna 's hair , just over the center of her forehead . 
`` Quite new ; ` brand ' new , in fact ; a present from my husband . 
It arrived this morning from New York . 
I may as well admit that this is my birthday , and that I am twenty-nine . 
In good time I expect you to drink my health . 
Meanwhile , I shall ask you to begin with this cocktail , composed -- would you say ` composed ? ' '' 
with an appeal to Miss Mayblunt -- `` composed by my father in honor of Sister Janet 's wedding . '' 
Before each guest stood a tiny glass that looked and sparkled like a garnet gem . 
`` Then , all things considered , '' spoke Arobin , `` it might not be amiss to start out by drinking the Colonel 's health in the cocktail which he composed , on the birthday of the most charming of women -- the daughter whom he invented . '' 
Mr. Merriman 's laugh at this sally was such a genuine outburst and so contagious that it started the dinner with an agreeable swing that never slackened . 
Miss Mayblunt begged to be allowed to keep her cocktail untouched before her , just to look at . 
The color was marvelous ! 
She could compare it to nothing she had ever seen , and the garnet lights which it emitted were unspeakably rare . 
She pronounced the Colonel an artist , and stuck to it . 
Monsieur Ratignolle was prepared to take things seriously ; the mets , the entre-mets , the service , the decorations , even the people . 
He looked up from his pompano and inquired of Arobin if he were related to the gentleman of that name who formed one of the firm of Laitner and Arobin , lawyers . 
The young man admitted that Laitner was a warm personal friend , who permitted Arobin 's name to decorate the firm 's letterheads and to appear upon a shingle that graced Perdido Street . 
`` There are so many inquisitive people and institutions abounding , '' said Arobin , `` that one is really forced as a matter of convenience these days to assume the virtue of an occupation if he has it not . '' 
Monsieur Ratignolle stared a little , and turned to ask Mademoiselle Reisz if she considered the symphony concerts up to the standard which had been set the previous winter . 
Mademoiselle Reisz answered Monsieur Ratignolle in French , which Edna thought a little rude , under the circumstances , but characteristic . 
Mademoiselle had only disagreeable things to say of the symphony concerts , and insulting remarks to make of all the musicians of New Orleans , singly and collectively . 
All her interest seemed to be centered upon the delicacies placed before her . 
Mr. Merriman said that Mr. Arobin 's remark about inquisitive people reminded him of a man from Waco the other day at the St. Charles Hotel -- but as Mr. Merriman 's stories were always lame and lacking point , his wife seldom permitted him to complete them . 
She interrupted him to ask if he remembered the name of the author whose book she had bought the week before to send to a friend in Geneva . 
She was talking `` books '' with Mr. Gouvernail and trying to draw from him his opinion upon current literary topics . 
Her husband told the story of the Waco man privately to Miss Mayblunt , who pretended to be greatly amused and to think it extremely clever . 
Mrs. Highcamp hung with languid but unaffected interest upon the warm and impetuous volubility of her left-hand neighbor , Victor Lebrun . 
Her attention was never for a moment withdrawn from him after seating herself at table ; and when he turned to Mrs. Merriman , who was prettier and more vivacious than Mrs. Highcamp , she waited with easy indifference for an opportunity to reclaim his attention . 
There was the occasional sound of music , of mandolins , sufficiently removed to be an agreeable accompaniment rather than an interruption to the conversation . 
Outside the soft , monotonous splash of a fountain could be heard ; the sound penetrated into the room with the heavy odor of jessamine that came through the open windows . 
The golden shimmer of Edna 's satin gown spread in rich folds on either side of her . 
There was a soft fall of lace encircling her shoulders . 
It was the color of her skin , without the glow , the myriad living tints that one may sometimes discover in vibrant flesh . 
There was something in her attitude , in her whole appearance when she leaned her head against the high-backed chair and spread her arms , which suggested the regal woman , the one who rules , who looks on , who stands alone . 
But as she sat there amid her guests , she felt the old ennui overtaking her ; the hopelessness which so often assailed her , which came upon her like an obsession , like something extraneous , independent of volition . 
It was something which announced itself ; a chill breath that seemed to issue from some vast cavern wherein discords waited . 
There came over her the acute longing which always summoned into her spiritual vision the presence of the beloved one , overpowering her at once with a sense of the unattainable . 
The moments glided on , while a feeling of good fellowship passed around the circle like a mystic cord , holding and binding these people together with jest and laughter . 
Monsieur Ratignolle was the first to break the pleasant charm . 
At ten o'clock he excused himself . 
Madame Ratignolle was waiting for him at home . 
She was bien souffrante , and she was filled with vague dread , which only her husband 's presence could allay . 
Mademoiselle Reisz arose with Monsieur Ratignolle , who offered to escort her to the car . 
She had eaten well ; she had tasted the good , rich wines , and they must have turned her head , for she bowed pleasantly to all as she withdrew from table . 
She kissed Edna upon the shoulder , and whispered : `` Bonne nuit , ma reine ; soyez sage . '' 
She had been a little bewildered upon rising , or rather , descending from her cushions , and Monsieur Ratignolle gallantly took her arm and led her away . 
Mrs. Highcamp was weaving a garland of roses , yellow and red . 
When she had finished the garland , she laid it lightly upon Victor 's black curls . 
He was reclining far back in the luxurious chair , holding a glass of champagne to the light . 
As if a magician 's wand had touched him , the garland of roses transformed him into a vision of Oriental beauty . 
His cheeks were the color of crushed grapes , and his dusky eyes glowed with a languishing fire . 
`` Sapristi ! '' 
exclaimed Arobin . 
But Mrs. Highcamp had one more touch to add to the picture . 
She took from the back of her chair a white silken scarf , with which she had covered her shoulders in the early part of the evening . 
She draped it across the boy in graceful folds , and in a way to conceal his black , conventional evening dress . 
He did not seem to mind what she did to him , only smiled , showing a faint gleam of white teeth , while he continued to gaze with narrowing eyes at the light through his glass of champagne . 
`` Oh ! 
to be able to paint in color rather than in words ! '' 
exclaimed Miss Mayblunt , losing herself in a rhapsodic dream as she looked at him . '' 
` There was a graven image of Desire Painted with red blood on a ground of gold . ' '' 
murmured Gouvernail , under his breath . 
The effect of the wine upon Victor was to change his accustomed volubility into silence . 
He seemed to have abandoned himself to a reverie , and to be seeing pleasing visions in the amber bead . 
`` Sing , '' entreated Mrs. Highcamp . 
`` Wo n't you sing to us ? '' 
`` Let him alone , '' said Arobin . 
`` He 's posing , '' offered Mr. Merriman ; `` let him have it out . '' 
`` I believe he 's paralyzed , '' laughed Mrs. Merriman . 
And leaning over the youth 's chair , she took the glass from his hand and held it to his lips . 
He sipped the wine slowly , and when he had drained the glass she laid it upon the table and wiped his lips with her little filmy handkerchief . 
`` Yes , I 'll sing for you , '' he said , turning in his chair toward Mrs. Highcamp . 
He clasped his hands behind his head , and looking up at the ceiling began to hum a little , trying his voice like a musician tuning an instrument . 
Then , looking at Edna , he began to sing : `` Ah ! 
si tu savais ! '' 
`` Stop ! '' 
she cried , `` do n't sing that . 
I do n't want you to sing it , '' and she laid her glass so impetuously and blindly upon the table as to shatter it against a carafe . 
The wine spilled over Arobin 's legs and some of it trickled down upon Mrs. Highcamp 's black gauze gown . 
Victor had lost all idea of courtesy , or else he thought his hostess was not in earnest , for he laughed and went on : `` Ah ! 
si tu savais Ce que tes yeux me disent '' -- `` Oh ! 
you must n't ! 
you must n't , '' exclaimed Edna , and pushing back her chair she got up , and going behind him placed her hand over his mouth . 
He kissed the soft palm that pressed upon his lips . 
`` No , no , I wo n't , Mrs. Pontellier . 
I did n't know you meant it , '' looking up at her with caressing eyes . 
The touch of his lips was like a pleasing sting to her hand . 
She lifted the garland of roses from his head and flung it across the room . 
`` Come , Victor ; you 've posed long enough . 
Give Mrs. Highcamp her scarf . '' 
Mrs. Highcamp undraped the scarf from about him with her own hands . 
Miss Mayblunt and Mr. Gouvernail suddenly conceived the notion that it was time to say good night . 
And Mr. and Mrs. Merriman wondered how it could be so late . 
Before parting from Victor , Mrs. Highcamp invited him to call upon her daughter , who she knew would be charmed to meet him and talk French and sing French songs with him . 
Victor expressed his desire and intention to call upon Miss Highcamp at the first opportunity which presented itself . 
He asked if Arobin were going his way . 
Arobin was not . 
The mandolin players had long since stolen away . 
A profound stillness had fallen upon the broad , beautiful street . 
The voices of Edna 's disbanding guests jarred like a discordant note upon the quiet harmony of the night . 
`` Well ? '' 
questioned Arobin , who had remained with Edna after the others had departed . 
`` Well , '' she reiterated , and stood up , stretching her arms , and feeling the need to relax her muscles after having been so long seated . 
`` What next ? '' 
he asked . 
`` The servants are all gone . 
They left when the musicians did . 
I have dismissed them . 
The house has to be closed and locked , and I shall trot around to the pigeon house , and shall send Celestine over in the morning to straighten things up . '' 
He looked around , and began to turn out some of the lights . 
`` What about upstairs ? '' 
he inquired . 
`` I think it is all right ; but there may be a window or two unlatched . 
We had better look ; you might take a candle and see . 
And bring me my wrap and hat on the foot of the bed in the middle room . '' 
He went up with the light , and Edna began closing doors and windows . 
She hated to shut in the smoke and the fumes of the wine . 
Arobin found her cape and hat , which he brought down and helped her to put on . 
When everything was secured and the lights put out , they left through the front door , Arobin locking it and taking the key , which he carried for Edna . 
He helped her down the steps . 
`` Will you have a spray of jessamine ? '' 
he asked , breaking off a few blossoms as he passed . 
`` No ; I do n't want anything . '' 
She seemed disheartened , and had nothing to say . 
She took his arm , which he offered her , holding up the weight of her satin train with the other hand . 
She looked down , noticing the black line of his leg moving in and out so close to her against the yellow shimmer of her gown . 
There was the whistle of a railway train somewhere in the distance , and the midnight bells were ringing . 
They met no one in their short walk . 
The `` pigeon house '' stood behind a locked gate , and a shallow parterre that had been somewhat neglected . 
There was a small front porch , upon which a long window and the front door opened . 
The door opened directly into the parlor ; there was no side entry . 
Back in the yard was a room for servants , in which old Celestine had been ensconced . 
Edna had left a lamp burning low upon the table . 
She had succeeded in making the room look habitable and homelike . 
There were some books on the table and a lounge near at hand . 
On the floor was a fresh matting , covered with a rug or two ; and on the walls hung a few tasteful pictures . 
But the room was filled with flowers . 
These were a surprise to her . 
Arobin had sent them , and had had Celestine distribute them during Edna 's absence . 
Her bedroom was adjoining , and across a small passage were the dining-room and kitchen . 
Edna seated herself with every appearance of discomfort . 
`` Are you tired ? '' 
he asked . 
`` Yes , and chilled , and miserable . 
I feel as if I had been wound up to a certain pitch -- too tight -- and something inside of me had snapped . '' 
She rested her head against the table upon her bare arm . 
`` You want to rest , '' he said , `` and to be quiet . 
I 'll go ; I 'll leave you and let you rest . '' 
`` Yes , '' she replied . 
He stood up beside her and smoothed her hair with his soft , magnetic hand . 
His touch conveyed to her a certain physical comfort . 
She could have fallen quietly asleep there if he had continued to pass his hand over her hair . 
He brushed the hair upward from the nape of her neck . 
`` I hope you will feel better and happier in the morning , '' he said . 
`` You have tried to do too much in the past few days . 
The dinner was the last straw ; you might have dispensed with it . '' 
`` Yes , '' she admitted ; `` it was stupid . '' 
`` No , it was delightful ; but it has worn you out . '' 
His hand had strayed to her beautiful shoulders , and he could feel the response of her flesh to his touch . 
He seated himself beside her and kissed her lightly upon the shoulder . 
`` I thought you were going away , '' she said , in an uneven voice . 
`` I am , after I have said good night . '' 
`` Good night , '' she murmured . 
He did not answer , except to continue to caress her . 
He did not say good night until she had become supple to his gentle , seductive entreaties . 
When Mr. Pontellier learned of his wife 's intention to abandon her home and take up her residence elsewhere , he immediately wrote her a letter of unqualified disapproval and remonstrance . 
She had given reasons which he was unwilling to acknowledge as adequate . 
He hoped she had not acted upon her rash impulse ; and he begged her to consider first , foremost , and above all else , what people would say . 
He was not dreaming of scandal when he uttered this warning ; that was a thing which would never have entered into his mind to consider in connection with his wife 's name or his own . 
He was simply thinking of his financial integrity . 
It might get noised about that the Pontelliers had met with reverses , and were forced to conduct their menage on a humbler scale than heretofore . 
It might do incalculable mischief to his business prospects . 
But remembering Edna 's whimsical turn of mind of late , and foreseeing that she had immediately acted upon her impetuous determination , he grasped the situation with his usual promptness and handled it with his well-known business tact and cleverness . 
The same mail which brought to Edna his letter of disapproval carried instructions -- the most minute instructions -- to a well-known architect concerning the remodeling of his home , changes which he had long contemplated , and which he desired carried forward during his temporary absence . 
Expert and reliable packers and movers were engaged to convey the furniture , carpets , pictures -- everything movable , in short -- to places of security . 
And in an incredibly short time the Pontellier house was turned over to the artisans . 
There was to be an addition -- a small snuggery ; there was to be frescoing , and hardwood flooring was to be put into such rooms as had not yet been subjected to this improvement . 
Furthermore , in one of the daily papers appeared a brief notice to the effect that Mr. and Mrs. Pontellier were contemplating a summer sojourn abroad , and that their handsome residence on Esplanade Street was undergoing sumptuous alterations , and would not be ready for occupancy until their return . 
Mr. Pontellier had saved appearances ! 
Edna admired the skill of his maneuver , and avoided any occasion to balk his intentions . 
When the situation as set forth by Mr. Pontellier was accepted and taken for granted , she was apparently satisfied that it should be so . 
The pigeon house pleased her . 
It at once assumed the intimate character of a home , while she herself invested it with a charm which it reflected like a warm glow . 
There was with her a feeling of having descended in the social scale , with a corresponding sense of having risen in the spiritual . 
Every step which she took toward relieving herself from obligations added to her strength and expansion as an individual . 
She began to look with her own eyes ; to see and to apprehend the deeper undercurrents of life . 
No longer was she content to `` feed upon opinion '' when her own soul had invited her . 
After a little while , a few days , in fact , Edna went up and spent a week with her children in Iberville . 
They were delicious February days , with all the summer 's promise hovering in the air . 
How glad she was to see the children ! 
She wept for very pleasure when she felt their little arms clasping her ; their hard , ruddy cheeks pressed against her own glowing cheeks . 
She looked into their faces with hungry eyes that could not be satisfied with looking . 
And what stories they had to tell their mother ! 
About the pigs , the cows , the mules ! 
About riding to the mill behind Gluglu ; fishing back in the lake with their Uncle Jasper ; picking pecans with Lidie 's little black brood , and hauling chips in their express wagon . 
It was a thousand times more fun to haul real chips for old lame Susie 's real fire than to drag painted blocks along the banquette on Esplanade Street ! 
She went with them herself to see the pigs and the cows , to look at the darkies laying the cane , to thrash the pecan trees , and catch fish in the back lake . 
She lived with them a whole week long , giving them all of herself , and gathering and filling herself with their young existence . 
They listened , breathless , when she told them the house in Esplanade Street was crowded with workmen , hammering , nailing , sawing , and filling the place with clatter . 
They wanted to know where their bed was ; what had been done with their rocking-horse ; and where did Joe sleep , and where had Ellen gone , and the cook ? 
But , above all , they were fired with a desire to see the little house around the block . 
Was there any place to play ? 
Were there any boys next door ? 
Raoul , with pessimistic foreboding , was convinced that there were only girls next door . 
Where would they sleep , and where would papa sleep ? 
She told them the fairies would fix it all right . 
The old Madame was charmed with Edna 's visit , and showered all manner of delicate attentions upon her . 
She was delighted to know that the Esplanade Street house was in a dismantled condition . 
It gave her the promise and pretext to keep the children indefinitely . 
It was with a wrench and a pang that Edna left her children . 
She carried away with her the sound of their voices and the touch of their cheeks . 
All along the journey homeward their presence lingered with her like the memory of a delicious song . 
But by the time she had regained the city the song no longer echoed in her soul . 
She was again alone . 
It happened sometimes when Edna went to see Mademoiselle Reisz that the little musician was absent , giving a lesson or making some small necessary household purchase . 
The key was always left in a secret hiding-place in the entry , which Edna knew . 
If Mademoiselle happened to be away , Edna would usually enter and wait for her return . 
When she knocked at Mademoiselle Reisz 's door one afternoon there was no response ; so unlocking the door , as usual , she entered and found the apartment deserted , as she had expected . 
Her day had been quite filled up , and it was for a rest , for a refuge , and to talk about Robert , that she sought out her friend . 
She had worked at her canvas -- a young Italian character study -- all the morning , completing the work without the model ; but there had been many interruptions , some incident to her modest housekeeping , and others of a social nature . 
Madame Ratignolle had dragged herself over , avoiding the too public thoroughfares , she said . 
She complained that Edna had neglected her much of late . 
Besides , she was consumed with curiosity to see the little house and the manner in which it was conducted . 
She wanted to hear all about the dinner party ; Monsieur Ratignolle had left so early . 
What had happened after he left ? 
The champagne and grapes which Edna sent over were TOO delicious . 
She had so little appetite ; they had refreshed and toned her stomach . 
Where on earth was she going to put Mr. Pontellier in that little house , and the boys ? 
And then she made Edna promise to go to her when her hour of trial overtook her . 
`` At any time -- any time of the day or night , dear , '' Edna assured her . 
Before leaving Madame Ratignolle said : `` In some way you seem to me like a child , Edna . 
You seem to act without a certain amount of reflection which is necessary in this life . 
That is the reason I want to say you must n't mind if I advise you to be a little careful while you are living here alone . 
Why do n't you have some one come and stay with you ? 
Would n't Mademoiselle Reisz come ? '' 
`` No ; she would n't wish to come , and I should n't want her always with me . '' 
`` Well , the reason -- you know how evil-minded the world is -- some one was talking of Alcee Arobin visiting you . 
Of course , it would n't matter if Mr. Arobin had not such a dreadful reputation . 
Monsieur Ratignolle was telling me that his attentions alone are considered enough to ruin a woman 's name . '' 
`` Does he boast of his successes ? '' 
asked Edna , indifferently , squinting at her picture . 
`` No , I think not . 
I believe he is a decent fellow as far as that goes . 
But his character is so well known among the men . 
I sha n't be able to come back and see you ; it was very , very imprudent to-day . '' 
`` Mind the step ! '' 
cried Edna . 
`` Do n't neglect me , '' entreated Madame Ratignolle ; `` and do n't mind what I said about Arobin , or having some one to stay with you . 
`` Of course not , '' Edna laughed . 
`` You may say anything you like to me . '' 
They kissed each other good-by . 
