`` Gal 's got grit , I see . '' 
The woman looked calm , as the boat went on ; and a beautiful soft summer breeze passed like a compassionate spirit over her head , -- the gentle breeze , that never inquires whether the brow is dusky or fair that it fans . 
And she saw sunshine sparkling on the water , in golden ripples , and heard gay voices , full of ease and pleasure , talking around her everywhere ; but her heart lay as if a great stone had fallen on it . 
Her baby raised himself up against her , and stroked her cheeks with his little hands ; and , springing up and down , crowing and chatting , seemed determined to arouse her . 
She strained him suddenly and tightly in her arms , and slowly one tear after another fell on his wondering , unconscious face ; and gradually she seemed , and little by little , to grow calmer , and busied herself with tending and nursing him . 
The child , a boy of ten months , was uncommonly large and strong of his age , and very vigorous in his limbs . 
Never , for a moment , still , he kept his mother constantly busy in holding him , and guarding his springing activity . 
`` That 's a fine chap ! '' 
said a man , suddenly stopping opposite to him , with his hands in his pockets . 
`` How old is he ? '' 
`` Ten months and a half , '' said the mother . 
The man whistled to the boy , and offered him part of a stick of candy , which he eagerly grabbed at , and very soon had it in a baby 's general depository , to wit , his mouth . 
`` Rum fellow ! '' 
said the man `` Knows what 's what ! '' 
and he whistled , and walked on . 
When he had got to the other side of the boat , he came across Haley , who was smoking on top of a pile of boxes . 
The stranger produced a match , and lighted a cigar , saying , as he did so , `` Decentish kind o ' wench you 've got round there , stranger . '' 
`` Why , I reckon she is tol ` able fair , '' said Haley , blowing the smoke out of his mouth . 
`` Taking her down south ? '' 
said the man . 
Haley nodded , and smoked on . 
`` Plantation hand ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Wal , '' said Haley , `` I 'm fillin ' out an order for a plantation , and I think I shall put her in . 
They telled me she was a good cook ; and they can use her for that , or set her at the cotton-picking . 
She 's got the right fingers for that ; I looked at 'em . 
Sell well , either way ; '' and Haley resumed his cigar . 
`` They wo n't want the young ` un on the plantation , '' said the man . 
`` I shall sell him , first chance I find , '' said Haley , lighting another cigar . 
`` S'pose you 'd be selling him tol ` able cheap , '' said the stranger , mounting the pile of boxes , and sitting down comfortably . 
`` Do n't know ` bout that , '' said Haley ; `` he 's a pretty smart young ` un , straight , fat , strong ; flesh as hard as a brick ! '' 
`` Very true , but then there 's the bother and expense of raisin ' . '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
said Haley ; `` they is raised as easy as any kind of critter there is going ; they a n't a bit more trouble than pups . 
This yer chap will be running all around , in a month . '' 
`` I 've got a good place for raisin ' , and I thought of takin ' in a little more stock , '' said the man . 
`` One cook lost a young ` un last week , -- got drownded in a washtub , while she was a hangin ' out the clothes , -- and I reckon it would be well enough to set her to raisin ' this yer . '' 
Haley and the stranger smoked a while in silence , neither seeming willing to broach the test question of the interview . 
At last the man resumed : `` You would n't think of wantin ' more than ten dollars for that ar chap , seeing you must get him off yer hand , any how ? '' 
Haley shook his head , and spit impressively . 
`` That wo n't do , no ways , '' he said , and began his smoking again . 
`` Well , stranger , what will you take ? '' 
`` Well , now , '' said Haley , `` I could raise that ar chap myself , or get him raised ; he 's oncommon likely and healthy , and he 'd fetch a hundred dollars , six months hence ; and , in a year or two , he 'd bring two hundred , if I had him in the right spot ; I sha n't take a cent less nor fifty for him now . '' 
`` O , stranger ! 
that 's rediculous , altogether , '' said the man . 
`` Fact ! '' 
said Haley , with a decisive nod of his head . 
`` I 'll give thirty for him , '' said the stranger , `` but not a cent more . '' 
`` Now , I 'll tell ye what I will do , '' said Haley , spitting again , with renewed decision . 
`` I 'll split the difference , and say forty-five ; and that 's the most I will do . '' 
`` Well , agreed ! '' 
said the man , after an interval . 
`` Done ! '' 
said Haley . 
`` Where do you land ? '' 
`` At Louisville , '' said the man . 
`` Louisville , '' said Haley . 
`` Very fair , we get there about dusk . 
Chap will be asleep , -- all fair , -- get him off quietly , and no screaming , -- happens beautiful , -- I like to do everything quietly , -- I hates all kind of agitation and fluster . '' 
And so , after a transfer of certain bills had passed from the man 's pocket-book to the trader 's , he resumed his cigar . 
It was a bright , tranquil evening when the boat stopped at the wharf at Louisville . 
The woman had been sitting with her baby in her arms , now wrapped in a heavy sleep . 
When she heard the name of the place called out , she hastily laid the child down in a little cradle formed by the hollow among the boxes , first carefully spreading under it her cloak ; and then she sprung to the side of the boat , in hopes that , among the various hotel-waiters who thronged the wharf , she might see her husband . 
In this hope , she pressed forward to the front rails , and , stretching far over them , strained her eyes intently on the moving heads on the shore , and the crowd pressed in between her and the child . 
`` Now 's your time , '' said Haley , taking the sleeping child up , and handing him to the stranger . 
`` Do n't wake him up , and set him to crying , now ; it would make a devil of a fuss with the gal . '' 
The man took the bundle carefully , and was soon lost in the crowd that went up the wharf . 
When the boat , creaking , and groaning , and puffing , had loosed from the wharf , and was beginning slowly to strain herself along , the woman returned to her old seat . 
The trader was sitting there , -- the child was gone ! 
`` Why , why , -- where ? '' 
she began , in bewildered surprise . 
`` Lucy , '' said the trader , `` your child 's gone ; you may as well know it first as last . 
You see , I know 'd you could n't take him down south ; and I got a chance to sell him to a first-rate family , that 'll raise him better than you can . '' 
The trader had arrived at that stage of Christian and political perfection which has been recommended by some preachers and politicians of the north , lately , in which he had completely overcome every humane weakness and prejudice . 
His heart was exactly where yours , sir , and mine could be brought , with proper effort and cultivation . 
The wild look of anguish and utter despair that the woman cast on him might have disturbed one less practised ; but he was used to it . 
He had seen that same look hundreds of times . 
You can get used to such things , too , my friend ; and it is the great object of recent efforts to make our whole northern community used to them , for the glory of the Union . 
So the trader only regarded the mortal anguish which he saw working in those dark features , those clenched hands , and suffocating breathings , as necessary incidents of the trade , and merely calculated whether she was going to scream , and get up a commotion on the boat ; for , like other supporters of our peculiar institution , he decidedly disliked agitation . 
But the woman did not scream . 
The shot had passed too straight and direct through the heart , for cry or tear . 
Dizzily she sat down . 
Her slack hands fell lifeless by her side . 
Her eyes looked straight forward , but she saw nothing . 
All the noise and hum of the boat , the groaning of the machinery , mingled dreamily to her bewildered ear ; and the poor , dumb-stricken heart had neither cry not tear to show for its utter misery . 
She was quite calm . 
The trader , who , considering his advantages , was almost as humane as some of our politicians , seemed to feel called on to administer such consolation as the case admitted of . 
`` I know this yer comes kinder hard , at first , Lucy , '' said he ; `` but such a smart , sensible gal as you are , wo n't give way to it . 
You see it 's necessary , and ca n't be helped ! '' 
`` O ! 
do n't , Mas ` r , do n't ! '' 
said the woman , with a voice like one that is smothering . 
`` You 're a smart wench , Lucy , '' he persisted ; `` I mean to do well by ye , and get ye a nice place down river ; and you 'll soon get another husband , -- such a likely gal as you -- '' `` O ! 
Mas ` r , if you only wo n't talk to me now , '' said the woman , in a voice of such quick and living anguish that the trader felt that there was something at present in the case beyond his style of operation . 
He got up , and the woman turned away , and buried her head in her cloak . 
The trader walked up and down for a time , and occasionally stopped and looked at her . 
`` Takes it hard , rather , '' he soliloquized , `` but quiet , tho ' ; -- let her sweat a while ; she 'll come right , by and by ! '' 
Tom had watched the whole transaction from first to last , and had a perfect understanding of its results . 
To him , it looked like something unutterably horrible and cruel , because , poor , ignorant black soul ! 
he had not learned to generalize , and to take enlarged views . 
If he had only been instructed by certain ministers of Christianity , he might have thought better of it , and seen in it an every-day incident of a lawful trade ; a trade which is the vital support of an institution which an American divine * tells us has `` no evils but such as are inseparable from any other relations in social and domestic life . '' 
But Tom , as we see , being a poor , ignorant fellow , whose reading had been confined entirely to the New Testament , could not comfort and solace himself with views like these . 
His very soul bled within him for what seemed to him the wrongs of the poor suffering thing that lay like a crushed reed on the boxes ; the feeling , living , bleeding , yet immortal thing , which American state law coolly classes with the bundles , and bales , and boxes , among which she is lying . 
* Dr. Joel Parker of Philadelphia . 
-LSB- Mrs. Stowe 's note . -RSB- 
Presbyterian clergyman -LRB- 1799-1873 -RRB- , a friend of the Beecher family . 
Mrs. Stowe attempted unsuccessfully to have this identifying note removed from the stereotype-plate of the first edition . 
Tom drew near , and tried to say something ; but she only groaned . 
Honestly , and with tears running down his own cheeks , he spoke of a heart of love in the skies , of a pitying Jesus , and an eternal home ; but the ear was deaf with anguish , and the palsied heart could not feel . 
Night came on , -- night calm , unmoved , and glorious , shining down with her innumerable and solemn angel eyes , twinkling , beautiful , but silent . 
There was no speech nor language , no pitying voice or helping hand , from that distant sky . 
One after another , the voices of business or pleasure died away ; all on the boat were sleeping , and the ripples at the prow were plainly heard . 
Tom stretched himself out on a box , and there , as he lay , he heard , ever and anon , a smothered sob or cry from the prostrate creature , -- `` O ! 
what shall I do ? 
O Lord ! 
O good Lord , do help me ! '' 
and so , ever and anon , until the murmur died away in silence . 
At midnight , Tom waked , with a sudden start . 
Something black passed quickly by him to the side of the boat , and he heard a splash in the water . 
No one else saw or heard anything . 
He raised his head , -- the woman 's place was vacant ! 
He got up , and sought about him in vain . 
The poor bleeding heart was still , at last , and the river rippled and dimpled just as brightly as if it had not closed above it . 
Patience ! 
patience ! 
ye whose hearts swell indignant at wrongs like these . 
Not one throb of anguish , not one tear of the oppressed , is forgotten by the Man of Sorrows , the Lord of Glory . 
In his patient , generous bosom he bears the anguish of a world . 
Bear thou , like him , in patience , and labor in love ; for sure as he is God , `` the year of his redeemed shall come . '' 
The trader waked up bright and early , and came out to see to his live stock . 
It was now his turn to look about in perplexity . 
`` Where alive is that gal ? '' 
he said to Tom . 
Tom , who had learned the wisdom of keeping counsel , did not feel called upon to state his observations and suspicions , but said he did not know . 
`` She surely could n't have got off in the night at any of the landings , for I was awake , and on the lookout , whenever the boat stopped . 
I never trust these yer things to other folks . '' 
This speech was addressed to Tom quite confidentially , as if it was something that would be specially interesting to him . 
Tom made no answer . 
The trader searched the boat from stem to stern , among boxes , bales and barrels , around the machinery , by the chimneys , in vain . 
`` Now , I say , Tom , be fair about this yer , '' he said , when , after a fruitless search , he came where Tom was standing . 
`` You know something about it , now . 
Do n't tell me , -- I know you do . 
I saw the gal stretched out here about ten o'clock , and ag ` in at twelve , and ag ` in between one and two ; and then at four she was gone , and you was a sleeping right there all the time . 
Now , you know something , -- you ca n't help it . '' 
`` Well , Mas ` r , '' said Tom , `` towards morning something brushed by me , and I kinder half woke ; and then I hearn a great splash , and then I clare woke up , and the gal was gone . 
That 's all I know on ` t. '' The trader was not shocked nor amazed ; because , as we said before , he was used to a great many things that you are not used to . 
Even the awful presence of Death struck no solemn chill upon him . 
He had seen Death many times , -- met him in the way of trade , and got acquainted with him , -- and he only thought of him as a hard customer , that embarrassed his property operations very unfairly ; and so he only swore that the gal was a baggage , and that he was devilish unlucky , and that , if things went on in this way , he should not make a cent on the trip . 
In short , he seemed to consider himself an ill-used man , decidedly ; but there was no help for it , as the woman had escaped into a state which never will give up a fugitive , -- not even at the demand of the whole glorious Union . 
The trader , therefore , sat discontentedly down , with his little account-book , and put down the missing body and soul under the head of losses ! 
`` He 's a shocking creature , is n't he , -- this trader ? 
so unfeeling ! 
It 's dreadful , really ! '' 
`` O , but nobody thinks anything of these traders ! 
They are universally despised , -- never received into any decent society . '' 
But who , sir , makes the trader ? 
Who is most to blame ? 
The enlightened , cultivated , intelligent man , who supports the system of which the trader is the inevitable result , or the poor trader himself ? 
You make the public statement that calls for his trade , that debauches and depraves him , till he feels no shame in it ; and in what are you better than he ? 
Are you educated and he ignorant , you high and he low , you refined and he coarse , you talented and he simple ? 
In the day of a future judgment , these very considerations may make it more tolerable for him than for you . 
In concluding these little incidents of lawful trade , we must beg the world not to think that American legislators are entirely destitute of humanity , as might , perhaps , be unfairly inferred from the great efforts made in our national body to protect and perpetuate this species of traffic . 
Who does not know how our great men are outdoing themselves , in declaiming against the foreign slave-trade . 
There are a perfect host of Clarksons and Wilberforces * risen up among us on that subject , most edifying to hear and behold . 
Trading negroes from Africa , dear reader , is so horrid ! 
It is not to be thought of ! 
But trading them from Kentucky , -- that 's quite another thing ! 
* Thomas Clarkson -LRB- 1760-1846 -RRB- and William Wilberforce -LRB- 1759 - 1833 -RRB- , English philanthropists and anti-slavery agitators who helped to secure passage of the Emancipation Bill by Parliament in 1833 . 
A quiet scene now rises before us . 
A large , roomy , neatly-painted kitchen , its yellow floor glossy and smooth , and without a particle of dust ; a neat , well-blacked cooking-stove ; rows of shining tin , suggestive of unmentionable good things to the appetite ; glossy green wood chairs , old and firm ; a small flag-bottomed rocking-chair , with a patch-work cushion in it , neatly contrived out of small pieces of different colored woollen goods , and a larger sized one , motherly and old , whose wide arms breathed hospitable invitation , seconded by the solicitation of its feather cushions , -- a real comfortable , persuasive old chair , and worth , in the way of honest , homely enjoyment , a dozen of your plush or brochetelle drawing-room gentry ; and in the chair , gently swaying back and forward , her eyes bent on some fine sewing , sat our fine old friend Eliza . 
Yes , there she is , paler and thinner than in her Kentucky home , with a world of quiet sorrow lying under the shadow of her long eyelashes , and marking the outline of her gentle mouth ! 
It was plain to see how old and firm the girlish heart was grown under the discipline of heavy sorrow ; and when , anon , her large dark eye was raised to follow the gambols of her little Harry , who was sporting , like some tropical butterfly , hither and thither over the floor , she showed a depth of firmness and steady resolve that was never there in her earlier and happier days . 
By her side sat a woman with a bright tin pan in her lap , into which she was carefully sorting some dried peaches . 
She might be fifty-five or sixty ; but hers was one of those faces that time seems to touch only to brighten and adorn . 
The snowy lisse crape cap , made after the strait Quaker pattern , -- the plain white muslin handkerchief , lying in placid folds across her bosom , -- the drab shawl and dress , -- showed at once the community to which she belonged . 
Her face was round and rosy , with a healthful downy softness , suggestive of a ripe peach . 
Her hair , partially silvered by age , was parted smoothly back from a high placid forehead , on which time had written no inscription , except peace on earth , good will to men , and beneath shone a large pair of clear , honest , loving brown eyes ; you only needed to look straight into them , to feel that you saw to the bottom of a heart as good and true as ever throbbed in woman 's bosom . 
So much has been said and sung of beautiful young girls , why do n't somebody wake up to the beauty of old women ? 
If any want to get up an inspiration under this head , we refer them to our good friend Rachel Halliday , just as she sits there in her little rocking-chair . 
It had a turn for quacking and squeaking , -- that chair had , -- either from having taken cold in early life , or from some asthmatic affection , or perhaps from nervous derangement ; but , as she gently swung backward and forward , the chair kept up a kind of subdued `` creechy crawchy , '' that would have been intolerable in any other chair . 
But old Simeon Halliday often declared it was as good as any music to him , and the children all avowed that they would n't miss of hearing mother 's chair for anything in the world . 
For why ? 
for twenty years or more , nothing but loving words , and gentle moralities , and motherly loving kindness , had come from that chair ; -- head-aches and heart-aches innumerable had been cured there , -- difficulties spiritual and temporal solved there , -- all by one good , loving woman , God bless her ! 
`` And so thee still thinks of going to Canada , Eliza ? '' 
she said , as she was quietly looking over her peaches . 
`` Yes , ma'am , '' said Eliza , firmly . 
`` I must go onward . 
I dare not stop . '' 
`` And what 'll thee do , when thee gets there ? 
Thee must think about that , my daughter . '' 
`` My daughter '' came naturally from the lips of Rachel Halliday ; for hers was just the face and form that made `` mother '' seem the most natural word in the world . 
Eliza 's hands trembled , and some tears fell on her fine work ; but she answered , firmly , `` I shall do -- anything I can find . 
I hope I can find something . '' 
`` Thee knows thee can stay here , as long as thee pleases , '' said Rachel . 
`` O , thank you , '' said Eliza , `` but '' -- she pointed to Harry -- `` I ca n't sleep nights ; I ca n't rest . 
Last night I dreamed I saw that man coming into the yard , '' she said , shuddering . 
`` Poor child ! '' 
said Rachel , wiping her eyes ; `` but thee must n't feel so . 
The Lord hath ordered it so that never hath a fugitive been stolen from our village . 
I trust thine will not be the first . '' 
The door here opened , and a little short , round , pin-cushiony woman stood at the door , with a cheery , blooming face , like a ripe apple . 
She was dressed , like Rachel , in sober gray , with the muslin folded neatly across her round , plump little chest . 
`` Ruth Stedman , '' said Rachel , coming joyfully forward ; `` how is thee , Ruth ? 
she said , heartily taking both her hands . 
`` Nicely , '' said Ruth , taking off her little drab bonnet , and dusting it with her handkerchief , displaying , as she did so , a round little head , on which the Quaker cap sat with a sort of jaunty air , despite all the stroking and patting of the small fat hands , which were busily applied to arranging it . 
Certain stray locks of decidedly curly hair , too , had escaped here and there , and had to be coaxed and cajoled into their place again ; and then the new comer , who might have been five-and-twenty , turned from the small looking-glass , before which she had been making these arrangements , and looked well pleased , -- as most people who looked at her might have been , -- for she was decidedly a wholesome , whole-hearted , chirruping little woman , as ever gladdened man 's heart withal . 
`` Ruth , this friend is Eliza Harris ; and this is the little boy I told thee of . '' 
`` I am glad to see thee , Eliza , -- very , '' said Ruth , shaking hands , as if Eliza were an old friend she had long been expecting ; `` and this is thy dear boy , -- I brought a cake for him , '' she said , holding out a little heart to the boy , who came up , gazing through his curls , and accepted it shyly . 
`` Where 's thy baby , Ruth ? '' 
said Rachel . 
`` O , he 's coming ; but thy Mary caught him as I came in , and ran off with him to the barn , to show him to the children . '' 
At this moment , the door opened , and Mary , an honest , rosy-looking girl , with large brown eyes , like her mother 's , came in with the baby . 
`` Ah ! 
ha ! '' 
said Rachel , coming up , and taking the great , white , fat fellow in her arms , `` how good he looks , and how he does grow ! '' 
`` To be sure , he does , '' said little bustling Ruth , as she took the child , and began taking off a little blue silk hood , and various layers and wrappers of outer garments ; and having given a twitch here , and a pull there , and variously adjusted and arranged him , and kissed him heartily , she set him on the floor to collect his thoughts . 
Baby seemed quite used to this mode of proceeding , for he put his thumb in his mouth -LRB- as if it were quite a thing of course -RRB- , and seemed soon absorbed in his own reflections , while the mother seated herself , and taking out a long stocking of mixed blue and white yarn , began to knit with briskness . 
`` Mary , thee 'd better fill the kettle , had n't thee ? '' 
gently suggested the mother . 
Mary took the kettle to the well , and soon reappearing , placed it over the stove , where it was soon purring and steaming , a sort of censer of hospitality and good cheer . 
The peaches , moreover , in obedience to a few gentle whispers from Rachel , were soon deposited , by the same hand , in a stew-pan over the fire . 
Rachel now took down a snowy moulding-board , and , tying on an apron , proceeded quietly to making up some biscuits , first saying to Mary , -- `` Mary , had n't thee better tell John to get a chicken ready ? '' 
and Mary disappeared accordingly . 
`` And how is Abigail Peters ? '' 
said Rachel , as she went on with her biscuits . 
`` O , she 's better , '' said Ruth ; `` I was in , this morning ; made the bed , tidied up the house . 
Leah Hills went in , this afternoon , and baked bread and pies enough to last some days ; and I engaged to go back to get her up , this evening . '' 
`` I will go in tomorrow , and do any cleaning there may be , and look over the mending , '' said Rachel . 
`` Ah ! 
that is well , '' said Ruth . 
`` I 've heard , '' she added , `` that Hannah Stanwood is sick . 
John was up there , last night , -- I must go there tomorrow . '' 
`` John can come in here to his meals , if thee needs to stay all day , '' suggested Rachel . 
`` Thank thee , Rachel ; will see , tomorrow ; but , here comes Simeon . '' 
Simeon Halliday , a tall , straight , muscular man , in drab coat and pantaloons , and broad-brimmed hat , now entered . 
`` How is thee , Ruth ? '' 
he said , warmly , as he spread his broad open hand for her little fat palm ; `` and how is John ? '' 
`` O ! 
John is well , and all the rest of our folks , '' said Ruth , cheerily . 
`` Any news , father ? '' 
said Rachel , as she was putting her biscuits into the oven . 
`` Peter Stebbins told me that they should be along tonight , with friends , '' said Simeon , significantly , as he was washing his hands at a neat sink , in a little back porch . 
`` Indeed ! '' 
said Rachel , looking thoughtfully , and glancing at Eliza . 
`` Did thee say thy name was Harris ? '' 
said Simeon to Eliza , as he reentered . 
Rachel glanced quickly at her husband , as Eliza tremulously answered `` yes ; '' her fears , ever uppermost , suggesting that possibly there might be advertisements out for her . 
`` Mother ! '' 
said Simeon , standing in the porch , and calling Rachel out . 
`` What does thee want , father ? '' 
said Rachel , rubbing her floury hands , as she went into the porch . 
`` This child 's husband is in the settlement , and will be here tonight , '' said Simeon . 
`` Now , thee does n't say that , father ? '' 
said Rachel , all her face radiant with joy . 
`` It 's really true . 
Peter was down yesterday , with the wagon , to the other stand , and there he found an old woman and two men ; and one said his name was George Harris ; and from what he told of his history , I am certain who he is . 
He is a bright , likely fellow , too . '' 
`` Shall we tell her now ? '' 
said Simeon . 
`` Let 's tell Ruth , '' said Rachel . 
`` Here , Ruth , -- come here . '' 
Ruth laid down her knitting-work , and was in the back porch in a moment . 
`` Ruth , what does thee think ? '' 
said Rachel . 
`` Father says Eliza 's husband is in the last company , and will be here tonight . '' 
A burst of joy from the little Quakeress interrupted the speech . 
She gave such a bound from the floor , as she clapped her little hands , that two stray curls fell from under her Quaker cap , and lay brightly on her white neckerchief . 
`` Hush thee , dear ! '' 
said Rachel , gently ; `` hush , Ruth ! 
Tell us , shall we tell her now ? '' 
`` Now ! 
to be sure , -- this very minute . 
Why , now , suppose ' t was my John , how should I feel ? 
Do tell her , right off . '' 
`` Thee uses thyself only to learn how to love thy neighbor , Ruth , '' said Simeon , looking , with a beaming face , on Ruth . 
`` To be sure . 
Is n't it what we are made for ? 
If I did n't love John and the baby , I should not know how to feel for her . 
Come , now do tell her , -- do ! '' 
and she laid her hands persuasively on Rachel 's arm . 
`` Take her into thy bed-room , there , and let me fry the chicken while thee does it . '' 
Rachel came out into the kitchen , where Eliza was sewing , and opening the door of a small bed-room , said , gently , `` Come in here with me , my daughter ; I have news to tell thee . '' 
The blood flushed in Eliza 's pale face ; she rose , trembling with nervous anxiety , and looked towards her boy . 
`` No , no , '' said little Ruth , darting up , and seizing her hands . 
`` Never thee fear ; it 's good news , Eliza , -- go in , go in ! '' 
And she gently pushed her to the door which closed after her ; and then , turning round , she caught little Harry in her arms , and began kissing him . 
`` Thee 'll see thy father , little one . 
Does thee know it ? 
Thy father is coming , '' she said , over and over again , as the boy looked wonderingly at her . 
Meanwhile , within the door , another scene was going on . 
Rachel Halliday drew Eliza toward her , and said , `` The Lord hath had mercy on thee , daughter ; thy husband hath escaped from the house of bondage . '' 
The blood flushed to Eliza 's cheek in a sudden glow , and went back to her heart with as sudden a rush . 
She sat down , pale and faint . 
`` Have courage , child , '' said Rachel , laying her hand on her head . 
`` He is among friends , who will bring him here tonight . '' 
`` Tonight ! '' 
Eliza repeated , `` tonight ! '' 
The words lost all meaning to her ; her head was dreamy and confused ; all was mist for a moment . 
When she awoke , she found herself snugly tucked up on the bed , with a blanket over her , and little Ruth rubbing her hands with camphor . 
She opened her eyes in a state of dreamy , delicious languor , such as one who has long been bearing a heavy load , and now feels it gone , and would rest . 
The tension of the nerves , which had never ceased a moment since the first hour of her flight , had given way , and a strange feeling of security and rest came over her ; and as she lay , with her large , dark eyes open , she followed , as in a quiet dream , the motions of those about her . 
She saw the door open into the other room ; saw the supper-table , with its snowy cloth ; heard the dreamy murmur of the singing tea-kettle ; saw Ruth tripping backward and forward , with plates of cake and saucers of preserves , and ever and anon stopping to put a cake into Harry 's hand , or pat his head , or twine his long curls round her snowy fingers . 
She saw the ample , motherly form of Rachel , as she ever and anon came to the bedside , and smoothed and arranged something about the bedclothes , and gave a tuck here and there , by way of expressing her good-will ; and was conscious of a kind of sunshine beaming down upon her from her large , clear , brown eyes . 
She saw Ruth 's husband come in , -- saw her fly up to him , and commence whispering very earnestly , ever and anon , with impressive gesture , pointing her little finger toward the room . 
She saw her , with the baby in her arms , sitting down to tea ; she saw them all at table , and little Harry in a high chair , under the shadow of Rachel 's ample wing ; there were low murmurs of talk , gentle tinkling of tea-spoons , and musical clatter of cups and saucers , and all mingled in a delightful dream of rest ; and Eliza slept , as she had not slept before , since the fearful midnight hour when she had taken her child and fled through the frosty starlight . 
She dreamed of a beautiful country , -- a land , it seemed to her , of rest , -- green shores , pleasant islands , and beautifully glittering water ; and there , in a house which kind voices told her was a home , she saw her boy playing , free and happy child . 
She heard her husband 's footsteps ; she felt him coming nearer ; his arms were around her , his tears falling on her face , and she awoke ! 
It was no dream . 
The daylight had long faded ; her child lay calmly sleeping by her side ; a candle was burning dimly on the stand , and her husband was sobbing by her pillow . 
The next morning was a cheerful one at the Quaker house . 
`` Mother '' was up betimes , and surrounded by busy girls and boys , whom we had scarce time to introduce to our readers yesterday , and who all moved obediently to Rachel 's gentle `` Thee had better , '' or more gentle `` Had n't thee better ? '' 
in the work of getting breakfast ; for a breakfast in the luxurious valleys of Indiana is a thing complicated and multiform , and , like picking up the rose-leaves and trimming the bushes in Paradise , asking other hands than those of the original mother . 
While , therefore , John ran to the spring for fresh water , and Simeon the second sifted meal for corn-cakes , and Mary ground coffee , Rachel moved gently , and quietly about , making biscuits , cutting up chicken , and diffusing a sort of sunny radiance over the whole proceeding generally . 
If there was any danger of friction or collision from the ill-regulated zeal of so many young operators , her gentle `` Come ! 
come ! '' 
or `` I would n't , now , '' was quite sufficient to allay the difficulty . 
Bards have written of the cestus of Venus , that turned the heads of all the world in successive generations . 
We had rather , for our part , have the cestus of Rachel Halliday , that kept heads from being turned , and made everything go on harmoniously . 
We think it is more suited to our modern days , decidedly . 
While all other preparations were going on , Simeon the elder stood in his shirt-sleeves before a little looking-glass in the corner , engaged in the anti-patriarchal operation of shaving . 
Everything went on so sociably , so quietly , so harmoniously , in the great kitchen , -- it seemed so pleasant to every one to do just what they were doing , there was such an atmosphere of mutual confidence and good fellowship everywhere , -- even the knives and forks had a social clatter as they went on to the table ; and the chicken and ham had a cheerful and joyous fizzle in the pan , as if they rather enjoyed being cooked than otherwise ; -- and when George and Eliza and little Harry came out , they met such a hearty , rejoicing welcome , no wonder it seemed to them like a dream . 
At last , they were all seated at breakfast , while Mary stood at the stove , baking griddle-cakes , which , as they gained the true exact golden-brown tint of perfection , were transferred quite handily to the table . 
Rachel never looked so truly and benignly happy as at the head of her table . 
There was so much motherliness and full-heartedness even in the way she passed a plate of cakes or poured a cup of coffee , that it seemed to put a spirit into the food and drink she offered . 
It was the first time that ever George had sat down on equal terms at any white man 's table ; and he sat down , at first , with some constraint and awkwardness ; but they all exhaled and went off like fog , in the genial morning rays of this simple , overflowing kindness . 
This , indeed , was a home , -- home , -- a word that George had never yet known a meaning for ; and a belief in God , and trust in his providence , began to encircle his heart , as , with a golden cloud of protection and confidence , dark , misanthropic , pining atheistic doubts , and fierce despair , melted away before the light of a living Gospel , breathed in living faces , preached by a thousand unconscious acts of love and good will , which , like the cup of cold water given in the name of a disciple , shall never lose their reward . 
`` Father , what if thee should get found out again ? '' 
said Simeon second , as he buttered his cake . 
`` I should pay my fine , '' said Simeon , quietly . 
`` But what if they put thee in prison ? '' 
`` Could n't thee and mother manage the farm ? '' 
said Simeon , smiling . 
`` Mother can do almost everything , '' said the boy . 
`` But is n't it a shame to make such laws ? '' 
`` Thee must n't speak evil of thy rulers , Simeon , '' said his father , gravely . 
`` The Lord only gives us our worldly goods that we may do justice and mercy ; if our rulers require a price of us for it , we must deliver it up . 
`` Well , I hate those old slaveholders ! '' 
said the boy , who felt as unchristian as became any modern reformer . 
`` I am surprised at thee , son , '' said Simeon ; `` thy mother never taught thee so . 
I would do even the same for the slaveholder as for the slave , if the Lord brought him to my door in affliction . '' 
Simeon second blushed scarlet ; but his mother only smiled , and said , `` Simeon is my good boy ; he will grow older , by and by , and then he will be like his father . '' 
`` I hope , my good sir , that you are not exposed to any difficulty on our account , '' said George , anxiously . 
`` Fear nothing , George , for therefore are we sent into the world . 
If we would not meet trouble for a good cause , we were not worthy of our name . '' 
`` But , for me , '' said George , `` I could not bear it . '' 
`` Fear not , then , friend George ; it is not for thee , but for God and man , we do it , '' said Simeon . 
`` And now thou must lie by quietly this day , and tonight , at ten o'clock , Phineas Fletcher will carry thee onward to the next stand , -- thee and the rest of thy company . 
The pursuers are hard after thee ; we must not delay . '' 
`` If that is the case , why wait till evening ? '' 
said George . 
`` Thou art safe here by daylight , for every one in the settlement is a Friend , and all are watching . 
It has been found safer to travel by night . '' 
`` A young star ! 
which shone O'er life -- too sweet an image , for such glass ! 
A lovely being , scarcely formed or moulded ; A rose with all its sweetest leaves yet folded . '' 
The Mississippi ! 
How , as by an enchanted wand , have its scenes been changed , since Chateaubriand wrote his prose-poetic description of it , * as a river of mighty , unbroken solitudes , rolling amid undreamed wonders of vegetable and animal existence . 
* In Atala ; or the Love and Constantcy of Two Savages in the Desert -LRB- 1801 -RRB- by Francois Auguste Rene , Vicomte de Chateaubriand -LRB- 1768-1848 -RRB- . 
But as in an hour , this river of dreams and wild romance has emerged to a reality scarcely less visionary and splendid . 
What other river of the world bears on its bosom to the ocean the wealth and enterprise of such another country ? 
-- a country whose products embrace all between the tropics and the poles ! 
Those turbid waters , hurrying , foaming , tearing along , an apt resemblance of that headlong tide of business which is poured along its wave by a race more vehement and energetic than any the old world ever saw . 
Ah ! 
would that they did not also bear along a more fearful freight , -- the tears of the oppressed , the sighs of the helpless , the bitter prayers of poor , ignorant hearts to an unknown God -- unknown , unseen and silent , but who will yet `` come out of his place to save all the poor of the earth ! '' 
The slanting light of the setting sun quivers on the sea-like expanse of the river ; the shivery canes , and the tall , dark cypress , hung with wreaths of dark , funereal moss , glow in the golden ray , as the heavily-laden steamboat marches onward . 
Piled with cotton-bales , from many a plantation , up over deck and sides , till she seems in the distance a square , massive block of gray , she moves heavily onward to the nearing mart . 
We must look some time among its crowded decks before we shall find again our humble friend Tom . 
High on the upper deck , in a little nook among the everywhere predominant cotton-bales , at last we may find him . 
Partly from confidence inspired by Mr. Shelby 's representations , and partly from the remarkably inoffensive and quiet character of the man , Tom had insensibly won his way far into the confidence even of such a man as Haley . 
At first he had watched him narrowly through the day , and never allowed him to sleep at night unfettered ; but the uncomplaining patience and apparent contentment of Tom 's manner led him gradually to discontinue these restraints , and for some time Tom had enjoyed a sort of parole of honor , being permitted to come and go freely where he pleased on the boat . 
Ever quiet and obliging , and more than ready to lend a hand in every emergency which occurred among the workmen below , he had won the good opinion of all the hands , and spent many hours in helping them with as hearty a good will as ever he worked on a Kentucky farm . 
When there seemed to be nothing for him to do , he would climb to a nook among the cotton-bales of the upper deck , and busy himself in studying over his Bible , -- and it is there we see him now . 
For a hundred or more miles above New Orleans , the river is higher than the surrounding country , and rolls its tremendous volume between massive levees twenty feet in height . 
The traveller from the deck of the steamer , as from some floating castle top , overlooks the whole country for miles and miles around . 
Tom , therefore , had spread out full before him , in plantation after plantation , a map of the life to which he was approaching . 
He saw the distant slaves at their toil ; he saw afar their villages of huts gleaming out in long rows on many a plantation , distant from the stately mansions and pleasure-grounds of the master ; -- and as the moving picture passed on , his poor , foolish heart would be turning backward to the Kentucky farm , with its old shadowy beeches , -- to the master 's house , with its wide , cool halls , and , near by , the little cabin overgrown with the multiflora and bignonia . 
There he seemed to see familiar faces of comrades who had grown up with him from infancy ; he saw his busy wife , bustling in her preparations for his evening meals ; he heard the merry laugh of his boys at their play , and the chirrup of the baby at his knee ; and then , with a start , all faded , and he saw again the canebrakes and cypresses and gliding plantations , and heard again the creaking and groaning of the machinery , all telling him too plainly that all that phase of life had gone by forever . 
In such a case , you write to your wife , and send messages to your children ; but Tom could not write , -- the mail for him had no existence , and the gulf of separation was unbridged by even a friendly word or signal . 
Is it strange , then , that some tears fall on the pages of his Bible , as he lays it on the cotton-bale , and , with patient finger , threading his slow way from word to word , traces out its promises ? 
Having learned late in life , Tom was but a slow reader , and passed on laboriously from verse to verse . 
Fortunate for him was it that the book he was intent on was one which slow reading can not injure , -- nay , one whose words , like ingots of gold , seem often to need to be weighed separately , that the mind may take in their priceless value . 
Let us follow him a moment , as , pointing to each word , and pronouncing each half aloud , he reads , `` Let -- not -- your -- heart -- be -- troubled . 
In -- my -- Father 's -- house -- are -- many -- mansions . 
I -- go -- to -- prepare -- a -- place -- for -- you . '' 
Cicero , when he buried his darling and only daughter , had a heart as full of honest grief as poor Tom 's , -- perhaps no fuller , for both were only men ; -- but Cicero could pause over no such sublime words of hope , and look to no such future reunion ; and if he had seen them , ten to one he would not have believed , -- he must fill his head first with a thousand questions of authenticity of manuscript , and correctness of translation . 
But , to poor Tom , there it lay , just what he needed , so evidently true and divine that the possibility of a question never entered his simple head . 
It must be true ; for , if not true , how could he live ? 
As for Tom 's Bible , though it had no annotations and helps in margin from learned commentators , still it had been embellished with certain way-marks and guide-boards of Tom 's own invention , and which helped him more than the most learned expositions could have done . 
It had been his custom to get the Bible read to him by his master 's children , in particular by young Master George ; and , as they read , he would designate , by bold , strong marks and dashes , with pen and ink , the passages which more particularly gratified his ear or affected his heart . 
His Bible was thus marked through , from one end to the other , with a variety of styles and designations ; so he could in a moment seize upon his favorite passages , without the labor of spelling out what lay between them ; -- and while it lay there before him , every passage breathing of some old home scene , and recalling some past enjoyment , his Bible seemed to him all of this life that remained , as well as the promise of a future one . 
Among the passengers on the boat was a young gentleman of fortune and family , resident in New Orleans , who bore the name of St. Clare . 
He had with him a daughter between five and six years of age , together with a lady who seemed to claim relationship to both , and to have the little one especially under her charge . 
Tom had often caught glimpses of this little girl , -- for she was one of those busy , tripping creatures , that can be no more contained in one place than a sunbeam or a summer breeze , -- nor was she one that , once seen , could be easily forgotten . 
Her form was the perfection of childish beauty , without its usual chubbiness and squareness of outline . 
There was about it an undulating and aerial grace , such as one might dream of for some mythic and allegorical being . 
Her face was remarkable less for its perfect beauty of feature than for a singular and dreamy earnestness of expression , which made the ideal start when they looked at her , and by which the dullest and most literal were impressed , without exactly knowing why . 
The shape of her head and the turn of her neck and bust was peculiarly noble , and the long golden-brown hair that floated like a cloud around it , the deep spiritual gravity of her violet blue eyes , shaded by heavy fringes of golden brown , -- all marked her out from other children , and made every one turn and look after her , as she glided hither and thither on the boat . 
Nevertheless , the little one was not what you would have called either a grave child or a sad one . 
On the contrary , an airy and innocent playfulness seemed to flicker like the shadow of summer leaves over her childish face , and around her buoyant figure . 
She was always in motion , always with a half smile on her rosy mouth , flying hither and thither , with an undulating and cloud-like tread , singing to herself as she moved as in a happy dream . 
