Baisemeaux obeyed . 
He summoned his lieutenant , and gave him an order , which the latter passed on , without disturbing himself about it , to the next whom it concerned . 
Half an hour afterwards they heard a gate shut in the court ; it was the door to the dungeon , which had just rendered up its prey to the free air . 
Aramis blew out all the candles which lighted the room but one , which he left burning behind the door . 
This flickering glare prevented the sight from resting steadily on any object . 
It multiplied tenfold the changing forms and shadows of the place , by its wavering uncertainty . 
Steps drew near . 
`` Go and meet your men , '' said Aramis to Baisemeaux . 
The governor obeyed . 
The sergeant and turnkeys disappeared . 
Baisemeaux re-entered , followed by a prisoner . 
Aramis had placed himself in the shade ; he saw without being seen . 
Baisemeaux , in an agitated tone of voice , made the young man acquainted with the order which set him at liberty . 
The prisoner listened , without making a single gesture or saying a word . '' 
`` You will swear -LRB- 't is the regulation that requires it -RRB- , '' added the governor , `` never to reveal anything that you have seen or heard in the Bastile . '' 
The prisoner perceived a crucifix ; he stretched out his hands and swore with his lips . 
`` And now , monsieur , you are free . 
Whither do you intend going ? '' 
The prisoner turned his head , as if looking behind him for some protection , on which he ought to rely . 
Then was it that Aramis came out of the shade : `` I am here , '' he said , `` to render the gentleman whatever service he may please to ask . '' 
The prisoner slightly reddened , and , without hesitation , passed his arm through that of Aramis . 
`` God have you in his holy keeping , '' he said , in a voice the firmness of which made the governor tremble as much as the form of the blessing astonished him . 
Aramis , on shaking hands with Baisemeaux , said to him ; `` Does my order trouble you ? 
Do you fear their finding it here , should they come to search ? '' 
`` I desire to keep it , monseigneur , '' said Baisemeaux . 
`` If they found it here , it would be a certain indication I should be lost , and in that case you would be a powerful and a last auxiliary for me . '' 
`` Being your accomplice , you mean ? '' 
answered Aramis , shrugging his shoulders . 
`` Adieu , Baisemeaux , '' said he . 
The horses were in waiting , making each rusty spring reverberate the carriage again with their impatience . 
Baisemeaux accompanied the bishop to the bottom of the steps . 
Aramis caused his companion to mount before him , then followed , and without giving the driver any further order , `` Go on , '' said he . 
The carriage rattled over the pavement of the courtyard . 
An officer with a torch went before the horses , and gave orders at every post to let them pass . 
During the time taken in opening all the barriers , Aramis barely breathed , and you might have heard his `` sealed heart knock against his ribs . '' 
The prisoner , buried in a corner of the carriage , made no more sign of life than his companion . 
At length , a jolt more sever than the others announced to them that they had cleared the last watercourse . 
Behind the carriage closed the last gate , that in the Rue St. Antoine . 
No more walls either on the right or the left ; heaven everywhere , liberty everywhere , and life everywhere . 
The horses , kept in check by a vigorous hand , went quietly as far as the middle of the faubourg . 
There they began to trot . 
Little by little , whether they were warming to their work , or whether they were urged , they gained in swiftness , and once past Bercy , the carriage seemed to fly , so great was the ardor of the coursers . 
The horses galloped thus as far as Villeneuve St. George 's , where relays were waiting . 
Then four instead of two whirled the carriage away in the direction of Melun , and pulled up for a moment in the middle of the forest of Senart . 
No doubt the order had been given the postilion beforehand , for Aramis had no occasion even to make a sign . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked the prisoner , as if waking from a long dream . 
`` The matter is , monseigneur , '' said Aramis , `` that before going further , it is necessary your royal highness and I should converse . '' 
`` I will await an opportunity , monsieur , '' answered the young prince . 
`` We could not have a better , monseigneur . 
We are in the middle of a forest , and no one can hear us . '' 
`` The postilion ? '' 
`` The postilion of this relay is deaf and dumb , monseigneur . '' 
`` I am at your service , M. d'Herblay . '' 
`` Is it your pleasure to remain in the carriage ? '' 
`` Yes ; we are comfortably seated , and I like this carriage , for it has restored me to liberty . '' 
`` Wait , monseigneur ; there is yet a precaution to be taken . '' 
`` What ? '' 
`` We are here on the highway ; cavaliers or carriages traveling like ourselves might pass , and seeing us stopping , deem us in some difficulty . 
Let us avoid offers of assistance , which would embarrass us . '' 
`` Give the postilion orders to conceal the carriage in one of the side avenues . '' '' 
'T is exactly what I wished to do , monseigneur . '' 
Aramis made a sign to the deaf and dumb driver of the carriage , whom he touched on the arm . 
The latter dismounted , took the leaders by the bridle , and led them over the velvet sward and the mossy grass of a winding alley , at the bottom of which , on this moonless night , the deep shades formed a curtain blacker than ink . 
This done , the man lay down on a slope near his horses , who , on either side , kept nibbling the young oak shoots . 
`` I am listening , '' said the young prince to Aramis ; `` but what are you doing there ? '' 
`` I am disarming myself of my pistols , of which we have no further need , monseigneur . '' 
: The Tempter . 
`` My prince , '' said Aramis , turning in the carriage towards his companion , `` weak creature as I am , so unpretending in genius , so low in the scale of intelligent beings , it has never yet happened to me to converse with a man without penetrating his thoughts through that living mask which has been thrown over our mind , in order to retain its expression . 
But to - night , in this darkness , in the reserve which you maintain , I can read nothing on your features , and something tells me that I shall have great difficulty in wresting from you a sincere declaration . 
I beseech you , then , not for love of me , for subjects should never weigh as anything in the balance which princes hold , but for love of yourself , to retain every syllable , every inflexion which , under the present most grave circumstances , will all have a sense and value as important as any every uttered in the world . '' 
`` I listen , '' replied the young prince , `` decidedly , without either eagerly seeking or fearing anything you are about to say to me . '' 
And he buried himself still deeper in the thick cushions of the carriage , trying to deprive his companion not only of the sight of him , but even of the very idea of his presence . 
Black was the darkness which fell wide and dense from the summits of the intertwining trees . 
The carriage , covered in by this prodigious roof , would not have received a particle of light , not even if a ray could have struggled through the wreaths of mist that were already rising in the avenue . 
`` Monseigneur , '' resumed Aramis , `` you know the history of the government which to-day controls France . 
The king issued from an infancy imprisoned like yours , obscure as yours , and confined as yours ; only , instead of ending , like yourself , this slavery in a prison , this obscurity in solitude , these straightened circumstances in concealment , he was fain to bear all these miseries , humiliations , and distresses , in full daylight , under the pitiless sun of royalty ; on an elevation flooded with light , where every stain appears a blemish , every glory a stain . 
The king has suffered ; it rankles in his mind ; and he will avenge himself . 
He will be a bad king . 
I say not that he will pour out his people 's blood , like Louis XI. , or Charles IX. ; for he has no mortal injuries to avenge ; but he will devour the means and substance of his people ; for he has himself undergone wrongs in his own interest and money . 
In the first place , then , I acquit my conscience , when I consider openly the merits and the faults of this great prince ; and if I condemn him , my conscience absolves me . '' 
Aramis paused . 
It was not to listen if the silence of the forest remained undisturbed , but it was to gather up his thoughts from the very bottom of his soul - to leave the thoughts he had uttered sufficient time to eat deeply into the mind of his companion . 
`` All that Heaven does , Heaven does well , '' continued the bishop of Vannes ; `` and I am so persuaded of it that I have long been thankful to have been chosen depositary of the secret which I have aided you to discover . 
To a just Providence was necessary an instrument , at once penetrating , persevering , and convinced , to accomplish a great work . 
I am this instrument . 
I possess penetration , perseverance , conviction ; I govern a mysterious people , who has taken for its motto , the motto of God , ` Patiens quia oeternus . ' '' 
The prince moved . 
`` I divine , monseigneur , why you are raising your head , and are surprised at the people I have under my command . 
You did not know you were dealing with a king - oh ! 
monseigneur , king of a people very humble , much disinherited ; humble because they have no force save when creeping ; disinherited , because never , almost never in this world , do my people reap the harvest they sow , nor eat the fruit they cultivate . 
They labor for an abstract idea ; they heap together all the atoms of their power , to from a single man ; and round this man , with the sweat of their labor , they create a misty halo , which his genius shall , in turn , render a glory gilded with the rays of all the crowns in Christendom . 
Such is the man you have beside you , monseigneur . 
It is to tell you that he has drawn you from the abyss for a great purpose , to raise you above the powers of the earth - above himself . '' 
-LRB- 1 -RRB- The prince lightly touched Aramis 's arm . 
`` You speak to me , '' he said , `` of that religious order whose chief you are . 
For me , the result of your words is , that the day you desire to hurl down the man you shall have raised , the event will be accomplished ; and that you will keep under your hand your creation of yesterday . '' 
`` Undeceive yourself , monseigneur , '' replied the bishop . 
`` I should not take the trouble to play this terrible game with your royal highness , if I had not a double interest in gaining it . 
The day you are elevated , you are elevated forever ; you will overturn the footstool , as you rise , and will send it rolling so far , that not even the sight of it will ever again recall to you its right to simple gratitude . '' 
`` Oh , monsieur ! '' 
`` Your movement , monseigneur , arises from an excellent disposition . 
I thank you . 
Be well assured , I aspire to more than gratitude ! 
I am convinced that , when arrived at the summit , you will judge me still more worthy to be your friend ; and then , monseigneur , we two will do such great deeds , that ages hereafter shall long speak of them . '' 
`` Tell me plainly , monsieur - tell me without disguise - what I am to-day , and what you aim at my being to-morrow . '' 
`` You are the son of King Louis XIII. , brother of Louis XIV. , natural and legitimate heir to the throne of France . 
In keeping you near him , as Monsieur has been kept - Monsieur , your younger brother - the king reserved to himself the right of being legitimate sovereign . 
The doctors only could dispute his legitimacy . 
But the doctors always prefer the king who is to the king who is not . 
Providence has willed that you should be persecuted ; this persecution to-day consecrates you king of France . 
You had , then , a right to reign , seeing that it is disputed ; you had a right to be proclaimed seeing that you have been concealed ; and you possess royal blood , since no one has dared to shed yours , as that of your servants has been shed . 
Now see , then , what this Providence , which you have so often accused of having in every way thwarted you , has done for you . 
It has given you the features , figure , age , and voice of your brother ; and the very causes of your persecution are about to become those of your triumphant restoration . 
To-morrow , after to-morrow - from the very first , regal phantom , living shade of Louis XIV. , you will sit upon his throne , whence the will of Heaven , confided in execution to the arm of man , will have hurled him , without hope of return . '' 
`` I understand , '' said the prince , `` my brother 's blood will not be shed , then . '' 
`` You will be sole arbiter of his fate . '' 
`` The secret of which they made an evil use against me ? '' 
`` You will employ it against him . 
What did he do to conceal it ? 
He concealed you . 
Living image of himself , you will defeat the conspiracy of Mazarin and Anne of Austria . 
You , my prince , will have the same interest in concealing him , who will , as a prisoner , resemble you , as you will resemble him as a king . '' 
`` I fall back on what I was saying to you . 
Who will guard him ? '' 
`` Who guarded you ? '' 
`` You know this secret - you have made use of it with regard to myself . 
Who else knows it ? '' 
`` The queen-mother and Madame de Chevreuse . '' 
`` What will they do ? '' 
`` Nothing , if you choose . '' 
`` How is that ? '' 
`` How can they recognize you , if you act in such a manner that no one can recognize you ? '' '' 
'T is true ; but there are grave difficulties . '' 
`` State them , prince . '' 
`` My brother is married ; I can not take my brother 's wife . '' 
`` I will cause Spain to consent to a divorce ; it is in the interest of your new policy ; it is human morality . 
All that is really noble and really useful in this world will find its account therein . '' 
`` The imprisoned king will speak . '' 
`` To whom do you think he will speak - to the walls ? '' 
`` You mean , by walls , the men in whom you put confidence . '' 
`` If need be , yes . 
And besides , your royal highness - '' `` Besides ? '' 
`` I was going to say , that the designs of Providence do not stop on such a fair road . 
Every scheme of this caliber is completed by its results , like a geometrical calculation . 
The king , in prison , will not be for you the cause of embarrassment that you have been for the king enthroned . 
His soul is naturally proud and impatient ; it is , moreover , disarmed and enfeebled , by being accustomed to honors , and by the license of supreme power . 
The same Providence which has willed that the concluding step in the geometrical calculation I have had the honor of describing to your royal highness should be your ascension to the throne , and the destruction of him who is hurtful to you , has also determined that the conquered one shall soon end both his own and your sufferings . 
Therefore , his soul and body have been adapted for but a brief agony . 
Put into prison as a private individual , left alone with your doubts , deprived of everything , you have exhibited the most sublime , enduring principle of life in withstanding all this . 
But your brother , a captive , forgotten , and in bonds , will not long endure the calamity ; and Heaven will resume his soul at the appointed time - that is to say , soon . '' 
At this point in Aramis 's gloomy analysis , a bird of night uttered from the depths of the forest that prolonged and plaintive cry which makes every creature tremble . 
`` I will exile the deposed king , '' said Philippe , shuddering ; '' ` twill be more human . '' 
`` The king 's good pleasure will decide the point , '' said Aramis . 
`` But has the problem been well put ? 
Have I brought out of the solution according to the wishes or the foresight of your royal highness ? '' 
`` Yes , monsieur , yes ; you have forgotten nothing - except , indeed , two things . '' 
`` The first ? '' 
`` Let us speak of it at once , with the same frankness we have already conversed in . 
Let us speak of the causes which may bring about the ruin of all the hopes we have conceived . 
Let us speak of the risks we are running . '' 
`` They would be immense , infinite , terrific , insurmountable , if , as I have said , all things did not concur to render them of absolutely no account . 
There is no danger either for you or for me , if the constancy and intrepidity of your royal highness are equal to that perfection of resemblance to your brother which nature has bestowed upon you . 
I repeat it , there are no dangers , only obstacles ; a word , indeed , which I find in all languages , but have always ill-understood , and , were I king , would have obliterated as useless and absurd . '' 
`` Yes , indeed , monsieur ; there is a very serious obstacle , an insurmountable danger , which you are forgetting . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Aramis . 
`` There is conscience , which cries aloud ; remorse , that never dies . '' 
`` True , true , '' said the bishop ; `` there is a weakness of heart of which you remind me . 
You are right , too , for that , indeed , is an immense obstacle . 
The horse afraid of the ditch , leaps into the middle of it , and is killed ! 
The man who trembling crosses his sword with that of another leaves loopholes whereby his enemy has him in his power . '' 
`` Have you a brother ? '' 
said the young man to Aramis . 
`` I am alone in the world , '' said the latter , with a hard , dry voice . 
`` But , surely , there is some one in the world whom you love ? '' 
added Philippe . 
`` No one ! 
- Yes , I love you . '' 
The young man sank into so profound a silence , that the mere sound of his respiration seemed like a roaring tumult for Aramis . 
`` Monseigneur , '' he resumed , `` I have not said all I had to say to your royal highness ; I have not offered you all the salutary counsels and useful resources which I have at my disposal . 
It is useless to flash bright visions before the eyes of one who seeks and loves darkness : useless , too , is it to let the magnificence of the cannon 's roar make itself heard in the ears of one who loves repose and the quiet of the country . 
Monseigneur , I have your happiness spread out before me in my thoughts ; listen to my words ; precious they indeed are , in their import and their sense , for you who look with such tender regard upon the bright heavens , the verdant meadows , the pure air . 
I know a country instinct with delights of every kind , an unknown paradise , a secluded corner of the world - where alone , unfettered and unknown , in the thick covert of the woods , amidst flowers , and streams of rippling water , you will forget all the misery that human folly has so recently allotted you . 
Oh ! 
listen to me , my prince . 
I do not jest . 
I have a heart , and mind , and soul , and can read your own , - aye , even to its depths . 
I will not take you unready for your task , in order to cast you into the crucible of my own desires , of my caprice , or my ambition . 
Let it be all or nothing . 
You are chilled and galled , sick at heart , overcome by excess of the emotions which but one hour 's liberty has produced in you . 
For me , that is a certain and unmistakable sign that you do not wish to continue at liberty . 
Would you prefer a more humble life , a life more suited to your strength ? 
Heaven is my witness , that I wish your happiness to be the result of the trial to which I have exposed you . '' 
`` Speak , speak , '' said the prince , with a vivacity which did not escape Aramis . 
`` I know , '' resumed the prelate , `` in the Bas-Poitou , a canton , of which no one in France suspects the existence . 
Twenty leagues of country is immense , is it not ? 
Twenty leagues , monseigneur , all covered with water and herbage , and reeds of the most luxuriant nature ; the whole studded with islands covered with woods of the densest foliage . 
These large marshes , covered with reeds as with a thick mantle , sleep silently and calmly beneath the sun 's soft and genial rays . 
A few fishermen with their families indolently pass their lives away there , with their great living-rafts of poplar and alder , the flooring formed of reeds , and the roof woven out of thick rushes . 
These barks , these floating-houses , are wafted to and fro by the changing winds . 
Whenever they touch a bank , it is but by chance ; and so gently , too , that the sleeping fisherman is not awakened by the shock . 
Should he wish to land , it is merely because he has seen a large flight of landrails or plovers , of wild ducks , teal , widgeon , or woodchucks , which fall an easy pray to net or gun . 
Silver shad , eels , greedy pike , red and gray mullet , swim in shoals into his nets ; he has but to choose the finest and largest , and return the others to the waters . 
Never yet has the food of the stranger , be he soldier or simple citizen , never has any one , indeed , penetrated into that district . 
The sun 's rays there are soft and tempered : in plots of solid earth , whose soil is swart and fertile , grows the vine , nourishing with generous juice its purple , white , and golden grapes . 
Once a week , a boat is sent to deliver the bread which has been baked at an oven - the common property of all . 
There - like the seigneurs of early days - powerful in virtue of your dogs , your fishing-lines , your guns , and your beautiful reed-built house , would you live , rich in the produce of the chase , in plentitude of absolute secrecy . 
There would years of your life roll away , at the end of which , no longer recognizable , for you would have been perfectly transformed , you would have succeeded in acquiring a destiny accorded to you by Heaven . 
There are a thousand pistoles in this bag , monseigneur - more , far more , than sufficient to purchase the whole marsh of which I have spoken ; more than enough to live there as many years as you have days to live ; more than enough to constitute you the richest , the freest , and the happiest man in the country . 
Accept it , as I offer it you - sincerely , cheerfully . 
Forthwith , without a moment 's pause , I will unharness two of my horses , which are attached to the carriage yonder , and they , accompanied by my servant - my deaf and dumb attendant - shall conduct you - traveling throughout the night , sleeping during the day - to the locality I have described ; and I shall , at least , have the satisfaction of knowing that I have rendered to my prince the major service he himself preferred . 
I shall have made one human being happy ; and Heaven for that will hold me in better account than if I had made one man powerful ; the former task is far more difficult . 
And now , monseigneur , your answer to this proposition ? 
Here is the money . 
Nay , do not hesitate . 
At Poitou , you can risk nothing , except the chance of catching the fevers prevalent there ; and even of them , the so-called wizards of the country will cure you , for the sake of your pistoles . 
If you play the other game , you run the chance of being assassinated on a throne , strangled in a prison-cell . 
Upon my soul , I assure you , now I begin to compare them together , I myself should hesitate which lot I should accept . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the young prince , `` before I determine , let me alight from this carriage , walk on the ground , and consult that still voice within me , which Heaven bids us all to hearken to . 
Ten minutes is all I ask , and then you shall have your answer . '' 
`` As you please , monseigneur , '' said Aramis , bending before him with respect , so solemn and august in tone and address had sounded these strange words . 
: Crown and Tiara . 
Aramis was the first to descend from the carriage ; he held the door open for the young man . 
He saw him place his foot on the mossy ground with a trembling of the whole body , and walk round the carriage with an unsteady and almost tottering step . 
It seemed as if the poor prisoner was unaccustomed to walk on God 's earth . 
It was the 15th of August , about eleven o'clock at night ; thick clouds , portending a tempest , overspread the heavens , and shrouded every light and prospect underneath their heavy folds . 
The extremities of the avenues were imperceptibly detached from the copse , by a lighter shadow of opaque gray , which , upon closer examination , became visible in the midst of the obscurity . 
But the fragrance which ascended from the grass , fresher and more penetrating than that which exhaled from the trees around him ; the warm and balmy air which enveloped him for the first time for many years past ; the ineffable enjoyment of liberty in an open country , spoke to the prince in so seductive a language , that notwithstanding the preternatural caution , we would almost say dissimulation of his character , of which we have tried to give an idea , he could not restrain his emotion , and breathed a sigh of ecstasy . 
Then , by degrees , he raised his aching head and inhaled the softly scented air , as it was wafted in gentle gusts to his uplifted face . 
Crossing his arms on his chest , as if to control this new sensation of delight , he drank in delicious draughts of that mysterious air which interpenetrates at night the loftiest forests . 
The sky he was contemplating , the murmuring waters , the universal freshness - was not all this reality ? 
Was not Aramis a madman to suppose that he had aught else to dream of in this world ? 
Those exciting pictures of country life , so free from fears and troubles , the ocean of happy days that glitters incessantly before all young imaginations , are real allurements wherewith to fascinate a poor , unhappy prisoner , worn out by prison cares , emaciated by the stifling air of the Bastile . 
It was the picture , it will be remembered , drawn by Aramis , when he offered the thousand pistoles he had with him in the carriage to the prince , and the enchanted Eden which the deserts of Bas-Poitou hid from the eyes of the world . 
Such were the reflections of Aramis as he watched , with an anxiety impossible to describe , the silent progress of the emotions of Philippe , whom he perceived gradually becoming more and more absorbed in his meditations . 
The young prince was offering up an inward prayer to Heaven , to be divinely guided in this trying moment , upon which his life or death depended . 
It was an anxious time for the bishop of Vannes , who had never before been so perplexed . 
His iron will , accustomed to overcome all obstacles , never finding itself inferior or vanquished on any occasion , to be foiled in so vast a project from not having foreseen the influence which a view of nature in all its luxuriance would have on the human mind ! 
Aramis , overwhelmed by anxiety , contemplated with emotion the painful struggle that was taking place in Philippe 's mind . 
This suspense lasted the whole ten minutes which the young man had requested . 
During this space of time , which appeared an eternity , Philippe continued gazing with an imploring and sorrowful look towards the heavens ; Aramis did not remove the piercing glance he had fixed on Philippe . 
Suddenly the young man bowed his head . 
His thought returned to the earth , his looks perceptibly hardened , his brow contracted , his mouth assuming an expression of undaunted courage ; again his looks became fixed , but this time they wore a worldly expression , hardened by covetousness , pride , and strong desire . 
Aramis 's look immediately became as soft as it had before been gloomy . 
Philippe , seizing his hand in a quick , agitated manner , exclaimed : `` Lead me to where the crown of France is to be found . '' 
`` Is this your decision , monseigneur ? '' 
asked Aramis . 
`` It is . '' 
`` Irrevocably so ? '' 
Philippe did not even deign to reply . 
He gazed earnestly at the bishop , as if to ask him if it were possible for a man to waver after having once made up his mind . 
`` Such looks are flashes of the hidden fire that betrays men 's character , '' said Aramis , bowing over Philippe 's hand ; `` you will be great , monseigneur , I will answer for that . '' 
`` Let us resume our conversation . 
I wished to discuss two points with you ; in the first place the dangers , or the obstacles we may meet with . 
That point is decided . 
The other is the conditions you intend imposing on me . 
It is your turn to speak , M. d'Herblay . '' 
`` The conditions , monseigneur ? '' 
`` Doubtless . 
You will not allow so mere a trifle to stop me , and you will not do me the injustice to suppose that I think you have no interest in this affair . 
Therefore , without subterfuge or hesitation , tell me the truth - '' `` I will do so , monseigneur . 
Once a king - '' `` When will that be ? '' 
`` To-morrow evening - I mean in the night . '' 
`` Explain yourself . '' 
`` When I shall have asked your highness a question . '' 
`` Do so . '' 
`` I sent to your highness a man in my confidence with instructions to deliver some closely written notes , carefully drawn up , which will thoroughly acquaint your highness with the different persons who compose and will compose your court . '' 
`` I perused those notes . '' 
`` Attentively ? '' 
`` I know them by heart . '' 
`` And understand them ? 
Pardon me , but I may venture to ask that question of a poor , abandoned captive of the Bastile ? 
In a week 's time it will not be requisite to further question a mind like yours . 
You will then be in full possession of liberty and power . '' 
`` Interrogate me , then , and I will be a scholar representing his lesson to his master . '' 
`` We will begin with your family , monseigneur . '' 
`` My mother , Anne of Austria ! 
all her sorrows , her painful malady . 
Oh ! 
I know her - I know her . '' 
`` Your second brother ? '' 
asked Aramis , bowing . 
`` To these notes , '' replied the prince , `` you have added portraits so faithfully painted , that I am able to recognize the persons whose characters , manners , and history you have so carefully portrayed . 
Monsieur , my brother , is a fine , dark young man , with a pale face ; he does not love his wife , Henrietta , whom I , Louis XIV. , loved a little , and still flirt with , even although she made me weep on the day she wished to dismiss Mademoiselle de la Valliere from her service in disgrace . '' 
`` You will have to be careful with regard to the watchfulness of the latter , '' said Aramis ; `` she is sincerely attached to the actual king . 
The eyes of a woman who loves are not easily deceived . '' 
`` She is fair , has blue eyes , whose affectionate gaze reveals her identity . 
She halts slightly in her gait ; she writes a letter every day , to which I have to send an answer by M. de Saint-Aignan . '' 
`` Do you know the latter ? '' 
`` As if I saw him , and I know the last verses he composed for me , as well as those I composed in answer to his . '' 
`` Very good . 
Do you know your ministers ? '' 
`` Colbert , an ugly , dark-browed man , but intelligent enough , his hair covering his forehead , a large , heavy , full head ; the mortal enemy of M. Fouquet . '' 
`` As for the latter , we need not disturb ourselves about him . '' 
`` No ; because necessarily you will not require me to exile him , I suppose ? '' 
Aramis , struck with admiration at the remark , said , `` You will become very great , monseigneur . '' 
`` You see , '' added the prince , `` that I know my lesson by heart , and with Heaven 's assistance , and yours afterwards , I shall seldom go wrong . '' 
`` You have still an awkward pair of eyes to deal with , monseigneur . '' 
`` Yes , the captain of the musketeers , M. d'Artagnan , your friend . '' 
`` Yes ; I can well say ` my friend . ' '' 
`` He who escorted La Valliere to Le Chaillot ; he who delivered up Monk , cooped in an iron box , to Charles II. ; he who so faithfully served my mother ; he to whom the crown of France owes so much that it owes everything . 
Do you intend to ask me to exile him also ? '' 
`` Never , sire . 
D'Artagnan is a man to whom , at a certain given time , I will undertake to reveal everything ; but be on your guard with him , for if he discovers our plot before it is revealed to him , you or I will certainly be killed or taken . 
He is a bold and enterprising man . '' 
`` I will think it over . 
Now tell me about M. Fouquet ; what do you wish to be done with regard to him ? '' 
`` One moment more , I entreat you , monseigneur ; and forgive me , if I seem to fail in respect to questioning you further . '' 
`` It is your duty to do so , nay , more than that , your right . '' 
`` Before we pass to M. Fouquet , I should very much regret forgetting another friend of mine . '' 
`` M. du Vallon , the Hercules of France , you mean ; oh ! 
as far as he is concerned , his interests are more than safe . '' 
`` No ; it is not he whom I intended to refer to . '' 
`` The Comte de la Fere , then ? '' 
`` And his son , the son of all four of us . '' 
`` That poor boy who is dying of love for La Valliere , whom my brother so disloyally bereft him of ? 
Be easy on that score . 
I shall know how to rehabilitate his happiness . 
Tell me only one thing , Monsieur d'Herblay ; do men , when they love , forget the treachery that has been shown them ? 
Can a man ever forgive the woman who has betrayed him ? 
Is that a French custom , or is it one of the laws of the human heart ? '' 
`` A man who loves deeply , as deeply as Raoul loves Mademoiselle de la Valliere , finishes by forgetting the fault or crime of the woman he loves ; but I do not yet know whether Raoul will be able to forget . '' 
`` I will see after that . 
Have you anything further to say about your friend ? '' 
`` No ; that is all . '' 
`` Well , then , now for M. Fouquet . 
What do you wish me to do for him ? '' 
`` To keep him on as surintendant , in the capacity in which he has hitherto acted , I entreat you . '' 
`` Be it so ; but he is the first minister at present . '' 
`` Not quite so . '' 
`` A king , ignorant and embarrassed as I shall be , will , as a matter of course , require a first minister of state . '' 
`` Your majesty will require a friend . '' 
`` I have only one , and that is yourself . '' 
`` You will have many others by and by , but none so devoted , none so zealous for your glory . '' 
`` You shall be my first minister of state . '' 
`` Not immediately , monseigneur , for that would give rise to too much suspicion and astonishment . '' 
`` M. de Richelieu , the first minister of my grandmother , Marie de Medici , was simply bishop of Lucon , as you are bishop of Vannes . '' 
`` I perceive that your royal highness has studied my notes to great advantage ; your amazing perspicacity overpowers me with delight . '' 
`` I am perfectly aware that M. de Richelieu , by means of the queen 's protection , soon became cardinal . '' 
`` It would be better , '' said Aramis , bowing , `` that I should not be appointed first minister until your royal highness has procured my nomination as cardinal . '' 
`` You shall be nominated before two months are past , Monsieur d'Herblay . 
But that is a matter of very trifling moment ; you would not offend me if you were to ask more than that , and you would cause me serious regret if you were to limit yourself to that . '' 
`` In that case , I have something still further to hope for , monseigneur . '' 
`` Speak ! 
speak ! '' 
`` M. Fouquet will not keep long at the head of affairs , he will soon get old . 
He is fond of pleasure , consistently , I mean , with all his labors , thanks to the youthfulness he still retains ; but this protracted youth will disappear at the approach of the first serious annoyance , or at the first illness he may experience . 
We will spare him the annoyance , because he is an agreeable and noble-hearted man ; but we can not save him from ill-health . 
So it is determined . 
When you shall have paid all M. Fouquet 's debts , and restored the finances to a sound condition , M. Fouquet will be able to remain the sovereign ruler in his little court of poets and painters , - we shall have made him rich . 
When that has been done , and I have become your royal highness 's prime minister , I shall be able to think of my own interests and yours . '' 
The young man looked at his interrogator . 
`` M. de Richelieu , of whom we were speaking just now , was very much to blame in the fixed idea he had of governing France alone , unaided . 
He allowed two kings , King Louis XIII . 
and himself , to be seated on the self - same throne , whilst he might have installed them more conveniently upon two separate and distinct thrones . '' 
`` Upon two thrones ? '' 
said the young man , thoughtfully . 
`` In fact , '' pursued Aramis , quietly , `` a cardinal , prime minister of France , assisted by the favor and by the countenance of his Most Christian Majesty the King of France , a cardinal to whom the king his master lends the treasures of the state , his army , his counsel , such a man would be acting with twofold injustice in applying these mighty resources to France alone . 
Besides , '' added Aramis , `` you will not be a king such as your father was , delicate in health , slow in judgment , whom all things wearied ; you will be a king governing by your brain and by your sword ; you will have in the government of the state no more than you will be able to manage unaided ; I should only interfere with you . 
Besides , our friendship ought never to be , I do not say impaired , but in any degree affected , by a secret thought . 
I shall have given you the throne of France , you will confer on me the throne of St. Peter . 
Whenever your loyal , firm , and mailed hand should joined in ties of intimate association the hand of a pope such as I shall be , neither Charles V. , who owned two-thirds of the habitable globe , nor Charlemagne , who possessed it entirely , will be able to reach to half your stature . 
I have no alliances , I have no predilections ; I will not throw you into persecutions of heretics , nor will I cast you into the troubled waters of family dissension ; I will simply say to you : The whole universe is our own ; for me the minds of men , for you their bodies . 
And as I shall be the first to die , you will have my inheritance . 
What do you say of my plan , monseigneur ? '' 
`` I say that you render me happy and proud , for no other reason than that of having comprehended you thoroughly . 
Monsieur d'Herblay , you shall be cardinal , and when cardinal , my prime minister ; and then you will point out to me the necessary steps to be taken to secure your election as pope , and I will take them . 
You can ask what guarantees from me you please . '' 
`` It is useless . 
Never shall I act except in such a manner that you will be the gainer ; I shall never ascend the ladder of fortune , fame , or position , until I have first seen you placed upon the round of the ladder immediately above me ; I shall always hold myself sufficiently aloof from you to escape incurring your jealousy , sufficiently near to sustain your personal advantage and to watch over your friendship . 
All the contracts in the world are easily violated because the interests included in them incline more to one side than to another . 
With us , however , this will never be the case ; I have no need of any guarantees . '' 
`` And so - my dear brother - will disappear ? '' 
`` Simply . 
We will remove him from his bed by means of a plank which yields to the pressure of the finger . 
Having retired to rest a crowned sovereign , he will awake a captive . 
Alone you will rule from that moment , and you will have no interest dearer and better than that of keeping me near you . '' 
`` I believe it . 
There is my hand on it , Monsieur d'Herblay . '' 
`` Allow me to kneel before you , sire , most respectfully . 
We will embrace each other on the day we shall have upon our temples , you the crown , I the tiara . '' 
`` Still embrace me this very day also , and be , for and towards me , more than great , more than skillful , more than sublime in genius ; be kind and indulgent - be my father ! '' 
Aramis was almost overcome as he listened to his voice ; he fancied he detected in his own heart an emotion hitherto unknown ; but this impression was speedily removed . 
`` His father ! '' 
he thought ; `` yes , his Holy Father . '' 
And they resumed their places in the carriage , which sped rapidly along the road leading to Vaux-le-Vicomte . 
: The Chateau de Vaux-le-Vicomte . 
The chateau of Vaux-le-Vicomte , situated about a league from Melun , had been built by Fouquet in 1655 , at a time when there was a scarcity of money in France ; Mazarin had taken all that there was , and Fouquet expended the remainder . 
However , as certain men have fertile , false , and useful vices , Fouquet , in scattering broadcast millions of money in the construction of this palace , had found a means of gathering , as the result of his generous profusion , three illustrious men together : Levau , the architect of the building ; Lenotre , the designer of the gardens ; and Lebrun , the decorator of the apartments . 
If the Chateau de Vaux possessed a single fault with which it could be reproached , it was its grand , pretentious character . 
It is even at the present day proverbial to calculate the number of acres of roofing , the restoration of which would , in our age , be the ruin of fortunes cramped and narrowed as the epoch itself . 
Vaux-le-Vicomte , when its magnificent gates , supported by caryatides , have been passed through , has the principal front of the main building opening upon a vast , so-called , court of honor , inclosed by deep ditches , bordered by a magnificent stone balustrade . 
Nothing could be more noble in appearance than the central forecourt raised upon the flight of steps , like a king upon his throne , having around it four pavilions at the angles , the immense Ionic columns of which rose majestically to the whole height of the building . 
The friezes ornamented with arabesques , and the pediments which crowned the pilasters , conferred richness and grace on every part of the building , while the domes which surmounted the whole added proportion and majesty . 
This mansion , built by a subject , bore a far greater resemblance to those royal residences which Wolsey fancied he was called upon to construct , in order to present them to his master form the fear of rendering him jealous . 
But if magnificence and splendor were displayed in any one particular part of this palace more than another , - if anything could be preferred to the wonderful arrangement of the interior , to the sumptuousness of the gilding , and to the profusion of the paintings and statues , it would be the park and gardens of Vaux . 
The jets d'eau , which were regarded as wonderful in 1653 , are still so , even at the present time ; the cascades awakened the admiration of kings and princes ; and as for the famous grotto , the theme of so many poetical effusions , the residence of that illustrious nymph of Vaux , whom Pelisson made converse with La Fontaine , we must be spared the description of all its beauties . 
We will do as Despreaux did , - we will enter the park , the trees of which are of eight years ' growth only - that is to say , in their present position - and whose summits even yet , as they proudly tower aloft , blushingly unfold their leaves to the earliest rays of the rising sun . 
Lenotre had hastened the pleasure of the Maecenas of his period ; all the nursery - grounds had furnished trees whose growth had been accelerated by careful culture and the richest plant-food . 
Every tree in the neighborhood which presented a fair appearance of beauty or stature had been taken up by its roots and transplanted to the park . 
Fouquet could well afford to purchase trees to ornament his park , since he had bought up three villages and their appurtenances -LRB- to use a legal word -RRB- to increase its extent . 
M. de Scudery said of this palace , that , for the purpose of keeping the grounds and gardens well watered , M. Fouquet had divided a river into a thousand fountains , and gathered the waters of a thousand fountains into torrents . 
This same Monsieur de Scudery said a great many other things in his `` Clelie , '' about this palace of Valterre , the charms of which he describes most minutely . 
We should be far wiser to send our curious readers to Vaux to judge for themselves , than to refer them to `` Clelie ; '' and yet there are as many leagues from Paris to Vaux , as there are volumes of the `` Clelie . '' 
This magnificent palace had been got ready for the reception of the greatest reigning sovereign of the time . 
M. Fouquet 's friends had transported thither , some their actors and their dresses , others their troops of sculptors and artists ; not forgetting others with their ready - mended pens , - floods of impromptus were contemplated . 
The cascades , somewhat rebellious nymphs though they were , poured forth their waters brighter and clearer than crystal : they scattered over the bronze triton and nereids their waves of foam , which glistened like fire in the rays of the sun . 
An army of servants were hurrying to and fro in squadrons in the courtyard and corridors ; while Fouquet , who had only that morning arrived , walked all through the palace with a calm , observant glance , in order to give his last orders , after his intendants had inspected everything . 
It was , as we have said , the 15th of August . 
The sun poured down its burning rays upon the heathen deities of marble and bronze : it raised the temperature of the water in the conch shells , and ripened , on the walls , those magnificent peaches , of which the king , fifty years later , spoke so regretfully , when , at Marly , on an occasion of a scarcity of the finer sorts of peaches being complained of , in the beautiful gardens there - gardens which had cost France double the amount that had been expended on Vaux - the great king observed to some one : `` You are far too young to have eaten any of M. Fouquet 's peaches . '' 
Oh , fame ! 
Oh , blazon of renown ! 
Oh , glory of this earth ! 
That very man whose judgment was so sound and accurate where merit was concerned - he who had swept into his coffers the inheritance of Nicholas Fouquet , who had robbed him of Lenotre and Lebrun , and had sent him to rot for the remainder of his life in one of the state prisons - merely remembered the peaches of that vanquished , crushed , forgotten enemy ! 
It was to little purpose that Fouquet had squandered thirty millions of francs in the fountains of his gardens , in the crucibles of his sculptors , in the writing-desks of his literary friends , in the portfolios of his painters ; vainly had he fancied that thereby he might be remembered . 
A peach - a blushing , rich-flavored fruit , nestling in the trellis work on the garden - wall , hidden beneath its long , green leaves , - this little vegetable production , that a dormouse would nibble up without a thought , was sufficient to recall to the memory of this great monarch the mournful shade of the last surintendant of France . 
With a perfect reliance that Aramis had made arrangements fairly to distribute the vast number of guests throughout the palace , and that he had not omitted to attend to any of the internal regulations for their comfort , Fouquet devoted his entire attention to the ensemble alone . 
In one direction Gourville showed him the preparations which had been made for the fireworks ; in another , Moliere led him over the theater ; at last , after he had visited the chapel , the salons , and the galleries , and was again going downstairs , exhausted with fatigue , Fouquet saw Aramis on the staircase . 
The prelate beckoned to him . 
The surintendant joined his friend , and , with him , paused before a large picture scarcely finished . 
Applying himself , heart and soul , to his work , the painter Lebrun , covered with perspiration , stained with paint , pale from fatigue and the inspiration of genius , was putting the last finishing touches with his rapid brush . 
It was the portrait of the king , whom they were expecting , dressed in the court suit which Percerin had condescended to show beforehand to the bishop of Vannes . 
Fouquet placed himself before this portrait , which seemed to live , as one might say , in the cool freshness of its flesh , and in its warmth of color . 
He gazed upon it long and fixedly , estimated the prodigious labor that had been bestowed upon it , and , not being able to find any recompense sufficiently great for this Herculean effort , he passed his arm round the painter 's neck and embraced him . 
The surintendant , by this action , had utterly ruined a suit of clothes worth a thousand pistoles , but he had satisfied , more than satisfied , Lebrun . 
It was a happy moment for the artist ; it was an unhappy moment for M. Percerin , who was walking behind Fouquet , and was engaged in admiring , in Lebrun 's painting , the suit that he had made for his majesty , a perfect objet d'art , as he called it , which was not to be matched except in the wardrobe of the surintendant . 
His distress and his exclamations were interrupted by a signal which had been given from the summit of the mansion . 
In the direction of Melun , in the still empty , open plain , the sentinels of Vaux had just perceived the advancing procession of the king and the queens . 
His majesty was entering Melun with his long train of carriages and cavaliers . 
`` In an hour - '' said Aramis to Fouquet . 
`` In an hour ! '' 
replied the latter , sighing . 
`` And the people who ask one another what is the good of these royal fetes ! '' 
continued the bishop of Vannes , laughing , with his false smile . 
`` Alas ! 
I , too , who am not the people , ask myself the same thing . '' 
`` I will answer you in four and twenty hours , monseigneur . 
Assume a cheerful countenance , for it should be a day of true rejoicing . '' 
`` Well , believe me or not , as you like , D'Herblay , '' said the surintendant , with a swelling heart , pointing at the cortege of Louis , visible in the horizon , `` he certainly loves me but very little , and I do not care much more for him ; but I can not tell you how it is , that since he is approaching my house - '' `` Well , what ? '' 
`` Well , since I know he is on his way here , as my guest , he is more sacred than ever for me ; he is my acknowledged sovereign , and as such is very dear to me . '' 
`` Dear ? 
yes , '' said Aramis , playing upon the word , as the Abbe Terray did , at a later period , with Louis XV . 
`` Do not laugh , D'Herblay ; I feel that , if he really seemed to wish it , I could love that young man . '' 
`` You should not say that to me , '' returned Aramis , `` but rather to M. Colbert . '' 
`` To M. Colbert ! '' 
exclaimed Fouquet . 
`` Why so ? '' 
`` Because he would allow you a pension out of the king 's privy purse , as soon as he becomes surintendant , '' said Aramis , preparing to leave as soon as he had dealt this last blow . 
`` Where are you going ? '' 
returned Fouquet , with a gloomy look . 
`` To my own apartment , in order to change my costume , monseigneur . '' 
`` Whereabouts are you lodging , D'Herblay ? '' 
`` In the blue room on the second story . '' 
`` The room immediately over the king 's room ? '' 
`` Precisely . '' 
`` You will be subject to very great restraint there . 
What an idea to condemn yourself to a room where you can not stir or move about ! '' 
`` During the night , monseigneur , I sleep or read in my bed . '' 
`` And your servants ? '' 
`` I have but one attendant with me . 
I find my reader quite sufficient . 
Adieu , monseigneur ; do not overfatigue yourself ; keep yourself fresh for the arrival of the king . '' 
`` We shall see you by and by , I suppose , and shall see your friend Du Vallon also ? '' 
`` He is lodging next to me , and is at this moment dressing . '' 
And Fouquet , bowing , with a smile , passed on like a commander-in-chief who pays the different outposts a visit after the enemy has been signaled in sight . 
-LRB- 2 -RRB- : The Wine of Melun . 
The king had , in point of fact , entered Melun with the intention of merely passing through the city . 
The youthful monarch was most eagerly anxious for amusements ; only twice during the journey had he been able to catch a glimpse of La Valliere , and , suspecting that his only opportunity of speaking to her would be after nightfall , in the gardens , and after the ceremonial of reception had been gone through , he had been very desirous to arrive at Vaux as early as possible . 
But he reckoned without his captain of the musketeers , and without M. Colbert . 
Like Calypso , who could not be consoled at the departure of Ulysses , our Gascon could not console himself for not having guessed why Aramis had asked Percerin to show him the king 's new costumes . 
`` There is not a doubt , '' he said to himself , `` that my friend the bishop of Vannes had some motive in that ; '' and then he began to rack his brains most uselessly . 
D'Artagnan , so intimately acquainted with all the court intrigues , who knew the position of Fouquet better than even Fouquet himself did , had conceived the strangest fancies and suspicions at the announcement of the fete , which would have ruined a wealthy man , and which became impossible , utter madness even , for a man so poor as he was . 
And then , the presence of Aramis , who had returned from Belle-Isle , and been nominated by Monsieur Fouquet inspector-general of all the arrangements ; his perseverance in mixing himself up with all the surintendant 's affairs ; his visits to Baisemeaux ; all this suspicious singularity of conduct had excessively troubled and tormented D'Artagnan during the last two weeks . 
`` With men of Aramis 's stamp , '' he said , `` one is never the stronger except sword in hand . 
So long as Aramis continued a soldier , there was hope of getting the better of him ; but since he has covered his cuirass with a stole , we are lost . 
But what can Aramis 's object possibly be ? '' 
And D'Artagnan plunged again into deep thought . 
`` What does it matter to me , after all , '' he continued , `` if his only object is to overthrow M. Colbert ? 
And what else can he be after ? '' 
And D'Artagnan rubbed his forehead - that fertile land , whence the plowshare of his nails had turned up so many and such admirable ideas in his time . 
He , at first , thought of talking the matter over with Colbert , but his friendship for Aramis , the oath of earlier days , bound him too strictly . 
He revolted at the bare idea of such a thing , and , besides , he hated the financier too cordially . 
Then , again , he wished to unburden his mind to the king ; but yet the king would not be able to understand the suspicions which had not even a shadow of reality at their base . 
He resolved to address himself to Aramis , direct , the first time he met him . 
`` I will get him , '' said the musketeer , `` between a couple of candles , suddenly , and when he least expects it , I will place my hand upon his heart , and he will tell me - What will he tell me ? 
Yes , he will tell me something , for mordioux ! 
there is something in it , I know . '' 
Somewhat calmer , D'Artagnan made every preparation for the journey , and took the greatest care that the military household of the king , as yet very inconsiderable in numbers , should be well officered and well disciplined in its meager and limited proportions . 
The result was that , through the captain 's arrangements , the king , on arriving at Melun , saw himself at the head of both the musketeers and Swiss guards , as well as a picket of the French guards . 
It might almost have been called a small army . 
M. Colbert looked at the troops with great delight : he even wished they had been a third more in number . 
`` But why ? '' 
said the king . 
`` In order to show greater honor to M. Fouquet , '' replied Colbert . 
`` In order to ruin him the sooner , '' thought D'Artagnan . 
When this little army appeared before Melun , the chief magistrates came out to meet the king , and to present him with the keys of the city , and invited him to enter the Hotel de Ville , in order to partake of the wine of honor . 
The king , who expected to pass through the city and to proceed to Vaux without delay , became quite red in the face from vexation . 
`` Who was fool enough to occasion this delay ? '' 
muttered the king , between his teeth , as the chief magistrate was in the middle of a long address . 
`` Not I , certainly , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` but I believe it was M. Colbert . '' 
Colbert , having heard his name pronounced , said , `` What was M. d'Artagnan good enough to say ? '' 
`` I was good enough to remark that it was you who stopped the king 's progress , so that he might taste the vin de Brie . 
Was I right ? '' 
`` Quite so , monsieur . '' 
`` In that case , then , it was you whom the king called some name or other . '' 
`` What name ? '' 
`` I hardly know ; but wait a moment - idiot , I think it was - no , no , it was fool or dolt . 
Yes ; his majesty said that the man who had thought of the vin de Melun was something of the sort . '' 
D'Artagnan , after this broadside , quietly caressed his mustache ; M. Colbert 's large head seemed to become larger and larger than ever . 
D'Artagnan , seeing how ugly anger made him , did not stop half-way . 
The orator still went on with his speech , while the king 's color was visibly increasing . 
`` Mordioux ! '' 
said the musketeer , coolly , `` the king is going to have an attack of determination of blood to the head . 
Where the deuce did you get hold of that idea , Monsieur Colbert ? 
You have no luck . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' said the financier , drawing himself up , `` my zeal for the king 's service inspired me with the idea . '' 
`` Bah ! '' 
`` Monsieur , Melun is a city , an excellent city , which pays well , and which it would be imprudent to displease . '' 
`` There , now ! 
I , who do not pretend to be a financier , saw only one idea in your idea . '' 
`` What was that , monsieur ? '' 
`` That of causing a little annoyance to M. Fouquet , who is making himself quite giddy on his donjons yonder , in waiting for us . '' 
This was a home-stroke , hard enough in all conscience . 
Colbert was completely thrown out of the saddle by it , and retired , thoroughly discomfited . 
Fortunately , the speech was now at an end ; the king drank the wine which was presented to him , and then every one resumed the progress through the city . 
The king bit his lips in anger , for the evening was closing in , and all hope of a walk with La Valliere was at an end . 
In order that the whole of the king 's household should enter Vaux , four hours at least were necessary , owing to the different arrangements . 
The king , therefore , who was boiling with impatience , hurried forward as much as possible , in order to reach it before nightfall . 
But , at the moment he was setting off again , other and fresh difficulties arose . 
`` Is not the king going to sleep at Melun ? '' 
said Colbert , in a low tone of voice , to D'Artagnan . 
M. Colbert must have been badly inspired that day , to address himself in that manner to the chief of the musketeers ; for the latter guessed that the king 's intention was very far from that of remaining where he was . 
D'Artagnan would not allow him to enter Vaux except he were well and strongly accompanied ; and desired that his majesty would not enter except with all the escort . 
On the other hand , he felt that these delays would irritate that impatient monarch beyond measure . 
In what way could he possibly reconcile these difficulties ? 
D'Artagnan took up Colbert 's remark , and determined to repeated it to the king . 
`` Sire , '' he said , `` M. Colbert has been asking me if your majesty does not intend to sleep at Melun . '' 
`` Sleep at Melun ! 
What for ? '' 
exclaimed Louis XIV . 
`` Sleep at Melun ! 
Who , in Heaven 's name , can have thought of such a thing , when M. Fouquet is expecting us this evening ? '' 
`` It was simply , '' replied Colbert , quickly , `` the fear of causing your majesty the least delay ; for , according to established etiquette , you can not enter any place , with the exception of your own royal residences , until the soldiers ' quarters have been marked out by the quartermaster , and the garrison properly distributed . '' 
D'Artagnan listened with the greatest attention , biting his mustache to conceal his vexation ; and the queens were not less interested . 
They were fatigued , and would have preferred to go to rest without proceeding any farther ; more especially , in order to prevent the king walking about in the evening with M. de Saint-Aignan and the ladies of the court , for , if etiquette required the princesses to remain within their own rooms , the ladies of honor , as soon as they had performed the services required of them , had no restrictions placed upon them , but were at liberty to walk about as they pleased . 
It will easily be conjectured that all these rival interests , gathering together in vapors , necessarily produced clouds , and that the clouds were likely to be followed by a tempest . 
The king had no mustache to gnaw , and therefore kept biting the handle of his whip instead , with ill-concealed impatience . 
How could he get out of it ? 
D'Artagnan looked as agreeable as possible , and Colbert as sulky as he could . 
Who was there he could get in a passion with ? 
`` We will consult the queen , '' said Louis XIV. , bowing to the royal ladies . 
And this kindness of consideration softened Maria Theresa 's heart , who , being of a kind and generous disposition , when left to her own free-will , replied : `` I shall be delighted to do whatever your majesty wishes . '' 
`` How long will it take us to get to Vaux ? '' 
inquired Anne of Austria , in slow and measured accents , placing her hand upon her bosom , where the seat of her pain lay . 
`` An hour for your majesty 's carriages , '' said D'Artagnan ; `` the roads are tolerably good . '' 
The king looked at him . 
`` And a quarter of an hour for the king , '' he hastened to add . 
`` We should arrive by daylight ? '' 
said Louis XIV . 
`` But the billeting of the king 's military escort , '' objected Colbert , softly , `` will make his majesty lose all the advantage of his speed , however quick he may be . '' 
`` Double ass that you are ! '' 
thought D'Artagnan ; `` if I had any interest or motive in demolishing your credit with the king , I could do it in ten minutes . 
If I were in the king 's place , '' he added aloud , `` I should , in going to M. Fouquet , leave my escort behind me ; I should go to him as a friend ; I should enter accompanied only by my captain of the guards ; I should consider that I was acting more nobly , and should be invested with a still more sacred character by doing so . '' 
Delight sparkled in the king 's eyes . 
`` That is indeed a very sensible suggestion . 
We will go to see a friend as friends ; the gentlemen who are with the carriages can go slowly : but we who are mounted will ride on . '' 
And he rode off , accompanied by all those who were mounted . 
Colbert hid his ugly head behind his horse 's neck . 
`` I shall be quits , '' said D'Artagnan , as he galloped along , `` by getting a little talk with Aramis this evening . 
And then , M. Fouquet is a man of honor . 
Mordioux ! 
I have said so , and it must be so . '' 
And this was the way how , towards seven o'clock in the evening , without announcing his arrival by the din of trumpets , and without even his advanced guard , without out-riders or musketeers , the king presented himself before the gate of Vaux , where Fouquet , who had been informed of his royal guest 's approach , had been waiting for the last half-hour , with his head uncovered , surrounded by his household and his friends . 
: Nectar and Ambrosia . 
M. Fouquet held the stirrup of the king , who , having dismounted , bowed most graciously , and more graciously still held out his hand to him , which Fouquet , in spite of a slight resistance on the king 's part , carried respectfully to his lips . 
The king wished to wait in the first courtyard for the arrival of the carriages , nor had he long to wait , for the roads had been put into excellent order by the superintendent , and a stone would hardly have been found of the size of an egg the whole way from Melun to Vaux ; so that the carriages , rolling along as though on a carpet , brought the ladies to Vaux , without jolting or fatigue , by eight o'clock . 
They were received by Madame Fouquet , and at the moment they made their appearance , a light as bright as day burst forth from every quarter , trees , vases , and marble statues . 
This species of enchantment lasted until their majesties had retired into the palace . 
All these wonders and magical effects which the chronicler has heaped up , or rather embalmed , in his recital , at the risk of rivaling the brain-born scenes of romancers ; these splendors whereby night seemed vanquished and nature corrected , together with every delight and luxury combined for the satisfaction of all the senses , as well as the imagination , Fouquet did in real truth offer to his sovereign in that enchanting retreat of which no monarch could at that time boast of possessing an equal . 
We do not intend to describe the grand banquet , at which the royal guests were present , nor the concerts , nor the fairy-like and more than magic transformations and metamorphoses ; it will be enough for our purpose to depict the countenance the king assumed , which , from being gay , soon wore a very gloomy , constrained , and irritated expression . 
He remembered his own residence , royal though it was , and the mean and indifferent style of luxury that prevailed there , which comprised but little more than what was merely useful for the royal wants , without being his own personal property . 
The large vases of the Louvre , the older furniture and plate of Henry II. , of Francis I. , and of Louis XI. , were but historic monuments of earlier days ; nothing but specimens of art , the relics of his predecessors ; while with Fouquet , the value of the article was as much in the workmanship as in the article itself . 
Fouquet ate from a gold service , which artists in his own employ had modeled and cast for him alone . 
Fouquet drank wines of which the king of France did not even know the name , and drank them out of goblets each more valuable than the entire royal cellar . 
What , too , was to be said of the apartments , the hangings , the pictures , the servants and officers , of every description , of his household ? 
What of the mode of service in which etiquette was replaced by order ; stiff formality by personal , unrestrained comfort ; the happiness and contentment of the guest became the supreme law of all who obeyed the host ? 
The perfect swarm of busily engaged persons moving about noiselessly ; the multitude of guests , - who were , however , even less numerous than the servants who waited on them , - the myriad of exquisitely prepared dishes , of gold and silver vases ; the floods of dazzling light , the masses of unknown flowers of which the hot-houses had been despoiled , redundant with luxuriance of unequaled scent and beauty ; the perfect harmony of the surroundings , which , indeed , was no more than the prelude of the promised fete , charmed all who were there ; and they testified their admiration over and over again , not by voice or gesture , but by deep silence and rapt attention , those two languages of the courtier which acknowledge the hand of no master powerful enough to restrain them . 
As for the king , his eyes filled with tears ; he dared not look at the queen . 
Anne of Austria , whose pride was superior to that of any creature breathing , overwhelmed her host by the contempt with which she treated everything handed to her . 
The young queen , kind-hearted by nature and curious by disposition , praised Fouquet , ate with an exceedingly good appetite , and asked the names of the strange fruits as they were placed upon the table . 
Fouquet replied that he was not aware of their names . 
The fruits came from his own stores ; he had often cultivated them himself , having an intimate acquaintance with the cultivation of exotic fruits and plants . 
The king felt and appreciated the delicacy of the replies , but was only the more humiliated ; he thought the queen a little too familiar in her manners , and that Anne of Austria resembled Juno a little too much , in being too proud and haughty ; his chief anxiety , however , was himself , that he might remain cold and distant in his behavior , bordering lightly the limits of supreme disdain or simple admiration . 
But Fouquet had foreseen all this ; he was , in fact , one of those men who foresee everything . 
The king had expressly declared that , so long as he remained under Fouquet 's roof , he did not wish his own different repasts to be served in accordance with the usual etiquette , and that he would , consequently , dine with the rest of society ; but by the thoughtful attention of the surintendant , the king 's dinner was served up separately , if one may so express it , in the middle of the general table ; the dinner , wonderful in every respect , from the dishes of which was composed , comprised everything the king liked and generally preferred to anything else . 
Louis had no excuse - he , indeed , who had the keenest appetite in his kingdom - for saying that he was not hungry . 
Nay , M. Fouquet did even better still ; he certainly , in obedience to the king 's expressed desire , seated himself at the table , but as soon as the soups were served , he arose and personally waited on the king , while Madame Fouquet stood behind the queen-mother 's armchair . 
The disdain of Juno and the sulky fits of temper of Jupiter could not resist this excess of kindly feeling and polite attention . 
The queen ate a biscuit dipped in a glass of San-Lucar wine ; and the king ate of everything , saying to M. Fouquet : `` It is impossible , monsieur le surintendant , to dine better anywhere . '' 
Whereupon the whole court began , on all sides , to devour the dishes spread before them with such enthusiasm that it looked as though a cloud of Egyptian locusts was settling down on green and growing crops . 
As soon , however , as his hunger was appeased , the king became morose and overgloomed again ; the more so in proportion to the satisfaction he fancied he had previously manifested , and particularly on account of the deferential manner which his courtiers had shown towards Fouquet . 
D'Artagnan , who ate a good deal and drank but little , without allowing it to be noticed , did not lose a single opportunity , but made a great number of observations which he turned to good profit . 
When the supper was finished , the king expressed a wish not to lose the promenade . 
The park was illuminated ; the moon , too , as if she had placed herself at the orders of the lord of Vaux , silvered the trees and lake with her own bright and quasi-phosphorescent light . 
The air was strangely soft and balmy ; the daintily shell-gravelled walks through the thickly set avenues yielded luxuriously to the feet . 
The fete was complete in every respect , for the king , having met La Valliere in one of the winding paths of the wood , was able to press her hand and say , `` I love you , '' without any one overhearing him except M. d'Artagnan , who followed , and M. Fouquet , who preceded him . 
The dreamy night of magical enchantments stole smoothly on . 
The king having requested to be shown to his room , there was immediately a movement in every direction . 
The queens passed to their own apartments , accompanied by them music of theorbos and lutes ; the king found his musketeers awaiting him on the grand flight of steps , for M. Fouquet had brought them on from Melun and had invited them to supper . 
D'Artagnan 's suspicions at once disappeared . 
He was weary , he had supped well , and wished , for once in his life , thoroughly to enjoy a fete given by a man who was in every sense of the word a king . 
`` M. Fouquet , '' he said , `` is the man for me . '' 
The king was conducted with the greatest ceremony to the chamber of Morpheus , of which we owe some cursory description to our readers . 
It was the handsomest and largest in the palace . 
Lebrun had painted on the vaulted ceiling the happy as well as the unhappy dreams which Morpheus inflicts on kings as well as on other men . 
Everything that sleep gives birth to that is lovely , its fairy scenes , its flowers and nectar , the wild voluptuousness or profound repose of the senses , had the painter elaborated on his frescoes . 
It was a composition as soft and pleasing in one part as dark and gloomy and terrible in another . 
The poisoned chalice , the glittering dagger suspended over the head of the sleeper ; wizards and phantoms with terrific masks , those half-dim shadows more alarming than the approach of fire or the somber face of midnight , these , and such as these , he had made the companions of his more pleasing pictures . 
No sooner had the king entered his room than a cold shiver seemed to pass through him , and on Fouquet asking him the cause of it , the king replied , as pale as death : `` I am sleepy , that is all . '' 
`` Does your majesty wish for your attendants at once ? '' 
`` No ; I have to talk with a few persons first , '' said the king . 
`` Will you have the goodness to tell M. Colbert I wish to see him . '' 
Fouquet bowed and left the room . 
: A Gascon , and a Gascon and a Half . 
D'Artagnan had determined to lose no time , and in fact he never was in the habit of doing so . 
After having inquired for Aramis , he had looked for him in every direction until he had succeeded in finding him . 
Besides , no sooner had the king entered Vaux , than Aramis had retired to his own room , meditating , doubtless , some new piece of gallant attention for his majesty 's amusement . 
D'Artagnan desired the servants to announce him , and found on the second story -LRB- in a beautiful room called the Blue Chamber , on account of the color of its hangings -RRB- the bishop of Vannes in company with Porthos and several of the modern Epicureans . 
Aramis came forward to embrace his friend , and offered him the best seat . 
As it was after awhile generally remarked among those present that the musketeer was reserved , and wished for an opportunity for conversing secretly with Aramis , the Epicureans took their leave . 
Porthos , however , did not stir ; for true it is that , having dined exceedingly well , he was fast asleep in his armchair ; and the freedom of conversation therefore was not interrupted by a third person . 
Porthos had a deep , harmonious snore , and people might talk in the midst of its loud bass without fear of disturbing him . 
D'Artagnan felt that he was called upon to open the conversation . 
`` Well , and so we have come to Vaux , '' he said . 
`` Why , yes , D'Artagnan . 
And how do you like the place ? '' 
`` Very much , and I like M. Fouquet , also . '' 
`` Is he not a charming host ? '' 
`` No one could be more so . '' 
`` I am told that the king began by showing great distance of manner towards M. Fouquet , but that his majesty grew much more cordial afterwards . '' 
`` You did not notice it , then , since you say you have been told so ? '' 
`` No ; I was engaged with the gentlemen who have just left the room about the theatrical performances and the tournaments which are to take place to-morrow . '' 
`` Ah , indeed ! 
you are the comptroller-general of the fetes here , then ? '' 
`` You know I am a friend of all kinds of amusement where the exercise of the imagination is called into activity ; I have always been a poet in one way or another . '' 
`` Yes , I remember the verses you used to write , they were charming . '' 
`` I have forgotten them , but I am delighted to read the verses of others , when those others are known by the names of Moliere , Pelisson , La Fontaine , etc. '' `` Do you know what idea occurred to me this evening , Aramis ? '' 
`` No ; tell me what it was , for I should never be able to guess it , you have so many . '' 
`` Well , the idea occurred to me , that the true king of France is not Louis XIV . '' 
`` What ! '' 
said Aramis , involuntarily , looking the musketeer full in the eyes . 
`` No , it is Monsieur Fouquet . '' 
Aramis breathed again , and smiled . 
`` Ah ! 
you are like all the rest , jealous , '' he said . 
`` I would wager that it was M. Colbert who turned that pretty phrase . '' 
D'Artagnan , in order to throw Aramis off his guard , related Colbert 's misadventures with regard to the vin de Melun . 
`` He comes of a mean race , does Colbert , '' said Aramis . 
`` Quite true . '' 
`` When I think , too , '' added the bishop , `` that that fellow will be your minister within four months , and that you will serve him as blindly as you did Richelieu or Mazarin - '' `` And as you serve M. Fouquet , '' said D'Artagnan . 
`` With this difference , though , that M. Fouquet is not M. Colbert . '' 
`` True , true , '' said D'Artagnan , as he pretended to become sad and full of reflection ; and then , a moment after , he added , `` Why do you tell me that M. Colbert will be minister in four months ? '' 
`` Because M. Fouquet will have ceased to be so , '' replied Aramis . 
`` He will be ruined , you mean ? '' 
said D'Artagnan . 
`` Completely so . '' 
`` Why does he give these fetes , then ? '' 
said the musketeer , in a tone so full of thoughtful consideration , and so well assumed , that the bishop was for the moment deceived by it . 
`` Why did you not dissuade him from it ? '' 
The latter part of the phrase was just a little too much , and Aramis 's former suspicions were again aroused . 
`` It is done with the object of humoring the king . '' 
`` By ruining himself ? '' 
`` Yes , by ruining himself for the king . '' 
`` A most eccentric , one might say , sinister calculation , that . '' 
`` Necessity , necessity , my friend . '' 
`` I do n't see that , dear Aramis . '' 
`` Do you not ? 
Have you not remarked M. Colbert 's daily increasing antagonism , and that he is doing his utmost to drive the king to get rid of the superintendent ? '' 
`` One must be blind not to see it . '' 
`` And that a cabal is already armed against M. Fouquet ? '' 
`` That is well known . '' 
`` What likelihood is there that the king would join a party formed against a man who will have spent everything he had to please him ? '' 
`` True , true , '' said D'Artagnan , slowly , hardly convinced , yet curious to broach another phase of the conversation . 
`` There are follies , and follies , '' he resumed , `` and I do not like those you are committing . '' 
`` What do you allude to ? '' 
`` As for the banquet , the ball , the concert , the theatricals , the tournaments , the cascades , the fireworks , the illuminations , and the presents - these are well and good , I grant ; but why were not these expenses sufficient ? 
Why was it necessary to have new liveries and costumes for your whole household ? '' 
`` You are quite right . 
I told M. Fouquet that myself ; he replied , that if he were rich enough he would offer the king a newly erected chateau , from the vanes at the houses to the very sub-cellars ; completely new inside and out ; and that , as soon as the king had left , he would burn the whole building and its contents , in order that it might not be made use of by any one else . '' 
`` How completely Spanish ! '' 
`` I told him so , and he then added this : ` Whoever advises me to spare expense , I shall look upon as my enemy . ' '' 
`` It is positive madness ; and that portrait , too ! '' 
`` What portrait ? '' 
said Aramis . 
`` That of the king , and the surprise as well . '' 
`` What surprise ? '' 
`` The surprise you seem to have in view , and on account of which you took some specimens away , when I met you at Percerin 's . '' 
D'Artagnan paused . 
The shaft was discharged , and all he had to do was to wait and watch its effect . 
`` That is merely an act of graceful attention , '' replied Aramis . 
D'Artagnan went up to his friend , took hold of both his hands , and looking him full in the eyes , said , `` Aramis , do you still care for me a very little ? '' 
`` What a question to ask ! '' 
`` Very good . 
One favor , then . 
Why did you take some patterns of the king 's costumes at Percerin 's ? '' 
`` Come with me and ask poor Lebrun , who has been working upon them for the last two days and nights . '' 
`` Aramis , that may be truth for everybody else , but for me - '' `` Upon my word , D'Artagnan , you astonish me . '' 
`` Be a little considerate . 
Tell me the exact truth ; you would not like anything disagreeable to happen to me , would you ? '' 
`` My dear friend , you are becoming quite incomprehensible . 
What suspicion can you have possibly got hold of ? '' 
`` Do you believe in my instinctive feelings ? 
Formerly you used to have faith in them . 
Well , then , an instinct tells me that you have some concealed project on foot . '' 
`` I - a project ? '' 
`` I am convinced of it . '' 
`` What nonsense ! '' 
`` I am not only sure of it , but I would even swear it . '' 
`` Indeed , D'Artagnan , you cause me the greatest pain . 
Is it likely , if I have any project in hand that I ought to keep secret from you , I should tell you about it ? 
If I had one that I could and ought to have revealed , should I not have long ago divulged it ? '' 
`` No , Aramis , no . 
There are certain projects which are never revealed until the favorable opportunity arrives . '' 
`` In that case , my dear fellow , '' returned the bishop , laughing , `` the only thing now is , that the ` opportunity ' has not yet arrived . '' 
D'Artagnan shook his head with a sorrowful expression . 
`` Oh , friendship , friendship ! '' 
he said , `` what an idle word you are ! 
Here is a man who , if I were but to ask it , would suffer himself to be cut in pieces for my sake . '' 
`` You are right , '' said Aramis , nobly . 
`` And this man , who would shed every drop of blood in his veins for me , will not open up before me the least corner in his heart . 
Friendship , I repeat , is nothing but an unsubstantial shadow - a lure , like everything else in this bright , dazzling world . '' 
`` It is not thus you should speak of our friendship , '' replied the bishop , in a firm , assured voice ; `` for ours is not of the same nature as those of which you have been speaking . '' 
`` Look at us , Aramis ; three out of the old ` four . ' 
You are deceiving me ; I suspect you ; and Porthos is fast asleep . 
An admirable trio of friends , do n't you think so ? 
What an affecting relic of the former dear old times ! '' 
`` I can only tell you one thing , D'Artagnan , and I swear it on the Bible : I love you just as I used to do . 
If I ever suspect you , it is on account of others , and not on account of either of us . 
In everything I may do , and should happen to succeed in , you will find your fourth . 
Will you promise me the same favor ? '' 
`` If I am not mistaken , Aramis , your words - at the moment you pronounce them - are full of generous feeling . '' 
`` Such a thing is very possible . '' 
`` You are conspiring against M. Colbert . 
If that be all , mordioux , tell me so at once . 
I have the instrument in my own hand , and will pull out the tooth easily enough . '' 
Aramis could not conceal a smile of disdain that flitted over his haughty features . 
`` And supposing that I were conspiring against Colbert , what harm would there be in that ? '' 
`` No , no ; that would be too trifling a matter for you to take in hand , and it was not on that account you asked Percerin for those patterns of the king 's costumes . 
Oh ! 
Aramis , we are not enemies , remember - we are brothers . 
Tell me what you wish to undertake , and , upon the word of a D'Artagnan , if I can not help you , I will swear to remain neuter . '' 
`` I am undertaking nothing , '' said Aramis . 
`` Aramis , a voice within me speaks and seems to trickle forth a rill of light within my darkness : it is a voice that has never yet deceived me . 
It is the king you are conspiring against . '' 
`` The king ? '' 
exclaimed the bishop , pretending to be annoyed . 
`` Your face will not convince me ; the king , I repeat . '' 
`` Will you help me ? '' 
said Aramis , smiling ironically . 
`` Aramis , I will do more than help you - I will do more than remain neuter - I will save you . '' 
`` You are mad , D'Artagnan . '' 
`` I am the wiser of the two , in this matter . '' 
`` You to suspect me of wishing to assassinate the king ! '' 
`` Who spoke of such a thing ? '' 
smiled the musketeer . 
`` Well , let us understand one another . 
I do not see what any one can do to a legitimate king as ours is , if he does not assassinate him . '' 
D'Artagnan did not say a word . 
`` Besides , you have your guards and your musketeers here , '' said the bishop . 
`` True . '' 
`` You are not in M. Fouquet 's house , but in your own . '' 
`` True ; but in spite of that , Aramis , grant me , for pity 's sake , one single word of a true friend . '' 
`` A true friend 's word is ever truth itself . 
If I think of touching , even with my finger , the son of Anne of Austria , the true king of this realm of France - if I have not the firm intention of prostrating myself before his throne - if in every idea I may entertain to-morrow , here at Vaux , will not be the most glorious day my king ever enjoyed - may Heaven 's lightning blast me where I stand ! '' 
Aramis had pronounced these words with his face turned towards the alcove of his own bedroom , where D'Artagnan , seated with his back towards the alcove , could not suspect that any one was lying concealed . 
The earnestness of his words , the studied slowness with which he pronounced them , the solemnity of his oath , gave the musketeer the most complete satisfaction . 
He took hold of both Aramis 's hands , and shook them cordially . 
Aramis had endured reproaches without turning pale , and had blushed as he listened to words of praise . 
D'Artagnan , deceived , did him honor ; but D'Artagnan , trustful and reliant , made him feel ashamed . 
`` Are you going away ? '' 
he said , as he embraced him , in order to conceal the flush on his face . 
`` Yes . 
Duty summons me . 
I have to get the watch-word . 
It seems I am to be lodged in the king 's ante-room . 
Where does Porthos sleep ? '' 
`` Take him away with you , if you like , for he rumbles through his sleepy nose like a park of artillery . '' 
`` Ah ! 
he does not stay with you , then ? '' 
said D'Artagnan . 
`` Not the least in the world . 
He has a chamber to himself , but I do n't know where . '' 
`` Very good ! '' 
said the musketeer ; from whom this separation of the two associates removed his last suspicion , and he touched Porthos lightly on the shoulder ; the latter replied by a loud yawn . 
`` Come , '' said D'Artagnan . 
`` What , D'Artagnan , my dear fellow , is that you ? 
What a lucky chance ! 
Oh , yes - true ; I have forgotten ; I am at the fete at Vaux . '' 
`` Yes ; and your beautiful dress , too . '' 
`` Yes , it was very attentive on the part of Monsieur Coquelin de Voliere , was it not ? '' 
`` Hush ! '' 
said Aramis . 
`` You are walking so heavily you will make the flooring give way . '' 
`` True , '' said the musketeer ; `` this room is above the dome , I think . '' 
`` And I did not choose it for a fencing-room , I assure you , '' added the bishop . 
`` The ceiling of the king 's room has all the lightness and calm of wholesome sleep . 
Do not forget , therefore , that my flooring is merely the covering of his ceiling . 
Good night , my friends , and in ten minutes I shall be asleep myself . '' 
And Aramis accompanied them to the door , laughing quietly all the while . 
As soon as they were outside , he bolted the door , hurriedly ; closed up the chinks of the windows , and then called out , `` Monseigneur ! 
- monseigneur ! '' 
Philippe made his appearance from the alcove , as he pushed aside a sliding panel placed behind the bed . 
`` M. d'Artagnan entertains a great many suspicions , it seems , '' he said . 
`` Ah ! 
- you recognized M. d'Artagnan , then ? '' 
`` Before you called him by his name , even . '' 
`` He is your captain of musketeers . '' 
`` He is very devoted to me , '' replied Philippe , laying a stress upon the personal pronoun . 
`` As faithful as a dog ; but he bites sometimes . 
If D'Artagnan does not recognize you before the other has disappeared , rely upon D'Artagnan to the end of the world ; for in that case , if he has seen nothing , he will keep his fidelity . 
If he sees , when it is too late , he is a Gascon , and will never admit that he has been deceived . '' 
`` I thought so . 
What are we to do , now ? '' 
`` Sit in this folding-chair . 
I am going to push aside a portion of the flooring ; you will look through the opening , which answers to one of the false windows made in the dome of the king 's apartment . 
Can you see ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said Philippe , starting as at the sight of an enemy ; `` I see the king ! '' 
`` What is he doing ? '' 
`` He seems to wish some man to sit down close to him . '' 
`` M. Fouquet ? '' 
`` No , no ; wait a moment - '' `` Look at the notes and the portraits , my prince . '' 
`` The man whom the king wishes to sit down in his presence is M. Colbert . '' 
`` Colbert sit down in the king 's presence ! '' 
exclaimed Aramis . 
`` It is impossible . '' 
`` Look . '' 
Aramis looked through the opening in the flooring . 
`` Yes , '' he said . 
`` Colbert himself . 
Oh , monseigneur ! 
what can we be going to hear - and what can result from this intimacy ? '' 
`` Nothing good for M. Fouquet , at all events . '' 
The prince did not deceive himself . 
We have seen that Louis XIV . 
had sent for Colbert , and Colbert had arrived . 
The conversation began between them by the king according to him one of the highest favors that he had ever done ; it was true the king was alone with his subject . 
`` Colbert , '' said he , `` sit down . '' 
The intendant , overcome with delight , for he feared he was about to be dismissed , refused this unprecedented honor . 
`` Does he accept ? '' 
said Aramis . 
`` No , he remains standing . '' 
`` Let us listen , then . '' 
And the future king and the future pope listened eagerly to the simple mortals they held under their feet , ready to crush them when they liked . 
`` Colbert , '' said the king , `` you have annoyed me exceedingly to-day . '' 
`` I know it , sire . '' 
`` Very good ; I like that answer . 
Yes , you knew it , and there was courage in the doing of it . '' 
`` I ran the risk of displeasing your majesty , but I risked , also , the concealment of your best interests . '' 
`` What ! 
you were afraid of something on my account ? '' 
`` I was , sire , even if it were nothing more than an indigestion , '' said Colbert ; `` for people do not give their sovereigns such banquets as the one of to-day , unless it be to stifle them beneath the burden of good living . '' 
Colbert awaited the effect this coarse jest would produce upon the king ; and Louis XIV. , who was the vainest and the most fastidiously delicate man in his kingdom , forgave Colbert the joke . 
`` The truth is , '' he said , `` that M. Fouquet has given me too good a meal . 
Tell me , Colbert , where does he get all the money required for this enormous expenditure , - can you tell ? '' 
`` Yes , I do know , sire . '' 
`` Will you be able to prove it with tolerable certainty ? '' 
`` Easily ; and to the utmost farthing . '' 
`` I know you are very exact . '' 
`` Exactitude is the principal qualification required in an intendant of finances . '' 
`` But all are not so . '' 
`` I thank you majesty for so flattering a compliment from your own lips . '' 
`` M. Fouquet , therefore , is rich - very rich , and I suppose every man knows he is so . '' 
`` Every one , sire ; the living as well as the dead . '' 
`` What does that mean , Monsieur Colbert ? '' 
`` The living are witnesses of M. Fouquet 's wealth , - they admire and applaud the result produced ; but the dead , wiser and better informed than we are , know how that wealth was obtained - and they rise up in accusation . '' 
`` So that M. Fouquet owes his wealth to some cause or other . '' 
`` The occupation of an intendant very often favors those who practice it . '' 
`` You have something to say to me more confidentially , I perceive ; do not be afraid , we are quite alone . '' 
`` I am never afraid of anything under the shelter of my own conscience , and under the protection of your majesty , '' said Colbert , bowing . 
`` If the dead , therefore , were to speak - '' `` They do speak sometimes , sire , - read . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
murmured Aramis , in the prince 's ear , who , close beside him , listened without losing a syllable , `` since you are placed here , monseigneur , in order to learn your vocation of a king , listen to a piece of infamy - of a nature truly royal . 
You are about to be a witness of one of those scenes which the foul fiend alone conceives and executes . 
Listen attentively , - you will find your advantage in it . '' 
The prince redoubled his attention , and saw Louis XIV . 
take from Colbert 's hands a letter the latter held out to him . 
`` The late cardinal 's handwriting , '' said the king . 
`` Your majesty has an excellent memory , '' replied Colbert , bowing ; `` it is an immense advantage for a king who is destined for hard work to recognize handwritings at the first glance . '' 
The king read Mazarin 's letter , and , as its contents are already known to the reader , in consequence of the misunderstanding between Madame de Chevreuse and Aramis , nothing further would be learned if we stated them here again . 
`` I do not quite understand , '' said the king , greatly interested . 
`` Your majesty has not acquired the utilitarian habit of checking the public accounts . '' 
`` I see that it refers to money that had been given to M. Fouquet . '' 
`` Thirteen millions . 
A tolerably good sum . '' 
`` Yes . 
Well , these thirteen millions are wanting to balance the total of the account . 
That is what I do not very well understand . 
How was this deficit possible ? '' 
`` Possible I do not say ; but there is no doubt about fact that it is really so . '' 
`` You say that these thirteen millions are found to be wanting in the accounts ? '' 
`` I do not say so , but the registry does . '' 
`` And this letter of M. Mazarin indicates the employment of that sum and the name of the person with whom it was deposited ? '' 
`` As your majesty can judge for yourself . '' 
`` Yes ; and the result is , then , that M. Fouquet has not yet restored the thirteen millions . '' 
`` That results from the accounts , certainly , sire . '' 
`` Well , and , consequently - '' `` Well , sire , in that case , inasmuch as M. Fouquet has not yet given back the thirteen millions , he must have appropriated them to his own purpose ; and with those thirteen millions one could incur four times and a little more as much expense , and make four times as great a display , as your majesty was able to do at Fontainebleau , where we only spent three millions altogether , if you remember . '' 
For a blunderer , the souvenir he had evoked was a rather skillfully contrived piece of baseness ; for by the remembrance of his own fete he , for the first time , perceived its inferiority compared with that of Fouquet . 
Colbert received back again at Vaux what Fouquet had given him at Fontainebleau , and , as a good financier , returned it with the best possible interest . 
Having once disposed the king 's mind in this artful way , Colbert had nothing of much importance to detain him . 
He felt that such was the case , for the king , too , had again sunk into a dull and gloomy state . 
Colbert awaited the first words from the king 's lips with as much impatience as Philippe and Aramis did from their place of observation . 
`` Are you aware what is the usual and natural consequence of all this , Monsieur Colbert ? '' 
said the king , after a few moments ' reflection . 
`` No , sire , I do not know . '' 
`` Well , then , the fact of the appropriation of the thirteen millions , if it can be proved - '' `` But it is so already . '' 
`` I mean if it were to be declared and certified , M. Colbert . '' 
`` I think it will be to-morrow , if your majesty - '' `` Were we not under M. Fouquet 's roof , you were going to say , perhaps , '' replied the king , with something of nobility in his demeanor . 
`` The king is in his own palace wherever he may be - especially in houses which the royal money has constructed . '' 
`` I think , '' said Philippe in a low tone to Aramis , `` that the architect who planned this dome ought , anticipating the use it could be put to at a future opportunity , so to have contrived that it might be made to fall upon the heads of scoundrels such as M. Colbert . '' 
`` I think so too , '' replied Aramis ; `` but M. Colbert is so very near the king at this moment . '' 
`` That is true , and that would open the succession . '' 
`` Of which your younger brother would reap all the advantage , monseigneur . 
But stay , let us keep quiet , and go on listening . '' 
`` We shall not have long to listen , '' said the young prince . 
`` Why not , monseigneur ? '' 
`` Because , if I were king , I should make no further reply . '' 
`` And what would you do ? '' 
`` I should wait until to-morrow morning to give myself time for reflection . '' 
Louis XIV . 
at last raised his eyes , and finding Colbert attentively waiting for his next remarks , said , hastily , changing the conversation , `` M. Colbert , I perceive it is getting very late , and I shall now retire to bed . 
By to-morrow morning I shall have made up my mind . '' 
`` Very good , sire , '' returned Colbert , greatly incensed , although he restrained himself in the presence of the king . 
The king made a gesture of adieu , and Colbert withdrew with a respectful bow . 
`` My attendants ! '' 
cried the king ; and , as they entered the apartment , Philippe was about to quit his post of observation . 
`` A moment longer , '' said Aramis to him , with his accustomed gentleness of manner ; `` what has just now taken place is only a detail , and to-morrow we shall have no occasion to think anything more about it ; but the ceremony of the king 's retiring to rest , the etiquette observed in addressing the king , that indeed is of the greatest importance . 
Learn , sire , and study well how you ought to go to bed of a night . 
Look ! 
look ! '' 
: Colbert . 
History will tell us , or rather history has told us , of the various events of the following day , of the splendid fetes given by the surintendant to his sovereign . 
Nothing but amusement and delight was allowed to prevail throughout the whole of the following day ; there was a promenade , a banquet , a comedy to be acted , and a comedy , too , in which , to his great amazement , Porthos recognized `` M. Coquelin de Voliere '' as one of the actors , in the piece called `` Les Facheux . '' 
Full of preoccupation , however , from the scene of the previous evening , and hardly recovered from the effects of the poison which Colbert had then administered to him , the king , during the whole of the day , so brilliant in its effects , so full of unexpected and startling novelties , in which all the wonders of the `` Arabian Night 's Entertainments '' seemed to be reproduced for his especial amusement - the king , we say , showed himself cold , reserved , and taciturn . 
Nothing could smooth the frowns upon his face ; every one who observed him noticed that a deep feeling of resentment , of remote origin , increased by slow degrees , as the source becomes a river , thanks to the thousand threads of water that increase its body , was keenly alive in the depths of the king 's heart . 
Towards the middle of the day only did he begin to resume a little serenity of manner , and by that time he had , in all probability , made up his mind . 
Aramis , who followed him step by step in his thoughts , as in his walk , concluded that the event he was expecting would not be long before it was announced . 
This time Colbert seemed to walk in concert with the bishop of Vannes , and had he received for every annoyance which he inflicted on the king a word of direction from Aramis , he could not have done better . 
During the whole of the day the king , who , in all probability , wished to free himself from some of the thoughts which disturbed his mind , seemed to seek La Valliere 's society as actively as he seemed to show his anxiety to flee that of M. Colbert or M. Fouquet . 
The evening came . 
The king had expressed a wish not to walk in the park until after cards in the evening . 
In the interval between supper and the promenade , cards and dice were introduced . 
The king won a thousand pistoles , and , having won them , put them in his pocket , and then rose , saying , `` And now , gentlemen , to the park . '' 
He found the ladies of the court were already there . 
The king , we have before observed , had won a thousand pistoles , and had put them in his pocket ; but M. Fouquet had somehow contrived to lose ten thousand , so that among the courtiers there was still left a hundred and ninety thousand francs ' profit to divide , a circumstance which made the countenances of the courtiers and the officers of the king 's household the most joyous countenances in the world . 
It was not the same , however , with the king 's face ; for , notwithstanding his success at play , to which he was by no means insensible , there still remained a slight shade of dissatisfaction . 
Colbert was waiting for or upon him at the corner of one of the avenues ; he was most probably waiting there in consequence of a rendezvous which had been given him by the king , as Louis XIV. , who had avoided him , or who had seemed to avoid him , suddenly made him a sign , and they then struck into the depths of the park together . 
But La Valliere , too , had observed the king 's gloomy aspect and kindling glances ; she had remarked this - and as nothing which lay hidden or smoldering in his heart was hidden from the gaze of her affection , she understood that this repressed wrath menaced some one ; she prepared to withstand the current of his vengeance , and intercede like an angel of mercy . 
Overcome by sadness , nervously agitated , deeply distressed at having been so long separated from her lover , disturbed at the sight of the emotion she had divined , she accordingly presented herself to the king with an embarrassed aspect , which in his then disposition of mind the king interpreted unfavorably . 
Then , as they were alone - nearly alone , inasmuch as Colbert , as soon as he perceived the young girl approaching , had stopped and drawn back a dozen paces - the king advanced towards La Valliere and took her by the hand . 
`` Mademoiselle , '' he said to her , `` should I be guilty of an indiscretion if I were to inquire if you were indisposed ? 
for you seem to breathe as if you were oppressed by some secret cause of uneasiness , and your eyes are filled with tears . '' 
`` Oh ! 
sire , if I be indeed so , and if my eyes are indeed full of tears , I am sorrowful only at the sadness which seems to oppress your majesty . '' 
`` My sadness ? 
You are mistaken , mademoiselle ; no , it is not sadness I experience . '' 
`` What is it , then , sire ? '' 
`` Humiliation . '' 
`` Humiliation ? 
oh ! 
sire , what a word for you to use ! '' 
`` I mean , mademoiselle , that wherever I may happen to be , no one else ought to be the master . 
Well , then , look round you on every side , and judge whether I am not eclipsed - I , the king of France - before the monarch of these wide domains . 
Oh ! '' 
he continued , clenching his hands and teeth , `` when I think that this king - '' `` Well , sire ? '' 
said Louise , terrified . '' 
- That this king is a faithless , unworthy servant , who grows proud and self-sufficient upon the strength of property that belongs to me , and which he has stolen . 
And therefore I am about to change this impudent minister 's fete into sorrow and mourning , of which the nymph of Vaux , as the poets say , shall not soon lose the remembrance . '' 
`` Oh ! 
your majesty - '' `` Well , mademoiselle , are you about to take M. Fouquet 's part ? '' 
said Louis , impatiently . 
`` No , sire ; I will only ask whether you are well informed . 
Your majesty has more than once learned the value of accusations made at court . '' 
Louis XIV . 
made a sign for Colbert to approach . 
`` Speak , Monsieur Colbert , '' said the young prince , `` for I almost believe that Mademoiselle de la Valliere has need of your assistance before she can put any faith in the king 's word . 
Tell mademoiselle what M. Fouquet has done ; and you , mademoiselle , will perhaps have the kindness to listen . 
It will not be long . '' 
Why did Louis XIV . 
insist upon it in such a manner ? 
A very simple reason - his heart was not at rest , his mind was not thoroughly convinced ; he imagined there lay some dark , hidden , tortuous intrigue behind these thirteen millions of francs ; and he wished that the pure heart of La Valliere , which had revolted at the idea of theft or robbery , should approve - even were it only by a single word - the resolution he had taken , and which , nevertheless , he hesitated before carrying into execution . 
`` Speak , monsieur , '' said La Valliere to Colbert , who had advanced ; `` speak , since the king wishes me to listen to you . 
Tell me , what is the crime with which M. Fouquet is charged ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
not very heinous , mademoiselle , '' he returned , `` a mere abuse of confidence . '' 
`` Speak , speak , Colbert ; and when you have related it , leave us , and go and inform M. d'Artagnan that I have certain orders to give him . '' 
`` M. d'Artagnan , sire ! '' 
exclaimed La Valliere ; `` but why send for M. d'Artagnan ? 
I entreat you to tell me . '' 
`` Pardieu ! 
