- To the castle , then ! '' 
He returned thither . 
M. de Lyonne was coming out . 
He gave D'Artagnan both hands , but told him that the king had been busy all the preceding evening and all night , and that orders had been given that no one should be admitted . 
`` Not even the captain who takes the order ? '' 
cried D'Artagnan . 
`` I think that is rather too strong . '' 
`` Not even he , '' said M. de Lyonne . 
`` Since that is the case , '' replied D'Artagnan , wounded to the heart ; `` since the captain of the musketeers , who has always entered the king 's chamber , is no longer allowed to enter it , his cabinet , or his salle-a - manger , either the king is dead , or his captain is in disgrace . 
Do me the favor , then , M. de Lyonne , who are in favor , to return and tell the king , plainly , I send him my resignation . '' 
`` D'Artagnan , beware of what you are doing ! '' 
`` For friendship 's sake , go ! '' 
and he pushed him gently towards the cabinet . 
`` Well , I will go , '' said Lyonne . 
D'Artagnan waited , walking about the corridor in no enviable mood . 
Lyonne returned . 
`` Well , what did the king say ? '' 
exclaimed D'Artagnan . 
`` He simply answered , '' Tis well , ' '' replied Lyonne . 
`` That it was well ! '' 
said the captain , with an explosion . 
`` That is to say , that he accepts it ? 
Good ! 
Now , then , I am free ! 
I am only a plain citizen , M. de Lyonne . 
I have the pleasure of bidding you good-bye ! 
Farewell , castle , corridor , ante-chamber ! 
a bourgeois , about to breathe at liberty , takes his farewell of you . '' 
And without waiting longer , the captain sprang from the terrace down the staircase , where he had picked up the fragments of Gourville 's letter . 
Five minutes after , he was at the hostelry , where , according to the custom of all great officers who have lodgings at the castle , he had taken what was called his city-chamber . 
But when he arrived there , instead of throwing off his sword and cloak , he took his pistols , put his money into a large leather purse , sent for his horses from the castle - stables , and gave orders that would ensure their reaching Vannes during the night . 
Everything went on according to his wishes . 
At eight o'clock in the evening , he was putting his foot in the stirrup , when M. de Gesvres appeared , at the head of twelve guards , in front of the hostelry . 
D'Artagnan saw all from the corner of his eye ; he could not fail seeing thirteen men and thirteen horses . 
But he feigned not to observe anything , and was about to put his horse in motion . 
Gesvres rode up to him . 
`` Monsieur d'Artagnan ! '' 
said he , aloud . 
`` Ah , Monsieur de Gesvres ! 
good evening ! '' 
`` One would say you were getting on horseback . '' 
`` More than that , - I am mounted , - as you see . '' 
`` It is fortunate I have met with you . '' 
`` Were you looking for me , then ? '' 
`` Mon Dieu ! 
yes . '' 
`` On the part of the king , I will wager ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` As I , three days ago , went in search of M. Fouquet ? '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
`` Nonsense ! 
It is of no use being over-delicate with me ; that is all labor lost . 
Tell me at once you are come to arrest me . '' 
`` To arrest you ? 
- Good heavens ! 
no . '' 
`` Why do you come to accost me with twelve horsemen at your heels , then ? '' 
`` I am making my round . '' 
`` That is n't bad ! 
And so you pick me up in your round , eh ? '' 
`` I do n't pick you up ; I meet with you , and I beg you to come with me . '' 
`` Where ? '' 
`` To the king . '' 
`` Good ! '' 
said D'Artagnan , with a bantering air ; `` the king is disengaged . '' 
`` For Heaven 's sake , captain , '' said M. de Gesvres , in a low voice to the musketeer , `` do not compromise yourself ! 
these men hear you . '' 
D'Artagnan laughed aloud , and replied : `` March ! 
People who are arrested are placed between the six first guards and the six last . '' 
`` But as I am not arresting you , '' said M. de Gesvres , `` you will march behind , with me , if you please . '' 
`` Well , '' said D'Artagnan , `` that is very polite , duke , and you are right in being so ; for if ever I had had to make my rounds near your chambre-de - ville , I should have been courteous to you , I assure you , on the word of a gentleman ! 
Now , one favor more ; what does the king want with me ? '' 
`` Oh , the king is furious ! '' 
`` Very well ! 
the king , who has thought it worth while to be angry , may take the trouble to grow calm again ; that is all . 
I sha n't die of that , I will swear . '' 
`` No , but - '' `` But - I shall be sent to keep company with unfortunate M. Fouquet . 
Mordioux ! 
That is a gallant man , a worthy man ! 
We shall live very sociably together , I will be sworn . '' 
`` Here we are at our place of destination , '' said the duke . 
`` Captain , for Heaven 's sake be calm with the king ! '' 
`` Ah ! 
ah ! 
you are playing the brave man with me , duke ! '' 
said D'Artagnan , throwing one of his defiant glances over Gesvres . 
`` I have been told that you are ambitious of uniting your guards with my musketeers . 
This strikes me as a splendid opportunity . '' 
`` I will take exceeding good care not to avail myself of it , captain . '' 
`` And why not , pray ? '' 
`` Oh , for many reasons - in the first place , for this : if I were to succeed you in the musketeers after having arrested you - '' `` Ah ! 
then you admit you have arrested me ? '' 
`` No , I do n't . '' 
`` Say met me , then . 
So , you were saying if you were to succeed me after having arrested me ? '' 
`` Your musketeers , at the first exercise with ball cartridges , would fire my way , by mistake . '' 
`` Oh , as to that I wo n't say ; for the fellows do love me a little . '' 
Gesvres made D'Artagnan pass in first , and took him straight to the cabinet where Louis was waiting for his captain of the musketeers , and placed himself behind his colleague in the ante-chamber . 
The king could be heard distinctly , speaking aloud to Colbert in the same cabinet where Colbert might have heard , a few days before , the king speaking aloud with M. d'Artagnan . 
The guards remained as a mounted picket before the principal gate ; and the report was quickly spread throughout the city that monsieur le capitaine of the musketeers had been arrested by order of the king . 
Then these men were seen to be in motion , and as in the good old times of Louis XIII . 
and M. de Treville , groups were formed , and staircases were filled ; vague murmurs , issuing from the court below , came rolling to the upper stories , like the distant moaning of the waves . 
M. de Gesvres became uneasy . 
He looked at his guards , who , after being interrogated by the musketeers who had just got among their ranks , began to shun them with a manifestation of innocence . 
D'Artagnan was certainly less disturbed by all this than M. de Gesvres , the captain of the guards . 
As soon as he entered , he seated himself on the ledge of a window whence with his eagle glance he saw all that was going on without the least emotion . 
No step of the progressive fermentation which had shown itself at the report of his arrest escaped him . 
He foresaw the very moment the explosion would take place ; and we know that his previsions were in general correct . 
`` It would be very whimsical , '' thought he , `` if , this evening , my praetorians should make me king of France . 
How I should laugh ! '' 
But , at the height , all was stopped . 
Guards , musketeers , officers , soldiers , murmurs , uneasiness , dispersed , vanished , died away ; there was an end of menace and sedition . 
One word had calmed the waves . 
The king had desired Brienne to say , `` Hush , messieurs ! 
you disturb the king . '' 
D'Artagnan sighed . 
`` All is over ! '' 
said he ; `` the musketeers of the present day are not those of his majesty Louis XIII . 
All is over ! '' 
`` Monsieur d'Artagnan , you are wanted in the ante-chamber of the king , '' proclaimed an usher . 
: King Louis XIV . 
The king was seated in his cabinet , with his back turned towards the door of entrance . 
In front of him was a mirror , in which , while turning over his papers , he could see at a glance those who came in . 
He did not take any notice of the entrance of D'Artagnan , but spread above his letters and plans the large silk cloth he used to conceal his secrets from the importunate . 
D'Artagnan understood this by-play , and kept in the background ; so that at the end of a minute the king , who heard nothing , and saw nothing save from the corner of his eye , was obliged to cry , `` Is not M. d'Artagnan there ? '' 
`` I am here , sire , '' replied the musketeer , advancing . 
`` Well , monsieur , '' said the king , fixing his pellucid eyes on D'Artagnan , `` what have you to say to me ? '' 
`` I , sire ! '' 
replied the latter , who watched the first blow of his adversary to make a good retort ; `` I have nothing to say to your majesty , unless it be that you have caused me to be arrested , and here I am . '' 
The king was going to reply that he had not had D'Artagnan arrested , but any such sentence appeared too much like an excuse , and he was silent . 
D'Artagnan likewise preserved an obstinate silence . 
`` Monsieur , '' at length resumed the king , `` what did I charge you to go and do at Belle-Isle ? 
Tell me , if you please . '' 
The king while uttering these words looked intently at his captain . 
Here D'Artagnan was fortunate ; the king seemed to place the game in his hands . 
`` I believe , '' replied he , `` that your majesty does me the honor to ask what I went to Belle-Isle to accomplish ? '' 
`` Yes , monsieur . '' 
`` Well ! 
sire , I know nothing about it ; it is not of me that question should be asked , but of that infinite number of officers of all kinds , to whom have been given innumerable orders of all kinds , whilst to me , head of the expedition , nothing precise was said or stated in any form whatever . '' 
The king was hurt : he showed it by his reply . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` orders have only been given to such as were judged faithful . '' 
`` And , therefore , I have been astonished , sire , '' retorted the musketeer , `` that a captain like myself , who ranks with a marechal of France , should have found himself under the orders of five or six lieutenants or majors , good to make spies of , possibly , but not at all fit to conduct a warlike expedition . 
It was upon this subject I came to demand an explanation of your majesty , when I found the door closed against me , which , the final insult offered to a brave man , has led me to quit your majesty 's service . '' 
`` Monsieur , '' replied the king , `` you still believe that you are living in an age when kings were , as you complain of having been , under the orders and at the discretion of their inferiors . 
You seem to forget that a king owes an account of his actions to none but God . '' 
`` I forget nothing , sire , '' said the musketeer , wounded by this lesson . 
`` Besides , I do not see in what an honest man , when he asks of his king how he has ill-served him , offends him . '' 
`` You have ill-served me , monsieur , by siding with my enemies against me . '' 
`` Who are your enemies , sire ? '' 
`` The men I sent you to fight . '' 
`` Two men the enemies of the whole of your majesty 's army ! 
That is incredible . '' 
`` You have no power to judge of my will . '' 
`` But I have to judge of my own friendships , sire . '' 
`` He who serves his friends does not serve his master . '' 
`` I so well understand this , sire , that I have respectfully offered your majesty my resignation . '' 
`` And I have accepted it , monsieur , '' said the king . 
`` Before being separated from you I was willing to prove to you that I know how to keep my word . '' 
`` Your majesty has kept more than your word , for your majesty has had me arrested , '' said D'Artagnan , with his cold , bantering air ; `` you did not promise me that , sire . '' 
The king would not condescend to perceive the pleasantry , and continued , seriously , `` You see , monsieur , to what grave steps your disobedience forces me . '' 
`` My disobedience ! '' 
cried D'Artagnan , red with anger . 
`` It is the mildest term that I can find , '' pursued the king . 
`` My idea was to take and punish rebels ; was I bound to inquire whether these rebels were your friends or not ? '' 
`` But I was , '' replied D'Artagnan . 
`` It was a cruelty on your majesty 's part to send me to capture my friends and lead them to your gibbets . '' 
`` It was a trial I had to make , monsieur , of pretended servants , who eat my bread and should defend my person . 
The trial has succeeded ill , Monsieur d'Artagnan . '' 
`` For one bad servant your majesty loses , '' said the musketeer , with bitterness , `` there are ten who , on that same day , go through a like ordeal . 
Listen to me , sire ; I am not accustomed to that service . 
Mine is a rebel sword when I am required to do ill . 
It was ill to send me in pursuit of two men whose lives M. Fouquet , your majesty 's preserver , implored you to save . 
Still further , these men were my friends . 
They did not attack your majesty , they succumbed to your blind anger . 
Besides , why were they not allowed to escape ? 
What crime had they committed ? 
I admit you may contest with me the right of judging their conduct . 
But why suspect me before the action ? 
Why surround me with spies ? 
Why disgrace me before the army ? 
Why me , in whom till now you showed the most entire confidence - who for thirty years have been attached to your person , and have given you a thousand proofs of my devotion - for it must be said , now that I am accused - why reduce me to see three thousand of the king 's soldiers march in battle against two men ? '' 
`` One would say you have forgotten what these men have done to me ! '' 
said the king , in a hollow voice , `` and that it was no merit of theirs I was not lost . '' 
`` Sire , one would imagine you forget that I was there . '' 
`` Enough , Monsieur d'Artagnan , enough of these dominating interests which arise to keep the sun itself from my interests . 
I am founding a state in which there shall be but one master , as I promised you ; the moment is at hand for me to keep my promise . 
You wish to be , according to your tastes or private friendships , free to destroy my plans and save my enemies ? 
I will thwart you or will drop you - seek a more compliant master . 
I know full well that another king would not conduct himself as I do , and would allow himself to be dominated by you , at the risk of sending you some day to keep company with M. Fouquet and the rest ; but I have an excellent memory , and for me , services are sacred titles to gratitude , to impunity . 
You shall only have this lesson , Monsieur d'Artagnan , as the punishment of your want of discipline , and I will not imitate my predecessors in anger , not having imitated them in favor . 
And , then , other reasons make me act mildly towards you ; in the first place , because you are a man of sense , a man of excellent sense , a man of heart , and that you will be a capital servant to him who shall have mastered you ; secondly , because you will cease to have any motives for insubordination . 
Your friends are now destroyed or ruined by me . 
These supports on which your capricious mind instinctively relied I have caused to disappear . 
At this moment , my soldiers have taken or killed the rebels of Belle-Isle . '' 
D'Artagnan became pale . 
`` Taken or killed ! '' 
cried he . 
`` Oh ! 
sire , if you thought what you tell , if you were sure you were telling me the truth , I should forget all that is just , all that is magnanimous in your words , to call you a barbarous king , and an unnatural man . 
But I pardon you these words , '' said he , smiling with pride ; `` I pardon them to a young prince who does not know , who can not comprehend what such men as M. d'Herblay , M. du Vallon , and myself are . 
Taken or killed ! 
Ah ! 
Ah ! 
sire ! 
tell me , if the news is true , how much has it cost you in men and money . 
We will then reckon if the game has been worth the stakes . '' 
As he spoke thus , the king went up to him in great anger , and said , `` Monsieur d'Artagnan , your replies are those of a rebel ! 
Tell me , if you please , who is king of France ? 
Do you know any other ? '' 
`` Sire , '' replied the captain of the musketeers , coldly , `` I very well remember that one morning at Vaux you addressed that question to many people who did not answer to it , whilst I , on my part , did answer to it . 
If I recognized my king on that day , when the thing was not easy , I think it would be useless to ask the question of me now , when your majesty and I are alone . '' 
At these words Louis cast down his eyes . 
It appeared to him that the shade of the unfortunate Philippe passed between D'Artagnan and himself , to evoke the remembrance of that terrible adventure . 
Almost at the same moment an officer entered and placed a dispatch in the hands of the king , who , in his turn , changed color , while reading it . 
`` Monsieur , '' said he , `` what I learn here you would know later ; it is better I should tell you , and that you should learn it from the mouth of your king . 
A battle has taken place at Belle-Isle . '' 
`` Is it possible ? '' 
said D'Artagnan , with a calm air , though his heart was beating fast enough to choke him . 
`` Well , sire ? '' 
`` Well , monsieur - and I have lost a hundred and ten men . '' 
A beam of joy and pride shone in the eyes of D'Artagnan . 
`` And the rebels ? '' 
said he . 
`` The rebels have fled , '' said the king . 
D'Artagnan could not restrain a cry of triumph . 
`` Only , '' added the king , `` I have a fleet which closely blockades Belle-Isle , and I am certain not a bark can escape . '' 
`` So that , '' said the musketeer , brought back to his dismal idea , `` if these two gentlemen are taken - '' `` They will be hanged , '' said the king , quietly . 
`` And do they know it ? '' 
replied D'Artagnan , repressing his trembling . 
`` They know it , because you must have told them yourself ; and all the country knows it . '' 
`` Then , sire , they will never be taken alive , I will answer for that . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said the king , negligently , and taking up his letter again . 
`` Very well , they will be dead , then , Monsieur d'Artagnan , and that will come to the same thing , since I should only take them to have them hanged . '' 
D'Artagnan wiped the sweat which flowed from his brow . 
`` I have told you , '' pursued Louis XIV. , `` that I would one day be an affectionate , generous , and constant master . 
You are now the only man of former times worthy of my anger or my friendship . 
I will not spare you either sentiment , according to your conduct . 
Could you serve a king , Monsieur d'Artagnan , who should have a hundred kings , his equals , in the kingdom ? 
Could I , tell me , do with such weak instruments the great things I meditate ? 
Did you ever see an artist effect great works with an unworthy tool ? 
Far from us , monsieur , the old leaven of feudal abuse ! 
The Fronde , which threatened to ruin monarchy , has emancipated it . 
I am master at home , Captain d'Artagnan , and I shall have servants who , lacking , perhaps , your genius , will carry devotion and obedience to the verge of heroism . 
Of what consequence , I ask you , of what consequence is it that God has given no sense to arms and legs ? 
It is to the head he has given genius , and the head , you know , the rest obey . 
I am the head . '' 
D'Artagnan started . 
Louis XIV . 
continued as if he had seen nothing , although this emotion had not by any means escaped him . 
`` Now , let us conclude between us two the bargain I promised to make with you one day when you found me in a very strange predicament at Blois . 
Do me justice , monsieur , when you admit I do not make any one pay for the tears of shame that I then shed . 
Look around you ; lofty heads have bowed . 
Bow yours , or choose such exile as will suit you . 
Perhaps , when reflecting upon it , you will find your king has a generous heart , who reckons sufficiently upon your loyalty to allow you to leave him dissatisfied , when you possess a great state secret . 
You are a brave man ; I know you to be so . 
Why have you judged me prematurely ? 
Judge me from this day forward , D'Artagnan , and be as severe as you please . '' 
D'Artagnan remained bewildered , mute , undecided for the first time in his life . 
At last he had found an adversary worthy of him . 
This was no longer trick , it was calculation ; no longer violence , but strength ; no longer passion , but will ; no longer boasting , but council . 
This young man who had brought down a Fouquet , and could do without a D'Artagnan , deranged the somewhat headstrong calculations of the musketeer . 
`` Come , let us see what stops you ? '' 
said the king , kindly . 
`` You have given in your resignation ; shall I refuse to accept it ? 
I admit that it may be hard for such an old captain to recover lost good-humor . '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
replied D'Artagnan , in a melancholy tone , `` that is not my most serious care . 
I hesitate to take back my resignation because I am old in comparison with you , and have habits difficult to abandon . 
Henceforward , you must have courtiers who know how to amuse you - madmen who will get themselves killed to carry out what you call your great works . 
Great they will be , I feel - but , if by chance I should not think them so ? 
I have seen war , sire , I have seen peace ; I have served Richelieu and Mazarin ; I have been scorched with your father , at the fire of Rochelle ; riddled with sword-thrusts like a sieve , having grown a new skin ten times , as serpents do . 
After affronts and injustices , I have a command which was formerly something , because it gave the bearer the right of speaking as he liked to his king . 
But your captain of the musketeers will henceforward be an officer guarding the outer doors . 
Truly , sire , if that is to be my employment from this time , seize the opportunity of our being on good terms , to take it from me . 
Do not imagine that I bear malice ; no , you have tamed me , as you say ; but it must be confessed that in taming me you have lowered me ; by bowing me you have convicted me of weakness . 
If you knew how well it suits me to carry my head high , and what a pitiful mien I shall have while scenting the dust of your carpets ! 
Oh ! 
sire , I regret sincerely , and you will regret as I do , the old days when the king of France saw in every vestibule those insolent gentlemen , lean , always swearing - cross-grained mastiffs , who could bite mortally in the hour of danger or of battle . 
These men were the best of courtiers to the hand which fed them - they would lick it ; but for the hand that struck them , oh ! 
the bite that followed ! 
A little gold on the lace of their cloaks , a slender stomach in their hauts-de-chausses , a little sparkling of gray in their dry hair , and you will behold the handsome dukes and peers , the haughty marechaux of France . 
But why should I tell you all this ? 
The king is master ; he wills that I should make verses , he wills that I should polish the mosaics of his ante - chambers with satin shoes . 
Mordioux ! 
that is difficult , but I have got over greater difficulties . 
I will do it . 
Why should I do it ? 
Because I love money ? 
- I have enough . 
Because I am ambitious ? 
- my career is almost at an end . 
Because I love the court ? 
No . 
I will remain here because I have been accustomed for thirty years to go and take the orderly word of the king , and to have said to me ` Good evening , D'Artagnan , ' with a smile I did not beg for . 
That smile I will beg for ! 
Are you content , sire ? '' 
And D'Artagnan bowed his silver head , upon which the smiling king placed his white hand with pride . 
`` Thanks , my old servant , my faithful friend , '' said he . 
`` As , reckoning from this day , I have no longer any enemies in France , it remains with me to send you to a foreign field to gather your marshal 's baton . 
Depend upon me for finding you an opportunity . 
In the meanwhile , eat of my very best bread , and sleep in absolute tranquillity . '' 
`` That is all kind and well ! '' 
said D'Artagnan , much agitated . 
`` But those poor men at Belle-Isle ? 
One of them , in particular - so good ! 
so brave ! 
so true ! '' 
`` Do you ask their pardon of me ? '' 
`` Upon my knees , sire ! '' 
`` Well ! 
then , go and take it to them , if it be still in time . 
But do you answer for them ? '' 
`` With my life , sire . '' 
`` Go , then . 
To-morrow I set out for Paris . 
Return by that time , for I do not wish you to leave me in the future . '' 
`` Be assured of that , sire , '' said D'Artagnan , kissing the royal hand . 
And with a heart swelling with joy , he rushed out of the castle on his way to Belle-Isle . 
: M. Fouquet 's Friends . 
The king had returned to Paris , and with him D'Artagnan , who , in twenty - four hours , having made with greatest care all possible inquiries at Belle-Isle , succeeded in learning nothing of the secret so well kept by the heavy rock of Locmaria , which had fallen on the heroic Porthos . 
The captain of the musketeers only knew what those two valiant men - these two friends , whose defense he had so nobly taken up , whose lives he had so earnestly endeavored to save - aided by three faithful Bretons , had accomplished against a whole army . 
He had seen , spread on the neighboring heath , the human remains which had stained with clouted blood the scattered stones among the flowering broom . 
He learned also that a bark had been seen far out at sea , and that , like a bird of prey , a royal vessel had pursued , overtaken , and devoured the poor little bird that was flying with such palpitating wings . 
But there D'Artagnan 's certainties ended . 
The field of supposition was thrown open . 
Now , what could he conjecture ? 
The vessel had not returned . 
It is true that a brisk wind had prevailed for three days ; but the corvette was known to be a good sailer and solid in its timbers ; it had no need to fear a gale of wind , and it ought , according to the calculation of D'Artagnan , to have either returned to Brest , or come back to the mouth of the Loire . 
Such was the news , ambiguous , it is true , but in some degree reassuring to him personally , which D'Artagnan brought to Louis XIV. , when the king , followed by all the court , returned to Paris . 
Louis , satisfied with his success - Louis , more mild and affable as he felt himself more powerful - had not ceased for an instant to ride beside the carriage door of Mademoiselle de la Valliere . 
Everybody was anxious to amuse the two queens , so as to make them forget this abandonment by son and husband . 
Everything breathed the future , the past was nothing to anybody . 
Only that past was like a painful bleeding wound to the hearts of certain tender and devoted spirits . 
Scarcely was the king reinstalled in Paris , when he received a touching proof of this . 
Louis XIV . 
had just risen and taken his first repast when his captain of the musketeers presented himself before him . 
D'Artagnan was pale and looked unhappy . 
The king , at the first glance , perceived the change in a countenance generally so unconcerned . 
`` What is the matter , D'Artagnan ? '' 
said he . 
`` Sire , a great misfortune has happened to me . '' 
`` Good heavens ! 
what is that ? '' 
`` Sire , I have lost one of my friends , M. du Vallon , in the affair of Belle-Isle . '' 
And , while speaking these words , D'Artagnan fixed his falcon eye upon Louis XIV. , to catch the first feeling that would show itself . 
`` I knew it , '' replied the king , quietly . 
`` You knew it , and did not tell me ! '' 
cried the musketeer . 
`` To what good ? 
Your grief , my friend , was so well worthy of respect . 
It was my duty to treat it gently . 
To have informed you of this misfortune , which I knew would pain you so greatly , D'Artagnan , would have been , in your eyes , to have triumphed over you . 
Yes , I knew that M. du Vallon had buried himself beneath the rocks of Locmaria ; I knew that M. d'Herblay had taken one of my vessels with its crew , and had compelled it to convey him to Bayonne . 
But I was willing you should learn these matters in a direct manner , in order that you might be convinced my friends are with me respected and sacred ; that always in me the man will sacrifice himself to subjects , whilst the king is so often found to sacrifice men to majesty and power . '' 
`` But , sire , how could you know ? '' 
`` How do you yourself know , D'Artagnan ? '' 
`` By this letter , sire , which M. d'Herblay , free and out of danger , writes me from Bayonne . '' 
`` Look here , '' said the king , drawing from a casket placed upon the table closet to the seat upon which D'Artagnan was leaning , `` here is a letter copied exactly from that of M. d'Herblay . 
Here is the very letter , which Colbert placed in my hands a week before you received yours . 
I am well served , you may perceive . '' 
`` Yes , sire , '' murmured the musketeer , `` you were the only man whose star was equal to the task of dominating the fortune and strength of my two friends . 
You have used your power , sire , you will not abuse it , will you ? '' 
`` D'Artagnan , '' said the king , with a smile beaming with kindness , `` I could have M. d'Herblay carried off from the territories of the king of Spain , and brought here , alive , to inflict justice upon him . 
But , D'Artagnan , be assured I will not yield to this first and natural impulse . 
He is free - let him continue free . '' 
`` Oh , sire ! 
you will not always remain so clement , so noble , so generous as you have shown yourself with respect to me and M. d'Herblay ; you will have about you counselors who will cure you of that weakness . '' 
`` No , D'Artagnan , you are mistaken when you accuse my council of urging me to pursue rigorous measures . 
The advice to spare M. d'Herblay comes from Colbert himself . '' 
`` Oh , sire ! '' 
said D'Artagnan , extremely surprised . 
`` As for you , '' continued the king , with a kindness very uncommon to him , `` I have several pieces of good news to announce to you ; but you shall know them , my dear captain , the moment I have made my accounts all straight . 
I have said that I wish to make , and would make , your fortune ; that promise will soon become reality . '' 
`` A thousand times thanks , sire ! 
I can wait . 
But I implore you , whilst I go and practice patience , that your majesty will deign to notice those poor people who have for so long a time besieged your ante-chamber , and come humbly to lay a petition at your feet . '' 
`` Who are they ? '' 
`` Enemies of your majesty . '' 
The king raised his head . 
`` Friends of M. Fouquet , '' added D'Artagnan . 
`` Their names ? '' 
`` M. Gourville , M. Pelisson , and a poet , M. Jean de la Fontaine . '' 
The king took a moment to reflect . 
`` What do they want ? '' 
`` I do not know . '' 
`` How do they appear ? '' 
`` In great affliction . '' 
`` What do they say ? '' 
`` Nothing . '' 
`` What do they do ? '' 
`` They weep . '' 
`` Let them come in , '' said the king , with a serious brow . 
D'Artagnan turned rapidly on his heel , raised the tapestry which closed the entrance to the royal chamber , and directing his voice to the adjoining room , cried , `` Enter . '' 
The three men D'Artagnan had named immediately appeared at the door of the cabinet in which were the king and his captain . 
A profound silence prevailed in their passage . 
The courtiers , at the approach of the friends of the unfortunate superintendent of finances , drew back , as if fearful of being affected by contagion with disgrace and misfortune . 
D'Artagnan , with a quick step , came forward to take by the hand the unhappy men who stood trembling at the door of the cabinet ; he led them in front of the king 's fauteuil , who , having placed himself in the embrasure of a window , awaited the moment of presentation , and was preparing himself to give the supplicants a rigorously diplomatic reception . 
The first of the friends of Fouquet 's to advance was Pelisson . 
He did not weep , but his tears were only restrained that the king might better hear his voice and prayer . 
Gourville bit his lips to check his tears , out of respect for the king . 
La Fontaine buried his face in his handkerchief , and the only signs of life he gave were the convulsive motions of his shoulders , raised by his sobs . 
The king preserved his dignity . 
His countenance was impassible . 
He even maintained the frown which appeared when D'Artagnan announced his enemies . 
He made a gesture which signified , `` Speak ; '' and he remained standing , with his eyes fixed searchingly on these desponding men . 
Pelisson bowed to the ground , and La Fontaine knelt as people do in churches . 
This dismal silence , disturbed only by sighs and groans , began to excite in the king , not compassion , but impatience . 
`` Monsieur Pelisson , '' said he , in a sharp , dry tone . 
`` Monsieur Gourville , and you , Monsieur - '' and he did not name La Fontaine , `` I can not , without sensible displeasure , see you come to plead for one of the greatest criminals it is the duty of justice to punish . 
A king does not allow himself to soften save at the tears of the innocent , the remorse of the guilty . 
I have no faith either in the remorse of M. Fouquet or the tears of his friends , because the one is tainted to the very heart , and the others ought to dread offending me in my own palace . 
For these reasons , I beg you , Monsieur Pelisson , Monsieur Gourville , and you , Monsieur - , to say nothing that will not plainly proclaim the respect you have for my will . '' 
`` Sire , '' replied Pelisson , trembling at these words , `` we are come to say nothing to your majesty that is not the most profound expression of the most sincere respect and love that are due to a king from all his subjects . 
Your majesty 's justice is redoubtable ; every one must yield to the sentences it pronounces . 
We respectfully bow before it . 
Far from us the idea of coming to defend him who has had the misfortune to offend your majesty . 
He who has incurred your displeasure may be a friend of ours , but he is an enemy to the state . 
We abandon him , but with tears , to the severity of the king . '' 
`` Besides , '' interrupted the king , calmed by that supplicating voice , and those persuasive words , `` my parliament will decide . 
I do not strike without first having weighed the crime ; my justice does not wield the sword without employing first a pair of scales . '' 
`` Therefore we have every confidence in that impartiality of the king , and hope to make our feeble voices heard , with the consent of your majesty , when the hour for defending an accused friend strikes . '' 
`` In that case , messieurs , what do you ask of me ? '' 
said the king , with his most imposing air . 
`` Sire , '' continued Pelisson , `` the accused has a wife and family . 
The little property he had was scarcely sufficient to pay his debts , and Madame Fouquet , since her husband 's captivity , is abandoned by everybody . 
The hand of your majesty strikes like the hand of God . 
When the Lord sends the curse of leprosy or pestilence into a family , every one flies and shuns the abode of the leprous or plague-stricken . 
Sometimes , but very rarely , a generous physician alone ventures to approach the ill-reputed threshold , passes it with courage , and risks his life to combat death . 
He is the last resource of the dying , the chosen instrument of heavenly mercy . 
Sire , we supplicate you , with clasped hands and bended knees , as a divinity is supplicated ! 
Madame Fouquet has no longer any friends , no longer any means of support ; she weeps in her deserted home , abandoned by all those who besieged its doors in the hour of prosperity ; she has neither credit nor hope left . 
At least , the unhappy wretch upon whom your anger falls receives from you , however culpable he may be , his daily bread though moistened by his tears . 
As much afflicted , more destitute than her husband , Madame Fouquet - the lady who had the honor to receive your majesty at her table - Madame Fouquet , the wife of the ancient superintendent of your majesty 's finances , Madame Fouquet has no longer bread . '' 
Here the mortal silence which had chained the breath of Pelisson 's two friends was broken by an outburst of sobs ; and D'Artagnan , whose chest heaved at hearing this humble prayer , turned round towards the angle of the cabinet to bite his mustache and conceal a groan . 
The king had preserved his eye dry and his countenance severe ; but the blood had mounted to his cheeks , and the firmness of his look was visibly diminished . 
`` What do you wish ? '' 
said he , in an agitated voice . 
`` We come humbly to ask your majesty , '' replied Pelisson , upon whom emotion was fast gaining , `` to permit us , without incurring the displeasure of your majesty , to lend to Madame Fouquet two thousand pistoles collected among the old friends of her husband , in order that the widow may not stand in need of the necessaries of life . '' 
At the word widow , pronounced by Pelisson whilst Fouquet was still alive , the king turned very pale ; - his pride disappeared ; pity rose from his heart to his lips ; he cast a softened look upon the men who knelt sobbing at his feet . 
`` God forbid , '' said he , `` that I should confound the innocent with the guilty . 
They know me but ill who doubt my mercy towards the weak . 
I strike none but the arrogant . 
Do , messieurs , do all that your hearts counsel you to assuage the grief of Madame Fouquet . 
Go , messieurs - go ! '' 
The three now rose in silence with dry eyes . 
The tears had been scorched away by contact with their burning cheeks and eyelids . 
They had not the strength to address their thanks to the king , who himself cut short their solemn reverences by entrenching himself suddenly behind the fauteuil . 
D'Artagnan remained alone with the king . 
`` Well , '' said he , approaching the young prince , who interrogated him with his look . 
`` Well , my master ! 
If you had not the device which belongs to your sun , I would recommend you one which M. Conrart might translate into eclectic Latin , ` Calm with the lowly ; stormy with the strong . ' '' 
The king smiled , and passed into the next apartment , after having said to D'Artagnan , `` I give you the leave of absence you must want to put the affairs of your friend , the late M. du Vallon , in order . '' 
: Porthos 's Will . 
At Pierrefonds everything was in mourning . 
The courts were deserted - the stables closed - the parterres neglected . 
In the basins , the fountains , formerly so jubilantly fresh and noisy , had stopped of themselves . 
Along the roads around the chateau came a few grave personages mounted on mules or country nags . 
These were rural neighbors , cures and bailiffs of adjacent estates . 
All these people entered the chateau silently , handed their horses to a melancholy-looking groom , and directed their steps , conducted by a huntsman in black , to the great dining-room , where Mousqueton received them at the door . 
Mousqueton had become so thin in two days that his clothes moved upon him like an ill - fitting scabbard in which the sword-blade dances at each motion . 
His face , composed of red and white , like that of the Madonna of Vandyke , was furrowed by two silver rivulets which had dug their beds in his cheeks , as full formerly as they had become flabby since his grief began . 
At each fresh arrival , Mousqueton found fresh tears , and it was pitiful to see him press his throat with his fat hand to keep from bursting into sobs and lamentations . 
All these visits were for the purpose of hearing the reading of Porthos 's will , announced for that day , and at which all the covetous friends of the dead man were anxious to be present , as he had left no relations behind him . 
The visitors took their places as they arrived , and the great room had just been closed when the clock struck twelve , the hour fixed for the reading of the important document . 
Porthos 's procureur - and that was naturally the successor of Master Coquenard - commenced by slowly unfolding the vast parchment upon which the powerful hand of Porthos had traced his sovereign will . 
The seal broken - the spectacles put on - the preliminary cough having sounded - every one pricked up his ears . 
Mousqueton had squatted himself in a corner , the better to weep and the better to hear . 
All at once the folding-doors of the great room , which had been shut , were thrown open as if by magic , and a warlike figure appeared upon the threshold , resplendent in the full light of the sun . 
This was D'Artagnan , who had come alone to the gate , and finding nobody to hold his stirrup , had tied his horse to the knocker and announced himself . 
The splendor of daylight invading the room , the murmur of all present , and , more than all , the instinct of the faithful dog , drew Mousqueton from his reverie ; he raised his head , recognized the old friend of his master , and , screaming with grief , he embraced his knees , watering the floor with his tears . 
D'Artagnan raised the poor intendant , embraced him as if he had been a brother , and , having nobly saluted the assembly , who all bowed as they whispered to each other his name , he went and took his seat at the extremity of the great carved oak hall , still holding by the hand poor Mousqueton , who was suffocating with excess of woe , and sank upon the steps . 
Then the procureur , who , like the rest , was considerably agitated , commenced . 
Porthos , after a profession of faith of the most Christian character , asked pardon of his enemies for all the injuries he might have done them . 
At this paragraph , a ray of inexpressible pride beamed from the eyes of D'Artagnan . 
He recalled to his mind the old soldier ; all those enemies of Porthos brought to earth by his valiant hand ; he reckoned up the numbers of them , and said to himself that Porthos had acted wisely , not to enumerate his enemies or the injuries done to them , or the task would have been too much for the reader . 
Then came the following schedule of his extensive lands : `` I possess at this present time , by the grace of God - `` 1 . 
The domain of Pierrefonds , lands , woods , meadows , waters , and forests , surrounded by good walls . 
`` 2 . 
The domain of Bracieux , chateaux , forests , plowed lands , forming three farms . 
`` 3 . 
The little estate Du Vallon , so named because it is in the valley . '' 
-LRB- Brave Porthos ! -RRB- 
`` 4 . 
Fifty farms in Touraine , amounting to five hundred acres . 
`` 5 . 
Three mills upon the Cher , bringing in six hundred livres each . 
`` 6 . 
Three fish-pools in Berry , producing two hundred livres a year . 
`` As to my personal or movable property , so called because it can be moved , as is so well explained by my learned friend the bishop of Vannes - '' -LRB- D'Artagnan shuddered at the dismal remembrance attached to that name -RRB- - the procureur continued imperturbably - `` they consist - '' `` 1 . 
In goods which I can not detail here for want of room , and which furnish all my chateaux or houses , but of which the list is drawn up by my intendant . '' 
Every one turned his eyes towards Mousqueton , who was still lost in grief . 
`` 2 . 
In twenty horses for saddle and draught , which I have particularly at my chateau of Pierrefonds , and which are called - Bayard , Roland , Charlemagne , Pepin , Dunois , La Hire , Ogier , Samson , Milo , Nimrod , Urganda , Armida , Flastrade , Dalilah , Rebecca , Yolande , Finette , Grisette , Lisette , and Musette . 
`` 3 . 
In sixty dogs , forming six packs , divided as follows : the first , for the stag ; the second , for the wolf ; the third , for the wild boar ; the fourth , for the hare ; and the two others , for setters and protection . 
`` 4 . 
In arms for war and the chase contained in my gallery of arms . 
`` 5 . 
My wines of Anjou , selected for Athos , who liked them formerly ; my wines of Burgundy , Champagne , Bordeaux , and Spain , stocking eight cellars and twelve vaults , in my various houses . 
`` 6 . 
My pictures and statues , which are said to be of great value , and which are sufficiently numerous to fatigue the sight . 
`` 7 . 
My library , consisting of six thousand volumes , quite new , and have never been opened . 
`` 8 . 
My silver plate , which is perhaps a little worn , but which ought to weigh from a thousand to twelve hundred pounds , for I had great trouble in lifting the coffer that contained it and could not carry it more than six times round my chamber . 
`` 9 . 
All these objects , in addition to the table and house linen , are divided in the residences I liked the best . '' 
Here the reader stopped to take breath . 
Every one sighed , coughed , and redoubled his attention . 
The procureur resumed : `` I have lived without having any children , and it is probable I never shall have any , which to me is a cutting grief . 
And yet I am mistaken , for I have a son , in common with my other friends ; that is , M. Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , the true son of M. le Comte de la Fere . 
`` This young nobleman appears to me extremely worthy to succeed the valiant gentleman of whom I am the friend and very humble servant . '' 
Here a sharp sound interrupted the reader . 
It was D'Artagnan 's sword , which , slipping from his baldric , had fallen on the sonorous flooring . 
Every one turned his eyes that way , and saw that a large tear had rolled from the thick lid of D'Artagnan , half-way down to his aquiline nose , the luminous edge of which shone like a little crescent moon . 
`` This is why , '' continued the procureur , `` I have left all my property , movable , or immovable , comprised in the above enumerations , to M. le Vicomte Raoul Auguste Jules de Bragelonne , son of M. le Comte de la Fere , to console him for the grief he seems to suffer , and enable him to add more luster to his already glorious name . '' 
A vague murmur ran through the auditory . 
The procureur continued , seconded by the flashing eye of D'Artagnan , which , glancing over the assembly , quickly restored the interrupted silence : `` On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do give to M. le Chevalier d'Artagnan , captain of the king 's musketeers , whatever the said Chevalier d'Artagnan may demand of my property . 
On condition that M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne do pay a good pension to M. le Chevalier d'Herblay , my friend , if he should need it in exile . 
I leave to my intendant Mousqueton all of my clothes , of city , war , or chase , to the number of forty-seven suits , in the assurance that he will wear them till they are worn out , for the love of and in remembrance of his master . 
Moreover , I bequeath to M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne my old servant and faithful friend Mousqueton , already named , providing that the said vicomte shall so act that Mousqueton shall declare , when dying , he has never ceased to be happy . '' 
On hearing these words , Mousqueton bowed , pale and trembling ; his shoulders shook convulsively ; his countenance , compressed by a frightful grief , appeared from between his icy hands , and the spectators saw him stagger and hesitate , as if , though wishing to leave the hall , he did not know the way . 
`` Mousqueton , my good friend , '' said D'Artagnan , `` go and make your preparations . 
I will take you with me to Athos 's house , whither I shall go on leaving Pierrefonds . '' 
Mousqueton made no reply . 
He scarcely breathed , as if everything in that hall would from that time be foreign . 
He opened the door , and slowly disappeared . 
The procureur finished his reading , after which the greater part of those who had come to hear the last will of Porthos dispersed by degrees , many disappointed , but all penetrated with respect . 
As for D'Artagnan , thus left alone , after having received the formal compliments of the procureur , he was lost in admiration of the wisdom of the testator , who had so judiciously bestowed his wealth upon the most necessitous and the most worthy , with a delicacy that neither nobleman nor courtier could have displayed more kindly . 
When Porthos enjoined Raoul de Bragelonne to give D'Artagnan all that he would ask , he knew well , our worthy Porthos , that D'Artagnan would ask or take nothing ; and in case he did demand anything , none but himself could say what . 
Porthos left a pension to Aramis , who , if he should be inclined to ask too much , was checked by the example of D'Artagnan ; and that word exile , thrown out by the testator , without apparent intention , was it not the mildest , most exquisite criticism upon that conduct of Aramis which had brought about the death of Porthos ? 
But there was no mention of Athos in the testament of the dead . 
Could the latter for a moment suppose that the son would not offer the best part to the father ? 
The rough mind of Porthos had fathomed all these causes , seized all these shades more clearly than law , better than custom , with more propriety than taste . 
`` Porthos had indeed a heart , '' said D'Artagnan to himself with a sigh . 
As he made this reflection , he fancied he hard a groan in the room above him ; and he thought immediately of poor Mousqueton , whom he felt it was a pleasing duty to divert from his grief . 
For this purpose he left the hall hastily to seek the worthy intendant , as he had not returned . 
He ascended the staircase leading to the first story , and perceived , in Porthos 's own chamber , a heap of clothes of all colors and materials , upon which Mousqueton had laid himself down after heaping them all on the floor together . 
It was the legacy of the faithful friend . 
Those clothes were truly his own ; they had been given to him ; the hand of Mousqueton was stretched over these relics , which he was kissing with his lips , with all his face , and covered with his body . 
D'Artagnan approached to console the poor fellow . 
`` My God ! '' 
said he , `` he does not stir - he has fainted ! '' 
But D'Artagnan was mistaken . 
Mousqueton was dead ! 
Dead , like the dog who , having lost his master , crawls back to die upon his cloak . 
: The Old Age of Athos . 
While these affairs were separating forever the four musketeers , formerly bound together in a manner that seemed indissoluble , Athos , left alone after the departure of Raoul , began to pay his tribute to that foretaste of death which is called the absence of those we love . 
Back in his house at Blois , no longer having even Grimaud to receive a poor smile as he passed through the parterre , Athos daily felt the decline of vigor of a nature which for so long a time had seemed impregnable . 
Age , which had been kept back by the presence of the beloved object , arrived with that cortege of pains and inconveniences , which grows by geometrical accretion . 
Athos had no longer his son to induce him to walk firmly , with head erect , as a good example ; he had no longer , in those brilliant eyes of the young man , an ever-ardent focus at which to kindle anew the fire of his looks . 
And then , must it be said , that nature , exquisite in tenderness and reserve , no longer finding anything to understand its feelings , gave itself up to grief with all the warmth of common natures when they yield to joy . 
The Comte de la Fere , who had remained a young man to his sixty-second year ; the warrior who had preserved his strength in spite of fatigue ; his freshness of mind in spite of misfortune , his mild serenity of soul and body in spite of Milady , in spite of Mazarin , in spite of La Valliere ; Athos had become an old man in a week , from the moment at which he lost the comfort of his later youth . 
Still handsome , though bent , noble , but sad , he sought , since his solitude , the deeper glades where sunshine scarcely penetrated . 
He discontinued all the mighty exercises he had enjoyed through life , when Raoul was no longer with him . 
The servants , accustomed to see him stirring with the dawn at all seasons , were astonished to hear seven o'clock strike before their master quitted his bed . 
Athos remained in bed with a book under his pillow - but he did not sleep , neither did he read . 
Remaining in bed that he might no longer have to carry his body , he allowed his soul and spirit to wander from their envelope and return to his son , or to God . 
-LRB- 6 -RRB- His people were sometimes terrified to see him , for hours together , absorbed in silent reverie , mute and insensible ; he no longer heard the timid step of the servant who came to the door of his chamber to watch the sleeping or waking of his master . 
It often occurred that he forgot the day had half passed away , that the hours for the two first meals were gone by . 
Then he was awakened . 
He rose , descended to his shady walk , then came out a little into the sun , as though to partake of its warmth for a minute in memory of his absent child . 
And then the dismal monotonous walk recommenced , until , exhausted , he regained the chamber and his bed , his domicile by choice . 
For several days the comte did not speak a single word . 
He refused to receive the visits that were paid him , and during the night he was seen to relight his lamp and pass long hours in writing , or examining parchments . 
Athos wrote one of these letters to Vannes , another to Fontainebleau ; they remained without answers . 
We know why : Aramis had quitted France , and D'Artagnan was traveling from Nantes to Paris , from Paris to Pierrefonds . 
His valet de chambre observed that he shortened his walk every day by several turns . 
The great alley of limes soon became too long for feet that used to traverse it formerly a hundred times a day . 
The comte walked feebly as far as the middle trees , seated himself upon a mossy bank that sloped towards a sidewalk , and there waited the return of his strength , or rather the return of night . 
Very shortly a hundred steps exhausted him . 
At length Athos refused to rise at all ; he declined all nourishment , and his terrified people , although he did not complain , although he wore a smile upon his lips , although he continued to speak with his sweet voice - his people went to Blois in search of the ancient physician of the late Monsieur , and brought him to the Comte de la Fere in such a fashion that he could see the comte without being himself seen . 
For this purpose , they placed him in a closet adjoining the chamber of the patient , and implored him not to show himself , for fear of displeasing their master , who had not asked for a physician . 
The doctor obeyed . 
Athos was a sort of model for the gentlemen of the country ; the Blaisois boasted of possessing this sacred relic of French glory . 
Athos was a great seigneur compared with such nobles as the king improvised by touching with his artificial scepter the parched-up trunks of the heraldic trees of the province . 
People respected Athos , we say , and they loved him . 
The physician could not bear to see his people weep , to see flock round him the poor of the canton , to whom Athos had so often given life and consolation by his kind words and his charities . 
He examined , therefore , from the depths of his hiding-place , the nature of that mysterious malady which bent and aged more mortally every day a man but lately so full of life and a desire to live . 
He remarked upon the cheeks of Athos the hectic hue of fever , which feeds upon itself ; slow fever , pitiless , born in a fold of the heart , sheltering itself behind that rampart , growing from the suffering it engenders , at once cause and effect of a perilous situation . 
The comte spoke to nobody ; he did not even talk to himself . 
His thought feared noise ; it approached to that degree of over-excitement which borders upon ecstasy . 
Man thus absorbed , though he does not yet belong to God , already appertains no longer to the earth . 
The doctor remained for several hours studying this painful struggle of the will against superior power ; he was terrified at seeing those eyes always fixed , ever directed on some invisible object ; was terrified at the monotonous beating of that heart from which never a sigh arose to vary the melancholy state ; for often pain becomes the hope of the physician . 
Half a day passed away thus . 
The doctor formed his resolution like a brave man ; he issued suddenly from his place of retreat , and went straight up to Athos , who beheld him without evincing more surprise than if he had understood nothing of the apparition . 
`` Monsieur le comte , I crave your pardon , '' said the doctor , coming up to the patient with open arms ; `` but I have a reproach to make you - you shall hear me . '' 
And he seated himself by the pillow of Athos , who had great trouble in rousing himself from his preoccupation . 
`` What is the matter , doctor ? '' 
asked the comte , after a silence . 
`` The matter is , you are ill , monsieur , and have had no advice . '' 
`` I ! 
ill ! '' 
said Athos , smiling . 
`` Fever , consumption , weakness , decay , monsieur le comte ! '' 
`` Weakness ! '' 
replied Athos ; `` is it possible ? 
I do not get up . '' 
`` Come , come ! 
monsieur le comte , no subterfuges ; you are a good Christian ? '' 
`` I hope so , '' said Athos . 
`` Is it your wish to kill yourself ? '' 
`` Never , doctor . '' 
`` Well ! 
monsieur , you are in a fair way of doing so . 
Thus to remain is suicide . 
Get well ! 
monsieur le comte , get well ! '' 
`` Of what ? 
Find the disease first . 
For my part , I never knew myself better ; never did the sky appear more blue to me ; never did I take more care of my flowers . '' 
`` You have a hidden grief . '' 
`` Concealed ! 
- not at all ; the absence of my son , doctor ; that is my malady , and I do not conceal it . '' 
`` Monsieur le comte , your son lives , he is strong , he has all the future before him - the future of men of merit , of his race ; live for him - '' `` But I do live , doctor ; oh ! 
be satisfied of that , '' added he , with a melancholy smile ; `` for as long as Raoul lives , it will be plainly known , for as long as he lives , I shall live . '' 
`` What do you say ? '' 
`` A very simple thing . 
At this moment , doctor , I leave life suspended within me . 
A forgetful , dissipated , indifferent life would be beyond my strength , now I have no longer Raoul with me . 
You do not ask the lamp to burn when the match has not illumed the flame ; do not ask me to live amidst noise and merriment . 
I vegetate , I prepare myself , I wait . 
Look , doctor ; remember those soldiers we have so often seen together at the ports , where they were waiting to embark ; lying down , indifferent , half on one element , half on the other ; they were neither at the place where the sea was going to carry them , nor at the place the earth was going to lose them ; baggage prepared , minds on the stretch , arms stacked - they waited . 
I repeat it , the word is the one which paints my present life . 
Lying down like the soldiers , my ear on the stretch for the report that may reach me , I wish to be ready to set out at the first summons . 
Who will make me that summons ? 
life or death ? 
God or Raoul ? 
My baggage is packed , my soul is prepared , I await the signal - I wait , doctor , I wait ! '' 
The doctor knew the temper of that mind ; he appreciated the strength of that body ; he reflected for the moment , told himself that words were useless , remedies absurd , and left the chateau , exhorting Athos 's servants not to quit him for a moment . 
The doctor being gone , Athos evinced neither anger nor vexation at having been disturbed . 
He did not even desire that all letters that came should be brought to him directly . 
He knew very well that every distraction which should arise would be a joy , a hope , which his servants would have paid with their blood to procure him . 
Sleep had become rare . 
By intense thinking , Athos forgot himself , for a few hours at most , in a reverie most profound , more obscure than other people would have called a dream . 
The momentary repose which this forgetfulness thus gave the body , still further fatigued the soul , for Athos lived a double life during these wanderings of his understanding . 
One night , he dreamt that Raoul was dressing himself in a tent , to go upon an expedition commanded by M. de Beaufort in person . 
The young man was sad ; he clasped his cuirass slowly , and slowly he girded on his sword . 
`` What is the matter ? '' 
asked his father , tenderly . 
`` What afflicts me is the death of Porthos , ever so dear a friend , '' replied Raoul . 
`` I suffer here the grief you soon will feel at home . '' 
And the vision disappeared with the slumber of Athos . 
At daybreak one of his servants entered his master 's apartment , and gave him a letter which came from Spain . 
`` The writing of Aramis , '' thought the comte ; and he read . 
`` Porthos is dead ! '' 
cried he , after the first lines . 
`` Oh ! 
Raoul , Raoul ! 
thanks ! 
thou keepest thy promise , thou warnest me ! '' 
And Athos , seized with a mortal sweat , fainted in his bed , without any other cause than weakness . 
: Athos 's Vision . 
When this fainting of Athos had ceased , the comte , almost ashamed of having given way before this superior natural event , dressed himself and ordered his horse , determined to ride to Blois , to open more certain correspondences with either Africa , D'Artagnan , or Aramis . 
In fact , this letter from Aramis informed the Comte de la Fere of the bad success of the expedition of Belle-Isle . 
It gave him sufficient details of the death of Porthos to move the tender and devoted heart of Athos to its innermost fibers . 
Athos wished to go and pay his friend Porthos a last visit . 
To render this honor to his companion in arms , he meant to send to D'Artagnan , to prevail upon him to recommence the painful voyage to Belle-Isle , to accomplish in his company that sad pilgrimage to the tomb of the giant he had so much loved , then to return to his dwelling to obey that secret influence which was conducting him to eternity by a mysterious road . 
But scarcely had his joyous servants dressed their master , whom they saw with pleasure preparing for a journey which might dissipate his melancholy ; scarcely had the comte 's gentlest horse been saddled and brought to the door , when the father of Raoul felt his head become confused , his legs give way , and he clearly perceived the impossibility of going one step further . 
He ordered himself to be carried into the sun ; they laid him upon his bed of moss where he passed a full hour before he could recover his spirits . 
Nothing could be more natural than this weakness after then inert repose of the latter days . 
Athos took a bouillon , to give him strength , and bathed his dried lips in a glassful of the wine he loved the best - that old Anjou wine mentioned by Porthos in his admirable will . 
Then , refreshed , free in mind , he had his horse brought again ; but only with the aid of his servants was he able painfully to climb into the saddle . 
He did not go a hundred paces ; a shivering seized him again at the turning of the road . 
`` This is very strange ! '' 
said he to his valet de chambre , who accompanied him . 
`` Let us stop , monsieur - I conjure you ! '' 
replied the faithful servant ; `` how pale you are getting ! '' 
`` That will not prevent my pursuing my route , now I have once started , '' replied the comte . 
And he gave his horse his head again . 
But suddenly , the animal , instead of obeying the thought of his master , stopped . 
A movement , of which Athos was unconscious , had checked the bit . 
`` Something , '' said Athos , `` wills that I should go no further . 
Support me , '' added he , stretching out his arms ; `` quick ! 
come closer ! 
I feel my muscles relax - I shall fall from my horse . '' 
The valet had seen the movement made by his master at the moment he received the order . 
He went up to him quickly , received the comte in his arms , and as they were not yet sufficiently distant from the house for the servants , who had remained at the door to watch their master 's departure , not to perceive the disorder in the usually regular proceeding of the comte , the valet called his comrades by gestures and voice , and all hastened to his assistance . 
Athos had gone but a few steps on his return , when he felt himself better again . 
His strength seemed to revive and with it the desire to go to Blois . 
He made his horse turn round : but , at the animal 's first steps , he sunk again into a state of torpor and anguish . 
`` Well ! 
decidedly , '' said he , `` it is willed that I should stay at home . '' 
His people flocked around him ; they lifted him from his horse , and carried him as quickly as possible into the house . 
Everything was prepared in his chamber , and they put him to bed . 
`` You will be sure to remember , '' said he , disposing himself to sleep , `` that I expect letters from Africa this very day . '' 
`` Monsieur will no doubt hear with pleasure that Blaisois 's son is gone on horseback , to gain an hour over the courier of Blois , '' replied his valet de chambre . 
`` Thank you , '' replied Athos , with his placid smile . 
The comte fell asleep , but his disturbed slumber resembled torture rather than repose . 
The servant who watched him saw several times the expression of internal suffering shadowed on his features . 
Perhaps Athos was dreaming . 
The day passed away . 
Blaisois 's son returned ; the courier had brought no news . 
The comte reckoned the minutes with despair ; he shuddered when those minutes made an hour . 
The idea that he was forgotten seized him once , and brought on a fearful pang of the heart . 
Everybody in the house had given up all hopes of the courier - his hour had long passed . 
Four times the express sent to Blois had repeated his journey , and there was nothing to the address of the comte . 
Athos knew that the courier only arrived once a week . 
Here , then , was a delay of eight mortal days to be endured . 
He commenced the night in this painful persuasion . 
All that a sick man , irritated by suffering , can add of melancholy suppositions to probabilities already gloomy , Athos heaped up during the early hours of this dismal night . 
The fever rose : it invaded the chest , where the fire soon caught , according to the expression of the physician , who had been brought back from Blois by Blaisois at his last journey . 
Soon it gained the head . 
The physician made two successive bleedings , which dislodged it for the time , but left the patient very weak , and without power of action in anything but his brain . 
And yet this redoubtable fever had ceased . 
It besieged with its last palpitations the tense extremities ; it ended by yielding as midnight struck . 
The physician , seeing the incontestable improvement , returned to Blois , after having ordered some prescriptions , and declared that the comte was saved . 
Then commenced for Athos a strange , indefinable state . 
Free to think , his mind turned towards Raoul , that beloved son . 
His imagination penetrated the fields of Africa in the environs of Gigelli , where M. de Beaufort must have landed with his army . 
A waste of gray rocks , rendered green in certain parts by the waters of the sea , when it lashed the shore in storms and tempest . 
Beyond , the shore , strewed over with these rocks like gravestones , ascended , in form of an amphitheater among mastic-trees and cactus , a sort of small town , full of smoke , confused noises , and terrified movements . 
All of a sudden , from the bosom of this smoke arose a flame , which succeeded , creeping along the houses , in covering the entire surface of the town , and increased by degrees , uniting in its red and angry vortices tears , screams , and supplicating arms outstretched to Heaven . 
There was , for a moment , a frightful pele-mele of timbers falling to pieces , of swords broken , of stones calcined , trees burnt and disappearing . 
It was a strange thing that in this chaos , in which Athos distinguished raised arms , in which he heard cries , sobs , and groans , he did not see one human figure . 
The cannon thundered at a distance , musketry madly barked , the sea moaned , flocks made their escape , bounding over the verdant slope . 
But not a soldier to apply the match to the batteries of cannon , not a sailor to assist in maneuvering the fleet , not a shepherd in charge of the flocks . 
After the ruin of the village , the destruction of the forts which dominated it , a ruin and destruction magically wrought without the co-operation of a single human being , the flames were extinguished , the smoke began to subside , then diminished in intensity , paled and disappeared entirely . 
Night then came over the scene ; night dark upon the earth , brilliant in the firmament . 
The large blazing stars which spangled the African sky glittered and gleamed without illuminating anything . 
A long silence ensued , which gave , for a moment , repose to the troubled imagination of Athos ; and as he felt that that which he saw was not terminated , he applied more attentively the eyes of his understanding on the strange spectacle which his imagination had presented . 
This spectacle was soon continued for him . 
A mild pale moon rose behind the declivities of the coast , streaking at first the undulating ripples of the sea , which appeared to have calmed after the roaring it had sent forth during the vision of Athos - the moon , we say , shed its diamonds and opals upon the briers and bushes of the hills . 
The gray rocks , so many silent and attentive phantoms , appeared to raise their heads to examine likewise the field of battle by the light of the moon , and Athos perceived that the field , empty during the combat , was now strewn with fallen bodies . 
An inexpressible shudder of fear and horror seized his soul as he recognized the white and blue uniforms of the soldiers of Picardy , with their long pikes and blue handles , and muskets marked with the fleur-de - lis on the butts . 
When he saw all the gaping wounds , looking up to the bright heavens as if to demand back of them the souls to which they had opened a passage , - when he saw the slaughtered horses , stiff , their tongues hanging out at one side of their mouths , sleeping in the shiny blood congealed around them , staining their furniture and their manes , - when he saw the white horse of M. de Beaufort , with his head beaten to pieces , in the first ranks of the dead , Athos passed a cold hand over his brow , which he was astonished not to find burning . 
He was convinced by this touch that he was present , as a spectator , without delirium 's dreadful aid , the day after the battle fought upon the shores of Gigelli by the army of the expedition , which he had seen leave the coast of France and disappear upon the dim horizon , and of which he had saluted with thought and gesture the last cannon-shot fired by the duke as a signal of farewell to his country . 
Who can paint the mortal agony with which his soul followed , like a vigilant eye , these effigies of clay-cold soldiers , and examined them , one after the other , to see if Raoul slept among them ? 
Who can express the intoxication of joy with which Athos bowed before God , and thanked Him for not having seen him he sought with so much fear among the dead ? 
In fact , fallen in their ranks , stiff , icy , the dead , still recognizable with ease , seemed to turn with complacency towards the Comte de la Fere , to be the better seen by him , during his sad review . 
But yet , he was astonished , while viewing all these bodies , not to perceive the survivors . 
To such a point did the illusion extend , that this vision was for him a real voyage made by the father into Africa , to obtain more exact information respecting his son . 
Fatigued , therefore , with having traversed seas and continents , he sought repose under one of the tents sheltered behind a rock , on the top of which floated the white fleur-de-lised pennon . 
He looked for a soldier to conduct him to the tent of M. de Beaufort . 
Then , while his eye was wandering over the plain , turning on all sides , he saw a white form appear behind the scented myrtles . 
This figure was clothed in the costume of an officer ; it held in its hand a broken sword ; it advanced slowly towards Athos , who , stopping short and fixing his eyes upon it , neither spoke nor moved , but wished to open his arms , because in this silent officer he had already recognized Raoul . 
The comte attempted to utter a cry , but it was stifled in his throat . 
Raoul , with a gesture , directed him to be silent , placing his finger on his lips and drawing back by degrees , without Athos being able to see his legs move . 
The comte , still paler than Raoul , followed his son , painfully traversing briers and bushes , stones and ditches , Raoul not appearing to touch the earth , no obstacle seeming to impede the lightness of his march . 
The comte , whom the inequalities of the path fatigued , soon stopped , exhausted . 
Raoul still continued to beckon him to follow him . 
The tender father , to whom love restored strength , made a last effort , and climbed the mountain after the young man , who attracted him by gesture and by smile . 
At length he gained the crest of the hill , and saw , thrown out in black , upon the horizon whitened by the moon , the aerial form of Raoul . 
Athos reached forth his hand to get closer to his beloved son upon the plateau , and the latter also stretched out his ; but suddenly , as if the young man had been drawn away in his own despite , still retreating , he left the earth , and Athos saw the clear blue sky shine between the feet of his child and the ground of the hill . 
Raoul rose insensibly into the void , smiling , still calling with gesture : - he departed towards heaven . 
Athos uttered a cry of tenderness and terror . 
He looked below again . 
He saw a camp destroyed , and all those white bodies of the royal army , like so many motionless atoms . 
And , then , raising his head , he saw the figure of his son still beckoning him to climb the mystic void . 
: The Angel of Death . 
Athos was at this part of his marvelous vision , when the charm was suddenly broken by a great noise rising from the outer gates . 
A horse was heard galloping over the hard gravel of the great alley , and the sound of noisy and animated conversations ascended to the chamber in which the comte was dreaming . 
Athos did not stir from the place he occupied ; he scarcely turned his head towards the door to ascertain the sooner what these noises could be . 
A heavy step ascended the stairs ; the horse , which had recently galloped , departed slowly towards the stables . 
Great hesitation appeared in the steps , which by degrees approached the chamber . 
A door was opened , and Athos , turning a little towards the part of the room the noise came from , cried , in a weak voice : `` It is a courier from Africa , is it not ? '' 
`` No , monsieur le comte , '' replied a voice which made the father of Raoul start upright in his bed . 
`` Grimaud ! '' 
murmured he . 
And the sweat began to pour down his face . 
Grimaud appeared in the doorway . 
It was no longer the Grimaud we have seen , still young with courage and devotion , when he jumped the first into the boat destined to convey Raoul de Bragelonne to the vessels of the royal fleet . 
'T was now a stern and pale old man , his clothes covered with dust , and hair whitened by old age . 
He trembled whilst leaning against the door-frame , and was near falling on seeing , by the light of the lamps , the countenance of his master . 
These two men who had lived so long together in a community of intelligence , and whose eyes , accustomed to economize expressions , knew how to say so many things silently - these two old friends , one as noble as the other in heart , if they were unequal in fortune and birth , remained tongue-tied whilst looking at each other . 
By the exchange of a single glance they had just read to the bottom of each other 's hearts . 
The old servitor bore upon his countenance the impression of a grief already old , the outward token of a grim familiarity with woe . 
He appeared to have no longer in use more than a single version of his thoughts . 
As formerly he was accustomed not to speak much , he was now accustomed not to smile at all . 
Athos read at a glance all these shades upon the visage of his faithful servant , and in the same tone he would have employed to speak to Raoul in his dream : `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` Raoul is dead . 
Is it not so ? '' 
Behind Grimaud the other servants listened breathlessly , with their eyes fixed upon the bed of their sick master . 
They heard the terrible question , and a heart-breaking silence followed . 
`` Yes , '' replied the old man , heaving the monosyllable from his chest with a hoarse , broken sigh . 
Then arose voices of lamentation , which groaned without measure , and filled with regrets and prayers the chamber where the agonized father sought with his eyes the portrait of his son . 
This was for Athos like the transition which led to his dream . 
Without uttering a cry , without shedding a tear , patient , mild , resigned as a martyr , he raised his eyes towards Heaven , in order there to see again , rising above the mountain of Gigelli , the beloved shade that was leaving him at the moment of Grimaud 's arrival . 
Without doubt , while looking towards the heavens , resuming his marvelous dream , he repassed by the same road by which the vision , at once so terrible and sweet , had led him before ; for after having gently closed his eyes , he reopened them and began to smile : he had just seen Raoul , who had smiled upon him . 
With his hands joined upon his breast , his face turned towards the window , bathed by the fresh air of night , which brought upon its wings the aroma of the flowers and the woods , Athos entered , never again to come out of it , into the contemplation of that paradise which the living never see . 
God willed , no doubt , to open to this elect the treasures of eternal beatitude , at this hour when other men tremble with the idea of being severely received by the Lord , and cling to this life they know , in the dread of the other life of which they get but merest glimpses by the dismal murky torch of death . 
Athos was spirit-guided by the pure serene soul of his son , which aspired to be like the paternal soul . 
Everything for this just man was melody and perfume in the rough road souls take to return to the celestial country . 
After an hour of this ecstasy , Athos softly raised his hands as white as wax ; the smile did not quit his lips , and he murmured low , so low as scarcely to be audible , these three words addressed to God or to Raoul : `` HERE I AM ! '' 
And his hands fell slowly , as though he himself had laid them on the bed . 
Death had been kind and mild to this noble creature . 
It had spared him the tortures of the agony , convulsions of the last departure ; had opened with an indulgent finger the gates of eternity to that noble soul . 
God had no doubt ordered it thus that the pious remembrance of this death should remain in the hearts of those present , and in the memory of other men - a death which caused to be loved the passage from this life to the other by those whose existence upon this earth leads them not to dread the last judgment . 
Athos preserved , even in the eternal sleep , that placid and sincere smile - an ornament which was to accompany him to the tomb . 
The quietude and calm of his fine features made his servants for a long time doubt whether he had really quitted life . 
The comte 's people wished to remove Grimaud , who , from a distance , devoured the face now quickly growing marble-pale , and did not approach , from pious fear of bringing to him the breath of death . 
But Grimaud , fatigued as he was , refused to leave the room . 
He sat himself down upon the threshold , watching his master with the vigilance of a sentinel , jealous to receive either his first waking look or his last dying sigh . 
The noises all were quiet in the house - every one respected the slumber of their lord . 
But Grimaud , by anxiously listening , perceived that the comte no longer breathed . 
He raised himself with his hands leaning on the ground , looked to see if there did not appear some motion in the body of his master . 
Nothing ! 
Fear seized him ; he rose completely up , and , at the very moment , heard some one coming up the stairs . 
A noise of spurs knocking against a sword - a warlike sound familiar to his ears - stopped him as he was going towards the bed of Athos . 
A voice more sonorous than brass or steel resounded within three paces of him . 
`` Athos ! 
Athos ! 
my friend ! '' 
cried this voice , agitated even to tears . 
`` Monsieur le Chevalier d'Artagnan , '' faltered out Grimaud . 
`` Where is he ? 
Where is he ? '' 
continued the musketeer . 
Grimaud seized his arm in his bony fingers , and pointed to the bed , upon the sheets of which the livid tints of death already showed . 
A choked respiration , the opposite to a sharp cry , swelled the throat of D'Artagnan . 
He advanced on tip-toe , trembling , frightened at the noise his feet made on the floor , his heart rent by a nameless agony . 
He placed his ear to the breast of Athos , his face to the comte 's mouth . 
Neither noise , nor breath ! 
D'Artagnan drew back . 
Grimaud , who had followed him with his eyes , and for whom each of his movements had been a revelation , came timidly ; seated himself at the foot of the bed , and glued his lips to the sheet which was raised by the stiffened feet of his master . 
Then large drops began to flow from his red eyes . 
This old man in invincible despair , who wept , bent doubled without uttering a word , presented the most touching spectacle that D'Artagnan , in a life so filled with emotion , had ever met with . 
The captain resumed standing in contemplation before that smiling dead man , who seemed to have burnished his last thought , to give his best friend , the man he had loved next to Raoul , a gracious welcome even beyond life . 
And for reply to that exalted flattery of hospitality , D'Artagnan went and kissed Athos fervently on the brow , and with his trembling fingers closed his eyes . 
Then he seated himself by the pillow without dread of that dead man , who had been so kind and affectionate to him for five and thirty years . 
He was feeding his soul with the remembrances the noble visage of the comte brought to his mind in crowds - some blooming and charming as that smile - some dark , dismal , and icy as that visage with its eyes now closed to all eternity . 
All at once the bitter flood which mounted from minute to minute invaded his heart , and swelled his breast almost to bursting . 
Incapable of mastering his emotion , he arose , and tearing himself violently from the chamber where he had just found dead him to whom he came to report the news of the death of Porthos , he uttered sobs so heart-rending that the servants , who seemed only to wait for an explosion of grief , answered to it by their lugubrious clamors , and the dogs of the late comte by their lamentable howlings . 
Grimaud was the only one who did not lift up his voice . 
Even in the paroxysm of his grief he would not have dared to profane the dead , or for the first time disturb the slumber of his master . 
Had not Athos always bidden him be dumb ? 
At daybreak D'Artagnan , who had wandered about the lower hall , biting his fingers to stifle his sighs - D'Artagnan went up once more ; and watching the moments when Grimaud turned his head towards him , he made him a sign to come to him , which the faithful servant obeyed without making more noise than a shadow . 
D'Artagnan went down again , followed by Grimaud ; and when he had gained the vestibule , taking the old man 's hands , `` Grimaud , '' said he , `` I have seen how the father died ; now let me know about the son . '' 
Grimaud drew from his breast a large letter , upon the envelope of which was traced the address of Athos . 
He recognized the writing of M. de Beaufort , broke the seal , and began to read , while walking about in the first steel-chill rays of dawn , in the dark alley of old limes , marked by the still visible footsteps of the comte who had just died . 
: The Bulletin . 
The Duc de Beaufort wrote to Athos . 
The letter destined for the living only reached the dead . 
God had changed the address . 
`` MY DEAR COMTE , '' wrote the prince , in his large , school-boy 's hand , - `` a great misfortune has struck us amidst a great triumph . 
The king loses one of the bravest of soldiers . 
I lose a friend . 
You lose M. de Bragelonne . 
He has died gloriously , so gloriously that I have not the strength to weep as I could wish . 
Receive my sad compliments , my dear comte . 
Heaven distributes trials according to the greatness of our hearts . 
This is an immense one , but not above your courage . 
Your good friend , `` LE DUC DE BEAUFORT . '' 
The letter contained a relation written by one of the prince 's secretaries . 
It was the most touching recital , and the most true , of that dismal episode which unraveled two existences . 
D'Artagnan , accustomed to battle emotions , and with a heart armed against tenderness , could not help starting on reading the name of Raoul , the name of that beloved boy who had become a shade now - like his father . 
`` In the morning , '' said the prince 's secretary , `` monseigneur commanded the attack . 
Normandy and Picardy had taken positions in the rocks dominated by the heights of the mountain , upon the declivity of which were raised the bastions of Gigelli . 
`` The cannon opened the action ; the regiments marched full of resolution ; the pikemen with pikes elevated , the musket-bearers with their weapons ready . 
The prince followed attentively the march and movements of the troops , so as to be able to sustain them with a strong reserve . 
With monseigneur were the oldest captains and his aides-de-camp . 
M. le Vicomte de Bragelonne had received orders not to leave his highness . 
In the meantime the enemy 's cannon , which at first thundered with little success against the masses , began to regulate their fire , and the balls , better directed , killed several men near the prince . 
The regiments formed in column , and , advancing against the ramparts , were rather roughly handled . 
There was a sort of hesitation in our troops , who found themselves ill-seconded by the artillery . 
In fact , the batteries which had been established the evening before had but a weak and uncertain aim , on account of their position . 
The upward direction of the aim lessened the justness of the shots as well as their range . 
`` Monseigneur , comprehending the bad effect of this position on the siege artillery , commanded the frigates moored in the little road to commence a regular fire against the place . 
M. de Bragelonne offered himself at once to carry this order . 
But monseigneur refused to acquiesce in the vicomte 's request . 
Monseigneur was right , for he loved and wished to spare the young nobleman . 
He was quite right , and the event took upon itself to justify his foresight and refusal ; for scarcely had the sergeant charged with the message solicited by M. de Bragelonne gained the seashore , when two shots from long carbines issued from the enemy 's ranks and laid him low . 
The sergeant fell , dyeing the sand with his blood ; observing which , M. de Bragelonne smiled at monseigneur , who said to him , ` You see , vicomte , I have saved your life . 
Report that , some day , to M. le Comte de la Fere , in order that , learning it from you , he may thank me . ' 
The young nobleman smiled sadly , and replied to the duke , ` It is true , monseigneur , that but for your kindness I should have been killed , where the poor sergeant has fallen , and should be at rest . ' 
M. de Bragelonne made this reply in such a tone that monseigneur answered him warmly , ` Vrai Dieu ! 
Young man , one would say that your mouth waters for death ; but , by the soul of Henry IV. , I have promised your father to bring you back alive ; and , please the Lord , I mean to keep my word . ' 
`` Monseigneur de Bragelonne colored , and replied , in a lower voice , ` Monseigneur , pardon me , I beseech you . 
I have always had a desire to meet good opportunities ; and it is so delightful to distinguish ourselves before our general , particularly when that general is M. le Duc de Beaufort . ' 
`` Monseigneur was a little softened by this ; and , turning to the officers who surrounded him , gave different orders . 
The grenadiers of the two regiments got near enough to the ditches and intrenchments to launch their grenades , which had but small effect . 
In the meanwhile , M. d'Estrees , who commanded the fleet , having seen the attempt of the sergeant to approach the vessels , understood that he must act without orders , and opened fire . 
Then the Arabs , finding themselves seriously injured by the balls from the fleet , and beholding the destruction and the ruin of their walls , uttered the most fearful cries . 
Their horsemen descended the mountain at a gallop , bent over their saddles , and rushed full tilt upon the columns of infantry , which , crossing their pikes , stopped this mad assault . 
Repulsed by the firm attitude of the battalion , the Arabs threw themselves with fury towards the etat-major , which was not on its guard at that moment . 
`` The danger was great ; monseigneur drew his sword ; his secretaries and people imitated him ; the officers of the suite engaged in combat with the furious Arabs . 
It was then M. de Bragelonne was able to satisfy the inclination he had so clearly shown from the commencement of the action . 
He fought near the prince with the valor of a Roman , and killed three Arabs with his small sword . 
But it was evident that his bravery did not arise from that sentiment of pride so natural to all who fight . 
It was impetuous , affected , even forced ; he sought to glut , intoxicate himself with strife and carnage . 
He excited himself to such a degree that monseigneur called to him to stop . 
He must have heard the voice of monseigneur , because we who were close to him heard it . 
He did not , however , stop , but continued his course to the intrenchments . 
As M. de Bragelonne was a well-disciplined officer , this disobedience to the orders of monseigneur very much surprised everybody , and M. de Beaufort redoubled his earnestness , crying , ` Stop , Bragelonne ! 
Where are you going ? 
Stop , ' repeated monseigneur , ' I command you ! ' 
`` We all , imitating the gesture of M. le duc , we all raised our hands . 
We expected that the cavalier would turn bridle ; but M. de Bragelonne continued to ride towards the palisades . '' 
` Stop , Bragelonne ! ' 
repeated the prince , in a very loud voice , ` stop ! 
in the name of your father ! ' 
`` At these words M. de Bragelonne turned round ; his countenance expressed a lively grief , but he did not stop ; we then concluded that his horse must have run away with him . 
When M. le duc saw cause to conclude that the vicomte was no longer master of his horse , and had watched him precede the first grenadiers , his highness cried , ` Musketeers , kill his horse ! 
A hundred pistoles for the man who kills his horse ! ' 
But who could expect to hit the beast without at least wounding his rider ? 
No one dared the attempt . 
At length one presented himself ; he was a sharp - shooter of the regiment of Picardy , named Luzerne , who took aim at the animal , fired , and hit him in the quarters , for we saw the blood redden the hair of the horse . 
Instead of falling , the cursed jennet was irritated , and carried him on more furiously than ever . 
Every Picard who saw this unfortunate young man rushing on to meet certain death , shouted in the loudest manner , ` Throw yourself off , monsieur le vicomte ! 
- off ! 
- off ! 
throw yourself off ! ' 
M. de Bragelonne was an officer much beloved in the army . 
Already had the vicomte arrived within pistol-shot of the ramparts , when a discharge was poured upon him that enshrouded him in fire and smoke . 
We lost sight of him ; the smoke dispersed ; he was on foot , upright ; his horse was killed . 
`` The vicomte was summoned to surrender by the Arabs , but he made them a negative sign with his head , and continued to march towards the palisades . 
This was a mortal imprudence . 
Nevertheless the entire army was pleased that he would not retreat , since ill-chance had led him so near . 
He marched a few paces further , and the two regiments clapped their hands . 
It was at this moment the second discharge shook the walls , and the Vicomte de Bragelonne again disappeared in the smoke ; but this time the smoke dispersed in vain ; we no longer saw him standing . 
He was down , with his head lower than his legs , among the bushes , and the Arabs began to think of leaving their intrenchments to come and cut off his head or take his body - as is the custom with the infidels . 
But Monseigneur le Duc de Beaufort had followed all this with his eyes , and the sad spectacle drew from him many painful sighs . 
He then cried aloud , seeing the Arabs running like white phantoms among the mastic-trees , ` Grenadiers ! 
lancers ! 
will you let them take that noble body ? ' 
`` Saying these words and waving his sword , he himself rode towards the enemy . 
The regiments , rushing in his steps , ran in their turn , uttering cries as terrible as those of the Arabs were wild . 
`` The combat commenced over the body of M. de Bragelonne , and with such inveteracy was it fought that a hundred and sixty Arabs were left upon the field , by the side of at least fifty of our troops . 
It was a lieutenant from Normandy who took the body of the vicomte on his shoulders and carried it back to the lines . 
The advantage was , however , pursued , the regiments took the reserve with them , and the enemy 's palisades were utterly destroyed . 
At three o'clock the fire of the Arabs ceased ; the hand-to-hand fight lasted two hours ; it was a massacre . 
At five o'clock we were victorious at all points ; the enemy had abandoned his positions , and M. le duc ordered the white flag to be planted on the summit of the little mountain . 
It was then we had time to think of M. de Bragelonne , who had eight large wounds in his body , through which almost all his blood had welled away . 
Still , however , he had breathed , which afforded inexpressible joy to monseigneur , who insisted on being present at the first dressing of the wounds and the consultation of the surgeons . 
There were two among them who declared M. de Bragelonne would live . 
Monseigneur threw his arms around their necks , and promised them a thousand louis each if they could save him . 
`` The vicomte heard these transports of joy , and whether he was in despair , or whether he suffered much from his wounds , he expressed by his countenance a contradiction , which gave rise to reflection , particularly in one of the secretaries when he had heard what follows . 
The third surgeon was the brother of Sylvain de Saint-Cosme , the most learned of them all . 
He probed the wounds in his turn , and said nothing . 
M. de Bragelonne fixed his eyes steadily upon the skillful surgeon , and seemed to interrogate his every movement . 
The latter , upon being questioned by monseigneur , replied that he saw plainly three mortal wounds out of eight , but so strong was the constitution of the wounded , so rich was he in youth , and so merciful was the goodness of God , that perhaps M. de Bragelonne might recover , particularly if he did not move in the slightest manner . 
Frere Sylvain added , turning towards his assistants , ` Above everything , do not allow him to move , even a finger , or you will kill him ; ' and we all left the tent in very low spirits . 
That secretary I have mentioned , on leaving the tent , thought he perceived a faint and sad smile glide over the lips of M. de Bragelonne when the duke said to him , in a cheerful , kind voice , ` We will save you , vicomte , we will save you yet . ' 
`` In the evening , when it was believed the wounded youth had taken some repose , one of the assistants entered his tent , but rushed out again immediately , uttering loud cries . 
We all ran up in disorder , M. le duc with us , and the assistant pointed to the body of M. de Bragelonne upon the ground , at the foot of his bed , bathed in the remainder of his blood . 
It appeared that he had suffered some convulsion , some delirium , and that he had fallen ; that the fall had accelerated his end , according to the prognosis of Frere Sylvain . 
We raised the vicomte ; he was cold and dead . 
He held a lock of fair hair in his right hand , and that hand was tightly pressed upon his heart . '' 
Then followed the details of the expedition , and of the victory obtained over the Arabs . 
D'Artagnan stopped at the account of the death of poor Raoul . 
`` Oh ! '' 
murmured he , `` unhappy boy ! 
a suicide ! '' 
And turning his eyes towards the chamber of the chateau , in which Athos slept in eternal sleep , `` They kept their words with each other , '' said he , in a low voice ; `` now I believe them to be happy ; they must be reunited . '' 
And he returned through the parterre with slow and melancholy steps . 
All the village - all the neighborhood - were filled with grieving neighbors relating to each other the double catastrophe , and making preparations for the funeral . 
: The Last Canto of the Poem . 
On the morrow , all the noblesse of the provinces , of the environs , and wherever messengers had carried the news , might have been seen arriving in detachments . 
D'Artagnan had shut himself up , without being willing to speak to anybody . 
Two such heavy deaths falling upon the captain , so closely after the death of Porthos , for a long time oppressed that spirit which had hitherto been so indefatigable and invulnerable . 
Except Grimaud , who entered his chamber once , the musketeer saw neither servants nor guests . 
He supposed , from the noises in the house , and the continual coming and going , that preparations were being made for the funeral of the comte . 
He wrote to the king to ask for an extension of his leave of absence . 
Grimaud , as we have said , had entered D'Artagnan 's apartment , had seated himself upon a joint-stool near the door , like a man who meditates profoundly ; then , rising , he made a sign to D'Artagnan to follow him . 
The latter obeyed in silence . 
Grimaud descended to the comte 's bed-chamber , showed the captain with his finger the place of the empty bed , and raised his eyes eloquently towards Heaven . 
`` Yes , '' replied D'Artagnan , `` yes , good Grimaud - now with the son he loved so much ! '' 
Grimaud left the chamber , and led the way to the hall , where , according to the custom of the province , the body was laid out , previously to being put away forever . 
D'Artagnan was struck at seeing two open coffins in the hall . 
In reply to the mute invitation of Grimaud , he approached , and saw in one of them Athos , still handsome in death , and , in the other , Raoul with his eyes closed , his cheeks pearly as those of the Palls of Virgil , with a smile on his violet lips . 
He shuddered at seeing the father and son , those two departed souls , represented on earth by two silent , melancholy bodies , incapable of touching each other , however close they might be . 
`` Raoul here ! '' 
murmured he . 
`` Oh ! 
Grimaud , why did you not tell me this ? '' 
Grimaud shook his head , and made no reply ; but taking D'Artagnan by the hand , he led him to the coffin , and showed him , under the thin winding - sheet , the black wounds by which life had escaped . 
The captain turned away his eyes , and , judging it was useless to question Grimaud , who would not answer , he recollected that M. de Beaufort 's secretary had written more than he , D'Artagnan , had had the courage to read . 
Taking up the recital of the affair which had cost Raoul his life , he found these words , which ended the concluding paragraph of the letter : `` Monseigneur le duc has ordered that the body of monsieur le vicomte should be embalmed , after the manner practiced by the Arabs when they wish their dead to be carried to their native land ; and monsieur le duc has appointed relays , so that the same confidential servant who brought up the young man might take back his remains to M. le Comte de la Fere . '' 
`` And so , '' thought D'Artagnan , `` I shall follow thy funeral , my dear boy - I , already old - I , who am of no value on earth - and I shall scatter dust upon that brow I kissed but two months since . 
God has willed it to be so . 
Thou hast willed it to be so , thyself . 
I have no longer the right even to weep . 
Thou hast chosen death ; it seemed to thee a preferable gift to life . '' 
At length arrived the moment when the chill remains of these two gentlemen were to be given back to mother earth . 
There was such an affluence of military and other people that up to the place of the sepulture , which was a little chapel on the plain , the road from the city was filled with horsemen and pedestrians in mourning . 
Athos had chosen for his resting-place the little inclosure of a chapel erected by himself near the boundary of his estates . 
He had had the stones , cut in 1550 , brought from an old Gothic manor-house in Berry , which had sheltered his early youth . 
The chapel , thus rebuilt , transported , was pleasing to the eye beneath its leafy curtains of poplars and sycamores . 
It was ministered in every Sunday , by the cure of the neighboring bourg , to whom Athos paid an allowance of two hundred francs for this service ; and all the vassals of his domain , with their families , came thither to hear mass , without having any occasion to go to the city . 
Behind the chapel extended , surrounded by two high hedges of hazel , elder and white thorn , and a deep ditch , the little inclosure - uncultivated , though gay in its sterility ; because the mosses there grew thick , wild heliotrope and ravenelles there mingled perfumes , while from beneath an ancient chestnut issued a crystal spring , a prisoner in its marble cistern , and on the thyme all around alighted thousands of bees from the neighboring plants , whilst chaffinches and redthroats sang cheerfully among the flower-spangled hedges . 
It was to this place the somber coffins were carried , attended by a silent and respectful crowd . 
The office of the dead being celebrated , the last adieux paid to the noble departed , the assembly dispersed , talking , along the roads , of the virtues and mild death of the father , of the hopes the son had given , and of his melancholy end upon the arid coast of Africa . 
Little by little , all noises were extinguished , like the lamps illuminating the humble nave . 
The minister bowed for the last time to the altar and the still fresh graves ; then , followed by his assistant , he slowly took the road back to the presbytery . 
D'Artagnan , left alone , perceived that night was coming on . 
He had forgotten the hour , thinking only of the dead . 
He arose from the oaken bench on which he was seated in the chapel , and wished , as the priest had done , to go and bid a last adieu to the double grave which contained his two lost friends . 
A woman was praying , kneeling on the moist earth . 
D'Artagnan stopped at the door of the chapel , to avoid disturbing her , and also to endeavor to find out who was the pious friend who performed this sacred duty with so much zeal and perseverance . 
The unknown had hidden her face in her hands , which were white as alabaster . 
From the noble simplicity of her costume , she must be a woman of distinction . 
Outside the inclosure were several horses mounted by servants ; a travelling carriage was in waiting for this lady . 
D'Artagnan in vain sought to make out what caused her delay . 
She continued praying , and frequently pressed her handkerchief to her face , by which D'Artagnan perceived she was weeping . 
He beheld her strike her breast with the compunction of a Christian woman . 
He heard her several times exclaim as from a wounded heart : `` Pardon ! 
pardon ! '' 
And as she appeared to abandon herself entirely to her grief , as she threw herself down , almost fainting , exhausted by complaints and prayers , D'Artagnan , touched by this love for his so much regretted friends , made a few steps towards the grave , in order to interrupt the melancholy colloquy of the penitent with the dead . 
But as soon as his step sounded on the gravel , the unknown raised her head , revealing to D'Artagnan a face aflood with tears , a well-known face . 
It was Mademoiselle de la Valliere ! 
