`` Where ` bouts do you live ? 
In this neighborhood ? ' 
`` No 'm . 
In Hookerville , seven mile below . 
I 've walked all the way and I 'm all tired out . '' 
`` Hungry , too , I reckon . 
I 'll find you something . '' 
`` No 'm , I ai n't hungry . 
I was so hungry I had to stop two miles below here at a farm ; so I ai n't hungry no more . 
It 's what makes me so late . 
My mother 's down sick , and out of money and everything , and I come to tell my uncle Abner Moore . 
He lives at the upper end of the town , she says . 
I hai n't ever been here before . 
Do you know him ? '' 
`` No ; but I do n't know everybody yet . 
I have n't lived here quite two weeks . 
It 's a considerable ways to the upper end of the town . 
You better stay here all night . 
Take off your bonnet . '' 
`` No , '' I says ; `` I 'll rest a while , I reckon , and go on . 
I ai n't afeared of the dark . '' 
She said she would n't let me go by myself , but her husband would be in by and by , maybe in a hour and a half , and she 'd send him along with me . 
Then she got to talking about her husband , and about her relations up the river , and her relations down the river , and about how much better off they used to was , and how they did n't know but they 'd made a mistake coming to our town , instead of letting well alone -- and so on and so on , till I was afeard I had made a mistake coming to her to find out what was going on in the town ; but by and by she dropped on to pap and the murder , and then I was pretty willing to let her clatter right along . 
She told about me and Tom Sawyer finding the six thousand dollars -LRB- only she got it ten -RRB- and all about pap and what a hard lot he was , and what a hard lot I was , and at last she got down to where I was murdered . 
I says : `` Who done it ? 
We 've heard considerable about these goings on down in Hookerville , but we do n't know who 't was that killed Huck Finn . '' 
`` Well , I reckon there 's a right smart chance of people HERE that 'd like to know who killed him . 
Some think old Finn done it himself . '' 
`` No -- is that so ? '' 
`` Most everybody thought it at first . 
He 'll never know how nigh he come to getting lynched . 
But before night they changed around and judged it was done by a runaway nigger named Jim . '' 
`` Why HE -- '' I stopped . 
I reckoned I better keep still . 
She run on , and never noticed I had put in at all : `` The nigger run off the very night Huck Finn was killed . 
So there 's a reward out for him -- three hundred dollars . 
And there 's a reward out for old Finn , too -- two hundred dollars . 
You see , he come to town the morning after the murder , and told about it , and was out with 'em on the ferryboat hunt , and right away after he up and left . 
Before night they wanted to lynch him , but he was gone , you see . 
Well , next day they found out the nigger was gone ; they found out he had n't ben seen sence ten o'clock the night the murder was done . 
So then they put it on him , you see ; and while they was full of it , next day , back comes old Finn , and went boo-hooing to Judge Thatcher to get money to hunt for the nigger all over Illinois with . 
The judge gave him some , and that evening he got drunk , and was around till after midnight with a couple of mighty hard - looking strangers , and then went off with them . 
Well , he hai n't come back sence , and they ai n't looking for him back till this thing blows over a little , for people thinks now that he killed his boy and fixed things so folks would think robbers done it , and then he 'd get Huck 's money without having to bother a long time with a lawsuit . 
People do say he war n't any too good to do it . 
Oh , he 's sly , I reckon . 
If he do n't come back for a year he 'll be all right . 
You ca n't prove anything on him , you know ; everything will be quieted down then , and he 'll walk in Huck 's money as easy as nothing . '' 
`` Yes , I reckon so , 'm . 
I do n't see nothing in the way of it . 
Has everybody quit thinking the nigger done it ? '' 
