Here 's the law a-standing ready to take a man 's son away from him -- a man 's own son , which he has had all the trouble and all the anxiety and all the expense of raising . 
Yes , just as that man has got that son raised at last , and ready to go to work and begin to do suthin ' for HIM and give him a rest , the law up and goes for him . 
And they call THAT govment ! 
That ai n't all , nuther . 
The law backs that old Judge Thatcher up and helps him to keep me out o ' my property . 
Here 's what the law does : The law takes a man worth six thousand dollars and up ` ards , and jams him into an old trap of a cabin like this , and lets him go round in clothes that ai n't fitten for a hog . 
They call that govment ! 
A man ca n't get his rights in a govment like this . 
Sometimes I 've a mighty notion to just leave the country for good and all . 
Yes , and I TOLD 'em so ; I told old Thatcher so to his face . 
Lots of 'em heard me , and can tell what I said . 
Says I , for two cents I 'd leave the blamed country and never come a-near it agin . 
Them 's the very words . 
I says look at my hat -- if you call it a hat -- but the lid raises up and the rest of it goes down till it 's below my chin , and then it ai n't rightly a hat at all , but more like my head was shoved up through a jint o ' stove-pipe . 
Look at it , says I -- such a hat for me to wear -- one of the wealthiest men in this town if I could git my rights . 
`` Oh , yes , this is a wonderful govment , wonderful . 
Why , looky here . 
There was a free nigger there from Ohio -- a mulatter , most as white as a white man . 
He had the whitest shirt on you ever see , too , and the shiniest hat ; and there ai n't a man in that town that 's got as fine clothes as what he had ; and he had a gold watch and chain , and a silver - headed cane -- the awfulest old gray-headed nabob in the State . 
And what do you think ? 
They said he was a p ` fessor in a college , and could talk all kinds of languages , and knowed everything . 
And that ai n't the wust . 
They said he could VOTE when he was at home . 
Well , that let me out . 
Thinks I , what is the country a-coming to ? 
It was ` lection day , and I was just about to go and vote myself if I war n't too drunk to get there ; but when they told me there was a State in this country where they 'd let that nigger vote , I drawed out . 
I says I 'll never vote agin . 
Them 's the very words I said ; they all heard me ; and the country may rot for all me -- I 'll never vote agin as long as I live . 
And to see the cool way of that nigger -- why , he would n't a give me the road if I had n't shoved him out o ' the way . 
I says to the people , why ai n't this nigger put up at auction and sold ? 
-- that 's what I want to know . 
And what do you reckon they said ? 
Why , they said he could n't be sold till he 'd been in the State six months , and he had n't been there that long yet . 
There , now -- that 's a specimen . 
They call that a govment that ca n't sell a free nigger till he 's been in the State six months . 
Here 's a govment that calls itself a govment , and lets on to be a govment , and thinks it is a govment , and yet 's got to set stock-still for six whole months before it can take a hold of a prowling , thieving , infernal , white-shirted free nigger , and -- '' Pap was agoing on so he never noticed where his old limber legs was taking him to , so he went head over heels over the tub of salt pork and barked both shins , and the rest of his speech was all the hottest kind of language -- mostly hove at the nigger and the govment , though he give the tub some , too , all along , here and there . 
He hopped around the cabin considerable , first on one leg and then on the other , holding first one shin and then the other one , and at last he let out with his left foot all of a sudden and fetched the tub a rattling kick . 
But it war n't good judgment , because that was the boot that had a couple of his toes leaking out of the front end of it ; so now he raised a howl that fairly made a body 's hair raise , and down he went in the dirt , and rolled there , and held his toes ; and the cussing he done then laid over anything he had ever done previous . 
He said so his own self afterwards . 
He had heard old Sowberry Hagan in his best days , and he said it laid over him , too ; but I reckon that was sort of piling it on , maybe . 
After supper pap took the jug , and said he had enough whisky there for two drunks and one delirium tremens . 
That was always his word . 
I judged he would be blind drunk in about an hour , and then I would steal the key , or saw myself out , one or t ` other . 
He drank and drank , and tumbled down on his blankets by and by ; but luck did n't run my way . 
He did n't go sound asleep , but was uneasy . 
He groaned and moaned and thrashed around this way and that for a long time . 
At last I got so sleepy I could n't keep my eyes open all I could do , and so before I knowed what I was about I was sound asleep , and the candle burning . 
I do n't know how long I was asleep , but all of a sudden there was an awful scream and I was up . 
There was pap looking wild , and skipping around every which way and yelling about snakes . 
He said they was crawling up his legs ; and then he would give a jump and scream , and say one had bit him on the cheek -- but I could n't see no snakes . 
