Seegars , I bet you -- and cost five cents apiece , solid cash . 
Steamboat captains is always rich , and get sixty dollars a month , and THEY do n't care a cent what a thing costs , you know , long as they want it . 
Stick a candle in your pocket ; I ca n't rest , Jim , till we give her a rummaging . 
Do you reckon Tom Sawyer would ever go by this thing ? 
Not for pie , he would n't . 
He 'd call it an adventure -- that 's what he 'd call it ; and he 'd land on that wreck if it was his last act . 
And would n't he throw style into it ? 
-- would n't he spread himself , nor nothing ? 
Why , you 'd think it was Christopher C'lumbus discovering Kingdom-Come . 
I wish Tom Sawyer WAS here . '' 
Jim he grumbled a little , but give in . 
He said we must n't talk any more than we could help , and then talk mighty low . 
The lightning showed us the wreck again just in time , and we fetched the stabboard derrick , and made fast there . 
The deck was high out here . 
We went sneaking down the slope of it to labboard , in the dark , towards the texas , feeling our way slow with our feet , and spreading our hands out to fend off the guys , for it was so dark we could n't see no sign of them . 
Pretty soon we struck the forward end of the skylight , and clumb on to it ; and the next step fetched us in front of the captain 's door , which was open , and by Jimminy , away down through the texas-hall we see a light ! 
and all in the same second we seem to hear low voices in yonder ! 
Jim whispered and said he was feeling powerful sick , and told me to come along . 
I says , all right , and was going to start for the raft ; but just then I heard a voice wail out and say : `` Oh , please do n't , boys ; I swear I wo n't ever tell ! '' 
Another voice said , pretty loud : `` It 's a lie , Jim Turner . 
You 've acted this way before . 
You always want more 'n your share of the truck , and you 've always got it , too , because you 've swore ' t if you did n't you 'd tell . 
But this time you 've said it jest one time too many . 
You 're the meanest , treacherousest hound in this country . '' 
By this time Jim was gone for the raft . 
I was just a-biling with curiosity ; and I says to myself , Tom Sawyer would n't back out now , and so I wo n't either ; I 'm a-going to see what 's going on here . 
So I dropped on my hands and knees in the little passage , and crept aft in the dark till there war n't but one stateroom betwixt me and the cross-hall of the texas . 
Then in there I see a man stretched on the floor and tied hand and foot , and two men standing over him , and one of them had a dim lantern in his hand , and the other one had a pistol . 
This one kept pointing the pistol at the man 's head on the floor , and saying : `` I 'd LIKE to ! 
And I orter , too -- a mean skunk ! '' 
The man on the floor would shrivel up and say , `` Oh , please do n't , Bill ; I hai n't ever goin ' to tell . '' 
And every time he said that the man with the lantern would laugh and say : '' ` Deed you AI N'T ! 
You never said no truer thing 'n that , you bet you . '' 
And once he said : `` Hear him beg ! 
and yit if we had n't got the best of him and tied him he 'd a killed us both . 
And what FOR ? 
Jist for noth ` n. Jist because we stood on our RIGHTS -- that 's what for . 
But I lay you ai n't a-goin ' to threaten nobody any more , Jim Turner . 
Put UP that pistol , Bill . '' 
Bill says : `` I do n't want to , Jake Packard . 
I 'm for killin ' him -- and did n't he kill old Hatfield jist the same way -- and do n't he deserve it ? '' 
`` But I do n't WANT him killed , and I 've got my reasons for it . '' 
`` Bless yo ' heart for them words , Jake Packard ! 
I 'll never forgit you long 's I live ! '' 
says the man on the floor , sort of blubbering . 
Packard did n't take no notice of that , but hung up his lantern on a nail and started towards where I was there in the dark , and motioned Bill to come . 
I crawfished as fast as I could about two yards , but the boat slanted so that I could n't make very good time ; so to keep from getting run over and catched I crawled into a stateroom on the upper side . 
The man came a-pawing along in the dark , and when Packard got to my stateroom , he says : `` Here -- come in here . '' 
And in he come , and Bill after him . 
But before they got in I was up in the upper berth , cornered , and sorry I come . 
