Well , next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out of oak laths , and begun to practice the sword fight -- the duke called himself Richard III. ; and the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was grand to see . 
But by and by the king tripped and fell overboard , and after that they took a rest , and had a talk about all kinds of adventures they 'd had in other times along the river . 
After dinner the duke says : `` Well , Capet , we 'll want to make this a first-class show , you know , so I guess we 'll add a little more to it . 
We want a little something to answer encores with , anyway . '' 
`` What 's onkores , Bilgewater ? '' 
The duke told him , and then says : `` I 'll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor 's hornpipe ; and you -- well , let me see -- oh , I 've got it -- you can do Hamlet 's soliloquy . '' 
`` Hamlet 's which ? '' 
`` Hamlet 's soliloquy , you know ; the most celebrated thing in Shakespeare . 
Ah , it 's sublime , sublime ! 
Always fetches the house . 
I have n't got it in the book -- I 've only got one volume -- but I reckon I can piece it out from memory . 
I 'll just walk up and down a minute , and see if I can call it back from recollection 's vaults . '' 
So he went to marching up and down , thinking , and frowning horrible every now and then ; then he would hoist up his eyebrows ; next he would squeeze his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan ; next he would sigh , and next he 'd let on to drop a tear . 
It was beautiful to see him . 
By and by he got it . 
He told us to give attention . 
Then he strikes a most noble attitude , with one leg shoved forwards , and his arms stretched away up , and his head tilted back , looking up at the sky ; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth ; and after that , all through his speech , he howled , and spread around , and swelled up his chest , and just knocked the spots out of any acting ever I see before . 
This is the speech -- I learned it , easy enough , while he was learning it to the king : To be , or not to be ; that is the bare bodkin That makes calamity of so long life ; For who would fardels bear , till Birnam Wood do come to Dunsinane , But that the fear of something after death Murders the innocent sleep , Great nature 's second course , And makes us rather sling the arrows of outrageous fortune Than fly to others that we know not of . 
There 's the respect must give us pause : Wake Duncan with thy knocking ! 
I would thou couldst ; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time , The oppressor 's wrong , the proud man 's contumely , The law 's delay , and the quietus which his pangs might take , In the dead waste and middle of the night , when churchyards yawn In customary suits of solemn black , But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns , Breathes forth contagion on the world , And thus the native hue of resolution , like the poor cat i ' the adage , Is sicklied o'er with care , And all the clouds that lowered o'er our housetops , With this regard their currents turn awry , And lose the name of action . 
'T is a consummation devoutly to be wished . 
But soft you , the fair Ophelia : Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws , But get thee to a nunnery -- go ! 
Well , the old man he liked that speech , and he mighty soon got it so he could do it first-rate . 
It seemed like he was just born for it ; and when he had his hand in and was excited , it was perfectly lovely the way he would rip and tear and rair up behind when he was getting it off . 
The first chance we got the duke he had some showbills printed ; and after that , for two or three days as we floated along , the raft was a most uncommon lively place , for there war n't nothing but sword fighting and rehearsing -- as the duke called it -- going on all the time . 
One morning , when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw , we come in sight of a little one-horse town in a big bend ; so we tied up about three-quarters of a mile above it , in the mouth of a crick which was shut in like a tunnel by the cypress trees , and all of us but Jim took the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that place for our show . 
We struck it mighty lucky ; there was going to be a circus there that afternoon , and the country people was already beginning to come in , in all kinds of old shackly wagons , and on horses . 
The circus would leave before night , so our show would have a pretty good chance . 
The duke he hired the courthouse , and we went around and stuck up our bills . 
They read like this : Shaksperean Revival ! ! ! 
Wonderful Attraction ! 
For One Night Only ! 
The world renowned tragedians , David Garrick the Younger , of Drury Lane Theatre London , and Edmund Kean the elder , of the Royal Haymarket Theatre , Whitechapel , Pudding Lane , Piccadilly , London , and the Royal Continental Theatres , in their sublime Shaksperean Spectacle entitled The Balcony Scene in Romeo and Juliet ! ! ! 
Romeo ... Mr. Garrick Juliet ... Mr. Kean Assisted by the whole strength of the company ! 
New costumes , new scenes , new appointments ! 
Also : The thrilling , masterly , and blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In Richard III . ! ! ! 
Richard III ... Mr. Garrick Richmond ... Mr. Kean Also : -LRB- by special request -RRB- Hamlet 's Immortal Soliloquy ! ! 
By The Illustrious Kean ! 
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris ! 
For One Night Only , On account of imperative European engagements ! 
Admission 25 cents ; children and servants , 10 cents . 
Then we went loafing around town . 
The stores and houses was most all old , shackly , dried up frame concerns that had n't ever been painted ; they was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts , so as to be out of reach of the water when the river was over-flowed . 
The houses had little gardens around them , but they did n't seem to raise hardly anything in them but jimpson-weeds , and sunflowers , and ash piles , and old curled-up boots and shoes , and pieces of bottles , and rags , and played-out tinware . 
The fences was made of different kinds of boards , nailed on at different times ; and they leaned every which way , and had gates that did n't generly have but one hinge -- a leather one . 
Some of the fences had been white - washed some time or another , but the duke said it was in Clumbus ' time , like enough . 
There was generly hogs in the garden , and people driving them out . 
All the stores was along one street . 
They had white domestic awnings in front , and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts . 
There was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings , and loafers roosting on them all day long , whittling them with their Barlow knives ; and chawing tobacco , and gaping and yawning and stretching -- a mighty ornery lot . 
