So they 'd got to work that off -- I never see such a girafft as the king was for wanting to swallow EVERYTHING . 
Well , whilst they was at it a steamboat landed , and in about two minutes up comes a crowd a-whooping and yelling and laughing and carrying on , and singing out : `` HERE 'S your opposition line ! 
here 's your two sets o ' heirs to old Peter Wilks -- and you pays your money and you takes your choice ! '' 
THEY was fetching a very nice-looking old gentleman along , and a nice - looking younger one , with his right arm in a sling . 
And , my souls , how the people yelled and laughed , and kept it up . 
But I did n't see no joke about it , and I judged it would strain the duke and the king some to see any . 
I reckoned they 'd turn pale . 
But no , nary a pale did THEY turn . 
The duke he never let on he suspicioned what was up , but just went a goo - gooing around , happy and satisfied , like a jug that 's googling out buttermilk ; and as for the king , he just gazed and gazed down sorrowful on them new-comers like it give him the stomach-ache in his very heart to think there could be such frauds and rascals in the world . 
Oh , he done it admirable . 
Lots of the principal people gethered around the king , to let him see they was on his side . 
That old gentleman that had just come looked all puzzled to death . 
Pretty soon he begun to speak , and I see straight off he pronounced LIKE an Englishman -- not the king 's way , though the king 's WAS pretty good for an imitation . 
I ca n't give the old gent 's words , nor I ca n't imitate him ; but he turned around to the crowd , and says , about like this : `` This is a surprise to me which I was n't looking for ; and I 'll acknowledge , candid and frank , I ai n't very well fixed to meet it and answer it ; for my brother and me has had misfortunes ; he 's broke his arm , and our baggage got put off at a town above here last night in the night by a mistake . 
I am Peter Wilks ' brother Harvey , and this is his brother William , which ca n't hear nor speak -- and ca n't even make signs to amount to much , now ' t he 's only got one hand to work them with . 
We are who we say we are ; and in a day or two , when I get the baggage , I can prove it . 
But up till then I wo n't say nothing more , but go to the hotel and wait . '' 
So him and the new dummy started off ; and the king he laughs , and blethers out : `` Broke his arm -- VERY likely , AI N'T it ? 
-- and very convenient , too , for a fraud that 's got to make signs , and ai n't learnt how . 
Lost their baggage ! 
That 's MIGHTY good ! 
-- and mighty ingenious -- under the CIRCUMSTANCES ! '' 
So he laughed again ; and so did everybody else , except three or four , or maybe half a dozen . 
One of these was that doctor ; another one was a sharp-looking gentleman , with a carpet-bag of the old-fashioned kind made out of carpet-stuff , that had just come off of the steamboat and was talking to him in a low voice , and glancing towards the king now and then and nodding their heads -- it was Levi Bell , the lawyer that was gone up to Louisville ; and another one was a big rough husky that come along and listened to all the old gentleman said , and was listening to the king now . 
And when the king got done this husky up and says : `` Say , looky here ; if you are Harvey Wilks , when 'd you come to this town ? '' 
`` The day before the funeral , friend , '' says the king . 
`` But what time o ' day ? '' 
`` In the evenin ' -- ` bout an hour er two before sundown . '' 
`` HOW 'D you come ? '' 
`` I come down on the Susan Powell from Cincinnati . '' 
`` Well , then , how 'd you come to be up at the Pint in the MORNIN ' -- in a canoe ? '' 
`` I war n't up at the Pint in the mornin ' . '' 
`` It 's a lie . '' 
Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk that way to an old man and a preacher . 
`` Preacher be hanged , he 's a fraud and a liar . 
He was up at the Pint that mornin ' . 
I live up there , do n't I ? 
Well , I was up there , and he was up there . 
I see him there . 
He come in a canoe , along with Tim Collins and a boy . '' 
The doctor he up and says : `` Would you know the boy again if you was to see him , Hines ? '' 
`` I reckon I would , but I do n't know . 
Why , yonder he is , now . 
I know him perfectly easy . '' 
It was me he pointed at . 
The doctor says : `` Neighbors , I do n't know whether the new couple is frauds or not ; but if THESE two ai n't frauds , I am an idiot , that 's all . 
I think it 's our duty to see that they do n't get away from here till we 've looked into this thing . 
Come along , Hines ; come along , the rest of you . 
We 'll take these fellows to the tavern and affront them with t ` other couple , and I reckon we 'll find out SOMETHING before we get through . '' 
It was nuts for the crowd , though maybe not for the king 's friends ; so we all started . 
