She was tore up a good deal -- one en ' of her was ; but dey war n't no great harm done , on ' y our traps was mos ' all los ' . 
Ef we hadn ' dive ' so deep en swum so fur under water , en de night hadn ' ben so dark , en we war n't so sk ` yerd , en ben sich punkin-heads , as de sayin ' is , we 'd a seed de raf ' . 
But it 's jis ' as well we did n't , ` kase now she 's all fixed up agin mos ' as good as new , en we 's got a new lot o ' stuff , in de place o ' what ` uz los ' . '' 
`` Why , how did you get hold of the raft again , Jim -- did you catch her ? '' 
`` How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods ? 
No ; some er de niggers foun ' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben ' , en dey hid her in a crick ` mongst de willows , en dey wuz so much jawin ' ` bout which un ` um she b ` long to de mos ' dat I come to heah ` bout it pooty soon , so I ups en settles de trouble by tellin ' ` um she do n't b ` long to none uv um , but to you en me ; en I ast 'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman 's propaty , en git a hid 'n for it ? 
Den I gin 'm ten cents apiece , en dey ` uz mighty well satisfied , en wisht some mo ' raf 's ` ud come along en make 'm rich agin . 
Dey 's mighty good to me , dese niggers is , en whatever I wants 'm to do fur me I doan ' have to ast 'm twice , honey . 
Dat Jack 's a good nigger , en pooty smart . '' 
`` Yes , he is . 
He ai n't ever told me you was here ; told me to come , and he 'd show me a lot of water-moccasins . 
If anything happens HE ai n't mixed up in it . 
He can say he never seen us together , and it 'll be the truth . '' 
I do n't want to talk much about the next day . 
I reckon I 'll cut it pretty short . 
I waked up about dawn , and was a-going to turn over and go to sleep again when I noticed how still it was -- did n't seem to be anybody stirring . 
That war n't usual . 
Next I noticed that Buck was up and gone . 
Well , I gets up , a-wondering , and goes down stairs -- nobody around ; everything as still as a mouse . 
Just the same outside . 
Thinks I , what does it mean ? 
Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack , and says : `` What 's it all about ? '' 
Says he : `` Do n't you know , Mars Jawge ? '' 
`` No , '' says I , `` I do n't . '' 
`` Well , den , Miss Sophia 's run off ! 
` deed she has . 
She run off in de night some time -- nobody do n't know jis ' when ; run off to get married to dat young Harney Shepherdson , you know -- leastways , so dey ` spec . 
De fambly foun ' it out ` bout half an hour ago -- maybe a little mo ' -- en ' I TELL you dey war n't no time los ' . 
Sich another hurryin ' up guns en hosses YOU never see ! 
De women folks has gone for to stir up de relations , en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him ` fo ' he kin git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia . 
I reck 'n dey 's gwyne to be mighty rough times . '' 
`` Buck went off ` thout waking me up . '' 
`` Well , I reck 'n he DID ! 
Dey war n't gwyne to mix you up in it . 
Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en ` lowed he 's gwyne to fetch home a Shepherdson or bust . 
Well , dey 'll be plenty un 'm dah , I reck ` n , en you bet you he 'll fetch one ef he gits a chanst . '' 
I took up the river road as hard as I could put . 
By and by I begin to hear guns a good ways off . 
When I came in sight of the log store and the woodpile where the steamboats lands I worked along under the trees and brush till I got to a good place , and then I clumb up into the forks of a cottonwood that was out of reach , and watched . 
There was a wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the tree , and first I was going to hide behind that ; but maybe it was luckier I did n't . 
There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open place before the log store , cussing and yelling , and trying to get at a couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the steamboat landing ; but they could n't come it . 
Every time one of them showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at . 
The two boys was squatting back to back behind the pile , so they could watch both ways . 
By and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling . 
They started riding towards the store ; then up gets one of the boys , draws a steady bead over the wood-rank , and drops one of them out of his saddle . 
All the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started to carry him to the store ; and that minute the two boys started on the run . 
They got half way to the tree I was in before the men noticed . 
Then the men see them , and jumped on their horses and took out after them . 
They gained on the boys , but it did n't do no good , the boys had too good a start ; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree , and slipped in behind it , and so they had the bulge on the men again . 
One of the boys was Buck , and the other was a slim young chap about nineteen years old . 
