I 'm jist a-freezn ' for something fresh , anyway . 
Le 's commence right away . '' 
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was , and said he was used to being Romeo , so the king could be Juliet . 
`` But if Juliet 's such a young gal , duke , my peeled head and my white whiskers is goin ' to look oncommon odd on her , maybe . '' 
`` No , do n't you worry ; these country jakes wo n't ever think of that . 
Besides , you know , you 'll be in costume , and that makes all the difference in the world ; Juliet 's in a balcony , enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed , and she 's got on her night-gown and her ruffled nightcap . 
Here are the costumes for the parts . '' 
He got out two or three curtain-calico suits , which he said was meedyevil armor for Richard III . 
and t ` other chap , and a long white cotton nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match . 
The king was satisfied ; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the most splendid spread-eagle way , prancing around and acting at the same time , to show how it had got to be done ; then he give the book to the king and told him to get his part by heart . 
There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend , and after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run in daylight without it being dangersome for Jim ; so he allowed he would go down to the town and fix that thing . 
The king allowed he would go , too , and see if he could n't strike something . 
We was out of coffee , so Jim said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some . 
When we got there there war n't nobody stirring ; streets empty , and perfectly dead and still , like Sunday . 
We found a sick nigger sunning himself in a back yard , and he said everybody that war n't too young or too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting , about two mile back in the woods . 
The king got the directions , and allowed he 'd go and work that camp-meeting for all it was worth , and I might go , too . 
The duke said what he was after was a printing-office . 
We found it ; a little bit of a concern , up over a carpenter shop -- carpenters and printers all gone to the meeting , and no doors locked . 
It was a dirty , littered-up place , and had ink marks , and handbills with pictures of horses and runaway niggers on them , all over the walls . 
The duke shed his coat and said he was all right now . 
So me and the king lit out for the camp-meeting . 
We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping , for it was a most awful hot day . 
There was as much as a thousand people there from twenty mile around . 
The woods was full of teams and wagons , hitched everywheres , feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off the flies . 
There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with branches , where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell , and piles of watermelons and green corn and such-like truck . 
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds , only they was bigger and held crowds of people . 
The benches was made out of outside slabs of logs , with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into for legs . 
They did n't have no backs . 
The preachers had high platforms to stand on at one end of the sheds . 
The women had on sun-bonnets ; and some had linsey-woolsey frocks , some gingham ones , and a few of the young ones had on calico . 
Some of the young men was barefooted , and some of the children did n't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen shirt . 
Some of the old women was knitting , and some of the young folks was courting on the sly . 
The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn . 
He lined out two lines , everybody sung it , and it was kind of grand to hear it , there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way ; then he lined out two more for them to sing -- and so on . 
The people woke up more and more , and sung louder and louder ; and towards the end some begun to groan , and some begun to shout . 
Then the preacher begun to preach , and begun in earnest , too ; and went weaving first to one side of the platform and then the other , and then a-leaning down over the front of it , with his arms and his body going all the time , and shouting his words out with all his might ; and every now and then he would hold up his Bible and spread it open , and kind of pass it around this way and that , shouting , `` It 's the brazen serpent in the wilderness ! 
Look upon it and live ! '' 
And people would shout out , `` Glory ! 
-- A-a-MEN ! '' 
And so he went on , and the people groaning and crying and saying amen : `` Oh , come to the mourners ' bench ! 
come , black with sin ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , sick and sore ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , lame and halt and blind ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , pore and needy , sunk in shame ! 
-LRB- A-A-MEN ! -RRB- 
come , all that 's worn and soiled and suffering ! 
-- come with a broken spirit ! 
