The stars were shining , and the leaves rustled in the woods ever so mournful ; and I heard an owl , away off , who-whooing about somebody that was dead , and a whippowill and a dog crying about somebody that was going to die ; and the wind was trying to whisper something to me , and I could n't make out what it was , and so it made the cold shivers run over me . 
Then away out in the woods I heard that kind of a sound that a ghost makes when it wants to tell about something that 's on its mind and ca n't make itself understood , and so ca n't rest easy in its grave , and has to go about that way every night grieving . 
I got so down-hearted and scared I did wish I had some company . 
Pretty soon a spider went crawling up my shoulder , and I flipped it off and it lit in the candle ; and before I could budge it was all shriveled up . 
I did n't need anybody to tell me that that was an awful bad sign and would fetch me some bad luck , so I was scared and most shook the clothes off of me . 
I got up and turned around in my tracks three times and crossed my breast every time ; and then I tied up a little lock of my hair with a thread to keep witches away . 
But I had n't no confidence . 
You do that when you 've lost a horseshoe that you 've found , instead of nailing it up over the door , but I had n't ever heard anybody say it was any way to keep off bad luck when you 'd killed a spider . 
I set down again , a-shaking all over , and got out my pipe for a smoke ; for the house was all as still as death now , and so the widow would n't know . 
Well , after a long time I heard the clock away off in the town go boom -- boom -- boom -- twelve licks ; and all still again -- stiller than ever . 
Pretty soon I heard a twig snap down in the dark amongst the trees -- something was a stirring . 
I set still and listened . 
Directly I could just barely hear a `` me-yow ! 
me-yow ! '' 
down there . 
That was good ! 
Says I , `` me-yow ! 
me-yow ! '' 
as soft as I could , and then I put out the light and scrambled out of the window on to the shed . 
Then I slipped down to the ground and crawled in among the trees , and , sure enough , there was Tom Sawyer waiting for me . 
WE went tiptoeing along a path amongst the trees back towards the end of the widow 's garden , stooping down so as the branches would n't scrape our heads . 
When we was passing by the kitchen I fell over a root and made a noise . 
We scrouched down and laid still . 
Miss Watson 's big nigger , named Jim , was setting in the kitchen door ; we could see him pretty clear , because there was a light behind him . 
He got up and stretched his neck out about a minute , listening . 
Then he says : `` Who dah ? '' 
He listened some more ; then he come tiptoeing down and stood right between us ; we could a touched him , nearly . 
Well , likely it was minutes and minutes that there war n't a sound , and we all there so close together . 
There was a place on my ankle that got to itching , but I das n't scratch it ; and then my ear begun to itch ; and next my back , right between my shoulders . 
Seemed like I 'd die if I could n't scratch . 
Well , I 've noticed that thing plenty times since . 
If you are with the quality , or at a funeral , or trying to go to sleep when you ai n't sleepy -- if you are anywheres where it wo n't do for you to scratch , why you will itch all over in upwards of a thousand places . 
Pretty soon Jim says : `` Say , who is you ? 
Whar is you ? 
Dog my cats ef I didn ' hear sumf ` n. Well , I know what I 's gwyne to do : I 's gwyne to set down here and listen tell I hears it agin . '' 
So he set down on the ground betwixt me and Tom . 
He leaned his back up against a tree , and stretched his legs out till one of them most touched one of mine . 
My nose begun to itch . 
It itched till the tears come into my eyes . 
But I das n't scratch . 
Then it begun to itch on the inside . 
Next I got to itching underneath . 
I did n't know how I was going to set still . 
This miserableness went on as much as six or seven minutes ; but it seemed a sight longer than that . 
I was itching in eleven different places now . 
I reckoned I could n't stand it more 'n a minute longer , but I set my teeth hard and got ready to try . 
Just then Jim begun to breathe heavy ; next he begun to snore -- and then I was pretty soon comfortable again . 
Tom he made a sign to me -- kind of a little noise with his mouth -- and we went creeping away on our hands and knees . 
When we was ten foot off Tom whispered to me , and wanted to tie Jim to the tree for fun . 
But I said no ; he might wake and make a disturbance , and then they 'd find out I war n't in . 
