it hurt her arm so . 
Then she told me to try for the next one . 
I wanted to be getting away before the old man got back , but of course I did n't let on . 
I got the thing , and the first rat that showed his nose I let drive , and if he 'd a stayed where he was he 'd a been a tolerable sick rat . 
She said that was first-rate , and she reckoned I would hive the next one . 
She went and got the lump of lead and fetched it back , and brought along a hank of yarn which she wanted me to help her with . 
I held up my two hands and she put the hank over them , and went on talking about her and her husband 's matters . 
But she broke off to say : `` Keep your eye on the rats . 
You better have the lead in your lap , handy . '' 
So she dropped the lump into my lap just at that moment , and I clapped my legs together on it and she went on talking . 
But only about a minute . 
Then she took off the hank and looked me straight in the face , and very pleasant , and says : `` Come , now , what 's your real name ? '' 
`` Wh -- what , mum ? '' 
`` What 's your real name ? 
Is it Bill , or Tom , or Bob ? 
-- or what is it ? '' 
I reckon I shook like a leaf , and I did n't know hardly what to do . 
But I says : `` Please to do n't poke fun at a poor girl like me , mum . 
If I 'm in the way here , I 'll -- '' `` No , you wo n't . 
Set down and stay where you are . 
I ai n't going to hurt you , and I ai n't going to tell on you , nuther . 
You just tell me your secret , and trust me . 
I 'll keep it ; and , what 's more , I 'll help you . 
So 'll my old man if you want him to . 
You see , you 're a runaway ` prentice , that 's all . 
It ai n't anything . 
There ai n't no harm in it . 
You 've been treated bad , and you made up your mind to cut . 
Bless you , child , I would n't tell on you . 
Tell me all about it now , that 's a good boy . '' 
So I said it would n't be no use to try to play it any longer , and I would just make a clean breast and tell her everything , but she mus n't go back on her promise . 
Then I told her my father and mother was dead , and the law had bound me out to a mean old farmer in the country thirty mile back from the river , and he treated me so bad I could n't stand it no longer ; he went away to be gone a couple of days , and so I took my chance and stole some of his daughter 's old clothes and cleared out , and I had been three nights coming the thirty miles . 
I traveled nights , and hid daytimes and slept , and the bag of bread and meat I carried from home lasted me all the way , and I had a-plenty . 
I said I believed my uncle Abner Moore would take care of me , and so that was why I struck out for this town of Goshen . 
`` Goshen , child ? 
This ai n't Goshen . 
This is St. Petersburg . 
Goshen 's ten mile further up the river . 
Who told you this was Goshen ? '' 
`` Why , a man I met at daybreak this morning , just as I was going to turn into the woods for my regular sleep . 
He told me when the roads forked I must take the right hand , and five mile would fetch me to Goshen . '' 
`` He was drunk , I reckon . 
He told you just exactly wrong . '' 
`` Well , he did act like he was drunk , but it ai n't no matter now . 
I got to be moving along . 
I 'll fetch Goshen before daylight . '' 
`` Hold on a minute . 
I 'll put you up a snack to eat . 
You might want it . '' 
So she put me up a snack , and says : `` Say , when a cow 's laying down , which end of her gets up first ? 
