A tow-head is a sandbar that has cottonwoods on it as thick as harrow-teeth . 
We had mountains on the Missouri shore and heavy timber on the Illinois side , and the channel was down the Missouri shore at that place , so we war n't afraid of anybody running across us . 
We laid there all day , and watched the rafts and steamboats spin down the Missouri shore , and up - bound steamboats fight the big river in the middle . 
I told Jim all about the time I had jabbering with that woman ; and Jim said she was a smart one , and if she was to start after us herself she would n't set down and watch a camp fire -- no , sir , she 'd fetch a dog . 
Well , then , I said , why could n't she tell her husband to fetch a dog ? 
Jim said he bet she did think of it by the time the men was ready to start , and he believed they must a gone up-town to get a dog and so they lost all that time , or else we would n't be here on a towhead sixteen or seventeen mile below the village -- no , indeedy , we would be in that same old town again . 
So I said I did n't care what was the reason they did n't get us as long as they did n't . 
When it was beginning to come on dark we poked our heads out of the cottonwood thicket , and looked up and down and across ; nothing in sight ; so Jim took up some of the top planks of the raft and built a snug wigwam to get under in blazing weather and rainy , and to keep the things dry . 
Jim made a floor for the wigwam , and raised it a foot or more above the level of the raft , so now the blankets and all the traps was out of reach of steamboat waves . 
Right in the middle of the wigwam we made a layer of dirt about five or six inches deep with a frame around it for to hold it to its place ; this was to build a fire on in sloppy weather or chilly ; the wigwam would keep it from being seen . 
We made an extra steering-oar , too , because one of the others might get broke on a snag or something . 
We fixed up a short forked stick to hang the old lantern on , because we must always light the lantern whenever we see a steamboat coming down - stream , to keep from getting run over ; but we would n't have to light it for up-stream boats unless we see we was in what they call a `` crossing '' ; for the river was pretty high yet , very low banks being still a little under water ; so up-bound boats did n't always run the channel , but hunted easy water . 
This second night we run between seven and eight hours , with a current that was making over four mile an hour . 
We catched fish and talked , and we took a swim now and then to keep off sleepiness . 
It was kind of solemn , drifting down the big , still river , laying on our backs looking up at the stars , and we did n't ever feel like talking loud , and it war n't often that we laughed -- only a little kind of a low chuckle . 
We had mighty good weather as a general thing , and nothing ever happened to us at all -- that night , nor the next , nor the next . 
Every night we passed towns , some of them away up on black hillsides , nothing but just a shiny bed of lights ; not a house could you see . 
The fifth night we passed St. Louis , and it was like the whole world lit up . 
In St. Petersburg they used to say there was twenty or thirty thousand people in St. Louis , but I never believed it till I see that wonderful spread of lights at two o'clock that still night . 
There war n't a sound there ; everybody was asleep . 
Every night now I used to slip ashore towards ten o'clock at some little village , and buy ten or fifteen cents ' worth of meal or bacon or other stuff to eat ; and sometimes I lifted a chicken that war n't roosting comfortable , and took him along . 
Pap always said , take a chicken when you get a chance , because if you do n't want him yourself you can easy find somebody that does , and a good deed ai n't ever forgot . 
I never see pap when he did n't want the chicken himself , but that is what he used to say , anyway . 
Mornings before daylight I slipped into cornfields and borrowed a watermelon , or a mushmelon , or a punkin , or some new corn , or things of that kind . 
Pap always said it war n't no harm to borrow things if you was meaning to pay them back some time ; but the widow said it war n't anything but a soft name for stealing , and no decent body would do it . 
Jim said he reckoned the widow was partly right and pap was partly right ; so the best way would be for us to pick out two or three things from the list and say we would n't borrow them any more -- then he reckoned it would n't be no harm to borrow the others . 
So we talked it over all one night , drifting along down the river , trying to make up our minds whether to drop the watermelons , or the cantelopes , or the mushmelons , or what . 
But towards daylight we got it all settled satisfactory , and concluded to drop crabapples and p ` simmons . 
We war n't feeling just right before that , but it was all comfortable now . 
I was glad the way it come out , too , because crabapples ai n't ever good , and the p ` simmons would n't be ripe for two or three months yet . 
We shot a water-fowl now and then that got up too early in the morning or did n't go to bed early enough in the evening . 
Take it all round , we lived pretty high . 
The fifth night below St. Louis we had a big storm after midnight , with a power of thunder and lightning , and the rain poured down in a solid sheet . 
We stayed in the wigwam and let the raft take care of itself . 
When the lightning glared out we could see a big straight river ahead , and high , rocky bluffs on both sides . 
By and by says I , `` Hel-LO , Jim , looky yonder ! '' 
It was a steamboat that had killed herself on a rock . 
We was drifting straight down for her . 
The lightning showed her very distinct . 
She was leaning over , with part of her upper deck above water , and you could see every little chimbly-guy clean and clear , and a chair by the big bell , with an old slouch hat hanging on the back of it , when the flashes come . 
Well , it being away in the night and stormy , and all so mysterious-like , I felt just the way any other boy would a felt when I see that wreck laying there so mournful and lonesome in the middle of the river . 
I wanted to get aboard of her and slink around a little , and see what there was there . 
So I says : `` Le 's land on her , Jim . '' 
But Jim was dead against it at first . 
He says : `` I doan ' want to go fool 'n ` long er no wrack . 
We 's doin ' blame ' well , en we better let blame ' well alone , as de good book says . 
Like as not dey 's a watchman on dat wrack . '' 
`` Watchman your grandmother , '' I says ; `` there ai n't nothing to watch but the texas and the pilot-house ; and do you reckon anybody 's going to resk his life for a texas and a pilot-house such a night as this , when it 's likely to break up and wash off down the river any minute ? '' 
Jim could n't say nothing to that , so he did n't try . 
`` And besides , '' I says , `` we might borrow something worth having out of the captain 's stateroom . 
