Then they stood there , with their hands on the ledge of the berth , and talked . 
I could n't see them , but I could tell where they was by the whisky they 'd been having . 
I was glad I did n't drink whisky ; but it would n't made much difference anyway , because most of the time they could n't a treed me because I did n't breathe . 
I was too scared . 
And , besides , a body COULD N'T breathe and hear such talk . 
They talked low and earnest . 
Bill wanted to kill Turner . 
He says : `` He 's said he 'll tell , and he will . 
If we was to give both our shares to him NOW it would n't make no difference after the row and the way we 've served him . 
Shore 's you 're born , he 'll turn State 's evidence ; now you hear ME . 
I 'm for putting him out of his troubles . '' 
`` So 'm I , '' says Packard , very quiet . 
`` Blame it , I 'd sorter begun to think you was n't . 
Well , then , that 's all right . 
Le 's go and do it . '' 
`` Hold on a minute ; I hai n't had my say yit . 
You listen to me . 
Shooting 's good , but there 's quieter ways if the thing 's GOT to be done . 
But what I say is this : it ai n't good sense to go court 'n around after a halter if you can git at what you 're up to in some way that 's jist as good and at the same time do n't bring you into no resks . 
Ai n't that so ? '' 
`` You bet it is . 
But how you goin ' to manage it this time ? '' 
`` Well , my idea is this : we 'll rustle around and gather up whatever pickins we 've overlooked in the staterooms , and shove for shore and hide the truck . 
Then we 'll wait . 
Now I say it ai n't a-goin ' to be more 'n two hours befo ' this wrack breaks up and washes off down the river . 
See ? 
He 'll be drownded , and wo n't have nobody to blame for it but his own self . 
I reckon that 's a considerble sight better 'n killin ' of him . 
I 'm unfavorable to killin ' a man as long as you can git aroun ' it ; it ai n't good sense , it ai n't good morals . 
Ai n't I right ? '' 
`` Yes , I reck 'n you are . 
But s ` pose she DO N'T break up and wash off ? '' 
`` Well , we can wait the two hours anyway and see , ca n't we ? '' 
`` All right , then ; come along . '' 
So they started , and I lit out , all in a cold sweat , and scrambled forward . 
It was dark as pitch there ; but I said , in a kind of a coarse whisper , `` Jim ! '' 
and he answered up , right at my elbow , with a sort of a moan , and I says : `` Quick , Jim , it ai n't no time for fooling around and moaning ; there 's a gang of murderers in yonder , and if we do n't hunt up their boat and set her drifting down the river so these fellows ca n't get away from the wreck there 's one of 'em going to be in a bad fix . 
But if we find their boat we can put ALL of 'em in a bad fix -- for the sheriff 'll get 'em . 
Quick -- hurry ! 
I 'll hunt the labboard side , you hunt the stabboard . 
You start at the raft , and -- '' `` Oh , my lordy , lordy ! 
RAF ' ? 
Dey ain ' no raf ' no mo ' ; she done broke loose en gone I -- en here we is ! '' 
WELL , I catched my breath and most fainted . 
Shut up on a wreck with such a gang as that ! 
But it war n't no time to be sentimentering . 
We 'd GOT to find that boat now -- had to have it for ourselves . 
So we went a-quaking and shaking down the stabboard side , and slow work it was , too -- seemed a week before we got to the stern . 
No sign of a boat . 
Jim said he did n't believe he could go any further -- so scared he had n't hardly any strength left , he said . 
