When I got by myself I went to thinking the thing over . 
I says to myself , shall I go to that doctor , private , and blow on these frauds ? 
No -- that wo n't do . 
He might tell who told him ; then the king and the duke would make it warm for me . 
Shall I go , private , and tell Mary Jane ? 
No -- I das n't do it . 
Her face would give them a hint , sure ; they 've got the money , and they 'd slide right out and get away with it . 
If she was to fetch in help I 'd get mixed up in the business before it was done with , I judge . 
No ; there ai n't no good way but one . 
I got to steal that money , somehow ; and I got to steal it some way that they wo n't suspicion that I done it . 
They 've got a good thing here , and they ai n't a-going to leave till they 've played this family and this town for all they 're worth , so I 'll find a chance time enough . 
I 'll steal it and hide it ; and by and by , when I 'm away down the river , I 'll write a letter and tell Mary Jane where it 's hid . 
But I better hive it tonight if I can , because the doctor maybe has n't let up as much as he lets on he has ; he might scare them out of here yet . 
So , thinks I , I 'll go and search them rooms . 
Upstairs the hall was dark , but I found the duke 's room , and started to paw around it with my hands ; but I recollected it would n't be much like the king to let anybody else take care of that money but his own self ; so then I went to his room and begun to paw around there . 
But I see I could n't do nothing without a candle , and I das n't light one , of course . 
So I judged I 'd got to do the other thing -- lay for them and eavesdrop . 
About that time I hears their footsteps coming , and was going to skip under the bed ; I reached for it , but it was n't where I thought it would be ; but I touched the curtain that hid Mary Jane 's frocks , so I jumped in behind that and snuggled in amongst the gowns , and stood there perfectly still . 
They come in and shut the door ; and the first thing the duke done was to get down and look under the bed . 
Then I was glad I had n't found the bed when I wanted it . 
And yet , you know , it 's kind of natural to hide under the bed when you are up to anything private . 
They sets down then , and the king says : `` Well , what is it ? 
And cut it middlin ' short , because it 's better for us to be down there a-whoopin ' up the mournin ' than up here givin ' 'em a chance to talk us over . '' 
`` Well , this is it , Capet . 
I ai n't easy ; I ai n't comfortable . 
That doctor lays on my mind . 
I wanted to know your plans . 
I 've got a notion , and I think it 's a sound one . '' 
`` What is it , duke ? '' 
`` That we better glide out of this before three in the morning , and clip it down the river with what we 've got . 
Specially , seeing we got it so easy -- GIVEN back to us , flung at our heads , as you may say , when of course we allowed to have to steal it back . 
I 'm for knocking off and lighting out . '' 
That made me feel pretty bad . 
About an hour or two ago it would a been a little different , but now it made me feel bad and disappointed , The king rips out and says : `` What ! 
And not sell out the rest o ' the property ? 
March off like a passel of fools and leave eight or nine thous 'n' dollars ' worth o ' property layin ' around jest sufferin ' to be scooped in ? 
-- and all good , salable stuff , too . '' 
The duke he grumbled ; said the bag of gold was enough , and he did n't want to go no deeper -- did n't want to rob a lot of orphans of EVERYTHING they had . 
`` Why , how you talk ! '' 
says the king . 
`` We sha 'n' t rob 'em of nothing at all but jest this money . 
The people that BUYS the property is the suff ` rers ; because as soon 's it 's found out ` at we did n't own it -- which wo n't be long after we 've slid -- the sale wo n't be valid , and it 'll all go back to the estate . 
These yer orphans 'll git their house back agin , and that 's enough for THEM ; they 're young and spry , and k 'n easy earn a livin ' . 
THEY ai n't a-goin to suffer . 
Why , jest think -- there 's thous 'n' s and thous 'n' s that ai n't nigh so well off . 
Bless you , THEY ai n't got noth 'n' to complain of . '' 
Well , the king he talked him blind ; so at last he give in , and said all right , but said he believed it was blamed foolishness to stay , and that doctor hanging over them . 
But the king says : `` Cuss the doctor ! 
What do we k ` yer for HIM ? 
Hai n't we got all the fools in town on our side ? 
