The king he spread his arms , and Marsy Jane she jumped for them , and the hare-lip jumped for the duke , and there they HAD it ! 
Everybody most , leastways women , cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have such good times . 
Then the king he hunched the duke private -- I see him do it -- and then he looked around and see the coffin , over in the corner on two chairs ; so then him and the duke , with a hand across each other 's shoulder , and t ` other hand to their eyes , walked slow and solemn over there , everybody dropping back to give them room , and all the talk and noise stopping , people saying `` Sh ! '' 
and all the men taking their hats off and drooping their heads , so you could a heard a pin fall . 
And when they got there they bent over and looked in the coffin , and took one sight , and then they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to Orleans , most ; and then they put their arms around each other 's necks , and hung their chins over each other 's shoulders ; and then for three minutes , or maybe four , I never see two men leak the way they done . 
And , mind you , everybody was doing the same ; and the place was that damp I never see anything like it . 
Then one of them got on one side of the coffin , and t ` other on t ` other side , and they kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the coffin , and let on to pray all to themselves . 
Well , when it come to that it worked the crowd like you never see anything like it , and everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out loud -- the poor girls , too ; and every woman , nearly , went up to the girls , without saying a word , and kissed them , solemn , on the forehead , and then put their hand on their head , and looked up towards the sky , with the tears running down , and then busted out and went off sobbing and swabbing , and give the next woman a show . 
I never see anything so disgusting . 
Well , by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little , and works himself up and slobbers out a speech , all full of tears and flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to lose the diseased , and to miss seeing diseased alive after the long journey of four thousand mile , but it 's a trial that 's sweetened and sanctified to us by this dear sympathy and these holy tears , and so he thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother 's heart , because out of their mouths they ca n't , words being too weak and cold , and all that kind of rot and slush , till it was just sickening ; and then he blubbers out a pious goody-goody Amen , and turns himself loose and goes to crying fit to bust . 
And the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer , and everybody joined in with all their might , and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting out . 
Music is a good thing ; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash I never see it freshen up things so , and sound so honest and bully . 
Then the king begins to work his jaw again , and says how him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family would take supper here with them this evening , and help set up with the ashes of the diseased ; and says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak he knows who he would name , for they was names that was very dear to him , and mentioned often in his letters ; and so he will name the same , to wit , as follows , vizz. : -- Rev. Mr. Hobson , and Deacon Lot Hovey , and Mr. Ben Rucker , and Abner Shackleford , and Levi Bell , and Dr. Robinson , and their wives , and the widow Bartley . 
Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting together -- that is , I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t ` other world , and the preacher was pinting him right . 
Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville on business . 
But the rest was on hand , and so they all come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him ; and then they shook hands with the duke and did n't say nothing , but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads whilst he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said `` Goo-goo -- goo-goo-goo '' all the time , like a baby that ca n't talk . 
So the king he blattered along , and managed to inquire about pretty much everybody and dog in town , by his name , and mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or another in the town , or to George 's family , or to Peter . 
And he always let on that Peter wrote him the things ; but that was a lie : he got every blessed one of them out of that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat . 
Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind , and the king he read it out loud and cried over it . 
It give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars , gold , to the girls ; and it give the tanyard -LRB- which was doing a good business -RRB- , along with some other houses and land -LRB- worth about seven thousand -RRB- , and three thousand dollars in gold to Harvey and William , and told where the six thousand cash was hid down cellar . 
So these two frauds said they 'd go and fetch it up , and have everything square and above-board ; and told me to come with a candle . 
We shut the cellar door behind us , and when they found the bag they spilt it out on the floor , and it was a lovely sight , all them yaller-boys . 
My , the way the king 's eyes did shine ! 
He slaps the duke on the shoulder and says : `` Oh , THIS ai n't bully nor noth ` n ! 
Oh , no , I reckon not ! 
Why , Biljy , it beats the Nonesuch , DO N'T it ? '' 
The duke allowed it did . 
They pawed the yaller-boys , and sifted them through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor ; and the king says : `` It ai n't no use talkin ' ; bein ' brothers to a rich dead man and representatives of furrin heirs that 's got left is the line for you and me , Bilge . 
Thish yer comes of trust 'n to Providence . 
It 's the best way , in the long run . 
I 've tried 'em all , and ther ' ai n't no better way . '' 
Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile , and took it on trust ; but no , they must count it . 
So they counts it , and it comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short . 
Says the king : `` Dern him , I wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen dollars ? '' 
They worried over that awhile , and ransacked all around for it . 
Then the duke says : `` Well , he was a pretty sick man , and likely he made a mistake -- I reckon that 's the way of it . 
The best way 's to let it go , and keep still about it . 
We can spare it . '' 
`` Oh , shucks , yes , we can SPARE it . 
I do n't k ` yer noth 'n ` bout that -- it 's the COUNT I 'm thinkin ' about . 
We want to be awful square and open and above-board here , you know . 
We want to lug this h-yer money up stairs and count it before everybody -- then ther ' ai n't noth 'n suspicious . 
But when the dead man says ther 's six thous 'n dollars , you know , we do n't want to -- '' `` Hold on , '' says the duke . 
`` Le 's make up the deffisit , '' and he begun to haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket . 
`` It 's a most amaz 'n' good idea , duke -- you HAVE got a rattlin ' clever head on you , '' says the king . 
`` Blest if the old Nonesuch ai n't a heppin ' us out agin , '' and HE begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them up . 
It most busted them , but they made up the six thousand clean and clear . 
`` Say , '' says the duke , `` I got another idea . 
Le 's go up stairs and count this money , and then take and GIVE IT TO THE GIRLS . '' 
`` Good land , duke , lem me hug you ! 
