I took it up , and held it in my hand . 
I was a - trembling , because I 'd got to decide , forever , betwixt two things , and I knowed it . 
I studied a minute , sort of holding my breath , and then says to myself : `` All right , then , I 'll GO to hell '' -- and tore it up . 
It was awful thoughts and awful words , but they was said . 
And I let them stay said ; and never thought no more about reforming . 
I shoved the whole thing out of my head , and said I would take up wickedness again , which was in my line , being brung up to it , and the other war n't . 
And for a starter I would go to work and steal Jim out of slavery again ; and if I could think up anything worse , I would do that , too ; because as long as I was in , and in for good , I might as well go the whole hog . 
Then I set to thinking over how to get at it , and turned over some considerable many ways in my mind ; and at last fixed up a plan that suited me . 
So then I took the bearings of a woody island that was down the river a piece , and as soon as it was fairly dark I crept out with my raft and went for it , and hid it there , and then turned in . 
I slept the night through , and got up before it was light , and had my breakfast , and put on my store clothes , and tied up some others and one thing or another in a bundle , and took the canoe and cleared for shore . 
I landed below where I judged was Phelps 's place , and hid my bundle in the woods , and then filled up the canoe with water , and loaded rocks into her and sunk her where I could find her again when I wanted her , about a quarter of a mile below a little steam sawmill that was on the bank . 
Then I struck up the road , and when I passed the mill I see a sign on it , `` Phelps 's Sawmill , '' and when I come to the farm-houses , two or three hundred yards further along , I kept my eyes peeled , but did n't see nobody around , though it was good daylight now . 
But I did n't mind , because I did n't want to see nobody just yet -- I only wanted to get the lay of the land . 
According to my plan , I was going to turn up there from the village , not from below . 
So I just took a look , and shoved along , straight for town . 
Well , the very first man I see when I got there was the duke . 
He was sticking up a bill for the Royal Nonesuch -- three-night performance -- like that other time . 
They had the cheek , them frauds ! 
I was right on him before I could shirk . 
He looked astonished , and says : `` Hel-LO ! 
Where 'd YOU come from ? '' 
Then he says , kind of glad and eager , `` Where 's the raft ? 
-- got her in a good place ? '' 
I says : `` Why , that 's just what I was going to ask your grace . '' 
Then he did n't look so joyful , and says : `` What was your idea for asking ME ? '' 
he says . 
`` Well , '' I says , `` when I see the king in that doggery yesterday I says to myself , we ca n't get him home for hours , till he 's soberer ; so I went a - loafing around town to put in the time and wait . 
A man up and offered me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch a sheep , and so I went along ; but when we was dragging him to the boat , and the man left me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him along , he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run , and we after him . 
We did n't have no dog , and so we had to chase him all over the country till we tired him out . 
We never got him till dark ; then we fetched him over , and I started down for the raft . 
When I got there and see it was gone , I says to myself , ` They 've got into trouble and had to leave ; and they 've took my nigger , which is the only nigger I 've got in the world , and now I 'm in a strange country , and ai n't got no property no more , nor nothing , and no way to make my living ; ' so I set down and cried . 
I slept in the woods all night . 
But what DID become of the raft , then ? 
-- and Jim -- poor Jim ! '' 
`` Blamed if I know -- that is , what 's become of the raft . 
That old fool had made a trade and got forty dollars , and when we found him in the doggery the loafers had matched half-dollars with him and got every cent but what he 'd spent for whisky ; and when I got him home late last night and found the raft gone , we said , ` That little rascal has stole our raft and shook us , and run off down the river . ' '' 
`` I would n't shake my NIGGER , would I ? 
-- the only nigger I had in the world , and the only property . '' 
`` We never thought of that . 
Fact is , I reckon we 'd come to consider him OUR nigger ; yes , we did consider him so -- goodness knows we had trouble enough for him . 
So when we see the raft was gone and we flat broke , there war n't anything for it but to try the Royal Nonesuch another shake . 
And I 've pegged along ever since , dry as a powder-horn . 
Where 's that ten cents ? 
Give it here . '' 
I had considerable money , so I give him ten cents , but begged him to spend it for something to eat , and give me some , because it was all the money I had , and I had n't had nothing to eat since yesterday . 
He never said nothing . 
The next minute he whirls on me and says : `` Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us ? 
We 'd skin him if he done that ! '' 
`` How can he blow ? 
Hai n't he run off ? '' 
