`` No -- leastways , not all at once -- that is , I do n't think I ever see them all come OUT at once but just one time . '' 
`` Hello ! 
When was that ? '' 
`` It was the day we had the funeral . 
In the morning . 
It war n't early , because I overslept . 
I was just starting down the ladder , and I see them . '' 
`` Well , go on , GO on ! 
What did they do ? 
How 'd they act ? '' 
`` They did n't do nothing . 
And they did n't act anyway much , as fur as I see . 
They tiptoed away ; so I seen , easy enough , that they 'd shoved in there to do up your majesty 's room , or something , s ` posing you was up ; and found you WAR N'T up , and so they was hoping to slide out of the way of trouble without waking you up , if they had n't already waked you up . '' 
`` Great guns , THIS is a go ! '' 
says the king ; and both of them looked pretty sick and tolerable silly . 
They stood there a-thinking and scratching their heads a minute , and the duke he bust into a kind of a little raspy chuckle , and says : `` It does beat all how neat the niggers played their hand . 
They let on to be SORRY they was going out of this region ! 
And I believed they WAS sorry , and so did you , and so did everybody . 
Do n't ever tell ME any more that a nigger ai n't got any histrionic talent . 
Why , the way they played that thing it would fool ANYBODY . 
In my opinion , there 's a fortune in 'em . 
If I had capital and a theater , I would n't want a better lay-out than that -- and here we 've gone and sold 'em for a song . 
Yes , and ai n't privileged to sing the song yet . 
Say , where IS that song -- that draft ? '' 
`` In the bank for to be collected . 
Where WOULD it be ? '' 
`` Well , THAT 'S all right then , thank goodness . '' 
Says I , kind of timid-like : `` Is something gone wrong ? '' 
The king whirls on me and rips out : `` None o ' your business ! 
You keep your head shet , and mind y' r own affairs -- if you got any . 
Long as you 're in this town do n't you forgit THAT -- you hear ? '' 
Then he says to the duke , `` We got to jest swaller it and say noth 'n' : mum 's the word for US . '' 
As they was starting down the ladder the duke he chuckles again , and says : `` Quick sales AND small profits ! 
It 's a good business -- yes . '' 
The king snarls around on him and says : `` I was trying to do for the best in sellin ' 'em out so quick . 
If the profits has turned out to be none , lackin ' considable , and none to carry , is it my fault any more 'n it 's yourn ? '' 
`` Well , THEY 'D be in this house yet and we WOULD N'T if I could a got my advice listened to . '' 
The king sassed back as much as was safe for him , and then swapped around and lit into ME again . 
He give me down the banks for not coming and TELLING him I see the niggers come out of his room acting that way -- said any fool would a KNOWED something was up . 
And then waltzed in and cussed HIMSELF awhile , and said it all come of him not laying late and taking his natural rest that morning , and he 'd be blamed if he 'd ever do it again . 
So they went off a-jawing ; and I felt dreadful glad I 'd worked it all off on to the niggers , and yet had n't done the niggers no harm by it . 
BY and by it was getting-up time . 
So I come down the ladder and started for down-stairs ; but as I come to the girls ' room the door was open , and I see Mary Jane setting by her old hair trunk , which was open and she 'd been packing things in it -- getting ready to go to England . 
But she had stopped now with a folded gown in her lap , and had her face in her hands , crying . 
I felt awful bad to see it ; of course anybody would . 
I went in there and says : `` Miss Mary Jane , you ca n't a-bear to see people in trouble , and I ca n't -- most always . 
Tell me about it . '' 
So she done it . 
And it was the niggers -- I just expected it . 
She said the beautiful trip to England was most about spoiled for her ; she did n't know HOW she was ever going to be happy there , knowing the mother and the children war n't ever going to see each other no more -- and then busted out bitterer than ever , and flung up her hands , and says : `` Oh , dear , dear , to think they ai n't EVER going to see each other any more ! '' 
