The men ripped around awhile , and then rode away . 
As soon as they was out of sight I sung out to Buck and told him . 
He did n't know what to make of my voice coming out of the tree at first . 
He was awful surprised . 
He told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the men come in sight again ; said they was up to some devilment or other -- would n't be gone long . 
I wished I was out of that tree , but I das n't come down . 
Buck begun to cry and rip , and ` lowed that him and his cousin Joe -LRB- that was the other young chap -RRB- would make up for this day yet . 
He said his father and his two brothers was killed , and two or three of the enemy . 
Said the Shepherdsons laid for them in ambush . 
Buck said his father and brothers ought to waited for their relations -- the Shepherdsons was too strong for them . 
I asked him what was become of young Harney and Miss Sophia . 
He said they 'd got across the river and was safe . 
I was glad of that ; but the way Buck did take on because he did n't manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him -- I hai n't ever heard anything like it . 
All of a sudden , bang ! 
bang ! 
bang ! 
goes three or four guns -- the men had slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their horses ! 
The boys jumped for the river -- both of them hurt -- and as they swum down the current the men run along the bank shooting at them and singing out , `` Kill them , kill them ! '' 
It made me so sick I most fell out of the tree . 
I ai n't a-going to tell ALL that happened -- it would make me sick again if I was to do that . 
I wished I had n't ever come ashore that night to see such things . 
I ai n't ever going to get shut of them -- lots of times I dream about them . 
I stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark , afraid to come down . 
Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods ; and twice I seen little gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns ; so I reckoned the trouble was still a-going on . 
I was mighty downhearted ; so I made up my mind I would n't ever go anear that house again , because I reckoned I was to blame , somehow . 
I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two and run off ; and I judged I ought to told her father about that paper and the curious way she acted , and then maybe he would a locked her up , and this awful mess would n't ever happened . 
When I got down out of the tree I crept along down the river bank a piece , and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water , and tugged at them till I got them ashore ; then I covered up their faces , and got away as quick as I could . 
I cried a little when I was covering up Buck 's face , for he was mighty good to me . 
It was just dark now . 
I never went near the house , but struck through the woods and made for the swamp . 
Jim war n't on his island , so I tramped off in a hurry for the crick , and crowded through the willows , red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that awful country . 
The raft was gone ! 
My souls , but I was scared ! 
I could n't get my breath for most a minute . 
Then I raised a yell . 
A voice not twenty-five foot from me says : `` Good lan ' ! 
is dat you , honey ? 
Doan ' make no noise . '' 
It was Jim 's voice -- nothing ever sounded so good before . 
I run along the bank a piece and got aboard , and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me , he was so glad to see me . 
He says : `` Laws bless you , chile , I ` uz right down sho ' you 's dead agin . 
Jack 's been heah ; he say he reck 'n you 's ben shot , kase you didn ' come home no mo ' ; so I 's jes ' dis minute a startin ' de raf ' down towards de mouf er de crick , so 's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for certain you IS dead . 
Lawsy , I 's mighty glad to git you back again , honey . '' 
I says : `` All right -- that 's mighty good ; they wo n't find me , and they 'll think I 've been killed , and floated down the river -- there 's something up there that 'll help them think so -- so do n't you lose no time , Jim , but just shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can . '' 
I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the middle of the Mississippi . 
Then we hung up our signal lantern , and judged that we was free and safe once more . 
I had n't had a bite to eat since yesterday , so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk , and pork and cabbage and greens -- there ai n't nothing in the world so good when it 's cooked right -- and whilst I eat my supper we talked and had a good time . 
I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds , and so was Jim to get away from the swamp . 
We said there war n't no home like a raft , after all . 
Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery , but a raft do n't . 
