He started and run round and round the cabin , hollering `` Take him off ! 
take him off ! 
he 's biting me on the neck ! '' 
I never see a man look so wild in the eyes . 
Pretty soon he was all fagged out , and fell down panting ; then he rolled over and over wonderful fast , kicking things every which way , and striking and grabbing at the air with his hands , and screaming and saying there was devils a-hold of him . 
He wore out by and by , and laid still a while , moaning . 
Then he laid stiller , and did n't make a sound . 
I could hear the owls and the wolves away off in the woods , and it seemed terrible still . 
He was laying over by the corner . 
By and by he raised up part way and listened , with his head to one side . 
He says , very low : `` Tramp -- tramp -- tramp ; that 's the dead ; tramp -- tramp -- tramp ; they 're coming after me ; but I wo n't go . 
Oh , they 're here ! 
do n't touch me -- do n't ! 
hands off -- they 're cold ; let go . 
Oh , let a poor devil alone ! '' 
Then he went down on all fours and crawled off , begging them to let him alone , and he rolled himself up in his blanket and wallowed in under the old pine table , still a-begging ; and then he went to crying . 
I could hear him through the blanket . 
By and by he rolled out and jumped up on his feet looking wild , and he see me and went for me . 
He chased me round and round the place with a clasp-knife , calling me the Angel of Death , and saying he would kill me , and then I could n't come for him no more . 
I begged , and told him I was only Huck ; but he laughed SUCH a screechy laugh , and roared and cussed , and kept on chasing me up . 
Once when I turned short and dodged under his arm he made a grab and got me by the jacket between my shoulders , and I thought I was gone ; but I slid out of the jacket quick as lightning , and saved myself . 
Pretty soon he was all tired out , and dropped down with his back against the door , and said he would rest a minute and then kill me . 
He put his knife under him , and said he would sleep and get strong , and then he would see who was who . 
So he dozed off pretty soon . 
By and by I got the old split-bottom chair and clumb up as easy as I could , not to make any noise , and got down the gun . 
I slipped the ramrod down it to make sure it was loaded , then I laid it across the turnip barrel , pointing towards pap , and set down behind it to wait for him to stir . 
And how slow and still the time did drag along . 
`` GIT up ! 
What you ` bout ? '' 
I opened my eyes and looked around , trying to make out where I was . 
It was after sun-up , and I had been sound asleep . 
Pap was standing over me looking sour and sick , too . 
He says : `` What you doin ' with this gun ? '' 
I judged he did n't know nothing about what he had been doing , so I says : `` Somebody tried to get in , so I was laying for him . '' 
`` Why did n't you roust me out ? '' 
`` Well , I tried to , but I could n't ; I could n't budge you . '' 
`` Well , all right . 
Do n't stand there palavering all day , but out with you and see if there 's a fish on the lines for breakfast . 
I 'll be along in a minute . '' 
He unlocked the door , and I cleared out up the river-bank . 
I noticed some pieces of limbs and such things floating down , and a sprinkling of bark ; so I knowed the river had begun to rise . 
I reckoned I would have great times now if I was over at the town . 
The June rise used to be always luck for me ; because as soon as that rise begins here comes cordwood floating down , and pieces of log rafts -- sometimes a dozen logs together ; so all you have to do is to catch them and sell them to the wood-yards and the sawmill . 
I went along up the bank with one eye out for pap and t ` other one out for what the rise might fetch along . 
Well , all at once here comes a canoe ; just a beauty , too , about thirteen or fourteen foot long , riding high like a duck . 
I shot head-first off of the bank like a frog , clothes and all on , and struck out for the canoe . 
I just expected there 'd be somebody laying down in it , because people often done that to fool folks , and when a chap had pulled a skiff out most to it they 'd raise up and laugh at him . 
But it war n't so this time . 
It was a drift-canoe sure enough , and I clumb in and paddled her ashore . 
Thinks I , the old man will be glad when he sees this -- she 's worth ten dollars . 
