But I said , come on , if we get left on this wreck we are in a fix , sure . 
So on we prowled again . 
We struck for the stern of the texas , and found it , and then scrabbled along forwards on the skylight , hanging on from shutter to shutter , for the edge of the skylight was in the water . 
When we got pretty close to the cross-hall door there was the skiff , sure enough ! 
I could just barely see her . 
I felt ever so thankful . 
In another second I would a been aboard of her , but just then the door opened . 
One of the men stuck his head out only about a couple of foot from me , and I thought I was gone ; but he jerked it in again , and says : `` Heave that blame lantern out o ' sight , Bill ! '' 
He flung a bag of something into the boat , and then got in himself and set down . 
It was Packard . 
Then Bill HE come out and got in . 
Packard says , in a low voice : `` All ready -- shove off ! '' 
I could n't hardly hang on to the shutters , I was so weak . 
But Bill says : `` Hold on -- 'd you go through him ? '' 
`` No . 
Did n't you ? '' 
`` No . 
So he 's got his share o ' the cash yet . '' 
`` Well , then , come along ; no use to take truck and leave money . '' 
`` Say , wo n't he suspicion what we 're up to ? '' 
`` Maybe he wo n't . 
But we got to have it anyway . 
Come along . '' 
So they got out and went in . 
The door slammed to because it was on the careened side ; and in a half second I was in the boat , and Jim come tumbling after me . 
I out with my knife and cut the rope , and away we went ! 
We did n't touch an oar , and we did n't speak nor whisper , nor hardly even breathe . 
We went gliding swift along , dead silent , past the tip of the paddle-box , and past the stern ; then in a second or two more we was a hundred yards below the wreck , and the darkness soaked her up , every last sign of her , and we was safe , and knowed it . 
When we was three or four hundred yards down-stream we see the lantern show like a little spark at the texas door for a second , and we knowed by that that the rascals had missed their boat , and was beginning to understand that they was in just as much trouble now as Jim Turner was . 
Then Jim manned the oars , and we took out after our raft . 
Now was the first time that I begun to worry about the men -- I reckon I had n't had time to before . 
I begun to think how dreadful it was , even for murderers , to be in such a fix . 
I says to myself , there ai n't no telling but I might come to be a murderer myself yet , and then how would I like it ? 
So says I to Jim : `` The first light we see we 'll land a hundred yards below it or above it , in a place where it 's a good hiding-place for you and the skiff , and then I 'll go and fix up some kind of a yarn , and get somebody to go for that gang and get them out of their scrape , so they can be hung when their time comes . '' 
But that idea was a failure ; for pretty soon it begun to storm again , and this time worse than ever . 
The rain poured down , and never a light showed ; everybody in bed , I reckon . 
We boomed along down the river , watching for lights and watching for our raft . 
After a long time the rain let up , but the clouds stayed , and the lightning kept whimpering , and by and by a flash showed us a black thing ahead , floating , and we made for it . 
It was the raft , and mighty glad was we to get aboard of it again . 
We seen a light now away down to the right , on shore . 
So I said I would go for it . 
The skiff was half full of plunder which that gang had stole there on the wreck . 
We hustled it on to the raft in a pile , and I told Jim to float along down , and show a light when he judged he had gone about two mile , and keep it burning till I come ; then I manned my oars and shoved for the light . 
As I got down towards it three or four more showed -- up on a hillside . 
It was a village . 
I closed in above the shore light , and laid on my oars and floated . 
As I went by I see it was a lantern hanging on the jackstaff of a double-hull ferryboat . 
I skimmed around for the watchman , a-wondering whereabouts he slept ; and by and by I found him roosting on the bitts forward , with his head down between his knees . 
I gave his shoulder two or three little shoves , and begun to cry . 
He stirred up in a kind of a startlish way ; but when he see it was only me he took a good gap and stretch , and then he says : `` Hello , what 's up ? 
