begone sah ! '' 
and she fetched first one and then another of them a clip and sent them howling , and then the rest followed ; and the next second half of them come back , wagging their tails around me , and making friends with me . 
There ai n't no harm in a hound , nohow . 
And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger boys without anything on but tow-linen shirts , and they hung on to their mother 's gown , and peeped out from behind her at me , bashful , the way they always do . 
And here comes the white woman running from the house , about forty-five or fifty year old , bareheaded , and her spinning-stick in her hand ; and behind her comes her little white children , acting the same way the little niggers was going . 
She was smiling all over so she could hardly stand -- and says : `` It 's YOU , at last ! 
-- AI N'T it ? '' 
I out with a `` Yes 'm '' before I thought . 
She grabbed me and hugged me tight ; and then gripped me by both hands and shook and shook ; and the tears come in her eyes , and run down over ; and she could n't seem to hug and shake enough , and kept saying , `` You do n't look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would ; but law sakes , I do n't care for that , I 'm so glad to see you ! 
Dear , dear , it does seem like I could eat you up ! 
Children , it 's your cousin Tom ! 
-- tell him howdy . '' 
But they ducked their heads , and put their fingers in their mouths , and hid behind her . 
So she run on : `` Lize , hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away -- or did you get your breakfast on the boat ? '' 
I said I had got it on the boat . 
So then she started for the house , leading me by the hand , and the children tagging after . 
When we got there she set me down in a split-bottomed chair , and set herself down on a little low stool in front of me , holding both of my hands , and says : `` Now I can have a GOOD look at you ; and , laws-a-me , I 've been hungry for it a many and a many a time , all these long years , and it 's come at last ! 
We been expecting you a couple of days and more . 
What kep ' you ? 
-- boat get aground ? '' 
`` Yes 'm -- she -- '' `` Do n't say yes 'm -- say Aunt Sally . 
Where 'd she get aground ? '' 
I did n't rightly know what to say , because I did n't know whether the boat would be coming up the river or down . 
But I go a good deal on instinct ; and my instinct said she would be coming up -- from down towards Orleans . 
That did n't help me much , though ; for I did n't know the names of bars down that way . 
I see I 'd got to invent a bar , or forget the name of the one we got aground on -- or -- Now I struck an idea , and fetched it out : `` It war n't the grounding -- that did n't keep us back but a little . 
We blowed out a cylinder-head . '' 
`` Good gracious ! 
anybody hurt ? '' 
`` No 'm . 
Killed a nigger . '' 
`` Well , it 's lucky ; because sometimes people do get hurt . 
Two years ago last Christmas your uncle Silas was coming up from Newrleans on the old Lally Rook , and she blowed out a cylinder-head and crippled a man . 
And I think he died afterwards . 
He was a Baptist . 
Your uncle Silas knowed a family in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well . 
Yes , I remember now , he DID die . 
Mortification set in , and they had to amputate him . 
But it did n't save him . 
Yes , it was mortification -- that was it . 
He turned blue all over , and died in the hope of a glorious resurrection . 
They say he was a sight to look at . 
Your uncle 's been up to the town every day to fetch you . 
And he 's gone again , not more 'n an hour ago ; he 'll be back any minute now . 
You must a met him on the road , did n't you ? 
-- oldish man , with a -- '' `` No , I did n't see nobody , Aunt Sally . 
The boat landed just at daylight , and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town and out a piece in the country , to put in the time and not get here too soon ; and so I come down the back way . '' 
`` Who 'd you give the baggage to ? '' 
`` Nobody . '' 
`` Why , child , it 'll be stole ! '' 
