He often done that . 
When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with his head down betwixt his knees , moaning and mourning to himself . 
I did n't take notice nor let on . 
I knowed what it was about . 
He was thinking about his wife and his children , away up yonder , and he was low and homesick ; because he had n't ever been away from home before in his life ; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white folks does for their ` n . 
It do n't seem natural , but I reckon it 's so . 
He was often moaning and mourning that way nights , when he judged I was asleep , and saying , `` Po ' little ` Lizabeth ! 
po ' little Johnny ! 
it 's mighty hard ; I spec ' I ai n't ever gwyne to see you no mo ' , no mo ' ! '' 
He was a mighty good nigger , Jim was . 
But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young ones ; and by and by he says : `` What makes me feel so bad dis time ` uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder on de bank like a whack , er a slam , while ago , en it mine me er de time I treat my little ` Lizabeth so ornery . 
She war n't on ' y ` bout fo ' year ole , en she tuck de sk ` yarlet fever , en had a powful rough spell ; but she got well , en one day she was a-stannin ' aroun ' , en I says to her , I says : '' ` Shet de do ' . ' 
`` She never done it ; jis ' stood dah , kiner smilin ' up at me . 
It make me mad ; en I says agin , mighty loud , I says : '' ` Doan ' you hear me ? 
Shet de do ' ! ' 
`` She jis stood de same way , kiner smilin ' up . 
I was a-bilin ' ! 
I says : '' ' I lay I MAKE you mine ! ' 
`` En wid dat I fetch ' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin ' . 
Den I went into de yuther room , en ` uz gone ` bout ten minutes ; en when I come back dah was dat do ' a-stannin ' open YIT , en dat chile stannin ' mos ' right in it , a-lookin ' down and mournin ' , en de tears runnin ' down . 
My , but I WUZ mad ! 
I was a-gwyne for de chile , but jis ' den -- it was a do ' dat open innerds -- jis ' den , ` long come de wind en slam it to , behine de chile , ker-BLAM ! 
-- en my lan ' , de chile never move ' ! 
My breff mos ' hop outer me ; en I feel so -- so -- I doan ' know HOW I feel . 
I crope out , all a - tremblin ' , en crope aroun ' en open de do ' easy en slow , en poke my head in behine de chile , sof ' en still , en all uv a sudden I says POW ! 
jis ' as loud as I could yell . 
SHE NEVER BUDGE ! 
Oh , Huck , I bust out a-cryin ' en grab her up in my arms , en say , ` Oh , de po ' little thing ! 
De Lord God Amighty fogive po ' ole Jim , kaze he never gwyne to fogive hisself as long 's he live ! ' 
Oh , she was plumb deef en dumb , Huck , plumb deef en dumb -- en I 'd ben a-treat 'n her so ! '' 
NEXT day , towards night , we laid up under a little willow towhead out in the middle , where there was a village on each side of the river , and the duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns . 
Jim he spoke to the duke , and said he hoped it would n't take but a few hours , because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope . 
You see , when we left him all alone we had to tie him , because if anybody happened on to him all by himself and not tied it would n't look much like he was a runaway nigger , you know . 
So the duke said it WAS kind of hard to have to lay roped all day , and he 'd cipher out some way to get around it . 
He was uncommon bright , the duke was , and he soon struck it . 
He dressed Jim up in King Lear 's outfit -- it was a long curtain-calico gown , and a white horse-hair wig and whiskers ; and then he took his theater paint and painted Jim 's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead , dull , solid blue , like a man that 's been drownded nine days . 
Blamed if he war n't the horriblest looking outrage I ever see . 
Then the duke took and wrote out a sign on a shingle so : Sick Arab -- but harmless when not out of his head . 
And he nailed that shingle to a lath , and stood the lath up four or five foot in front of the wigwam . 
Jim was satisfied . 
He said it was a sight better than lying tied a couple of years every day , and trembling all over every time there was a sound . 
The duke told him to make himself free and easy , and if anybody ever come meddling around , he must hop out of the wigwam , and carry on a little , and fetch a howl or two like a wild beast , and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone . 
Which was sound enough judgment ; but you take the average man , and he would n't wait for him to howl . 
Why , he did n't only look like he was dead , he looked considerable more than that . 
These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again , because there was so much money in it , but they judged it would n't be safe , because maybe the news might a worked along down by this time . 
They could n't hit no project that suited exactly ; so at last the duke said he reckoned he 'd lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he could n't put up something on the Arkansaw village ; and the king he allowed he would drop over to t ` other village without any plan , but just trust in Providence to lead him the profitable way -- meaning the devil , I reckon . 
We had all bought store clothes where we stopped last ; and now the king put his 'n on , and he told me to put mine on . 
I done it , of course . 
The king 's duds was all black , and he did look real swell and starchy . 
I never knowed how clothes could change a body before . 
