I tied up in the old place , and reckoned I would sleep in the canoe . 
I did n't sleep much . 
I could n't , somehow , for thinking . 
And every time I waked up I thought somebody had me by the neck . 
So the sleep did n't do me no good . 
By and by I says to myself , I ca n't live this way ; I 'm a - going to find out who it is that 's here on the island with me ; I 'll find it out or bust . 
Well , I felt better right off . 
So I took my paddle and slid out from shore just a step or two , and then let the canoe drop along down amongst the shadows . 
The moon was shining , and outside of the shadows it made it most as light as day . 
I poked along well on to an hour , everything still as rocks and sound asleep . 
Well , by this time I was most down to the foot of the island . 
A little ripply , cool breeze begun to blow , and that was as good as saying the night was about done . 
I give her a turn with the paddle and brung her nose to shore ; then I got my gun and slipped out and into the edge of the woods . 
I sat down there on a log , and looked out through the leaves . 
I see the moon go off watch , and the darkness begin to blanket the river . 
But in a little while I see a pale streak over the treetops , and knowed the day was coming . 
So I took my gun and slipped off towards where I had run across that camp fire , stopping every minute or two to listen . 
But I had n't no luck somehow ; I could n't seem to find the place . 
But by and by , sure enough , I catched a glimpse of fire away through the trees . 
I went for it , cautious and slow . 
By and by I was close enough to have a look , and there laid a man on the ground . 
It most give me the fantods . 
He had a blanket around his head , and his head was nearly in the fire . 
I set there behind a clump of bushes in about six foot of him , and kept my eyes on him steady . 
It was getting gray daylight now . 
Pretty soon he gapped and stretched himself and hove off the blanket , and it was Miss Watson 's Jim ! 
I bet I was glad to see him . 
I says : `` Hello , Jim ! '' 
and skipped out . 
He bounced up and stared at me wild . 
Then he drops down on his knees , and puts his hands together and says : `` Doan ' hurt me -- do n't ! 
I hai n't ever done no harm to a ghos ' . 
I alwuz liked dead people , en done all I could for 'em . 
You go en git in de river agin , whah you b ` longs , en doan ' do nuffn to Ole Jim , ` at ` uz awluz yo ' fren ' . '' 
Well , I war n't long making him understand I war n't dead . 
I was ever so glad to see Jim . 
I war n't lonesome now . 
I told him I war n't afraid of HIM telling the people where I was . 
I talked along , but he only set there and looked at me ; never said nothing . 
Then I says : `` It 's good daylight . 
Le 's get breakfast . 
Make up your camp fire good . '' 
`` What 's de use er makin ' up de camp fire to cook strawbries en sich truck ? 
But you got a gun , hai n't you ? 
Den we kin git sumfn better den strawbries . '' 
`` Strawberries and such truck , '' I says . 
`` Is that what you live on ? '' 
`` I couldn ' git nuffn else , '' he says . 
`` Why , how long you been on the island , Jim ? '' 
`` I come heah de night arter you 's killed . '' 
