That was so -- I could n't get around that noway . 
That was where it pinched . 
Conscience says to me , `` What had poor Miss Watson done to you that you could see her nigger go off right under your eyes and never say one single word ? 
What did that poor old woman do to you that you could treat her so mean ? 
Why , she tried to learn you your book , she tried to learn you your manners , she tried to be good to you every way she knowed how . 
THAT 'S what she done . '' 
I got to feeling so mean and so miserable I most wished I was dead . 
I fidgeted up and down the raft , abusing myself to myself , and Jim was fidgeting up and down past me . 
We neither of us could keep still . 
Every time he danced around and says , `` Dah 's Cairo ! '' 
it went through me like a shot , and I thought if it WAS Cairo I reckoned I would die of miserableness . 
Jim talked out loud all the time while I was talking to myself . 
He was saying how the first thing he would do when he got to a free State he would go to saving up money and never spend a single cent , and when he got enough he would buy his wife , which was owned on a farm close to where Miss Watson lived ; and then they would both work to buy the two children , and if their master would n't sell them , they 'd get an Ab ` litionist to go and steal them . 
It most froze me to hear such talk . 
He would n't ever dared to talk such talk in his life before . 
Just see what a difference it made in him the minute he judged he was about free . 
It was according to the old saying , `` Give a nigger an inch and he 'll take an ell . '' 
Thinks I , this is what comes of my not thinking . 
Here was this nigger , which I had as good as helped to run away , coming right out flat-footed and saying he would steal his children -- children that belonged to a man I did n't even know ; a man that had n't ever done me no harm . 
I was sorry to hear Jim say that , it was such a lowering of him . 
My conscience got to stirring me up hotter than ever , until at last I says to it , `` Let up on me -- it ai n't too late yet -- I 'll paddle ashore at the first light and tell . '' 
I felt easy and happy and light as a feather right off . 
All my troubles was gone . 
I went to looking out sharp for a light , and sort of singing to myself . 
By and by one showed . 
Jim sings out : `` We 's safe , Huck , we 's safe ! 
Jump up and crack yo ' heels ! 
Dat 's de good ole Cairo at las ' , I jis knows it ! '' 
I says : `` I 'll take the canoe and go and see , Jim . 
It might n't be , you know . '' 
He jumped and got the canoe ready , and put his old coat in the bottom for me to set on , and give me the paddle ; and as I shoved off , he says : `` Pooty soon I 'll be a-shout 'n' for joy , en I 'll say , it 's all on accounts o ' Huck ; I 's a free man , en I could n't ever ben free ef it hadn ' ben for Huck ; Huck done it . 
Jim wo n't ever forgit you , Huck ; you 's de bes ' fren ' Jim 's ever had ; en you 's de ONLY fren ' ole Jim 's got now . '' 
I was paddling off , all in a sweat to tell on him ; but when he says this , it seemed to kind of take the tuck all out of me . 
I went along slow then , and I war n't right down certain whether I was glad I started or whether I war n't . 
When I was fifty yards off , Jim says : `` Dah you goes , de ole true Huck ; de on ' y white genlman dat ever kep ' his promise to ole Jim . '' 
Well , I just felt sick . 
But I says , I GOT to do it -- I ca n't get OUT of it . 
Right then along comes a skiff with two men in it with guns , and they stopped and I stopped . 
One of them says : `` What 's that yonder ? '' 
`` A piece of a raft , '' I says . 
`` Do you belong on it ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` Any men on it ? '' 
`` Only one , sir . '' 
`` Well , there 's five niggers run off to-night up yonder , above the head of the bend . 
Is your man white or black ? '' 
I did n't answer up prompt . 
I tried to , but the words would n't come . 
I tried for a second or two to brace up and out with it , but I war n't man enough -- had n't the spunk of a rabbit . 
I see I was weakening ; so I just give up trying , and up and says : `` He 's white . '' 
