Well , the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied that young fellow . 
Blamed if he did n't inquire about everybody and everything in that blessed town , and all about the Wilkses ; and about Peter 's business -- which was a tanner ; and about George 's -- which was a carpenter ; and about Harvey 's -- which was a dissentering minister ; and so on , and so on . 
Then he says : `` What did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for ? '' 
`` Because she 's a big Orleans boat , and I was afeard she might n't stop there . 
When they 're deep they wo n't stop for a hail . 
A Cincinnati boat will , but this is a St. Louis one . '' 
`` Was Peter Wilks well off ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , pretty well off . 
He had houses and land , and it 's reckoned he left three or four thousand in cash hid up som ` ers . '' 
`` When did you say he died ? '' 
`` I did n't say , but it was last night . '' 
`` Funeral to-morrow , likely ? '' 
`` Yes , ` bout the middle of the day . '' 
`` Well , it 's all terrible sad ; but we 've all got to go , one time or another . 
So what we want to do is to be prepared ; then we 're all right . '' 
`` Yes , sir , it 's the best way . 
Ma used to always say that . '' 
When we struck the boat she was about done loading , and pretty soon she got off . 
The king never said nothing about going aboard , so I lost my ride , after all . 
When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up another mile to a lonesome place , and then he got ashore and says : `` Now hustle back , right off , and fetch the duke up here , and the new carpet-bags . 
And if he 's gone over to t ` other side , go over there and git him . 
And tell him to git himself up regardless . 
Shove along , now . '' 
I see what HE was up to ; but I never said nothing , of course . 
When I got back with the duke we hid the canoe , and then they set down on a log , and the king told him everything , just like the young fellow had said it -- every last word of it . 
And all the time he was a-doing it he tried to talk like an Englishman ; and he done it pretty well , too , for a slouch . 
I ca n't imitate him , and so I ai n't a-going to try to ; but he really done it pretty good . 
Then he says : `` How are you on the deef and dumb , Bilgewater ? '' 
The duke said , leave him alone for that ; said he had played a deef and dumb person on the histronic boards . 
So then they waited for a steamboat . 
About the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along , but they did n't come from high enough up the river ; but at last there was a big one , and they hailed her . 
She sent out her yawl , and we went aboard , and she was from Cincinnati ; and when they found we only wanted to go four or five mile they was booming mad , and gave us a cussing , and said they would n't land us . 
But the king was ca 'm . 
He says : `` If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and put off in a yawl , a steamboat kin afford to carry 'em , ca n't it ? '' 
So they softened down and said it was all right ; and when we got to the village they yawled us ashore . 
About two dozen men flocked down when they see the yawl a-coming , and when the king says : `` Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher ' Mr. Peter Wilks lives ? '' 
they give a glance at one another , and nodded their heads , as much as to say , `` What d' I tell you ? '' 
Then one of them says , kind of soft and gentle : `` I 'm sorry sir , but the best we can do is to tell you where he DID live yesterday evening . '' 
Sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash , and fell up against the man , and put his chin on his shoulder , and cried down his back , and says : `` Alas , alas , our poor brother -- gone , and we never got to see him ; oh , it 's too , too hard ! '' 
Then he turns around , blubbering , and makes a lot of idiotic signs to the duke on his hands , and blamed if he did n't drop a carpet-bag and bust out a-crying . 
If they war n't the beatenest lot , them two frauds , that ever I struck . 
Well , the men gathered around and sympathized with them , and said all sorts of kind things to them , and carried their carpet-bags up the hill for them , and let them lean on them and cry , and told the king all about his brother 's last moments , and the king he told it all over again on his hands to the duke , and both of them took on about that dead tanner like they 'd lost the twelve disciples . 
Well , if ever I struck anything like it , I 'm a nigger . 
It was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race . 
THE news was all over town in two minutes , and you could see the people tearing down on the run from every which way , some of them putting on their coats as they come . 
Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd , and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march . 
The windows and dooryards was full ; and every minute somebody would say , over a fence : `` Is it THEM ? '' 
And somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say : `` You bet it is . '' 
When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed , and the three girls was standing in the door . 
Mary Jane WAS red-headed , but that do n't make no difference , she was most awful beautiful , and her face and her eyes was all lit up like glory , she was so glad her uncles was come . 
