`` Yes he will LAST , too . 
You do n't reckon it 's going to take thirty-seven years to dig out through a DIRT foundation , do you ? '' 
`` How long will it take , Tom ? '' 
`` Well , we ca n't resk being as long as we ought to , because it may n't take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans . 
He 'll hear Jim ai n't from there . 
Then his next move will be to advertise Jim , or something like that . 
So we ca n't resk being as long digging him out as we ought to . 
By rights I reckon we ought to be a couple of years ; but we ca n't . 
Things being so uncertain , what I recommend is this : that we really dig right in , as quick as we can ; and after that , we can LET ON , to ourselves , that we was at it thirty-seven years . 
Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the first time there 's an alarm . 
Yes , I reckon that 'll be the best way . '' 
`` Now , there 's SENSE in that , '' I says . 
`` Letting on do n't cost nothing ; letting on ai n't no trouble ; and if it 's any object , I do n't mind letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year . 
It would n't strain me none , after I got my hand in . 
So I 'll mosey along now , and smouch a couple of case-knives . '' 
`` Smouch three , '' he says ; `` we want one to make a saw out of . '' 
`` Tom , if it ai n't unregular and irreligious to sejest it , '' I says , `` there 's an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the weather - boarding behind the smoke-house . '' 
He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like , and says : `` It ai n't no use to try to learn you nothing , Huck . 
Run along and smouch the knives -- three of them . '' 
So I done it . 
AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the lightning-rod , and shut ourselves up in the lean-to , and got out our pile of fox-fire , and went to work . 
We cleared everything out of the way , about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log . 
Tom said we was right behind Jim 's bed now , and we 'd dig in under it , and when we got through there could n't nobody in the cabin ever know there was any hole there , because Jim 's counter-pin hung down most to the ground , and you 'd have to raise it up and look under to see the hole . 
So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight ; and then we was dog-tired , and our hands was blistered , and yet you could n't see we 'd done anything hardly . 
At last I says : `` This ai n't no thirty-seven year job ; this is a thirty-eight year job , Tom Sawyer . '' 
He never said nothing . 
But he sighed , and pretty soon he stopped digging , and then for a good little while I knowed that he was thinking . 
Then he says : `` It ai n't no use , Huck , it ai n't a-going to work . 
If we was prisoners it would , because then we 'd have as many years as we wanted , and no hurry ; and we would n't get but a few minutes to dig , every day , while they was changing watches , and so our hands would n't get blistered , and we could keep it up right along , year in and year out , and do it right , and the way it ought to be done . 
But WE ca n't fool along ; we got to rush ; we ai n't got no time to spare . 
If we was to put in another night this way we 'd have to knock off for a week to let our hands get well -- could n't touch a case-knife with them sooner . '' 
`` Well , then , what we going to do , Tom ? '' 
`` I 'll tell you . 
It ai n't right , and it ai n't moral , and I would n't like it to get out ; but there ai n't only just the one way : we got to dig him out with the picks , and LET ON it 's case-knives . '' 
`` NOW you 're TALKING ! '' 
I says ; `` your head gets leveler and leveler all the time , Tom Sawyer , '' I says . 
`` Picks is the thing , moral or no moral ; and as for me , I do n't care shucks for the morality of it , nohow . 
When I start in to steal a nigger , or a watermelon , or a Sunday-school book , I ai n't no ways particular how it 's done so it 's done . 
What I want is my nigger ; or what I want is my watermelon ; or what I want is my Sunday - school book ; and if a pick 's the handiest thing , that 's the thing I 'm a - going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that Sunday-school book out with ; and I do n't give a dead rat what the authorities thinks about it nuther . '' 
`` Well , '' he says , `` there 's excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like this ; if it war n't so , I would n't approve of it , nor I would n't stand by and see the rules broke -- because right is right , and wrong is wrong , and a body ai n't got no business doing wrong when he ai n't ignorant and knows better . 
It might answer for YOU to dig Jim out with a pick , WITHOUT any letting on , because you do n't know no better ; but it would n't for me , because I do know better . 
Gim me a case-knife . '' 
He had his own by him , but I handed him mine . 
He flung it down , and says : `` Gim me a CASE-KNIFE . '' 
I did n't know just what to do -- but then I thought . 
I scratched around amongst the old tools , and got a pickaxe and give it to him , and he took it and went to work , and never said a word . 
He was always just that particular . 
Full of principle . 
So then I got a shovel , and then we picked and shoveled , turn about , and made the fur fly . 
We stuck to it about a half an hour , which was as long as we could stand up ; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for it . 
