`` That 's odd ! 
But still I do n't see quite ... I can understand that thereby you could spoil a valuable stone , but personal invisibility is a far cry . '' 
`` Precisely , '' said Griffin . 
`` But consider , visibility depends on the action of the visible bodies on light . 
Either a body absorbs light , or it reflects or refracts it , or does all these things . 
If it neither reflects nor refracts nor absorbs light , it can not of itself be visible . 
You see an opaque red box , for instance , because the colour absorbs some of the light and reflects the rest , all the red part of the light , to you . 
If it did not absorb any particular part of the light , but reflected it all , then it would be a shining white box . 
Silver ! 
A diamond box would neither absorb much of the light nor reflect much from the general surface , but just here and there where the surfaces were favourable the light would be reflected and refracted , so that you would get a brilliant appearance of flashing reflections and translucencies -- a sort of skeleton of light . 
A glass box would not be so brilliant , not so clearly visible , as a diamond box , because there would be less refraction and reflection . 
See that ? 
From certain points of view you would see quite clearly through it . 
Some kinds of glass would be more visible than others , a box of flint glass would be brighter than a box of ordinary window glass . 
A box of very thin common glass would be hard to see in a bad light , because it would absorb hardly any light and refract and reflect very little . 
And if you put a sheet of common white glass in water , still more if you put it in some denser liquid than water , it would vanish almost altogether , because light passing from water to glass is only slightly refracted or reflected or indeed affected in any way . 
It is almost as invisible as a jet of coal gas or hydrogen is in air . 
And for precisely the same reason ! '' 
`` Yes , '' said Kemp , `` that is pretty plain sailing . '' 
`` And here is another fact you will know to be true . 
If a sheet of glass is smashed , Kemp , and beaten into a powder , it becomes much more visible while it is in the air ; it becomes at last an opaque white powder . 
This is because the powdering multiplies the surfaces of the glass at which refraction and reflection occur . 
In the sheet of glass there are only two surfaces ; in the powder the light is reflected or refracted by each grain it passes through , and very little gets right through the powder . 
But if the white powdered glass is put into water , it forthwith vanishes . 
The powdered glass and water have much the same refractive index ; that is , the light undergoes very little refraction or reflection in passing from one to the other . 
`` You make the glass invisible by putting it into a liquid of nearly the same refractive index ; a transparent thing becomes invisible if it is put in any medium of almost the same refractive index . 
And if you will consider only a second , you will see also that the powder of glass might be made to vanish in air , if its refractive index could be made the same as that of air ; for then there would be no refraction or reflection as the light passed from glass to air . '' 
`` Yes , yes , '' said Kemp . 
`` But a man 's not powdered glass ! '' 
`` No , '' said Griffin . 
`` He 's more transparent ! '' 
`` Nonsense ! '' 
`` That from a doctor ! 
How one forgets ! 
Have you already forgotten your physics , in ten years ? 
Just think of all the things that are transparent and seem not to be so . 
Paper , for instance , is made up of transparent fibres , and it is white and opaque only for the same reason that a powder of glass is white and opaque . 
Oil white paper , fill up the interstices between the particles with oil so that there is no longer refraction or reflection except at the surfaces , and it becomes as transparent as glass . 
And not only paper , but cotton fibre , linen fibre , wool fibre , woody fibre , and bone , Kemp , flesh , Kemp , hair , Kemp , nails and nerves , Kemp , in fact the whole fabric of a man except the red of his blood and the black pigment of hair , are all made up of transparent , colourless tissue . 
So little suffices to make us visible one to the other . 
For the most part the fibres of a living creature are no more opaque than water . '' 
`` Great Heavens ! '' 
cried Kemp . 
`` Of course , of course ! 
I was thinking only last night of the sea larvae and all jelly-fish ! '' 
`` Now you have me ! 
And all that I knew and had in mind a year after I left London -- six years ago . 
But I kept it to myself . 
I had to do my work under frightful disadvantages . 
Oliver , my professor , was a scientific bounder , a journalist by instinct , a thief of ideas -- he was always prying ! 
