The Invisible Man A Grotesque Romance By H.G. Wells CONTENTS THE STRANGE MAN 'S ARRIVAL The stranger came early in February , one wintry day , through a biting wind and a driving snow , the last snowfall of the year , over the down , walking from Bramblehurst railway station , and carrying a little black portmanteau in his thickly gloved hand . 
He was wrapped up from head to foot , and the brim of his soft felt hat hid every inch of his face but the shiny tip of his nose ; the snow had piled itself against his shoulders and chest , and added a white crest to the burden he carried . 
He staggered into the `` Coach and Horses '' more dead than alive , and flung his portmanteau down . 
`` A fire , '' he cried , `` in the name of human charity ! 
A room and a fire ! '' 
He stamped and shook the snow from off himself in the bar , and followed Mrs. Hall into her guest parlour to strike his bargain . 
And with that much introduction , that and a couple of sovereigns flung upon the table , he took up his quarters in the inn . 
Mrs. Hall lit the fire and left him there while she went to prepare him a meal with her own hands . 
A guest to stop at Iping in the wintertime was an unheard-of piece of luck , let alone a guest who was no `` haggler , '' and she was resolved to show herself worthy of her good fortune . 
As soon as the bacon was well under way , and Millie , her lymphatic aid , had been brisked up a bit by a few deftly chosen expressions of contempt , she carried the cloth , plates , and glasses into the parlour and began to lay them with the utmost eclat . 
Although the fire was burning up briskly , she was surprised to see that her visitor still wore his hat and coat , standing with his back to her and staring out of the window at the falling snow in the yard . 
His gloved hands were clasped behind him , and he seemed to be lost in thought . 
She noticed that the melting snow that still sprinkled his shoulders dripped upon her carpet . 
`` Can I take your hat and coat , sir ? '' 
she said , `` and give them a good dry in the kitchen ? '' 
`` No , '' he said without turning . 
She was not sure she had heard him , and was about to repeat her question . 
He turned his head and looked at her over his shoulder . 
`` I prefer to keep them on , '' he said with emphasis , and she noticed that he wore big blue spectacles with sidelights , and had a bush side-whisker over his coat-collar that completely hid his cheeks and face . 
`` Very well , sir , '' she said . 
`` As you like . 
In a bit the room will be warmer . '' 
He made no answer , and had turned his face away from her again , and Mrs. Hall , feeling that her conversational advances were ill-timed , laid the rest of the table things in a quick staccato and whisked out of the room . 
When she returned he was still standing there , like a man of stone , his back hunched , his collar turned up , his dripping hat-brim turned down , hiding his face and ears completely . 
She put down the eggs and bacon with considerable emphasis , and called rather than said to him , `` Your lunch is served , sir . '' 
`` Thank you , '' he said at the same time , and did not stir until she was closing the door . 
Then he swung round and approached the table with a certain eager quickness . 
As she went behind the bar to the kitchen she heard a sound repeated at regular intervals . 
Chirk , chirk , chirk , it went , the sound of a spoon being rapidly whisked round a basin . 
`` That girl ! '' 
she said . 
`` There ! 
I clean forgot it . 
It 's her being so long ! '' 
And while she herself finished mixing the mustard , she gave Millie a few verbal stabs for her excessive slowness . 
She had cooked the ham and eggs , laid the table , and done everything , while Millie -LRB- help indeed ! -RRB- 
had only succeeded in delaying the mustard . 
And him a new guest and wanting to stay ! 
Then she filled the mustard pot , and , putting it with a certain stateliness upon a gold and black tea-tray , carried it into the parlour . 
She rapped and entered promptly . 
As she did so her visitor moved quickly , so that she got but a glimpse of a white object disappearing behind the table . 
It would seem he was picking something from the floor . 
She rapped down the mustard pot on the table , and then she noticed the overcoat and hat had been taken off and put over a chair in front of the fire , and a pair of wet boots threatened rust to her steel fender . 
She went to these things resolutely . 
`` I suppose I may have them to dry now , '' she said in a voice that brooked no denial . 
`` Leave the hat , '' said her visitor , in a muffled voice , and turning she saw he had raised his head and was sitting and looking at her . 
For a moment she stood gaping at him , too surprised to speak . 
He held a white cloth -- it was a serviette he had brought with him -- over the lower part of his face , so that his mouth and jaws were completely hidden , and that was the reason of his muffled voice . 
But it was not that which startled Mrs. Hall . 
It was the fact that all his forehead above his blue glasses was covered by a white bandage , and that another covered his ears , leaving not a scrap of his face exposed excepting only his pink , peaked nose . 
