The axe receded into the passage , and fell to a position about two feet from the ground . 
They could hear the Invisible Man breathing . 
`` Stand away , you two , '' he said . 
`` I want that man Kemp . '' 
`` We want you , '' said the first policeman , making a quick step forward and wiping with his poker at the Voice . 
The Invisible Man must have started back , and he blundered into the umbrella stand . 
Then , as the policeman staggered with the swing of the blow he had aimed , the Invisible Man countered with the axe , the helmet crumpled like paper , and the blow sent the man spinning to the floor at the head of the kitchen stairs . 
But the second policeman , aiming behind the axe with his poker , hit something soft that snapped . 
There was a sharp exclamation of pain and then the axe fell to the ground . 
The policeman wiped again at vacancy and hit nothing ; he put his foot on the axe , and struck again . 
Then he stood , poker clubbed , listening intent for the slightest movement . 
He heard the dining-room window open , and a quick rush of feet within . 
His companion rolled over and sat up , with the blood running down between his eye and ear . 
`` Where is he ? '' 
asked the man on the floor . 
`` Do n't know . 
I 've hit him . 
He 's standing somewhere in the hall . 
Unless he 's slipped past you . 
Doctor Kemp -- sir . '' 
Pause . 
`` Doctor Kemp , '' cried the policeman again . 
The second policeman began struggling to his feet . 
He stood up . 
Suddenly the faint pad of bare feet on the kitchen stairs could be heard . 
`` Yap ! '' 
cried the first policeman , and incontinently flung his poker . 
It smashed a little gas bracket . 
He made as if he would pursue the Invisible Man downstairs . 
Then he throught better of it and stepped into the dining-room . 
`` Doctor Kemp -- '' he began , and stopped short . 
`` Doctor Kemp 's a hero , '' he said , as his companion looked over his shoulder . 
The dining-room window was wide open , and neither housemaid nor Kemp was to be seen . 
The second policeman 's opinion of Kemp was terse and vivid . 
THE HUNTER HUNTED Mr. Heelas , Mr. Kemp 's nearest neighbour among the villa holders , was asleep in his summer house when the siege of Kemp 's house began . 
Mr. Heelas was one of the sturdy minority who refused to believe `` in all this nonsense '' about an Invisible Man . 
His wife , however , as he was subsequently to be reminded , did . 
He insisted upon walking about his garden just as if nothing was the matter , and he went to sleep in the afternoon in accordance with the custom of years . 
He slept through the smashing of the windows , and then woke up suddenly with a curious persuasion of something wrong . 
He looked across at Kemp 's house , rubbed his eyes and looked again . 
Then he put his feet to the ground , and sat listening . 
He said he was damned , but still the strange thing was visible . 
The house looked as though it had been deserted for weeks -- after a violent riot . 
Every window was broken , and every window , save those of the belvedere study , was blinded by the internal shutters . 
`` I could have sworn it was all right '' -- he looked at his watch -- `` twenty minutes ago . '' 
He became aware of a measured concussion and the clash of glass , far away in the distance . 
And then , as he sat open-mouthed , came a still more wonderful thing . 
The shutters of the drawing-room window were flung open violently , and the housemaid in her outdoor hat and garments , appeared struggling in a frantic manner to throw up the sash . 
Suddenly a man appeared beside her , helping her -- Dr. Kemp ! 
In another moment the window was open , and the housemaid was struggling out ; she pitched forward and vanished among the shrubs . 
