And you know the knavish system of the scientific world . 
I simply would not publish , and let him share my credit . 
I went on working ; I got nearer and nearer making my formula into an experiment , a reality . 
I told no living soul , because I meant to flash my work upon the world with crushing effect and become famous at a blow . 
I took up the question of pigments to fill up certain gaps . 
And suddenly , not by design but by accident , I made a discovery in physiology . '' 
`` Yes ? '' 
`` You know the red colouring matter of blood ; it can be made white -- colourless -- and remain with all the functions it has now ! '' 
Kemp gave a cry of incredulous amazement . 
The Invisible Man rose and began pacing the little study . 
`` You may well exclaim . 
I remember that night . 
It was late at night -- in the daytime one was bothered with the gaping , silly students -- and I worked then sometimes till dawn . 
It came suddenly , splendid and complete in my mind . 
I was alone ; the laboratory was still , with the tall lights burning brightly and silently . 
In all my great moments I have been alone . 
` One could make an animal -- a tissue -- transparent ! 
One could make it invisible ! 
All except the pigments -- I could be invisible ! ' 
I said , suddenly realising what it meant to be an albino with such knowledge . 
It was overwhelming . 
I left the filtering I was doing , and went and stared out of the great window at the stars . ' 
I could be invisible ! ' 
I repeated . 
`` To do such a thing would be to transcend magic . 
And I beheld , unclouded by doubt , a magnificent vision of all that invisibility might mean to a man -- the mystery , the power , the freedom . 
Drawbacks I saw none . 
You have only to think ! 
And I , a shabby , poverty-struck , hemmed-in demonstrator , teaching fools in a provincial college , might suddenly become -- this . 
I ask you , Kemp if you ... Anyone , I tell you , would have flung himself upon that research . 
And I worked three years , and every mountain of difficulty I toiled over showed another from its summit . 
The infinite details ! 
And the exasperation ! 
A professor , a provincial professor , always prying . 
` When are you going to publish this work of yours ? ' 
was his everlasting question . 
And the students , the cramped means ! 
Three years I had of it -- `` And after three years of secrecy and exasperation , I found that to complete it was impossible -- impossible . '' 
`` How ? '' 
asked Kemp . 
`` Money , '' said the Invisible Man , and went again to stare out of the window . 
He turned around abruptly . 
`` I robbed the old man -- robbed my father . 
`` The money was not his , and he shot himself . '' 
AT THE HOUSE IN GREAT PORTLAND STREET For a moment Kemp sat in silence , staring at the back of the headless figure at the window . 
Then he started , struck by a thought , rose , took the Invisible Man 's arm , and turned him away from the outlook . 
`` You are tired , '' he said , `` and while I sit , you walk about . 
Have my chair . '' 
He placed himself between Griffin and the nearest window . 
For a space Griffin sat silent , and then he resumed abruptly : `` I had left the Chesilstowe cottage already , '' he said , `` when that happened . 
