Phipps , the Unitarian , had a front tooth broken , and Henfrey was injured in the cartilage of his ear . 
Jaffers was struck under the jaw , and , turning , caught at something that intervened between him and Huxter in the melee , and prevented their coming together . 
He felt a muscular chest , and in another moment the whole mass of struggling , excited men shot out into the crowded hall . 
`` I got him ! '' 
shouted Jaffers , choking and reeling through them all , and wrestling with purple face and swelling veins against his unseen enemy . 
Men staggered right and left as the extraordinary conflict swayed swiftly towards the house door , and went spinning down the half-dozen steps of the inn . 
Jaffers cried in a strangled voice -- holding tight , nevertheless , and making play with his knee -- spun around , and fell heavily undermost with his head on the gravel . 
Only then did his fingers relax . 
There were excited cries of `` Hold him ! '' 
`` Invisible ! '' 
and so forth , and a young fellow , a stranger in the place whose name did not come to light , rushed in at once , caught something , missed his hold , and fell over the constable 's prostrate body . 
Half-way across the road a woman screamed as something pushed by her ; a dog , kicked apparently , yelped and ran howling into Huxter 's yard , and with that the transit of the Invisible Man was accomplished . 
For a space people stood amazed and gesticulating , and then came panic , and scattered them abroad through the village as a gust scatters dead leaves . 
But Jaffers lay quite still , face upward and knees bent , at the foot of the steps of the inn . 
IN TRANSIT The eighth chapter is exceedingly brief , and relates that Gibbons , the amateur naturalist of the district , while lying out on the spacious open downs without a soul within a couple of miles of him , as he thought , and almost dozing , heard close to him the sound as of a man coughing , sneezing , and then swearing savagely to himself ; and looking , beheld nothing . 
Yet the voice was indisputable . 
It continued to swear with that breadth and variety that distinguishes the swearing of a cultivated man . 
It grew to a climax , diminished again , and died away in the distance , going as it seemed to him in the direction of Adderdean . 
It lifted to a spasmodic sneeze and ended . 
Gibbons had heard nothing of the morning 's occurrences , but the phenomenon was so striking and disturbing that his philosophical tranquillity vanished ; he got up hastily , and hurried down the steepness of the hill towards the village , as fast as he could go . 
MR. THOMAS MARVEL You must picture Mr. Thomas Marvel as a person of copious , flexible visage , a nose of cylindrical protrusion , a liquorish , ample , fluctuating mouth , and a beard of bristling eccentricity . 
His figure inclined to embonpoint ; his short limbs accentuated this inclination . 
He wore a furry silk hat , and the frequent substitution of twine and shoe-laces for buttons , apparent at critical points of his costume , marked a man essentially bachelor . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel was sitting with his feet in a ditch by the roadside over the down towards Adderdean , about a mile and a half out of Iping . 
His feet , save for socks of irregular open-work , were bare , his big toes were broad , and pricked like the ears of a watchful dog . 
In a leisurely manner -- he did everything in a leisurely manner -- he was contemplating trying on a pair of boots . 
They were the soundest boots he had come across for a long time , but too large for him ; whereas the ones he had were , in dry weather , a very comfortable fit , but too thin-soled for damp . 
Mr. Thomas Marvel hated roomy shoes , but then he hated damp . 
He had never properly thought out which he hated most , and it was a pleasant day , and there was nothing better to do . 
So he put the four shoes in a graceful group on the turf and looked at them . 
And seeing them there among the grass and springing agrimony , it suddenly occurred to him that both pairs were exceedingly ugly to see . 
He was not at all startled by a voice behind him . 
`` They 're boots , anyhow , '' said the Voice . 
`` They are -- charity boots , '' said Mr. Thomas Marvel , with his head on one side regarding them distastefully ; `` and which is the ugliest pair in the whole blessed universe , I 'm darned if I know ! '' 
`` H 'm , '' said the Voice . 
`` I 've worn worse -- in fact , I 've worn none . 
But none so owdacious ugly -- if you 'll allow the expression . 
I 've been cadging boots -- in particular -- for days . 
Because I was sick of them . 
They 're sound enough , of course . 
But a gentleman on tramp sees such a thundering lot of his boots . 
And if you 'll believe me , I 've raised nothing in the whole blessed country , try as I would , but them . 
Look at 'em ! 
And a good country for boots , too , in a general way . 
But it 's just my promiscuous luck . 
I 've got my boots in this country ten years or more . 
And then they treat you like this . '' 
`` It 's a beast of a country , '' said the Voice . 
`` And pigs for people . '' 
`` Ai n't it ? '' 
