He wondered what his antagonist was doing . 
He started . 
There was a smash from below . 
He hesitated and went downstairs again . 
Suddenly the house resounded with heavy blows and the splintering of wood . 
He heard a smash and the destructive clang of the iron fastenings of the shutters . 
He turned the key and opened the kitchen door . 
As he did so , the shutters , split and splintering , came flying inward . 
He stood aghast . 
The window frame , save for one crossbar , was still intact , but only little teeth of glass remained in the frame . 
The shutters had been driven in with an axe , and now the axe was descending in sweeping blows upon the window frame and the iron bars defending it . 
Then suddenly it leapt aside and vanished . 
He saw the revolver lying on the path outside , and then the little weapon sprang into the air . 
He dodged back . 
The revolver cracked just too late , and a splinter from the edge of the closing door flashed over his head . 
He slammed and locked the door , and as he stood outside he heard Griffin shouting and laughing . 
Then the blows of the axe with its splitting and smashing consequences , were resumed . 
Kemp stood in the passage trying to think . 
In a moment the Invisible Man would be in the kitchen . 
This door would not keep him a moment , and then -- A ringing came at the front door again . 
It would be the policemen . 
He ran into the hall , put up the chain , and drew the bolts . 
He made the girl speak before he dropped the chain , and the three people blundered into the house in a heap , and Kemp slammed the door again . 
`` The Invisible Man ! '' 
said Kemp . 
`` He has a revolver , with two shots -- left . 
He 's killed Adye . 
Shot him anyhow . 
Did n't you see him on the lawn ? 
He 's lying there . '' 
`` Who ? '' 
said one of the policemen . 
`` Adye , '' said Kemp . 
`` We came in the back way , '' said the girl . 
`` What 's that smashing ? '' 
asked one of the policemen . 
`` He 's in the kitchen -- or will be . 
He has found an axe -- '' Suddenly the house was full of the Invisible Man 's resounding blows on the kitchen door . 
The girl stared towards the kitchen , shuddered , and retreated into the dining-room . 
Kemp tried to explain in broken sentences . 
They heard the kitchen door give . 
`` This way , '' said Kemp , starting into activity , and bundled the policemen into the dining-room doorway . 
`` Poker , '' said Kemp , and rushed to the fender . 
He handed the poker he had carried to the policeman and the dining-room one to the other . 
He suddenly flung himself backward . 
`` Whup ! '' 
said one policeman , ducked , and caught the axe on his poker . 
The pistol snapped its penultimate shot and ripped a valuable Sidney Cooper . 
The second policeman brought his poker down on the little weapon , as one might knock down a wasp , and sent it rattling to the floor . 
At the first clash the girl screamed , stood screaming for a moment by the fireplace , and then ran to open the shutters -- possibly with an idea of escaping by the shattered window . 
