`` I 'm rare sorry the darg -- '' `` Not a bit , '' said the stranger . 
`` Never broke the skin . 
Hurry up with those things . '' 
He then swore to himself , so Mr. Hall asserts . 
Directly the first crate was , in accordance with his directions , carried into the parlour , the stranger flung himself upon it with extraordinary eagerness , and began to unpack it , scattering the straw with an utter disregard of Mrs. Hall 's carpet . 
And from it he began to produce bottles -- little fat bottles containing powders , small and slender bottles containing coloured and white fluids , fluted blue bottles labeled Poison , bottles with round bodies and slender necks , large green-glass bottles , large white-glass bottles , bottles with glass stoppers and frosted labels , bottles with fine corks , bottles with bungs , bottles with wooden caps , wine bottles , salad-oil bottles -- putting them in rows on the chiffonnier , on the mantel , on the table under the window , round the floor , on the bookshelf -- everywhere . 
The chemist 's shop in Bramblehurst could not boast half so many . 
Quite a sight it was . 
Crate after crate yielded bottles , until all six were empty and the table high with straw ; the only things that came out of these crates besides the bottles were a number of test-tubes and a carefully packed balance . 
And directly the crates were unpacked , the stranger went to the window and set to work , not troubling in the least about the litter of straw , the fire which had gone out , the box of books outside , nor for the trunks and other luggage that had gone upstairs . 
When Mrs. Hall took his dinner in to him , he was already so absorbed in his work , pouring little drops out of the bottles into test-tubes , that he did not hear her until she had swept away the bulk of the straw and put the tray on the table , with some little emphasis perhaps , seeing the state that the floor was in . 
Then he half turned his head and immediately turned it away again . 
But she saw he had removed his glasses ; they were beside him on the table , and it seemed to her that his eye sockets were extraordinarily hollow . 
He put on his spectacles again , and then turned and faced her . 
She was about to complain of the straw on the floor when he anticipated her . 
`` I wish you would n't come in without knocking , '' he said in the tone of abnormal exasperation that seemed so characteristic of him . 
`` I knocked , but seemingly -- '' `` Perhaps you did . 
But in my investigations -- my really very urgent and necessary investigations -- the slightest disturbance , the jar of a door -- I must ask you -- '' `` Certainly , sir . 
You can turn the lock if you 're like that , you know . 
Any time . '' 
`` A very good idea , '' said the stranger . 
`` This stror , sir , if I might make so bold as to remark -- '' `` Do n't . 
If the straw makes trouble put it down in the bill . '' 
And he mumbled at her -- words suspiciously like curses . 
He was so odd , standing there , so aggressive and explosive , bottle in one hand and test-tube in the other , that Mrs. Hall was quite alarmed . 
But she was a resolute woman . 
`` In which case , I should like to know , sir , what you consider -- '' `` A shilling -- put down a shilling . 
Surely a shilling 's enough ? '' 
`` So be it , '' said Mrs. Hall , taking up the table-cloth and beginning to spread it over the table . 
`` If you 're satisfied , of course -- '' He turned and sat down , with his coat-collar toward her . 
All the afternoon he worked with the door locked and , as Mrs. Hall testifies , for the most part in silence . 
But once there was a concussion and a sound of bottles ringing together as though the table had been hit , and the smash of a bottle flung violently down , and then a rapid pacing athwart the room . 
Fearing `` something was the matter , '' she went to the door and listened , not caring to knock . 
`` I ca n't go on , '' he was raving . 
`` I _ ca n't _ go on . 
Three hundred thousand , four hundred thousand ! 
The huge multitude ! 
Cheated ! 
All my life it may take me ! 
... Patience ! 
Patience indeed ! 
... Fool ! 
fool ! '' 
There was a noise of hobnails on the bricks in the bar , and Mrs. Hall had very reluctantly to leave the rest of his soliloquy . 
When she returned the room was silent again , save for the faint crepitation of his chair and the occasional clink of a bottle . 
It was all over ; the stranger had resumed work . 
When she took in his tea she saw broken glass in the corner of the room under the concave mirror , and a golden stain that had been carelessly wiped . 
She called attention to it . 
`` Put it down in the bill , '' snapped her visitor . 
`` For God 's sake do n't worry me . 
