`` You 'd better move on , '' said the mariner . 
`` Who 's moving on ? '' 
said Mr. Marvel . 
He was receding obliquely with a curious hurrying gait , with occasional violent jerks forward . 
Some way along the road he began a muttered monologue , protests and recriminations . 
`` Silly devil ! '' 
said the mariner , legs wide apart , elbows akimbo , watching the receding figure . 
`` I 'll show you , you silly ass -- hoaxing me ! 
It 's here -- on the paper ! '' 
Mr. Marvel retorted incoherently and , receding , was hidden by a bend in the road , but the mariner still stood magnificent in the midst of the way , until the approach of a butcher 's cart dislodged him . 
Then he turned himself towards Port Stowe . 
`` Full of extra-ordinary asses , '' he said softly to himself . 
`` Just to take me down a bit -- that was his silly game -- It 's on the paper ! '' 
And there was another extraordinary thing he was presently to hear , that had happened quite close to him . 
And that was a vision of a `` fist full of money '' -LRB- no less -RRB- travelling without visible agency , along by the wall at the corner of St. Michael 's Lane . 
A brother mariner had seen this wonderful sight that very morning . 
He had snatched at the money forthwith and had been knocked headlong , and when he had got to his feet the butterfly money had vanished . 
Our mariner was in the mood to believe anything , he declared , but that was a bit too stiff . 
Afterwards , however , he began to think things over . 
The story of the flying money was true . 
And all about that neighbourhood , even from the august London and Country Banking Company , from the tills of shops and inns -- doors standing that sunny weather entirely open -- money had been quietly and dexterously making off that day in handfuls and rouleaux , floating quietly along by walls and shady places , dodging quickly from the approaching eyes of men . 
And it had , though no man had traced it , invariably ended its mysterious flight in the pocket of that agitated gentleman in the obsolete silk hat , sitting outside the little inn on the outskirts of Port Stowe . 
It was ten days after -- and indeed only when the Burdock story was already old -- that the mariner collated these facts and began to understand how near he had been to the wonderful Invisible Man . 
THE MAN WHO WAS RUNNING In the early evening time Dr. Kemp was sitting in his study in the belvedere on the hill overlooking Burdock . 
It was a pleasant little room , with three windows -- north , west , and south -- and bookshelves covered with books and scientific publications , and a broad writing-table , and , under the north window , a microscope , glass slips , minute instruments , some cultures , and scattered bottles of reagents . 
Dr. Kemp 's solar lamp was lit , albeit the sky was still bright with the sunset light , and his blinds were up because there was no offence of peering outsiders to require them pulled down . 
Dr. Kemp was a tall and slender young man , with flaxen hair and a moustache almost white , and the work he was upon would earn him , he hoped , the fellowship of the Royal Society , so highly did he think of it . 
And his eye , presently wandering from his work , caught the sunset blazing at the back of the hill that is over against his own . 
For a minute perhaps he sat , pen in mouth , admiring the rich golden colour above the crest , and then his attention was attracted by the little figure of a man , inky black , running over the hill-brow towards him . 
He was a shortish little man , and he wore a high hat , and he was running so fast that his legs verily twinkled . 
`` Another of those fools , '' said Dr. Kemp . 
`` Like that ass who ran into me this morning round a corner , with the '' Visible Man a-coming , sir ! ' 
I ca n't imagine what possess people . 
One might think we were in the thirteenth century . '' 
He got up , went to the window , and stared at the dusky hillside , and the dark little figure tearing down it . 
`` He seems in a confounded hurry , '' said Dr. Kemp , `` but he does n't seem to be getting on . 
If his pockets were full of lead , he could n't run heavier . '' 
`` Spurted , sir , '' said Dr. Kemp . 
In another moment the higher of the villas that had clambered up the hill from Burdock had occulted the running figure . 
He was visible again for a moment , and again , and then again , three times between the three detached houses that came next , and then the terrace hid him . 
`` Asses ! '' 
said Dr. Kemp , swinging round on his heel and walking back to his writing-table . 
But those who saw the fugitive nearer , and perceived the abject terror on his perspiring face , being themselves in the open roadway , did not share in the doctor 's contempt . 
By the man pounded , and as he ran he chinked like a well-filled purse that is tossed to and fro . 
He looked neither to the right nor the left , but his dilated eyes stared straight downhill to where the lamps were being lit , and the people were crowded in the street . 
And his ill-shaped mouth fell apart , and a glairy foam lay on his lips , and his breath came hoarse and noisy . 
All he passed stopped and began staring up the road and down , and interrogating one another with an inkling of discomfort for the reason of his haste . 
And then presently , far up the hill , a dog playing in the road yelped and ran under a gate , and as they still wondered something -- a wind -- a pad , pad , pad , -- a sound like a panting breathing , rushed by . 
People screamed . 
People sprang off the pavement : It passed in shouts , it passed by instinct down the hill . 
