`` But a fool of a cabman , standing outside a public house , made a sudden rush for this , and his extending fingers took me with excruciating violence under the ear . 
I let the whole down with a smash on the cabman , and then , with shouts and the clatter of feet about me , people coming out of shops , vehicles pulling up , I realised what I had done for myself , and cursing my folly , backed against a shop window and prepared to dodge out of the confusion . 
In a moment I should be wedged into a crowd and inevitably discovered . 
I pushed by a butcher boy , who luckily did not turn to see the nothingness that shoved him aside , and dodged behind the cab-man 's four-wheeler . 
I do not know how they settled the business , I hurried straight across the road , which was happily clear , and hardly heeding which way I went , in the fright of detection the incident had given me , plunged into the afternoon throng of Oxford Street . 
`` I tried to get into the stream of people , but they were too thick for me , and in a moment my heels were being trodden upon . 
I took to the gutter , the roughness of which I found painful to my feet , and forthwith the shaft of a crawling hansom dug me forcibly under the shoulder blade , reminding me that I was already bruised severely . 
I staggered out of the way of the cab , avoided a perambulator by a convulsive movement , and found myself behind the hansom . 
A happy thought saved me , and as this drove slowly along I followed in its immediate wake , trembling and astonished at the turn of my adventure . 
And not only trembling , but shivering . 
It was a bright day in January and I was stark naked and the thin slime of mud that covered the road was freezing . 
Foolish as it seems to me now , I had not reckoned that , transparent or not , I was still amenable to the weather and all its consequences . 
`` Then suddenly a bright idea came into my head . 
I ran round and got into the cab . 
And so , shivering , scared , and sniffing with the first intimations of a cold , and with the bruises in the small of my back growing upon my attention , I drove slowly along Oxford Street and past Tottenham Court Road . 
My mood was as different from that in which I had sallied forth ten minutes ago as it is possible to imagine . 
This invisibility indeed ! 
The one thought that possessed me was -- how was I to get out of the scrape I was in . 
`` We crawled past Mudie 's , and there a tall woman with five or six yellow-labelled books hailed my cab , and I sprang out just in time to escape her , shaving a railway van narrowly in my flight . 
I made off up the roadway to Bloomsbury Square , intending to strike north past the Museum and so get into the quiet district . 
I was now cruelly chilled , and the strangeness of my situation so unnerved me that I whimpered as I ran . 
At the northward corner of the Square a little white dog ran out of the Pharmaceutical Society 's offices , and incontinently made for me , nose down . 
`` I had never realised it before , but the nose is to the mind of a dog what the eye is to the mind of a seeing man . 
Dogs perceive the scent of a man moving as men perceive his vision . 
This brute began barking and leaping , showing , as it seemed to me , only too plainly that he was aware of me . 
I crossed Great Russell Street , glancing over my shoulder as I did so , and went some way along Montague Street before I realised what I was running towards . 
`` Then I became aware of a blare of music , and looking along the street saw a number of people advancing out of Russell Square , red shirts , and the banner of the Salvation Army to the fore . 
Such a crowd , chanting in the roadway and scoffing on the pavement , I could not hope to penetrate , and dreading to go back and farther from home again , and deciding on the spur of the moment , I ran up the white steps of a house facing the museum railings , and stood there until the crowd should have passed . 
Happily the dog stopped at the noise of the band too , hesitated , and turned tail , running back to Bloomsbury Square again . 
`` On came the band , bawling with unconscious irony some hymn about ` When shall we see His face ? ' 
and it seemed an interminable time to me before the tide of the crowd washed along the pavement by me . 
Thud , thud , thud , came the drum with a vibrating resonance , and for the moment I did not notice two urchins stopping at the railings by me . 
` See 'em , ' said one . 
` See what ? ' 
said the other . 
` Why -- them footmarks -- bare . 
Like what you makes in mud . ' 
`` I looked down and saw the youngsters had stopped and were gaping at the muddy footmarks I had left behind me up the newly whitened steps . 
The passing people elbowed and jostled them , but their confounded intelligence was arrested . 
` Thud , thud , thud , when , thud , shall we see , thud , his face , thud , thud . ' 
` There 's a barefoot man gone up them steps , or I do n't know nothing , ' said one . 
` And he ai n't never come down again . 
And his foot was a-bleeding . ' 
`` The thick of the crowd had already passed . 
` Looky there , Ted , ' quoth the younger of the detectives , with the sharpness of surprise in his voice , and pointed straight to my feet . 
I looked down and saw at once the dim suggestion of their outline sketched in splashes of mud . 
For a moment I was paralysed . '' 
` Why , that 's rum , ' said the elder . 
` Dashed rum ! 
It 's just like the ghost of a foot , ai n't it ? ' 
