said Kemp . 
`` I did n't mean to interrupt . '' 
`` It 's very probably been killed , '' said the Invisible Man . 
`` It was alive four days after , I know , and down a grating in Great Tichfield Street ; because I saw a crowd round the place , trying to see whence the miaowing came . '' 
He was silent for the best part of a minute . 
Then he resumed abruptly : `` I remember that morning before the change very vividly . 
I must have gone up Great Portland Street . 
I remember the barracks in Albany Street , and the horse soldiers coming out , and at last I found the summit of Primrose Hill . 
It was a sunny day in January -- one of those sunny , frosty days that came before the snow this year . 
My weary brain tried to formulate the position , to plot out a plan of action . 
`` I was surprised to find , now that my prize was within my grasp , how inconclusive its attainment seemed . 
As a matter of fact I was worked out ; the intense stress of nearly four years ' continuous work left me incapable of any strength of feeling . 
I was apathetic , and I tried in vain to recover the enthusiasm of my first inquiries , the passion of discovery that had enabled me to compass even the downfall of my father 's grey hairs . 
Nothing seemed to matter . 
I saw pretty clearly this was a transient mood , due to overwork and want of sleep , and that either by drugs or rest it would be possible to recover my energies . 
`` All I could think clearly was that the thing had to be carried through ; the fixed idea still ruled me . 
And soon , for the money I had was almost exhausted . 
I looked about me at the hillside , with children playing and girls watching them , and tried to think of all the fantastic advantages an invisible man would have in the world . 
After a time I crawled home , took some food and a strong dose of strychnine , and went to sleep in my clothes on my unmade bed . 
Strychnine is a grand tonic , Kemp , to take the flabbiness out of a man . '' 
`` It 's the devil , '' said Kemp . 
`` It 's the palaeolithic in a bottle . '' 
`` I awoke vastly invigorated and rather irritable . 
You know ? '' 
`` I know the stuff . '' 
`` And there was someone rapping at the door . 
It was my landlord with threats and inquiries , an old Polish Jew in a long grey coat and greasy slippers . 
I had been tormenting a cat in the night , he was sure -- the old woman 's tongue had been busy . 
He insisted on knowing all about it . 
The laws in this country against vivisection were very severe -- he might be liable . 
I denied the cat . 
Then the vibration of the little gas engine could be felt all over the house , he said . 
That was true , certainly . 
He edged round me into the room , peering about over his German-silver spectacles , and a sudden dread came into my mind that he might carry away something of my secret . 
I tried to keep between him and the concentrating apparatus I had arranged , and that only made him more curious . 
What was I doing ? 
Why was I always alone and secretive ? 
Was it legal ? 
Was it dangerous ? 
I paid nothing but the usual rent . 
His had always been a most respectable house -- in a disreputable neighbourhood . 
Suddenly my temper gave way . 
I told him to get out . 
He began to protest , to jabber of his right of entry . 
In a moment I had him by the collar ; something ripped , and he went spinning out into his own passage . 
I slammed and locked the door and sat down quivering . 
`` He made a fuss outside , which I disregarded , and after a time he went away . 
`` But this brought matters to a crisis . 
I did not know what he would do , nor even what he had the power to do . 
To move to fresh apartments would have meant delay ; altogether I had barely twenty pounds left in the world , for the most part in a bank -- and I could not afford that . 
