To gain time I answered them . 
The invisible rag and pillow came to hand and I opened the window and pitched them out on to the cistern cover . 
As the window opened , a heavy crash came at the door . 
Someone had charged it with the idea of smashing the lock . 
But the stout bolts I had screwed up some days before stopped him . 
That startled me , made me angry . 
I began to tremble and do things hurriedly . 
`` I tossed together some loose paper , straw , packing paper and so forth , in the middle of the room , and turned on the gas . 
Heavy blows began to rain upon the door . 
I could not find the matches . 
I beat my hands on the wall with rage . 
I turned down the gas again , stepped out of the window on the cistern cover , very softly lowered the sash , and sat down , secure and invisible , but quivering with anger , to watch events . 
They split a panel , I saw , and in another moment they had broken away the staples of the bolts and stood in the open doorway . 
It was the landlord and his two step-sons , sturdy young men of three or four and twenty . 
Behind them fluttered the old hag of a woman from downstairs . 
`` You may imagine their astonishment to find the room empty . 
One of the younger men rushed to the window at once , flung it up and stared out . 
His staring eyes and thick-lipped bearded face came a foot from my face . 
I was half minded to hit his silly countenance , but I arrested my doubled fist . 
He stared right through me . 
So did the others as they joined him . 
The old man went and peered under the bed , and then they all made a rush for the cupboard . 
They had to argue about it at length in Yiddish and Cockney English . 
They concluded I had not answered them , that their imagination had deceived them . 
A feeling of extraordinary elation took the place of my anger as I sat outside the window and watched these four people -- for the old lady came in , glancing suspiciously about her like a cat , trying to understand the riddle of my behaviour . 
`` The old man , so far as I could understand his patois , agreed with the old lady that I was a vivisectionist . 
The sons protested in garbled English that I was an electrician , and appealed to the dynamos and radiators . 
They were all nervous about my arrival , although I found subsequently that they had bolted the front door . 
The old lady peered into the cupboard and under the bed , and one of the young men pushed up the register and stared up the chimney . 
One of my fellow lodgers , a coster-monger who shared the opposite room with a butcher , appeared on the landing , and he was called in and told incoherent things . 
`` It occurred to me that the radiators , if they fell into the hands of some acute well-educated person , would give me away too much , and watching my opportunity , I came into the room and tilted one of the little dynamos off its fellow on which it was standing , and smashed both apparatus . 
Then , while they were trying to explain the smash , I dodged out of the room and went softly downstairs . 
`` I went into one of the sitting-rooms and waited until they came down , still speculating and argumentative , all a little disappointed at finding no ` horrors , ' and all a little puzzled how they stood legally towards me . 
Then I slipped up again with a box of matches , fired my heap of paper and rubbish , put the chairs and bedding thereby , led the gas to the affair , by means of an india-rubber tube , and waving a farewell to the room left it for the last time . '' 
`` You fired the house ! '' 
exclaimed Kemp . 
`` Fired the house . 
It was the only way to cover my trail -- and no doubt it was insured . 
I slipped the bolts of the front door quietly and went out into the street . 
I was invisible , and I was only just beginning to realise the extraordinary advantage my invisibility gave me . 
My head was already teeming with plans of all the wild and wonderful things I had now impunity to do . 
IN OXFORD STREET `` In going downstairs the first time I found an unexpected difficulty because I could not see my feet ; indeed I stumbled twice , and there was an unaccustomed clumsiness in gripping the bolt . 
By not looking down , however , I managed to walk on the level passably well . 
`` My mood , I say , was one of exaltation . 
I felt as a seeing man might do , with padded feet and noiseless clothes , in a city of the blind . 
I experienced a wild impulse to jest , to startle people , to clap men on the back , fling people 's hats astray , and generally revel in my extraordinary advantage . 
`` But hardly had I emerged upon Great Portland Street , however -LRB- my lodging was close to the big draper 's shop there -RRB- , when I heard a clashing concussion and was hit violently behind , and turning saw a man carrying a basket of soda-water syphons , and looking in amazement at his burden . 
Although the blow had really hurt me , I found something so irresistible in his astonishment that I laughed aloud . 
` The devil 's in the basket , ' I said , and suddenly twisted it out of his hand . 
He let go incontinently , and I swung the whole weight into the air . 
