Vanish ! 
It was irresistible . 
Then there would be an inquiry , the sacking of my room . 
`` At the thought of the possibility of my work being exposed or interrupted at its very climax , I became very angry and active . 
I hurried out with my three books of notes , my cheque-book -- the tramp has them now -- and directed them from the nearest Post Office to a house of call for letters and parcels in Great Portland Street . 
I tried to go out noiselessly . 
Coming in , I found my landlord going quietly upstairs ; he had heard the door close , I suppose . 
You would have laughed to see him jump aside on the landing as came tearing after him . 
He glared at me as I went by him , and I made the house quiver with the slamming of my door . 
I heard him come shuffling up to my floor , hesitate , and go down . 
I set to work upon my preparations forthwith . 
`` It was all done that evening and night . 
While I was still sitting under the sickly , drowsy influence of the drugs that decolourise blood , there came a repeated knocking at the door . 
It ceased , footsteps went away and returned , and the knocking was resumed . 
There was an attempt to push something under the door -- a blue paper . 
Then in a fit of irritation I rose and went and flung the door wide open . 
` Now then ? ' 
said I. `` It was my landlord , with a notice of ejectment or something . 
He held it out to me , saw something odd about my hands , I expect , and lifted his eyes to my face . 
`` For a moment he gaped . 
Then he gave a sort of inarticulate cry , dropped candle and writ together , and went blundering down the dark passage to the stairs . 
I shut the door , locked it , and went to the looking-glass . 
Then I understood his terror ... . 
My face was white -- like white stone . 
`` But it was all horrible . 
I had not expected the suffering . 
A night of racking anguish , sickness and fainting . 
I set my teeth , though my skin was presently afire , all my body afire ; but I lay there like grim death . 
I understood now how it was the cat had howled until I chloroformed it . 
Lucky it was I lived alone and untended in my room . 
There were times when I sobbed and groaned and talked . 
But I stuck to it ... . 
I became insensible and woke languid in the darkness . 
`` The pain had passed . 
I thought I was killing myself and I did not care . 
I shall never forget that dawn , and the strange horror of seeing that my hands had become as clouded glass , and watching them grow clearer and thinner as the day went by , until at last I could see the sickly disorder of my room through them , though I closed my transparent eyelids . 
My limbs became glassy , the bones and arteries faded , vanished , and the little white nerves went last . 
I gritted my teeth and stayed there to the end . 
At last only the dead tips of the fingernails remained , pallid and white , and the brown stain of some acid upon my fingers . 
`` I struggled up . 
At first I was as incapable as a swathed infant -- stepping with limbs I could not see . 
I was weak and very hungry . 
I went and stared at nothing in my shaving-glass , at nothing save where an attenuated pigment still remained behind the retina of my eyes , fainter than mist . 
I had to hang on to the table and press my forehead against the glass . 
`` It was only by a frantic effort of will that I dragged myself back to the apparatus and completed the process . 
`` I slept during the forenoon , pulling the sheet over my eyes to shut out the light , and about midday I was awakened again by a knocking . 
My strength had returned . 
I sat up and listened and heard a whispering . 
I sprang to my feet and as noiselessly as possible began to detach the connections of my apparatus , and to distribute it about the room , so as to destroy the suggestions of its arrangement . 
Presently the knocking was renewed and voices called , first my landlord 's , and then two others . 
