Mr. Bunting was standing in the window engaged in an attempt to clothe himself in the hearth-rug and a West Surrey Gazette . 
`` Who 's coming ? '' 
he said , so startled that his costume narrowly escaped disintegration . 
`` Invisible Man , '' said Cuss , and rushed on to the window . 
`` We 'd better clear out from here ! 
He 's fighting mad ! 
Mad ! '' 
In another moment he was out in the yard . 
`` Good heavens ! '' 
said Mr. Bunting , hesitating between two horrible alternatives . 
He heard a frightful struggle in the passage of the inn , and his decision was made . 
He clambered out of the window , adjusted his costume hastily , and fled up the village as fast as his fat little legs would carry him . 
From the moment when the Invisible Man screamed with rage and Mr. Bunting made his memorable flight up the village , it became impossible to give a consecutive account of affairs in Iping . 
Possibly the Invisible Man 's original intention was simply to cover Marvel 's retreat with the clothes and books . 
But his temper , at no time very good , seems to have gone completely at some chance blow , and forthwith he set to smiting and overthrowing , for the mere satisfaction of hurting . 
You must figure the street full of running figures , of doors slamming and fights for hiding-places . 
You must figure the tumult suddenly striking on the unstable equilibrium of old Fletcher 's planks and two chairs -- with cataclysmic results . 
You must figure an appalled couple caught dismally in a swing . 
And then the whole tumultuous rush has passed and the Iping street with its gauds and flags is deserted save for the still raging unseen , and littered with cocoanuts , overthrown canvas screens , and the scattered stock in trade of a sweetstuff stall . 
Everywhere there is a sound of closing shutters and shoving bolts , and the only visible humanity is an occasional flitting eye under a raised eyebrow in the corner of a window pane . 
The Invisible Man amused himself for a little while by breaking all the windows in the `` Coach and Horses , '' and then he thrust a street lamp through the parlour window of Mrs. Gribble . 
He it must have been who cut the telegraph wire to Adderdean just beyond Higgins ' cottage on the Adderdean road . 
And after that , as his peculiar qualities allowed , he passed out of human perceptions altogether , and he was neither heard , seen , nor felt in Iping any more . 
He vanished absolutely . 
But it was the best part of two hours before any human being ventured out again into the desolation of Iping street . 
MR. MARVEL DISCUSSES HIS RESIGNATION When the dusk was gathering and Iping was just beginning to peep timorously forth again upon the shattered wreckage of its Bank Holiday , a short , thick-set man in a shabby silk hat was marching painfully through the twilight behind the beechwoods on the road to Bramblehurst . 
He carried three books bound together by some sort of ornamental elastic ligature , and a bundle wrapped in a blue table-cloth . 
His rubicund face expressed consternation and fatigue ; he appeared to be in a spasmodic sort of hurry . 
He was accompanied by a voice other than his own , and ever and again he winced under the touch of unseen hands . 
`` If you give me the slip again , '' said the Voice , `` if you attempt to give me the slip again -- '' `` Lord ! '' 
said Mr. Marvel . 
`` That shoulder 's a mass of bruises as it is . '' 
`` On my honour , '' said the Voice , `` I will kill you . '' 
`` I did n't try to give you the slip , '' said Marvel , in a voice that was not far remote from tears . 
`` I swear I did n't . 
I did n't know the blessed turning , that was all ! 
How the devil was I to know the blessed turning ? 
As it is , I 've been knocked about -- '' `` You 'll get knocked about a great deal more if you do n't mind , '' said the Voice , and Mr. Marvel abruptly became silent . 
He blew out his cheeks , and his eyes were eloquent of despair . 
`` It 's bad enough to let these floundering yokels explode my little secret , without your cutting off with my books . 
It 's lucky for some of them they cut and ran when they did ! 
Here am I ... No one knew I was invisible ! 
And now what am I to do ? '' 
`` What am I to do ? '' 
asked Marvel , sotto voce . 
`` It 's all about . 
It will be in the papers ! 
Everybody will be looking for me ; everyone on their guard -- '' The Voice broke off into vivid curses and ceased . 
The despair of Mr. Marvel 's face deepened , and his pace slackened . 
`` Go on ! '' 
