The bearded man 's revolver cracked and the looking-glass at the back of the parlour starred and came smashing and tinkling down . 
As the barman entered the room he saw Marvel , curiously crumpled up and struggling against the door that led to the yard and kitchen . 
The door flew open while the barman hesitated , and Marvel was dragged into the kitchen . 
There was a scream and a clatter of pans . 
Marvel , head down , and lugging back obstinately , was forced to the kitchen door , and the bolts were drawn . 
Then the policeman , who had been trying to pass the barman , rushed in , followed by one of the cabmen , gripped the wrist of the invisible hand that collared Marvel , was hit in the face and went reeling back . 
The door opened , and Marvel made a frantic effort to obtain a lodgment behind it . 
Then the cabman collared something . 
`` I got him , '' said the cabman . 
The barman 's red hands came clawing at the unseen . 
`` Here he is ! '' 
said the barman . 
Mr. Marvel , released , suddenly dropped to the ground and made an attempt to crawl behind the legs of the fighting men . 
The struggle blundered round the edge of the door . 
The voice of the Invisible Man was heard for the first time , yelling out sharply , as the policeman trod on his foot . 
Then he cried out passionately and his fists flew round like flails . 
The cabman suddenly whooped and doubled up , kicked under the diaphragm . 
The door into the bar-parlour from the kitchen slammed and covered Mr. Marvel 's retreat . 
The men in the kitchen found themselves clutching at and struggling with empty air . 
`` Where 's he gone ? '' 
cried the man with the beard . 
`` Out ? '' 
`` This way , '' said the policeman , stepping into the yard and stopping . 
A piece of tile whizzed by his head and smashed among the crockery on the kitchen table . 
`` I 'll show him , '' shouted the man with the black beard , and suddenly a steel barrel shone over the policeman 's shoulder , and five bullets had followed one another into the twilight whence the missile had come . 
As he fired , the man with the beard moved his hand in a horizontal curve , so that his shots radiated out into the narrow yard like spokes from a wheel . 
A silence followed . 
`` Five cartridges , '' said the man with the black beard . 
`` That 's the best of all . 
Four aces and a joker . 
Get a lantern , someone , and come and feel about for his body . '' 
DR. KEMP 'S VISITOR Dr. Kemp had continued writing in his study until the shots aroused him . 
Crack , crack , crack , they came one after the other . 
`` Hullo ! '' 
said Dr. Kemp , putting his pen into his mouth again and listening . 
`` Who 's letting off revolvers in Burdock ? 
What are the asses at now ? '' 
He went to the south window , threw it up , and leaning out stared down on the network of windows , beaded gas-lamps and shops , with its black interstices of roof and yard that made up the town at night . 
`` Looks like a crowd down the hill , '' he said , `` by ` The Cricketers , ' '' and remained watching . 
Thence his eyes wandered over the town to far away where the ships ' lights shone , and the pier glowed -- a little illuminated , facetted pavilion like a gem of yellow light . 
The moon in its first quarter hung over the westward hill , and the stars were clear and almost tropically bright . 
After five minutes , during which his mind had travelled into a remote speculation of social conditions of the future , and lost itself at last over the time dimension , Dr. Kemp roused himself with a sigh , pulled down the window again , and returned to his writing desk . 
It must have been about an hour after this that the front-door bell rang . 
He had been writing slackly , and with intervals of abstraction , since the shots . 
He sat listening . 
He heard the servant answer the door , and waited for her feet on the staircase , but she did not come . 
`` Wonder what that was , '' said Dr. Kemp . 
He tried to resume his work , failed , got up , went downstairs from his study to the landing , rang , and called over the balustrade to the housemaid as she appeared in the hall below . 
`` Was that a letter ? '' 
he asked . 
