Every thicket , every quiet corner . 
And put all weapons -- all implements that might be weapons , away . 
He ca n't carry such things for long . 
And what he can snatch up and strike men with must be hidden away . '' 
`` Good again , '' said Adye . 
`` We shall have him yet ! '' 
`` And on the roads , '' said Kemp , and hesitated . 
`` Yes ? '' 
said Adye . 
`` Powdered glass , '' said Kemp . 
`` It 's cruel , I know . 
But think of what he may do ! '' 
Adye drew the air in sharply between his teeth . 
`` It 's unsportsmanlike . 
I do n't know . 
But I 'll have powdered glass got ready . 
If he goes too far ... '' `` The man 's become inhuman , I tell you , '' said Kemp . 
`` I am as sure he will establish a reign of terror -- so soon as he has got over the emotions of this escape -- as I am sure I am talking to you . 
Our only chance is to be ahead . 
He has cut himself off from his kind . 
His blood be upon his own head . '' 
THE WICKSTEED MURDER The Invisible Man seems to have rushed out of Kemp 's house in a state of blind fury . 
A little child playing near Kemp 's gateway was violently caught up and thrown aside , so that its ankle was broken , and thereafter for some hours the Invisible Man passed out of human perceptions . 
No one knows where he went nor what he did . 
But one can imagine him hurrying through the hot June forenoon , up the hill and on to the open downland behind Port Burdock , raging and despairing at his intolerable fate , and sheltering at last , heated and weary , amid the thickets of Hintondean , to piece together again his shattered schemes against his species . 
That seems to most probable refuge for him , for there it was he re-asserted himself in a grimly tragical manner about two in the afternoon . 
One wonders what his state of mind may have been during that time , and what plans he devised . 
No doubt he was almost ecstatically exasperated by Kemp 's treachery , and though we may be able to understand the motives that led to that deceit , we may still imagine and even sympathise a little with the fury the attempted surprise must have occasioned . 
Perhaps something of the stunned astonishment of his Oxford Street experiences may have returned to him , for he had evidently counted on Kemp 's co-operation in his brutal dream of a terrorised world . 
At any rate he vanished from human ken about midday , and no living witness can tell what he did until about half-past two . 
It was a fortunate thing , perhaps , for humanity , but for him it was a fatal inaction . 
During that time a growing multitude of men scattered over the countryside were busy . 
In the morning he had still been simply a legend , a terror ; in the afternoon , by virtue chiefly of Kemp 's drily worded proclamation , he was presented as a tangible antagonist , to be wounded , captured , or overcome , and the countryside began organising itself with inconceivable rapidity . 
By two o'clock even he might still have removed himself out of the district by getting aboard a train , but after two that became impossible . 
Every passenger train along the lines on a great parallelogram between Southampton , Manchester , Brighton and Horsham , travelled with locked doors , and the goods traffic was almost entirely suspended . 
And in a great circle of twenty miles round Port Burdock , men armed with guns and bludgeons were presently setting out in groups of three and four , with dogs , to beat the roads and fields . 
Mounted policemen rode along the country lanes , stopping at every cottage and warning the people to lock up their houses , and keep indoors unless they were armed , and all the elementary schools had broken up by three o'clock , and the children , scared and keeping together in groups , were hurrying home . 
Kemp 's proclamation -- signed indeed by Adye -- was posted over almost the whole district by four or five o'clock in the afternoon . 
It gave briefly but clearly all the conditions of the struggle , the necessity of keeping the Invisible Man from food and sleep , the necessity for incessant watchfulness and for a prompt attention to any evidence of his movements . 
And so swift and decided was the action of the authorities , so prompt and universal was the belief in this strange being , that before nightfall an area of several hundred square miles was in a stringent state of siege . 
And before nightfall , too , a thrill of horror went through the whole watching nervous countryside . 
Going from whispering mouth to mouth , swift and certain over the length and breadth of the country , passed the story of the murder of Mr. Wicksteed . 
If our supposition that the Invisible Man 's refuge was the Hintondean thickets , then we must suppose that in the early afternoon he sallied out again bent upon some project that involved the use of a weapon . 
We can not know what the project was , but the evidence that he had the iron rod in hand before he met Wicksteed is to me at least overwhelming . 
Of course we can know nothing of the details of that encounter . 
It occurred on the edge of a gravel pit , not two hundred yards from Lord Burdock 's lodge gate . 
Everything points to a desperate struggle -- the trampled ground , the numerous wounds Mr. Wicksteed received , his splintered walking-stick ; but why the attack was made , save in a murderous frenzy , it is impossible to imagine . 
Indeed the theory of madness is almost unavoidable . 
Mr. Wicksteed was a man of forty-five or forty-six , steward to Lord Burdock , of inoffensive habits and appearance , the very last person in the world to provoke such a terrible antagonist . 
Against him it would seem the Invisible Man used an iron rod dragged from a broken piece of fence . 
