For even when tranquilly swimming through the mid-day sea in a calm , with his elevated hump sun-dried as a dromedary 's in the desert ; even then , the whale always carries a small basin of water on his head , as under a blazing sun you will sometimes see a cavity in a rock filled up with rain . 
Nor is it at all prudent for the hunter to be over curious touching the precise nature of the whale spout . 
It will not do for him to be peering into it , and putting his face in it . 
You can not go with your pitcher to this fountain and fill it , and bring it away . 
For even when coming into slight contact with the outer , vapory shreds of the jet , which will often happen , your skin will feverishly smart , from the acridness of the thing so touching it . 
And I know one , who coming into still closer contact with the spout , whether with some scientific object in view , or otherwise , I can not say , the skin peeled off from his cheek and arm . 
Wherefore , among whalemen , the spout is deemed poisonous ; they try to evade it . 
Another thing ; I have heard it said , and I do not much doubt it , that if the jet is fairly spouted into your eyes , it will blind you . 
The wisest thing the investigator can do then , it seems to me , is to let this deadly spout alone . 
Still , we can hypothesize , even if we can not prove and establish . 
My hypothesis is this : that the spout is nothing but mist . 
And besides other reasons , to this conclusion I am impelled , by considerations touching the great inherent dignity and sublimity of the Sperm Whale ; I account him no common , shallow being , inasmuch as it is an undisputed fact that he is never found on soundings , or near shores ; all other whales sometimes are . 
He is both ponderous and profound . 
And I am convinced that from the heads of all ponderous profound beings , such as Plato , Pyrrho , the Devil , Jupiter , Dante , and so on , there always goes up a certain semi-visible steam , while in the act of thinking deep thoughts . 
While composing a little treatise on Eternity , I had the curiosity to place a mirror before me ; and ere long saw reflected there , a curious involved worming and undulation in the atmosphere over my head . 
The invariable moisture of my hair , while plunged in deep thought , after six cups of hot tea in my thin shingled attic , of an August noon ; this seems an additional argument for the above supposition . 
And how nobly it raises our conceit of the mighty , misty monster , to behold him solemnly sailing through a calm tropical sea ; his vast , mild head overhung by a canopy of vapor , engendered by his incommunicable contemplations , and that vapor -- as you will sometimes see it -- glorified by a rainbow , as if Heaven itself had put its seal upon his thoughts . 
For d'ye see , rainbows do not visit the clear air ; they only irradiate vapor . 
And so , through all the thick mists of the dim doubts in my mind , divine intuitions now and then shoot , enkindling my fog with a heavenly ray . 
And for this I thank God ; for all have doubts ; many deny ; but doubts or denials , few along with them , have intuitions . 
Doubts of all things earthly , and intuitions of some things heavenly ; this combination makes neither believer nor infidel , but makes a man who regards them both with equal eye . 
The Tail Other poets have warbled the praises of the soft eye of the antelope , and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights ; less celestial , I celebrate a tail . 
Reckoning the largest sized Sperm Whale 's tail to begin at that point of the trunk where it tapers to about the girth of a man , it comprises upon its upper surface alone , an area of at least fifty square feet . 
The compact round body of its root expands into two broad , firm , flat palms or flukes , gradually shoaling away to less than an inch in thickness . 
At the crotch or junction , these flukes slightly overlap , then sideways recede from each other like wings , leaving a wide vacancy between . 
In no living thing are the lines of beauty more exquisitely defined than in the crescentic borders of these flukes . 
At its utmost expansion in the full grown whale , the tail will considerably exceed twenty feet across . 
The entire member seems a dense webbed bed of welded sinews ; but cut into it , and you find that three distinct strata compose it : -- upper , middle , and lower . 
The fibres in the upper and lower layers , are long and horizontal ; those of the middle one , very short , and running crosswise between the outside layers . 
This triune structure , as much as anything else , imparts power to the tail . 
To the student of old Roman walls , the middle layer will furnish a curious parallel to the thin course of tiles always alternating with the stone in those wonderful relics of the antique , and which undoubtedly contribute so much to the great strength of the masonry . 
But as if this vast local power in the tendinous tail were not enough , the whole bulk of the leviathan is knit over with a warp and woof of muscular fibres and filaments , which passing on either side the loins and running down into the flukes , insensibly blend with them , and largely contribute to their might ; so that in the tail the confluent measureless force of the whole whale seems concentrated to a point . 
Could annihilation occur to matter , this were the thing to do it . 
Nor does this -- its amazing strength , at all tend to cripple the graceful flexion of its motions ; where infantileness of ease undulates through a Titanism of power . 
On the contrary , those motions derive their most appalling beauty from it . 
Real strength never impairs beauty or harmony , but it often bestows it ; and in everything imposingly beautiful , strength has much to do with the magic . 
Take away the tied tendons that all over seem bursting from the marble in the carved Hercules , and its charm would be gone . 
As devout Eckerman lifted the linen sheet from the naked corpse of Goethe , he was overwhelmed with the massive chest of the man , that seemed as a Roman triumphal arch . 
When Angelo paints even God the Father in human form , mark what robustness is there . 
And whatever they may reveal of the divine love in the Son , the soft , curled , hermaphroditical Italian pictures , in which his idea has been most successfully embodied ; these pictures , so destitute as they are of all brawniness , hint nothing of any power , but the mere negative , feminine one of submission and endurance , which on all hands it is conceded , form the peculiar practical virtues of his teachings . 
Such is the subtle elasticity of the organ I treat of , that whether wielded in sport , or in earnest , or in anger , whatever be the mood it be in , its flexions are invariably marked by exceeding grace . 
Therein no fairy 's arm can transcend it . 
Five great motions are peculiar to it . 
First , when used as a fin for progression ; Second , when used as a mace in battle ; Third , in sweeping ; Fourth , in lobtailing ; Fifth , in peaking flukes . 
First : Being horizontal in its position , the Leviathan 's tail acts in a different manner from the tails of all other sea creatures . 
It never wriggles . 
In man or fish , wriggling is a sign of inferiority . 
To the whale his tail is the sole means of propulsion . 
Scroll-wise coiled forwards beneath the body , and then rapidly sprung backwards , it is this which gives that singular darting , leaping motion to the monster when furiously swimming . 
His side-fins only serve to steer by . 
