perry easy ! 
He was going on with some wild reminiscences about his tomahawk-pipe which , it seemed , had in its two uses both brained his foes and soothed his soul , when we were directly attracted to the sleeping rigger . 
The strong vapor now completely filling the contracted hole , it began to tell upon him . 
He breathed with a sort of muffledness ; then seemed troubled in the nose ; then revolved over once or twice ; then sat up and rubbed his eyes . 
`` Holloa ! '' 
he breathed at last , `` who be ye smokers ? '' 
`` Shipped men , '' answered I , `` when does she sail ? '' 
`` Aye , aye , ye are going in her , be ye ? 
She sails to-day . 
The Captain came aboard last night . '' 
`` What Captain ? 
-- Ahab ? '' 
`` Who but him indeed ? '' 
I was going to ask him some further questions concerning Ahab , when we heard a noise on deck . 
`` Holloa ! 
Starbuck 's astir , '' said the rigger . 
`` He 's a lively chief mate that ; good man , and a pious ; but all alive now , I must turn to . '' 
And so saying he went on deck , and we followed . 
It was now clear sunrise . 
Soon the crew came on board in twos and threes ; the riggers bestirred themselves ; the mates were actively engaged ; and several of the shore people were busy in bringing various last things on board . 
Meanwhile Captain Ahab remained invisibly enshrined within his cabin . 
Merry Christmas At length , towards noon , upon the final dismissal of the ship 's riggers , and after the Pequod had been hauled out from the wharf , and after the ever-thoughtful Charity had come off in a whale-boat , with her last gift -- a nightcap for Stubb , the second mate , her brother-in-law , and a spare Bible for the steward -- after all this , the two Captains , Peleg and Bildad , issued from the cabin , and turning to the chief mate , Peleg said : `` Now , Mr. Starbuck , are you sure everything is right ? 
Captain Ahab is all ready -- just spoke to him -- nothing more to be got from shore , eh ? 
Well , call all hands , then . 
Muster 'em aft here -- blast 'em ! '' 
`` No need of profane words , however great the hurry , Peleg , '' said Bildad , `` but away with thee , friend Starbuck , and do our bidding . '' 
How now ! 
Here upon the very point of starting for the voyage , Captain Peleg and Captain Bildad were going it with a high hand on the quarter-deck , just as if they were to be joint-commanders at sea , as well as to all appearances in port . 
And , as for Captain Ahab , no sign of him was yet to be seen ; Only , they said he was in the cabin . 
But then , the idea was , that his presence was by no means necessary in getting the ship under weigh , and steering her well out to sea . 
Indeed , as that was not at all his proper business , but the pilot 's ; and as he was not yet completely recovered -- so they said -- therefore , Captain Ahab stayed below . 
And all this seemed natural enough ; especially as in the merchant service many captains never show themselves on deck for a considerable time after heaving up the anchor , but remain over the cabin table , having a farewell merry-making with their shore friends , before they quit the ship for good with the pilot . 
But there was not much chance to think over the matter , for Captain Peleg was now all alive . 
He seemed to do most of the talking and commanding , and not Bildad . 
`` Aft here , ye sons of bachelors , '' he cried , as the sailors lingered at the main-mast . 
`` Mr. Starbuck , drive aft . '' 
`` Strike the tent there ! '' 
-- was the next order . 
As I hinted before , this whalebone marquee was never pitched except in port ; and on board the Pequod , for thirty years , the order to strike the tent was well known to be the next thing to heaving up the anchor . 
`` Man the capstan ! 
Blood and thunder ! 
-- jump ! '' 
-- was the next command , and the crew sprang for the handspikes . 
Now in getting under weigh , the station generally occupied by the pilot is the forward part of the ship . 
And here Bildad , who , with Peleg , be it known , in addition to his other offices , was one of the licensed pilots of the port -- he being suspected to have got himself made a pilot in order to save the Nantucket pilot-fee to all the ships he was concerned in , for he never piloted any other craft -- Bildad , I say , might now be seen actively engaged in looking over the bows for the approaching anchor , and at intervals singing what seemed a dismal stave of psalmody , to cheer the hands at the windlass , who roared forth some sort of a chorus about the girls in Booble Alley , with hearty good will . 
Nevertheless , not three days previous , Bildad had told them that no profane songs would be allowed on board the Pequod , particularly in getting under weigh ; and Charity , his sister , had placed a small choice copy of Watts in each seaman 's berth . 
Meantime , overseeing the other part of the ship , Captain Peleg ripped and swore astern in the most frightful manner . 
I almost thought he would sink the ship before the anchor could be got up ; involuntarily I paused on my handspike , and told Queequeg to do the same , thinking of the perils we both ran , in starting on the voyage with such a devil for a pilot . 
I was comforting myself , however , with the thought that in pious Bildad might be found some salvation , spite of his seven hundred and seventy-seventh lay ; when I felt a sudden sharp poke in my rear , and turning round , was horrified at the apparition of Captain Peleg in the act of withdrawing his leg from my immediate vicinity . 
That was my first kick . 
