thou terror of all cruisers that crossed their wakes in the vicinity of the Tattoo Land ? 
Was it not so , O Morquan ! 
King of Japan , whose lofty jet they say at times assumed the semblance of a snow-white cross against the sky ? 
Was it not so , O Don Miguel ! 
thou Chilian whale , marked like an old tortoise with mystic hieroglyphics upon the back ! 
In plain prose , here are four whales as well known to the students of Cetacean History as Marius or Sylla to the classic scholar . 
But this is not all . 
New Zealand Tom and Don Miguel , after at various times creating great havoc among the boats of different vessels , were finally gone in quest of , systematically hunted out , chased and killed by valiant whaling captains , who heaved up their anchors with that express object as much in view , as in setting out through the Narragansett Woods , Captain Butler of old had it in his mind to capture that notorious murderous savage Annawon , the headmost warrior of the Indian King Philip . 
I do not know where I can find a better place than just here , to make mention of one or two other things , which to me seem important , as in printed form establishing in all respects the reasonableness of the whole story of the White Whale , more especially the catastrophe . 
For this is one of those disheartening instances where truth requires full as much bolstering as error . 
So ignorant are most landsmen of some of the plainest and most palpable wonders of the world , that without some hints touching the plain facts , historical and otherwise , of the fishery , they might scout at Moby Dick as a monstrous fable , or still worse and more detestable , a hideous and intolerable allegory . 
First : Though most men have some vague flitting ideas of the general perils of the grand fishery , yet they have nothing like a fixed , vivid conception of those perils , and the frequency with which they recur . 
One reason perhaps is , that not one in fifty of the actual disasters and deaths by casualties in the fishery , ever finds a public record at home , however transient and immediately forgotten that record . 
Do you suppose that that poor fellow there , who this moment perhaps caught by the whale-line off the coast of New Guinea , is being carried down to the bottom of the sea by the sounding leviathan -- do you suppose that that poor fellow 's name will appear in the newspaper obituary you will read to-morrow at your breakfast ? 
No : because the mails are very irregular between here and New Guinea . 
In fact , did you ever hear what might be called regular news direct or indirect from New Guinea ? 
Yet I will tell you that upon one particular voyage which I made to the Pacific , among many others we spoke thirty different ships , every one of which had had a death by a whale , some of them more than one , and three that had each lost a boat 's crew . 
For God 's sake , be economical with your lamps and candles ! 
not a gallon you burn , but at least one drop of man 's blood was spilled for it . 
Secondly : People ashore have indeed some indefinite idea that a whale is an enormous creature of enormous power ; but I have ever found that when narrating to them some specific example of this two-fold enormousness , they have significantly complimented me upon my facetiousness ; when , I declare upon my soul , I had no more idea of being facetious than Moses , when he wrote the history of the plagues of Egypt . 
But fortunately the special point I here seek can be established upon testimony entirely independent of my own . 
That point is this : The Sperm Whale is in some cases sufficiently powerful , knowing , and judiciously malicious , as with direct aforethought to stave in , utterly destroy , and sink a large ship ; and what is more , the Sperm Whale has done it . 
First : In the year 1820 the ship Essex , Captain Pollard , of Nantucket , was cruising in the Pacific Ocean . 
One day she saw spouts , lowered her boats , and gave chase to a shoal of sperm whales . 
Ere long , several of the whales were wounded ; when , suddenly , a very large whale escaping from the boats , issued from the shoal , and bore directly down upon the ship . 
Dashing his forehead against her hull , he so stove her in , that in less than `` ten minutes '' she settled down and fell over . 
Not a surviving plank of her has been seen since . 
After the severest exposure , part of the crew reached the land in their boats . 
Being returned home at last , Captain Pollard once more sailed for the Pacific in command of another ship , but the gods shipwrecked him again upon unknown rocks and breakers ; for the second time his ship was utterly lost , and forthwith forswearing the sea , he has never attempted it since . 
At this day Captain Pollard is a resident of Nantucket . 
I have seen Owen Chace , who was chief mate of the Essex at the time of the tragedy ; I have read his plain and faithful narrative ; I have conversed with his son ; and all this within a few miles of the scene of the catastrophe . 
* * The following are extracts from Chace 's narrative : `` Every fact seemed to warrant me in concluding that it was anything but chance which directed his operations ; he made two several attacks upon the ship , at a short interval between them , both of this catastrophe I have never chanced to their direction , were calculated to do us the whale hunters I have now and then heard casual allusions to it . 
Thirdly : Some eighteen or twenty years ago Commodore J -- then commanding an American sloop-of-war of the first class , happened to be dining with a party of whaling captains , on board a Nantucket ship in the harbor of Oahu , Sandwich Islands . 
Conversation turning upon whales , the Commodore was pleased to be sceptical touching the amazing strength ascribed to them by the professional gentlemen present . 
He peremptorily denied for example , that any whale could so smite his stout sloop-of-war as to cause her to leak so much as a thimbleful . 
Very good ; but there is more coming . 
Some weeks later , the Commodore set sail in this impregnable craft for Valparaiso . 
But he was stopped on the way by a portly sperm whale , that begged a few moments ' confidential business with him . 
That business consisted in fetching the Commodore 's craft such a thwack , that with all his pumps going he made straight for the nearest port to heave down and repair . 
I am not superstitious , but I consider the Commodore 's interview with that whale as providential . 
Was not Saul of Tarsus converted from unbelief by a similar fright ? 
I tell you , the sperm whale will stand no nonsense . 
I will now refer you to Langsdorff 's Voyages for a little circumstance in point , peculiarly interesting to the writer hereof . 
Langsdorff , you must know by the way , was attached to the Russian Admiral Krusenstern 's famous Discovery Expedition in the beginning of the present century . 
Captain Langsdorff thus begins his seventeenth chapter : `` By the thirteenth of May our ship was ready to sail , and the next day we were out in the open sea , on our way to Ochotsh . 
The weather was very clear and fine , but so intolerably cold that we were obliged to keep on our fur clothing . 
For some days we had very little wind ; it was not till the nineteenth that a brisk gale from the northwest sprang up . 
An uncommonly large whale , the body of which was larger than the ship itself , lay almost at the surface of the water , but was not perceived by any one on board till the moment when the ship , which was in full sail , was almost upon him , so that it was impossible to prevent its striking against him . 
We were thus placed in the most imminent danger , as this gigantic creature , setting up its back , raised the ship three feet at least out of the water . 
The masts reeled , and the sails fell altogether , while we who were below all sprang instantly upon the deck , concluding that we had struck upon some rock ; instead of this we saw the monster sailing off with the utmost gravity and solemnity . 
