A quoin is a solid which differs from a wedge in having its sharp end formed by the steep inclination of one side , instead of the mutual tapering of both sides . 
The lower subdivided part , called the junk , is one immense honeycomb of oil , formed by the crossing and recrossing , into ten thousand infiltrated cells , of tough elastic white fibres throughout its whole extent . 
The upper part , known as the Case , may be regarded as the great Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale . 
And as that famous great tierce is mystically carved in front , so the whale 's vast plaited forehead forms innumerable strange devices for the emblematical adornment of his wondrous tun . 
Moreover , as that of Heidelburgh was always replenished with the most excellent of the wines of the Rhenish valleys , so the tun of the whale contains by far the most precious of all his oily vintages ; namely , the highly-prized spermaceti , in its absolutely pure , limpid , and odoriferous state . 
Nor is this precious substance found unalloyed in any other part of the creature . 
Though in life it remains perfectly fluid , yet , upon exposure to the air , after death , it soon begins to concrete ; sending forth beautiful crystalline shoots , as when the first thin delicate ice is just forming in water . 
A large whale 's case generally yields about five hundred gallons of sperm , though from unavoidable circumstances , considerable of it is spilled , leaks , and dribbles away , or is otherwise irrevocably lost in the ticklish business of securing what you can . 
I know not with what fine and costly material the Heidelburgh Tun was coated within , but in superlative richness that coating could not possibly have compared with the silken pearl-colored membrane , like the lining of a fine pelisse , forming the inner surface of the Sperm Whale 's case . 
It will have been seen that the Heidelburgh Tun of the Sperm Whale embraces the entire length of the entire top of the head ; and since -- as has been elsewhere set forth -- the head embraces one third of the whole length of the creature , then setting that length down at eighty feet for a good sized whale , you have more than twenty-six feet for the depth of the tun , when it is lengthwise hoisted up and down against a ship 's side . 
As in decapitating the whale , the operator 's instrument is brought close to the spot where an entrance is subsequently forced into the spermaceti magazine ; he has , therefore , to be uncommonly heedful , lest a careless , untimely stroke should invade the sanctuary and wastingly let out its invaluable contents . 
It is this decapitated end of the head , also , which is at last elevated out of the water , and retained in that position by the enormous cutting tackles , whose hempen combinations , on one side , make quite a wilderness of ropes in that quarter . 
Thus much being said , attend now , I pray you , to that marvellous and -- in this particular instance -- almost fatal operation whereby the Sperm Whale 's great Heidelburgh Tun is tapped . 
Cistern and Buckets Nimble as a cat , Tashtego mounts aloft ; and without altering his erect posture , runs straight out upon the overhanging mainyard-arm , to the part where it exactly projects over the hoisted Tun . 
He has carried with him a light tackle called a whip , consisting of only two parts , travelling through a single-sheaved block . 
Securing this block , so that it hangs down from the yard-arm , he swings one end of the rope , till it is caught and firmly held by a hand on the deck . 
Then , hand-over-hand , down the other part , the Indian drops through the air , till dexterously he lands on the summit of the head . 
There -- still high elevated above the rest of the company , to whom he vivaciously cries -- he seems some Turkish Muezzin calling the good people to prayers from the top of a tower . 
A short-handled sharp spade being sent up to him , he diligently searches for the proper place to begin breaking into the Tun . 
In this business he proceeds very heedfully , like a treasure-hunter in some old house , sounding the walls to find where the gold is masoned in . 
By the time this cautious search is over , a stout ironbound bucket , precisely like a well-bucket , has been attached to one end of the whip ; while the other end , being stretched across the deck , is there held by two or three alert hands . 
These last now hoist the bucket within grasp of the Indian , to whom another person has reached up a very long pole . 
Inserting this pole into the bucket , Tashtego downward guides the bucket into the Tun , till it entirely disappears ; then giving the word to the seamen at the whip , up comes the bucket again , all bubbling like a dairy-maid 's pail of new milk . 
Carefully lowered from its height , the full-freighted vessel is caught by an appointed hand , and quickly emptied into a large tub . 
Then remounting aloft , it again goes through the same round until the deep cistern will yield no more . 
Towards the end , Tashtego has to ram his long pole harder and harder , and deeper and deeper into the Tun , until some twenty feet of the pole have gone down . 
Now , the people of the Pequod had been baling some time in this way ; several tubs had been filled with the fragrant sperm ; when all at once a queer accident happened . 
Whether it was that Tashtego , that wild Indian , was so heedless and reckless as to let go for a moment his one-handed hold on the great cabled tackles suspending the head ; or whether the place where he stood was so treacherous and oozy ; or whether the Evil One himself would have it to fall out so , without stating his particular reasons ; how it was exactly , there is no telling now ; but , on a sudden , as the eightieth or ninetieth bucket came suckingly up -- my God ! 
poor Tashtego -- like the twin reciprocating bucket in a veritable well , dropped head-foremost down into this great Tun of Heidelburgh , and with a horrible oily gurgling , went clean out of sight ! 
`` Man overboard ! '' 
cried Daggoo , who amid the general consternation first came to his senses . 
`` Swing the bucket this way ! '' 
and putting one foot into it , so as the better to secure his slippery hand-hold on the whip itself the hoisters ran him high up to the top of the head , almost before Tashtego could have reached its interior bottom . 
Meantime , there was a terrible tumult . 
Looking over the side , they saw the before lifeless head throbbing and heaving just below the surface of the sea , as if that moment seized with some momentous idea ; whereas it was only the poor Indian unconsciously revealing by those struggles the perilous depth to which he had sunk . 
At this instant , while Daggoo , on the summit of the head , was clearing the whip -- which had somehow got foul of the great cutting tackles -- a sharp cracking noise was heard ; and to the unspeakable horror of all , one of the two enormous hooks suspending the head tore out , and with a vast vibration the enormous mass sideways swung , till the drunk ship reeled and shook as if smitten by an iceberg . 
The one remaining hook , upon which the entire strain now depended , seemed every instant to be on the point of giving way ; an event still more likely from the violent motions of the head . 
`` Come down , come down ! '' 
yelled the seamen to Daggoo , but with one hand holding on to the heavy tackles , so that if the head should drop , he would still remain suspended ; the negro having cleared the foul line , rammed down the bucket into the now collapsed well , meaning that the buried harpooneer should grasp it , and so be hoisted out . 
`` In heaven 's name , man , '' cried Stubb , `` are you ramming home a cartridge there ? 
-- Avast ! 
How will that help him ; jamming that iron-bound bucket on top of his head ? 
Avast , will ye ! '' 
`` Stand clear of the tackle ! '' 
cried a voice like the bursting of a rocket . 
Almost in the same instant , with a thunder-boom , the enormous mass dropped into the sea , like Niagara 's Table-Rock into the whirlpool ; the suddenly relieved hull rolled away from it , to far down her glittering copper ; and all caught their breath , as half swinging -- now over the sailors ' heads , and now over the water -- Daggoo , through a thick mist of spray , was dimly beheld clinging to the pendulous tackles , while poor , buried-alive Tashtego was sinking utterly down to the bottom of the sea ! 
But hardly had the blinding vapor cleared away , when a naked figure with a boardingsword in his hand , was for one swift moment seen hovering over the bulwarks . 
The next , a loud splash announced that my brave Queequeg had dived to the rescue . 
One packed rush was made to the side , and every eye counted every ripple , as moment followed moment , and no sign of either the sinker or the diver could be seen . 
Some hands now jumped into a boat alongside , and pushed a little off from the ship . 
