Drop your tongs , cook , and hear my orders . 
Do ye hear ? 
Hold your hat in one hand , and clap t ` other a ` top of your heart , when I 'm giving my orders , cook . 
What ! 
that your heart , there ? 
-- that 's your gizzard ! 
Aloft ! 
aloft ! 
-- that 's it -- now you have it . 
Hold it there now , and pay attention . '' 
`` All ` dention , '' said the old black , with both hands placed as desired , vainly wriggling his grizzled head , as if to get both ears in front at one and the same time . 
`` Well then , cook , you see this whale-steak of yours was so very bad , that I have put it out of sight as soon as possible ; you see that , do n't you ? 
Well , for the future , when you cook another whale-steak for my private table here , the capstan , I 'll tell you what to do so as not to spoil it by overdoing . 
Hold the steak in one hand , and show a live coal to it with the other ; that done , dish it ; d'ye hear ? 
And now to-morrow , cook , when we are cutting in the fish , be sure you stand by to get the tips of his fins ; have them put in pickle . 
As for the ends of the flukes , have them soused , cook . 
There , now ye may go . '' 
But Fleece had hardly got three paces off , when he was recalled . 
`` Cook , give me cutlets for supper to-morrow night in the mid-watch . 
D'ye hear ? 
away you sail then . 
-- Halloa ! 
stop ! 
make a bow before you go . 
-- Avast heaving again ! 
Whale-balls for breakfast -- do n't forget . '' 
`` Wish , by gor ! 
whale eat him , ` stead of him eat whale . 
I 'm bressed if he ai n't more of shark dan Massa Shark hisself , '' muttered the old man , limping away ; with which sage ejaculation he went to his hammock . 
The Whale as a Dish That mortal man should feed upon the creature that feeds his lamp , and , like Stubb , eat him by his own light , as you may say ; this seems so outlandish a thing that one must needs go a little into the history and philosophy of it . 
It is upon record , that three centuries ago the tongue of the Right Whale was esteemed a great delicacy in France , and commanded large prices there . 
Also , that in Henry VIIIth 's time , a certain cook of the court obtained a handsome reward for inventing an admirable sauce to be eaten with barbacued porpoises , which , you remember , are a species of whale . 
Porpoises , indeed , are to this day considered fine eating . 
The meat is made into balls about the size of billiard balls , and being well seasoned and spiced might be taken for turtle-balls or veal balls . 
The old monks of Dunfermline were very fond of them . 
They had a great porpoise grant from the crown . 
The fact is , that among his hunters at least , the whale would by all hands be considered a noble dish , were there not so much of him ; but when you come to sit down before a meat-pie nearly one hundred feet long , it takes away your appetite . 
Only the most unprejudiced of men like Stubb , nowadays partake of cooked whales ; but the Esquimaux are not so fastidious . 
We all know how they live upon whales , and have rare old vintages of prime old train oil . 
Zogranda , one of their most famous doctors , recommends strips of blubber for infants , as being exceedingly juicy and nourishing . 
And this reminds me that certain Englishmen , who long ago were accidentally left in Greenland by a whaling vessel -- that these men actually lived for several months on the mouldy scraps of whales which had been left ashore after trying out the blubber . 
Among the Dutch whalemen these scraps are called `` fritters '' ; which , indeed , they greatly resemble , being brown and crisp , and smelling something like old Amsterdam housewives ' dough-nuts or oly-cooks , when fresh . 
They have such an eatable look that the most self-denying stranger can hardly keep his hands off . 
But what further depreciates the whale as a civilized dish , is his exceeding richness . 
He is the great prize ox of the sea , too fat to be delicately good . 
Look at his hump , which would be as fine eating as the buffalo 's -LRB- which is esteemed a rare dish -RRB- , were it not such a solid pyramid of fat . 
But the spermaceti itself , how bland and creamy that is ; like the transparent , half jellied , white meat of a cocoanut in the third month of its growth , yet far too rich to supply a substitute for butter . 
Nevertheless , many whalemen have a method of absorbing it into some other substance , and then partaking of it . 
In the long try watches of the night it is a common thing for the seamen to dip their ship-biscuit into the huge oil-pots and let them fry there awhile . 
Many a good supper have I thus made . 
