But it was no use -- I did all I could ; sat up with him nights ; was very severe with him in the matter of diet - '' `` Oh , very severe ! '' 
chimed in the patient himself ; then suddenly altering his voice , `` Drinking hot rum toddies with me every night , till he could n't see to put on the bandages ; and sending me to bed , half seas over , about three o'clock in the morning . 
Oh , ye stars ! 
he sat up with me indeed , and was very severe in my diet . 
Oh ! 
a great watcher , and very dietetically severe , is Dr. Bunger . 
-LRB- Bunger , you dog , laugh out ! 
why do n't ye ? 
You know you 're a precious jolly rascal . -RRB- 
But , heave ahead , boy , I 'd rather be killed by you than kept alive by any other man . '' 
`` My captain , you must have ere this perceived , respected sir '' -- said the imperturbable godly-looking Bunger , slightly bowing to Ahab -- `` is apt to be facetious at times ; he spins us many clever things of that sort . 
But I may as well say -- en passant , as the French remark -- that I myself -- that is to say , Jack Bunger , late of the reverend clergy -- am a strict total abstinence man ; I never drink - '' `` Water ! '' 
cried the captain ; `` he never drinks it ; it 's a sort of fits to him ; fresh water throws him into the hydrophobia ; but go on -- go on with the arm story . '' 
`` Yes , I may as well , '' said the surgeon , coolly . 
`` I was about observing , sir , before Captain Boomer 's facetious interruption , that spite of my best and severest endeavors , the wound kept getting worse and worse ; the truth was , sir , it was as ugly gaping wound as surgeon ever saw ; more than two feet and several inches long . 
I measured it with the lead line . 
In short , it grew black ; I knew what was threatened , and off it came . 
But I had no hand in shipping that ivory arm there ; that thing is against all rule '' -- pointing at it with the marlingspike -- `` that is the captain 's work , not mine ; he ordered the carpenter to make it ; he had that club-hammer there put to the end , to knock some one 's brains out with , I suppose , as he tried mine once . 
He flies into diabolical passions sometimes . 
Do ye see this dent , sir '' -- removing his hat , and brushing aside his hair , and exposing a bowl-like cavity in his skull , but which bore not the slightest scarry trace , or any token of ever having been a wound -- `` Well , the captain there will tell you how that came there ; he knows . '' 
`` No , I do n't , '' said the captain , `` but his mother did ; he was born with it . 
Oh , you solemn rogue , you -- you Bunger ! 
was there ever such another Bunger in the watery world ? 
Bunger , when you die , you ought to die in pickle , you dog ; you should be preserved to future ages , you rascal . '' 
`` What became of the White Whale ? '' 
now cried Ahab , who thus far had been impatiently listening to this byeplay between the two Englishmen . 
`` Oh ! '' 
cried the one-armed captain , Oh , yes ! 
Well ; after he sounded , we did n't see him again for some time ; in fact , as I before hinted , I did n't then know what whale it was that had served me such a trick , till some time afterwards , when coming back to the Line , we heard about Moby Dick -- as some call him -- and then I knew it was he . '' 
`` Did ` st thou cross his wake again ? '' 
`` Twice . '' 
`` But could not fasten ? '' 
`` Did n't want to try to ; ai n't one limb enough ? 
What should I do without this other arm ? 
And I 'm thinking Moby Dick does n't bite so much as he swallows . '' 
`` Well , then , '' interrupted Bunger , `` give him your left arm for bait to get the right . 
Do you know , gentlemen '' -- very gravely and mathematically bowing to each Captain in succession -- `` Do you know , gentlemen , that the digestive organs of the whale are so inscrutably constructed by Divine Providence , that it is quite impossible for him to completely digest even a man 's arm ? 
And he knows it too . 
So that what you take for the White Whale 's malice is only his awkwardness . 
For he never means to swallow a single limb ; he only thinks to terrify by feints . 
But sometimes he is like the old juggling fellow , formerly a patient of mine in Ceylon , that making believe swallow jack-knives , once upon a time let one drop into him in good earnest , and there it stayed for a twelvemonth or more ; when I gave him an emetic , and he heaved it up in small tacks , d'ye see ? 
No possible way for him to digest that jack-knife , and fully incorporate it into his general bodily system . 
Yes , Captain Boomer , if you are quick enough about it , and have a mind to pawn one arm for the sake of the privilege of giving decent burial to the other , why , in that case the arm is yours ; only let the whale have another chance at you shortly , that 's all . '' 
`` No , thank you , Bunger , '' said the English Captain , `` he 's welcome to the arm he has , since I ca n't help it , and did n't know him then ; but not to another one . 
No more White Whales for me ; I 've lowered for him once , and that has satisfied me . 
There would be great glory in killing him , I know that ; and there is a ship-load of precious sperm in him , but , hark ye , he 's best let alone ; do n't you think so , Captain ? '' 
-- glancing at the ivory leg . 
`` He is . 
But he will still be hunted , for all that . 
What is best let alone , that accursed thing is not always what least allures . 
