When all preliminaries were over and Peleg had got everything ready for signing , he turned to me and said , `` I guess , Quohog there do n't know how to write , does he ? 
I say , Quohog , blast ye ! 
dost thou sign thy name or make thy mark ? 
But at this question , Queequeg , who had twice or thrice before taken part in similar ceremonies , looked no ways abashed ; but taking the offered pen , copied upon the paper , in the proper place , an exact counterpart of a queer round figure which was tattooed upon his arm ; so that through Captain Peleg 's obstinate mistake touching his appellative , it stood something like this : -- Quohog . 
his X mark . 
Meanwhile Captain Bildad sat earnestly and steadfastly eyeing Queequeg , and at last rising solemnly and fumbling in the huge pockets of his broadskirted drab coat took out a bundle of tracts , and selecting one entitled `` The Latter Day Coming ; or No Time to Lose , '' placed it in Queequeg 's hands , and then grasping them and the book with both his , looked earnestly into his eyes , and said , `` Son of darkness , I must do my duty by thee ; I am part owner of this ship , and feel concerned for the souls of all its crew ; if thou still clingest to thy Pagan ways , which I sadly fear , I beseech thee , remain not for aye a Belial bondsman . 
Spurn the idol Bell , and the hideous dragon ; turn from the wrath to come ; mind thine eye , I say ; oh ! 
goodness gracious ! 
steer clear of the fiery pit ! '' 
Something of the salt sea yet lingered in old Bildad 's language , heterogeneously mixed with Scriptural and domestic phrases . 
`` Avast there , avast there , Bildad , avast now spoiling our harpooneer , cried Peleg . 
`` Pious harpooneers never make good voyagers -- it takes the shark out of 'em ; no harpooneer is worth a straw who aint pretty sharkish . 
There was young Nat Swaine , once the bravest boat-header out of all Nantucket and the Vineyard ; he joined the meeting , and never came to good . 
He got so frightened about his plaguy soul , that he shrinked and sheered away from whales , for fear of after-claps , in case he got stove and went to Davy Jones . '' 
`` Peleg ! 
Peleg ! '' 
said Bildad , lifting his eyes and hands , `` thou thyself , as I myself , hast seen many a perilous time ; thou knowest , Peleg , what it is to have the fear of death ; how , then , can ` st thou prate in this ungodly guise . 
Thou beliest thine own heart , Peleg . 
Tell me , when this same Pequod here had her three masts overboard in that typhoon on Japan , that same voyage when thou went mate with Captain Ahab , did ` st thou not think of Death and the Judgment then ? '' 
`` Hear him , hear him now , '' cried Peleg , marching across the cabin , and thrusting his hands far down into his pockets , -- `` hear him , all of ye . 
Think of that ! 
When every moment we thought the ship would sink ! 
Death and the Judgment then ? 
What ? 
With all three masts making such an everlasting thundering against the side ; and every sea breaking over us , fore and aft . 
Think of Death and the Judgment then ? 
No ! 
no time to think about Death then . 
Life was what Captain Ahab and I was thinking of ; and how to save all hands how to rig jury-masts how to get into the nearest port ; that was what I was thinking of . '' 
Bildad said no more , but buttoning up his coat , stalked on deck , where we followed him . 
There he stood , very quietly overlooking some sailmakers who were mending a top-sail in the waist . 
Now and then he stooped to pick up a patch , or save an end of tarred twine , which otherwise might have been wasted . 
The Prophet `` Shipmates , have ye shipped in that ship ? '' 
Queequeg and I had just left the Pequod , and were sauntering away from the water , for the moment each occupied with his own thoughts , when the above words were put to us by a stranger , who , pausing before us , levelled his massive forefinger at the vessel in question . 
He was but shabbily apparelled in faded jacket and patched trowsers ; a rag of a black handkerchief investing his neck . 
A confluent smallpox had in all directions flowed over his face , and left it like the complicated ribbed bed of a torrent , when the rushing waters have been dried up . 
`` Have ye shipped in her ? '' 
he repeated . 
`` You mean the ship Pequod , I suppose , '' said I , trying to gain a little more time for an uninterrupted look at him . 
`` Aye , the Pequod -- that ship there , '' he said , drawing back his whole arm and then rapidly shoving it straight out from him - , with the fixed bayonet of his pointed finger darted full at the object . 
`` Yes , '' said I , `` we have just signed the articles . '' 
`` Anything down there about your souls ? '' 
`` About what ? '' 
`` Oh , perhaps you hav 'n' t got any , '' he said quickly . 
`` No matter though , I know many chaps that hav 'n' t got any , -- good luck to 'em ; and they are all the better off for it . 
A soul 's a sort of a fifth wheel to a wagon . '' 
`` What are you jabbering about , shipmate ? '' 
said I. `` He 's got enough , though , to make up for all deficiencies of that sort in other chaps , '' abruptly said the stranger , placing a nervous emphasis upon the word he . 
`` Queequeg , '' said I , `` let 's go ; this fellow has broken loose from somewhere ; he 's talking about something and somebody we do n't know . '' 
`` Stop ! '' 
