He 's all a magnet ! 
How long since thou saw ` st him last ? 
Which way heading ? '' 
`` Bless my soul , and curse the foul fiend 's , '' cried Bunger , stoopingly walking round Ahab , and like a dog , strangely snuffing ; `` this man 's blood -- bring the thermometer ! 
-- it 's at the boiling point ! 
-- his pulse makes these planks beat ! 
-- sir ! '' 
-- taking a lancet from his pocket , and drawing near to Ahab 's arm . 
`` Avast ! '' 
roared Ahab , dashing him against the bulwarks -- `` Man the boat ! 
Which way heading ? '' 
`` Good God ! '' 
cried the English Captain , to whom the question was put . 
`` What 's the matter ? 
He was heading east , I think . 
-- Is your Captain crazy ? '' 
whispering Fedallah . 
But Fedallah , putting a finger on his lip , slid over the bulwarks to take the boat 's steering oar , and Ahab , swinging the cutting-tackle towards him commanded the ship 's sailors to stand by to lower . 
In a moment he was standing in the boat 's stern , and the Manilla men were springing to their oars . 
In vain the English Captain hailed him . 
With back to the stranger ship , and face set like a flint to his own , Ahab stood upright till alongside of the Pequod . 
The Decanter Ere the English ship fades from sight be it set down here , that she hailed from London , and was named after the late Samuel Enderby , merchant of that city , the original of the famous whaling house of enderby and sons ; a house which in my poor whaleman 's opinion , comes not far behind the united royal houses of the Tudors and Bourbons , in point of real historical interest . 
How long , prior to the year of our Lord 1775 , this great whaling house was in existence , my numerous fish-documents do not make plain ; but in that year -LRB- 1775 -RRB- it fitted out the first English ships that ever regularly hunted the Sperm Whale ; though for some score of years previous -LRB- ever since 1726 -RRB- our valiant Coffins and Maceys of Nantucket and the Vineyard had in large fleets pursued the Leviathan , but only in the North and South Atlantic : not elsewhere . 
Be it distinctly recorded here , that the Nantucketers were the first among mankind to harpoon with civilized steel the great Sperm Whale ; and that for half a century they were the only people of the whole globe who so harpooned him . 
In 1778 , a fine ship , the Amelia , fitted out for the express purpose , and at the sole charge of the vigorous Enderbys , boldly rounded Cape Horn , and was the first among the nations to lower a whale-boat of any sort in the great South Sea . 
The voyage was a skilful and lucky one ; and returning to her berth with her hold full of the precious sperm , the Amelia 's example was soon followed by other ships , English and American , and thus the vast Sperm Whale grounds of the Pacific were thrown open . 
But not content with this good deed , the indefatigable house again bestirred itself : Samuel and all his Sons -- how many , their mother only knows -- and under their immediate auspices , and partly , I think , at their expense , the British government was induced to send the sloop-of-war Rattler on a whaling voyage of discovery into the South Sea . 
Commanded by a naval Post-Captain , the Rattler made a rattling voyage of it , and did some service ; how much does not appear . 
But this is not all . 
In 1819 , the same house fitted out a discovery whale ship of their own , to go on a tasting cruise to the remote waters of Japan . 
That ship -- well called the `` Syren '' -- made a noble experimental cruise ; and it was thus that the great Japanese Whaling Ground first became generally known . 
The Syren in this famous voyage was commanded by a Captain Coffin , a Nantucketer . 
All honor to the Enderbies , therefore , whose house , I think , exists to the present day ; though doubtless the original Samuel must long ago have slipped his cable for the great South Sea of the other world . 
The ship named after him was worthy of the honor , being a very fast sailer and a noble craft every way . 
I boarded her once at midnight somewhere off the Patagonian coast , and drank good flip down in the forecastle . 
It was a fine gam we had , and they were all trumps -- every soul on board . 
A short life to them , and a jolly death . 
And that fine gam I had -- long , very long after old Ahab touched her planks with his ivory heel -- it minds me of the noble , solid , Saxon hospitality of that ship ; and may my parson forget me , and the devil remember me , if I ever lose sight of it . 
Flip ? 
Did I say we had flip ? 
Yes , and we flipped it at the rate of ten gallons the hour ; and when the squall came -LRB- for it 's squally off there by Patagonia -RRB- , and all hands -- visitors and all -- were called to reef topsails , we were so top-heavy that we had to swing each other aloft in bowlines ; and we ignorantly furled the skirts of our jackets into the sails , so that we hung there , reefed fast in the howling gale , a warning example to all drunken tars . 
However , the masts did not go overboard ; and by and by we scrambled down , so sober , that we had to pass the flip again , though the savage salt spray bursting down the forecastle scuttle , rather too much diluted and pickled it for my taste . 
The beef was fine -- tough , but with body in it . 
They said it was bullbeef ; others , that it was dromedary beef ; but I do not know , for certain , how that was . 
They had dumplings too ; small , but substantial , symmetrically globular , and indestructible dumplings . 
I fancied that you could feel them , and roll them about in you after they were swallowed . 
If you stooped over too far forward , you risked their pitching out of you like billiard-balls . 
The bread -- but that could n't be helped ; besides , it was an anti-scorbutic , in short , the bread contained the only fresh fare they had . 
But the forecastle was not very light , and it was very easy to step over into a dark corner when you ate it . 
But all in all , taking her from truck to helm , considering the dimensions of the cook 's boilers , including his own live parchment boilers ; fore and aft , I say , the Samuel Enderby was a jolly ship ; of good fare and plenty ; fine flip and strong ; crack fellows all , and capital from boot heels to hat-band . 
