cried a foreboding voice in her wake . 
`` In vain , oh , ye strangers , ye fly our sad burial ; ye but turn us your taffrail to show us your coffin ! '' 
The Symphony It was a clear steel-blue day . 
The firmaments of air and sea were hardly separable in that all-pervading azure ; only , the pensive air was transparently pure and soft , with a woman 's look , and the robust and man-like sea heaved with long , strong , lingering swells , as Samson 's chest in his sleep . 
Hither , and thither , on high , glided the snow-white wings of small , unspeckled birds ; these were the gentle thoughts of the feminine air ; but to and fro in the deeps , far down in the bottomless blue , rushed mighty leviathans , sword-fish , and sharks ; and these were the strong , troubled , murderous thinkings of the masculine sea . 
But though thus contrasting within , the contrast was only in shades and shadows without ; those two seemed one ; it was only the sex , as it were , that distinguished them . 
Aloft , like a royal czar and king , the sun seemed giving this gentle air to this bold and rolling sea ; even as bride to groom . 
And at the girdling line of the horizon , a soft and tremulous motion -- most seen here at the Equator -- denoted the fond , throbbing trust , the loving alarms , with which the poor bride gave her bosom away . 
Tied up and twisted ; gnarled and knotted with wrinkles ; haggardly firm and unyielding ; his eyes glowing like coals , that still glow in the ashes of ruin ; untottering Ahab stood forth in the clearness of the morn ; lifting his splintered helmet of a brow to the fair girl 's forehead of heaven . 
Oh , immortal infancy , and innocency of the azure ! 
Invisible winged creatures that frolic all round us ! 
Sweet childhood of air and sky ! 
how oblivious were ye of old Ahab 's close-coiled woe ! 
But so have I seen little Miriam and Martha , laughing-eyed elves , heedlessly gambol around their old sire ; sporting with the circle of singed locks which grew on the marge of that burnt-out crater of his brain . 
Slowly crossing the deck from the scuttle , Ahab leaned over the side and watched how his shadow in the water sank and sank to his gaze , the more and the more that he strove to pierce the profundity . 
But the lovely aromas in that enchanted air did at last seem to dispel , for a moment , the cankerous thing in his soul . 
That glad , happy air , that winsome sky , did at last stroke and caress him ; the step-mother world , so long cruel -- forbidding -- now threw affectionate arms round his stubborn neck , and did seem to joyously sob over him , as if over one , that however wilful and erring , she could yet find it in her heart to save and to bless . 
From beneath his slouched hat Ahab dropped a tear into the sea ; nor did all the Pacific contain such wealth as that one wee drop . 
Starbuck saw the old man ; saw him , how he heavily leaned over the side ; and he seemed to hear in his own true heart the measureless sobbing that stole out of the centre of the serenity around . 
Careful not to touch him , or be noticed by him , he yet drew near to him , and stood there . 
Ahab turned . 
`` Starbuck ! '' 
`` Sir . '' 
`` Oh , Starbuck ! 
it is a mild , mild wind , and a mild looking sky . 
On such a day -- very much such a sweetness as this -- I struck my first whale -- a boy-harpooneer of eighteen ! 
Forty -- forty -- forty years ago ! 
-- ago ! 
Forty years of continual whaling ! 
forty years of privation , and peril , and storm-time ! 
forty years on the pitiless sea ! 
for forty years has Ahab forsaken the peaceful land , for forty years to make war on the horrors of the deep ! 
Aye and yes , Starbuck , out of those forty years I have not spent three ashore . 
When I think of this life I have led ; the desolation of solitude it has been ; the masoned , walled-town of a Captain 's exclusiveness , which admits but small entrance to any sympathy from the green country without -- oh , weariness ! 
heaviness ! 
Guinea-coast slavery of solitary command ! 
-- when I think of all this ; only half-suspected , not so keenly known to me before -- and how for forty years I have fed upon dry salted fare -- fit emblem of the dry nourishment of my soul ! 
-- when the poorest landsman has had fresh fruit to his daily hand , and broken the world 's fresh bread to my mouldy crusts -- away , whole oceans away , from that young girl-wife I wedded past fifty , and sailed for Cape Horn the next day , leaving but one dent in my marriage pillow -- wife ? 
wife ? 
-- rather a widow with her husband alive ? 
Aye , I widowed that poor girl when I married her , Starbuck ; and then , the madness , the frenzy , the boiling blood and the smoking brow , with which , for a thousand lowerings old Ahab has furiously , foamingly chased his prey -- more a demon than a man ! 
-- aye , aye ! 
what a forty years ' fool -- fool -- old fool , has old Ahab been ! 
Why this strife of the chase ? 
why weary , and palsy the arm at the oar , and the iron , and the lance ? 
how the richer or better is Ahab now ? 
Behold . 
Oh , Starbuck ! 
is it not hard , that with this weary load I bear , one poor leg should have been snatched from under me ? 
Here , brush this old hair aside ; it blinds me , that I seem to weep . 
