Perchance , too , it would have dropped ye dead . 
Perchance ye need it not . 
Down lances ! 
And now , ye mates , I do appoint ye three cupbearers to my three pagan kinsmen there -- yon three most honorable gentlemen and noblemen , my valiant harpooneers . 
Disdain the task ? 
What , when the great Pope washes the feet of beggars , using his tiara for ewer ? 
Oh , my sweet cardinals ! 
your own condescension , that shall bend ye to it . 
I do not order ye ; ye will it . 
Cut your seizings and draw the poles , ye harpooneers ! '' 
Silently obeying the order , the three harpooneers now stood with the detached iron part of their harpoons , some three feet long , held , barbs up , before him . 
`` Stab me not with that keen steel ! 
Cant them ; cant them over ! 
know ye not the goblet end ? 
Turn up the socket ! 
So , so ; now , ye cup-bearers , advance . 
The irons ! 
take them ; hold them while I fill ! '' 
Forthwith , slowly going from one officer to the other , he brimmed the harpoon sockets with the fiery waters from the pewter . 
`` Now , three to three , ye stand . 
Commend the murderous chalices ! 
Bestow them , ye who are now made parties to this indissoluble league . 
Ha ! 
Starbuck ! 
but the deed is done ! 
Yon ratifying sun now waits to sit upon it . 
Drink , ye harpooneers ! 
drink and swear , ye men that man the deathful whaleboat 's bow -- Death to Moby Dick ! 
God hunt us all , if we do not hunt Moby Dick to his death ! '' 
The long , barbed steel goblets were lifted ; and to cries and maledictions against the white whale , the spirits were simultaneously quaffed down with a hiss . 
Starbuck paled , and turned , and shivered . 
Once more , and finally , the replenished pewter went the rounds among the frantic crew ; when , waving his free hand to them , they all dispersed ; and Ahab retired within his cabin . 
Sunset The cabin ; by the stern windows ; Ahab sitting alone , and gazing out . 
I leave a white and turbid wake ; pale waters , paler cheeks , where'er I sail . 
The envious billows sidelong swell to whelm my track ; let them ; but first I pass . 
Yonder , by the ever-brimming goblet 's rim , the warm waves blush like wine . 
The gold brow plumbs the blue . 
The diver sun -- slow dived from noon -- goes down ; my soul mounts up ! 
she wearies with her endless hill . 
Is , then , the crown too heavy that I wear ? 
this Iron Crown of Lombardy . 
Yet is it bright with many a gem ; I the wearer , see not its far flashings ; but darkly feel that I wear that , that dazzlingly confounds . 
'T is iron -- that I know -- not gold . 
'T is split , too -- that I feel ; the jagged edge galls me so , my brain seems to beat against the solid metal ; aye , steel skull , mine ; the sort that needs no helmet in the most brain-battering fight ! 
Dry heat upon my brow ? 
Oh ! 
time was , when as the sunrise nobly spurred me , so the sunset soothed . 
No more . 
This lovely light , it lights not me ; all loveliness is anguish to me , since I can ne'er enjoy . 
Gifted with the high perception , I lack the low , enjoying power ; damned , most subtly and most malignantly ! 
