Why tell the whole ? 
The blows of the basement hammer every day grew more and more between ; and each blow every day grew fainter than the last ; the wife sat frozen at the window , with tearless eyes , glitteringly gazing into the weeping faces of her children ; the bellows fell ; the forge choked up with cinders ; the house was sold ; the mother dived down into the long church-yard grass ; her children twice followed her thither ; and the houseless , familyless old man staggered off a vagabond in crape ; his every woe unreverenced ; his grey head a scorn to flaxen curls ! 
Death seems the only desirable sequel for a career like this ; but Death is only a launching into the region of the strange Untried ; it is but the first salutation to the possibilities of the immense Remote , the Wild , the Watery , the Unshored ; therefore , to the death-longing eyes of such men , who still have left in them some interior compunctions against suicide , does the all-contributed and all-receptive ocean alluringly spread forth his whole plain of unimaginable , taking terrors , and wonderful , new-life adventures ; and from the hearts of infinite Pacifics , the thousand mermaids sing to them -- `` Come hither , broken-hearted ; here is another life without the guilt of intermediate death ; here are wonders supernatural , without dying for them . 
Come hither ! 
bury thyself in a life which , to your now equally abhorred and abhorring , landed world , is more oblivious than death . 
Come hither ! 
put up thy grave-stone , too , within the churchyard , and come hither , till we marry thee ! '' 
Hearkening to these voices , East and West , by early sunrise , and by fall of eve , the blacksmith 's soul responded , Aye , I come ! 
And so Perth went a-whaling . 
The Forge With matted beard , and swathed in a bristling shark-skin apron , about mid-day , Perth was standing between his forge and anvil , the latter placed upon an iron-wood log , with one hand holding a pike-head in the coals , and with the other at his forge 's lungs , when Captain Ahab came along , carrying in his hand a small rusty-looking leathern bag . 
While yet a little distance from the forge , moody Ahab paused ; till at last , Perth , withdrawing his iron from the fire , began hammering it upon the anvil -- the red mass sending off the sparks in thick hovering flights , some of which flew close to Ahab . 
`` Are these thy Mother Carey 's chickens , Perth ? 
they are always flying in thy wake ; birds of good omen , too , but not to all ; -- look here , they burn ; but thou -- thou liv ` st among them without a scorch . '' 
`` Because I am scorched all over , Captain Ahab , '' answered Perth , resting for a moment on his hammer ; `` I am past scorching - , not easily can ` st thou scorch a scar . '' 
`` Well , well ; no more . 
Thy shrunk voice sounds too calmly , sanely woeful to me . 
In no Paradise myself , I am impatient of all misery in others that is not mad . 
Thou should ` st go mad , blacksmith ; say , why dost thou not go mad ? 
How can ` st thou endure without being mad ? 
Do the heavens yet hate thee , that thou can ` st not go mad ? 
-- What wert thou making there ? '' 
`` Welding an old pike-head , sir ; there were seams and dents in it . '' 
`` And can ` st thou make it all smooth again , blacksmith , after such hard usage as it had ? '' 
`` I think so , sir . '' 
`` And I suppose thou can ` st smoothe almost any seams and dents ; never mind how hard the metal , blacksmith ? '' 
`` Aye , sir , I think I can ; all seams and dents but one . '' 
`` Look ye here then , '' cried Ahab , passionately advancing , and leaning with both hands on Perth 's shoulders ; `` look ye here -- here -- can ye smoothe out a seam like this , blacksmith , '' sweeping one hand across his ribbed brow ; `` if thou could ` st , blacksmith , glad enough would I lay my head upon thy anvil , and feel thy heaviest hammer between my eyes . 
Answer ! 
Can ` st thou smoothe this seam ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
that is the one , sir ! 
Said I not all seams and dents but one ? '' 
`` Aye , blacksmith , it is the one ; aye , man , it is unsmoothable ; for though thou only see ` st it here in my flesh , it has worked down into the bone of my skull -- that is all wrinkles ! 
But , away with child 's play ; no more gaffs and pikes to-day . 
Look ye here ! '' 
jingling the leathern bag , as if it were full of gold coins . 
`` I , too , want a harpoon made ; one that a thousand yoke of fiends could not part , Perth ; something that will stick in a whale like his own fin-bone . 
There 's the stuff , '' flinging the pouch upon the anvil . 
`` Look ye , blacksmith , these are the gathered nail-stubbs of the steel shoes of racing horses . '' 
`` Horse-shoe stubbs , sir ? 
Why , Captain Ahab , thou hast here , then , the best and stubbornest stuff we blacksmiths ever work . '' 
`` I know it , old man ; these stubbs will weld together like glue from the melted bones of murderers . 
Quick ! 
forge me the harpoon . 
And forge me first , twelve rods for its shank ; then wind , and twist , and hammer these twelve together like the yarns and strands of a tow-line . 
Quick ! 
I 'll blow the fire . '' 
When at last the twelve rods were made , Ahab tried them , one by one , by spiralling them , with his own hand , round a long , heavy iron bolt . 
`` A flaw ! '' 
rejecting the last one . 
