Come , why do n't some of ye burst a blood-vessel ? 
Who 's that been dropping an anchor overboard -- we do n't budge an inch -- we 're becalmed . 
Halloo , here 's grass growing in the boat 's bottom -- and by the Lord , the mast there 's budding . 
This wo n't do , boys . 
Look at that Yarman ! 
The short and long of it is , men , will ye spit fire or not ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
see the suds he makes ! '' 
cried Flask , dancing up and down -- `` What a hump -- Oh , do pile on the beef -- lays like a log ! 
Oh ! 
my lads , do spring -- slap-jacks and quahogs for supper , you know , my lads -- baked clams and muffins -- oh , do , do , spring , -- he 's a hundred barreler -- do n't lose him now -- do n't oh , do n't ! 
-- see that Yarman -- Oh , wo n't ye pull for your duff , my lads -- such a sog ! 
such a sogger ! 
Do n't ye love sperm ? 
There goes three thousand dollars , men ! 
-- a bank ! 
-- a whole bank ! 
The bank of England ! 
-- Oh , do , do , do ! 
-- What 's that Yarman about now ? '' 
At this moment Derick was in the act of pitching his lamp-feeder at the advancing boats , and also his oil-can ; perhaps with the double view of retarding his rivals ' way , and at the same time economically accelerating his own by the momentary impetus of the backward toss . 
`` The unmannerly Dutch dogger ! '' 
cried Stubb . 
`` Pull now , men , like fifty thousand line-of-battle-ship loads of red-haired devils . 
What d'ye say , Tashtego ; are you the man to snap your spine in two-and-twenty pieces for the honor of old Gayhead ? 
What d'ye say ? '' 
`` I say , pull like god-dam , '' -- cried the Indian . 
Fiercely , but evenly incited by the taunts of the German , the Pequod 's three boats now began ranging almost abreast ; and , so disposed , momentarily neared him . 
In that fine , loose , chivalrous attitude of the headsman when drawing near to his prey , the three mates stood up proudly , occasionally backing the after oarsman with an exhilarating cry of , `` There she slides , now ! 
Hurrah for the white-ash breeze ! 
Down with the Yarman ! 
Sail over him ! '' 
But so decided an original start had Derick had , that spite of all their gallantry , he would have proved the victor in this race , had not a righteous judgment descended upon him in a crab which caught the blade of his midship oarsman . 
While this clumsy lubber was striving to free his white-ash , and while , in consequence , Derick 's boat was nigh to capsizing , and he thundering away at his men in a mighty rage ; -- that was a good time for Starbuck , Stubb , and Flask . 
With a shout , they took a mortal start forwards , and slantingly ranged up on the German 's quarter . 
An instant more , and all four boats were diagonically in the whale 's immediate wake , while stretching from them , on both sides , was the foaming swell that he made . 
It was a terrific , most pitiable , and maddening sight . 
The whale was now going head out , and sending his spout before him in a continual tormented jet ; while his one poor fin beat his side in an agony of fright . 
Now to this hand , now to that , he yawed in his faltering flight , and still at every billow that he broke , he spasmodically sank in the sea , or sideways rolled towards the sky his one beating fin . 
So have I seen a bird with clipped wing , making affrighted broken circles in the air , vainly striving to escape the piratical hawks . 
But the bird has a voice , and with plaintive cries will make known her fear ; but the fear of this vast dumb brute of the sea , was chained up and enchanted in him ; he had no voice , save that choking respiration through his spiracle , and this made the sight of him unspeakably pitiable ; while still , in his amazing bulk , portcullis jaw , and omnipotent tail , there was enough to appal the stoutest man who so pitied . 
Seeing now that but a very few moments more would give the Pequod 's boats the advantage , and rather than be thus foiled of his game , Derick chose to hazard what to him must have seemed a most unusually long dart , ere the last chance would for ever escape . 
But no sooner did his harpooneer stand up for the stroke , than all three tigers -- Queequeg , Tashtego , Daggoo -- instinctively sprang to their feet , and standing in a diagonal row , simultaneously pointed their barbs ; and darted over the head of the German harpooneer , their three Nantucket irons entered the whale . 
Blinding vapors of foam and white-fire ! 
The three boats , in the first fury of the whale 's headlong rush , bumped the German 's aside with such force , that both Derick and his baffled harpooneer were spilled out , and sailed over by the three flying keels . 
`` Do n't be afraid , my butter-boxes , '' cried Stubb , casting a passing glance upon them as he shot by ; `` ye 'll be picked up presently -- all right -- I saw some sharks astern -- St. Bernard 's dogs , you know -- relieve distressed travellers . 
Hurrah ! 
this is the way to sail now . 
Every keel a sunbeam ! 
Hurrah ! 
