It was even so ; in their headlong eagerness , the men had mistaken some other thing for the whale-spout , as the event itself soon proved ; for hardly had Ahab reached his perch ; hardly was the rope belayed to its pin on deck , when he struck the key-note to an orchestra , that made the air vibrate as with the combined discharge of rifles . 
The triumphant halloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard , as -- much nearer to the ship than the place of the imaginary jet , less than a mile ahead -- Moby Dick bodily burst into view ! 
For not by any calm and indolent spoutings ; not by the peaceable gush of that mystic fountain in his head , did the White Whale now reveal his vicinity ; but by the far more wondrous phenomenon of breaching . 
Rising with his utmost velocity from the furthest depths , the Sperm Whale thus booms his entire bulk into the pure element of air , and piling up a mountain of dazzling foam , shows his place to the distance of seven miles and more . 
In those moments , the torn , enraged waves he shakes off , seem his mane ; in some cases , this breaching is his act of defiance . 
`` There she breaches ! 
there she breaches ! '' 
was the cry , as in his immeasurable bravadoes the White Whale tossed himself salmon-like to Heaven . 
So suddenly seen in the blue plain of the sea , and relieved against the still bluer margin of the sky , the spray that he raised , for the moment , intolerably glittered and glared like a glacier ; and stood there gradually fading and fading away from its first sparkling intensity , to the dim mistiness of an advancing shower in a vale . 
`` Aye , breach your last to the sun , Moby Dick ! '' 
cried Ahab , `` thy hour and thy harpoon are at hand ! 
-- Down ! 
down all of ye , but one man at the fore . 
The boats ! 
-- stand by ! '' 
Unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds , the men , like shooting stars , slid to the deck , by the isolated backstays and halyards ; while Ahab , less dartingly , but still rapidly was dropped from his perch . 
`` Lower away , '' he cried , so soon as he had reached his boat -- a spare one , rigged the afternoon previous . 
`` Mr. Starbuck , the ship is thine -- keep away from the boats , but keep near them . 
Lower , all ! '' 
As if to strike a quick terror into them , by this time being the first assailant himself , Moby Dick had turned , and was now coming for the three crews . 
Ahab 's boat was central ; and cheering his men , he told them he would take the whale head-and-head , -- that is , pull straight up to his forehead , -- a not uncommon thing ; for when within a certain limit , such a course excludes the coming onset from the whale 's sidelong vision . 
But ere that close limit was gained , and while yet all three boats were plain as the ship 's three masts to his eye ; the White Whale churning himself into furious speed , almost in an instant as it were , rushing among the boats with open jaws , and a lashing tail , offered appalling battle on every side ; and heedless of the irons darted at him from every boat , seemed only intent on annihilating each separate plank of which those boats were made . 
But skilfully manoeuvred , incessantly wheeling like trained chargers in the field ; the boats for a while eluded him ; though , at times , but by a plank 's breadth ; while all the time , Ahab 's unearthly slogan tore every other cry but his to shreds . 
But at last in his untraceable evolutions , the White Whale so crossed and recrossed , and in a thousand ways entangled the slack of the three lines now fast to him , that they foreshortened , and , of themselves , warped the devoted boats towards the planted irons in him ; though now for a moment the whale drew aside a little , as if to rally for a more tremendous charge . 
Seizing that opportunity , Ahab first paid out more line ; and then was rapidly hauling and jerking in upon it again -- hoping that way to disencumber it of some snarls -- when lo ! 
-- a sight more savage than the embattled teeth of sharks ! 
Caught and twisted -- corkscrewed in the mazes of the line , loose harpoons and lances , with all their bristling barbs and points , came flashing and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab 's boat . 
Only one thing could be done . 
Seizing the boat-knife , he critically reached within -- through -- and then , without -- the rays of steel ; dragged in the line beyond , passed it , inboard , to the bowsman , and then , twice sundering the rope near the chocks -- dropped the intercepted fagot of steel into the sea ; and was all fast again . 
That instant , the White Whale made a sudden rush among the remaining tangles of the other lines ; by so doing , irresistibly dragged the more involved boats of Stubb and Flask towards his flukes ; dashed them together like two rolling husks on a surf-beaten beach , and then , diving down into the sea , disappeared in a boiling maelstrom , in which , for a space , the odorous cedar chips of the wrecks danced round and round , like the grated nutmeg in a swiftly stirred bowl of punch . 
While the two crews were yet circling in the waters , reaching out after the revolving line-tubs , oars , and other floating furniture , while aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial , twitching his legs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks ; and Stubb was lustily singing out for some one to ladle him up ; and while the old man 's line -- now parting -- admitted of his pulling into the creamy pool to rescue whom he could ; -- in that wild simultaneousness of a thousand concreted perils , -- Ahab 's yet unstricken boat seemed drawn up towards Heaven by invisible wires , -- as , arrow-like , shooting perpendicularly from the sea , the White Whale dashed his broad forehead against its bottom , and sent it turning over and over , into the air ; till it fell again -- gunwale downwards -- and Ahab and his men struggled out from under it , like seals from a sea-side cave . 
The first uprising momentum of the whale -- modifying its direction as he struck the surface -- involuntarily launched him along it , to a little distance from the centre of the destruction he had made ; and with his back to it , he now lay for a moment slowly feeling with his flukes from side to side ; and whenever a stray oar , bit of plank , the least chip or crumb of the boats touched his skin , his tail swiftly drew back , and came sideways smiting the sea . 
But soon , as if satisfied that his work for that time was done , he pushed his pleated forehead through the ocean , and trailing after him the intertangled lines , continued his leeward way at a traveller 's methodic pace . 
As before , the attentive ship having descried the whole fight , again came bearing down to the rescue , and dropping a boat , picked up the floating mariners , tubs , oars , and whatever else could be caught at , and safely landed them on her decks . 
Some sprained shoulders , wrists , and ankles ; livid contusions ; wrenched harpoons and lances ; inextricable intricacies of rope ; shattered oars and planks ; all these were there ; but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to have befallen any one . 
As with Fedallah the day before , so Ahab was now found grimly clinging to his boat 's broken half , which afforded a comparatively easy float ; nor did it so exhaust him as the previous day 's mishap . 
But when he was helped to the deck , all eyes were fastened upon him ; as instead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon the shoulder of Starbuck , who had thus far been the foremost to assist him . 
His ivory leg had been snapped off , leaving but one short sharp splinter . 
`` Aye , aye , Starbuck , 't is sweet to lean sometimes , be the leaner who he will ; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has . '' 
`` The ferrule has not stood , sir , '' said the carpenter , now coming up ; I put good work into that leg . '' 
`` But no bones broken , sir , I hope , '' said Stubb with true concern . 
`` Aye ! 
and all splintered to pieces , Stubb ! 
-- d'ye see it . 
-- But even with a broken bone , old Ahab is untouched ; and I account no living bone of mine one jot more me , than this dead one that 's lost . 
Nor white whale , nor man , nor fiend , can so much as graze old Ahab in his own proper and inaccessible being . 
Can any lead touch yonder floor , any mast scrape yonder roof ? 
-- Aloft there ! 
which way ? '' 
`` Dead to leeward , sir . '' 
