No : he desired a canoe like those of Nantucket , all the more congenial to him , being a whaleman , that like a whale-boat these coffin-canoes were without a keel ; though that involved but uncertain steering , and much lee-way adown the dim ages . 
Now , when this strange circumstance was made known aft , the carpenter was at once commanded to do Queequeg 's bidding , whatever it might include . 
There was some heathenish , coffin-colored old lumber aboard , which , upon a long previous voyage , had been cut from the aboriginal groves of the Lackaday islands , and from these dark planks the coffin was recommended to be made . 
No sooner was the carpenter apprised of the order , than taking his rule , he forthwith with all the indifferent promptitude of his character , proceeded into the forecastle and took Queequeg 's measure with great accuracy , regularly chalking Queequeg 's person as he shifted the rule . 
`` Ah ! 
poor fellow ! 
he 'll have to die now , '' ejaculated the Long Island sailor . 
Going to his vice-bench , the carpenter for convenience sake and general reference , now transferringly measured on it the exact length the coffin was to be , and then made the transfer permanent by cutting two notches at its extremities . 
This done , he marshalled the planks and his tools , and to work . 
When the last nail was driven , and the lid duly planed and fitted , he lightly shouldered the coffin and went forward with it , inquiring whether they were ready for it yet in that direction . 
Overhearing the indignant but half-humorous cries with which the people on deck began to drive the coffin away , Queequeg , to every one 's consternation , commanded that the thing should be instantly brought to him , nor was there any denying him ; seeing that , of all mortals , some dying men are the most tyrannical ; and certainly , since they will shortly trouble us so little for evermore , the poor fellows ought to be indulged . 
Leaning over in his hammock , Queequeg long regarded the coffin with an attentive eye . 
He then called for his harpoon , had the wooden stock drawn from it , and then had the iron part placed in the coffin along with one of the paddles of his boat . 
All by his own request , also , biscuits were then ranged round the sides within ; a flask of fresh water was placed at the head , and a small bag of woody earth scraped up in the hold at the foot ; and a piece of sail-cloth being rolled up for a pillow , Queequeg now entreated to be lifted into his final bed , that he might make trial of its comforts , if any it had . 
He lay without moving a few minutes , then told one to go to his bag and bring out his little god , Yojo . 
Then crossing his arms on his breast with Yojo between , he called for the coffin lid -LRB- hatch he called it -RRB- to be placed over him . 
The head part turned over with a leather hinge , and there lay Queequeg in his coffin with little but his composed countenance in view . 
`` Rarmai '' -LRB- it will do ; it is easy -RRB- , he murmured at last , and signed to be replaced in his hammock . 
But ere this was done , Pip , who had been slily hovering near by all the while , drew nigh to him where he lay , and with soft sobbings , took him by the hand ; in the other , holding his tambourine . 
`` Poor rover ! 
will ye never have done with all this weary roving ? 
Where go ye now ? 
But if the currents carry ye to those sweet Antilles where the beaches are only beat with water-lilies , will ye do one little errand for me ? 
Seek out one Pip , who 's now been missing long : I think he 's in those far Antilles . 
If ye find him , then comfort him ; for he must be very sad ; for look ! 
he 's left his tambourine behind ; -- I found it . 
Rig-a-dig , dig , dig ! 
Now , Queequeg , die ; and I 'll beat ye your dying march . '' 
`` I have heard , '' murmured Starbuck , gazing down the scuttle , `` that in violent fevers , men , all ignorance , have talked in ancient tongues ; and that when the mystery is probed , it turns out always that in their wholly forgotten childhood those ancient tongues had been really spoken in their hearing by some lofty scholars . 
So , to my fond faith , poor Pip , in this strange sweetness of his lunacy , brings heavenly vouchers of all our heavenly homes . 
Where learned he that , but there ? 
-- Hark ! 
he speaks again ; but more wildly now . '' 
`` Form two and two ! 
Let 's make a General of him ! 
Ho , where 's his harpoon ? 
Lay it across here . 
-- Rig-a-dig , dig , dig ! 
huzza ! 
Oh for a game cock now to sit upon his head and crow ! 
Queequeg dies game ! 
-- mind ye that ; Queequeg dies game ! 
-- take ye good heed of that ; Queequeg dies game ! 
I say ; game , game , game ! 
but base little Pip , he died a coward ; died all a ` shiver ; -- out upon Pip ! 
Hark ye ; if ye find Pip , tell all the Antilles he 's a runaway ; a coward , a coward , a coward ! 
Tell them he jumped from a whale-boat ! 
I 'd never beat my tambourine over base Pip , and hail him General , if he were once more dying here . 
No , no ! 
shame upon all cowards -- shame upon them ! 
