Old Captain Peleg , many years her chief-mate , before he commanded another vessel of his own , and now a retired seaman , and one of the principal owners of the Pequod , -- this old Peleg , during the term of his chief-mateship , had built upon her original grotesqueness , and inlaid it , all over , with a quaintness both of material and device , unmatched by anything except it be Thorkill-Hake 's carved buckler or bedstead . 
She was apparelled like any barbaric Ethiopian emperor , his neck heavy with pendants of polished ivory . 
She was a thing of trophies . 
A cannibal of a craft , tricking herself forth in the chased bones of her enemies . 
All round , her unpanelled , open bulwarks were garnished like one continuous jaw , with the long sharp teeth of the sperm whale , inserted there for pins , to fasten her old hempen thews and tendons to . 
Those thews ran not through base blocks of land wood , but deftly travelled over sheaves of sea-ivory . 
Scorning a turnstile wheel at her reverend helm , she sported there a tiller ; and that tiller was in one mass , curiously carved from the long narrow lower jaw of her hereditary foe . 
The helmsman who steered by that tiller in a tempest , felt like the Tartar , when he holds back his fiery steed by clutching its jaw . 
A noble craft , but somehow a most melancholy ! 
All noble things are touched with that . 
Now when I looked about the quarter-deck , for some one having authority , in order to propose myself as a candidate for the voyage , at first I saw nobody ; but I could not well overlook a strange sort of tent , or rather wigwam , pitched a little behind the main-mast . 
It seemed only a temporary erection used in port . 
It was of a conical shape , some ten feet high ; consisting of the long , huge slabs of limber black bone taken from the middle and highest part of the jaws of the right-whale . 
Planted with their broad ends on the deck , a circle of these slabs laced together , mutually sloped towards each other , and at the apex united in a tufted point , where the loose hairy fibres waved to and fro like a top-knot on some old Pottowotamie Sachem 's head . 
A triangular opening faced towards the bows of the ship , so that the insider commanded a complete view forward . 
And half concealed in this queer tenement , I at length found one who by his aspect seemed to have authority ; and who , it being noon , and the ship 's work suspended , was now enjoying respite from the burden of command . 
He was seated on an old-fashioned oaken chair , wriggling all over with curious carving ; and the bottom of which was formed of a stout interlacing of the same elastic stuff of which the wigwam was constructed . 
There was nothing so very particular , perhaps , about the appearance of the elderly man I saw ; he was brown and brawny , like most old seamen , and heavily rolled up in blue pilot-cloth , cut in the Quaker style ; only there was a fine and almost microscopic net-work of the minutest wrinkles interlacing round his eyes , which must have arisen from his continual sailings in many hard gales , and always looking to windward ; -- for this causes the muscles about the eyes to become pursed together . 
Such eye-wrinkles are very effectual in a scowl . 
`` Is this the Captain of the Pequod ? '' 
said I , advancing to the door of the tent . 
`` Supposing it be the Captain of the Pequod , what dost thou want of him ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` I was thinking of shipping . '' 
`` Thou wast , wast thou ? 
I see thou art no Nantucketer -- ever been in a stove boat ? '' 
`` No , Sir , I never have . '' 
`` Dost know nothing at all about whaling , I dare say -- eh ? 
`` Nothing , Sir ; but I have no doubt I shall soon learn . 
I 've been several voyages in the merchant service , and I think that - '' `` Merchant service be damned . 
Talk not that lingo to me . 
Dost see that leg ? 
-- I 'll take that leg away from thy stern , if ever thou talkest of the merchant service to me again . 
Marchant service indeed ! 
I suppose now ye feel considerable proud of having served in those marchant ships . 
But flukes ! 
man , what makes thee want to go a whaling , eh ? 
-- it looks a little suspicious , do n't it , eh ? 
-- Hast not been a pirate , hast thou ? 
-- Didst not rob thy last Captain , didst thou ? 
-- Dost not think of murdering the officers when thou gettest to sea ? '' 
I protested my innocence of these things . 
I saw that under the mask of these half humorous innuendoes , this old seaman , as an insulated Quakerish Nantucketer , was full of his insular prejudices , and rather distrustful of all aliens , unless they hailed from Cape Cod or the Vineyard . 
`` But what takes thee a-whaling ? 
I want to know that before I think of shipping ye . '' 
`` Well , sir , I want to see what whaling is . 
I want to see the world . '' 
`` Want to see what whaling is , eh ? 
Have ye clapped eye on Captain Ahab ? '' 
`` Who is Captain Ahab , sir ? '' 
