And let me in this place movingly admonish you , ye ship-owners of Nantucket ! 
Beware of enlisting in your vigilant fisheries any lad with lean brow and hollow eye ; given to unseasonable meditativeness ; and who offers to ship with the Phaedon instead of Bowditch in his head . 
Beware of such an one , I say : your whales must be seen before they can be killed ; and this sunken-eyed young Platonist will tow you ten wakes round the world , and never make you one pint of sperm the richer . 
Nor are these monitions at all unneeded . 
For nowadays , the whale-fishery furnishes an asylum for many romantic , melancholy , and absent-minded young men , disgusted with the corking care of earth , and seeking sentiment in tar and blubber . 
Childe Harold not unfrequently perches himself upon the mast-head of some luckless disappointed whale-ship , and in moody phrase ejaculates : -- `` Roll on , thou deep and dark blue ocean , roll ! 
Ten thousand blubber-hunters sweep over thee in vain . '' 
Very often do the captains of such ships take those absent-minded young philosophers to task , upbraiding them with not feeling sufficient `` interest '' in the voyage ; half-hinting that they are so hopelessly lost to all honorable ambition , as that in their secret souls they would rather not see whales than otherwise . 
But all in vain ; those young Platonists have a notion that their vision is imperfect ; they are short-sighted ; what use , then , to strain the visual nerve ? 
They have left their opera-glasses at home . 
`` Why , thou monkey , '' said a harpooneer to one of these lads , `` we 've been cruising now hard upon three years , and thou hast not raised a whale yet . 
Whales are scarce as hen 's teeth whenever thou art up here . '' 
Perhaps they were ; or perhaps there might have been shoals of them in the far horizon ; but lulled into such an opium-like listlessness of vacant , unconscious reverie is this absent-minded youth by the blending cadence of waves with thoughts , that at last he loses his identity ; takes the mystic ocean at his feet for the visible image of that deep , blue , bottomless soul , pervading mankind and nature ; and every strange , half-seen , gliding , beautiful thing that eludes him ; every dimly-discovered , uprising fin of some undiscernible form , seems to him the embodiment of those elusive thoughts that only people the soul by continually flitting through it . 
In this enchanted mood , thy spirit ebbs away to whence it came ; becomes diffused through time and space ; like Crammer 's sprinkled Pantheistic ashes , forming at last a part of every shore the round globe over . 
There is no life in thee , now , except that rocking life imparted by a gently rolling ship ; by her , borrowed from the sea ; by the sea , from the inscrutable tides of God . 
But while this sleep , this dream is on ye , move your foot or hand an inch ; slip your hold at all ; and your identity comes back in horror . 
Over Descartian vortices you hover . 
And perhaps , at midday , in the fairest weather , with one half-throttled shriek you drop through that transparent air into the summer sea , no more to rise for ever . 
Heed it well , ye Pantheists ! 
The Quarter-Deck -LRB- Enter Ahab : Then , all -RRB- It was not a great while after the affair of the pipe , that one morning shortly after breakfast , Ahab , as was his wont , ascended the cabin-gangway to the deck . 
There most sea-captains usually walk at that hour , as country gentlemen , after the same meal , take a few turns in the garden . 
Soon his steady , ivory stride was heard , as to and fro he paced his old rounds , upon planks so familiar to his tread , that they were all over dented , like geological stones , with the peculiar mark of his walk . 
Did you fixedly gaze , too , upon that ribbed and dented brow ; there also , you would see still stranger foot-prints -- the foot-prints of his one unsleeping , ever-pacing thought . 
But on the occasion in question , those dents looked deeper , even as his nervous step that morning left a deeper mark . 
And , so full of his thought was Ahab , that at every uniform turn that he made , now at the main-mast and now at the binnacle , you could almost see that thought turn in him as he turned , and pace in him as he paced ; so completely possessing him , indeed , that it all but seemed the inward mould of every outer movement . 
`` D'ye mark him , Flask ? '' 
whispered Stubb ; `` the chick that 's in him pecks the shell . 
` Twill soon be out . '' 
The hours wore on ; -- Ahab now shut up within his cabin ; anon , pacing the deck , with the same intense bigotry of purpose in his aspect . 
It drew near the close of day . 
Suddenly he came to a halt by the bulwarks , and inserting his bone leg into the auger-hole there , and with one hand grasping a shroud , he ordered Starbuck to send everybody aft . 
`` Sir ! '' 
said the mate , astonished at an order seldom or never given on ship-board except in some extraordinary case . 
`` Send everybody aft , '' repeated Ahab . 
`` Mast-heads , there ! 
come down ! '' 
When the entire ship 's company were assembled , and with curious and not wholly unapprehensive faces , were eyeing him , for he looked not unlike the weather horizon when a storm is coming up , Ahab , after rapidly glancing over the bulwarks , and then darting his eyes among the crew , started from his standpoint ; and as though not a soul were nigh him resumed his heavy turns upon the deck . 
With bent head and half-slouched hat he continued to pace , unmindful of the wondering whispering among the men ; till Stubb cautiously whispered to Flask , that Ahab must have summoned them there for the purpose of witnessing a pedestrian feat . 
But this did not last long . 
Vehemently pausing , he cried : -- `` What do ye do when ye see a whale , men ? '' 
`` Sing out for him ! '' 
was the impulsive rejoinder from a score of clubbed voices . 
`` Good ! '' 
cried Ahab , with a wild approval in his tones ; observing the hearty animation into which his unexpected question had so magnetically thrown them . 
`` And what do ye next , men ? '' 
`` Lower away , and after him ! '' 
`` And what tune is it ye pull to , men ? '' 
`` A dead whale or a stove boat ! '' 
More and more strangely and fiercely glad and approving , grew the countenance of the old man at every shout ; while the mariners began to gaze curiously at each other , as if marvelling how it was that they themselves became so excited at such seemingly purposeless questions . 
But , they were all eagerness again , as Ahab , now half-revolving in his pivot-hole , with one hand reaching high up a shroud , and tightly , almost convulsively grasping it , addressed them thus : -- `` All ye mast-headers have before now heard me give orders about a white whale . 
