Oh , cruel ! 
what hast thou done with her ? 
There lies my puzzle ; but thine is greater . 
Thou knowest not how came ye , hence callest thyself unbegotten ; certainly knowest not thy beginning , hence callest thyself unbegun . 
I know that of me , which thou knowest not of thyself , oh , thou omnipotent . 
There is some unsuffusing thing beyond thee , thou clear spirit , to whom all thy eternity is but time , all thy creativeness mechanical . 
Through thee , thy flaming self , my scorched eyes do dimly see it . 
Oh , thou foundling fire , thou hermit immemorial , thou too hast thy incommunicable riddle , thy unparticipated grief . 
Here again with haughty agony , I read my sire . 
Leap ! 
leap up , and lick the sky ! 
I leap with thee ; I burn with thee ; would fain be welded with thee ; defyingly I worship thee ! '' 
`` The boat ! 
the boat ! '' 
cried Starbuck , `` look at thy boat , old man ! '' 
Ahab 's harpoon , the one forged at Perth 's fire , remained firmly lashed in its conspicuous crotch , so that it projected beyond his whale-boat 's bow ; but the sea that had stove its bottom had caused the loose leather sheath to drop off ; and from the keen steel barb there now came a levelled flame of pale , forked fire . 
As the silent harpoon burned there like a serpent 's tongue , Starbuck grasped Ahab by the arm -- `` God , God is against thee , old man ; forbear ! ' 
t is an ill voyage ! 
ill begun , ill continued ; let me square the yards , while we may , old man , and make a fair wind of it homewards , to go on a better voyage than this . '' 
Overhearing Starbuck , the panic-stricken crew instantly ran to the braces -- though not a sail was left aloft . 
For the moment all the aghast mate 's thoughts seemed theirs ; they raised a half mutinous cry . 
But dashing the rattling lightning links to the deck , and snatching the burning harpoon , Ahab waved it like a torch among them ; swearing to transfix with it the first sailor that but cast loose a rope 's end . 
Petrified by his aspect , and still more shrinking from the fiery dart that he held , the men fell back in dismay , and Ahab again spoke : -- `` All your oaths to hunt the White Whale are as binding as mine ; and heart , soul , and body , lungs and life , old Ahab is bound . 
And that ye may know to what tune this heart beats : look ye here ; thus I blow out the last fear ! '' 
And with one blast of his breath he extinguished the flame . 
As in the hurricane that sweeps the plain , men fly the neighborhood of some lone , gigantic elm , whose very height and strength but render it so much the more unsafe , because so much the more a mark for thunderbolts ; so at those last words of Ahab 's many of the mariners did run from him in a terror of dismay . 
The Deck Toward the End of the First Night Watch Ahab standing by the helm . 
Starbuck approaching him . 
We must send down the main-top-sail yard , sir . 
The band is working loose and the lee lift is half-stranded . 
Shall I strike it , sir ? '' 
`` Strike nothing ; lash it . 
If I had sky-sail poles , I 'd sway them up now . '' 
`` Sir ! 
-- in God 's name ! 
-- sir ? '' 
`` Well . '' 
`` The anchors are working , sir . 
Shall I get them inboard ? '' 
`` Strike nothing , and stir nothing but lash everything . 
The wind rises , but it has not got up to my table-lands yet . 
Quick , and see to it . 
-- By masts and keels ! 
he takes me for the hunchbacked skipper of some coasting smack . 
Send down my main-top-sail yard ! 
Ho , gluepots ! 
Loftiest trucks were made for wildest winds , and this brain-truck of mine now sails amid the cloud-scud . 
Shall I strike that ? 
Oh , none but cowards send down their brain-trucks in tempest time . 
What a hooroosh aloft there ! 
