`` I grow blind ; hands ! 
stretch out before me that I may yet grope my way . 
Is ' t night ? '' 
`` The whale ! 
The ship ! '' 
cried the cringing oarsmen . 
`` Oars ! 
oars ! 
Slope downwards to thy depths , O sea that ere it be for ever too late , Ahab may slide this last , last time upon his mark ! 
I see : the ship ! 
the ship ! 
Dash on , my men ! 
Will ye not save my ship ? '' 
But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the sledge-hammering seas , the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks burst through , and in an instant almost , the temporarily disabled boat lay nearly level with the waves ; its half-wading , splashing crew , trying hard to stop the gap and bale out the pouring water . 
Meantime , for that one beholding instant , Tashtego 's mast-head hammer remained suspended in his hand ; and the red flag , half-wrapping him as with a plaid , then streamed itself straight out from him , as his own forward-flowing heart ; while Starbuck and Stubb , standing upon the bowsprit beneath , caught sight of the down-coming monster just as soon as he . 
`` The whale , the whale ! 
Up helm , up helm ! 
Oh , all ye sweet powers of air , now hug me close ! 
Let not Starbuck die , if die he must , in a woman 's fainting fit . 
Up helm , I say -- ye fools , the jaw ! 
the jaw ! 
Is this the end of all my bursting prayers ? 
all my life-long fidelities ? 
Oh , Ahab , Ahab , lo , thy work . 
Steady ! 
helmsman , steady . 
Nay , nay ! 
Up helm again ! 
He turns to meet us ! 
Oh , his unappeasable brow drives on towards one , whose duty tells him he can not depart . 
My God , stand by me now ! '' 
`` Stand not by me , but stand under me , whoever you are that will now help Stubb ; for Stubb , too , sticks here . 
I grin at thee , thou grinning whale ! 
Who ever helped Stubb , or kept Stubb awake , but Stubb 's own unwinking eye ? 
And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattrass that is all too soft ; would it were stuffed with brushwood ! 
I grin at thee , thou grinning whale ! 
Look ye , sun , moon , and stars ! 
I call ye assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost . 
For all that , I would yet ring glasses with ye , would ye but hand the cup ! 
Oh , oh ! 
oh , oh ! 
thou grinning whale , but there 'll be plenty of gulping soon ! 
Why fly ye not , O Ahab ! 
For me , off shoes and jacket to it ; let Stubb die in his drawers ! 
A most mouldy and over salted death , though ; -- cherries ! 
cherries ! 
cherries ! 
Oh , Flask , for one red cherry ere we die ! '' 
`` Cherries ? 
I only wish that we were where they grow . 
