With other men , perhaps , such things would not have been inducements ; but as for me , I am tormented with an everlasting itch for things remote . 
I love to sail forbidden seas , and land on barbarous coasts . 
Not ignoring what is good , I am quick to perceive a horror , and could still be social with it -- would they let me -- since it is but well to be on friendly terms with all the inmates of the place one lodges in . 
By reason of these things , then , the whaling voyage was welcome ; the great flood-gates of the wonder-world swung open , and in the wild conceits that swayed me to my purpose , two and two there floated into my inmost soul , endless processions of the whale , and , mid most of them all , one grand hooded phantom , like a snow hill in the air . 
The Carpet-Bag I stuffed a shirt or two into my old carpet-bag , tucked it under my arm , and started for Cape Horn and the Pacific . 
Quitting the good city of old Manhatto , I duly arrived in New Bedford . 
It was on a Saturday night in December . 
Much was I disappointed upon learning that the little packet for Nantucket had already sailed , and that no way of reaching that place would offer , till the following Monday . 
As most young candidates for the pains and penalties of whaling stop at this same New Bedford , thence to embark on their voyage , it may as well be related that I , for one , had no idea of so doing . 
For my mind was made up to sail in no other than a Nantucket craft , because there was a fine , boisterous something about everything connected with that famous old island , which amazingly pleased me . 
Besides though New Bedford has of late been gradually monopolizing the business of whaling , and though in this matter poor old Nantucket is now much behind her , yet Nantucket was her great original -- the Tyre of this Carthage ; -- the place where the first dead American whale was stranded . 
Where else but from Nantucket did those aboriginal whalemen , the Red-Men , first sally out in canoes to give chase to the Leviathan ? 
And where but from Nantucket , too , did that first adventurous little sloop put forth , partly laden with imported cobblestones -- so goes the story -- to throw at the whales , in order to discover when they were nigh enough to risk a harpoon from the bowsprit ? 
Now having a night , a day , and still another night following before me in New Bedford , ere I could embark for my destined port , it became a matter of concernment where I was to eat and sleep meanwhile . 
It was a very dubious-looking , nay , a very dark and dismal night , bitingly cold and cheerless . 
I knew no one in the place . 
With anxious grapnels I had sounded my pocket , and only brought up a few pieces of silver , -- So , wherever you go , Ishmael , said I to myself , as I stood in the middle of a dreary street shouldering my bag , and comparing the gloom towards the north with the darkness towards the south -- wherever in your wisdom you may conclude to lodge for the night , my dear Ishmael , be sure to inquire the price , and do n't be too particular . 
With halting steps I paced the streets , and passed the sign of `` The Crossed Harpoons '' -- but it looked too expensive and jolly there . 
Further on , from the bright red windows of the `` Sword-Fish Inn , '' there came such fervent rays , that it seemed to have melted the packed snow and ice from before the house , for everywhere else the congealed frost lay ten inches thick in a hard , asphaltic pavement , -- rather weary for me , when I struck my foot against the flinty projections , because from hard , remorseless service the soles of my boots were in a most miserable plight . 
Too expensive and jolly , again thought I , pausing one moment to watch the broad glare in the street , and hear the sounds of the tinkling glasses within . 
But go on , Ishmael , said I at last ; do n't you hear ? 
get away from before the door ; your patched boots are stopping the way . 
So on I went . 
I now by instinct followed the streets that took me waterward , for there , doubtless , were the cheapest , if not the cheeriest inns . 
Such dreary streets ! 
Blocks of blackness , not houses , on either hand , and here and there a candle , like a candle moving about in a tomb . 
At this hour of the night , of the last day of the week , that quarter of the town proved all but deserted . 
But presently I came to a smoky light proceeding from a low , wide building , the door of which stood invitingly open . 
It had a careless look , as if it were meant for the uses of the public ; so , entering , the first thing I did was to stumble over an ash-box in the porch . 
Ha ! 
thought I , ha , as the flying particles almost choked me , are these ashes from that destroyed city , Gomorrah ? 
But `` The Crossed Harpoons , '' and the `` The Sword-Fish ? '' 
-- this , then must needs be the sign of `` The Trap . '' 
However , I picked myself up and hearing a loud voice within , pushed on and opened a second , interior door . 
It seemed the great Black Parliament sitting in Tophet . 
A hundred black faces turned round in their rows to peer ; and beyond , a black Angel of Doom was beating a book in a pulpit . 
It was a negro church ; and the preacher 's text was about the blackness of darkness , and the weeping and wailing and teeth-gnashing there . 
Ha , Ishmael , muttered I , backing out , Wretched entertainment at the sign of ` The Trap ! ' 
Moving on , I at last came to a dim sort of light not far from the docks , and heard a forlorn creaking in the air ; and looking up , saw a swinging sign over the door with a white painting upon it , faintly representing a tall straight jet of misty spray , and these words underneath -- `` The Spouter Inn : -- Peter Coffin . '' 
Coffin ? 
-- Spouter ? 
-- Rather ominous in that particular connexion , thought I . 
But it is a common name in Nantucket , they say , and I suppose this Peter here is an emigrant from there . 
As the light looked so dim , and the place , for the time , looked quiet enough , and the dilapidated little wooden house itself looked as if it might have been carted here from the ruins of some burnt district , and as the swinging sign had a poverty-stricken sort of creak to it , I thought that here was the very spot for cheap lodgings , and the best of pea coffee . 
It was a queer sort of place -- a gable-ended old house , one side palsied as it were , and leaning over sadly . 
It stood on a sharp bleak corner , where that tempestuous wind Euroclydon kept up a worse howling than ever it did about poor Paul 's tossed craft . 
Euroclydon , nevertheless , is a mighty pleasant zephyr to any one in-doors , with his feet on the hob quietly toasting for bed . 
In judging of that tempestuous wind called Euroclydon , '' says an old writer -- of whose works I possess the only copy extant -- `` it maketh a marvellous difference , whether thou lookest out at it from a glass window where the frost is all on the outside , or whether thou observest it from that sashless window , where the frost is on both sides , and of which the wight Death is the only glazier . '' 
True enough , thought I , as this passage occurred to my mind -- old black-letter , thou reasonest well . 
Yes , these eyes are windows , and this body of mine is the house . 
