He now perceived that the Guernsey-man , who had just got into the chains , and was using a cutting-spade , had slung his nose in a sort of bag . 
`` What 's the matter with your nose , there ? '' 
said Stubb . 
`` Broke it ? '' 
`` I wish it was broken , or that I did n't have any nose at all ! '' 
answered the Guernsey-man , who did not seem to relish the job he was at very much . 
`` But what are you holding yours for ? '' 
`` Oh , nothing ! 
It 's a wax nose ; I have to hold it on . 
Fine day , ai n't it ? 
Air rather gardenny , I should say ; throw us a bunch of posies , will ye , Bouton-de-Rose ? '' 
`` What in the devil 's name do you want here ? '' 
roared the Guernseyman , flying into a sudden passion . 
`` Oh ! 
keep cool -- cool ? 
yes , that 's the word ! 
why do n't you pack those whales in ice while you 're working at 'em ? 
But joking aside , though ; do you know , Rose-bud , that it 's all nonsense trying to get any oil out of such whales ? 
As for that dried up one , there , he has n't a gill in his whole carcase . '' 
`` I know that well enough ; but , d'ye see , the Captain here wo n't believe it ; this is his first voyage ; he was a Cologne manufacturer before . 
But come aboard , and mayhap he 'll believe you , if he wo n't me ; and so I 'll get out of this dirty scrape . '' 
`` Anything to oblige ye , my sweet and pleasant fellow , '' rejoined Stubb , and with that he soon mounted to the deck . 
There a queer scene presented itself . 
The sailors , in tasselled caps of red worsted , were getting the heavy tackles in readiness for the whales . 
But they worked rather slow and talked very fast , and seemed in anything but a good humor . 
All their noses upwardly projected from their faces like so many jibbooms . 
Now and then pairs of them would drop their work , and run up to the mast-head to get some fresh air . 
Some thinking they would catch the plague , dipped oakum in coal-tar , and at intervals held it to their nostrils . 
Others having broken the stems of their pipes almost short off at the bowl , were vigorously puffing tobacco-smoke , so that it constantly filled their olfactories . 
Stubb was struck by a shower of outcries and anathemas proceeding from the Captain 's round-house abaft ; and looking in that direction saw a fiery face thrust from behind the door , which was held ajar from within . 
This was the tormented surgeon , who , after in vain remonstrating against the proceedings of the day , had betaken himself to the Captain 's round-house -LRB- cabinet he called it -RRB- to avoid the pest ; but still , could not help yelling out his entreaties and indignations at times . 
Marking all this , Stubb argued well for his scheme , and turning to the Guernsey-man had a little chat with him , during which the stranger mate expressed his detestation of his Captain as a conceited ignoramus , who had brought them all into so unsavory and unprofitable a pickle . 
Sounding him carefully , Stubb further perceived that the Guernsey-man had not the slightest suspicion concerning the ambergris . 
He therefore held his peace on that head , but otherwise was quite frank and confidential with him , so that the two quickly concocted a little plan for both circumventing and satirizing the Captain , without his at all dreaming of distrusting their sincerity . 
According to this little plan of theirs , the Guernsey-man , under cover of an interpreter 's office , was to tell the Captain what he pleased , but as coming from Stubb ; and as for Stubb , he was to utter any nonsense that should come uppermost in him during the interview . 
By this time their destined victim appeared from his cabin . 
He was a small and dark , but rather delicate looking man for a sea-captain , with large whiskers and moustache , however ; and wore a red cotton velvet vest with watch-seals at his side . 
To this gentleman , Stubb was now politely introduced by the Guernsey-man , who at once ostentatiously put on the aspect of interpreting between them . 
`` What shall I say to him first ? '' 
said he . 
`` Why , '' said Stubb , eyeing the velvet vest and the watch and seals , `` you may as well begin by telling him that he looks a sort of babyish to me , though I do n't pretend to be a judge . '' 
`` He says , Monsieur , '' said the Guernsey-man , in French , turning to his captain , `` that only yesterday his ship spoke a vessel , whose captain and chief-mate , with six sailors , had all died of a fever caught from a blasted whale they had brought alongside . '' 
Upon this the captain started , and eagerly desired to know more . 
`` What now ? '' 
said the Guernsey-man to Stubb . 
`` Why , since he takes it so easy , tell him that now I have eyed him carefully , I 'm quite certain that he 's no more fit to command a whale-ship than a St. Jago monkey . 
In fact , tell him from me he 's a baboon . '' 
`` He vows and declares , Monsieur , that the other whale , the dried one , is far more deadly than the blasted one ; in fine , Monsieur , he conjures us , as we value our lives , to cut loose from these fish . '' 
Instantly the captain ran forward , and in a loud voice commanded his crew to desist from hoisting the cutting-tackles , and at once cast loose the cables and chains confining the whales to the ship . 
`` What now ? '' 
