The parted mouth of Tashtego revealed his shark-white teeth , which strangely gleamed as if they too had been tipped by corpusants ; while lit up by the preternatural light , Queequeg 's tattooing burned like Satanic blue flames on his body . 
The tableau all waned at last with the pallidness aloft ; and once more the Pequod and every soul on her decks were wrapped in a pall . 
A moment or two passed , when Starbuck , going forward , pushed against some one . 
It was Stubb . 
`` What thinkest thou now , man ; I heard thy cry ; it was not the same in the song . '' 
`` No , no , it was n't ; I said the corpusants have mercy on us all ; and I hope they will , still . 
But do they only have mercy on long faces ? 
-- have they no bowels for a laugh ? 
And look ye , Mr. Starbuck -- but it 's too dark to look . 
Hear me , then ; I take that mast-head flame we saw for a sign of good luck ; for those masts are rooted in a hold that is going to be chock a ' block with sperm-oil , d'ye see ; and so , all that sperm will work up into the masts , like sap in a tree . 
Yes , our three masts will yet be as three spermaceti candles -- that 's the good promise we saw . '' 
At that moment Starbuck caught sight of Stubb 's face slowly beginning to glimmer into sight . 
Glancing upwards , he cried : `` See ! 
see ! '' 
and once more the high tapering flames were beheld with what seemed redoubled supernaturalness in their pallor . 
`` The corpusants have mercy on us all , '' cried Stubb , again . 
At the base of the main-mast , full beneath the doubloon and the flame , the Parsee was kneeling in Ahab 's front , but with his head bowed away from him ; while near by , from the arched and overhanging rigging , where they had just been engaged securing a spar , a number of the seamen , arrested by the glare , now cohered together , and hung pendulous , like a knot of numbed wasps from a drooping , orchard twig . 
In various enchanted attitudes like the standing , or stepping , or running skeletons in Herculaneum , others remained rooted to the deck ; but all their eyes upcast . 
`` Aye , aye , men ! '' 
cried Ahab . 
`` Look up at it ; mark it well ; the white flame but lights the way to the White Whale ! 
Hand me those mainmast links there ; I would fain feel this pulse , and let mine beat against it ; blood against fire ! 
So . '' 
Then turning -- the last link held fast in his left hand , he put his foot upon the Parsee ; and with fixed upward eye , and high-flung right arm , he stood erect before the lofty tri-pointed trinity of flames . 
`` Oh ! 
thou clear spirit of clear fire , whom on these seas I as Persian once did worship , till in the sacramental act so burned by thee , that to this hour I bear the scar ; I now know thee , thou clear spirit , and I now know that thy right worship is defiance . 
To neither love nor reverence wilt thou be kind ; and e ` en for hate thou canst but kill ; and all are killed . 
No fearless fool now fronts thee . 
I own thy speechless , placeless power ; but to the last gasp of my earthquake life will dispute its unconditional , unintegral mastery in me . 
In the midst of the personified impersonal , a personality stands here . 
Though but a point at best ; whenceso'er I came ; whereso'er I go ; yet while I earthly live , the queenly personality lives in me , and feels her royal rights . 
But war is pain , and hate is woe . 
Come in thy lowest form of love , and I will kneel and kiss thee ; but at thy highest , come as mere supernal power ; and though thou launchest navies of full-freighted worlds , there 's that in here that still remains indifferent . 
Oh , thou clear spirit , of thy fire thou madest me , and like a true child of fire , I breathe it back to thee . '' 
-LSB- Sudden , repeated flashes of lightning ; the nine flames leap lengthwise to thrice their previous height ; Ahab , with the rest , closes his eyes , his right hand pressed hard upon them . -RSB- 
`` I own thy speechless , placeless power ; said I not so ? 
Nor was it wrung from me ; nor do I now drop these links . 
Thou canst blind ; but I can then grope . 
Thou canst consume ; but I can then be ashes . 
Take the homage of these poor eyes , and shutter-hands . 
I would not take it . 
The lightning flashes through my skull ; mine eyeballs ache and ache ; my whole beaten brain seems as beheaded , and rolling on some stunning ground . 
Oh , oh ! 
Yet blindfold , yet will I talk to thee . 
Light though thou be , thou leapest out of darkness ; but I am darkness leaping out of light , leaping out of thee ! 
The javelins cease ; open eyes ; see , or not ? 
There burn the flames ! 
Oh , thou magnanimous ! 
now do I do glory in my genealogy . 
But thou art but my fiery father ; my sweet mother , I know not . 
