So man 's seconds tick ! 
Oh ! 
how immaterial are all materials ! 
What things real are there , but imponderable thoughts ? 
Here now 's the very dreaded symbol of grim death , by a mere hap , made the expressive sign of the help and hope of most endangered life . 
A life-buoy of a coffin ! 
Does it go further ? 
Can it be that in some spiritual sense the coffin is , after all , but an immortality-preserver ! 
I 'll think of that . 
But no . 
So far gone am I in the dark side of earth , that its other side , the theoretic bright one , seems but uncertain twilight to me . 
Will ye never have done , Carpenter , with that accursed sound ? 
I go below ; let me not see that thing here when I return again . 
Now , then , Pip , we 'll talk this over ; I do suck most wondrous philosophies from thee ! 
Some unknown conduits from the unknown worlds must empty into thee ! '' 
The Pequod Meets The Rachel Next day , a large ship , the Rachel , was descried , bearing directly down upon the Pequod , all her spars thickly clustering with men . 
At the time the Pequod was making good speed through the water ; but as the broad-winged windward stranger shot nigh to her , the boastful sails all fell together as blank bladders that are burst , and all life fled from the smitten hull . 
`` Bad news ; she brings bad news , '' muttered the old Manxman . 
But ere her commander , who , with trumpet to mouth , stood up in his boat ; ere he could hopefully hail , Ahab 's voice was heard . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
`` Aye , yesterday . 
Have ye seen a whale-boat adrift ? '' 
Throttling his joy , Ahab negatively answered this unexpected question ; and would then have fain boarded the stranger , when the stranger captain himself , having stopped his vessel 's way , was seen descending her side . 
A few keen pulls , and his boat-hook soon clinched the Pequod 's main-chains , and he sprang to the deck . 
Immediately he was recognized by Ahab for a Nantucketer he knew . 
But no formal salutation was exchanged . 
`` Where was he ? 
-- not killed ! 
-- not killed ! '' 
cried Ahab , closely advancing . 
`` How was it ? '' 
It seemed that somewhat late on the afternoon of the day previous , while three of the stranger 's boats were engaged with a shoal of whales , which had led them some four or five miles from the ship ; and while they were yet in swift chase to windward , the white hump and head of Moby Dick had suddenly loomed up out of the blue water , not very far to leeward ; whereupon , the fourth rigged boat -- a reserved one -- had been instantly lowered in chase . 
After a keen sail before the wind , this fourth boat -- the swiftest keeled of all -- seemed to have succeeded in fastening -- at least , as well as the man at the mast-head could tell anything about it . 
In the distance he saw the diminished dotted boat ; and then a swift gleam of bubbling white water ; and after that nothing more ; whence it was concluded that the stricken whale must have indefinitely run away with his pursuers , as often happens . 
There was some apprehension , but no positive alarm , as yet . 
The recall signals were placed in the rigging ; darkness came on ; and forced to pick up her three far to windward boats -- ere going in quest of the fourth one in the precisely opposite direction -- the ship had not only been necessitated to leave that boat to its fate till near midnight , but , for the time , to increase her distance from it . 
But the rest of her crew being at last safe aboard , she crowded all sail -- stunsail on stunsail -- after the missing boat ; kindling a fire in her try-pots for a beacon ; and every other man aloft on the look-out . 
But though when she had thus sailed a sufficient distance to gain the presumed place of the absent ones when last seen ; though she then paused to lower her spare boats to pull all around her ; and not finding anything , had again dashed on ; again paused , and lowered her boats ; and though she had thus continued doing till daylight ; yet not the least glimpse of the missing keel had been seen . 
The story told , the stranger Captain immediately went on to reveal his object in boarding the Pequod . 
He desired that ship to unite with his own in the search ; by sailing over the sea some four or five miles apart , on parallel lines , and so sweeping a double horizon , as it were . 
`` I will wager something now , '' whispered Stubb to Flask , `` that some one in that missing boat wore off that Captain 's best coat ; mayhap , his watch -- he 's so cursed anxious to get it back . 
Who ever heard of two pious whale-ships cruising after one missing whale-boat in the height of the whaling season ? 
See , Flask , only see how pale he looks -- pale in the very buttons of his eyes -- look -- it was n't the coat -- it must have been the - '' `` My boy , my own boy is among them . 
For God 's sake -- I beg , I conjure '' -- here exclaimed the stranger Captain to Ahab , who thus far had but icily received his petition . 
`` For eight-and-forty hours let me charter your ship -- I will gladly pay for it , and roundly pay for it -- if there be no other way -- for eight-and-forty hours only -- only that -- you must , oh , you must , and you shall do this thing . '' 
`` His son ! '' 
cried Stubb , `` oh , it 's his son he 's lost ! 
I take back the coat and watch -- what says Ahab ? 
We must save that boy . '' 
`` He 's drowned with the rest on 'em , last night , '' said the old Manx sailor standing behind them ; `` I heard ; all of ye heard their spirits . '' 
