But to such unresting vigilance over their dangerous allies was this small band of whites necessitated , both by night and by day , and so extreme was the hard work they underwent , that upon the vessel being ready again for sea , they were in such a weakened condition that the captain durst not put off with them in so heavy a vessel . 
After taking counsel with his officers , he anchored the ship as far off shore as possible ; loaded and ran out his two cannon from the bows ; stacked his muskets on the poop ; and warning the Islanders not to approach the ship at their peril , took one man with him , and setting the sail of his best whale-boat , steered straight before the wind for Tahiti , five hundred miles distant , to procure a reinforcement to his crew . 
`` On the fourth day of the sail , a large canoe was descried , which seemed to have touched at a low isle of corals . 
He steered away from it ; but the savage craft bore down on him ; and soon the voice of Steelkilt hailed him to heave to , or he would run him under water . 
The captain presented a pistol . 
With one foot on each prow of the yoked war-canoes , the Lakeman laughed him to scorn ; assuring him that if the pistol so much as clicked in the lock , he would bury him in bubbles and foam . '' 
` What do you want of me ? ' 
cried the captain . '' 
` Where are you bound ? 
and for what are you bound ? ' 
demanded Steelkilt ; ` no lies . ' '' ' 
I am bound to Tahiti for more men . ' '' 
` Very good . 
Let me board you a moment -- I come in peace . ' 
With that he leaped from the canoe , swam to the boat ; and climbing the gunwale , stood face to face with the captain . '' 
` Cross your arms , sir ; throw back your head . 
Now , repeat after me . 
As soon as Steelkilt leaves me , I swear to beach this boat on yonder island , and remain there six days . 
If I do not , may lightning strike me ! ' '' ' 
A pretty scholar , ' laughed the Lakeman . 
` Adios , Senor ! ' 
and leaping into the sea , he swam back to his comrades . 
`` Watching the boat till it was fairly beached , and drawn up to the roots of the cocoa-nut trees , Steelkilt made sail again , and in due time arrived at Tahiti , his own place of destination . 
There , luck befriended him ; two ships were about to sail for France , and were providentially in want of precisely that number of men which the sailor headed . 
They embarked , and so for ever got the start of their former captain , had he been at all minded to work them legal retribution . 
`` Some ten days after the French ships sailed , the whale-boat arrived , and the captain was forced to enlist some of the more civilized Tahitians , who had been somewhat used to the sea . 
Chartering a small native schooner , he returned with them to his vessel ; and finding all right there , again resumed his cruisings . 
`` Where Steelkilt now is , gentlemen , none know ; but upon the island of Nantucket , the widow of Radney still turns to the sea which refuses to give up its dead ; still in dreams sees the awful white whale that destroyed him . '' 
` Are you through ? ' 
said Don Sebastian , quietly . '' ' 
I am , Don . ' '' 
` Then I entreat you , tell me if to the best of your own convictions , this your story is in substance really true ? 
It is so passing wonderful ! 
Did you get it from an unquestionable source ? 
Bear with me if I seem to press . ' '' 
` Also bear with all of us , sir sailor ; for we all join in Don Sebastian 's suit , ' cried the company , with exceeding interest . '' 
` Is there a copy of the Holy Evangelists in the Golden Inn , gentlemen ? ' '' 
` Nay , ' said Don Sebastian ; ` but I know a worthy priest near by , who will quickly procure one for me . 
I go for it ; but are you well advised ? 
this may grow too serious . ' '' 
` Will you be so good as to bring the priest also , Don ? ' '' 
` Though there are no Auto-da-Fe 's in Lima now , ' said one of the company to another ; ' I fear our sailor friend runs risks of the archiepiscopacy . 
Let us withdraw more out of the moonlight . 
I see no need of this . ' '' 
` Excuse me for running after you , Don Sebastian ; but may I also beg that you will be particular in procuring the largest sized Evangelists you can . ' 
` This is the priest , he brings you the Evangelists , ' said Don Sebastian , gravely , returning with a tall and solemn figure . '' 
` Let me remove my hat . 
Now , venerable priest , further into the light , and hold the Holy Book before me that I may touch it . '' 
` So help me Heaven , and on my honor the story I have told ye , gentlemen , is in substance and its great items , true . 
I know it to be true ; it happened on this ball ; I trod the ship ; I knew the crew ; I have seen and talked with Steelkilt since the death of Radney . '' 
