turn to ! 
-- I make no promise ; to your duty ! 
Do you want to sink the ship , by knocking off at a time like this ? 
Turn to ! ' 
and he once more raised a pistol . '' 
` Sink the ship ? ' 
cried Steelkilt . 
` Aye , let her sink . 
Not a man of us turns to , unless you swear not to raise a rope-yarn against us . 
What say ye , men ? ' 
turning to his comrades . 
A fierce cheer was their response . 
`` The Lakeman now patrolled the barricade , all the while keeping his eye on the Captain , and jerking out such sentences as these : -- ` It 's not our fault ; we did n't want it ; I told him to take his hammer away ; it was boy 's business ; he might have known me before this ; I told him not to prick the buffalo ; I believe I have broken a finger here against his cursed jaw ; ai n't those mincing knives down in the forecastle there , men ? 
look to those handspikes , my hearties . 
Captain , by God , look to yourself ; say the word ; do n't be a fool ; forget it all ; we are ready to turn to ; treat us decently , and we 're your men ; but we wo n't be flogged . ' '' 
` Turn to ! 
I make no promises , turn to , I say ! ' '' 
` Look ye , now , ' cried the Lakeman , flinging out his arm towards him , ` there are a few of us here -LRB- and I am one of them -RRB- who have shipped for the cruise , d'ye see ; now as you well know , sir , we can claim our discharge as soon as the anchor is down ; so we do n't want a row ; it 's not our interest ; we want to be peaceable ; we are ready to work , but we wo n't be flogged . ' '' 
` Turn to ! ' 
roared the Captain . 
`` Steelkilt glanced round him a moment , and then said : -- ' I tell you what it is now , Captain , rather than kill ye , and be hung for such a shabby rascal , we wo n't lift a hand against ye unless ye attack us ; but till you say the word about not flogging us , we do n't do a hand 's turn . ' '' 
` Down into the forecastle then , down with ye , I 'll keep ye there till ye 're sick of it . 
Down ye go . ' '' 
` Shall we ? ' 
cried the ringleader to his men . 
Most of them were against it ; but at length , in obedience to Steelkilt , they preceded him down into their dark den , growlingly disappearing , like bears into a cave . 
`` As the Lakeman 's bare head was just level with the planks , the Captain and his posse leaped the barricade , and rapidly drawing over the slide of the scuttle , planted their group of hands upon it , and loudly called for the steward to bring the heavy brass padlock belonging to the companionway . 
Then opening the slide a little , the Captain whispered something down the crack , closed it , and turned the key upon them -- ten in number -- leaving on deck some twenty or more , who thus far had remained neutral . 
`` All night a wide-awake watch was kept by all the officers , forward and aft , especially about the forecastle scuttle and fore hatchway ; at which last place it was feared the insurgents might emerge , after breaking through the bulkhead below . 
But the hours of darkness passed in peace ; the men who still remained at their duty toiling hard at the pumps , whose clinking and clanking at intervals through the dreary night dismally resounded through the ship . 
`` At sunrise the Captain went forward , and knocking on the deck , summoned the prisoners to work ; but with a yell they refused . 
Water was then lowered down to them , and a couple of handfuls of biscuit were tossed after it ; when again turning the key upon them and pocketing it , the Captain returned to the quarter-deck . 
Twice every day for three days this was repeated ; but on the fourth morning a confused wrangling , and then a scuffling was heard , as the customary summons was delivered ; and suddenly four men burst up from the forecastle , saying they were ready to turn to . 
The fetid closeness of the air , and a famishing diet , united perhaps to some fears of ultimate retribution , had constrained them to surrender at discretion . 
Emboldened by this , the Captain reiterated his demand to the rest , but Steelkilt shouted up to him a terrific hint to stop his babbling and betake himself where he belonged . 
On the fifth morning three others of the mutineers bolted up into the air from the desperate arms below that sought to restrain them . 
Only three were left . '' 
` Better turn to , now ? ' 
said the Captain with a heartless jeer . '' 
` Shut us up again , will ye ! ' 
cried Steelkilt . 
`` Oh ! 
certainly , '' said the Captain , and the key clicked . 
`` It was at this point , gentlemen , that enraged by the defection of seven of his former associates , and stung by the mocking voice that had last hailed him , and maddened by his long entombment in a place as black as the bowels of despair ; it was then that Steelkilt proposed to the two Canallers , thus far apparently of one mind with him , to burst out of their hole at the next summoning of the garrison ; and armed with their keen mincing knives -LRB- long , crescentic , heavy implements with a handle at each end -RRB- run amuck from the bowsprit to the taffrail ; and if by any devilishness of desperation possible , seize the ship . 
For himself , he would do this , he said , whether they joined him or not . 
That was the last night he should spend in that den . 
But the scheme met with no opposition on the part of the other two ; they swore they were ready for that , or for any other mad thing , for anything in short but a surrender . 
And what was more , they each insisted upon being the first man on deck , when the time to make the rush should come . 
But to this their leader as fiercely objected , reserving that priority for himself ; particularly as his two comrades would not yield , the one to the other , in the matter ; and both of them could not be first , for the ladder would but admit one man at a time . 
And here , gentlemen , the foul play of these miscreants must come out . 
