Ding , dong , ding ! 
Who 's seen Pip ? 
He must be up here ; let 's try the door . 
What ? 
neither lock , nor bolt , nor bar ; and yet there 's no opening it . 
It must be the spell ; he told me to stay here : Aye , and told me this screwed chair was mine . 
Here , then , I 'll seat me , against the transom , in the ship 's full middle , all her keel and her three masts before me . 
Here , our old sailors say , in their black seventy-fours great admirals sometimes sit at table , and lord it over rows of captains and lieutenants . 
Ha ! 
what 's this ? 
epaulets ! 
epaulets ! 
the epaulets all come crowding . 
Pass round the decanters ; glad to see ye ; fill up , monsieurs ! 
What an odd feeling , now , when a black boy 's host to white men with gold lace upon their coats ! 
-- Monsieurs , have ye seen one Pip ? 
-- a little negro lad , five feet high , hang-dog look , and cowardly ! 
Jumped from a whale-boat once ; -- seen him ? 
No ! 
Well then , fill up again , captains , and let 's drink shame upon all cowards ! 
I name no names . 
Shame upon them ! 
Put one foot upon the table . 
Shame upon all cowards . 
-- Hist ! 
above there , I hear ivory -- Oh , master ! 
master ! 
I am indeed down-hearted when you walk over me . 
But here I 'll stay , though this stern strikes rocks ; and they bulge through ; and oysters come to join me . '' 
The Hat And now that at the proper time and place , after so long and wide a preliminary cruise , Ahab , -- all other whaling waters swept -- seemed to have chased his foe into an oceanfold , to slay him the more securely there ; now , that he found himself hard by the very latitude and longitude where his tormenting wound had been inflicted ; now that a vessel had been spoken which on the very day preceding had actually encountered Moby Dick ; -- and now that all his successive meetings with various ships contrastingly concurred to show the demoniac indifference with which the white whale tore his hunters , whether sinning or sinned against ; now it was that there lurked a something in the old man 's eyes , which it was hardly sufferable for feeble souls to see . 
As the unsetting polar star , which through the livelong , arctic , six months ' night sustains its piercing , steady , central gaze ; so Ahab 's purpose now fixedly gleamed down upon the constant midnight of the gloomy crew . 
It domineered above them so , that all their bodings , doubts , misgivings , fears , were fain to hide beneath their souls , and not sprout forth a single spear or leaf . 
In this foreshadowing interval , too , all humor , forced or natural , vanished . 
Stubb no more strove to raise a smile ; Starbuck no more strove to check one . 
Alike , joy and sorrow , hope and fear , seemed ground to finest dust , and powdered , for the time , in the clamped mortar of Ahab 's iron soul . 
Like machines , they dumbly moved about the deck , ever conscious that the old man 's despot eye was on them . 
But did you deeply scan him in his more secret confidential hours when he thought no glance but one was on him ; then you would have seen that even as Ahab 's eyes so awed the crew 's , the inscrutable Parsee 's glance awed his ; or somehow , at least , in some wild way , at times affected it . 
Such an added , gliding strangeness began to invest the thin Fedallah now ; such ceaseless shudderings shook him ; that the men looked dubious at him ; half uncertain , as it seemed , whether indeed he were a mortal substance , or else a tremulous shadow cast upon the deck by some unseen being 's body . 
And that shadow was always hovering there . 
For not by night , even , had Fedallah ever certainly been known to slumber , or go below . 
He would stand still for hours : but never sat or leaned ; his wan but wondrous eyes did plainly say -- We two watchmen never rest . 
Nor , at any time , by night or day could the mariners now step upon the deck , unless Ahab was before them ; either standing in his pivot-hole , or exactly pacing the planks between two undeviating limits , -- the main-mast and the mizen ; or else they saw him standing in the cabin-scuttle , -- his living foot advanced upon the deck , as if to step ; his hat slouched heavily over his eyes ; so that however motionless he stood , however the days and nights were added on , that he had not swung in his hammock ; yet hidden beneath that slouching hat , they could never tell unerringly whether , for all this , his eyes were really closed at times ; or whether he was still intently scanning them ; no matter , though he stood so in the scuttle for a whole hour on the stretch , and the unheeded night-damp gathered in beads of dew upon that stone-carved coat and hat . 
The clothes that the night had wet , the next day 's sunshine dried upon him ; and so , day after day , and night after night ; he went no more beneath the planks ; whatever he wanted from the cabin that thing he sent for . 
He ate in the same open air ; that is , his two only meals , -- breakfast and dinner : supper he never touched ; nor reaped his beard ; which darkly grew all gnarled , as unearthed roots of trees blown over , which still grow idly on at naked base , though perished in the upper verdure . 
But though his whole life was now become one watch on deck ; and though the Parsee 's mystic watch was without intermission as his own ; yet these two never seemed to speak -- one man to the other -- unless at long intervals some passing unmomentous matter made it necessary . 
Though such a potent spell seemed secretly to join the twain ; openly , and to the awe-struck crew , they seemed pole-like asunder . 
If by day they chanced to speak one word ; by night , dumb men were both , so far as concerned the slightest verbal interchange . 
At times , for longest hours , without a single hail , they stood far parted in the starlight ; Ahab in his scuttle , the Parsee by the main-mast ; but still fixedly gazing upon each other ; as if in the Parsee Ahab saw his forethrown shadow , in Ahab the Parsee his abandoned substance . 
And yet , somehow , did Ahab -- in his own proper self , as daily , hourly , and every instant , commandingly revealed to his subordinates , -- Ahab seemed an independent lord ; the Parsee but his slave . 
Still again both seemed yoked together , and an unseen tyrant driving them ; the lean shade siding the solid rib . 
