But all remained still as before . 
I began to grow alarmed . 
I had allowed him such abundant time ; I thought he might have had an apoplectic fit . 
I looked through the key-hole ; but the door opening into an odd corner of the room , the key-hole prospect was but a crooked and sinister one . 
I could only see part of the foot-board of the bed and a line of the wall , but nothing more . 
I was surprised to behold resting against the wall the wooden shaft of Queequeg 's harpoon , which the landlady the evening previous had taken from him , before our mounting to the chamber . 
That 's strange , thought I ; but at any rate , since the harpoon stands yonder , and he seldom or never goes abroad without it , therefore he must be inside here , and no possible mistake . 
`` Queequeg ! 
-- Queequeg ! '' 
-- all still . 
Something must have happened . 
Apoplexy ! 
I tried to burst open the door ; but it stubbornly resisted . 
Running down stairs , I quickly stated my suspicions to the first person I met -- the chamber-maid . 
`` La ! 
la ! '' 
she cried , `` I thought something must be the matter . 
I went to make the bed after breakfast , and the door was locked ; and not a mouse to be heard ; and it 's been just so silent ever since . 
But I thought , may be , you had both gone off and locked your baggage in for safe keeping . 
La ! 
La , ma'am ! 
-- Mistress ! 
murder ! 
Mrs. Hussey ! 
apoplexy ! '' 
-- and with these cries she ran towards the kitchen , I following . 
Mrs. Hussey soon appeared , with a mustard-pot in one hand and a vinegar-cruet in the other , having just broken away from the occupation of attending to the castors , and scolding her little black boy meantime . 
`` Wood-house ! '' 
cried I , `` which way to it ? 
Run for God 's sake , and fetch something to pry open the door -- the axe ! 
-- the axe ! 
he 's had a stroke ; depend upon it ! '' 
-- and so saying I was unmethodically rushing up stairs again empty-handed , when Mrs. Hussey interposed the mustard-pot and vinegar-cruet , and the entire castor of her countenance . 
`` What 's the matter with you , young man ? '' 
`` Get the axe ! 
For God 's sake , run for the doctor , some one , while I pry it open ! '' 
`` Look here , '' said the landlady , quickly putting down the vinegar-cruet , so as to have one hand free ; `` look here ; are you talking about prying open any of my doors ? '' 
-- and with that she seized my arm . 
`` What 's the matter with you ? 
What 's the matter with you , shipmate ? '' 
In as calm , but rapid a manner as possible , I gave her to understand the whole case . 
Unconsciously clapping the vinegar-cruet to one side of her nose , she ruminated for an instant ; then exclaimed -- `` No ! 
I have n't seen it since I put it there . '' 
Running to a little closet under the landing of the stairs , she glanced in , and returning , told me that Queequeg 's harpoon was missing . 
`` He 's killed himself , '' she cried . 
`` It 's unfort ` nate Stiggs done over again there goes another counterpane -- God pity his poor mother ! 
-- it will be the ruin of my house . 
Has the poor lad a sister ? 
Where 's that girl ? 
-- there , Betty , go to Snarles the Painter , and tell him to paint me a sign , with -- `` no suicides permitted here , and no smoking in the parlor ; '' -- might as well kill both birds at once . 
