`` Work that over again , Perth . '' 
This done , Perth was about to begin welding the twelve into one , when Ahab stayed his hand , and said he would weld his own iron . 
As , then , with regular , gasping hems , he hammered on the anvil , Perth passing to him the glowing rods , one after the other , and the hard pressed forge shooting up its intense straight flame , the Parsee passed silently , and bowing over his head towards the fire , seemed invoking some curse or some blessing on the toil . 
But , as Ahab looked up , he slid aside . 
`` What 's that bunch of lucifers dodging about there for ? '' 
muttered Stubb , looking on from the forecastle . 
`` That Parsee smells fire like a fusee ; and smells of it himself , like a hot musket 's powder-pan . '' 
At last the shank , in one complete rod , received its final heat ; and as Perth , to temper it , plunged it all hissing into the cask of water near by , the scalding steam shot up into Ahab 's bent face . 
`` Would ` st thou brand me , Perth ? '' 
wincing for a moment with the pain ; `` have I been but forging my own branding-iron , then ? '' 
`` Pray God , not that ; yet I fear something , Captain Ahab . 
Is not this harpoon for the White Whale ? '' 
`` For the white fiend ! 
But now for the barbs ; thou must make them thyself , man . 
Here are my razors -- the best of steel ; here , and make the barbs sharp as the needle-sleet of the Icy Sea . '' 
For a moment , the old blacksmith eyed the razors as though he would fain not use them . 
`` Take them , man , I have no need for them ; for I now neither shave , sup , nor pray till -- but here -- to work ! '' 
Fashioned at last into an arrowy shape , and welded by Perth to the shank , the steel soon pointed the end of the iron ; and as the blacksmith was about giving the barbs their final heat , prior to tempering them , he cried to Ahab to place the water-cask near . 
`` No , no -- no water for that ; I want it of the true death-temper . 
Ahoy , there ! 
Tashtego , Queequeg , Daggoo ! 
What say ye , pagans ! 
Will ye give me as much blood as will cover this barb ? '' 
holding it high up . 
A cluster of dark nods replied , Yes . 
Three punctures were made in the heathen flesh , and the White Whale 's barbs were then tempered . 
`` Ego non baptizo te in nomine patris , sed in nomine diaboli ! '' 
deliriously howled Ahab , as the malignant iron scorchingly devoured the baptismal blood . 
Now , mustering the spare poles from below , and selecting one of hickory , with the bark still investing it , Ahab fitted the end to the socket of the iron . 
A coil of new tow-line was then unwound , and some fathoms of it taken to the windlass , and stretched to a great tension . 
Pressing his foot upon it , till the rope hummed like a harp-string , then eagerly bending over it , and seeing no strandings , Ahab exclaimed , `` Good ! 
and now for the seizings . '' 
At one extremity the rope was unstranded , and the separate spread yarns were all braided and woven round the socket of the harpoon ; the pole was then driven hard up into the socket ; from the lower end the rope was traced halfway along the pole 's length , and firmly secured so , with inter-twistings of twine . 
This done , pole , iron , and rope -- like the Three Fates -- remained inseparable , and Ahab moodily stalked away with the weapon ; the sound of his ivory leg , and the sound of the hickory pole , both hollowly ringing along every plank . 
But ere he entered his cabin , a light , unnatural , half-bantering , yet most piteous sound was heard . 
Oh ! 
Pip , thy wretched laugh , thy idle but unresting eye ; all thy strange mummeries not unmeaningly blended with the black tragedy of the melancholy ship , and mocked it ! 
The Gilder Penetrating further and further into the heart of the Japanese cruising ground the Pequod was soon all astir in the fishery . 
Often , in mild , pleasant weather , for twelve , fifteen , eighteen , and twenty hours on the stretch , they were engaged in the boats , steadily pulling , or sailing , or paddling after the whales , or for an interlude of sixty or seventy minutes calmly awaiting their uprising ; though with but small success for their pains . 
At such times , under an abated sun ; afloat all day upon smooth , slow heaving swells ; seated in his boat , light as a birch canoe ; and so sociably mixing with the soft waves themselves , that like hearth-stone cats they purr against the gunwale ; these are the times of dreamy quietude , when beholding the tranquil beauty and brilliancy of the ocean 's skin , one forgets the tiger heart that pants beneath it ; and would not willingly remember , that this velvet paw but conceals a remorseless fang . 
These are the times , when in his whale-boat the rover softly feels a certain filial , confident , land-like feeling towards the sea ; that he regards it as so much flowery earth ; and the distant ship revealing only the tops of her masts , seems struggling forward , not through high rolling waves , but through the tall grass of a rolling prairie : as when the western emigrants ' horses only show their erected ears , while their hidden bodies widely wade through the amazing verdure . 
The long-drawn virgin vales ; the mild blue hill-sides ; as over these there steals the hush , the hum ; you almost swear that play-wearied children lie sleeping in these solitudes , in some glad May-time , when the flowers of the woods are plucked . 
And all this mixes with your most mystic mood ; so that fact and fancy , half-way meeting , interpenetrate , and form one seamless whole . 
Nor did such soothing scenes , however temporary , fail of at least as temporary an effect on Ahab . 
But if these secret golden keys did seem to open in him his own secret golden treasuries , yet did his breath upon them prove but tarnishing . 
Oh , grassy glades ! 
oh ever vernal endless landscapes in the soul ; in ye , -- though long parched by the dead drought of the earthly life , -- in ye , men yet may roll , like young horses in new morning clover ; and for some few fleeting moments , feel the cool dew of the life immortal on them . 
Would to God these blessed calms would last . 
But the mingled , mingling threads of life are woven by warp and woof : calms crossed by storms , a storm for every calm . 
There is no steady unretracing progress in this life ; we do not advance through fixed gradations , and at the last one pause : -- through infancy 's unconscious spell , boyhood 's thoughtless faith , adolescence ' doubt -LRB- the common doom -RRB- , then scepticism , then disbelief , resting at last in manhood 's pondering repose of If . 
