I 'll not have the Burtons hoisted . '' 
`` What will the owners say , sir ? '' 
`` Let the owners stand on Nantucket beach and outyell the Typhoons . 
What cares Ahab ? 
Owners , owners ? 
Thou art always prating to me , Starbuck , about those miserly owners , as if the owners were my conscience . 
But look ye , the only real owner of anything is its commander ; and hark ye , my conscience is in this ship 's keel . 
-- On deck ! '' 
`` Captain Ahab , '' said the reddening mate , moving further into the cabin , with a daring so strangely respectful and cautious that it almost seemed not only every way seeking to avoid the slightest outward manifestation of itself , but within also seemed more than half distrustful of itself ; `` A better man than I might well pass over in thee what he would quickly enough resent in a younger man ; aye , and in a happier , Captain Ahab . '' 
`` Devils ! 
Dost thou then so much as dare to critically think of me ? 
-- On deck ! '' 
`` Nay , sir , not yet ; I do entreat . 
And I do dare , sir -- to be forbearing ! 
Shall we not understand each other better than hitherto , Captain Ahab ? '' 
Ahab seized a loaded musket from the rack -LRB- forming part of most South-Sea-men 's cabin furniture -RRB- , and pointing it towards Starbuck , exclaimed : `` There is one God that is Lord over the earth , and one Captain that is lord over the Pequod . 
-- On deck ! '' 
For an instant in the flashing eyes of the mate , and his fiery cheeks , you would have almost thought that he had really received the blaze of the levelled tube . 
But , mastering his emotion , he half calmly rose , and as he quitted the cabin , paused for an instant and said : `` Thou hast outraged , not insulted me , Sir ; but for that I ask thee not to beware of Starbuck ; thou wouldst but laugh ; but let Ahab beware of Ahab ; beware of thyself , old man . '' 
`` He waxes brave , but nevertheless obeys ; most careful bravery that ! '' 
murmured Ahab , as Starbuck disappeared . 
`` What 's that he said -- Ahab beware of Ahab -- there 's something there ! '' 
Then unconsciously using the musket for a staff , with an iron brow he paced to and fro in the little cabin ; but presently the thick plaits of his forehead relaxed , and returning the gun to the rack , he went to the deck . 
`` Thou art but too good a fellow , Starbuck , '' he said lowly to the mate ; then raising his voice to the crew : `` Furl the t ` gallant-sails , and close-reef the top-sails , fore and aft ; back the main-yard ; up Burtons , and break out in the main-hold . '' 
It were perhaps vain to surmise exactly why it was , that as respecting Starbuck , Ahab thus acted . 
It may have been a flash of honesty in him ; or mere prudential policy which , under the circumstance , imperiously forbade the slightest symptom of open disaffection , however transient , in the important chief officer of his ship . 
However it was , his orders were executed ; and the Burtons were hoisted . 
Queequeg in His Coffin Upon searching , it was found that the casks last struck into the hold were perfectly sound , and that the leak must be further off . 
So , it being calm weather , they broke out deeper and deeper , disturbing the slumbers of the huge ground-tier butts ; and from that black midnight sending those gigantic moles into the daylight above . 
So deep did they go ; and so ancient , and corroded , and weedy the aspect of the lowermost puncheons , that you almost looked next for some mouldy corner-stone cask containing coins of Captain Noah , with copies of the posted placards , vainly warning the infatuated old world from the flood . 
Tierce after tierce , too , of water , and bread , and beef , and shooks of staves , and iron bundles of hoops , were hoisted out , till at last the piled decks were hard to get about ; and the hollow hull echoed under foot , as if you were treading over empty catacombs , and reeled and rolled in the sea like an air-freighted demijohn . 
Top-heavy was the ship as a dinnerless student with all Aristotle in his head . 
Well was it that the Typhoons did not visit them then . 
Now , at this time it was that my poor pagan companion , and fast bosom-friend , Queequeg , was seized with a fever , which brought him nigh to his endless end . 
Be it said , that in this vocation of whaling , sinecures are unknown ; dignity and danger go hand in hand ; till you get to be Captain , the higher you rise the harder you toil . 
So with poor Queequeg , who , as harpooneer , must not only face all the rage of the living whale , but -- as we have elsewhere seen -- mount his dead back in a rolling sea ; and finally descend into the gloom of the hold , and bitterly sweating all day in that subterraneous confinement , resolutely manhandle the clumsiest casks and see to their stowage . 
To be short , among whalemen , the harpooneers are the holders , so called . 
Poor Queequeg ! 
when the ship was about half disembowelled , you should have stooped over the hatchway , and peered down upon him there ; where , stripped to his woollen drawers , the tattooed savage was crawling about amid that dampness and slime , like a green spotted lizard at the bottom of a well . 
And a well , or an ice-house , it somehow proved to him , poor pagan ; where , strange to say , for all the heat of his sweatings , he caught a terrible chill which lapsed into a fever ; and at last , after some days ' suffering , laid him in his hammock , close to the very sill of the door of death . 
How he wasted and wasted away in those few long-lingering days , till there seemed but little left of him but his frame and tattooing . 
But as all else in him thinned , and his cheek-bones grew sharper , his eyes , nevertheless , seemed growing fuller and fuller ; they became of a strange softness of lustre ; and mildly but deeply looked out at you there from his sickness , a wondrous testimony to that immortal health in him which could not die , or be weakened . 
And like circles on the water , which , as they grow fainter , expand ; so his eyes seemed rounding and rounding , like the rings of Eternity . 
An awe that can not be named would steal over you as you sat by the side of this waning savage , and saw as strange things in his face , as any beheld who were bystanders when Zoroaster died . 
For whatever is truly wondrous and fearful in man , never yet was put into words or books . 
And the drawing near of Death , which alike levels all , alike impresses all with a last revelation , which only an author from the dead could adequately tell . 
So that -- let us say it again -- no dying Chaldee or Greek had higher and holier thoughts than those , whose mysterious shades you saw creeping over the face of poor Queequeg , as he quietly lay in his swaying hammock , and the rolling sea seemed gently rocking him to his final rest , and the ocean 's invisible flood-tide lifted him higher and higher towards his destined heaven . 
Not a man of the crew but gave him up ; and , as for Queequeg himself , what he thought of his case was forcibly shown by a curious favor he asked . 
He called one to him in the grey morning watch , when the day was just breaking , and taking his hand , said that while in Nantucket he had chanced to see certain little canoes of dark wood , like the rich war-wood of his native isle ; and upon inquiry , he had learned that all whalemen who died in Nantucket , were laid in those same dark canoes , and that the fancy of being so laid had much pleased him ; for it was not unlike the custom of his own race , who , after embalming a dead warrior , stretched him out in his canoe , and so left him to be floated away to the starry archipelagoes ; for not only do they believe that the stars are isles , but that far beyond all visible horizons , their own mild , uncontinented seas , interflow with the blue heavens ; and so form the white breakers of the milky way . 
He added , that he shuddered at the thought of being buried in his hammock , according to the usual sea-custom , tossed like something vile to the death-devouring sharks . 
