Thrusted light is worse than presented pistols . 
I thought , sir , that you spoke to carpenter . 
Carpenter ? 
why that 's -- but no ; -- a very tidy , and , I may say , an extremely gentlemanlike sort of business thou art in here , carpenter ; -- or would ` st thou rather work in clay ? 
Sir ? 
-- Clay ? 
clay , sir ? 
That 's mud ; we leave clay to ditchers , sir . 
The fellow 's impious ! 
What art thou sneezing about ? 
Bone is rather dusty , sir . 
Take the hint , then ; and when thou art dead , never bury thyself under living people 's noses . 
Sir ? 
-- oh ! 
ah ! 
-- I guess so ; so ; -- yes , yes -- oh dear ! 
Look ye , carpenter , I dare say thou callest thyself a right good workmanlike workman , eh ? 
Well , then , will it speak thoroughly well for thy work , if , when I come to mount this leg thou makest , I shall nevertheless feel another leg in the same identical place with it ; that is , carpenter , my old lost leg ; the flesh and blood one , I mean . 
Canst thou not drive that old Adam away ? 
Truly , sir , I begin to understand somewhat now . 
Yes , I have heard something curious on that score , sir ; how that a dismasted man never entirely loses the feeling of his old spar , but it will be still pricking him at times . 
May I humbly ask if it be really so , sir ? 
It is , man . 
Look , put thy live leg here in the place where mine once was ; so , now , here is only one distinct leg to the eye , yet two to the soul . 
Where thou feelest tingling life ; there , exactly there , there to a hair , do I. Is ' t a riddle ? 
I should humbly call it a poser , sir . 
Hist , then . 
How dost thou know that some entire , living , thinking thing may not be invisibly and uninterpenetratingly standing precisely where thou now standest ; aye , and standing there in thy spite ? 
In thy most solitary hours , then , dost thou not fear eavesdroppers ? 
Hold , do n't speak ! 
And if I still feel the smart of my crushed leg , though it be now so long dissolved ; then , why mayest not thou , carpenter , feel the fiery pains of hell for ever , and without a body ? 
Hah ! 
Good Lord ! 
Truly , sir , if it comes to that , I must calculate over again ; I think I did n't carry a small figure , sir . 
Look ye , pudding-heads should never grant premises . 
-- How long before this leg is done ? 
Perhaps an hour , sir . 
Bungle away at it then , and bring it to me -LRB- turns to go -RRB- . 
Oh , Life . 
Here I am , proud as Greek god , and yet standing debtor to this blockhead for a bone to stand on ! 
Cursed be that mortal inter-indebtedness which will not do away with ledgers . 
I would be free as air ; and I 'm down in the whole world 's books . 
I am so rich , I could have given bid for bid with the wealthiest Praetorians at the auction of the Roman empire -LRB- which was the world 's -RRB- ; and yet I owe for the flesh in the tongue I brag with . 
By heavens ! 
I 'll get a crucible , and into it , and dissolve myself down to one small , compendious vertebra . 
So . 
Carpenter -LRB- resuming his work -RRB- . 
Well , well , well ! 
Stubb knows him best of all , and Stubb always says he 's queer ; says nothing but that one sufficient little word queer ; he 's queer , says Stubb ; he 's queer -- queer , queer ; and keeps dinning it into Mr. Starbuck all the time -- queer -- sir -- queer , queer , very queer . 
And here 's his leg . 
