-- Aye , and thou goest before ; and this , this then is the hearse that thou didst promise . 
But I hold thee to the last letter of thy word . 
Where is the second hearse ? 
Away , mates , to the ship ! 
those boats are useless now ; repair them if ye can in time , and return to me ; if not , Ahab is enough to die -- Down , men ! 
the first thing that but offers to jump from this boat I stand in , that thing I harpoon . 
Ye are not other men , but my arms and my legs ; and so obey me . 
-- Where 's the whale ? 
gone down again ? '' 
But he looked too nigh the boat ; for as if bent upon escaping with the corpse he bore , and as if the particular place of the last encounter had been but a stage in his leeward voyage , Moby Dick was now again steadily swimming forward ; and had almost passed the ship , -- which thus far had been sailing in the contrary direction to him , though for the present her headway had been stopped . 
He seemed swimming with his utmost velocity , and now only intent upon pursuing his own straight path in the sea . 
`` Oh ! 
Ahab , '' cried Starbuck , `` not too late is it , even now , the third day , to desist . 
See ! 
Moby Dick seeks thee not . 
It is thou , thou , that madly seekest him ! '' 
Setting sail to the rising wind , the lonely boat was swiftly impelled to leeward , by both oars and canvas . 
And at last when Ahab was sliding by the vessel , so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck 's face as he leaned over the rail , he hailed him to turn the vessel about , and follow him , not too swiftly , at a judicious interval . 
Glancing upwards he saw Tashtego , Queequeg , and Daggoo , eagerly mounting to the three mast-heads ; while the oarsmen were rocking in the two staved boats which had but just been hoisted to the side , and were busily at work in repairing them . 
One after the other , through the port-holes , as he sped , he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flask , busying themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances . 
As he saw all this ; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats ; far other hammers seemed driving a nail into his heart . 
But he rallied . 
And now marking that the vane or flag was gone from the main-mast-head , he shouted to Tashtego , who had just gained that perch , to descend again for another flag , and a hammer and nails , and so nail it to the mast . 
Whether fagged by the three days ' running chase , and the resistance to his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore ; or whether it was some latent deceitfulness and malice in him : whichever was true , the White Whale 's way now began to abate , as it seemed , from the boat so rapidly nearing him once more ; though indeed the whale 's last start had not been so long a one as before . 
And still as Ahab glided over the waves the unpitying sharks accompanied him ; and so pertinaciously stuck to the boat ; and so continually bit at the plying oars , that the blades became jagged and crunched , and left small splinters in the sea , at almost every dip . 
`` Heed them not ! 
those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars . 
Pull on ! 
't is the better rest , the sharks ' jaw than the yielding water . '' 
`` But at every bite , sir , the thin blades grow smaller and smaller ! '' 
`` They will last long enough ! 
pull on ! 
-- But who can tell '' -- he muttered -- `` whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on Ahab ? 
-- But pull on ! 
Aye , all alive , now -- we near him . 
The helm ! 
take the helm ! 
let me pass , '' -- and so saying two of the oarsmen helped him forward to the bows of the still flying boat . 
At length as the craft was cast to one side , and ran ranging along with the White Whale 's flank , he seemed strangely oblivious of its advance -- as the whale sometimes will -- and Ahab was fairly within the smoky mountain mist , which , thrown off from the whale 's spout , curled round his great Monadnock hump ; he was even thus close to him ; when , with body arched back , and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to the poise , he darted his fierce iron , and his far fiercer curse into the hated whale . 
As both steel and curse sank to the socket , as if sucked into a morass , Moby Dick sideways writhed ; spasmodically rolled his nigh flank against the bow , and , without staving a hole in it , so suddenly canted the boat over , that had it not been for the elevated part of the gunwale to which he then clung , Ahab would once more have been tossed into the sea . 
As it was , three of the oarsmen -- who foreknew not the precise instant of the dart , and were therefore unprepared for its effects -- these were flung out ; but so fell , that , in an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again , and rising to its level on a combing wave , hurled themselves bodily inboard again ; the third man helplessly dropping astern , but still afloat and swimming . 
Almost simultaneously , with a mighty volition of ungraduated , instantaneous swiftness , the White Whale darted through the weltering sea . 
But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns with the line , and hold it so ; and commanded the crew to turn round on their seats , and tow the boat up to the mark ; the moment the treacherous line felt that double strain and tug , it snapped in the empty air ! 
`` What breaks in me ? 
Some sinew cracks ! 
-- 't is whole again ; oars ! 
oars ! 
Burst in upon him ! '' 
Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat , the whale wheeled round to present his blank forehead at bay ; but in that evolution , catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship ; seemingly seeing in it the source of all his persecutions ; bethinking it -- it may be -- a larger and nobler foe ; of a sudden , he bore down upon its advancing prow , smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam . 
Ahab staggered ; his hand smote his forehead . 
