I 'd crawl somewhere to a cave , and slink there . 
And yet , 't is a noble and heroic thing , the wind ! 
who ever conquered it ? 
In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow . 
Run tilting at it , and you but run through it . 
Ha ! 
a coward wind that strikes stark naked men , but will not stand to receive a single blow . 
Even Ahab is a braver thing -- a nobler thing than that . 
Would now the wind but had a body ; but all the things that most exasperate and outrage mortal man , all these things are bodiless , but only bodiless as objects , not as agents . 
There 's a most special , a most cunning , oh , a most malicious difference ! 
And yet , I say again , and swear it now , that there 's something all glorious and gracious in the wind . 
These warm Trade Winds , at least , that in the clear heavens blow straight on , in strong and steadfast , vigorous mildness ; and veer not from their mark , however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack , and mightiest Mississippies of the land swift and swerve about , uncertain where to go at last . 
And by the eternal Poles ! 
these same Trades that so directly blow my good ship on ; these Trades , or something like them -- something so unchangeable , and full as strong , blow my keeled soul along ! 
To it ! 
Aloft there ! 
What d'ye see ? '' 
`` Nothing , sir . '' 
`` Nothing ! 
and noon at hand ! 
The doubloon goes a-begging ! 
See the sun ! 
Aye , aye , it must be so . 
I 've over-sailed him . 
How , got the start ? 
Aye , he 's chasing me now ; not I , him -- that 's bad ; I might have known it , too . 
Fool ! 
the lines -- the harpoons he 's towing . 
Aye , aye , I have run him by last night . 
About ! 
about ! 
Come down , all of ye , but the regular look outs ! 
Man the braces ! '' 
Steering as she had done , the wind had been somewhat on the Pequod 's quarter , so that now being pointed in the reverse direction , the braced ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own white wake . 
`` Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw , '' murmured Starbuck to himself , as he coiled the new-hauled main-brace upon the rail . 
`` God keep us , but already my bones feel damp within me , and from the inside wet my flesh . 
I misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him ! '' 
`` Stand by to sway me up ! '' 
cried Ahab , advancing to the hempen basket . 
`` We should meet him soon . '' 
`` Aye , aye , sir , '' and straightway Starbuck did Ahab 's bidding , and once more Ahab swung on high . 
A whole hour now passed ; gold-beaten out to ages . 
Time itself now held long breaths with keen suspense . 
But at last , some three points off the weather bow , Ahab descried the spout again , and instantly from the three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had voiced it . 
`` Forehead to forehead I meet thee , this third time , Moby Dick ! 
On deck there ! 
-- brace sharper up ; crowd her into the wind 's eye . 
He 's too far off to lower yet , Mr. Starbuck . 
The sails shake ! 
Stand over that helmsman with a top-maul ! 
