For be this Parsee what he may , all rib and keel was solid Ahab . 
At the first faintest glimmering of the dawn , his iron voice was heard from aft , -- `` Man the mast-heads ! '' 
-- and all through the day , till after sunset and after twilight , the same voice every hour , at the striking of the helmsman 's bell , was heard -- `` What d'ye see ? 
-- sharp ! 
sharp ! 
sharp ! '' 
But when three or four days had slided by , after meeting the children-seeking Rachel ; and no spout had yet been seen ; the monomaniac old man seemed distrustful of his crew 's fidelity ; at least , of nearly all except the Pagan harpooneers ; he seemed to doubt , even , whether Stubb and Flask might not willingly overlook the sight he sought . 
But if these suspicions were really his , he sagaciously refrained from verbally expressing them , however his actions might seem to hint them . 
`` I will have the first sight of the whale myself , '' -- he said . 
`` Aye ! 
Ahab must have the doubloon ! 
and with his own hands he rigged a nest of basketed bowlines ; and sending a hand aloft , with a single sheaved block , to secure to the mainmast head , he received the two ends of the downwardreeved rope ; and attaching one to his basket prepared a pin for the other end , in order to fasten it at the rail . 
This done , with that end yet in his hand and standing beside the pin , he looked round upon his crew , sweeping from one to the other ; pausing his glance long upon Daggoo , Queequeg , Tashtego ; but shunning Fedallah ; and then settling his firm relying eye upon the chief mate , said , -- `` Take the rope , sir -- I give it into thy hands , Starbuck . '' 
Then arranging his person in the basket , he gave the word for them to hoist him to his perch , Starbuck being the one who secured the rope at last ; and afterwards stood near it . 
And thus , with one hand clinging round the royal mast , Ahab gazed abroad upon the sea for miles and miles , -- ahead astern , this side , and that , -- within the wide expanded circle commanded at so great a height . 
When in working with his hands at some lofty almost isolated place in the rigging , which chances to afford no foothold , the sailor at sea is hoisted up to that spot , and sustained there by the rope ; under these circumstances , its fastened end on deck is always given in strict charge to some one man who has the special watch of it . 
Because in such a wilderness of running rigging , whose various different relations aloft can not always be infallibly discerned by what is seen of them at the deck ; and when the deck-ends of these ropes are being every few minutes cast down from the fastenings , it would be but a natural fatality , if , unprovided with a constant watchman , the hoisted sailor should by some carelessness of the crew be cast adrift and fall all swooping to the sea . 
So Ahab 's proceedings in this matter were not unusual ; the only strange thing about them seemed to be , that Starbuck , almost the one only man who had ever ventured to oppose him with anything in the slightest degree approaching to decision -- one of those too , whose faithfulness on the look-out he had seemed to doubt somewhat ; it was strange , that this was the very man he should select for his watchman ; freely giving his whole life into such an otherwise distrusted person 's hands . 
Now , the first time Ahab was perched aloft ; ere he had been there ten minutes ; one of those red-billed savage sea-hawks which so often fly incommodiously close round the manned mast-heads of whalemen in these latitudes ; one of these birds came wheeling and screaming round his head in a maze of untrackably swift circlings . 
Then it darted a thousand feet straight up into the air ; then spiralized downwards , and went eddying again round his head . 
But with his gaze fixed upon the dim and distant horizon , Ahab seemed not to mark this wild bird ; nor , indeed , would any one else have marked it much , it being no uncommon circumstance ; only now almost the least heedful eye seemed to see some sort of cunning meaning in almost every sight . 
`` Your hat , your hat , sir ! '' 
suddenly cried the Sicilian seaman , who being posted at the mizen-mast-head , stood directly behind Ahab , though somewhat lower than his level , and with a deep gulf of air dividing them . 
But already the sable wing was before the old man 's eyes ; the long hooked bill at his head : with a scream , the black hawk darted away with his prize . 
An eagle flew thrice round Tarquin 's head , removing his cap to replace it , and thereupon Tanaquil , his wife , declared that Tarquin would be king of Rome . 
But only by the replacing of the cap was that omen accounted good . 
Ahab 's hat was never restored ; the wild hawk flew on and on with it ; far in advance of the prow : and at last disappeared ; while from the point of that disappearance , a minute black spot was dimly discerned , falling from that vast height into the sea . 
The Pequod Meets The Delight The intense Pequod sailed on ; the rolling waves and days went by ; the life-buoy-coffin still lightly swung ; and another ship , most miserably misnamed the Delight , was descried . 
As she drew nigh , all eyes were fixed upon her broad beams , called shears , which , in some whaling-ships , cross the quarter-deck at the height of eight or nine feet ; serving to carry the spare , unrigged , or disabled boats . 
Upon the stranger 's shears were beheld the shattered , white ribs , and some few splintered planks , of what had once been a whale-boat ; but you now saw through this wreck , as plainly as you see through the peeled , half-unhinged , and bleaching skeleton of a horse . 
`` Hast seen the White Whale ? '' 
`` Look ! '' 
replied the hollow-cheeked captain from his taffrail ; and with his trumpet he pointed to the wreck . 
`` Hast killed him ? '' 
`` The harpoon is not yet forged that will ever will do that , '' answered the other , sadly glancing upon a rounded hammock on the deck , whose gathered sides some noiseless sailors were busy in sewing together . 
`` Not forged ! '' 
and snatching Perth 's levelled iron from the crotch , Ahab held it out , exclaiming -- `` Look ye , Nantucketer ; here in this hand I hold his death ! 
Tempered in blood , and tempered by lightning are these barbs ; and I swear to temper them triply in that hot place behind the fin , where the White Whale most feels his accursed life ! '' 
`` Then God keep thee , old man -- see ` st thou that '' -- pointing to the hammock -- `` I bury but one of five stout men , who were alive only yesterday ; but were dead ere night . 
Only that one I bury ; the rest were buried before they died ; you sail upon their tomb . '' 
Then turning to his crew -- `` Are ye ready there ? 
place the plank then on the rail , and lift the body ; so , then -- Oh ! 
God '' -- advancing towards the hammock with uplifted hands -- `` may the resurrection and the life - '' `` Brace forward ! 
Up helm ! '' 
cried Ahab like lightning to his men . 
But the suddenly started Pequod was not quick enough to escape the sound of the splash that the corpse soon made as it struck the sea ; not so quick , indeed , but that some of the flying bubbles might have sprinkled her hull with their ghostly baptism . 
As Ahab now glided from the dejected Delight , the strange life-buoy hanging at the Pequod 's stern came into conspicuous relief . 
`` Ha ! 
yonder ! 
look yonder , men ! '' 
