`` Ha ! 
ha ! '' 
cried Daggoo , all at once , from his now quiet , swinging perch overhead ; and looking further off from the side , we saw an arm thrust upright from the blue waves ; a sight strange to see , as an arm thrust forth from the grass over a grave . 
`` Both ! 
both ! 
-- it is both ! '' 
- cried Daggoo again with a joyful shout ; and soon after , Queequeg was seen boldly striking out with one hand , and with the other clutching the long hair of the Indian . 
Drawn into the waiting boat , they were quickly brought to the deck ; but Tashtego was long in coming to , and Queequeg did not look very brisk . 
Now , how had this noble rescue been accomplished ? 
Why , diving after the slowly descending head , Queequeg with his keen sword had made side lunges near its bottom , so as to scuttle a large hole there ; then dropping his sword , had thrust his long arm far inwards and upwards , and so hauled out our poor Tash by the head . 
He averred , that upon first thrusting in for him , a leg was presented ; but well knowing that that was not as it ought to be , and might occasion great trouble ; -- he had thrust back the leg , and by a dexterous heave and toss , had wrought a somerset upon the Indian ; so that with the next trial , he came forth in the good old way -- head foremost . 
As for the great head itself , that was doing as well as could be expected . 
And thus , through the courage and great skill in obstetrics of Queequeg , the deliverance , or rather , delivery of Tashtego , was successfully accomplished , in the teeth , too , of the most untoward and apparently hopeless impediments ; which is a lesson by no means to be forgotten . 
Midwifery should be taught in the same course with fencing and boxing , riding and rowing . 
I know that this queer adventure of the Gay-Header 's will be sure to seem incredible to some landsmen , though they themselves may have either seen or heard of some one 's falling into a cistern ashore ; an accident which not seldom happens , and with much less reason too than the Indian 's , considering the exceeding slipperiness of the curb of the Sperm Whale 's well . 
But , peradventure , it may be sagaciously urged , how is this ? 
We thought the tissued , infiltrated head of the Sperm Whale , was the lightest and most corky part about him ; and yet thou makest it sink in an element of a far greater specific gravity than itself . 
We have thee there . 
Not at all , but I have ye ; for at the time poor Tash fell in , the case had been nearly emptied of its lighter contents , leaving little but the dense tendinous wall of the well -- a double welded , hammered substance , as I have before said , much heavier than the sea water , and a lump of which sinks in it like lead almost . 
But the tendency to rapid sinking in this substance was in the present instance materially counteracted by the other parts of the head remaining undetached from it , so that it sank very slowly and deliberately indeed , affording Queequeg a fair chance for performing his agile obstetrics on the run , as you may say . 
Yes , it was a running delivery , so it was . 
Now , had Tashtego perished in that head , it had been a very precious perishing ; smothered in the very whitest and daintiest of fragrant spermaceti ; coffined , hearsed , and tombed in the secret inner chamber and sanctum sanctorum of the whale . 
Only one sweeter end can readily be recalled -- the delicious death of an Ohio honey-hunter , who seeking honey in the crotch of a hollow tree , found such exceeding store of it , that leaning too far over , it sucked him in , so that he died embalmed . 
How many , think ye , have likewise fallen into Plato 's honey head , and sweetly perished there ? 
The Prairie To scan the lines of his face , or feel the bumps on the head of this Leviathan ; this is a thing which no Physiognomist or Phrenologist has as yet undertaken . 
Such an enterprise would seem almost as hopeful as for Lavater to have scrutinized the wrinkles on the Rock of Gibraltar , or for Gall to have mounted a ladder and manipulated the Dome of the Pantheon . 
Still , in that famous work of his , Lavater not only treats of the various faces of men , but also attentively studies the faces of horses , birds , serpents , and fish ; and dwells in detail upon the modifications of expression discernible therein . 
Nor have Gall and his disciple Spurzheim failed to throw out some hints touching the phrenological characteristics of other beings than man . 
Therefore , though I am but ill qualified for a pioneer , in the application of these two semi-sciences to the whale , I will do my endeavor . 
I try all things ; I achieve what I can . 
Physiognomically regarded , the Sperm Whale is an anomalous creature . 
He has no proper nose . 
And since the nose is the central and most conspicuous of the features ; and since it perhaps most modifies and finally controls their combined expression ; hence it would seem that its entire absence , as an external appendage , must very largely affect the countenance of the whale . 
For as in landscape gardening , a spire , cupola , monument , or tower of some sort , is deemed almost indispensable to the completion of the scene ; so no face can be physiognomically in keeping without the elevated open-work belfry of the nose . 
Dash the nose from Phidias 's marble Jove , and what a sorry remainder ! 
Nevertheless , Leviathan is of so mighty a magnitude , all his proportions are so stately , that the same deficiency which in the sculptured Jove were hideous , in him is no blemish at all . 
Nay , it is an added grandeur . 
A nose to the whale would have been impertinent . 
As on your physiognomical voyage you sail round his vast head in your jollyboat , your noble conceptions of him are never insulted by the reflection that he has a nose to be pulled . 
A pestilent conceit , which so often will insist upon obtruding even when beholding the mightiest royal beadle on his throne . 
In some particulars , perhaps the most imposing physiognomical view to be had of the Sperm Whale , is that of the full front of his head . 
This aspect is sublime . 
In thought , a fine human brow is like the East when troubled with the morning . 
In the repose of the pasture , the curled brow of the bull has a touch of the grand in it . 
Pushing heavy cannon up mountain defiles , the elephant 's brow is majestic . 
Human or animal , the mystical brow is as that great golden seal affixed by the German Emperors to their decrees . 
It signifies -- `` God : done this day by my hand . '' 
But in most creatures , nay in man himself , very often the brow is but a mere strip of alpine land lying along the snow line . 
Few are the foreheads which like Shakespeare 's or Melancthon 's rise so high , and descend so low , that the eyes themselves seem clear , eternal , tideless mountain lakes ; and all above them in the forehead 's wrinkles , you seem to track the antlered thoughts descending there to drink , as the Highland hunters track the snow prints of the deer . 
But in the great Sperm Whale , this high and mighty god-like dignity inherent in the brow is so immensely amplified , that gazing on it , in that full front view , you feel the Deity and the dread powers more forcibly than in beholding any other object in living nature . 
