Yet the voice spake true ; for scarce had he pushed from the ship , when numbers of sharks , seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath the hull , maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars , every time they dipped in the water ; and in this way accompanied the boat with their bites . 
It is a thing not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats in those swarming seas ; the sharks at times apparently following them in the same prescient way that vultures hover over the banners of marching regiments in the east . 
But these were the first sharks that had been observed by the Pequod since the White Whale had been first descried ; and whether it was that Ahab 's crew were all such tiger-yellow barbarians , and therefore their flesh more musky to the senses of the sharks -- a matter sometimes well known to affect them , -- however it was , they seemed to follow that one boat without molesting the others . 
`` Heart of wrought steel ! '' 
murmured Starbuck gazing over the side , and following with his eyes the receding boat -- `` canst thou yet ring boldly to that sight ? 
-- lowering thy keel among ravening sharks , and followed by them , open-mouthed to the chase ; and this the critical third day ? 
-- For when three days flow together in one continuous intense pursuit ; be sure the first is the morning , the second the noon , and the third the evening and the end of that thing -- be that end what it may . 
Oh ! 
my God ! 
what is this that shoots through me , and leaves me so deadly calm , yet expectant , -- fixed at the top of a shudder ! 
Future things swim before me , as in empty outlines and skeletons ; all the past is somehow grown dim . 
Mary , girl ; thou fadest in pale glories behind me ; boy ! 
I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue . 
Strangest problems of life seem clearing ; but clouds sweep between -- Is my journey 's end coming ? 
My legs feel faint ; like his who has footed it all day . 
Feel thy heart , -- beats it yet ? 
Stir thyself , Starbuck ! 
-- stave it off -- move , move ! 
speak aloud ! 
-- Mast-head there ! 
See ye my boy 's hand on the hill ? 
-- Crazed ; aloft there ! 
-- keep thy keenest eye upon the boats : -- mark well the whale ! 
-- Ho ! 
again ! 
-- drive off that hawk ! 
see ! 
he pecks -- he tears the vane '' -- pointing to the red flag flying at the main-truck -- `` Ha , he soars away with it ! 
-- Where 's the old man now ? 
see ` st thou that sight , oh Ahab ! 
-- shudder , shudder ! '' 
The boats had not gone very far , when by a signal from the mast-heads -- a downward pointed arm , Ahab knew that the whale had sounded ; but intending to be near him at the next rising , he held on his way a little sideways from the vessel ; the becharmed crew maintaining the profoundest silence , as the head-bent waves hammered and hammered against the opposing bow . 
`` Drive , drive in your nails , oh ye waves ! 
to their uttermost heads drive them in ! 
ye but strike a thing without a lid ; and no coffin and no hearse can be mine : -- and hemp only can kill me ! 
Ha ! 
ha ! '' 
Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles ; then quickly upheaved , as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice , swiftly rising to the surface . 
A low rumbling sound was heard ; a subterraneous hum ; and then all held their breaths ; as bedraggled with trailing ropes , and harpoons , and lances , a vast form shot lengthwise , but obliquely from the sea . 
Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist , it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air ; and then fell swamping back into the deep . 
Crushed thirty feet upwards , the waters flashed for an instant like heaps of fountains , then brokenly sank in a shower of flakes , leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the marble trunk of the whale . 
`` Give way ! '' 
cried Ahab to the oarsmen , and the boats darted forward to the attack ; but maddened by yesterday 's fresh irons that corroded in him , Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell from heaven . 
The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad white forehead , beneath the transparent skin , looked knitted together ; as head on , he came churning his tail among the boats ; and once more flailed them apart ; spilling out the irons and lances from the two mates ' boats , and dashing in one side of the upper part of their bows , but leaving Ahab 's almost without a scar . 
While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks ; and as the whale swimming out from them , turned , and showed one entire flank as he shot by them again ; at that moment a quick cry went up . 
Lashed round and round to the fish 's back ; pinioned in the turns upon turns in which , during the past night , the whale had reeled the involutions of the lines around him , the half torn body of the Parsee was seen ; his sable raiment frayed to shreds ; his distended eyes turned full upon old Ahab . 
The harpoon dropped from his hand . 
`` Befooled , befooled ! '' 
-- drawing in a long lean breath -- `` Aye , Parsee ! 
I see thee again . 
