jolly is the gale , And a joker is the whale , A ' flourishin ' his tail , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
The scud all a flyin ' , That 's his flip only foamin ' ; When he stirs in the spicin ' , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
Thunder splits the ships , But he only smacks his lips , A tastin ' of this flip , -- Such a funny , sporty , gamy , jesty , joky , hoky-poky lad , is the Ocean , oh ! 
`` Avast Stubb , '' cried Starbuck , `` let the Typhoon sing , and strike his harp here in our rigging ; but if thou art a brave man thou wilt hold thy peace . '' 
`` But I am not a brave man ; never said I was a brave man ; I am a coward ; and I sing to keep up my spirits . 
And I tell you what it is , Mr. Starbuck , there 's no way to stop my singing in this world but to cut my throat . 
And when that 's done , ten to one I sing ye the doxology for a wind-up . '' 
`` Madman ! 
look through my eyes if thou hast none of thine own . '' 
`` What ! 
how can you see better of a dark night than anybody else , never mind how foolish ? '' 
`` Here ! '' 
cried Starbuck , seizing Stubb by the shoulder , and pointing his hand towards the weather bow , `` markest thou not that the gale comes from the eastward , the very course Ahab is to run for Moby Dick ? 
the very course he swung to this day noon ? 
now mark his boat there ; where is that stove ? 
In the stern-sheets , man ; where he is wont to stand -- his stand-point is stove , man ! 
Now jump overboard , and sing away , if thou must ! 
`` I do n't half understand ye : what 's in the wind ? '' 
`` Yes , yes , round the Cape of Good Hope is the shortest way to Nantucket , '' soliloquized Starbuck suddenly , heedless of Stubb 's question . 
`` The gale that now hammers at us to stave us , we can turn it into a fair wind that will drive us towards home . 
Yonder , to windward , all is blackness of doom ; but to leeward , homeward -- I see it lightens up there ; but not with the lightning . '' 
At that moment in one of the intervals of profound darkness , following the flashes , a voice was heard at his side ; and almost at the same instant a volley of thunder peals rolled overhead . 
`` Who 's there ? '' 
`` Old Thunder ! '' 
said Ahab , groping his way along the bulwarks to his pivot-hole ; but suddenly finding his path made plain to him by elbowed lances of fire . 
Now , as the lightning rod to a spire on shore is intended to carry off the perilous fluid into the soil ; so the kindred rod which at sea some ships carry to each mast , is intended to conduct it into the water . 
But as this conductor must descend to considerable depth , that its end may avoid all contact with the hull ; and as moreover , if kept constantly towing there , it would be liable to many mishaps , besides interfering not a little with some of the rigging , and more or less impeding the vessel 's way in the water ; because of all this , the lower parts of a ship 's lightning-rods are not always overboard ; but are generally made in long slender links , so as to be the more readily hauled up into the chains outside , or thrown down into the sea , as occasion may require . 
`` The rods ! 
the rods ! '' 
cried Starbuck to the crew , suddenly admonished to vigilance by the vivid lightning that had just been darting flambeaux , to light Ahab to his post . 
`` Are they overboard ? 
drop them over , fore and aft . 
Quick ! '' 
`` Avast ! '' 
cried Ahab ; `` let 's have fair play here , though we be the weaker side . 
Yet I 'll contribute to raise rods on the Himmalehs and Andes , that all the world may be secured ; but out on privileges ! 
Let them be , sir . '' 
`` Look aloft ! '' 
cried Starbuck . 
`` The corpusants ! 
the corpusants ! 
All the yard-arms were tipped with a pallid fire ; and touched at each tri-pointed lightning-rod-end with three tapering white flames , each of the three tall masts was silently burning in that sulphurous air , like three gigantic wax tapers before an altar . 
`` Blast the boat ! 
let it go ! '' 
cried Stubb at this instant , as a swashing sea heaved up under his own little craft so that its gunwale violently jammed his hand , as he was passing a lashing . 
`` Blast it ! '' 
-- but slipping backward on the deck , his uplifted eyes caught the flames ; and immediately shifting his tone he cried -- `` The corpusants have mercy on us all ! '' 
To sailors , oaths are household words ; they will swear in the trance of the calm , and in the teeth of the tempest ; they will imprecate curses from the topsail-yard-arms , when most they teeter over to a seething sea ; but in all my voyagings , seldom have I heard a common oath when God 's burning finger has been laid on the ship ; when His `` Mene , Mene , Tekel Upharsin '' has been woven into the shrouds and the cordage . 
While this pallidness was burning aloft , few words were heard from the enchanted crew ; who in one thick cluster stood on the forecastle , all their eyes gleaming in that pale phosphorescence , like a faraway constellation of stars . 
Relieved against the ghostly light , the gigantic jet negro , Daggoo , loomed up to thrice his real stature , and seemed the black cloud from which the thunder had come . 
