He too worships fire ; most faithful , broad , baronial vassal of the sun ! 
-- Oh that these too-favoring eyes should see these too-favoring sights . 
Look ! 
here , far water-locked ; beyond all hum of human weal or woe ; in these most candid and impartial seas ; where to traditions no rocks furnish tablets ; where for long Chinese ages , the billows have still rolled on speechless and unspoken to , as stars that shine upon the Niger 's unknown source ; here , too , life dies sunwards full of faith , but see ! 
no sooner dead , than death whirls round the corpse , and it heads some other way . 
`` Oh , thou dark Hindoo half of nature , who of drowned bones hast builded thy separate throne somewhere in the heart of these unverdured seas ; thou art an infidel , thou queen , and too truly speakest to me in the wide-slaughtering Typhoon , and the hushed burial of its after calm . 
Nor has this thy whale sunwards turned his dying head , and then gone round again , without a lesson to me . 
`` Oh , trebly hooped and welded hip of power ! 
Oh , high aspiring , rainbowed jet ! 
-- that one strivest , this one jettest all in vain ! 
In vain , oh whale , dost thou seek intercedings with yon all-quickening sun , that only calls forth life , but gives it not again . 
Yet dost thou darker half , rock me with a prouder , if a darker faith . 
All thy unnamable imminglings float beneath me here ; I am buoyed by breaths of once living things , exhaled as air , but water now . 
`` Then hail , for ever hail , O sea , in whose eternal tossings the wild fowl finds his only rest . 
Born of earth , yet suckled by the sea ; though hill and valley mothered me , ye billows are my foster-brothers ! '' 
The Whale Watch The four whales slain that evening had died wide apart ; one , far to windward ; one less distant , to leeward ; one ahead ; one astern . 
These last three were brought alongside ere nightfall ; but the windward one could not be reached till morning ; and the boat that had killed it lay by its side all night ; and that boat was Ahab 's . 
The waif-pole was thrust upright into the dead whale 's spout-hole ; and the lantern hanging from its top , cast a troubled flickering glare upon the black , glossy back , and far out upon the midnight waves , which gently chafed the whale 's broad flank , like soft surf upon a beach . 
Ahab and all his boat 's crew seemed asleep but the Parsee ; who crouching in the bow , sat watching the sharks , that spectrally played round the whale , and tapped the light cedar planks with their tails . 
A sound like the moaning in squadrons over Asphaltites of unforgiven ghosts of Gomorrah , ran shuddering through the air . 
Started from his slumbers , Ahab , face to face , saw the Parsee ; and hooped round by the gloom of the night they seemed the last men in a flooded world . 
`` I have dreamed it again , '' said he . 
`` Of the hearses ? 
Have I not said , old man , that neither hearse nor coffin can be thine ? '' 
`` And who are hearsed that die on the sea ? '' 
`` But I said , old man , that ere thou couldst die on this voyage , two hearses must verily be seen by thee on the sea ; the first not made by mortal hands ; and the visible wood of the last one must be grown in America . '' 
`` Aye , aye ! 
a strange sight that , Parsee ! 
-- a hearse and its plumes floating over the ocean with the waves for the pall-bearers . 
Ha ! 
Such a sight we shall not soon see . '' 
`` Believe it or not , thou canst not die till it be seen , old man . '' 
`` And what was that saying about thyself ? '' 
`` Though it come to the last , I shall still go before thee thy pilot . '' 
`` And when thou art so gone before -- if that ever befall -- then ere I can follow , thou must still appear to me , to pilot me still ? 
-- Was it not so ? 
Well , then , did I believe all ye say , oh my pilot ! 
I have here two pledges that I shall yet slay Moby Dick and survive it . '' 
`` Take another pledge , old man , '' said the Parsee , as his eyes lighted up like fire-flies in the gloom -- `` Hemp only can kill thee . '' 
`` The gallows , ye mean . 
-- I am immortal then , on land and on sea , '' cried Ahab , with a laugh of derision ; -- `` Immortal on land and on sea ! '' 
Both were silent again , as one man . 
The grey dawn came on , and the slumbering crew arose from the boat 's bottom , and ere noon the dead whale was brought to the ship . 
The Quadrant The season for the Line at length drew near ; and every day when Ahab , coming from his cabin cast his eyes aloft , the vigilant helmsman would ostentatiously handle his spokes , and the eager mariners quickly run to the braces , and would stand there with all their eyes centrally fixed on the nailed doubloon ; impatient for the order to point the ship 's prow for the equator . 
In good time the order came . 
It was hard upon high noon ; and Ahab , seated in the bows of his high-hoisted boat , was about taking his wonted daily observation of the sun to determine his latitude . 
Now , in that Japanese sea , the days in summer are as freshets of effulgences . 
That unblinkingly vivid Japanese sun seems the blazing focus of the glassy ocean 's immeasurable burning-glass . 
The sky looks lacquered ; clouds there are none ; the horizon floats ; and this nakedness of unrelieved radiance is as the insufferable splendors of God 's throne . 
Well that Ahab 's quadrant was furnished with colored glasses , through which to take sight of that solar fire . 
