-- Why then do you try to `` enlarge '' your mind ? 
Subtilize it . 
Let us now with whatever levers and steam-engines we have at hand , cant over the sperm whale 's head , so , that it may lie bottom up ; then , ascending by a ladder to the summit , have a peep down the mouth ; and were it not that the body is now completely separated from it , with a lantern we might descend into the great Kentucky Mammoth Cave of his stomach . 
But let us hold on here by this tooth , and look about us where we are . 
What a really beautiful and chaste-looking mouth ! 
from floor to ceiling , lined , or rather papered with a glistening white membrane , glossy as bridal satins . 
But come out now , and look at this portentous lower jaw , which seems like the long narrow lid of an immense snuff-box , with the hinge at one end , instead of one side . 
If you pry it up , so as to get it overhead , and expose its rows of teeth , it seems a terrific portcullis ; and such , alas ! 
it proves to many a poor wight in the fishery , upon whom these spikes fall with impaling force . 
But far more terrible is it to behold , when fathoms down in the sea , you see some sulky whale , floating there suspended , with his prodigious jaw , some fifteen feet long , hanging straight down at right-angles with his body ; for all the world like a ship 's jibboom . 
This whale is not dead ; he is only dispirited ; out of sorts , perhaps ; hypochondriac ; and so supine , that the hinges of his jaw have relaxed , leaving him there in that ungainly sort of plight , a reproach to all his tribe , who must , no doubt , imprecate lock-jaws upon him . 
In most cases this lower jaw -- being easily unhinged by a practised artist -- is disengaged and hoisted on deck for the purpose of extracting the ivory teeth , and furnishing a supply of that hard white whalebone with which the fishermen fashion all sorts of curious articles including canes , umbrella-stocks , and handles to riding-whips . 
With a long , weary hoist the jaw is dragged on board , as if it were an anchor ; and when the proper time comes -- some few days after the other work -- Queequeg , Daggoo , and Tashtego , being all accomplished dentists , are set to drawing teeth . 
With a keen cutting-spade , Queequeg lances the gums ; then the jaw is lashed down to ringbolts , and a tackle being rigged from aloft , they drag out these teeth , as Michigan oxen drag stumps of old oaks out of wild woodlands . 
There are generally forty-two teeth in all ; in old whales , much worn down , but undecayed ; nor filled after our artificial fashion . 
The jaw is afterwards sawn into slabs , and piled away like joists for building houses . 
The Right Whale 's Head - Contrasted View Crossing the deck , let us now have a good long look at the the Right Whale 's head . 
As in general shape the noble Sperm Whale 's head may be compared to a Roman war-chariot -LRB- especially in front , where it is so broadly rounded -RRB- ; so , at a broad view , the Right Whale 's head bears a rather inelegant resemblance to a gigantic galliot-toed shoe . 
Two hundred years ago an old Dutch voyager likened its shape to that of a shoemaker 's last . 
And in this same last or shoe , that old woman of the nursery tale with the swarming brood , might very comfortably be lodged , she and all her progeny . 
But as you come nearer to this great head it begins to assume different aspects , according to your point of view . 
If you stand on its summit and look at these two f-shaped spout-holes , you would take the whole head for an enormous bass viol , and these spiracles , the apertures in its soundingboard . 
Then , again , if you fix your eye upon this strange , crested , comblike incrustation on the top of the mass -- this green , barnacled thing , which the Greenlanders call the `` crown , '' and the Southern fishers the `` bonnet '' of the Right Whale ; fixing your eyes solely on this , you would take the head for the trunk of some huge oak , with a bird 's nest in its crotch . 
At any rate , when you watch those live crabs that nestle here on this bonnet , such an idea will be almost sure to occur to you ; unless , indeed , your fancy has been fixed by the technical term `` crown '' also bestowed upon it ; in which case you will take great interest in thinking how this mighty monster is actually a diademed king of the sea , whose green crown has been put together for him in this marvellous manner . 
But if this whale be a king , he is a very sulky looking fellow to grace a diadem . 
Look at that hanging lower lip ! 
what a huge sulk and pout is there ! 
a sulk and pout , by carpenter 's measurement , about twenty feet long and five feet deep ; a sulk and pout that will yield you some 500 gallons of oil and more . 
A great pity , now , that this unfortunate whale should be hare-lipped . 
The fissure is about a foot across . 
Probably the mother during an important interval was sailing down the Peruvian coast , when earthquakes caused the beach to gape . 
Over this lip , as over a slippery threshold , we now slide into the mouth . 
Upon my word were I at Mackinaw , I should take this to be the inside of an Indian wigwam . 
Good Lord ! 
is this the road that Jonah went ? 
The roof is about twelve feet high , and runs to a pretty sharp angle , as if there were a regular ridge-pole there ; while these ribbed , arched , hairy sides , present us with those wondrous , half vertical , scimitar-shaped slats of whalebone , say three hundred on a side , which depending from the upper part of the head or crown bone , form those Venetian blinds which have elsewhere been cursorily mentioned . 
The edges of these bones are fringed with hairy fibres , through which the Right Whale strains the water , and in whose intricacies he retains the small fish , when openmouthed he goes through the seas of brit in feeding time . 
In the central blinds of bone , as they stand in their natural order , there are certain curious marks , curves , hollows , and ridges , whereby some whalemen calculate the creature 's age , as the age of an oak by its circular rings . 
Though the certainty of this criterion is far from demonstrable , yet it has the savor of analogical probability . 
At any rate , if we yield to it , we must grant a far greater age to the Right Whale than at first glance will seem reasonable . 
In old times , there seem to have prevailed the most curious fancies concerning these blinds . 
One voyager in Purchas calls them the wondrous `` whiskers '' inside of the whale 's mouth ; * another , `` hogs ' bristles '' ; a third old gentleman in Hackluyt uses the following elegant language : `` There are about two hundred and fifty fins growing on each side of his upper chop , which arch over his tongue on each side of his mouth . '' 
* This reminds us that the Right Whale really has a sort of whisker , or rather a moustache , consisting of a few scattered white hairs on the upper part of the outer end of the lower jaw . 
Sometimes these tufts impart a rather brigandish expression to his otherwise solemn countenance . 
As every one knows , these same `` hogs ' bristles , '' `` fins , '' `` whiskers , '' `` blinds , '' or whatever you please , furnish to the ladies their busks and other stiffening contrivances . 
But in this particular , the demand has long been on the decline . 
It was in Queen Anne 's time that the bone was in its glory , the farthingale being then all the fashion . 
And as those ancient dames moved about gaily , though in the jaws of the whale , as you may say ; even so , in a shower , with the like thoughtlessness , do we nowadays fly under the same jaws for protection ; the umbrella being a tent spread over the same bone . 
But now forget all about blinds and whiskers for a moment , and , standing in the Right Whale 's mouth , look around you afresh . 
Seeing all these colonnades of bone so methodically ranged about , would you not think you were inside of the great Haarlem organ , and gazing upon its thousand pipes ? 
