The next moment the light was extinguished , and this wild cannibal , tomahawk between his teeth , sprang into bed with me . 
I sang out , I could not help it now ; and giving a sudden grunt of astonishment he began feeling me . 
Stammering out something , I knew not what , I rolled away from him against the wall , and then conjured him , whoever or whatever he might be , to keep quiet , and let me get up and light the lamp again . 
But his guttural responses satisfied me at once that he but ill comprehended my meaning . 
`` Who-e debel you ? '' 
-- he at last said -- `` you no speak-e , dam-me , I kill-e . '' 
And so saying the lighted tomahawk began flourishing about me in the dark . 
`` Landlord , for God 's sake , Peter Coffin ! '' 
shouted I. `` Landlord ! 
Watch ! 
Coffin ! 
Angels ! 
save me ! '' 
`` Speak-e ! 
tell-ee me who-ee be , or dam-me , I kill-e ! '' 
again growled the cannibal , while his horrid flourishings of the tomahawk scattered the hot tobacco ashes about me till I thought my linen would get on fire . 
But thank heaven , at that moment the landlord came into the room light in hand , and leaping from the bed I ran up to him . 
`` Do n't be afraid now , '' said he , grinning again , `` Queequeg here would n't harm a hair of your head . '' 
`` Stop your grinning , '' shouted I , `` and why did n't you tell me that that infernal harpooneer was a cannibal ? '' 
`` I thought ye know 'd it ; -- did n't I tell ye , he was a peddlin ' heads around town ? 
-- but turn flukes again and go to sleep . 
Queequeg , look here -- you sabbee me , I sabbee -- you this man sleepe you -- you sabbee ? '' 
`` Me sabbee plenty '' -- grunted Queequeg , puffing away at his pipe and sitting up in bed . 
`` You gettee in , '' he added , motioning to me with his tomahawk , and throwing the clothes to one side . 
He really did this in not only a civil but a really kind and charitable way . 
I stood looking at him a moment . 
For all his tattooings he was on the whole a clean , comely looking cannibal . 
What 's all this fuss I have been making about , thought I to myself -- the man 's a human being just as I am : he has just as much reason to fear me , as I have to be afraid of him . 
Better sleep with a sober cannibal than a drunken Christian . 
`` Landlord , '' said I , `` tell him to stash his tomahawk there , or pipe , or whatever you call it ; tell him to stop smoking , in short , and I will turn in with him . 
But I do n't fancy having a man smoking in bed with me . 
It 's dangerous . 
Besides , I ai n't insured . '' 
This being told to Queequeg , he at once complied , and again politely motioned me to get into bed -- rolling over to one side as much as to say -- I wo n't touch a leg of ye . '' 
`` Good night , landlord , '' said I , `` you may go . '' 
I turned in , and never slept better in my life . 
The Counterpane Upon waking next morning about daylight , I found Queequeg 's arm thrown over me in the most loving and affectionate manner . 
You had almost thought I had been his wife . 
The counterpane was of patchwork , full of odd little parti-colored squares and triangles ; and this arm of his tattooed all over with an interminable Cretan labyrinth of a figure , no two parts of which were of one precise shade -- owing I suppose to his keeping his arm at sea unmethodically in sun and shade , his shirt sleeves irregularly rolled up at various times -- this same arm of his , I say , looked for all the world like a strip of that same patchwork quilt . 
Indeed , partly lying on it as the arm did when I first awoke , I could hardly tell it from the quilt , they so blended their hues together ; and it was only by the sense of weight and pressure that I could tell that Queequeg was hugging me . 
My sensations were strange . 
Let me try to explain them . 
When I was a child , I well remember a somewhat similar circumstance that befell me ; whether it was a reality or a dream , I never could entirely settle . 
The circumstance was this . 
I had been cutting up some caper or other -- I think it was trying to crawl up the chimney , as I had seen a little sweep do a few days previous ; and my stepmother who , somehow or other , was all the time whipping me , or sending me to bed supperless , -- my mother dragged me by the legs out of the chimney and packed me off to bed , though it was only two o'clock in the afternoon of the 21st June , the longest day in the year in our hemisphere . 
I felt dreadfully . 
But there was no help for it , so up stairs I went to my little room in the third floor , undressed myself as slowly as possible so as to kill time , and with a bitter sigh got between the sheets . 
I lay there dismally calculating that sixteen entire hours must elapse before I could hope for a resurrection . 
Sixteen hours in bed ! 
the small of my back ached to think of it . 
