What the devil 's the matter with me ? 
I do n't stand right on my legs . 
Coming afoul of that old man has a sort of turned me wrong side out . 
By the Lord , I must have been dreaming , though -- How ? 
how ? 
how ? 
-- but the only way 's to stash it ; so here goes to hammock again ; and in the morning , I 'll see how this plaguey juggling thinks over by daylight . '' 
The Pipe When Stubb had departed , Ahab stood for a while leaning over the bulwarks ; and then , as had been usual with him of late , calling a sailor of the watch , he sent him below for his ivory stool , and also his pipe . 
Lighting the pipe at the binnacle lamp and planting the stool on the weather side of the deck , he sat and smoked . 
In old Norse times , the thrones of the sea-loving Danish kings were fabricated , saith tradition , of the tusks of the narwhale . 
How could one look at Ahab then , seated on that tripod of bones , without bethinking him of the royalty it symbolized ? 
For a Khan of the plank , and a king of the sea and a great lord of Leviathans was Ahab . 
Some moments passed , during which the thick vapor came from his mouth in quick and constant puffs , which blew back again into his face . 
`` How now , '' he soliloquized at last , withdrawing the tube , `` this smoking no longer soothes . 
Oh , my pipe ! 
hard must it go with me if thy charm be gone ! 
Here have I been unconsciously toiling , not pleasuring -- aye , and ignorantly smoking to windward all the while ; to windward , and with such nervous whiffs , as if , like the dying whale , my final jets were the strongest and fullest of trouble . 
What business have I with this pipe ? 
This thing that is meant for sereneness , to send up mild white vapors among mild white hairs , not among torn iron-grey locks like mine . 
I 'll smoke no more - '' He tossed the still lighted pipe into the sea . 
The fire hissed in the waves ; the same instant the ship shot by the bubble the sinking pipe made . 
With slouched hat , Ahab lurchingly paced the planks . 
Queen Mab Next morning Stubb accosted Flask . 
`` Such a queer dream , King-Post , I never had . 
You know the old man 's ivory leg , well I dreamed he kicked me with it ; and when I tried to kick back , upon my soul , my little man , I kicked my leg right off ! 
And then , presto ! 
Ahab seemed a pyramid , and I like a blazing fool , kept kicking at it . 
But what was still more curious , Flask -- you know how curious all dreams are -- through all this rage that I was in , I somehow seemed to be thinking to myself , that after all , it was not much of an insult , that kick from Ahab . 
` Why , ' thinks I , ` what 's the row ? 
It 's not a real leg , only a false one . ' 
And there 's a mighty difference between a living thump and a dead thump . 
That 's what makes a blow from the hand , Flask , fifty times more savage to bear than a blow from a cane . 
The living member -- that makes the living insult , my little man . 
And thinks I to myself all the while , mind , while I was stubbing my silly toes against that cursed pyramid -- so confoundedly contradictory was it all , all the while , I say , I was thinking to myself , ` what 's his leg now , but a cane - . 
a whale-bone cane . 
Yes , ' thinks I , ` it was only a playful cudgelling -- in fact , only a whaleboning that he gave me -- not a base kick . 
Besides , ' thinks I , ` look at it once ; why , the end of it -- the foot part -- what a small sort of end it is ; whereas , if a broad footed farmer kicked me , there 's a devilish broad insult . 
But this insult is whittled down to a point only . ' 
But now comes the greatest joke of the dream , Flask . 
While I was battering away at the pyramid , a sort of badger-haired old merman , with a hump on his back , takes me by the shoulders , and slews me round . 
` What are you ` bout ? ' 
says he . 
Slid ! 
man , but I was frightened . 
Such a phiz ! 
But , somehow , next moment I was over the fright . 
` What am I about ? ' 
says I at last . 
` And what business is that of yours , I should like to know , Mr. Humpback ? 
Do you want a kick ? ' 
