The men ripped around awhile , and then rode away . 
As soon as they was out of sight I sung out to Buck and told him . 
He did n't know what to make of my voice coming out of the tree at first . 
He was awful surprised . 
He told me to watch out sharp and let him know when the men come in sight again ; said they was up to some devilment or other -- would n't be gone long . 
I wished I was out of that tree , but I das n't come down . 
Buck begun to cry and rip , and ` lowed that him and his cousin Joe -LRB- that was the other young chap -RRB- would make up for this day yet . 
He said his father and his two brothers was killed , and two or three of the enemy . 
Said the Shepherdsons laid for them in ambush . 
Buck said his father and brothers ought to waited for their relations -- the Shepherdsons was too strong for them . 
I asked him what was become of young Harney and Miss Sophia . 
He said they 'd got across the river and was safe . 
I was glad of that ; but the way Buck did take on because he did n't manage to kill Harney that day he shot at him -- I hai n't ever heard anything like it . 
All of a sudden , bang ! 
bang ! 
bang ! 
goes three or four guns -- the men had slipped around through the woods and come in from behind without their horses ! 
The boys jumped for the river -- both of them hurt -- and as they swum down the current the men run along the bank shooting at them and singing out , `` Kill them , kill them ! '' 
It made me so sick I most fell out of the tree . 
I ai n't a-going to tell ALL that happened -- it would make me sick again if I was to do that . 
I wished I had n't ever come ashore that night to see such things . 
I ai n't ever going to get shut of them -- lots of times I dream about them . 
I stayed in the tree till it begun to get dark , afraid to come down . 
Sometimes I heard guns away off in the woods ; and twice I seen little gangs of men gallop past the log store with guns ; so I reckoned the trouble was still a-going on . 
I was mighty downhearted ; so I made up my mind I would n't ever go anear that house again , because I reckoned I was to blame , somehow . 
I judged that that piece of paper meant that Miss Sophia was to meet Harney somewheres at half-past two and run off ; and I judged I ought to told her father about that paper and the curious way she acted , and then maybe he would a locked her up , and this awful mess would n't ever happened . 
When I got down out of the tree I crept along down the river bank a piece , and found the two bodies laying in the edge of the water , and tugged at them till I got them ashore ; then I covered up their faces , and got away as quick as I could . 
I cried a little when I was covering up Buck 's face , for he was mighty good to me . 
It was just dark now . 
I never went near the house , but struck through the woods and made for the swamp . 
Jim war n't on his island , so I tramped off in a hurry for the crick , and crowded through the willows , red-hot to jump aboard and get out of that awful country . 
The raft was gone ! 
My souls , but I was scared ! 
I could n't get my breath for most a minute . 
Then I raised a yell . 
A voice not twenty-five foot from me says : `` Good lan ' ! 
is dat you , honey ? 
Doan ' make no noise . '' 
It was Jim 's voice -- nothing ever sounded so good before . 
I run along the bank a piece and got aboard , and Jim he grabbed me and hugged me , he was so glad to see me . 
He says : `` Laws bless you , chile , I ` uz right down sho ' you 's dead agin . 
Jack 's been heah ; he say he reck 'n you 's ben shot , kase you didn ' come home no mo ' ; so I 's jes ' dis minute a startin ' de raf ' down towards de mouf er de crick , so 's to be all ready for to shove out en leave soon as Jack comes agin en tells me for certain you IS dead . 
Lawsy , I 's mighty glad to git you back again , honey . '' 
I says : `` All right -- that 's mighty good ; they wo n't find me , and they 'll think I 've been killed , and floated down the river -- there 's something up there that 'll help them think so -- so do n't you lose no time , Jim , but just shove off for the big water as fast as ever you can . '' 
I never felt easy till the raft was two mile below there and out in the middle of the Mississippi . 
Then we hung up our signal lantern , and judged that we was free and safe once more . 
I had n't had a bite to eat since yesterday , so Jim he got out some corn-dodgers and buttermilk , and pork and cabbage and greens -- there ai n't nothing in the world so good when it 's cooked right -- and whilst I eat my supper we talked and had a good time . 
I was powerful glad to get away from the feuds , and so was Jim to get away from the swamp . 
We said there war n't no home like a raft , after all . 
Other places do seem so cramped up and smothery , but a raft do n't . 
You feel mighty free and easy and comfortable on a raft . 
TWO or three days and nights went by ; I reckon I might say they swum by , they slid along so quiet and smooth and lovely . 
Here is the way we put in the time . 
It was a monstrous big river down there -- sometimes a mile and a half wide ; we run nights , and laid up and hid daytimes ; soon as night was most gone we stopped navigating and tied up -- nearly always in the dead water under a towhead ; and then cut young cottonwoods and willows , and hid the raft with them . 
Then we set out the lines . 
Next we slid into the river and had a swim , so as to freshen up and cool off ; then we set down on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee deep , and watched the daylight come . 
Not a sound anywheres -- perfectly still -- just like the whole world was asleep , only sometimes the bullfrogs a - cluttering , maybe . 
The first thing to see , looking away over the water , was a kind of dull line -- that was the woods on t ` other side ; you could n't make nothing else out ; then a pale place in the sky ; then more paleness spreading around ; then the river softened up away off , and war n't black any more , but gray ; you could see little dark spots drifting along ever so far away -- trading scows , and such things ; and long black streaks -- rafts ; sometimes you could hear a sweep screaking ; or jumbled up voices , it was so still , and sounds come so far ; and by and by you could see a streak on the water which you know by the look of the streak that there 's a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it and makes that streak look that way ; and you see the mist curl up off of the water , and the east reddens up , and the river , and you make out a log-cabin in the edge of the woods , away on the bank on t ` other side of the river , being a woodyard , likely , and piled by them cheats so you can throw a dog through it anywheres ; then the nice breeze springs up , and comes fanning you from over there , so cool and fresh and sweet to smell on account of the woods and the flowers ; but sometimes not that way , because they 've left dead fish laying around , gars and such , and they do get pretty rank ; and next you 've got the full day , and everything smiling in the sun , and the song - birds just going it ! 
A little smoke could n't be noticed now , so we would take some fish off of the lines and cook up a hot breakfast . 
And afterwards we would watch the lonesomeness of the river , and kind of lazy along , and by and by lazy off to sleep . 
Wake up by and by , and look to see what done it , and maybe see a steamboat coughing along up-stream , so far off towards the other side you could n't tell nothing about her only whether she was a stern-wheel or side-wheel ; then for about an hour there would n't be nothing to hear nor nothing to see -- just solid lonesomeness . 
Next you 'd see a raft sliding by , away off yonder , and maybe a galoot on it chopping , because they 're most always doing it on a raft ; you 'd see the axe flash and come down -- you do n't hear nothing ; you see that axe go up again , and by the time it 's above the man 's head then you hear the K'CHUNK ! 
-- it had took all that time to come over the water . 
So we would put in the day , lazying around , listening to the stillness . 
Once there was a thick fog , and the rafts and things that went by was beating tin pans so the steamboats would n't run over them . 
A scow or a raft went by so close we could hear them talking and cussing and laughing -- heard them plain ; but we could n't see no sign of them ; it made you feel crawly ; it was like spirits carrying on that way in the air . 
Jim said he believed it was spirits ; but I says : `` No ; spirits would n't say , ` Dern the dern fog . ' '' 
Soon as it was night out we shoved ; when we got her out to about the middle we let her alone , and let her float wherever the current wanted her to ; then we lit the pipes , and dangled our legs in the water , and talked about all kinds of things -- we was always naked , day and night , whenever the mosquitoes would let us -- the new clothes Buck 's folks made for me was too good to be comfortable , and besides I did n't go much on clothes , nohow . 
Sometimes we 'd have that whole river all to ourselves for the longest time . 
Yonder was the banks and the islands , across the water ; and maybe a spark -- which was a candle in a cabin window ; and sometimes on the water you could see a spark or two -- on a raft or a scow , you know ; and maybe you could hear a fiddle or a song coming over from one of them crafts . 
It 's lovely to live on a raft . 
We had the sky up there , all speckled with stars , and we used to lay on our backs and look up at them , and discuss about whether they was made or only just happened . 
Jim he allowed they was made , but I allowed they happened ; I judged it would have took too long to MAKE so many . 
Jim said the moon could a LAID them ; well , that looked kind of reasonable , so I did n't say nothing against it , because I 've seen a frog lay most as many , so of course it could be done . 
We used to watch the stars that fell , too , and see them streak down . 
Jim allowed they 'd got spoiled and was hove out of the nest . 
Once or twice of a night we would see a steamboat slipping along in the dark , and now and then she would belch a whole world of sparks up out of her chimbleys , and they would rain down in the river and look awful pretty ; then she would turn a corner and her lights would wink out and her powwow shut off and leave the river still again ; and by and by her waves would get to us , a long time after she was gone , and joggle the raft a bit , and after that you would n't hear nothing for you could n't tell how long , except maybe frogs or something . 
After midnight the people on shore went to bed , and then for two or three hours the shores was black -- no more sparks in the cabin windows . 
These sparks was our clock -- the first one that showed again meant morning was coming , so we hunted a place to hide and tie up right away . 
One morning about daybreak I found a canoe and crossed over a chute to the main shore -- it was only two hundred yards -- and paddled about a mile up a crick amongst the cypress woods , to see if I could n't get some berries . 
Just as I was passing a place where a kind of a cowpath crossed the crick , here comes a couple of men tearing up the path as tight as they could foot it . 
I thought I was a goner , for whenever anybody was after anybody I judged it was ME -- or maybe Jim . 
I was about to dig out from there in a hurry , but they was pretty close to me then , and sung out and begged me to save their lives -- said they had n't been doing nothing , and was being chased for it -- said there was men and dogs a-coming . 
They wanted to jump right in , but I says : `` Do n't you do it . 
I do n't hear the dogs and horses yet ; you 've got time to crowd through the brush and get up the crick a little ways ; then you take to the water and wade down to me and get in -- that 'll throw the dogs off the scent . '' 
They done it , and soon as they was aboard I lit out for our towhead , and in about five or ten minutes we heard the dogs and the men away off , shouting . 
We heard them come along towards the crick , but could n't see them ; they seemed to stop and fool around a while ; then , as we got further and further away all the time , we could n't hardly hear them at all ; by the time we had left a mile of woods behind us and struck the river , everything was quiet , and we paddled over to the towhead and hid in the cottonwoods and was safe . 
One of these fellows was about seventy or upwards , and had a bald head and very gray whiskers . 
He had an old battered-up slouch hat on , and a greasy blue woollen shirt , and ragged old blue jeans britches stuffed into his boot-tops , and home-knit galluses -- no , he only had one . 
He had an old long-tailed blue jeans coat with slick brass buttons flung over his arm , and both of them had big , fat , ratty-looking carpet-bags . 
The other fellow was about thirty , and dressed about as ornery . 
After breakfast we all laid off and talked , and the first thing that come out was that these chaps did n't know one another . 
`` What got you into trouble ? '' 
says the baldhead to t ` other chap . 
`` Well , I 'd been selling an article to take the tartar off the teeth -- and it does take it off , too , and generly the enamel along with it -- but I stayed about one night longer than I ought to , and was just in the act of sliding out when I ran across you on the trail this side of town , and you told me they were coming , and begged me to help you to get off . 
So I told you I was expecting trouble myself , and would scatter out WITH you . 
That 's the whole yarn -- what 's yourn ? 
`` Well , I 'd ben a-running ' a little temperance revival thar ` bout a week , and was the pet of the women folks , big and little , for I was makin ' it mighty warm for the rummies , I TELL you , and takin ' as much as five or six dollars a night -- ten cents a head , children and niggers free -- and business a-growin ' all the time , when somehow or another a little report got around last night that I had a way of puttin ' in my time with a private jug on the sly . 
A nigger rousted me out this mornin ' , and told me the people was getherin ' on the quiet with their dogs and horses , and they 'd be along pretty soon and give me ` bout half an hour 's start , and then run me down if they could ; and if they got me they 'd tar and feather me and ride me on a rail , sure . 
I did n't wait for no breakfast -- I war n't hungry . '' 
`` Old man , '' said the young one , `` I reckon we might double-team it together ; what do you think ? '' 
`` I ai n't undisposed . 
What 's your line -- mainly ? '' 
`` Jour printer by trade ; do a little in patent medicines ; theater-actor -- tragedy , you know ; take a turn to mesmerism and phrenology when there 's a chance ; teach singing-geography school for a change ; sling a lecture sometimes -- oh , I do lots of things -- most anything that comes handy , so it ai n't work . 
What 's your lay ? '' 
`` I 've done considerble in the doctoring way in my time . 
Layin ' on o ' hands is my best holt -- for cancer and paralysis , and sich things ; and I k 'n tell a fortune pretty good when I 've got somebody along to find out the facts for me . 
Preachin 's my line , too , and workin ' camp-meetin 's , and missionaryin ' around . '' 
Nobody never said anything for a while ; then the young man hove a sigh and says : `` Alas ! '' 
`` What 're you alassin ' about ? '' 
says the bald-head . 
`` To think I should have lived to be leading such a life , and be degraded down into such company . '' 
And he begun to wipe the corner of his eye with a rag . 
`` Dern your skin , ai n't the company good enough for you ? '' 
says the baldhead , pretty pert and uppish . 
`` Yes , it IS good enough for me ; it 's as good as I deserve ; for who fetched me so low when I was so high ? 
I did myself . 
I do n't blame YOU , gentlemen -- far from it ; I do n't blame anybody . 
I deserve it all . 
Let the cold world do its worst ; one thing I know -- there 's a grave somewhere for me . 
The world may go on just as it 's always done , and take everything from me -- loved ones , property , everything ; but it ca n't take that . 
Some day I 'll lie down in it and forget it all , and my poor broken heart will be at rest . '' 
He went on a-wiping . 
`` Drot your pore broken heart , '' says the baldhead ; `` what are you heaving your pore broken heart at US f ` r ? 
WE hai n't done nothing . '' 
`` No , I know you have n't . 
I ai n't blaming you , gentlemen . 
I brought myself down -- yes , I did it myself . 
It 's right I should suffer -- perfectly right -- I do n't make any moan . '' 
`` Brought you down from whar ? 
Whar was you brought down from ? '' 
`` Ah , you would not believe me ; the world never believes -- let it pass -- 't is no matter . 
The secret of my birth -- '' `` The secret of your birth ! 
Do you mean to say -- '' `` Gentlemen , '' says the young man , very solemn , `` I will reveal it to you , for I feel I may have confidence in you . 
By rights I am a duke ! '' 
Jim 's eyes bugged out when he heard that ; and I reckon mine did , too . 
Then the baldhead says : `` No ! 
you ca n't mean it ? '' 
`` Yes . 
My great-grandfather , eldest son of the Duke of Bridgewater , fled to this country about the end of the last century , to breathe the pure air of freedom ; married here , and died , leaving a son , his own father dying about the same time . 
The second son of the late duke seized the titles and estates -- the infant real duke was ignored . 
I am the lineal descendant of that infant -- I am the rightful Duke of Bridgewater ; and here am I , forlorn , torn from my high estate , hunted of men , despised by the cold world , ragged , worn , heart-broken , and degraded to the companionship of felons on a raft ! '' 
Jim pitied him ever so much , and so did I . 
We tried to comfort him , but he said it war n't much use , he could n't be much comforted ; said if we was a mind to acknowledge him , that would do him more good than most anything else ; so we said we would , if he would tell us how . 
He said we ought to bow when we spoke to him , and say `` Your Grace , '' or `` My Lord , '' or `` Your Lordship '' -- and he would n't mind it if we called him plain `` Bridgewater , '' which , he said , was a title anyway , and not a name ; and one of us ought to wait on him at dinner , and do any little thing for him he wanted done . 
Well , that was all easy , so we done it . 
All through dinner Jim stood around and waited on him , and says , `` Will yo ' Grace have some o ' dis or some o ' dat ? '' 
and so on , and a body could see it was mighty pleasing to him . 
But the old man got pretty silent by and by -- did n't have much to say , and did n't look pretty comfortable over all that petting that was going on around that duke . 
He seemed to have something on his mind . 
So , along in the afternoon , he says : `` Looky here , Bilgewater , '' he says , `` I 'm nation sorry for you , but you ai n't the only person that 's had troubles like that . '' 
`` No ? '' 
`` No you ai n't . 
You ai n't the only person that 's ben snaked down wrongfully out 'n a high place . '' 
`` Alas ! '' 
`` No , you ai n't the only person that 's had a secret of his birth . '' 
And , by jings , HE begins to cry . 
`` Hold ! 
What do you mean ? '' 
`` Bilgewater , kin I trust you ? '' 
says the old man , still sort of sobbing . 
`` To the bitter death ! '' 
He took the old man by the hand and squeezed it , and says , `` That secret of your being : speak ! '' 
`` Bilgewater , I am the late Dauphin ! '' 
You bet you , Jim and me stared this time . 
Then the duke says : `` You are what ? '' 
`` Yes , my friend , it is too true -- your eyes is lookin ' at this very moment on the pore disappeared Dauphin , Looy the Seventeen , son of Looy the Sixteen and Marry Antonette . '' 
`` You ! 
At your age ! 
No ! 
You mean you 're the late Charlemagne ; you must be six or seven hundred years old , at the very least . '' 
`` Trouble has done it , Bilgewater , trouble has done it ; trouble has brung these gray hairs and this premature balditude . 
Yes , gentlemen , you see before you , in blue jeans and misery , the wanderin ' , exiled , trampled-on , and sufferin ' rightful King of France . '' 
Well , he cried and took on so that me and Jim did n't know hardly what to do , we was so sorry -- and so glad and proud we 'd got him with us , too . 
So we set in , like we done before with the duke , and tried to comfort HIM . 
But he said it war n't no use , nothing but to be dead and done with it all could do him any good ; though he said it often made him feel easier and better for a while if people treated him according to his rights , and got down on one knee to speak to him , and always called him `` Your Majesty , '' and waited on him first at meals , and did n't set down in his presence till he asked them . 
So Jim and me set to majestying him , and doing this and that and t ` other for him , and standing up till he told us we might set down . 
This done him heaps of good , and so he got cheerful and comfortable . 
But the duke kind of soured on him , and did n't look a bit satisfied with the way things was going ; still , the king acted real friendly towards him , and said the duke 's great-grandfather and all the other Dukes of Bilgewater was a good deal thought of by HIS father , and was allowed to come to the palace considerable ; but the duke stayed huffy a good while , till by and by the king says : `` Like as not we got to be together a blamed long time on this h-yer raft , Bilgewater , and so what 's the use o ' your bein ' sour ? 
It 'll only make things oncomfortable . 
It ai n't my fault I war n't born a duke , it ai n't your fault you war n't born a king -- so what 's the use to worry ? 
Make the best o ' things the way you find 'em , says I -- that 's my motto . 
This ai n't no bad thing that we 've struck here -- plenty grub and an easy life -- come , give us your hand , duke , and le 's all be friends . '' 
The duke done it , and Jim and me was pretty glad to see it . 
It took away all the uncomfortableness and we felt mighty good over it , because it would a been a miserable business to have any unfriendliness on the raft ; for what you want , above all things , on a raft , is for everybody to be satisfied , and feel right and kind towards the others . 
It did n't take me long to make up my mind that these liars war n't no kings nor dukes at all , but just low-down humbugs and frauds . 
But I never said nothing , never let on ; kept it to myself ; it 's the best way ; then you do n't have no quarrels , and do n't get into no trouble . 
If they wanted us to call them kings and dukes , I had n't no objections , ` long as it would keep peace in the family ; and it war n't no use to tell Jim , so I did n't tell him . 
If I never learnt nothing else out of pap , I learnt that the best way to get along with his kind of people is to let them have their own way . 
THEY asked us considerable many questions ; wanted to know what we covered up the raft that way for , and laid by in the daytime instead of running -- was Jim a runaway nigger ? 
Says I : `` Goodness sakes ! 
would a runaway nigger run SOUTH ? '' 
No , they allowed he would n't . 
I had to account for things some way , so I says : `` My folks was living in Pike County , in Missouri , where I was born , and they all died off but me and pa and my brother Ike . 
Pa , he ` lowed he 'd break up and go down and live with Uncle Ben , who 's got a little one - horse place on the river , forty-four mile below Orleans . 
Pa was pretty poor , and had some debts ; so when he 'd squared up there war n't nothing left but sixteen dollars and our nigger , Jim . 
That war n't enough to take us fourteen hundred mile , deck passage nor no other way . 
Well , when the river rose pa had a streak of luck one day ; he ketched this piece of a raft ; so we reckoned we 'd go down to Orleans on it . 
Pa 's luck did n't hold out ; a steamboat run over the forrard corner of the raft one night , and we all went overboard and dove under the wheel ; Jim and me come up all right , but pa was drunk , and Ike was only four years old , so they never come up no more . 
Well , for the next day or two we had considerable trouble , because people was always coming out in skiffs and trying to take Jim away from me , saying they believed he was a runaway nigger . 
We do n't run daytimes no more now ; nights they do n't bother us . '' 
The duke says : `` Leave me alone to cipher out a way so we can run in the daytime if we want to . 
I 'll think the thing over -- I 'll invent a plan that 'll fix it . 
We 'll let it alone for to-day , because of course we do n't want to go by that town yonder in daylight -- it might n't be healthy . '' 
Towards night it begun to darken up and look like rain ; the heat lightning was squirting around low down in the sky , and the leaves was beginning to shiver -- it was going to be pretty ugly , it was easy to see that . 
So the duke and the king went to overhauling our wigwam , to see what the beds was like . 
My bed was a straw tick better than Jim 's , which was a corn-shuck tick ; there 's always cobs around about in a shuck tick , and they poke into you and hurt ; and when you roll over the dry shucks sound like you was rolling over in a pile of dead leaves ; it makes such a rustling that you wake up . 
Well , the duke allowed he would take my bed ; but the king allowed he would n't . 
He says : `` I should a reckoned the difference in rank would a sejested to you that a corn-shuck bed war n't just fitten for me to sleep on . 
Your Grace 'll take the shuck bed yourself . '' 
Jim and me was in a sweat again for a minute , being afraid there was going to be some more trouble amongst them ; so we was pretty glad when the duke says : '' 'T is my fate to be always ground into the mire under the iron heel of oppression . 
Misfortune has broken my once haughty spirit ; I yield , I submit ; 't is my fate . 
I am alone in the world -- let me suffer ; can bear it . '' 
We got away as soon as it was good and dark . 
The king told us to stand well out towards the middle of the river , and not show a light till we got a long ways below the town . 
We come in sight of the little bunch of lights by and by -- that was the town , you know -- and slid by , about a half a mile out , all right . 
When we was three-quarters of a mile below we hoisted up our signal lantern ; and about ten o'clock it come on to rain and blow and thunder and lighten like everything ; so the king told us to both stay on watch till the weather got better ; then him and the duke crawled into the wigwam and turned in for the night . 
It was my watch below till twelve , but I would n't a turned in anyway if I 'd had a bed , because a body do n't see such a storm as that every day in the week , not by a long sight . 
My souls , how the wind did scream along ! 
And every second or two there 'd come a glare that lit up the white-caps for a half a mile around , and you 'd see the islands looking dusty through the rain , and the trees thrashing around in the wind ; then comes a H-WHACK ! 
-- bum ! 
bum ! 
bumble-umble-um-bum-bum-bum-bum -- and the thunder would go rumbling and grumbling away , and quit -- and then RIP comes another flash and another sockdolager . 
The waves most washed me off the raft sometimes , but I had n't any clothes on , and did n't mind . 
We did n't have no trouble about snags ; the lightning was glaring and flittering around so constant that we could see them plenty soon enough to throw her head this way or that and miss them . 
I had the middle watch , you know , but I was pretty sleepy by that time , so Jim he said he would stand the first half of it for me ; he was always mighty good that way , Jim was . 
I crawled into the wigwam , but the king and the duke had their legs sprawled around so there war n't no show for me ; so I laid outside -- I did n't mind the rain , because it was warm , and the waves war n't running so high now . 
About two they come up again , though , and Jim was going to call me ; but he changed his mind , because he reckoned they war n't high enough yet to do any harm ; but he was mistaken about that , for pretty soon all of a sudden along comes a regular ripper and washed me overboard . 
It most killed Jim a-laughing . 
He was the easiest nigger to laugh that ever was , anyway . 
I took the watch , and Jim he laid down and snored away ; and by and by the storm let up for good and all ; and the first cabin-light that showed I rousted him out , and we slid the raft into hiding quarters for the day . 
The king got out an old ratty deck of cards after breakfast , and him and the duke played seven-up a while , five cents a game . 
Then they got tired of it , and allowed they would `` lay out a campaign , '' as they called it . 
The duke went down into his carpet-bag , and fetched up a lot of little printed bills and read them out loud . 
One bill said , `` The celebrated Dr. Armand de Montalban , of Paris , '' would `` lecture on the Science of Phrenology '' at such and such a place , on the blank day of blank , at ten cents admission , and `` furnish charts of character at twenty-five cents apiece . '' 
The duke said that was HIM . 
In another bill he was the `` world - renowned Shakespearian tragedian , Garrick the Younger , of Drury Lane , London . '' 
In other bills he had a lot of other names and done other wonderful things , like finding water and gold with a `` divining-rod , '' `` dissipating witch spells , '' and so on . 
By and by he says : `` But the histrionic muse is the darling . 
Have you ever trod the boards , Royalty ? '' 
`` No , '' says the king . 
`` You shall , then , before you 're three days older , Fallen Grandeur , '' says the duke . 
`` The first good town we come to we 'll hire a hall and do the sword fight in Richard III . 
and the balcony scene in Romeo and Juliet . 
How does that strike you ? '' 
`` I 'm in , up to the hub , for anything that will pay , Bilgewater ; but , you see , I do n't know nothing about play-actin ' , and hai n't ever seen much of it . 
I was too small when pap used to have 'em at the palace . 
Do you reckon you can learn me ? '' 
`` Easy ! '' 
`` All right . 
I 'm jist a-freezn ' for something fresh , anyway . 
Le 's commence right away . '' 
So the duke he told him all about who Romeo was and who Juliet was , and said he was used to being Romeo , so the king could be Juliet . 
`` But if Juliet 's such a young gal , duke , my peeled head and my white whiskers is goin ' to look oncommon odd on her , maybe . '' 
`` No , do n't you worry ; these country jakes wo n't ever think of that . 
Besides , you know , you 'll be in costume , and that makes all the difference in the world ; Juliet 's in a balcony , enjoying the moonlight before she goes to bed , and she 's got on her night-gown and her ruffled nightcap . 
Here are the costumes for the parts . '' 
He got out two or three curtain-calico suits , which he said was meedyevil armor for Richard III . 
and t ` other chap , and a long white cotton nightshirt and a ruffled nightcap to match . 
The king was satisfied ; so the duke got out his book and read the parts over in the most splendid spread-eagle way , prancing around and acting at the same time , to show how it had got to be done ; then he give the book to the king and told him to get his part by heart . 
There was a little one-horse town about three mile down the bend , and after dinner the duke said he had ciphered out his idea about how to run in daylight without it being dangersome for Jim ; so he allowed he would go down to the town and fix that thing . 
The king allowed he would go , too , and see if he could n't strike something . 
We was out of coffee , so Jim said I better go along with them in the canoe and get some . 
When we got there there war n't nobody stirring ; streets empty , and perfectly dead and still , like Sunday . 
We found a sick nigger sunning himself in a back yard , and he said everybody that war n't too young or too sick or too old was gone to camp-meeting , about two mile back in the woods . 
The king got the directions , and allowed he 'd go and work that camp-meeting for all it was worth , and I might go , too . 
The duke said what he was after was a printing-office . 
We found it ; a little bit of a concern , up over a carpenter shop -- carpenters and printers all gone to the meeting , and no doors locked . 
It was a dirty , littered-up place , and had ink marks , and handbills with pictures of horses and runaway niggers on them , all over the walls . 
The duke shed his coat and said he was all right now . 
So me and the king lit out for the camp-meeting . 
We got there in about a half an hour fairly dripping , for it was a most awful hot day . 
There was as much as a thousand people there from twenty mile around . 
The woods was full of teams and wagons , hitched everywheres , feeding out of the wagon-troughs and stomping to keep off the flies . 
There was sheds made out of poles and roofed over with branches , where they had lemonade and gingerbread to sell , and piles of watermelons and green corn and such-like truck . 
The preaching was going on under the same kinds of sheds , only they was bigger and held crowds of people . 
The benches was made out of outside slabs of logs , with holes bored in the round side to drive sticks into for legs . 
They did n't have no backs . 
The preachers had high platforms to stand on at one end of the sheds . 
The women had on sun-bonnets ; and some had linsey-woolsey frocks , some gingham ones , and a few of the young ones had on calico . 
Some of the young men was barefooted , and some of the children did n't have on any clothes but just a tow-linen shirt . 
Some of the old women was knitting , and some of the young folks was courting on the sly . 
The first shed we come to the preacher was lining out a hymn . 
He lined out two lines , everybody sung it , and it was kind of grand to hear it , there was so many of them and they done it in such a rousing way ; then he lined out two more for them to sing -- and so on . 
The people woke up more and more , and sung louder and louder ; and towards the end some begun to groan , and some begun to shout . 
Then the preacher begun to preach , and begun in earnest , too ; and went weaving first to one side of the platform and then the other , and then a-leaning down over the front of it , with his arms and his body going all the time , and shouting his words out with all his might ; and every now and then he would hold up his Bible and spread it open , and kind of pass it around this way and that , shouting , `` It 's the brazen serpent in the wilderness ! 
Look upon it and live ! '' 
And people would shout out , `` Glory ! 
-- A-a-MEN ! '' 
And so he went on , and the people groaning and crying and saying amen : `` Oh , come to the mourners ' bench ! 
come , black with sin ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , sick and sore ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , lame and halt and blind ! 
-LRB- AMEN ! -RRB- 
come , pore and needy , sunk in shame ! 
-LRB- A-A-MEN ! -RRB- 
come , all that 's worn and soiled and suffering ! 
-- come with a broken spirit ! 
come with a contrite heart ! 
come in your rags and sin and dirt ! 
the waters that cleanse is free , the door of heaven stands open -- oh , enter in and be at rest ! '' 
-LRB- A-A-MEN ! 
GLORY , GLORY HALLELUJAH ! -RRB- 
And so on . 
You could n't make out what the preacher said any more , on account of the shouting and crying . 
Folks got up everywheres in the crowd , and worked their way just by main strength to the mourners ' bench , with the tears running down their faces ; and when all the mourners had got up there to the front benches in a crowd , they sung and shouted and flung themselves down on the straw , just crazy and wild . 
Well , the first I knowed the king got a-going , and you could hear him over everybody ; and next he went a-charging up on to the platform , and the preacher he begged him to speak to the people , and he done it . 
He told them he was a pirate -- been a pirate for thirty years out in the Indian Ocean -- and his crew was thinned out considerable last spring in a fight , and he was home now to take out some fresh men , and thanks to goodness he 'd been robbed last night and put ashore off of a steamboat without a cent , and he was glad of it ; it was the blessedest thing that ever happened to him , because he was a changed man now , and happy for the first time in his life ; and , poor as he was , he was going to start right off and work his way back to the Indian Ocean , and put in the rest of his life trying to turn the pirates into the true path ; for he could do it better than anybody else , being acquainted with all pirate crews in that ocean ; and though it would take him a long time to get there without money , he would get there anyway , and every time he convinced a pirate he would say to him , `` Do n't you thank me , do n't you give me no credit ; it all belongs to them dear people in Pokeville camp-meeting , natural brothers and benefactors of the race , and that dear preacher there , the truest friend a pirate ever had ! '' 
And then he busted into tears , and so did everybody . 
Then somebody sings out , `` Take up a collection for him , take up a collection ! '' 
Well , a half a dozen made a jump to do it , but somebody sings out , `` Let HIM pass the hat around ! '' 
Then everybody said it , the preacher too . 
So the king went all through the crowd with his hat swabbing his eyes , and blessing the people and praising them and thanking them for being so good to the poor pirates away off there ; and every little while the prettiest kind of girls , with the tears running down their cheeks , would up and ask him would he let them kiss him for to remember him by ; and he always done it ; and some of them he hugged and kissed as many as five or six times -- and he was invited to stay a week ; and everybody wanted him to live in their houses , and said they 'd think it was an honor ; but he said as this was the last day of the camp-meeting he could n't do no good , and besides he was in a sweat to get to the Indian Ocean right off and go to work on the pirates . 
When we got back to the raft and he come to count up he found he had collected eighty-seven dollars and seventy-five cents . 
And then he had fetched away a three-gallon jug of whisky , too , that he found under a wagon when he was starting home through the woods . 
The king said , take it all around , it laid over any day he 'd ever put in in the missionarying line . 
He said it war n't no use talking , heathens do n't amount to shucks alongside of pirates to work a camp-meeting with . 
The duke was thinking HE 'D been doing pretty well till the king come to show up , but after that he did n't think so so much . 
He had set up and printed off two little jobs for farmers in that printing-office -- horse bills -- and took the money , four dollars . 
And he had got in ten dollars ' worth of advertisements for the paper , which he said he would put in for four dollars if they would pay in advance -- so they done it . 
The price of the paper was two dollars a year , but he took in three subscriptions for half a dollar apiece on condition of them paying him in advance ; they were going to pay in cordwood and onions as usual , but he said he had just bought the concern and knocked down the price as low as he could afford it , and was going to run it for cash . 
He set up a little piece of poetry , which he made , himself , out of his own head -- three verses -- kind of sweet and saddish -- the name of it was , `` Yes , crush , cold world , this breaking heart '' -- and he left that all set up and ready to print in the paper , and did n't charge nothing for it . 
Well , he took in nine dollars and a half , and said he 'd done a pretty square day 's work for it . 
Then he showed us another little job he 'd printed and had n't charged for , because it was for us . 
It had a picture of a runaway nigger with a bundle on a stick over his shoulder , and `` $ 200 reward '' under it . 
The reading was all about Jim , and just described him to a dot . 
It said he run away from St. Jacques ' plantation , forty mile below New Orleans , last winter , and likely went north , and whoever would catch him and send him back he could have the reward and expenses . 
`` Now , '' says the duke , `` after to-night we can run in the daytime if we want to . 
Whenever we see anybody coming we can tie Jim hand and foot with a rope , and lay him in the wigwam and show this handbill and say we captured him up the river , and were too poor to travel on a steamboat , so we got this little raft on credit from our friends and are going down to get the reward . 
Handcuffs and chains would look still better on Jim , but it would n't go well with the story of us being so poor . 
Too much like jewelry . 
Ropes are the correct thing -- we must preserve the unities , as we say on the boards . '' 
We all said the duke was pretty smart , and there could n't be no trouble about running daytimes . 
We judged we could make miles enough that night to get out of the reach of the powwow we reckoned the duke 's work in the printing office was going to make in that little town ; then we could boom right along if we wanted to . 
We laid low and kept still , and never shoved out till nearly ten o'clock ; then we slid by , pretty wide away from the town , and did n't hoist our lantern till we was clear out of sight of it . 
When Jim called me to take the watch at four in the morning , he says : `` Huck , does you reck 'n we gwyne to run acrost any mo ' kings on dis trip ? '' 
`` No , '' I says , `` I reckon not . '' 
`` Well , '' says he , `` dat 's all right , den . 
I doan ' mine one er two kings , but dat 's enough . 
Dis one 's powerful drunk , en de duke ain ' much better . '' 
I found Jim had been trying to get him to talk French , so he could hear what it was like ; but he said he had been in this country so long , and had so much trouble , he 'd forgot it . 
IT was after sun-up now , but we went right on and did n't tie up . 
The king and the duke turned out by and by looking pretty rusty ; but after they 'd jumped overboard and took a swim it chippered them up a good deal . 
After breakfast the king he took a seat on the corner of the raft , and pulled off his boots and rolled up his britches , and let his legs dangle in the water , so as to be comfortable , and lit his pipe , and went to getting his Romeo and Juliet by heart . 
When he had got it pretty good him and the duke begun to practice it together . 
The duke had to learn him over and over again how to say every speech ; and he made him sigh , and put his hand on his heart , and after a while he said he done it pretty well ; `` only , '' he says , `` you must n't bellow out ROMEO ! 
that way , like a bull -- you must say it soft and sick and languishy , so -- R-o-o-meo ! 
that is the idea ; for Juliet 's a dear sweet mere child of a girl , you know , and she does n't bray like a jackass . '' 
Well , next they got out a couple of long swords that the duke made out of oak laths , and begun to practice the sword fight -- the duke called himself Richard III. ; and the way they laid on and pranced around the raft was grand to see . 
But by and by the king tripped and fell overboard , and after that they took a rest , and had a talk about all kinds of adventures they 'd had in other times along the river . 
After dinner the duke says : `` Well , Capet , we 'll want to make this a first-class show , you know , so I guess we 'll add a little more to it . 
We want a little something to answer encores with , anyway . '' 
`` What 's onkores , Bilgewater ? '' 
The duke told him , and then says : `` I 'll answer by doing the Highland fling or the sailor 's hornpipe ; and you -- well , let me see -- oh , I 've got it -- you can do Hamlet 's soliloquy . '' 
`` Hamlet 's which ? '' 
`` Hamlet 's soliloquy , you know ; the most celebrated thing in Shakespeare . 
Ah , it 's sublime , sublime ! 
Always fetches the house . 
I have n't got it in the book -- I 've only got one volume -- but I reckon I can piece it out from memory . 
I 'll just walk up and down a minute , and see if I can call it back from recollection 's vaults . '' 
So he went to marching up and down , thinking , and frowning horrible every now and then ; then he would hoist up his eyebrows ; next he would squeeze his hand on his forehead and stagger back and kind of moan ; next he would sigh , and next he 'd let on to drop a tear . 
It was beautiful to see him . 
By and by he got it . 
He told us to give attention . 
Then he strikes a most noble attitude , with one leg shoved forwards , and his arms stretched away up , and his head tilted back , looking up at the sky ; and then he begins to rip and rave and grit his teeth ; and after that , all through his speech , he howled , and spread around , and swelled up his chest , and just knocked the spots out of any acting ever I see before . 
This is the speech -- I learned it , easy enough , while he was learning it to the king : To be , or not to be ; that is the bare bodkin That makes calamity of so long life ; For who would fardels bear , till Birnam Wood do come to Dunsinane , But that the fear of something after death Murders the innocent sleep , Great nature 's second course , And makes us rather sling the arrows of outrageous fortune Than fly to others that we know not of . 
There 's the respect must give us pause : Wake Duncan with thy knocking ! 
I would thou couldst ; For who would bear the whips and scorns of time , The oppressor 's wrong , the proud man 's contumely , The law 's delay , and the quietus which his pangs might take , In the dead waste and middle of the night , when churchyards yawn In customary suits of solemn black , But that the undiscovered country from whose bourne no traveler returns , Breathes forth contagion on the world , And thus the native hue of resolution , like the poor cat i ' the adage , Is sicklied o'er with care , And all the clouds that lowered o'er our housetops , With this regard their currents turn awry , And lose the name of action . 
'T is a consummation devoutly to be wished . 
But soft you , the fair Ophelia : Ope not thy ponderous and marble jaws , But get thee to a nunnery -- go ! 
Well , the old man he liked that speech , and he mighty soon got it so he could do it first-rate . 
It seemed like he was just born for it ; and when he had his hand in and was excited , it was perfectly lovely the way he would rip and tear and rair up behind when he was getting it off . 
The first chance we got the duke he had some showbills printed ; and after that , for two or three days as we floated along , the raft was a most uncommon lively place , for there war n't nothing but sword fighting and rehearsing -- as the duke called it -- going on all the time . 
One morning , when we was pretty well down the State of Arkansaw , we come in sight of a little one-horse town in a big bend ; so we tied up about three-quarters of a mile above it , in the mouth of a crick which was shut in like a tunnel by the cypress trees , and all of us but Jim took the canoe and went down there to see if there was any chance in that place for our show . 
We struck it mighty lucky ; there was going to be a circus there that afternoon , and the country people was already beginning to come in , in all kinds of old shackly wagons , and on horses . 
The circus would leave before night , so our show would have a pretty good chance . 
The duke he hired the courthouse , and we went around and stuck up our bills . 
They read like this : Shaksperean Revival ! ! ! 
Wonderful Attraction ! 
For One Night Only ! 
The world renowned tragedians , David Garrick the Younger , of Drury Lane Theatre London , and Edmund Kean the elder , of the Royal Haymarket Theatre , Whitechapel , Pudding Lane , Piccadilly , London , and the Royal Continental Theatres , in their sublime Shaksperean Spectacle entitled The Balcony Scene in Romeo and Juliet ! ! ! 
Romeo ... Mr. Garrick Juliet ... Mr. Kean Assisted by the whole strength of the company ! 
New costumes , new scenes , new appointments ! 
Also : The thrilling , masterly , and blood-curdling Broad-sword conflict In Richard III . ! ! ! 
Richard III ... Mr. Garrick Richmond ... Mr. Kean Also : -LRB- by special request -RRB- Hamlet 's Immortal Soliloquy ! ! 
By The Illustrious Kean ! 
Done by him 300 consecutive nights in Paris ! 
For One Night Only , On account of imperative European engagements ! 
Admission 25 cents ; children and servants , 10 cents . 
Then we went loafing around town . 
The stores and houses was most all old , shackly , dried up frame concerns that had n't ever been painted ; they was set up three or four foot above ground on stilts , so as to be out of reach of the water when the river was over-flowed . 
The houses had little gardens around them , but they did n't seem to raise hardly anything in them but jimpson-weeds , and sunflowers , and ash piles , and old curled-up boots and shoes , and pieces of bottles , and rags , and played-out tinware . 
The fences was made of different kinds of boards , nailed on at different times ; and they leaned every which way , and had gates that did n't generly have but one hinge -- a leather one . 
Some of the fences had been white - washed some time or another , but the duke said it was in Clumbus ' time , like enough . 
There was generly hogs in the garden , and people driving them out . 
All the stores was along one street . 
They had white domestic awnings in front , and the country people hitched their horses to the awning-posts . 
There was empty drygoods boxes under the awnings , and loafers roosting on them all day long , whittling them with their Barlow knives ; and chawing tobacco , and gaping and yawning and stretching -- a mighty ornery lot . 
They generly had on yellow straw hats most as wide as an umbrella , but did n't wear no coats nor waistcoats , they called one another Bill , and Buck , and Hank , and Joe , and Andy , and talked lazy and drawly , and used considerable many cuss words . 
There was as many as one loafer leaning up against every awning-post , and he most always had his hands in his britches-pockets , except when he fetched them out to lend a chaw of tobacco or scratch . 
What a body was hearing amongst them all the time was : `` Gim me a chaw ' v tobacker , Hank . '' 
`` Cai n't ; I hai n't got but one chaw left . 
Ask Bill . '' 
Maybe Bill he gives him a chaw ; maybe he lies and says he ai n't got none . 
Some of them kinds of loafers never has a cent in the world , nor a chaw of tobacco of their own . 
They get all their chawing by borrowing ; they say to a fellow , `` I wisht you 'd len ' me a chaw , Jack , I jist this minute give Ben Thompson the last chaw I had '' -- which is a lie pretty much everytime ; it do n't fool nobody but a stranger ; but Jack ai n't no stranger , so he says : `` YOU give him a chaw , did you ? 
So did your sister 's cat 's grandmother . 
You pay me back the chaws you 've awready borry 'd off 'n me , Lafe Buckner , then I 'll loan you one or two ton of it , and wo n't charge you no back intrust , nuther . '' 
`` Well , I DID pay you back some of it wunst . '' 
`` Yes , you did -- ` bout six chaws . 
You borry 'd store tobacker and paid back nigger-head . '' 
Store tobacco is flat black plug , but these fellows mostly chaws the natural leaf twisted . 
When they borrow a chaw they do n't generly cut it off with a knife , but set the plug in between their teeth , and gnaw with their teeth and tug at the plug with their hands till they get it in two ; then sometimes the one that owns the tobacco looks mournful at it when it 's handed back , and says , sarcastic : `` Here , gim me the CHAW , and you take the PLUG . '' 
All the streets and lanes was just mud ; they war n't nothing else BUT mud -- mud as black as tar and nigh about a foot deep in some places , and two or three inches deep in ALL the places . 
The hogs loafed and grunted around everywheres . 
You 'd see a muddy sow and a litter of pigs come lazying along the street and whollop herself right down in the way , where folks had to walk around her , and she 'd stretch out and shut her eyes and wave her ears whilst the pigs was milking her , and look as happy as if she was on salary . 
And pretty soon you 'd hear a loafer sing out , `` Hi ! 
SO boy ! 
sick him , Tige ! '' 
and away the sow would go , squealing most horrible , with a dog or two swinging to each ear , and three or four dozen more a - coming ; and then you would see all the loafers get up and watch the thing out of sight , and laugh at the fun and look grateful for the noise . 
Then they 'd settle back again till there was a dog fight . 
There could n't anything wake them up all over , and make them happy all over , like a dog fight -- unless it might be putting turpentine on a stray dog and setting fire to him , or tying a tin pan to his tail and see him run himself to death . 
On the river front some of the houses was sticking out over the bank , and they was bowed and bent , and about ready to tumble in , The people had moved out of them . 
The bank was caved away under one corner of some others , and that corner was hanging over . 
People lived in them yet , but it was dangersome , because sometimes a strip of land as wide as a house caves in at a time . 
Sometimes a belt of land a quarter of a mile deep will start in and cave along and cave along till it all caves into the river in one summer . 
Such a town as that has to be always moving back , and back , and back , because the river 's always gnawing at it . 
The nearer it got to noon that day the thicker and thicker was the wagons and horses in the streets , and more coming all the time . 
Families fetched their dinners with them from the country , and eat them in the wagons . 
There was considerable whisky drinking going on , and I seen three fights . 
By and by somebody sings out : `` Here comes old Boggs ! 
-- in from the country for his little old monthly drunk ; here he comes , boys ! '' 
All the loafers looked glad ; I reckoned they was used to having fun out of Boggs . 
One of them says : `` Wonder who he 's a-gwyne to chaw up this time . 
If he 'd a-chawed up all the men he 's ben a-gwyne to chaw up in the last twenty year he 'd have considerable ruputation now . '' 
Another one says , `` I wisht old Boggs 'd threaten me , ` cuz then I 'd know I war n't gwyne to die for a thousan ' year . '' 
Boggs comes a-tearing along on his horse , whooping and yelling like an Injun , and singing out : `` Cler the track , thar . 
I 'm on the waw-path , and the price uv coffins is a-gwyne to raise . '' 
He was drunk , and weaving about in his saddle ; he was over fifty year old , and had a very red face . 
Everybody yelled at him and laughed at him and sassed him , and he sassed back , and said he 'd attend to them and lay them out in their regular turns , but he could n't wait now because he 'd come to town to kill old Colonel Sherburn , and his motto was , `` Meat first , and spoon vittles to top off on . '' 
He see me , and rode up and says : `` Whar 'd you come f 'm , boy ? 
You prepared to die ? '' 
Then he rode on . 
I was scared , but a man says : `` He do n't mean nothing ; he 's always a-carryin ' on like that when he 's drunk . 
He 's the best naturedest old fool in Arkansaw -- never hurt nobody , drunk nor sober . '' 
Boggs rode up before the biggest store in town , and bent his head down so he could see under the curtain of the awning and yells : `` Come out here , Sherburn ! 
Come out and meet the man you 've swindled . 
You 're the houn ' I 'm after , and I 'm a-gwyne to have you , too ! '' 
And so he went on , calling Sherburn everything he could lay his tongue to , and the whole street packed with people listening and laughing and going on . 
By and by a proud-looking man about fifty-five -- and he was a heap the best dressed man in that town , too -- steps out of the store , and the crowd drops back on each side to let him come . 
He says to Boggs , mighty ca 'm and slow -- he says : `` I 'm tired of this , but I 'll endure it till one o'clock . 
Till one o'clock , mind -- no longer . 
If you open your mouth against me only once after that time you ca n't travel so far but I will find you . '' 
Then he turns and goes in . 
The crowd looked mighty sober ; nobody stirred , and there war n't no more laughing . 
Boggs rode off blackguarding Sherburn as loud as he could yell , all down the street ; and pretty soon back he comes and stops before the store , still keeping it up . 
Some men crowded around him and tried to get him to shut up , but he would n't ; they told him it would be one o'clock in about fifteen minutes , and so he MUST go home -- he must go right away . 
But it did n't do no good . 
He cussed away with all his might , and throwed his hat down in the mud and rode over it , and pretty soon away he went a-raging down the street again , with his gray hair a-flying . 
Everybody that could get a chance at him tried their best to coax him off of his horse so they could lock him up and get him sober ; but it war n't no use -- up the street he would tear again , and give Sherburn another cussing . 
By and by somebody says : `` Go for his daughter ! 
-- quick , go for his daughter ; sometimes he 'll listen to her . 
If anybody can persuade him , she can . '' 
So somebody started on a run . 
I walked down street a ways and stopped . 
In about five or ten minutes here comes Boggs again , but not on his horse . 
He was a-reeling across the street towards me , bare-headed , with a friend on both sides of him a-holt of his arms and hurrying him along . 
He was quiet , and looked uneasy ; and he war n't hanging back any , but was doing some of the hurrying himself . 
Somebody sings out : `` Boggs ! '' 
I looked over there to see who said it , and it was that Colonel Sherburn . 
He was standing perfectly still in the street , and had a pistol raised in his right hand -- not aiming it , but holding it out with the barrel tilted up towards the sky . 
The same second I see a young girl coming on the run , and two men with her . 
Boggs and the men turned round to see who called him , and when they see the pistol the men jumped to one side , and the pistol-barrel come down slow and steady to a level -- both barrels cocked . 
Boggs throws up both of his hands and says , `` O Lord , do n't shoot ! '' 
Bang ! 
goes the first shot , and he staggers back , clawing at the air -- bang ! 
goes the second one , and he tumbles backwards on to the ground , heavy and solid , with his arms spread out . 
That young girl screamed out and comes rushing , and down she throws herself on her father , crying , and saying , `` Oh , he 's killed him , he 's killed him ! '' 
The crowd closed up around them , and shouldered and jammed one another , with their necks stretched , trying to see , and people on the inside trying to shove them back and shouting , `` Back , back ! 
give him air , give him air ! '' 
Colonel Sherburn he tossed his pistol on to the ground , and turned around on his heels and walked off . 
They took Boggs to a little drug store , the crowd pressing around just the same , and the whole town following , and I rushed and got a good place at the window , where I was close to him and could see in . 
They laid him on the floor and put one large Bible under his head , and opened another one and spread it on his breast ; but they tore open his shirt first , and I seen where one of the bullets went in . 
He made about a dozen long gasps , his breast lifting the Bible up when he drawed in his breath , and letting it down again when he breathed it out -- and after that he laid still ; he was dead . 
Then they pulled his daughter away from him , screaming and crying , and took her off . 
She was about sixteen , and very sweet and gentle looking , but awful pale and scared . 
Well , pretty soon the whole town was there , squirming and scrouging and pushing and shoving to get at the window and have a look , but people that had the places would n't give them up , and folks behind them was saying all the time , `` Say , now , you 've looked enough , you fellows ; ` tai n't right and ` tai n't fair for you to stay thar all the time , and never give nobody a chance ; other folks has their rights as well as you . '' 
There was considerable jawing back , so I slid out , thinking maybe there was going to be trouble . 
The streets was full , and everybody was excited . 
Everybody that seen the shooting was telling how it happened , and there was a big crowd packed around each one of these fellows , stretching their necks and listening . 
One long , lanky man , with long hair and a big white fur stovepipe hat on the back of his head , and a crooked-handled cane , marked out the places on the ground where Boggs stood and where Sherburn stood , and the people following him around from one place to t ` other and watching everything he done , and bobbing their heads to show they understood , and stooping a little and resting their hands on their thighs to watch him mark the places on the ground with his cane ; and then he stood up straight and stiff where Sherburn had stood , frowning and having his hat-brim down over his eyes , and sung out , `` Boggs ! '' 
and then fetched his cane down slow to a level , and says `` Bang ! '' 
staggered backwards , says `` Bang ! '' 
again , and fell down flat on his back . 
The people that had seen the thing said he done it perfect ; said it was just exactly the way it all happened . 
Then as much as a dozen people got out their bottles and treated him . 
Well , by and by somebody said Sherburn ought to be lynched . 
In about a minute everybody was saying it ; so away they went , mad and yelling , and snatching down every clothes-line they come to to do the hanging with . 
