THEY swarmed up towards Sherburn 's house , a-whooping and raging like Injuns , and everything had to clear the way or get run over and tromped to mush , and it was awful to see . 
Children was heeling it ahead of the mob , screaming and trying to get out of the way ; and every window along the road was full of women 's heads , and there was nigger boys in every tree , and bucks and wenches looking over every fence ; and as soon as the mob would get nearly to them they would break and skaddle back out of reach . 
Lots of the women and girls was crying and taking on , scared most to death . 
They swarmed up in front of Sherburn 's palings as thick as they could jam together , and you could n't hear yourself think for the noise . 
It was a little twenty-foot yard . 
Some sung out `` Tear down the fence ! 
tear down the fence ! '' 
Then there was a racket of ripping and tearing and smashing , and down she goes , and the front wall of the crowd begins to roll in like a wave . 
Just then Sherburn steps out on to the roof of his little front porch , with a double-barrel gun in his hand , and takes his stand , perfectly ca 'm and deliberate , not saying a word . 
The racket stopped , and the wave sucked back . 
Sherburn never said a word -- just stood there , looking down . 
The stillness was awful creepy and uncomfortable . 
Sherburn run his eye slow along the crowd ; and wherever it struck the people tried a little to out - gaze him , but they could n't ; they dropped their eyes and looked sneaky . 
Then pretty soon Sherburn sort of laughed ; not the pleasant kind , but the kind that makes you feel like when you are eating bread that 's got sand in it . 
Then he says , slow and scornful : `` The idea of YOU lynching anybody ! 
It 's amusing . 
The idea of you thinking you had pluck enough to lynch a MAN ! 
Because you 're brave enough to tar and feather poor friendless cast-out women that come along here , did that make you think you had grit enough to lay your hands on a MAN ? 
Why , a MAN 'S safe in the hands of ten thousand of your kind -- as long as it 's daytime and you 're not behind him . 
`` Do I know you ? 
I know you clear through was born and raised in the South , and I 've lived in the North ; so I know the average all around . 
The average man 's a coward . 
In the North he lets anybody walk over him that wants to , and goes home and prays for a humble spirit to bear it . 
In the South one man all by himself , has stopped a stage full of men in the daytime , and robbed the lot . 
Your newspapers call you a brave people so much that you think you are braver than any other people -- whereas you 're just AS brave , and no braver . 
Why do n't your juries hang murderers ? 
Because they 're afraid the man 's friends will shoot them in the back , in the dark -- and it 's just what they WOULD do . 
`` So they always acquit ; and then a MAN goes in the night , with a hundred masked cowards at his back and lynches the rascal . 
Your mistake is , that you did n't bring a man with you ; that 's one mistake , and the other is that you did n't come in the dark and fetch your masks . 
You brought PART of a man -- Buck Harkness , there -- and if you had n't had him to start you , you 'd a taken it out in blowing . 
`` You did n't want to come . 
The average man do n't like trouble and danger . 
YOU do n't like trouble and danger . 
But if only HALF a man -- like Buck Harkness , there -- shouts ` Lynch him ! 
lynch him ! ' 
you 're afraid to back down -- afraid you 'll be found out to be what you are -- COWARDS -- and so you raise a yell , and hang yourselves on to that half-a-man 's coat-tail , and come raging up here , swearing what big things you 're going to do . 
The pitifulest thing out is a mob ; that 's what an army is -- a mob ; they do n't fight with courage that 's born in them , but with courage that 's borrowed from their mass , and from their officers . 
But a mob without any MAN at the head of it is BENEATH pitifulness . 
Now the thing for YOU to do is to droop your tails and go home and crawl in a hole . 
If any real lynching 's going to be done it will be done in the dark , Southern fashion ; and when they come they 'll bring their masks , and fetch a MAN along . 
Now LEAVE -- and take your half-a-man with you '' -- tossing his gun up across his left arm and cocking it when he says this . 
The crowd washed back sudden , and then broke all apart , and went tearing off every which way , and Buck Harkness he heeled it after them , looking tolerable cheap . 
I could a stayed if I wanted to , but I did n't want to . 
I went to the circus and loafed around the back side till the watchman went by , and then dived in under the tent . 
I had my twenty-dollar gold piece and some other money , but I reckoned I better save it , because there ai n't no telling how soon you are going to need it , away from home and amongst strangers that way . 
You ca n't be too careful . 
I ai n't opposed to spending money on circuses when there ai n't no other way , but there ai n't no use in WASTING it on them . 
It was a real bully circus . 
It was the splendidest sight that ever was when they all come riding in , two and two , a gentleman and lady , side by side , the men just in their drawers and undershirts , and no shoes nor stirrups , and resting their hands on their thighs easy and comfortable -- there must a been twenty of them -- and every lady with a lovely complexion , and perfectly beautiful , and looking just like a gang of real sure-enough queens , and dressed in clothes that cost millions of dollars , and just littered with diamonds . 
It was a powerful fine sight ; I never see anything so lovely . 
And then one by one they got up and stood , and went a-weaving around the ring so gentle and wavy and graceful , the men looking ever so tall and airy and straight , with their heads bobbing and skimming along , away up there under the tent-roof , and every lady 's rose - leafy dress flapping soft and silky around her hips , and she looking like the most loveliest parasol . 
And then faster and faster they went , all of them dancing , first one foot out in the air and then the other , the horses leaning more and more , and the ringmaster going round and round the center-pole , cracking his whip and shouting `` Hi ! 
-- hi ! '' 
and the clown cracking jokes behind him ; and by and by all hands dropped the reins , and every lady put her knuckles on her hips and every gentleman folded his arms , and then how the horses did lean over and hump themselves ! 
And so one after the other they all skipped off into the ring , and made the sweetest bow I ever see , and then scampered out , and everybody clapped their hands and went just about wild . 
Well , all through the circus they done the most astonishing things ; and all the time that clown carried on so it most killed the people . 
The ringmaster could n't ever say a word to him but he was back at him quick as a wink with the funniest things a body ever said ; and how he ever COULD think of so many of them , and so sudden and so pat , was what I could n't noway understand . 
Why , I could n't a thought of them in a year . 
And by and by a drunk man tried to get into the ring -- said he wanted to ride ; said he could ride as well as anybody that ever was . 
They argued and tried to keep him out , but he would n't listen , and the whole show come to a standstill . 
Then the people begun to holler at him and make fun of him , and that made him mad , and he begun to rip and tear ; so that stirred up the people , and a lot of men begun to pile down off of the benches and swarm towards the ring , saying , `` Knock him down ! 
throw him out ! '' 
and one or two women begun to scream . 
So , then , the ringmaster he made a little speech , and said he hoped there would n't be no disturbance , and if the man would promise he would n't make no more trouble he would let him ride if he thought he could stay on the horse . 
So everybody laughed and said all right , and the man got on . 
The minute he was on , the horse begun to rip and tear and jump and cavort around , with two circus men hanging on to his bridle trying to hold him , and the drunk man hanging on to his neck , and his heels flying in the air every jump , and the whole crowd of people standing up shouting and laughing till tears rolled down . 
And at last , sure enough , all the circus men could do , the horse broke loose , and away he went like the very nation , round and round the ring , with that sot laying down on him and hanging to his neck , with first one leg hanging most to the ground on one side , and then t ` other one on t ` other side , and the people just crazy . 
It war n't funny to me , though ; I was all of a tremble to see his danger . 
But pretty soon he struggled up astraddle and grabbed the bridle , a-reeling this way and that ; and the next minute he sprung up and dropped the bridle and stood ! 
and the horse a-going like a house afire too . 
He just stood up there , a - sailing around as easy and comfortable as if he war n't ever drunk in his life -- and then he begun to pull off his clothes and sling them . 
He shed them so thick they kind of clogged up the air , and altogether he shed seventeen suits . 
And , then , there he was , slim and handsome , and dressed the gaudiest and prettiest you ever saw , and he lit into that horse with his whip and made him fairly hum -- and finally skipped off , and made his bow and danced off to the dressing-room , and everybody just a-howling with pleasure and astonishment . 
Then the ringmaster he see how he had been fooled , and he WAS the sickest ringmaster you ever see , I reckon . 
Why , it was one of his own men ! 
He had got up that joke all out of his own head , and never let on to nobody . 
Well , I felt sheepish enough to be took in so , but I would n't a been in that ringmaster 's place , not for a thousand dollars . 
I do n't know ; there may be bullier circuses than what that one was , but I never struck them yet . 
Anyways , it was plenty good enough for ME ; and wherever I run across it , it can have all of MY custom every time . 
Well , that night we had OUR show ; but there war n't only about twelve people there -- just enough to pay expenses . 
And they laughed all the time , and that made the duke mad ; and everybody left , anyway , before the show was over , but one boy which was asleep . 
So the duke said these Arkansaw lunkheads could n't come up to Shakespeare ; what they wanted was low comedy -- and maybe something ruther worse than low comedy , he reckoned . 
He said he could size their style . 
So next morning he got some big sheets of wrapping paper and some black paint , and drawed off some handbills , and stuck them up all over the village . 
The bills said : AT THE COURT HOUSE ! 
FOR 3 NIGHTS ONLY ! 
The World-Renowned Tragedians DAVID GARRICK THE YOUNGER ! 
AND EDMUND KEAN THE ELDER ! 
Of the London and Continental Theatres , In their Thrilling Tragedy of THE KING 'S CAMELEOPARD , OR THE ROYAL NONESUCH ! ! ! 
Admission 50 cents . 
Then at the bottom was the biggest line of all , which said : LADIES AND CHILDREN NOT ADMITTED . 
`` There , '' says he , `` if that line do n't fetch them , I do n't know Arkansaw ! '' 
WELL , all day him and the king was hard at it , rigging up a stage and a curtain and a row of candles for footlights ; and that night the house was jam full of men in no time . 
When the place could n't hold no more , the duke he quit tending door and went around the back way and come on to the stage and stood up before the curtain and made a little speech , and praised up this tragedy , and said it was the most thrillingest one that ever was ; and so he went on a-bragging about the tragedy , and about Edmund Kean the Elder , which was to play the main principal part in it ; and at last when he 'd got everybody 's expectations up high enough , he rolled up the curtain , and the next minute the king come a-prancing out on all fours , naked ; and he was painted all over , ring-streaked-and - striped , all sorts of colors , as splendid as a rainbow . 
And -- but never mind the rest of his outfit ; it was just wild , but it was awful funny . 
The people most killed themselves laughing ; and when the king got done capering and capered off behind the scenes , they roared and clapped and stormed and haw-hawed till he come back and done it over again , and after that they made him do it another time . 
Well , it would make a cow laugh to see the shines that old idiot cut . 
Then the duke he lets the curtain down , and bows to the people , and says the great tragedy will be performed only two nights more , on accounts of pressing London engagements , where the seats is all sold already for it in Drury Lane ; and then he makes them another bow , and says if he has succeeded in pleasing them and instructing them , he will be deeply obleeged if they will mention it to their friends and get them to come and see it . 
Twenty people sings out : `` What , is it over ? 
Is that ALL ? '' 
The duke says yes . 
Then there was a fine time . 
Everybody sings out , `` Sold ! '' 
and rose up mad , and was a-going for that stage and them tragedians . 
But a big , fine looking man jumps up on a bench and shouts : `` Hold on ! 
Just a word , gentlemen . '' 
They stopped to listen . 
`` We are sold -- mighty badly sold . 
But we do n't want to be the laughing stock of this whole town , I reckon , and never hear the last of this thing as long as we live . 
NO . 
What we want is to go out of here quiet , and talk this show up , and sell the REST of the town ! 
Then we 'll all be in the same boat . 
Ai n't that sensible ? '' 
-LRB- `` You bet it is ! 
-- the jedge is right ! '' 
everybody sings out . -RRB- 
`` All right , then -- not a word about any sell . 
Go along home , and advise everybody to come and see the tragedy . '' 
Next day you could n't hear nothing around that town but how splendid that show was . 
House was jammed again that night , and we sold this crowd the same way . 
When me and the king and the duke got home to the raft we all had a supper ; and by and by , about midnight , they made Jim and me back her out and float her down the middle of the river , and fetch her in and hide her about two mile below town . 
The third night the house was crammed again -- and they war n't new-comers this time , but people that was at the show the other two nights . 
I stood by the duke at the door , and I see that every man that went in had his pockets bulging , or something muffled up under his coat -- and I see it war n't no perfumery , neither , not by a long sight . 
I smelt sickly eggs by the barrel , and rotten cabbages , and such things ; and if I know the signs of a dead cat being around , and I bet I do , there was sixty-four of them went in . 
I shoved in there for a minute , but it was too various for me ; I could n't stand it . 
Well , when the place could n't hold no more people the duke he give a fellow a quarter and told him to tend door for him a minute , and then he started around for the stage door , I after him ; but the minute we turned the corner and was in the dark he says : `` Walk fast now till you get away from the houses , and then shin for the raft like the dickens was after you ! '' 
I done it , and he done the same . 
We struck the raft at the same time , and in less than two seconds we was gliding down stream , all dark and still , and edging towards the middle of the river , nobody saying a word . 
I reckoned the poor king was in for a gaudy time of it with the audience , but nothing of the sort ; pretty soon he crawls out from under the wigwam , and says : `` Well , how 'd the old thing pan out this time , duke ? '' 
He had n't been up - town at all . 
We never showed a light till we was about ten mile below the village . 
Then we lit up and had a supper , and the king and the duke fairly laughed their bones loose over the way they 'd served them people . 
The duke says : `` Greenhorns , flatheads ! 
I knew the first house would keep mum and let the rest of the town get roped in ; and I knew they 'd lay for us the third night , and consider it was THEIR turn now . 
Well , it IS their turn , and I 'd give something to know how much they 'd take for it . 
I WOULD just like to know how they 're putting in their opportunity . 
They can turn it into a picnic if they want to -- they brought plenty provisions . '' 
Them rapscallions took in four hundred and sixty-five dollars in that three nights . 
I never see money hauled in by the wagon-load like that before . 
By and by , when they was asleep and snoring , Jim says : `` Do n't it s ` prise you de way dem kings carries on , Huck ? '' 
`` No , '' I says , `` it do n't . '' 
`` Why do n't it , Huck ? '' 
`` Well , it do n't , because it 's in the breed . 
I reckon they 're all alike , '' `` But , Huck , dese kings o ' ourn is reglar rapscallions ; dat 's jist what dey is ; dey 's reglar rapscallions . '' 
`` Well , that 's what I 'm a-saying ; all kings is mostly rapscallions , as fur as I can make out . '' 
`` Is dat so ? '' 
`` You read about them once -- you 'll see . 
Look at Henry the Eight ; this 'n 's a Sunday-school Superintendent to HIM . 
And look at Charles Second , and Louis Fourteen , and Louis Fifteen , and James Second , and Edward Second , and Richard Third , and forty more ; besides all them Saxon heptarchies that used to rip around so in old times and raise Cain . 
My , you ought to seen old Henry the Eight when he was in bloom . 
He WAS a blossom . 
He used to marry a new wife every day , and chop off her head next morning . 
And he would do it just as indifferent as if he was ordering up eggs . 
` Fetch up Nell Gwynn , ' he says . 
They fetch her up . 
Next morning , ` Chop off her head ! ' 
And they chop it off . 
` Fetch up Jane Shore , ' he says ; and up she comes , Next morning , ` Chop off her head ' -- and they chop it off . 
` Ring up Fair Rosamun . ' 
Fair Rosamun answers the bell . 
Next morning , ` Chop off her head . ' 
And he made every one of them tell him a tale every night ; and he kept that up till he had hogged a thousand and one tales that way , and then he put them all in a book , and called it Domesday Book -- which was a good name and stated the case . 
You do n't know kings , Jim , but I know them ; and this old rip of ourn is one of the cleanest I 've struck in history . 
Well , Henry he takes a notion he wants to get up some trouble with this country . 
How does he go at it -- give notice ? 
-- give the country a show ? 
No . 
All of a sudden he heaves all the tea in Boston Harbor overboard , and whacks out a declaration of independence , and dares them to come on . 
That was HIS style -- he never give anybody a chance . 
He had suspicions of his father , the Duke of Wellington . 
Well , what did he do ? 
Ask him to show up ? 
No -- drownded him in a butt of mamsey , like a cat . 
S'pose people left money laying around where he was -- what did he do ? 
He collared it . 
S'pose he contracted to do a thing , and you paid him , and did n't set down there and see that he done it -- what did he do ? 
He always done the other thing . 
S'pose he opened his mouth -- what then ? 
If he did n't shut it up powerful quick he 'd lose a lie every time . 
That 's the kind of a bug Henry was ; and if we 'd a had him along ` stead of our kings he 'd a fooled that town a heap worse than ourn done . 
I do n't say that ourn is lambs , because they ai n't , when you come right down to the cold facts ; but they ai n't nothing to THAT old ram , anyway . 
All I say is , kings is kings , and you got to make allowances . 
Take them all around , they 're a mighty ornery lot . 
It 's the way they 're raised . '' 
`` But dis one do SMELL so like de nation , Huck . '' 
`` Well , they all do , Jim . 
We ca n't help the way a king smells ; history do n't tell no way . '' 
`` Now de duke , he 's a tolerble likely man in some ways . '' 
`` Yes , a duke 's different . 
But not very different . 
This one 's a middling hard lot for a duke . 
When he 's drunk there ai n't no near-sighted man could tell him from a king . '' 
`` Well , anyways , I doan ' hanker for no mo ' un um , Huck . 
Dese is all I kin stan ' . '' 
`` It 's the way I feel , too , Jim . 
But we 've got them on our hands , and we got to remember what they are , and make allowances . 
Sometimes I wish we could hear of a country that 's out of kings . '' 
What was the use to tell Jim these war n't real kings and dukes ? 
It would n't a done no good ; and , besides , it was just as I said : you could n't tell them from the real kind . 
I went to sleep , and Jim did n't call me when it was my turn . 
He often done that . 
When I waked up just at daybreak he was sitting there with his head down betwixt his knees , moaning and mourning to himself . 
I did n't take notice nor let on . 
I knowed what it was about . 
He was thinking about his wife and his children , away up yonder , and he was low and homesick ; because he had n't ever been away from home before in his life ; and I do believe he cared just as much for his people as white folks does for their ` n . 
It do n't seem natural , but I reckon it 's so . 
He was often moaning and mourning that way nights , when he judged I was asleep , and saying , `` Po ' little ` Lizabeth ! 
po ' little Johnny ! 
it 's mighty hard ; I spec ' I ai n't ever gwyne to see you no mo ' , no mo ' ! '' 
He was a mighty good nigger , Jim was . 
But this time I somehow got to talking to him about his wife and young ones ; and by and by he says : `` What makes me feel so bad dis time ` uz bekase I hear sumpn over yonder on de bank like a whack , er a slam , while ago , en it mine me er de time I treat my little ` Lizabeth so ornery . 
She war n't on ' y ` bout fo ' year ole , en she tuck de sk ` yarlet fever , en had a powful rough spell ; but she got well , en one day she was a-stannin ' aroun ' , en I says to her , I says : '' ` Shet de do ' . ' 
`` She never done it ; jis ' stood dah , kiner smilin ' up at me . 
It make me mad ; en I says agin , mighty loud , I says : '' ` Doan ' you hear me ? 
Shet de do ' ! ' 
`` She jis stood de same way , kiner smilin ' up . 
I was a-bilin ' ! 
I says : '' ' I lay I MAKE you mine ! ' 
`` En wid dat I fetch ' her a slap side de head dat sont her a-sprawlin ' . 
Den I went into de yuther room , en ` uz gone ` bout ten minutes ; en when I come back dah was dat do ' a-stannin ' open YIT , en dat chile stannin ' mos ' right in it , a-lookin ' down and mournin ' , en de tears runnin ' down . 
My , but I WUZ mad ! 
I was a-gwyne for de chile , but jis ' den -- it was a do ' dat open innerds -- jis ' den , ` long come de wind en slam it to , behine de chile , ker-BLAM ! 
-- en my lan ' , de chile never move ' ! 
My breff mos ' hop outer me ; en I feel so -- so -- I doan ' know HOW I feel . 
I crope out , all a - tremblin ' , en crope aroun ' en open de do ' easy en slow , en poke my head in behine de chile , sof ' en still , en all uv a sudden I says POW ! 
jis ' as loud as I could yell . 
SHE NEVER BUDGE ! 
Oh , Huck , I bust out a-cryin ' en grab her up in my arms , en say , ` Oh , de po ' little thing ! 
De Lord God Amighty fogive po ' ole Jim , kaze he never gwyne to fogive hisself as long 's he live ! ' 
Oh , she was plumb deef en dumb , Huck , plumb deef en dumb -- en I 'd ben a-treat 'n her so ! '' 
NEXT day , towards night , we laid up under a little willow towhead out in the middle , where there was a village on each side of the river , and the duke and the king begun to lay out a plan for working them towns . 
Jim he spoke to the duke , and said he hoped it would n't take but a few hours , because it got mighty heavy and tiresome to him when he had to lay all day in the wigwam tied with the rope . 
You see , when we left him all alone we had to tie him , because if anybody happened on to him all by himself and not tied it would n't look much like he was a runaway nigger , you know . 
So the duke said it WAS kind of hard to have to lay roped all day , and he 'd cipher out some way to get around it . 
He was uncommon bright , the duke was , and he soon struck it . 
He dressed Jim up in King Lear 's outfit -- it was a long curtain-calico gown , and a white horse-hair wig and whiskers ; and then he took his theater paint and painted Jim 's face and hands and ears and neck all over a dead , dull , solid blue , like a man that 's been drownded nine days . 
Blamed if he war n't the horriblest looking outrage I ever see . 
Then the duke took and wrote out a sign on a shingle so : Sick Arab -- but harmless when not out of his head . 
And he nailed that shingle to a lath , and stood the lath up four or five foot in front of the wigwam . 
Jim was satisfied . 
He said it was a sight better than lying tied a couple of years every day , and trembling all over every time there was a sound . 
The duke told him to make himself free and easy , and if anybody ever come meddling around , he must hop out of the wigwam , and carry on a little , and fetch a howl or two like a wild beast , and he reckoned they would light out and leave him alone . 
Which was sound enough judgment ; but you take the average man , and he would n't wait for him to howl . 
Why , he did n't only look like he was dead , he looked considerable more than that . 
These rapscallions wanted to try the Nonesuch again , because there was so much money in it , but they judged it would n't be safe , because maybe the news might a worked along down by this time . 
They could n't hit no project that suited exactly ; so at last the duke said he reckoned he 'd lay off and work his brains an hour or two and see if he could n't put up something on the Arkansaw village ; and the king he allowed he would drop over to t ` other village without any plan , but just trust in Providence to lead him the profitable way -- meaning the devil , I reckon . 
We had all bought store clothes where we stopped last ; and now the king put his 'n on , and he told me to put mine on . 
I done it , of course . 
The king 's duds was all black , and he did look real swell and starchy . 
I never knowed how clothes could change a body before . 
Why , before , he looked like the orneriest old rip that ever was ; but now , when he 'd take off his new white beaver and make a bow and do a smile , he looked that grand and good and pious that you 'd say he had walked right out of the ark , and maybe was old Leviticus himself . 
Jim cleaned up the canoe , and I got my paddle ready . 
There was a big steamboat laying at the shore away up under the point , about three mile above the town -- been there a couple of hours , taking on freight . 
Says the king : `` Seein ' how I 'm dressed , I reckon maybe I better arrive down from St. Louis or Cincinnati , or some other big place . 
Go for the steamboat , Huckleberry ; we 'll come down to the village on her . '' 
I did n't have to be ordered twice to go and take a steamboat ride . 
I fetched the shore a half a mile above the village , and then went scooting along the bluff bank in the easy water . 
Pretty soon we come to a nice innocent-looking young country jake setting on a log swabbing the sweat off of his face , for it was powerful warm weather ; and he had a couple of big carpet-bags by him . 
`` Run her nose in shore , '' says the king . 
I done it . 
`` Wher ' you bound for , young man ? '' 
`` For the steamboat ; going to Orleans . '' 
`` Git aboard , '' says the king . 
`` Hold on a minute , my servant 'll he ' p you with them bags . 
Jump out and he ' p the gentleman , Adolphus '' -- meaning me , I see . 
I done so , and then we all three started on again . 
The young chap was mighty thankful ; said it was tough work toting his baggage such weather . 
He asked the king where he was going , and the king told him he 'd come down the river and landed at the other village this morning , and now he was going up a few mile to see an old friend on a farm up there . 
The young fellow says : `` When I first see you I says to myself , ` It 's Mr. Wilks , sure , and he come mighty near getting here in time . ' 
But then I says again , ` No , I reckon it ai n't him , or else he would n't be paddling up the river . ' 
You AI N'T him , are you ? '' 
`` No , my name 's Blodgett -- Elexander Blodgett -- REVEREND Elexander Blodgett , I s ` pose I must say , as I 'm one o ' the Lord 's poor servants . 
But still I 'm jist as able to be sorry for Mr. Wilks for not arriving in time , all the same , if he 's missed anything by it -- which I hope he has n't . '' 
`` Well , he do n't miss any property by it , because he 'll get that all right ; but he 's missed seeing his brother Peter die -- which he may n't mind , nobody can tell as to that -- but his brother would a give anything in this world to see HIM before he died ; never talked about nothing else all these three weeks ; had n't seen him since they was boys together -- and had n't ever seen his brother William at all -- that 's the deef and dumb one -- William ai n't more than thirty or thirty-five . 
Peter and George were the only ones that come out here ; George was the married brother ; him and his wife both died last year . 
Harvey and William 's the only ones that 's left now ; and , as I was saying , they have n't got here in time . '' 
`` Did anybody send 'em word ? '' 
`` Oh , yes ; a month or two ago , when Peter was first took ; because Peter said then that he sorter felt like he war n't going to get well this time . 
You see , he was pretty old , and George 's g ` yirls was too young to be much company for him , except Mary Jane , the red-headed one ; and so he was kinder lonesome after George and his wife died , and did n't seem to care much to live . 
He most desperately wanted to see Harvey -- and William , too , for that matter -- because he was one of them kind that ca n't bear to make a will . 
He left a letter behind for Harvey , and said he 'd told in it where his money was hid , and how he wanted the rest of the property divided up so George 's g ` yirls would be all right -- for George did n't leave nothing . 
And that letter was all they could get him to put a pen to . '' 
`` Why do you reckon Harvey do n't come ? 
Wher ' does he live ? '' 
`` Oh , he lives in England -- Sheffield -- preaches there -- has n't ever been in this country . 
He has n't had any too much time -- and besides he might n't a got the letter at all , you know . '' 
`` Too bad , too bad he could n't a lived to see his brothers , poor soul . 
You going to Orleans , you say ? '' 
`` Yes , but that ai n't only a part of it . 
I 'm going in a ship , next Wednesday , for Ryo Janeero , where my uncle lives . '' 
`` It 's a pretty long journey . 
But it 'll be lovely ; wisht I was a-going . 
Is Mary Jane the oldest ? 
How old is the others ? '' 
`` Mary Jane 's nineteen , Susan 's fifteen , and Joanna 's about fourteen -- that 's the one that gives herself to good works and has a hare-lip . '' 
`` Poor things ! 
to be left alone in the cold world so . '' 
`` Well , they could be worse off . 
Old Peter had friends , and they ai n't going to let them come to no harm . 
There 's Hobson , the Babtis ' preacher ; and Deacon Lot Hovey , and Ben Rucker , and Abner Shackleford , and Levi Bell , the lawyer ; and Dr. Robinson , and their wives , and the widow Bartley , and -- well , there 's a lot of them ; but these are the ones that Peter was thickest with , and used to write about sometimes , when he wrote home ; so Harvey 'll know where to look for friends when he gets here . '' 
Well , the old man went on asking questions till he just fairly emptied that young fellow . 
Blamed if he did n't inquire about everybody and everything in that blessed town , and all about the Wilkses ; and about Peter 's business -- which was a tanner ; and about George 's -- which was a carpenter ; and about Harvey 's -- which was a dissentering minister ; and so on , and so on . 
Then he says : `` What did you want to walk all the way up to the steamboat for ? '' 
`` Because she 's a big Orleans boat , and I was afeard she might n't stop there . 
When they 're deep they wo n't stop for a hail . 
A Cincinnati boat will , but this is a St. Louis one . '' 
`` Was Peter Wilks well off ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , pretty well off . 
He had houses and land , and it 's reckoned he left three or four thousand in cash hid up som ` ers . '' 
`` When did you say he died ? '' 
`` I did n't say , but it was last night . '' 
`` Funeral to-morrow , likely ? '' 
`` Yes , ` bout the middle of the day . '' 
`` Well , it 's all terrible sad ; but we 've all got to go , one time or another . 
So what we want to do is to be prepared ; then we 're all right . '' 
`` Yes , sir , it 's the best way . 
Ma used to always say that . '' 
When we struck the boat she was about done loading , and pretty soon she got off . 
The king never said nothing about going aboard , so I lost my ride , after all . 
When the boat was gone the king made me paddle up another mile to a lonesome place , and then he got ashore and says : `` Now hustle back , right off , and fetch the duke up here , and the new carpet-bags . 
And if he 's gone over to t ` other side , go over there and git him . 
And tell him to git himself up regardless . 
Shove along , now . '' 
I see what HE was up to ; but I never said nothing , of course . 
When I got back with the duke we hid the canoe , and then they set down on a log , and the king told him everything , just like the young fellow had said it -- every last word of it . 
And all the time he was a-doing it he tried to talk like an Englishman ; and he done it pretty well , too , for a slouch . 
I ca n't imitate him , and so I ai n't a-going to try to ; but he really done it pretty good . 
Then he says : `` How are you on the deef and dumb , Bilgewater ? '' 
The duke said , leave him alone for that ; said he had played a deef and dumb person on the histronic boards . 
So then they waited for a steamboat . 
About the middle of the afternoon a couple of little boats come along , but they did n't come from high enough up the river ; but at last there was a big one , and they hailed her . 
She sent out her yawl , and we went aboard , and she was from Cincinnati ; and when they found we only wanted to go four or five mile they was booming mad , and gave us a cussing , and said they would n't land us . 
But the king was ca 'm . 
He says : `` If gentlemen kin afford to pay a dollar a mile apiece to be took on and put off in a yawl , a steamboat kin afford to carry 'em , ca n't it ? '' 
So they softened down and said it was all right ; and when we got to the village they yawled us ashore . 
About two dozen men flocked down when they see the yawl a-coming , and when the king says : `` Kin any of you gentlemen tell me wher ' Mr. Peter Wilks lives ? '' 
they give a glance at one another , and nodded their heads , as much as to say , `` What d' I tell you ? '' 
Then one of them says , kind of soft and gentle : `` I 'm sorry sir , but the best we can do is to tell you where he DID live yesterday evening . '' 
Sudden as winking the ornery old cretur went an to smash , and fell up against the man , and put his chin on his shoulder , and cried down his back , and says : `` Alas , alas , our poor brother -- gone , and we never got to see him ; oh , it 's too , too hard ! '' 
Then he turns around , blubbering , and makes a lot of idiotic signs to the duke on his hands , and blamed if he did n't drop a carpet-bag and bust out a-crying . 
If they war n't the beatenest lot , them two frauds , that ever I struck . 
Well , the men gathered around and sympathized with them , and said all sorts of kind things to them , and carried their carpet-bags up the hill for them , and let them lean on them and cry , and told the king all about his brother 's last moments , and the king he told it all over again on his hands to the duke , and both of them took on about that dead tanner like they 'd lost the twelve disciples . 
Well , if ever I struck anything like it , I 'm a nigger . 
It was enough to make a body ashamed of the human race . 
THE news was all over town in two minutes , and you could see the people tearing down on the run from every which way , some of them putting on their coats as they come . 
Pretty soon we was in the middle of a crowd , and the noise of the tramping was like a soldier march . 
The windows and dooryards was full ; and every minute somebody would say , over a fence : `` Is it THEM ? '' 
And somebody trotting along with the gang would answer back and say : `` You bet it is . '' 
When we got to the house the street in front of it was packed , and the three girls was standing in the door . 
Mary Jane WAS red-headed , but that do n't make no difference , she was most awful beautiful , and her face and her eyes was all lit up like glory , she was so glad her uncles was come . 
The king he spread his arms , and Marsy Jane she jumped for them , and the hare-lip jumped for the duke , and there they HAD it ! 
Everybody most , leastways women , cried for joy to see them meet again at last and have such good times . 
Then the king he hunched the duke private -- I see him do it -- and then he looked around and see the coffin , over in the corner on two chairs ; so then him and the duke , with a hand across each other 's shoulder , and t ` other hand to their eyes , walked slow and solemn over there , everybody dropping back to give them room , and all the talk and noise stopping , people saying `` Sh ! '' 
and all the men taking their hats off and drooping their heads , so you could a heard a pin fall . 
And when they got there they bent over and looked in the coffin , and took one sight , and then they bust out a-crying so you could a heard them to Orleans , most ; and then they put their arms around each other 's necks , and hung their chins over each other 's shoulders ; and then for three minutes , or maybe four , I never see two men leak the way they done . 
And , mind you , everybody was doing the same ; and the place was that damp I never see anything like it . 
Then one of them got on one side of the coffin , and t ` other on t ` other side , and they kneeled down and rested their foreheads on the coffin , and let on to pray all to themselves . 
Well , when it come to that it worked the crowd like you never see anything like it , and everybody broke down and went to sobbing right out loud -- the poor girls , too ; and every woman , nearly , went up to the girls , without saying a word , and kissed them , solemn , on the forehead , and then put their hand on their head , and looked up towards the sky , with the tears running down , and then busted out and went off sobbing and swabbing , and give the next woman a show . 
I never see anything so disgusting . 
Well , by and by the king he gets up and comes forward a little , and works himself up and slobbers out a speech , all full of tears and flapdoodle about its being a sore trial for him and his poor brother to lose the diseased , and to miss seeing diseased alive after the long journey of four thousand mile , but it 's a trial that 's sweetened and sanctified to us by this dear sympathy and these holy tears , and so he thanks them out of his heart and out of his brother 's heart , because out of their mouths they ca n't , words being too weak and cold , and all that kind of rot and slush , till it was just sickening ; and then he blubbers out a pious goody-goody Amen , and turns himself loose and goes to crying fit to bust . 
And the minute the words were out of his mouth somebody over in the crowd struck up the doxolojer , and everybody joined in with all their might , and it just warmed you up and made you feel as good as church letting out . 
Music is a good thing ; and after all that soul-butter and hogwash I never see it freshen up things so , and sound so honest and bully . 
Then the king begins to work his jaw again , and says how him and his nieces would be glad if a few of the main principal friends of the family would take supper here with them this evening , and help set up with the ashes of the diseased ; and says if his poor brother laying yonder could speak he knows who he would name , for they was names that was very dear to him , and mentioned often in his letters ; and so he will name the same , to wit , as follows , vizz. : -- Rev. Mr. Hobson , and Deacon Lot Hovey , and Mr. Ben Rucker , and Abner Shackleford , and Levi Bell , and Dr. Robinson , and their wives , and the widow Bartley . 
Rev. Hobson and Dr. Robinson was down to the end of the town a-hunting together -- that is , I mean the doctor was shipping a sick man to t ` other world , and the preacher was pinting him right . 
Lawyer Bell was away up to Louisville on business . 
But the rest was on hand , and so they all come and shook hands with the king and thanked him and talked to him ; and then they shook hands with the duke and did n't say nothing , but just kept a-smiling and bobbing their heads like a passel of sapheads whilst he made all sorts of signs with his hands and said `` Goo-goo -- goo-goo-goo '' all the time , like a baby that ca n't talk . 
So the king he blattered along , and managed to inquire about pretty much everybody and dog in town , by his name , and mentioned all sorts of little things that happened one time or another in the town , or to George 's family , or to Peter . 
And he always let on that Peter wrote him the things ; but that was a lie : he got every blessed one of them out of that young flathead that we canoed up to the steamboat . 
Then Mary Jane she fetched the letter her father left behind , and the king he read it out loud and cried over it . 
It give the dwelling-house and three thousand dollars , gold , to the girls ; and it give the tanyard -LRB- which was doing a good business -RRB- , along with some other houses and land -LRB- worth about seven thousand -RRB- , and three thousand dollars in gold to Harvey and William , and told where the six thousand cash was hid down cellar . 
So these two frauds said they 'd go and fetch it up , and have everything square and above-board ; and told me to come with a candle . 
We shut the cellar door behind us , and when they found the bag they spilt it out on the floor , and it was a lovely sight , all them yaller-boys . 
My , the way the king 's eyes did shine ! 
He slaps the duke on the shoulder and says : `` Oh , THIS ai n't bully nor noth ` n ! 
Oh , no , I reckon not ! 
Why , Biljy , it beats the Nonesuch , DO N'T it ? '' 
The duke allowed it did . 
They pawed the yaller-boys , and sifted them through their fingers and let them jingle down on the floor ; and the king says : `` It ai n't no use talkin ' ; bein ' brothers to a rich dead man and representatives of furrin heirs that 's got left is the line for you and me , Bilge . 
Thish yer comes of trust 'n to Providence . 
It 's the best way , in the long run . 
I 've tried 'em all , and ther ' ai n't no better way . '' 
Most everybody would a been satisfied with the pile , and took it on trust ; but no , they must count it . 
So they counts it , and it comes out four hundred and fifteen dollars short . 
Says the king : `` Dern him , I wonder what he done with that four hundred and fifteen dollars ? '' 
They worried over that awhile , and ransacked all around for it . 
Then the duke says : `` Well , he was a pretty sick man , and likely he made a mistake -- I reckon that 's the way of it . 
The best way 's to let it go , and keep still about it . 
We can spare it . '' 
`` Oh , shucks , yes , we can SPARE it . 
I do n't k ` yer noth 'n ` bout that -- it 's the COUNT I 'm thinkin ' about . 
We want to be awful square and open and above-board here , you know . 
We want to lug this h-yer money up stairs and count it before everybody -- then ther ' ai n't noth 'n suspicious . 
But when the dead man says ther 's six thous 'n dollars , you know , we do n't want to -- '' `` Hold on , '' says the duke . 
`` Le 's make up the deffisit , '' and he begun to haul out yaller-boys out of his pocket . 
`` It 's a most amaz 'n' good idea , duke -- you HAVE got a rattlin ' clever head on you , '' says the king . 
`` Blest if the old Nonesuch ai n't a heppin ' us out agin , '' and HE begun to haul out yaller-jackets and stack them up . 
It most busted them , but they made up the six thousand clean and clear . 
`` Say , '' says the duke , `` I got another idea . 
Le 's go up stairs and count this money , and then take and GIVE IT TO THE GIRLS . '' 
`` Good land , duke , lem me hug you ! 
It 's the most dazzling idea ` at ever a man struck . 
You have cert ` nly got the most astonishin ' head I ever see . 
Oh , this is the boss dodge , ther ' ai n't no mistake ` bout it . 
Let 'em fetch along their suspicions now if they want to -- this 'll lay 'em out . '' 
When we got up-stairs everybody gethered around the table , and the king he counted it and stacked it up , three hundred dollars in a pile -- twenty elegant little piles . 
Everybody looked hungry at it , and licked their chops . 
Then they raked it into the bag again , and I see the king begin to swell himself up for another speech . 
He says : `` Friends all , my poor brother that lays yonder has done generous by them that 's left behind in the vale of sorrers . 
He has done generous by these yer poor little lambs that he loved and sheltered , and that 's left fatherless and motherless . 
Yes , and we that knowed him knows that he would a done MORE generous by 'em if he had n't ben afeard o ' woundin ' his dear William and me . 
Now , WOULD N'T he ? 
Ther ' ai n't no question ` bout it in MY mind . 
Well , then , what kind o ' brothers would it be that 'd stand in his way at sech a time ? 
And what kind o ' uncles would it be that 'd rob -- yes , ROB -- sech poor sweet lambs as these ` at he loved so at sech a time ? 
If I know William -- and I THINK I do -- he -- well , I 'll jest ask him . '' 
He turns around and begins to make a lot of signs to the duke with his hands , and the duke he looks at him stupid and leather-headed a while ; then all of a sudden he seems to catch his meaning , and jumps for the king , goo-gooing with all his might for joy , and hugs him about fifteen times before he lets up . 
Then the king says , `` I knowed it ; I reckon THAT 'll convince anybody the way HE feels about it . 
Here , Mary Jane , Susan , Joanner , take the money -- take it ALL . 
It 's the gift of him that lays yonder , cold but joyful . '' 
Mary Jane she went for him , Susan and the hare-lip went for the duke , and then such another hugging and kissing I never see yet . 
And everybody crowded up with the tears in their eyes , and most shook the hands off of them frauds , saying all the time : `` You DEAR good souls ! 
-- how LOVELY ! 
-- how COULD you ! '' 
Well , then , pretty soon all hands got to talking about the diseased again , and how good he was , and what a loss he was , and all that ; and before long a big iron-jawed man worked himself in there from outside , and stood a-listening and looking , and not saying anything ; and nobody saying anything to him either , because the king was talking and they was all busy listening . 
The king was saying -- in the middle of something he 'd started in on -- '' -- they bein ' partickler friends o ' the diseased . 
That 's why they 're invited here this evenin ' ; but tomorrow we want ALL to come -- everybody ; for he respected everybody , he liked everybody , and so it 's fitten that his funeral orgies sh 'd be public . '' 
And so he went a-mooning on and on , liking to hear himself talk , and every little while he fetched in his funeral orgies again , till the duke he could n't stand it no more ; so he writes on a little scrap of paper , `` OBSEQUIES , you old fool , '' and folds it up , and goes to goo-gooing and reaching it over people 's heads to him . 
The king he reads it and puts it in his pocket , and says : `` Poor William , afflicted as he is , his HEART 'S aluz right . 
Asks me to invite everybody to come to the funeral -- wants me to make 'em all welcome . 
But he need n't a worried -- it was jest what I was at . '' 
Then he weaves along again , perfectly ca 'm , and goes to dropping in his funeral orgies again every now and then , just like he done before . 
And when he done it the third time he says : `` I say orgies , not because it 's the common term , because it ai n't -- obsequies bein ' the common term -- but because orgies is the right term . 
Obsequies ai n't used in England no more now -- it 's gone out . 
We say orgies now in England . 
Orgies is better , because it means the thing you 're after more exact . 
It 's a word that 's made up out 'n the Greek ORGO , outside , open , abroad ; and the Hebrew JEESUM , to plant , cover up ; hence inTER . 
So , you see , funeral orgies is an open er public funeral . '' 
He was the WORST I ever struck . 
Well , the iron-jawed man he laughed right in his face . 
Everybody was shocked . 
Everybody says , `` Why , DOCTOR ! '' 
and Abner Shackleford says : `` Why , Robinson , hai n't you heard the news ? 
This is Harvey Wilks . '' 
The king he smiled eager , and shoved out his flapper , and says : `` Is it my poor brother 's dear good friend and physician ? 
I -- '' `` Keep your hands off of me ! '' 
says the doctor . 
`` YOU talk like an Englishman , DO N'T you ? 
It 's the worst imitation I ever heard . 
YOU Peter Wilks 's brother ! 
You 're a fraud , that 's what you are ! '' 
Well , how they all took on ! 
They crowded around the doctor and tried to quiet him down , and tried to explain to him and tell him how Harvey 'd showed in forty ways that he WAS Harvey , and knowed everybody by name , and the names of the very dogs , and begged and BEGGED him not to hurt Harvey 's feelings and the poor girl 's feelings , and all that . 
But it war n't no use ; he stormed right along , and said any man that pretended to be an Englishman and could n't imitate the lingo no better than what he did was a fraud and a liar . 
The poor girls was hanging to the king and crying ; and all of a sudden the doctor ups and turns on THEM . 
He says : `` I was your father 's friend , and I 'm your friend ; and I warn you as a friend , and an honest one that wants to protect you and keep you out of harm and trouble , to turn your backs on that scoundrel and have nothing to do with him , the ignorant tramp , with his idiotic Greek and Hebrew , as he calls it . 
He is the thinnest kind of an impostor -- has come here with a lot of empty names and facts which he picked up somewheres , and you take them for PROOFS , and are helped to fool yourselves by these foolish friends here , who ought to know better . 
Mary Jane Wilks , you know me for your friend , and for your unselfish friend , too . 
Now listen to me ; turn this pitiful rascal out -- I BEG you to do it . 
Will you ? '' 
Mary Jane straightened herself up , and my , but she was handsome ! 
She says : `` HERE is my answer . '' 
She hove up the bag of money and put it in the king 's hands , and says , `` Take this six thousand dollars , and invest for me and my sisters any way you want to , and do n't give us no receipt for it . '' 
Then she put her arm around the king on one side , and Susan and the hare - lip done the same on the other . 
Everybody clapped their hands and stomped on the floor like a perfect storm , whilst the king held up his head and smiled proud . 
The doctor says : `` All right ; I wash MY hands of the matter . 
But I warn you all that a time 's coming when you 're going to feel sick whenever you think of this day . '' 
And away he went . 
`` All right , doctor , '' says the king , kinder mocking him ; `` we 'll try and get 'em to send for you ; '' which made them all laugh , and they said it was a prime good hit . 
WELL , when they was all gone the king he asks Mary Jane how they was off for spare rooms , and she said she had one spare room , which would do for Uncle William , and she 'd give her own room to Uncle Harvey , which was a little bigger , and she would turn into the room with her sisters and sleep on a cot ; and up garret was a little cubby , with a pallet in it . 
The king said the cubby would do for his valley -- meaning me . 
So Mary Jane took us up , and she showed them their rooms , which was plain but nice . 
She said she 'd have her frocks and a lot of other traps took out of her room if they was in Uncle Harvey 's way , but he said they war n't . 
The frocks was hung along the wall , and before them was a curtain made out of calico that hung down to the floor . 
There was an old hair trunk in one corner , and a guitar-box in another , and all sorts of little knickknacks and jimcracks around , like girls brisken up a room with . 
The king said it was all the more homely and more pleasanter for these fixings , and so do n't disturb them . 
The duke 's room was pretty small , but plenty good enough , and so was my cubby . 
That night they had a big supper , and all them men and women was there , and I stood behind the king and the duke 's chairs and waited on them , and the niggers waited on the rest . 
Mary Jane she set at the head of the table , with Susan alongside of her , and said how bad the biscuits was , and how mean the preserves was , and how ornery and tough the fried chickens was -- and all that kind of rot , the way women always do for to force out compliments ; and the people all knowed everything was tiptop , and said so -- said `` How DO you get biscuits to brown so nice ? '' 
and `` Where , for the land 's sake , DID you get these amaz 'n pickles ? '' 
and all that kind of humbug talky-talk , just the way people always does at a supper , you know . 
And when it was all done me and the hare-lip had supper in the kitchen off of the leavings , whilst the others was helping the niggers clean up the things . 
The hare-lip she got to pumping me about England , and blest if I did n't think the ice was getting mighty thin sometimes . 
She says : `` Did you ever see the king ? '' 
`` Who ? 
William Fourth ? 
Well , I bet I have -- he goes to our church . '' 
I knowed he was dead years ago , but I never let on . 
So when I says he goes to our church , she says : `` What -- regular ? '' 
`` Yes -- regular . 
His pew 's right over opposite ourn -- on t ` other side the pulpit . '' 
`` I thought he lived in London ? '' 
`` Well , he does . 
Where WOULD he live ? '' 
`` But I thought YOU lived in Sheffield ? '' 
I see I was up a stump . 
I had to let on to get choked with a chicken bone , so as to get time to think how to get down again . 
Then I says : `` I mean he goes to our church regular when he 's in Sheffield . 
That 's only in the summer time , when he comes there to take the sea baths . '' 
`` Why , how you talk -- Sheffield ai n't on the sea . '' 
`` Well , who said it was ? '' 
