`` I reckon we 'll go and see for ourselves . '' 
`` I wish you would , '' says I , `` because it 's pap that 's there , and maybe you 'd help me tow the raft ashore where the light is . 
He 's sick -- and so is mam and Mary Ann . '' 
`` Oh , the devil ! 
we 're in a hurry , boy . 
But I s ` pose we 've got to . 
Come , buckle to your paddle , and let 's get along . '' 
I buckled to my paddle and they laid to their oars . 
When we had made a stroke or two , I says : `` Pap 'll be mighty much obleeged to you , I can tell you . 
Everybody goes away when I want them to help me tow the raft ashore , and I ca n't do it by myself . '' 
`` Well , that 's infernal mean . 
Odd , too . 
Say , boy , what 's the matter with your father ? '' 
`` It 's the -- a -- the -- well , it ai n't anything much . '' 
They stopped pulling . 
It war n't but a mighty little ways to the raft now . 
One says : `` Boy , that 's a lie . 
What IS the matter with your pap ? 
Answer up square now , and it 'll be the better for you . '' 
`` I will , sir , I will , honest -- but do n't leave us , please . 
It 's the -- the -- Gentlemen , if you 'll only pull ahead , and let me heave you the headline , you wo n't have to come a-near the raft -- please do . '' 
`` Set her back , John , set her back ! '' 
says one . 
They backed water . 
`` Keep away , boy -- keep to looard . 
Confound it , I just expect the wind has blowed it to us . 
Your pap 's got the small-pox , and you know it precious well . 
Why did n't you come out and say so ? 
Do you want to spread it all over ? '' 
`` Well , '' says I , a-blubbering , `` I 've told everybody before , and they just went away and left us . '' 
`` Poor devil , there 's something in that . 
We are right down sorry for you , but we -- well , hang it , we do n't want the small-pox , you see . 
Look here , I 'll tell you what to do . 
Do n't you try to land by yourself , or you 'll smash everything to pieces . 
You float along down about twenty miles , and you 'll come to a town on the left-hand side of the river . 
It will be long after sun-up then , and when you ask for help you tell them your folks are all down with chills and fever . 
Do n't be a fool again , and let people guess what is the matter . 
Now we 're trying to do you a kindness ; so you just put twenty miles between us , that 's a good boy . 
It would n't do any good to land yonder where the light is -- it 's only a wood-yard . 
Say , I reckon your father 's poor , and I 'm bound to say he 's in pretty hard luck . 
Here , I 'll put a twenty-dollar gold piece on this board , and you get it when it floats by . 
I feel mighty mean to leave you ; but my kingdom ! 
it wo n't do to fool with small-pox , do n't you see ? '' 
`` Hold on , Parker , '' says the other man , `` here 's a twenty to put on the board for me . 
Good-bye , boy ; you do as Mr. Parker told you , and you 'll be all right . '' 
`` That 's so , my boy -- good-bye , good-bye . 
If you see any runaway niggers you get help and nab them , and you can make some money by it . '' 
`` Good-bye , sir , '' says I ; `` I wo n't let no runaway niggers get by me if I can help it . '' 
They went off and I got aboard the raft , feeling bad and low , because I knowed very well I had done wrong , and I see it war n't no use for me to try to learn to do right ; a body that do n't get STARTED right when he 's little ai n't got no show -- when the pinch comes there ai n't nothing to back him up and keep him to his work , and so he gets beat . 
Then I thought a minute , and says to myself , hold on ; s ` pose you 'd a done right and give Jim up , would you felt better than what you do now ? 
No , says I , I 'd feel bad -- I 'd feel just the same way I do now . 
Well , then , says I , what 's the use you learning to do right when it 's troublesome to do right and ai n't no trouble to do wrong , and the wages is just the same ? 
I was stuck . 
I could n't answer that . 
So I reckoned I would n't bother no more about it , but after this always do whichever come handiest at the time . 
I went into the wigwam ; Jim war n't there . 
I looked all around ; he war n't anywhere . 
I says : `` Jim ! '' 
`` Here I is , Huck . 
Is dey out o ' sight yit ? 
Do n't talk loud . '' 
He was in the river under the stern oar , with just his nose out . 
I told him they were out of sight , so he come aboard . 
He says : `` I was a-listenin ' to all de talk , en I slips into de river en was gwyne to shove for sho ' if dey come aboard . 
Den I was gwyne to swim to de raf ' agin when dey was gone . 
But lawsy , how you did fool 'em , Huck ! 
Dat WUZ de smartes ' dodge ! 
I tell you , chile , I ` spec it save ' ole Jim -- ole Jim ai n't going to forgit you for dat , honey . '' 
Then we talked about the money . 
It was a pretty good raise -- twenty dollars apiece . 
Jim said we could take deck passage on a steamboat now , and the money would last us as far as we wanted to go in the free States . 
He said twenty mile more war n't far for the raft to go , but he wished we was already there . 
Towards daybreak we tied up , and Jim was mighty particular about hiding the raft good . 
Then he worked all day fixing things in bundles , and getting all ready to quit rafting . 
That night about ten we hove in sight of the lights of a town away down in a left-hand bend . 
I went off in the canoe to ask about it . 
Pretty soon I found a man out in the river with a skiff , setting a trot-line . 
I ranged up and says : `` Mister , is that town Cairo ? '' 
`` Cairo ? 
no . 
You must be a blame ' fool . '' 
`` What town is it , mister ? '' 
`` If you want to know , go and find out . 
If you stay here botherin ' around me for about a half a minute longer you 'll get something you wo n't want . '' 
I paddled to the raft . 
Jim was awful disappointed , but I said never mind , Cairo would be the next place , I reckoned . 
We passed another town before daylight , and I was going out again ; but it was high ground , so I did n't go . 
No high ground about Cairo , Jim said . 
I had forgot it . 
We laid up for the day on a towhead tolerable close to the left-hand bank . 
I begun to suspicion something . 
So did Jim . 
I says : `` Maybe we went by Cairo in the fog that night . '' 
He says : `` Doan ' le 's talk about it , Huck . 
Po ' niggers ca n't have no luck . 
I awluz ` spected dat rattlesnake-skin war n't done wid its work . '' 
`` I wish I 'd never seen that snake-skin , Jim -- I do wish I 'd never laid eyes on it . '' 
`` It ai n't yo ' fault , Huck ; you didn ' know . 
Do n't you blame yo ` self ` bout it . '' 
When it was daylight , here was the clear Ohio water inshore , sure enough , and outside was the old regular Muddy ! 
So it was all up with Cairo . 
We talked it all over . 
It would n't do to take to the shore ; we could n't take the raft up the stream , of course . 
There war n't no way but to wait for dark , and start back in the canoe and take the chances . 
So we slept all day amongst the cottonwood thicket , so as to be fresh for the work , and when we went back to the raft about dark the canoe was gone ! 
We did n't say a word for a good while . 
There war n't anything to say . 
We both knowed well enough it was some more work of the rattlesnake-skin ; so what was the use to talk about it ? 
It would only look like we was finding fault , and that would be bound to fetch more bad luck -- and keep on fetching it , too , till we knowed enough to keep still . 
By and by we talked about what we better do , and found there war n't no way but just to go along down with the raft till we got a chance to buy a canoe to go back in . 
We war n't going to borrow it when there war n't anybody around , the way pap would do , for that might set people after us . 
So we shoved out after dark on the raft . 
Anybody that do n't believe yet that it 's foolishness to handle a snake - skin , after all that that snake-skin done for us , will believe it now if they read on and see what more it done for us . 
The place to buy canoes is off of rafts laying up at shore . 
But we did n't see no rafts laying up ; so we went along during three hours and more . 
Well , the night got gray and ruther thick , which is the next meanest thing to fog . 
You ca n't tell the shape of the river , and you ca n't see no distance . 
It got to be very late and still , and then along comes a steamboat up the river . 
We lit the lantern , and judged she would see it . 
Up-stream boats did n't generly come close to us ; they go out and follow the bars and hunt for easy water under the reefs ; but nights like this they bull right up the channel against the whole river . 
We could hear her pounding along , but we did n't see her good till she was close . 
She aimed right for us . 
Often they do that and try to see how close they can come without touching ; sometimes the wheel bites off a sweep , and then the pilot sticks his head out and laughs , and thinks he 's mighty smart . 
Well , here she comes , and we said she was going to try and shave us ; but she did n't seem to be sheering off a bit . 
She was a big one , and she was coming in a hurry , too , looking like a black cloud with rows of glow-worms around it ; but all of a sudden she bulged out , big and scary , with a long row of wide-open furnace doors shining like red-hot teeth , and her monstrous bows and guards hanging right over us . 
There was a yell at us , and a jingling of bells to stop the engines , a powwow of cussing , and whistling of steam -- and as Jim went overboard on one side and I on the other , she come smashing straight through the raft . 
I dived -- and I aimed to find the bottom , too , for a thirty-foot wheel had got to go over me , and I wanted it to have plenty of room . 
I could always stay under water a minute ; this time I reckon I stayed under a minute and a half . 
Then I bounced for the top in a hurry , for I was nearly busting . 
I popped out to my armpits and blowed the water out of my nose , and puffed a bit . 
Of course there was a booming current ; and of course that boat started her engines again ten seconds after she stopped them , for they never cared much for raftsmen ; so now she was churning along up the river , out of sight in the thick weather , though I could hear her . 
I sung out for Jim about a dozen times , but I did n't get any answer ; so I grabbed a plank that touched me while I was `` treading water , '' and struck out for shore , shoving it ahead of me . 
But I made out to see that the drift of the current was towards the left-hand shore , which meant that I was in a crossing ; so I changed off and went that way . 
It was one of these long , slanting , two-mile crossings ; so I was a good long time in getting over . 
I made a safe landing , and clumb up the bank . 
I could n't see but a little ways , but I went poking along over rough ground for a quarter of a mile or more , and then I run across a big old - fashioned double log-house before I noticed it . 
I was going to rush by and get away , but a lot of dogs jumped out and went to howling and barking at me , and I knowed better than to move another peg . 
IN about a minute somebody spoke out of a window without putting his head out , and says : `` Be done , boys ! 
Who 's there ? '' 
I says : `` It 's me . '' 
`` Who 's me ? '' 
`` George Jackson , sir . '' 
`` What do you want ? '' 
`` I do n't want nothing , sir . 
I only want to go along by , but the dogs wo n't let me . '' 
`` What are you prowling around here this time of night for -- hey ? '' 
`` I war n't prowling around , sir , I fell overboard off of the steamboat . '' 
`` Oh , you did , did you ? 
Strike a light there , somebody . 
What did you say your name was ? '' 
`` George Jackson , sir . 
I 'm only a boy . '' 
`` Look here , if you 're telling the truth you need n't be afraid -- nobody 'll hurt you . 
But do n't try to budge ; stand right where you are . 
Rouse out Bob and Tom , some of you , and fetch the guns . 
George Jackson , is there anybody with you ? '' 
`` No , sir , nobody . '' 
I heard the people stirring around in the house now , and see a light . 
The man sung out : `` Snatch that light away , Betsy , you old fool -- ai n't you got any sense ? 
Put it on the floor behind the front door . 
Bob , if you and Tom are ready , take your places . '' 
`` All ready . '' 
`` Now , George Jackson , do you know the Shepherdsons ? '' 
`` No , sir ; I never heard of them . '' 
`` Well , that may be so , and it may n't . 
Now , all ready . 
Step forward , George Jackson . 
And mind , do n't you hurry -- come mighty slow . 
If there 's anybody with you , let him keep back -- if he shows himself he 'll be shot . 
Come along now . 
Come slow ; push the door open yourself -- just enough to squeeze in , d' you hear ? '' 
I did n't hurry ; I could n't if I 'd a wanted to . 
I took one slow step at a time and there war n't a sound , only I thought I could hear my heart . 
The dogs were as still as the humans , but they followed a little behind me . 
When I got to the three log doorsteps I heard them unlocking and unbarring and unbolting . 
I put my hand on the door and pushed it a little and a little more till somebody said , `` There , that 's enough -- put your head in . '' 
I done it , but I judged they would take it off . 
The candle was on the floor , and there they all was , looking at me , and me at them , for about a quarter of a minute : Three big men with guns pointed at me , which made me wince , I tell you ; the oldest , gray and about sixty , the other two thirty or more -- all of them fine and handsome -- and the sweetest old gray-headed lady , and back of her two young women which I could n't see right well . 
The old gentleman says : `` There ; I reckon it 's all right . 
Come in . '' 
As soon as I was in the old gentleman he locked the door and barred it and bolted it , and told the young men to come in with their guns , and they all went in a big parlor that had a new rag carpet on the floor , and got together in a corner that was out of the range of the front windows -- there war n't none on the side . 
They held the candle , and took a good look at me , and all said , `` Why , HE ai n't a Shepherdson -- no , there ai n't any Shepherdson about him . '' 
Then the old man said he hoped I would n't mind being searched for arms , because he did n't mean no harm by it -- it was only to make sure . 
So he did n't pry into my pockets , but only felt outside with his hands , and said it was all right . 
He told me to make myself easy and at home , and tell all about myself ; but the old lady says : `` Why , bless you , Saul , the poor thing 's as wet as he can be ; and do n't you reckon it may be he 's hungry ? '' 
`` True for you , Rachel -- I forgot . '' 
So the old lady says : `` Betsy '' -LRB- this was a nigger woman -RRB- , `` you fly around and get him something to eat as quick as you can , poor thing ; and one of you girls go and wake up Buck and tell him -- oh , here he is himself . 
Buck , take this little stranger and get the wet clothes off from him and dress him up in some of yours that 's dry . '' 
Buck looked about as old as me -- thirteen or fourteen or along there , though he was a little bigger than me . 
He had n't on anything but a shirt , and he was very frowzy-headed . 
He came in gaping and digging one fist into his eyes , and he was dragging a gun along with the other one . 
He says : `` Ai n't they no Shepherdsons around ? '' 
They said , no , 't was a false alarm . 
`` Well , '' he says , `` if they 'd a ben some , I reckon I 'd a got one . '' 
They all laughed , and Bob says : `` Why , Buck , they might have scalped us all , you 've been so slow in coming . '' 
`` Well , nobody come after me , and it ai n't right I 'm always kept down ; I do n't get no show . '' 
`` Never mind , Buck , my boy , '' says the old man , `` you 'll have show enough , all in good time , do n't you fret about that . 
Go ` long with you now , and do as your mother told you . '' 
When we got up-stairs to his room he got me a coarse shirt and a roundabout and pants of his , and I put them on . 
While I was at it he asked me what my name was , but before I could tell him he started to tell me about a bluejay and a young rabbit he had catched in the woods day before yesterday , and he asked me where Moses was when the candle went out . 
I said I did n't know ; I had n't heard about it before , no way . 
`` Well , guess , '' he says . 
`` How 'm I going to guess , '' says I , `` when I never heard tell of it before ? '' 
`` But you can guess , ca n't you ? 
It 's just as easy . '' 
`` WHICH candle ? '' 
I says . 
`` Why , any candle , '' he says . 
`` I do n't know where he was , '' says I ; `` where was he ? '' 
`` Why , he was in the DARK ! 
That 's where he was ! '' 
`` Well , if you knowed where he was , what did you ask me for ? '' 
`` Why , blame it , it 's a riddle , do n't you see ? 
Say , how long are you going to stay here ? 
You got to stay always . 
We can just have booming times -- they do n't have no school now . 
Do you own a dog ? 
I 've got a dog -- and he 'll go in the river and bring out chips that you throw in . 
Do you like to comb up Sundays , and all that kind of foolishness ? 
You bet I do n't , but ma she makes me . 
Confound these ole britches ! 
I reckon I 'd better put 'em on , but I 'd ruther not , it 's so warm . 
Are you all ready ? 
All right . 
Come along , old hoss . '' 
Cold corn-pone , cold corn-beef , butter and buttermilk -- that is what they had for me down there , and there ai n't nothing better that ever I 've come across yet . 
Buck and his ma and all of them smoked cob pipes , except the nigger woman , which was gone , and the two young women . 
They all smoked and talked , and I eat and talked . 
The young women had quilts around them , and their hair down their backs . 
They all asked me questions , and I told them how pap and me and all the family was living on a little farm down at the bottom of Arkansaw , and my sister Mary Ann run off and got married and never was heard of no more , and Bill went to hunt them and he war n't heard of no more , and Tom and Mort died , and then there war n't nobody but just me and pap left , and he was just trimmed down to nothing , on account of his troubles ; so when he died I took what there was left , because the farm did n't belong to us , and started up the river , deck passage , and fell overboard ; and that was how I come to be here . 
So they said I could have a home there as long as I wanted it . 
Then it was most daylight and everybody went to bed , and I went to bed with Buck , and when I waked up in the morning , drat it all , I had forgot what my name was . 
So I laid there about an hour trying to think , and when Buck waked up I says : `` Can you spell , Buck ? '' 
`` Yes , '' he says . 
`` I bet you ca n't spell my name , '' says I. `` I bet you what you dare I can , '' says he . 
`` All right , '' says I , `` go ahead . '' 
`` G-e-o-r-g-e J-a-x-o-n -- there now , '' he says . 
`` Well , '' says I , `` you done it , but I did n't think you could . 
It ai n't no slouch of a name to spell -- right off without studying . '' 
I set it down , private , because somebody might want ME to spell it next , and so I wanted to be handy with it and rattle it off like I was used to it . 
It was a mighty nice family , and a mighty nice house , too . 
I had n't seen no house out in the country before that was so nice and had so much style . 
It did n't have an iron latch on the front door , nor a wooden one with a buckskin string , but a brass knob to turn , the same as houses in town . 
There war n't no bed in the parlor , nor a sign of a bed ; but heaps of parlors in towns has beds in them . 
There was a big fireplace that was bricked on the bottom , and the bricks was kept clean and red by pouring water on them and scrubbing them with another brick ; sometimes they wash them over with red water-paint that they call Spanish-brown , same as they do in town . 
They had big brass dog-irons that could hold up a saw-log . 
There was a clock on the middle of the mantelpiece , with a picture of a town painted on the bottom half of the glass front , and a round place in the middle of it for the sun , and you could see the pendulum swinging behind it . 
It was beautiful to hear that clock tick ; and sometimes when one of these peddlers had been along and scoured her up and got her in good shape , she would start in and strike a hundred and fifty before she got tuckered out . 
They would n't took any money for her . 
Well , there was a big outlandish parrot on each side of the clock , made out of something like chalk , and painted up gaudy . 
By one of the parrots was a cat made of crockery , and a crockery dog by the other ; and when you pressed down on them they squeaked , but did n't open their mouths nor look different nor interested . 
They squeaked through underneath . 
There was a couple of big wild-turkey-wing fans spread out behind those things . 
On the table in the middle of the room was a kind of a lovely crockery basket that had apples and oranges and peaches and grapes piled up in it , which was much redder and yellower and prettier than real ones is , but they war n't real because you could see where pieces had got chipped off and showed the white chalk , or whatever it was , underneath . 
This table had a cover made out of beautiful oilcloth , with a red and blue spread-eagle painted on it , and a painted border all around . 
It come all the way from Philadelphia , they said . 
There was some books , too , piled up perfectly exact , on each corner of the table . 
One was a big family Bible full of pictures . 
One was Pilgrim 's Progress , about a man that left his family , it did n't say why . 
I read considerable in it now and then . 
The statements was interesting , but tough . 
Another was Friendship 's Offering , full of beautiful stuff and poetry ; but I did n't read the poetry . 
Another was Henry Clay 's Speeches , and another was Dr. Gunn 's Family Medicine , which told you all about what to do if a body was sick or dead . 
There was a hymn book , and a lot of other books . 
And there was nice split-bottom chairs , and perfectly sound , too -- not bagged down in the middle and busted , like an old basket . 
They had pictures hung on the walls -- mainly Washingtons and Lafayettes , and battles , and Highland Marys , and one called `` Signing the Declaration . '' 
There was some that they called crayons , which one of the daughters which was dead made her own self when she was only fifteen years old . 
They was different from any pictures I ever see before -- blacker , mostly , than is common . 
One was a woman in a slim black dress , belted small under the armpits , with bulges like a cabbage in the middle of the sleeves , and a large black scoop-shovel bonnet with a black veil , and white slim ankles crossed about with black tape , and very wee black slippers , like a chisel , and she was leaning pensive on a tombstone on her right elbow , under a weeping willow , and her other hand hanging down her side holding a white handkerchief and a reticule , and underneath the picture it said `` Shall I Never See Thee More Alas . '' 
Another one was a young lady with her hair all combed up straight to the top of her head , and knotted there in front of a comb like a chair-back , and she was crying into a handkerchief and had a dead bird laying on its back in her other hand with its heels up , and underneath the picture it said `` I Shall Never Hear Thy Sweet Chirrup More Alas . '' 
There was one where a young lady was at a window looking up at the moon , and tears running down her cheeks ; and she had an open letter in one hand with black sealing wax showing on one edge of it , and she was mashing a locket with a chain to it against her mouth , and underneath the picture it said `` And Art Thou Gone Yes Thou Art Gone Alas . '' 
These was all nice pictures , I reckon , but I did n't somehow seem to take to them , because if ever I was down a little they always give me the fan-tods . 
Everybody was sorry she died , because she had laid out a lot more of these pictures to do , and a body could see by what she had done what they had lost . 
But I reckoned that with her disposition she was having a better time in the graveyard . 
She was at work on what they said was her greatest picture when she took sick , and every day and every night it was her prayer to be allowed to live till she got it done , but she never got the chance . 
It was a picture of a young woman in a long white gown , standing on the rail of a bridge all ready to jump off , with her hair all down her back , and looking up to the moon , with the tears running down her face , and she had two arms folded across her breast , and two arms stretched out in front , and two more reaching up towards the moon -- and the idea was to see which pair would look best , and then scratch out all the other arms ; but , as I was saying , she died before she got her mind made up , and now they kept this picture over the head of the bed in her room , and every time her birthday come they hung flowers on it . 
Other times it was hid with a little curtain . 
The young woman in the picture had a kind of a nice sweet face , but there was so many arms it made her look too spidery , seemed to me . 
This young girl kept a scrap-book when she was alive , and used to paste obituaries and accidents and cases of patient suffering in it out of the Presbyterian Observer , and write poetry after them out of her own head . 
It was very good poetry . 
This is what she wrote about a boy by the name of Stephen Dowling Bots that fell down a well and was drownded : ODE TO STEPHEN DOWLING BOTS , DEC 'D And did young Stephen sicken , And did young Stephen die ? 
And did the sad hearts thicken , And did the mourners cry ? 
No ; such was not the fate of Young Stephen Dowling Bots ; Though sad hearts round him thickened , 'T was not from sickness ' shots . 
No whooping-cough did rack his frame , Nor measles drear with spots ; Not these impaired the sacred name Of Stephen Dowling Bots . 
Despised love struck not with woe That head of curly knots , Nor stomach troubles laid him low , Young Stephen Dowling Bots . 
O no . 
Then list with tearful eye , Whilst I his fate do tell . 
His soul did from this cold world fly By falling down a well . 
They got him out and emptied him ; Alas it was too late ; His spirit was gone for to sport aloft In the realms of the good and great . 
If Emmeline Grangerford could make poetry like that before she was fourteen , there ai n't no telling what she could a done by and by . 
Buck said she could rattle off poetry like nothing . 
She did n't ever have to stop to think . 
He said she would slap down a line , and if she could n't find anything to rhyme with it would just scratch it out and slap down another one , and go ahead . 
She war n't particular ; she could write about anything you choose to give her to write about just so it was sadful . 
Every time a man died , or a woman died , or a child died , she would be on hand with her `` tribute '' before he was cold . 
She called them tributes . 
The neighbors said it was the doctor first , then Emmeline , then the undertaker -- the undertaker never got in ahead of Emmeline but once , and then she hung fire on a rhyme for the dead person 's name , which was Whistler . 
She war n't ever the same after that ; she never complained , but she kinder pined away and did not live long . 
Poor thing , many 's the time I made myself go up to the little room that used to be hers and get out her poor old scrap-book and read in it when her pictures had been aggravating me and I had soured on her a little . 
I liked all that family , dead ones and all , and war n't going to let anything come between us . 
Poor Emmeline made poetry about all the dead people when she was alive , and it did n't seem right that there war n't nobody to make some about her now she was gone ; so I tried to sweat out a verse or two myself , but I could n't seem to make it go somehow . 
They kept Emmeline 's room trim and nice , and all the things fixed in it just the way she liked to have them when she was alive , and nobody ever slept there . 
The old lady took care of the room herself , though there was plenty of niggers , and she sewed there a good deal and read her Bible there mostly . 
Well , as I was saying about the parlor , there was beautiful curtains on the windows : white , with pictures painted on them of castles with vines all down the walls , and cattle coming down to drink . 
There was a little old piano , too , that had tin pans in it , I reckon , and nothing was ever so lovely as to hear the young ladies sing `` The Last Link is Broken '' and play `` The Battle of Prague '' on it . 
The walls of all the rooms was plastered , and most had carpets on the floors , and the whole house was whitewashed on the outside . 
It was a double house , and the big open place betwixt them was roofed and floored , and sometimes the table was set there in the middle of the day , and it was a cool , comfortable place . 
Nothing could n't be better . 
And war n't the cooking good , and just bushels of it too ! 
COL. GRANGERFORD was a gentleman , you see . 
He was a gentleman all over ; and so was his family . 
He was well born , as the saying is , and that 's worth as much in a man as it is in a horse , so the Widow Douglas said , and nobody ever denied that she was of the first aristocracy in our town ; and pap he always said it , too , though he war n't no more quality than a mudcat himself . 
Col. Grangerford was very tall and very slim , and had a darkish-paly complexion , not a sign of red in it anywheres ; he was clean shaved every morning all over his thin face , and he had the thinnest kind of lips , and the thinnest kind of nostrils , and a high nose , and heavy eyebrows , and the blackest kind of eyes , sunk so deep back that they seemed like they was looking out of caverns at you , as you may say . 
His forehead was high , and his hair was black and straight and hung to his shoulders . 
His hands was long and thin , and every day of his life he put on a clean shirt and a full suit from head to foot made out of linen so white it hurt your eyes to look at it ; and on Sundays he wore a blue tail-coat with brass buttons on it . 
He carried a mahogany cane with a silver head to it . 
There war n't no frivolishness about him , not a bit , and he war n't ever loud . 
He was as kind as he could be -- you could feel that , you know , and so you had confidence . 
Sometimes he smiled , and it was good to see ; but when he straightened himself up like a liberty-pole , and the lightning begun to flicker out from under his eyebrows , you wanted to climb a tree first , and find out what the matter was afterwards . 
He did n't ever have to tell anybody to mind their manners -- everybody was always good-mannered where he was . 
Everybody loved to have him around , too ; he was sunshine most always -- I mean he made it seem like good weather . 
When he turned into a cloudbank it was awful dark for half a minute , and that was enough ; there would n't nothing go wrong again for a week . 
When him and the old lady come down in the morning all the family got up out of their chairs and give them good-day , and did n't set down again till they had set down . 
Then Tom and Bob went to the sideboard where the decanter was , and mixed a glass of bitters and handed it to him , and he held it in his hand and waited till Tom 's and Bob 's was mixed , and then they bowed and said , `` Our duty to you , sir , and madam ; '' and THEY bowed the least bit in the world and said thank you , and so they drank , all three , and Bob and Tom poured a spoonful of water on the sugar and the mite of whisky or apple brandy in the bottom of their tumblers , and give it to me and Buck , and we drank to the old people too . 
Bob was the oldest and Tom next -- tall , beautiful men with very broad shoulders and brown faces , and long black hair and black eyes . 
They dressed in white linen from head to foot , like the old gentleman , and wore broad Panama hats . 
Then there was Miss Charlotte ; she was twenty-five , and tall and proud and grand , but as good as she could be when she war n't stirred up ; but when she was she had a look that would make you wilt in your tracks , like her father . 
She was beautiful . 
So was her sister , Miss Sophia , but it was a different kind . 
She was gentle and sweet like a dove , and she was only twenty . 
Each person had their own nigger to wait on them -- Buck too . 
My nigger had a monstrous easy time , because I war n't used to having anybody do anything for me , but Buck 's was on the jump most of the time . 
This was all there was of the family now , but there used to be more -- three sons ; they got killed ; and Emmeline that died . 
The old gentleman owned a lot of farms and over a hundred niggers . 
Sometimes a stack of people would come there , horseback , from ten or fifteen mile around , and stay five or six days , and have such junketings round about and on the river , and dances and picnics in the woods daytimes , and balls at the house nights . 
These people was mostly kinfolks of the family . 
The men brought their guns with them . 
It was a handsome lot of quality , I tell you . 
There was another clan of aristocracy around there -- five or six families -- mostly of the name of Shepherdson . 
They was as high-toned and well born and rich and grand as the tribe of Grangerfords . 
The Shepherdsons and Grangerfords used the same steamboat landing , which was about two mile above our house ; so sometimes when I went up there with a lot of our folks I used to see a lot of the Shepherdsons there on their fine horses . 
One day Buck and me was away out in the woods hunting , and heard a horse coming . 
We was crossing the road . 
Buck says : `` Quick ! 
Jump for the woods ! '' 
We done it , and then peeped down the woods through the leaves . 
Pretty soon a splendid young man come galloping down the road , setting his horse easy and looking like a soldier . 
He had his gun across his pommel . 
I had seen him before . 
It was young Harney Shepherdson . 
I heard Buck 's gun go off at my ear , and Harney 's hat tumbled off from his head . 
He grabbed his gun and rode straight to the place where we was hid . 
But we did n't wait . 
We started through the woods on a run . 
The woods war n't thick , so I looked over my shoulder to dodge the bullet , and twice I seen Harney cover Buck with his gun ; and then he rode away the way he come -- to get his hat , I reckon , but I could n't see . 
We never stopped running till we got home . 
The old gentleman 's eyes blazed a minute -- 't was pleasure , mainly , I judged -- then his face sort of smoothed down , and he says , kind of gentle : `` I do n't like that shooting from behind a bush . 
Why did n't you step into the road , my boy ? '' 
`` The Shepherdsons do n't , father . 
They always take advantage . '' 
Miss Charlotte she held her head up like a queen while Buck was telling his tale , and her nostrils spread and her eyes snapped . 
The two young men looked dark , but never said nothing . 
Miss Sophia she turned pale , but the color come back when she found the man war n't hurt . 
Soon as I could get Buck down by the corn-cribs under the trees by ourselves , I says : `` Did you want to kill him , Buck ? '' 
`` Well , I bet I did . '' 
`` What did he do to you ? '' 
`` Him ? 
He never done nothing to me . '' 
`` Well , then , what did you want to kill him for ? '' 
`` Why , nothing -- only it 's on account of the feud . '' 
`` What 's a feud ? '' 
`` Why , where was you raised ? 
Do n't you know what a feud is ? '' 
`` Never heard of it before -- tell me about it . '' 
`` Well , '' says Buck , `` a feud is this way : A man has a quarrel with another man , and kills him ; then that other man 's brother kills HIM ; then the other brothers , on both sides , goes for one another ; then the COUSINS chip in -- and by and by everybody 's killed off , and there ai n't no more feud . 
But it 's kind of slow , and takes a long time . '' 
`` Has this one been going on long , Buck ? '' 
`` Well , I should RECKON ! 
It started thirty year ago , or som ` ers along there . 
There was trouble ` bout something , and then a lawsuit to settle it ; and the suit went agin one of the men , and so he up and shot the man that won the suit -- which he would naturally do , of course . 
Anybody would . '' 
`` What was the trouble about , Buck ? 
-- land ? '' 
`` I reckon maybe -- I do n't know . '' 
`` Well , who done the shooting ? 
Was it a Grangerford or a Shepherdson ? '' 
`` Laws , how do I know ? 
It was so long ago . '' 
`` Do n't anybody know ? '' 
`` Oh , yes , pa knows , I reckon , and some of the other old people ; but they do n't know now what the row was about in the first place . '' 
`` Has there been many killed , Buck ? '' 
`` Yes ; right smart chance of funerals . 
But they do n't always kill . 
Pa 's got a few buckshot in him ; but he do n't mind it ` cuz he do n't weigh much , anyway . 
Bob 's been carved up some with a bowie , and Tom 's been hurt once or twice . '' 
`` Has anybody been killed this year , Buck ? '' 
`` Yes ; we got one and they got one . 
` Bout three months ago my cousin Bud , fourteen year old , was riding through the woods on t ` other side of the river , and did n't have no weapon with him , which was blame ' foolishness , and in a lonesome place he hears a horse a-coming behind him , and sees old Baldy Shepherdson a-linkin ' after him with his gun in his hand and his white hair a-flying in the wind ; and ` stead of jumping off and taking to the brush , Bud ` lowed he could out-run him ; so they had it , nip and tuck , for five mile or more , the old man a-gaining all the time ; so at last Bud seen it war n't any use , so he stopped and faced around so as to have the bullet holes in front , you know , and the old man he rode up and shot him down . 
But he did n't git much chance to enjoy his luck , for inside of a week our folks laid HIM out . '' 
`` I reckon that old man was a coward , Buck . '' 
`` I reckon he WAR N'T a coward . 
Not by a blame ' sight . 
There ai n't a coward amongst them Shepherdsons -- not a one . 
And there ai n't no cowards amongst the Grangerfords either . 
Why , that old man kep ' up his end in a fight one day for half an hour against three Grangerfords , and come out winner . 
They was all a-horseback ; he lit off of his horse and got behind a little woodpile , and kep ' his horse before him to stop the bullets ; but the Grangerfords stayed on their horses and capered around the old man , and peppered away at him , and he peppered away at them . 
Him and his horse both went home pretty leaky and crippled , but the Grangerfords had to be FETCHED home -- and one of 'em was dead , and another died the next day . 
No , sir ; if a body 's out hunting for cowards he do n't want to fool away any time amongst them Shepherdsons , becuz they do n't breed any of that KIND . '' 
Next Sunday we all went to church , about three mile , everybody a - horseback . 
The men took their guns along , so did Buck , and kept them between their knees or stood them handy against the wall . 
The Shepherdsons done the same . 
It was pretty ornery preaching -- all about brotherly love , and such-like tiresomeness ; but everybody said it was a good sermon , and they all talked it over going home , and had such a powerful lot to say about faith and good works and free grace and preforeordestination , and I do n't know what all , that it did seem to me to be one of the roughest Sundays I had run across yet . 
About an hour after dinner everybody was dozing around , some in their chairs and some in their rooms , and it got to be pretty dull . 
Buck and a dog was stretched out on the grass in the sun sound asleep . 
I went up to our room , and judged I would take a nap myself . 
I found that sweet Miss Sophia standing in her door , which was next to ours , and she took me in her room and shut the door very soft , and asked me if I liked her , and I said I did ; and she asked me if I would do something for her and not tell anybody , and I said I would . 
Then she said she 'd forgot her Testament , and left it in the seat at church between two other books , and would I slip out quiet and go there and fetch it to her , and not say nothing to nobody . 
I said I would . 
So I slid out and slipped off up the road , and there war n't anybody at the church , except maybe a hog or two , for there war n't any lock on the door , and hogs likes a puncheon floor in summer - time because it 's cool . 
If you notice , most folks do n't go to church only when they 've got to ; but a hog is different . 
Says I to myself , something 's up ; it ai n't natural for a girl to be in such a sweat about a Testament . 
So I give it a shake , and out drops a little piece of paper with `` HALF-PAST TWO '' wrote on it with a pencil . 
I ransacked it , but could n't find anything else . 
I could n't make anything out of that , so I put the paper in the book again , and when I got home and upstairs there was Miss Sophia in her door waiting for me . 
She pulled me in and shut the door ; then she looked in the Testament till she found the paper , and as soon as she read it she looked glad ; and before a body could think she grabbed me and give me a squeeze , and said I was the best boy in the world , and not to tell anybody . 
She was mighty red in the face for a minute , and her eyes lighted up , and it made her powerful pretty . 
I was a good deal astonished , but when I got my breath I asked her what the paper was about , and she asked me if I had read it , and I said no , and she asked me if I could read writing , and I told her `` no , only coarse-hand , '' and then she said the paper war n't anything but a book-mark to keep her place , and I might go and play now . 
I went off down to the river , studying over this thing , and pretty soon I noticed that my nigger was following along behind . 
When we was out of sight of the house he looked back and around a second , and then comes a - running , and says : `` Mars Jawge , if you 'll come down into de swamp I 'll show you a whole stack o ' water-moccasins . '' 
Thinks I , that 's mighty curious ; he said that yesterday . 
He oughter know a body do n't love water-moccasins enough to go around hunting for them . 
What is he up to , anyway ? 
So I says : `` All right ; trot ahead . '' 
I followed a half a mile ; then he struck out over the swamp , and waded ankle deep as much as another half-mile . 
We come to a little flat piece of land which was dry and very thick with trees and bushes and vines , and he says : `` You shove right in dah jist a few steps , Mars Jawge ; dah 's whah dey is . 
I 's seed 'm befo ' ; I do n't k ` yer to see 'em no mo ' . '' 
Then he slopped right along and went away , and pretty soon the trees hid him . 
I poked into the place a-ways and come to a little open patch as big as a bedroom all hung around with vines , and found a man laying there asleep -- and , by jings , it was my old Jim ! 
I waked him up , and I reckoned it was going to be a grand surprise to him to see me again , but it war n't . 
He nearly cried he was so glad , but he war n't surprised . 
Said he swum along behind me that night , and heard me yell every time , but das n't answer , because he did n't want nobody to pick HIM up and take him into slavery again . 
Says he : `` I got hurt a little , en could n't swim fas ' , so I wuz a considable ways behine you towards de las ' ; when you landed I reck ` ned I could ketch up wid you on de lan ' ` dout havin ' to shout at you , but when I see dat house I begin to go slow . 
I ` uz off too fur to hearwhat dey say to you -- I wuz ` fraid o ' de dogs ; but when it ` uz all quiet agin I knowed you 's in de house , so I struck out for de woods to wait for day . 
Early in de mawnin ' some er de niggers come along , gwyne to de fields , en dey tuk me en showed me dis place , whah de dogs ca n't track me on accounts o ' de water , en dey brings me truck to eat every night , en tells me how you 's a-gitt 'n along . '' 
`` Why did n't you tell my Jack to fetch me here sooner , Jim ? '' 
`` Well , ` twar n't no use to ` sturb you , Huck , tell we could do sumfn -- but we 's all right now . 
I ben a-buyin ' pots en pans en vittles , as I got a chanst , en a-patchin ' up de raf ' nights when -- '' `` WHAT raft , Jim ? '' 
`` Our ole raf ' . '' 
`` You mean to say our old raft war n't smashed all to flinders ? '' 
`` No , she war n't . 
She was tore up a good deal -- one en ' of her was ; but dey war n't no great harm done , on ' y our traps was mos ' all los ' . 
Ef we hadn ' dive ' so deep en swum so fur under water , en de night hadn ' ben so dark , en we war n't so sk ` yerd , en ben sich punkin-heads , as de sayin ' is , we 'd a seed de raf ' . 
But it 's jis ' as well we did n't , ` kase now she 's all fixed up agin mos ' as good as new , en we 's got a new lot o ' stuff , in de place o ' what ` uz los ' . '' 
`` Why , how did you get hold of the raft again , Jim -- did you catch her ? '' 
`` How I gwyne to ketch her en I out in de woods ? 
No ; some er de niggers foun ' her ketched on a snag along heah in de ben ' , en dey hid her in a crick ` mongst de willows , en dey wuz so much jawin ' ` bout which un ` um she b ` long to de mos ' dat I come to heah ` bout it pooty soon , so I ups en settles de trouble by tellin ' ` um she do n't b ` long to none uv um , but to you en me ; en I ast 'm if dey gwyne to grab a young white genlman 's propaty , en git a hid 'n for it ? 
Den I gin 'm ten cents apiece , en dey ` uz mighty well satisfied , en wisht some mo ' raf 's ` ud come along en make 'm rich agin . 
Dey 's mighty good to me , dese niggers is , en whatever I wants 'm to do fur me I doan ' have to ast 'm twice , honey . 
Dat Jack 's a good nigger , en pooty smart . '' 
`` Yes , he is . 
He ai n't ever told me you was here ; told me to come , and he 'd show me a lot of water-moccasins . 
If anything happens HE ai n't mixed up in it . 
He can say he never seen us together , and it 'll be the truth . '' 
I do n't want to talk much about the next day . 
I reckon I 'll cut it pretty short . 
I waked up about dawn , and was a-going to turn over and go to sleep again when I noticed how still it was -- did n't seem to be anybody stirring . 
That war n't usual . 
Next I noticed that Buck was up and gone . 
Well , I gets up , a-wondering , and goes down stairs -- nobody around ; everything as still as a mouse . 
Just the same outside . 
Thinks I , what does it mean ? 
Down by the wood-pile I comes across my Jack , and says : `` What 's it all about ? '' 
Says he : `` Do n't you know , Mars Jawge ? '' 
`` No , '' says I , `` I do n't . '' 
`` Well , den , Miss Sophia 's run off ! 
` deed she has . 
She run off in de night some time -- nobody do n't know jis ' when ; run off to get married to dat young Harney Shepherdson , you know -- leastways , so dey ` spec . 
De fambly foun ' it out ` bout half an hour ago -- maybe a little mo ' -- en ' I TELL you dey war n't no time los ' . 
Sich another hurryin ' up guns en hosses YOU never see ! 
De women folks has gone for to stir up de relations , en ole Mars Saul en de boys tuck dey guns en rode up de river road for to try to ketch dat young man en kill him ` fo ' he kin git acrost de river wid Miss Sophia . 
I reck 'n dey 's gwyne to be mighty rough times . '' 
`` Buck went off ` thout waking me up . '' 
`` Well , I reck 'n he DID ! 
Dey war n't gwyne to mix you up in it . 
Mars Buck he loaded up his gun en ` lowed he 's gwyne to fetch home a Shepherdson or bust . 
Well , dey 'll be plenty un 'm dah , I reck ` n , en you bet you he 'll fetch one ef he gits a chanst . '' 
I took up the river road as hard as I could put . 
By and by I begin to hear guns a good ways off . 
When I came in sight of the log store and the woodpile where the steamboats lands I worked along under the trees and brush till I got to a good place , and then I clumb up into the forks of a cottonwood that was out of reach , and watched . 
There was a wood-rank four foot high a little ways in front of the tree , and first I was going to hide behind that ; but maybe it was luckier I did n't . 
There was four or five men cavorting around on their horses in the open place before the log store , cussing and yelling , and trying to get at a couple of young chaps that was behind the wood-rank alongside of the steamboat landing ; but they could n't come it . 
Every time one of them showed himself on the river side of the woodpile he got shot at . 
The two boys was squatting back to back behind the pile , so they could watch both ways . 
By and by the men stopped cavorting around and yelling . 
They started riding towards the store ; then up gets one of the boys , draws a steady bead over the wood-rank , and drops one of them out of his saddle . 
All the men jumped off of their horses and grabbed the hurt one and started to carry him to the store ; and that minute the two boys started on the run . 
They got half way to the tree I was in before the men noticed . 
Then the men see them , and jumped on their horses and took out after them . 
They gained on the boys , but it did n't do no good , the boys had too good a start ; they got to the woodpile that was in front of my tree , and slipped in behind it , and so they had the bulge on the men again . 
One of the boys was Buck , and the other was a slim young chap about nineteen years old . 
