This looked out upon the street , two lace curtains brown with dirt guarding the window . 
I went and peered out through their interstices . 
Outside the day was bright -- by contrast with the brown shadows of the dismal house in which I found myself , dazzlingly bright . 
A brisk traffic was going by , fruit carts , a hansom , a four-wheeler with a pile of boxes , a fishmonger 's cart . 
I turned with spots of colour swimming before my eyes to the shadowy fixtures behind me . 
My excitement was giving place to a clear apprehension of my position again . 
The room was full of a faint scent of benzoline , used , I suppose , in cleaning the garments . 
`` I began a systematic search of the place . 
I should judge the hunchback had been alone in the house for some time . 
He was a curious person . 
Everything that could possibly be of service to me I collected in the clothes storeroom , and then I made a deliberate selection . 
I found a handbag I thought a suitable possession , and some powder , rouge , and sticking-plaster . 
`` I had thought of painting and powdering my face and all that there was to show of me , in order to render myself visible , but the disadvantage of this lay in the fact that I should require turpentine and other appliances and a considerable amount of time before I could vanish again . 
Finally I chose a mask of the better type , slightly grotesque but not more so than many human beings , dark glasses , greyish whiskers , and a wig . 
I could find no underclothing , but that I could buy subsequently , and for the time I swathed myself in calico dominoes and some white cashmere scarfs . 
I could find no socks , but the hunchback 's boots were rather a loose fit and sufficed . 
In a desk in the shop were three sovereigns and about thirty shillings ' worth of silver , and in a locked cupboard I burst in the inner room were eight pounds in gold . 
I could go forth into the world again , equipped . 
`` Then came a curious hesitation . 
Was my appearance really credible ? 
I tried myself with a little bedroom looking-glass , inspecting myself from every point of view to discover any forgotten chink , but it all seemed sound . 
I was grotesque to the theatrical pitch , a stage miser , but I was certainly not a physical impossibility . 
Gathering confidence , I took my looking-glass down into the shop , pulled down the shop blinds , and surveyed myself from every point of view with the help of the cheval glass in the corner . 
`` I spent some minutes screwing up my courage and then unlocked the shop door and marched out into the street , leaving the little man to get out of his sheet again when he liked . 
In five minutes a dozen turnings intervened between me and the costumier 's shop . 
No one appeared to notice me very pointedly . 
My last difficulty seemed overcome . '' 
He stopped again . 
`` And you troubled no more about the hunchback ? '' 
said Kemp . 
`` No , '' said the Invisible Man . 
`` Nor have I heard what became of him . 
I suppose he untied himself or kicked himself out . 
The knots were pretty tight . '' 
He became silent and went to the window and stared out . 
`` What happened when you went out into the Strand ? '' 
`` Oh ! 
-- disillusionment again . 
I thought my troubles were over . 
Practically I thought I had impunity to do whatever I chose , everything -- save to give away my secret . 
So I thought . 
Whatever I did , whatever the consequences might be , was nothing to me . 
I had merely to fling aside my garments and vanish . 
No person could hold me . 
I could take my money where I found it . 
I decided to treat myself to a sumptuous feast , and then put up at a good hotel , and accumulate a new outfit of property . 
I felt amazingly confident ; it 's not particularly pleasant recalling that I was an ass . 
I went into a place and was already ordering lunch , when it occurred to me that I could not eat unless I exposed my invisible face . 
I finished ordering the lunch , told the man I should be back in ten minutes , and went out exasperated . 
I do n't know if you have ever been disappointed in your appetite . '' 
`` Not quite so badly , '' said Kemp , `` but I can imagine it . '' 
`` I could have smashed the silly devils . 
At last , faint with the desire for tasteful food , I went into another place and demanded a private room . ' 
I am disfigured , ' I said . 
` Badly . ' 
They looked at me curiously , but of course it was not their affair -- and so at last I got my lunch . 
It was not particularly well served , but it sufficed ; and when I had had it , I sat over a cigar , trying to plan my line of action . 
And outside a snowstorm was beginning . 
`` The more I thought it over , Kemp , the more I realised what a helpless absurdity an Invisible Man was -- in a cold and dirty climate and a crowded civilised city . 
Before I made this mad experiment I had dreamt of a thousand advantages . 
That afternoon it seemed all disappointment . 
I went over the heads of the things a man reckons desirable . 
No doubt invisibility made it possible to get them , but it made it impossible to enjoy them when they are got . 
Ambition -- what is the good of pride of place when you can not appear there ? 
What is the good of the love of woman when her name must needs be Delilah ? 
I have no taste for politics , for the blackguardisms of fame , for philanthropy , for sport . 
What was I to do ? 
And for this I had become a wrapped-up mystery , a swathed and bandaged caricature of a man ! '' 
He paused , and his attitude suggested a roving glance at the window . 
`` But how did you get to Iping ? '' 
said Kemp , anxious to keep his guest busy talking . 
`` I went there to work . 
I had one hope . 
It was a half idea ! 
I have it still . 
It is a full blown idea now . 
A way of getting back ! 
Of restoring what I have done . 
When I choose . 
When I have done all I mean to do invisibly . 
And that is what I chiefly want to talk to you about now . '' 
`` You went straight to Iping ? '' 
`` Yes . 
I had simply to get my three volumes of memoranda and my cheque-book , my luggage and underclothing , order a quantity of chemicals to work out this idea of mine -- I will show you the calculations as soon as I get my books -- and then I started . 
Jove ! 
I remember the snowstorm now , and the accursed bother it was to keep the snow from damping my pasteboard nose . '' 
`` At the end , '' said Kemp , `` the day before yesterday , when they found you out , you rather -- to judge by the papers -- '' `` I did . 
Rather . 
Did I kill that fool of a constable ? '' 
`` No , '' said Kemp . 
`` He 's expected to recover . '' 
`` That 's his luck , then . 
I clean lost my temper , the fools ! 
Why could n't they leave me alone ? 
And that grocer lout ? '' 
`` There are no deaths expected , '' said Kemp . 
`` I do n't know about that tramp of mine , '' said the Invisible Man , with an unpleasant laugh . 
`` By Heaven , Kemp , you do n't know what rage is ! 
... To have worked for years , to have planned and plotted , and then to get some fumbling purblind idiot messing across your course ! 
... Every conceivable sort of silly creature that has ever been created has been sent to cross me . 
`` If I have much more of it , I shall go wild -- I shall start mowing 'em . 
`` As it is , they 've made things a thousand times more difficult . '' 
`` No doubt it 's exasperating , '' said Kemp , drily . 
THE PLAN THAT FAILED `` But now , '' said Kemp , with a side glance out of the window , `` what are we to do ? '' 
He moved nearer his guest as he spoke in such a manner as to prevent the possibility of a sudden glimpse of the three men who were advancing up the hill road -- with an intolerable slowness , as it seemed to Kemp . 
`` What were you planning to do when you were heading for Port Burdock ? 
Had you any plan ? '' 
`` I was going to clear out of the country . 
But I have altered that plan rather since seeing you . 
I thought it would be wise , now the weather is hot and invisibility possible , to make for the South . 
Especially as my secret was known , and everyone would be on the lookout for a masked and muffled man . 
You have a line of steamers from here to France . 
My idea was to get aboard one and run the risks of the passage . 
Thence I could go by train into Spain , or else get to Algiers . 
It would not be difficult . 
There a man might always be invisible -- and yet live . 
And do things . 
I was using that tramp as a money box and luggage carrier , until I decided how to get my books and things sent over to meet me . '' 
`` That 's clear . '' 
`` And then the filthy brute must needs try and rob me ! 
He has hidden my books , Kemp . 
Hidden my books ! 
If I can lay my hands on him ! '' 
`` Best plan to get the books out of him first . '' 
`` But where is he ? 
Do you know ? '' 
`` He 's in the town police station , locked up , by his own request , in the strongest cell in the place . '' 
`` Cur ! '' 
said the Invisible Man . 
`` But that hangs up your plans a little . '' 
`` We must get those books ; those books are vital . '' 
`` Certainly , '' said Kemp , a little nervously , wondering if he heard footsteps outside . 
`` Certainly we must get those books . 
But that wo n't be difficult , if he does n't know they 're for you . '' 
`` No , '' said the Invisible Man , and thought . 
Kemp tried to think of something to keep the talk going , but the Invisible Man resumed of his own accord . 
`` Blundering into your house , Kemp , '' he said , `` changes all my plans . 
For you are a man that can understand . 
In spite of all that has happened , in spite of this publicity , of the loss of my books , of what I have suffered , there still remain great possibilities , huge possibilities -- '' `` You have told no one I am here ? '' 
he asked abruptly . 
Kemp hesitated . 
`` That was implied , '' he said . 
`` No one ? '' 
insisted Griffin . 
`` Not a soul . '' 
`` Ah ! 
Now -- '' The Invisible Man stood up , and sticking his arms akimbo began to pace the study . 
`` I made a mistake , Kemp , a huge mistake , in carrying this thing through alone . 
I have wasted strength , time , opportunities . 
Alone -- it is wonderful how little a man can do alone ! 
To rob a little , to hurt a little , and there is the end . 
`` What I want , Kemp , is a goal-keeper , a helper , and a hiding-place , an arrangement whereby I can sleep and eat and rest in peace , and unsuspected . 
I must have a confederate . 
With a confederate , with food and rest -- a thousand things are possible . 
`` Hitherto I have gone on vague lines . 
We have to consider all that invisibility means , all that it does not mean . 
It means little advantage for eavesdropping and so forth -- one makes sounds . 
It 's of little help -- a little help perhaps -- in housebreaking and so forth . 
Once you 've caught me you could easily imprison me . 
But on the other hand I am hard to catch . 
This invisibility , in fact , is only good in two cases : It 's useful in getting away , it 's useful in approaching . 
It 's particularly useful , therefore , in killing . 
I can walk round a man , whatever weapon he has , choose my point , strike as I like . 
Dodge as I like . 
Escape as I like . '' 
Kemp 's hand went to his moustache . 
Was that a movement downstairs ? 
`` And it is killing we must do , Kemp . '' 
`` It is killing we must do , '' repeated Kemp . 
`` I 'm listening to your plan , Griffin , but I 'm not agreeing , mind . 
Why killing ? '' 
`` Not wanton killing , but a judicious slaying . 
The point is , they know there is an Invisible Man -- as well as we know there is an Invisible Man . 
And that Invisible Man , Kemp , must now establish a Reign of Terror . 
Yes ; no doubt it 's startling . 
But I mean it . 
A Reign of Terror . 
He must take some town like your Burdock and terrify and dominate it . 
He must issue his orders . 
He can do that in a thousand ways -- scraps of paper thrust under doors would suffice . 
And all who disobey his orders he must kill , and kill all who would defend them . '' 
`` Humph ! '' 
said Kemp , no longer listening to Griffin but to the sound of his front door opening and closing . 
`` It seems to me , Griffin , '' he said , to cover his wandering attention , `` that your confederate would be in a difficult position . '' 
`` No one would know he was a confederate , '' said the Invisible Man , eagerly . 
And then suddenly , `` Hush ! 
What 's that downstairs ? '' 
`` Nothing , '' said Kemp , and suddenly began to speak loud and fast . 
`` I do n't agree to this , Griffin , '' he said . 
`` Understand me , I do n't agree to this . 
Why dream of playing a game against the race ? 
How can you hope to gain happiness ? 
Do n't be a lone wolf . 
Publish your results ; take the world -- take the nation at least -- into your confidence . 
Think what you might do with a million helpers -- '' The Invisible Man interrupted -- arm extended . 
`` There are footsteps coming upstairs , '' he said in a low voice . 
`` Nonsense , '' said Kemp . 
`` Let me see , '' said the Invisible Man , and advanced , arm extended , to the door . 
And then things happened very swiftly . 
Kemp hesitated for a second and then moved to intercept him . 
The Invisible Man started and stood still . 
`` Traitor ! '' 
cried the Voice , and suddenly the dressing-gown opened , and sitting down the Unseen began to disrobe . 
Kemp made three swift steps to the door , and forthwith the Invisible Man -- his legs had vanished -- sprang to his feet with a shout . 
Kemp flung the door open . 
As it opened , there came a sound of hurrying feet downstairs and voices . 
With a quick movement Kemp thrust the Invisible Man back , sprang aside , and slammed the door . 
The key was outside and ready . 
In another moment Griffin would have been alone in the belvedere study , a prisoner . 
Save for one little thing . 
The key had been slipped in hastily that morning . 
As Kemp slammed the door it fell noisily upon the carpet . 
Kemp 's face became white . 
He tried to grip the door handle with both hands . 
For a moment he stood lugging . 
Then the door gave six inches . 
But he got it closed again . 
The second time it was jerked a foot wide , and the dressing-gown came wedging itself into the opening . 
His throat was gripped by invisible fingers , and he left his hold on the handle to defend himself . 
He was forced back , tripped and pitched heavily into the corner of the landing . 
The empty dressing-gown was flung on the top of him . 
Halfway up the staircase was Colonel Adye , the recipient of Kemp 's letter , the chief of the Burdock police . 
He was staring aghast at the sudden appearance of Kemp , followed by the extraordinary sight of clothing tossing empty in the air . 
He saw Kemp felled , and struggling to his feet . 
He saw him rush forward , and go down again , felled like an ox . 
Then suddenly he was struck violently . 
By nothing ! 
A vast weight , it seemed , leapt upon him , and he was hurled headlong down the staircase , with a grip on his throat and a knee in his groin . 
An invisible foot trod on his back , a ghostly patter passed downstairs , he heard the two police officers in the hall shout and run , and the front door of the house slammed violently . 
He rolled over and sat up staring . 
He saw , staggering down the staircase , Kemp , dusty and disheveled , one side of his face white from a blow , his lip bleeding , and a pink dressing-gown and some underclothing held in his arms . 
`` My God ! '' 
cried Kemp , `` the game 's up ! 
He 's gone ! '' 
THE HUNTING OF THE INVISIBLE MAN For a space Kemp was too inarticulate to make Adye understand the swift things that had just happened . 
They stood on the landing , Kemp speaking swiftly , the grotesque swathings of Griffin still on his arm . 
But presently Adye began to grasp something of the situation . 
`` He is mad , '' said Kemp ; `` inhuman . 
He is pure selfishness . 
He thinks of nothing but his own advantage , his own safety . 
I have listened to such a story this morning of brutal self-seeking ... . 
He has wounded men . 
He will kill them unless we can prevent him . 
He will create a panic . 
Nothing can stop him . 
He is going out now -- furious ! '' 
`` He must be caught , '' said Adye . 
`` That is certain . '' 
`` But how ? '' 
cried Kemp , and suddenly became full of ideas . 
`` You must begin at once . 
You must set every available man to work ; you must prevent his leaving this district . 
Once he gets away , he may go through the countryside as he wills , killing and maiming . 
He dreams of a reign of terror ! 
A reign of terror , I tell you . 
You must set a watch on trains and roads and shipping . 
The garrison must help . 
You must wire for help . 
The only thing that may keep him here is the thought of recovering some books of notes he counts of value . 
I will tell you of that ! 
There is a man in your police station -- Marvel . '' 
`` I know , '' said Adye , `` I know . 
Those books -- yes . 
But the tramp ... '' `` Says he has n't them . 
But he thinks the tramp has . 
And you must prevent him from eating or sleeping ; day and night the country must be astir for him . 
Food must be locked up and secured , all food , so that he will have to break his way to it . 
The houses everywhere must be barred against him . 
Heaven send us cold nights and rain ! 
The whole country-side must begin hunting and keep hunting . 
I tell you , Adye , he is a danger , a disaster ; unless he is pinned and secured , it is frightful to think of the things that may happen . '' 
`` What else can we do ? '' 
said Adye . 
`` I must go down at once and begin organising . 
But why not come ? 
Yes -- you come too ! 
Come , and we must hold a sort of council of war -- get Hopps to help -- and the railway managers . 
By Jove ! 
it 's urgent . 
Come along -- tell me as we go . 
What else is there we can do ? 
Put that stuff down . '' 
In another moment Adye was leading the way downstairs . 
They found the front door open and the policemen standing outside staring at empty air . 
`` He 's got away , sir , '' said one . 
`` We must go to the central station at once , '' said Adye . 
`` One of you go on down and get a cab to come up and meet us -- quickly . 
And now , Kemp , what else ? '' 
`` Dogs , '' said Kemp . 
`` Get dogs . 
They do n't see him , but they wind him . 
Get dogs . '' 
`` Good , '' said Adye . 
`` It 's not generally known , but the prison officials over at Halstead know a man with bloodhounds . 
Dogs . 
What else ? '' 
`` Bear in mind , '' said Kemp , `` his food shows . 
After eating , his food shows until it is assimilated . 
So that he has to hide after eating . 
You must keep on beating . 
Every thicket , every quiet corner . 
And put all weapons -- all implements that might be weapons , away . 
He ca n't carry such things for long . 
And what he can snatch up and strike men with must be hidden away . '' 
`` Good again , '' said Adye . 
`` We shall have him yet ! '' 
`` And on the roads , '' said Kemp , and hesitated . 
`` Yes ? '' 
said Adye . 
`` Powdered glass , '' said Kemp . 
`` It 's cruel , I know . 
But think of what he may do ! '' 
Adye drew the air in sharply between his teeth . 
`` It 's unsportsmanlike . 
I do n't know . 
But I 'll have powdered glass got ready . 
If he goes too far ... '' `` The man 's become inhuman , I tell you , '' said Kemp . 
`` I am as sure he will establish a reign of terror -- so soon as he has got over the emotions of this escape -- as I am sure I am talking to you . 
Our only chance is to be ahead . 
He has cut himself off from his kind . 
His blood be upon his own head . '' 
THE WICKSTEED MURDER The Invisible Man seems to have rushed out of Kemp 's house in a state of blind fury . 
A little child playing near Kemp 's gateway was violently caught up and thrown aside , so that its ankle was broken , and thereafter for some hours the Invisible Man passed out of human perceptions . 
No one knows where he went nor what he did . 
But one can imagine him hurrying through the hot June forenoon , up the hill and on to the open downland behind Port Burdock , raging and despairing at his intolerable fate , and sheltering at last , heated and weary , amid the thickets of Hintondean , to piece together again his shattered schemes against his species . 
That seems to most probable refuge for him , for there it was he re-asserted himself in a grimly tragical manner about two in the afternoon . 
One wonders what his state of mind may have been during that time , and what plans he devised . 
No doubt he was almost ecstatically exasperated by Kemp 's treachery , and though we may be able to understand the motives that led to that deceit , we may still imagine and even sympathise a little with the fury the attempted surprise must have occasioned . 
Perhaps something of the stunned astonishment of his Oxford Street experiences may have returned to him , for he had evidently counted on Kemp 's co-operation in his brutal dream of a terrorised world . 
At any rate he vanished from human ken about midday , and no living witness can tell what he did until about half-past two . 
It was a fortunate thing , perhaps , for humanity , but for him it was a fatal inaction . 
During that time a growing multitude of men scattered over the countryside were busy . 
In the morning he had still been simply a legend , a terror ; in the afternoon , by virtue chiefly of Kemp 's drily worded proclamation , he was presented as a tangible antagonist , to be wounded , captured , or overcome , and the countryside began organising itself with inconceivable rapidity . 
By two o'clock even he might still have removed himself out of the district by getting aboard a train , but after two that became impossible . 
Every passenger train along the lines on a great parallelogram between Southampton , Manchester , Brighton and Horsham , travelled with locked doors , and the goods traffic was almost entirely suspended . 
And in a great circle of twenty miles round Port Burdock , men armed with guns and bludgeons were presently setting out in groups of three and four , with dogs , to beat the roads and fields . 
Mounted policemen rode along the country lanes , stopping at every cottage and warning the people to lock up their houses , and keep indoors unless they were armed , and all the elementary schools had broken up by three o'clock , and the children , scared and keeping together in groups , were hurrying home . 
Kemp 's proclamation -- signed indeed by Adye -- was posted over almost the whole district by four or five o'clock in the afternoon . 
It gave briefly but clearly all the conditions of the struggle , the necessity of keeping the Invisible Man from food and sleep , the necessity for incessant watchfulness and for a prompt attention to any evidence of his movements . 
And so swift and decided was the action of the authorities , so prompt and universal was the belief in this strange being , that before nightfall an area of several hundred square miles was in a stringent state of siege . 
And before nightfall , too , a thrill of horror went through the whole watching nervous countryside . 
Going from whispering mouth to mouth , swift and certain over the length and breadth of the country , passed the story of the murder of Mr. Wicksteed . 
If our supposition that the Invisible Man 's refuge was the Hintondean thickets , then we must suppose that in the early afternoon he sallied out again bent upon some project that involved the use of a weapon . 
We can not know what the project was , but the evidence that he had the iron rod in hand before he met Wicksteed is to me at least overwhelming . 
Of course we can know nothing of the details of that encounter . 
It occurred on the edge of a gravel pit , not two hundred yards from Lord Burdock 's lodge gate . 
Everything points to a desperate struggle -- the trampled ground , the numerous wounds Mr. Wicksteed received , his splintered walking-stick ; but why the attack was made , save in a murderous frenzy , it is impossible to imagine . 
Indeed the theory of madness is almost unavoidable . 
Mr. Wicksteed was a man of forty-five or forty-six , steward to Lord Burdock , of inoffensive habits and appearance , the very last person in the world to provoke such a terrible antagonist . 
Against him it would seem the Invisible Man used an iron rod dragged from a broken piece of fence . 
He stopped this quiet man , going quietly home to his midday meal , attacked him , beat down his feeble defences , broke his arm , felled him , and smashed his head to a jelly . 
Of course , he must have dragged this rod out of the fencing before he met his victim -- he must have been carrying it ready in his hand . 
Only two details beyond what has already been stated seem to bear on the matter . 
One is the circumstance that the gravel pit was not in Mr. Wicksteed 's direct path home , but nearly a couple of hundred yards out of his way . 
The other is the assertion of a little girl to the effect that , going to her afternoon school , she saw the murdered man `` trotting '' in a peculiar manner across a field towards the gravel pit . 
Her pantomime of his action suggests a man pursuing something on the ground before him and striking at it ever and again with his walking-stick . 
She was the last person to see him alive . 
He passed out of her sight to his death , the struggle being hidden from her only by a clump of beech trees and a slight depression in the ground . 
Now this , to the present writer 's mind at least , lifts the murder out of the realm of the absolutely wanton . 
We may imagine that Griffin had taken the rod as a weapon indeed , but without any deliberate intention of using it in murder . 
Wicksteed may then have come by and noticed this rod inexplicably moving through the air . 
Without any thought of the Invisible Man -- for Port Burdock is ten miles away -- he may have pursued it . 
It is quite conceivable that he may not even have heard of the Invisible Man . 
One can then imagine the Invisible Man making off -- quietly in order to avoid discovering his presence in the neighbourhood , and Wicksteed , excited and curious , pursuing this unaccountably locomotive object -- finally striking at it . 
No doubt the Invisible Man could easily have distanced his middle-aged pursuer under ordinary circumstances , but the position in which Wicksteed 's body was found suggests that he had the ill luck to drive his quarry into a corner between a drift of stinging nettles and the gravel pit . 
To those who appreciate the extraordinary irascibility of the Invisible Man , the rest of the encounter will be easy to imagine . 
But this is pure hypothesis . 
The only undeniable facts -- for stories of children are often unreliable -- are the discovery of Wicksteed 's body , done to death , and of the blood-stained iron rod flung among the nettles . 
The abandonment of the rod by Griffin , suggests that in the emotional excitement of the affair , the purpose for which he took it -- if he had a purpose -- was abandoned . 
He was certainly an intensely egotistical and unfeeling man , but the sight of his victim , his first victim , bloody and pitiful at his feet , may have released some long pent fountain of remorse which for a time may have flooded whatever scheme of action he had contrived . 
After the murder of Mr. Wicksteed , he would seem to have struck across the country towards the downland . 
There is a story of a voice heard about sunset by a couple of men in a field near Fern Bottom . 
It was wailing and laughing , sobbing and groaning , and ever and again it shouted . 
It must have been queer hearing . 
It drove up across the middle of a clover field and died away towards the hills . 
That afternoon the Invisible Man must have learnt something of the rapid use Kemp had made of his confidences . 
He must have found houses locked and secured ; he may have loitered about railway stations and prowled about inns , and no doubt he read the proclamations and realised something of the nature of the campaign against him . 
And as the evening advanced , the fields became dotted here and there with groups of three or four men , and noisy with the yelping of dogs . 
These men-hunters had particular instructions in the case of an encounter as to the way they should support one another . 
But he avoided them all . 
We may understand something of his exasperation , and it could have been none the less because he himself had supplied the information that was being used so remorselessly against him . 
For that day at least he lost heart ; for nearly twenty-four hours , save when he turned on Wicksteed , he was a hunted man . 
In the night , he must have eaten and slept ; for in the morning he was himself again , active , powerful , angry , and malignant , prepared for his last great struggle against the world . 
THE SIEGE OF KEMP 'S HOUSE Kemp read a strange missive , written in pencil on a greasy sheet of paper . 
`` You have been amazingly energetic and clever , '' this letter ran , `` though what you stand to gain by it I can not imagine . 
You are against me . 
For a whole day you have chased me ; you have tried to rob me of a night 's rest . 
But I have had food in spite of you , I have slept in spite of you , and the game is only beginning . 
The game is only beginning . 
There is nothing for it , but to start the Terror . 
This announces the first day of the Terror . 
Port Burdock is no longer under the Queen , tell your Colonel of Police , and the rest of them ; it is under me -- the Terror ! 
This is day one of year one of the new epoch -- the Epoch of the Invisible Man . 
I am Invisible Man the First . 
To begin with the rule will be easy . 
The first day there will be one execution for the sake of example -- a man named Kemp . 
Death starts for him to-day . 
He may lock himself away , hide himself away , get guards about him , put on armour if he likes -- Death , the unseen Death , is coming . 
Let him take precautions ; it will impress my people . 
Death starts from the pillar box by midday . 
The letter will fall in as the postman comes along , then off ! 
The game begins . 
Death starts . 
Help him not , my people , lest Death fall upon you also . 
To-day Kemp is to die . '' 
Kemp read this letter twice , `` It 's no hoax , '' he said . 
`` That 's his voice ! 
And he means it . '' 
He turned the folded sheet over and saw on the addressed side of it the postmark Hintondean , and the prosaic detail `` 2d . 
to pay . '' 
He got up slowly , leaving his lunch unfinished -- the letter had come by the one o'clock post -- and went into his study . 
He rang for his housekeeper , and told her to go round the house at once , examine all the fastenings of the windows , and close all the shutters . 
He closed the shutters of his study himself . 
From a locked drawer in his bedroom he took a little revolver , examined it carefully , and put it into the pocket of his lounge jacket . 
He wrote a number of brief notes , one to Colonel Adye , gave them to his servant to take , with explicit instructions as to her way of leaving the house . 
`` There is no danger , '' he said , and added a mental reservation , `` to you . '' 
He remained meditative for a space after doing this , and then returned to his cooling lunch . 
He ate with gaps of thought . 
Finally he struck the table sharply . 
`` We will have him ! '' 
he said ; `` and I am the bait . 
He will come too far . '' 
He went up to the belvedere , carefully shutting every door after him . 
`` It 's a game , '' he said , `` an odd game -- but the chances are all for me , Mr. Griffin , in spite of your invisibility . 
Griffin contra mundum ... with a vengeance . '' 
He stood at the window staring at the hot hillside . 
`` He must get food every day -- and I do n't envy him . 
Did he really sleep last night ? 
Out in the open somewhere -- secure from collisions . 
I wish we could get some good cold wet weather instead of the heat . 
`` He may be watching me now . '' 
He went close to the window . 
Something rapped smartly against the brickwork over the frame , and made him start violently back . 
`` I 'm getting nervous , '' said Kemp . 
But it was five minutes before he went to the window again . 
`` It must have been a sparrow , '' he said . 
Presently he heard the front-door bell ringing , and hurried downstairs . 
He unbolted and unlocked the door , examined the chain , put it up , and opened cautiously without showing himself . 
A familiar voice hailed him . 
It was Adye . 
`` Your servant 's been assaulted , Kemp , '' he said round the door . 
`` What ! '' 
exclaimed Kemp . 
`` Had that note of yours taken away from her . 
He 's close about here . 
Let me in . '' 
Kemp released the chain , and Adye entered through as narrow an opening as possible . 
He stood in the hall , looking with infinite relief at Kemp refastening the door . 
`` Note was snatched out of her hand . 
Scared her horribly . 
She 's down at the station . 
Hysterics . 
He 's close here . 
What was it about ? '' 
Kemp swore . 
`` What a fool I was , '' said Kemp . 
`` I might have known . 
It 's not an hour 's walk from Hintondean . 
Already ? '' 
`` What 's up ? '' 
said Adye . 
`` Look here ! '' 
said Kemp , and led the way into his study . 
He handed Adye the Invisible Man 's letter . 
Adye read it and whistled softly . 
`` And you -- ? '' 
said Adye . 
`` Proposed a trap -- like a fool , '' said Kemp , `` and sent my proposal out by a maid servant . 
To him . '' 
Adye followed Kemp 's profanity . 
`` He 'll clear out , '' said Adye . 
`` Not he , '' said Kemp . 
A resounding smash of glass came from upstairs . 
Adye had a silvery glimpse of a little revolver half out of Kemp 's pocket . 
`` It 's a window , upstairs ! '' 
said Kemp , and led the way up . 
There came a second smash while they were still on the staircase . 
When they reached the study they found two of the three windows smashed , half the room littered with splintered glass , and one big flint lying on the writing table . 
The two men stopped in the doorway , contemplating the wreckage . 
Kemp swore again , and as he did so the third window went with a snap like a pistol , hung starred for a moment , and collapsed in jagged , shivering triangles into the room . 
`` What 's this for ? '' 
said Adye . 
`` It 's a beginning , '' said Kemp . 
`` There 's no way of climbing up here ? '' 
`` Not for a cat , '' said Kemp . 
`` No shutters ? '' 
`` Not here . 
All the downstairs rooms -- Hullo ! '' 
Smash , and then whack of boards hit hard came from downstairs . 
`` Confound him ! '' 
said Kemp . 
`` That must be -- yes -- it 's one of the bedrooms . 
He 's going to do all the house . 
But he 's a fool . 
The shutters are up , and the glass will fall outside . 
He 'll cut his feet . '' 
Another window proclaimed its destruction . 
The two men stood on the landing perplexed . 
`` I have it ! '' 
said Adye . 
