found that Andre Chenier embarrassed them somewhat , and they had him guillot ... that is to say , those great men on the 7th of Thermidor , besought Andre Chenier , in the interests of public safety , to be so good as to go ... '' M. Gillenormand , clutched by the throat by his own phrase , could not proceed . 
Being able neither to finish it nor to retract it , while his daughter arranged the pillow behind Marius , who was overwhelmed with so many emotions , the old man rushed headlong , with as much rapidity as his age permitted , from the bed-chamber , shut the door behind him , and , purple , choking and foaming at the mouth , his eyes starting from his head , he found himself nose to nose with honest Basque , who was blacking boots in the anteroom . 
He seized Basque by the collar , and shouted full in his face in fury : -- `` By the hundred thousand Javottes of the devil , those ruffians did assassinate him ! '' 
`` Who , sir ? '' 
`` Andre Chenier ! '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said Basque in alarm . 
MADEMOISELLE GILLENORMAND ENDS BY NO LONGER THINKING IT A BAD THING THAT M. FAUCHELEVENT SHOULD HAVE ENTERED WITH SOMETHING UNDER HIS ARM Cosette and Marius beheld each other once more . 
What that interview was like we decline to say . 
There are things which one must not attempt to depict ; the sun is one of them . 
The entire family , including Basque and Nicolette , were assembled in Marius ' chamber at the moment when Cosette entered it . 
Precisely at that moment , the grandfather was on the point of blowing his nose ; he stopped short , holding his nose in his handkerchief , and gazing over it at Cosette . 
She appeared on the threshold ; it seemed to him that she was surrounded by a glory . 
`` Adorable ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
Then he blew his nose noisily . 
Cosette was intoxicated , delighted , frightened , in heaven . 
She was as thoroughly alarmed as any one can be by happiness . 
She stammered all pale , yet flushed , she wanted to fling herself into Marius ' arms , and dared not . 
Ashamed of loving in the presence of all these people . 
People are pitiless towards happy lovers ; they remain when the latter most desire to be left alone . 
Lovers have no need of any people whatever . 
With Cosette , and behind her , there had entered a man with white hair who was grave yet smiling , though with a vague and heartrending smile . 
It was `` Monsieur Fauchelevent '' ; it was Jean Valjean . 
He was very well dressed , as the porter had said , entirely in black , in perfectly new garments , and with a white cravat . 
The porter was a thousand leagues from recognizing in this correct bourgeois , in this probable notary , the fear-inspiring bearer of the corpse , who had sprung up at his door on the night of the 7th of June , tattered , muddy , hideous , haggard , his face masked in blood and mire , supporting in his arms the fainting Marius ; still , his porter 's scent was aroused . 
When M. Fauchelevent arrived with Cosette , the porter had not been able to refrain from communicating to his wife this aside : `` I do n't know why it is , but I ca n't help fancying that I 've seen that face before . '' 
M. Fauchelevent in Marius ' chamber , remained apart near the door . 
He had under his arm , a package which bore considerable resemblance to an octavo volume enveloped in paper . 
The enveloping paper was of a greenish hue , and appeared to be mouldy . 
`` Does the gentleman always have books like that under his arm ? '' 
Mademoiselle Gillenormand , who did not like books , demanded in a low tone of Nicolette . 
`` Well , '' retorted M. Gillenormand , who had overheard her , in the same tone , `` he 's a learned man . 
What then ? 
Is that his fault ? 
Monsieur Boulard , one of my acquaintances , never walked out without a book under his arm either , and he always had some old volume hugged to his heart like that . '' 
And , with a bow , he said aloud : `` Monsieur Tranchelevent ... '' Father Gillenormand did not do it intentionally , but inattention to proper names was an aristocratic habit of his . 
`` Monsieur Tranchelevent , I have the honor of asking you , on behalf of my grandson , Baron Marius Pontmercy , for the hand of Mademoiselle . '' 
Monsieur Tranchelevent bowed . 
`` That 's settled , '' said the grandfather . 
And , turning to Marius and Cosette , with both arms extended in blessing , he cried : `` Permission to adore each other ! '' 
They did not require him to repeat it twice . 
So much the worse ! 
the chirping began . 
They talked low . 
Marius , resting on his elbow on his reclining chair , Cosette standing beside him . 
`` Oh , heavens ! '' 
murmured Cosette , `` I see you once again ! 
it is thou ! 
it is you ! 
The idea of going and fighting like that ! 
But why ? 
It is horrible . 
I have been dead for four months . 
Oh ! 
how wicked it was of you to go to that battle ! 
What had I done to you ? 
I pardon you , but you will never do it again . 
A little while ago , when they came to tell us to come to you , I still thought that I was about to die , but it was from joy . 
I was so sad ! 
I have not taken the time to dress myself , I must frighten people with my looks ! 
What will your relatives say to see me in a crumpled collar ? 
Do speak ! 
You let me do all the talking . 
We are still in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
It seems that your shoulder was terrible . 
They told me that you could put your fist in it . 
And then , it seems that they cut your flesh with the scissors . 
That is frightful . 
I have cried till I have no eyes left . 
It is queer that a person can suffer like that . 
Your grandfather has a very kindly air . 
Do n't disturb yourself , do n't rise on your elbow , you will injure yourself . 
Oh ! 
how happy I am ! 
So our unhappiness is over ! 
I am quite foolish . 
I had things to say to you , and I no longer know in the least what they were . 
Do you still love me ? 
We live in the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
There is no garden . 
I made lint all the time ; stay , sir , look , it is your fault , I have a callous on my fingers . '' 
`` Angel ! '' 
said Marius . 
Angel is the only word in the language which can not be worn out . 
No other word could resist the merciless use which lovers make of it . 
Then as there were spectators , they paused and said not a word more , contenting themselves with softly touching each other 's hands . 
M. Gillenormand turned towards those who were in the room and cried : `` Talk loud , the rest of you . 
Make a noise , you people behind the scenes . 
Come , a little uproar , the deuce ! 
so that the children can chatter at their ease . '' 
And , approaching Marius and Cosette , he said to them in a very low voice : `` Call each other thou . 
Do n't stand on ceremony . '' 
Aunt Gillenormand looked on in amazement at this irruption of light in her elderly household . 
There was nothing aggressive about this amazement ; it was not the least in the world like the scandalized and envious glance of an owl at two turtle-doves , it was the stupid eye of a poor innocent seven and fifty years of age ; it was a life which had been a failure gazing at that triumph , love . 
`` Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior , '' said her father to her , `` I told you that this is what would happen to you . '' 
He remained silent for a moment , and then added : `` Look at the happiness of others . '' 
Then he turned to Cosette . 
`` How pretty she is ! 
how pretty she is ! 
She 's a Greuze . 
So you are going to have that all to yourself , you scamp ! 
Ah ! 
my rogue , you are getting off nicely with me , you are happy ; if I were not fifteen years too old , we would fight with swords to see which of us should have her . 
Come now ! 
I am in love with you , mademoiselle . 
It 's perfectly simple . 
It is your right . 
You are in the right . 
Ah ! 
what a sweet , charming little wedding this will make ! 
Our parish is Saint-Denis du Saint Sacrament , but I will get a dispensation so that you can be married at Saint-Paul . 
The church is better . 
It was built by the Jesuits . 
It is more coquettish . 
It is opposite the fountain of Cardinal de Birague . 
The masterpiece of Jesuit architecture is at Namur . 
It is called Saint-Loup . 
You must go there after you are married . 
It is worth the journey . 
Mademoiselle , I am quite of your mind , I think girls ought to marry ; that is what they are made for . 
There is a certain Sainte-Catherine whom I should always like to see uncoiffed . 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- It 's a fine thing to remain a spinster , but it is chilly . 
The Bible says : Multiply . 
In order to save the people , Jeanne d'Arc is needed ; but in order to make people , what is needed is Mother Goose . 
So , marry , my beauties . 
I really do not see the use in remaining a spinster ! 
I know that they have their chapel apart in the church , and that they fall back on the Society of the Virgin ; but , sapristi , a handsome husband , a fine fellow , and at the expiration of a year , a big , blond brat who nurses lustily , and who has fine rolls of fat on his thighs , and who musses up your breast in handfuls with his little rosy paws , laughing the while like the dawn , -- that 's better than holding a candle at vespers , and chanting Turris eburnea ! '' 
-LSB- 62 -RSB- In allusion to the expression , coiffer Sainte-Catherine , `` to remain unmarried . '' 
The grandfather executed a pirouette on his eighty-year-old heels , and began to talk again like a spring that has broken loose once more : `` Ainsi , bornant les cours de tes revasseries , Alcippe , il est donc vrai , dans peu tu te maries . '' 
-LSB- 63 -RSB- -LSB- 63 -RSB- `` Thus , hemming in the course of thy musings , Alcippus , it is true that thou wilt wed ere long . '' 
`` By the way ! '' 
`` What is it , father ? '' 
`` Have not you an intimate friend ? '' 
`` Yes , Courfeyrac . '' 
`` What has become of him ? '' 
`` He is dead . '' 
`` That is good . '' 
He seated himself near them , made Cosette sit down , and took their four hands in his aged and wrinkled hands : `` She is exquisite , this darling . 
She 's a masterpiece , this Cosette ! 
She is a very little girl and a very great lady . 
She will only be a Baroness , which is a come down for her ; she was born a Marquise . 
What eyelashes she has ! 
Get it well fixed in your noddles , my children , that you are in the true road . 
Love each other . 
Be foolish about it . 
Love is the folly of men and the wit of God . 
Adore each other . 
Only , '' he added , suddenly becoming gloomy , `` what a misfortune ! 
It has just occurred to me ! 
More than half of what I possess is swallowed up in an annuity ; so long as I live , it will not matter , but after my death , a score of years hence , ah ! 
my poor children , you will not have a sou ! 
Your beautiful white hands , Madame la Baronne , will do the devil the honor of pulling him by the tail . '' 
-LSB- 64 -RSB- -LSB- 64 -RSB- Tirer le diable par la queue , `` to live from hand to mouth . '' 
At this point they heard a grave and tranquil voice say : `` Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent possesses six hundred thousand francs . '' 
It was the voice of Jean Valjean . 
So far he had not uttered a single word , no one seemed to be aware that he was there , and he had remained standing erect and motionless , behind all these happy people . 
`` What has Mademoiselle Euphrasie to do with the question ? '' 
inquired the startled grandfather . 
`` I am she , '' replied Cosette . 
`` Six hundred thousand francs ? '' 
resumed M. Gillenormand . 
`` Minus fourteen or fifteen thousand francs , possibly , '' said Jean Valjean . 
And he laid on the table the package which Mademoiselle Gillenormand had mistaken for a book . 
Jean Valjean himself opened the package ; it was a bundle of bank-notes . 
They were turned over and counted . 
There were five hundred notes for a thousand francs each , and one hundred and sixty-eight of five hundred . 
In all , five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs . 
`` This is a fine book , '' said M. Gillenormand . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
murmured the aunt . 
`` This arranges things well , does it not , Mademoiselle Gillenormand senior ? '' 
said the grandfather . 
`` That devil of a Marius has ferreted out the nest of a millionaire grisette in his tree of dreams ! 
Just trust to the love affairs of young folks now , will you ! 
Students find studentesses with six hundred thousand francs . 
Cherubino works better than Rothschild . '' 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four thousand francs ! '' 
repeated Mademoiselle Gillenormand , in a low tone . 
`` Five hundred and eighty-four ! 
one might as well say six hundred thousand ! '' 
As for Marius and Cosette , they were gazing at each other while this was going on ; they hardly heeded this detail . 
DEPOSIT YOUR MONEY IN A FOREST RATHER THAN WITH A NOTARY The reader has , no doubt , understood , without necessitating a lengthy explanation , that Jean Valjean , after the Champmathieu affair , had been able , thanks to his first escape of a few days ' duration , to come to Paris and to withdraw in season , from the hands of Laffitte , the sum earned by him , under the name of Monsieur Madeleine , at Montreuil-sur-Mer ; and that fearing that he might be recaptured , -- which eventually happened -- he had buried and hidden that sum in the forest of Montfermeil , in the locality known as the Blaru-bottom . 
The sum , six hundred and thirty thousand francs , all in bank-bills , was not very bulky , and was contained in a box ; only , in order to preserve the box from dampness , he had placed it in a coffer filled with chestnut shavings . 
In the same coffer he had placed his other treasures , the Bishop 's candlesticks . 
It will be remembered that he had carried off the candlesticks when he made his escape from Montreuil-sur-Mer . 
The man seen one evening for the first time by Boulatruelle , was Jean Valjean . 
Later on , every time that Jean Valjean needed money , he went to get it in the Blaru-bottom . 
Hence the absences which we have mentioned . 
He had a pickaxe somewhere in the heather , in a hiding-place known to himself alone . 
When he beheld Marius convalescent , feeling that the hour was at hand , when that money might prove of service , he had gone to get it ; it was he again , whom Boulatruelle had seen in the woods , but on this occasion , in the morning instead of in the evening . 
Boulatreulle inherited his pickaxe . 
The actual sum was five hundred and eighty-four thousand , five hundred francs . 
Jean Valjean withdrew the five hundred francs for himself . 
-- `` We shall see hereafter , '' he thought . 
The difference between that sum and the six hundred and thirty thousand francs withdrawn from Laffitte represented his expenditure in ten years , from 1823 to 1833 . 
The five years of his stay in the convent had cost only five thousand francs . 
Jean Valjean set the two candlesticks on the chimney-piece , where they glittered to the great admiration of Toussaint . 
Moreover , Jean Valjean knew that he was delivered from Javert . 
The story had been told in his presence , and he had verified the fact in the Moniteur , how a police inspector named Javert had been found drowned under a boat belonging to some laundresses , between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf , and that a writing left by this man , otherwise irreproachable and highly esteemed by his superiors , pointed to a fit of mental aberration and a suicide . 
-- `` In fact , '' thought Jean Valjean , `` since he left me at liberty , once having got me in his power , he must have been already mad . '' 
THE TWO OLD MEN DO EVERYTHING , EACH ONE AFTER HIS OWN FASHION , TO RENDER COSETTE HAPPY Everything was made ready for the wedding . 
The doctor , on being consulted , declared that it might take place in February . 
It was then December . 
A few ravishing weeks of perfect happiness passed . 
The grandfather was not the least happy of them all . 
He remained for a quarter of an hour at a time gazing at Cosette . 
`` The wonderful , beautiful girl ! '' 
he exclaimed . 
`` And she has so sweet and good an air ! 
she is , without exception , the most charming girl that I have ever seen in my life . 
Later on , she 'll have virtues with an odor of violets . 
How graceful ! 
one can not live otherwise than nobly with such a creature . 
Marius , my boy , you are a Baron , you are rich , do n't go to pettifogging , I beg of you . '' 
Cosette and Marius had passed abruptly from the sepulchre to paradise . 
The transition had not been softened , and they would have been stunned , had they not been dazzled by it . 
`` Do you understand anything about it ? '' 
said Marius to Cosette . 
`` No , '' replied Cosette , `` but it seems to me that the good God is caring for us . '' 
Jean Valjean did everything , smoothed away every difficulty , arranged everything , made everything easy . 
He hastened towards Cosette 's happiness with as much ardor , and , apparently with as much joy , as Cosette herself . 
As he had been a mayor , he understood how to solve that delicate problem , with the secret of which he alone was acquainted , Cosette 's civil status . 
If he were to announce her origin bluntly , it might prevent the marriage , who knows ? 
He extricated Cosette from all difficulties . 
He concocted for her a family of dead people , a sure means of not encountering any objections . 
Cosette was the only scion of an extinct family ; Cosette was not his own daughter , but the daughter of the other Fauchelevent . 
Two brothers Fauchelevent had been gardeners to the convent of the Petit-Picpus . 
Inquiry was made at that convent ; the very best information and the most respectable references abounded ; the good nuns , not very apt and but little inclined to fathom questions of paternity , and not attaching any importance to the matter , had never understood exactly of which of the two Fauchelevents Cosette was the daughter . 
They said what was wanted and they said it with zeal . 
An acte de notoriete was drawn up . 
Cosette became in the eyes of the law , Mademoiselle Euphrasie Fauchelevent . 
She was declared an orphan , both father and mother being dead . 
Jean Valjean so arranged it that he was appointed , under the name of Fauchelevent , as Cosette 's guardian , with M. Gillenormand as supervising guardian over him . 
As for the five hundred and eighty thousand francs , they constituted a legacy bequeathed to Cosette by a dead person , who desired to remain unknown . 
The original legacy had consisted of five hundred and ninety-four thousand francs ; but ten thousand francs had been expended on the education of Mademoiselle Euphrasie , five thousand francs of that amount having been paid to the convent . 
This legacy , deposited in the hands of a third party , was to be turned over to Cosette at her majority , or at the date of her marriage . 
This , taken as a whole , was very acceptable , as the reader will perceive , especially when the sum due was half a million . 
There were some peculiarities here and there , it is true , but they were not noticed ; one of the interested parties had his eyes blindfolded by love , the others by the six hundred thousand francs . 
Cosette learned that she was not the daughter of that old man whom she had so long called father . 
He was merely a kinsman ; another Fauchelevent was her real father . 
At any other time this would have broken her heart . 
But at the ineffable moment which she was then passing through , it cast but a slight shadow , a faint cloud , and she was so full of joy that the cloud did not last long . 
She had Marius . 
The young man arrived , the old man was effaced ; such is life . 
And then , Cosette had , for long years , been habituated to seeing enigmas around her ; every being who has had a mysterious childhood is always prepared for certain renunciations . 
Nevertheless , she continued to call Jean Valjean : Father . 
Cosette , happy as the angels , was enthusiastic over Father Gillenormand . 
It is true that he overwhelmed her with gallant compliments and presents . 
While Jean Valjean was building up for Cosette a normal situation in society and an unassailable status , M. Gillenormand was superintending the basket of wedding gifts . 
Nothing so amused him as being magnificent . 
He had given to Cosette a robe of Binche guipure which had descended to him from his own grandmother . 
`` These fashions come up again , '' said he , `` ancient things are the rage , and the young women of my old age dress like the old women of my childhood . '' 
He rifled his respectable chests of drawers in Coromandel lacquer , with swelling fronts , which had not been opened for years . 
-- `` Let us hear the confession of these dowagers , '' he said , `` let us see what they have in their paunches . '' 
He noisily violated the pot-bellied drawers of all his wives , of all his mistresses and of all his grandmothers . 
Pekins , damasks , lampas , painted moires , robes of shot gros de Tours , India kerchiefs embroidered in gold that could be washed , dauphines without a right or wrong side , in the piece , Genoa and Alencon point lace , parures in antique goldsmith 's work , ivory bon-bon boxes ornamented with microscopic battles , gewgaws and ribbons -- he lavished everything on Cosette . 
Cosette , amazed , desperately in love with Marius , and wild with gratitude towards M. Gillenormand , dreamed of a happiness without limit clothed in satin and velvet . 
Her wedding basket seemed to her to be upheld by seraphim . 
Her soul flew out into the azure depths , with wings of Mechlin lace . 
The intoxication of the lovers was only equalled , as we have already said , by the ecstasy of the grandfather . 
A sort of flourish of trumpets went on in the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire . 
Every morning , a fresh offering of bric-a-brac from the grandfather to Cosette . 
All possible knickknacks glittered around her . 
One day Marius , who was fond of talking gravely in the midst of his bliss , said , apropos of I know not what incident : `` The men of the revolution are so great , that they have the prestige of the ages , like Cato and like Phocion , and each one of them seems to me an antique memory . '' 
`` Moire antique ! '' 
exclaimed the old gentleman . 
`` Thanks , Marius . 
That is precisely the idea of which I was in search . '' 
And on the following day , a magnificent dress of tea-rose colored moire antique was added to Cosette 's wedding presents . 
From these fripperies , the grandfather extracted a bit of wisdom . 
`` Love is all very well ; but there must be something else to go with it . 
The useless must be mingled with happiness . 
Happiness is only the necessary . 
Season that enormously with the superfluous for me . 
A palace and her heart . 
Her heart and the Louvre . 
Her heart and the grand waterworks of Versailles . 
Give me my shepherdess and try to make her a duchess . 
Fetch me Phyllis crowned with corn-flowers , and add a hundred thousand francs income . 
Open for me a bucolic perspective as far as you can see , beneath a marble colonnade . 
I consent to the bucolic and also to the fairy spectacle of marble and gold . 
Dry happiness resembles dry bread . 
One eats , but one does not dine . 
I want the superfluous , the useless , the extravagant , excess , that which serves no purpose . 
I remember to have seen , in the Cathedral of Strasburg , a clock , as tall as a three-story house which marked the hours , which had the kindness to indicate the hour , but which had not the air of being made for that ; and which , after having struck midday , or midnight , -- midday , the hour of the sun , or midnight , the hour of love , -- or any other hour that you like , gave you the moon and the stars , the earth and the sea , birds and fishes , Phoebus and Phoebe , and a host of things which emerged from a niche , and the twelve apostles , and the Emperor Charles the Fifth , and Eponine , and Sabinus , and a throng of little gilded goodmen , who played on the trumpet to boot . 
Without reckoning delicious chimes which it sprinkled through the air , on every occasion , without any one 's knowing why . 
Is a petty bald clock-face which merely tells the hour equal to that ? 
For my part , I am of the opinion of the big clock of Strasburg , and I prefer it to the cuckoo clock from the Black Forest . '' 
M. Gillenormand talked nonsense in connection with the wedding , and all the fripperies of the eighteenth century passed pell-mell through his dithyrambs . 
`` You are ignorant of the art of festivals . 
You do not know how to organize a day of enjoyment in this age , '' he exclaimed . 
`` Your nineteenth century is weak . 
It lacks excess . 
It ignores the rich , it ignores the noble . 
In everything it is clean-shaven . 
Your third estate is insipid , colorless , odorless , and shapeless . 
The dreams of your bourgeois who set up , as they express it : a pretty boudoir freshly decorated , violet , ebony and calico . 
Make way ! 
Make way ! 
the Sieur Curmudgeon is marrying Mademoiselle Clutch-penny . 
Sumptuousness and splendor . 
A louis d'or has been stuck to a candle . 
There 's the epoch for you . 
My demand is that I may flee from it beyond the Sarmatians . 
Ah ! 
in 1787 , I predict that all was lost , from the day when I beheld the Duc de Rohan , Prince de Leon , Duc de Chabot , Duc de Montbazon , Marquis de Sonbise , Vicomte de Thouars , peer of France , go to Longchamps in a tapecu ! 
That has borne its fruits . 
In this century , men attend to business , they gamble on ` Change , they win money , they are stingy . 
People take care of their surfaces and varnish them ; every one is dressed as though just out of a band-box , washed , soaped , scraped , shaved , combed , waked , smoothed , rubbed , brushed , cleaned on the outside , irreproachable , polished as a pebble , discreet , neat , and at the same time , death of my life , in the depths of their consciences they have dung-heaps and cesspools that are enough to make a cow-herd who blows his nose in his fingers , recoil . 
I grant to this age the device : ` Dirty Cleanliness . ' 
Do n't be vexed , Marius , give me permission to speak ; I say no evil of the people as you see , I am always harping on your people , but do look favorably on my dealing a bit of a slap to the bourgeoisie . 
I belong to it . 
He who loves well lashes well . 
Thereupon , I say plainly , that now-a-days people marry , but that they no longer know how to marry . 
Ah ! 
it is true , I regret the grace of the ancient manners . 
I regret everything about them , their elegance , their chivalry , those courteous and delicate ways , that joyous luxury which every one possessed , music forming part of the wedding , a symphony above stairs , a beating of drums below stairs , the dances , the joyous faces round the table , the fine-spun gallant compliments , the songs , the fireworks , the frank laughter , the devil 's own row , the huge knots of ribbon . 
I regret the bride 's garter . 
The bride 's garter is cousin to the girdle of Venus . 
On what does the war of Troy turn ? 
On Helen 's garter , parbleu ! 
Why did they fight , why did Diomed the divine break over the head of Meriones that great brazen helmet of ten points ? 
why did Achilles and Hector hew each other up with vast blows of their lances ? 
Because Helen allowed Paris to take her garter . 
With Cosette 's garter , Homer would construct the Iliad . 
He would put in his poem , a loquacious old fellow , like me , and he would call him Nestor . 
My friends , in bygone days , in those amiable days of yore , people married wisely ; they had a good contract , and then they had a good carouse . 
As soon as Cujas had taken his departure , Gamacho entered . 
But , in sooth ! 
the stomach is an agreeable beast which demands its due , and which wants to have its wedding also . 
People supped well , and had at table a beautiful neighbor without a guimpe so that her throat was only moderately concealed . 
Oh ! 
the large laughing mouths , and how gay we were in those days ! 
youth was a bouquet ; every young man terminated in a branch of lilacs or a tuft of roses ; whether he was a shepherd or a warrior ; and if , by chance , one was a captain of dragoons , one found means to call oneself Florian . 
People thought much of looking well . 
They embroidered and tinted themselves . 
A bourgeois had the air of a flower , a Marquis had the air of a precious stone . 
People had no straps to their boots , they had no boots . 
They were spruce , shining , waved , lustrous , fluttering , dainty , coquettish , which did not at all prevent their wearing swords by their sides . 
The humming-bird has beak and claws . 
That was the day of the Galland Indies . 
One of the sides of that century was delicate , the other was magnificent ; and by the green cabbages ! 
people amused themselves . 
To-day , people are serious . 
The bourgeois is avaricious , the bourgeoise is a prude ; your century is unfortunate . 
People would drive away the Graces as being too low in the neck . 
Alas ! 
beauty is concealed as though it were ugliness . 
Since the revolution , everything , including the ballet-dancers , has had its trousers ; a mountebank dancer must be grave ; your rigadoons are doctrinarian . 
It is necessary to be majestic . 
People would be greatly annoyed if they did not carry their chins in their cravats . 
The ideal of an urchin of twenty when he marries , is to resemble M. Royer-Collard . 
And do you know what one arrives at with that majesty ? 
at being petty . 
Learn this : joy is not only joyous ; it is great . 
But be in love gayly then , what the deuce ! 
marry , when you marry , with fever and giddiness , and tumult , and the uproar of happiness ! 
Be grave in church , well and good . 
But , as soon as the mass is finished , sarpejou ! 
you must make a dream whirl around the bride . 
A marriage should be royal and chimerical ; it should promenade its ceremony from the cathedral of Rheims to the pagoda of Chanteloup . 
I have a horror of a paltry wedding . 
Ventregoulette ! 
be in Olympus for that one day , at least . 
Be one of the gods . 
Ah ! 
people might be sylphs . 
Games and Laughter , argiraspides ; they are stupids . 
My friends , every recently made bridegroom ought to be Prince Aldobrandini . 
Profit by that unique minute in life to soar away to the empyrean with the swans and the eagles , even if you do have to fall back on the morrow into the bourgeoisie of the frogs . 
Do n't economize on the nuptials , do not prune them of their splendors ; do n't scrimp on the day when you beam . 
The wedding is not the housekeeping . 
Oh ! 
if I were to carry out my fancy , it would be gallant , violins would be heard under the trees . 
Here is my programme : sky-blue and silver . 
I would mingle with the festival the rural divinities , I would convoke the Dryads and the Nereids . 
The nuptials of Amphitrite , a rosy cloud , nymphs with well dressed locks and entirely naked , an Academician offering quatrains to the goddess , a chariot drawn by marine monsters . 
`` Triton trottait devant , et tirait de sa conque Des sons si ravissants qu'il ravissait quiconque ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- -- there 's a festive programme , there 's a good one , or else I know nothing of such matters , deuce take it ! '' 
-LSB- 65 -RSB- `` Triton trotted on before , and drew from his conch-shell sounds so ravishing that he delighted everyone ! '' 
While the grandfather , in full lyrical effusion , was listening to himself , Cosette and Marius grew intoxicated as they gazed freely at each other . 
Aunt Gillenormand surveyed all this with her imperturbable placidity . 
Within the last five or six months she had experienced a certain amount of emotions . 
Marius returned , Marius brought back bleeding , Marius brought back from a barricade , Marius dead , then living , Marius reconciled , Marius betrothed , Marius wedding a poor girl , Marius wedding a millionairess . 
The six hundred thousand francs had been her last surprise . 
Then , her indifference of a girl taking her first communion returned to her . 
She went regularly to service , told her beads , read her euchology , mumbled Aves in one corner of the house , while I love you was being whispered in the other , and she beheld Marius and Cosette in a vague way , like two shadows . 
The shadow was herself . 
There is a certain state of inert asceticism in which the soul , neutralized by torpor , a stranger to that which may be designated as the business of living , receives no impressions , either human , or pleasant or painful , with the exception of earthquakes and catastrophes . 
This devotion , as Father Gillenormand said to his daughter , corresponds to a cold in the head . 
You smell nothing of life . 
Neither any bad , nor any good odor . 
Moreover , the six hundred thousand francs had settled the elderly spinster 's indecision . 
Her father had acquired the habit of taking her so little into account , that he had not consulted her in the matter of consent to Marius ' marriage . 
He had acted impetuously , according to his wont , having , a despot-turned slave , but a single thought , -- to satisfy Marius . 
As for the aunt , -- it had not even occurred to him that the aunt existed , and that she could have an opinion of her own , and , sheep as she was , this had vexed her . 
Somewhat resentful in her inmost soul , but impassible externally , she had said to herself : `` My father has settled the question of the marriage without reference to me ; I shall settle the question of the inheritance without consulting him . '' 
She was rich , in fact , and her father was not . 
She had reserved her decision on this point . 
It is probable that , had the match been a poor one , she would have left him poor . 
`` So much the worse for my nephew ! 
he is wedding a beggar , let him be a beggar himself ! '' 
But Cosette 's half-million pleased the aunt , and altered her inward situation so far as this pair of lovers were concerned . 
One owes some consideration to six hundred thousand francs , and it was evident that she could not do otherwise than leave her fortune to these young people , since they did not need it . 
It was arranged that the couple should live with the grandfather -- M. Gillenormand insisted on resigning to them his chamber , the finest in the house . 
`` That will make me young again , '' he said . 
`` It 's an old plan of mine . 
I have always entertained the idea of having a wedding in my chamber . '' 
He furnished this chamber with a multitude of elegant trifles . 
He had the ceiling and walls hung with an extraordinary stuff , which he had by him in the piece , and which he believed to have emanated from Utrecht with a buttercup-colored satin ground , covered with velvet auricula blossoms . 
-- `` It was with that stuff , '' said he , `` that the bed of the Duchesse d'Anville at la Roche-Guyon was draped . '' 
-- On the chimney-piece , he set a little figure in Saxe porcelain , carrying a muff against her nude stomach . 
M. Gillenormand 's library became the lawyer 's study , which Marius needed ; a study , it will be remembered , being required by the council of the order . 
THE EFFECTS OF DREAMS MINGLED WITH HAPPINESS The lovers saw each other every day . 
Cosette came with M. Fauchelevent . 
-- `` This is reversing things , '' said Mademoiselle Gillenormand , `` to have the bride come to the house to do the courting like this . '' 
But Marius ' convalescence had caused the habit to become established , and the arm-chairs of the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , better adapted to interviews than the straw chairs of the Rue de l'Homme Arme , had rooted it . 
Marius and M. Fauchelevent saw each other , but did not address each other . 
It seemed as though this had been agreed upon . 
Every girl needs a chaperon . 
Cosette could not have come without M. Fauchelevent . 
In Marius ' eyes , M. Fauchelevent was the condition attached to Cosette . 
He accepted it . 
By dint of discussing political matters , vaguely and without precision , from the point of view of the general amelioration of the fate of all men , they came to say a little more than `` yes '' and `` no . '' 
Once , on the subject of education , which Marius wished to have free and obligatory , multiplied under all forms lavished on every one , like the air and the sun in a word , respirable for the entire population , they were in unison , and they almost conversed . 
M. Fauchelevent talked well , and even with a certain loftiness of language -- still he lacked something indescribable . 
M. Fauchelevent possessed something less and also something more , than a man of the world . 
Marius , inwardly , and in the depths of his thought , surrounded with all sorts of mute questions this M. Fauchelevent , who was to him simply benevolent and cold . 
There were moments when doubts as to his own recollections occurred to him . 
There was a void in his memory , a black spot , an abyss excavated by four months of agony . 
-- Many things had been lost therein . 
He had come to the point of asking himself whether it were really a fact that he had seen M. Fauchelevent , so serious and so calm a man , in the barricade . 
This was not , however , the only stupor which the apparitions and the disappearances of the past had left in his mind . 
It must not be supposed that he was delivered from all those obsessions of the memory which force us , even when happy , even when satisfied , to glance sadly behind us . 
The head which does not turn backwards towards horizons that have vanished contains neither thought nor love . 
At times , Marius clasped his face between his hands , and the vague and tumultuous past traversed the twilight which reigned in his brain . 
Again he beheld Mabeuf fall , he heard Gavroche singing amid the grape-shot , he felt beneath his lips the cold brow of Eponine ; Enjolras , Courfeyrac , Jean Prouvaire , Combeferre , Bossuet , Grantaire , all his friends rose erect before him , then dispersed into thin air . 
Were all those dear , sorrowful , valiant , charming or tragic beings merely dreams ? 
had they actually existed ? 
The revolt had enveloped everything in its smoke . 
These great fevers create great dreams . 
He questioned himself ; he felt himself ; all these vanished realities made him dizzy . 
Where were they all then ? 
was it really true that all were dead ? 
A fall into the shadows had carried off all except himself . 
It all seemed to him to have disappeared as though behind the curtain of a theatre . 
There are curtains like this which drop in life . 
God passes on to the following act . 
And he himself -- was he actually the same man ? 
He , the poor man , was rich ; he , the abandoned , had a family ; he , the despairing , was to marry Cosette . 
It seemed to him that he had traversed a tomb , and that he had entered into it black and had emerged from it white , and in that tomb the others had remained . 
At certain moments , all these beings of the past , returned and present , formed a circle around him , and overshadowed him ; then he thought of Cosette , and recovered his serenity ; but nothing less than this felicity could have sufficed to efface that catastrophe . 
M. Fauchelevent almost occupied a place among these vanished beings . 
Marius hesitated to believe that the Fauchelevent of the barricade was the same as this Fauchelevent in flesh and blood , sitting so gravely beside Cosette . 
The first was , probably , one of those nightmares occasioned and brought back by his hours of delirium . 
However , the natures of both men were rigid , no question from Marius to M. Fauchelevent was possible . 
Such an idea had not even occurred to him . 
We have already indicated this characteristic detail . 
Two men who have a secret in common , and who , by a sort of tacit agreement , exchange not a word on the subject , are less rare than is commonly supposed . 
Once only , did Marius make the attempt . 
He introduced into the conversation the Rue de la Chanvrerie , and , turning to M. Fauchelevent , he said to him : `` Of course , you are acquainted with that street ? '' 
`` What street ? '' 
`` The Rue de la Chanvrerie . '' 
`` I have no idea of the name of that street , '' replied M. Fauchelevent , in the most natural manner in the world . 
The response which bore upon the name of the street and not upon the street itself , appeared to Marius to be more conclusive than it really was . 
`` Decidedly , '' thought he , `` I have been dreaming . 
I have been subject to a hallucination . 
It was some one who resembled him . 
M. Fauchelevent was not there . '' ' 
TWO MEN IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND Marius ' enchantment , great as it was , could not efface from his mind other pre-occupations . 
While the wedding was in preparation , and while awaiting the date fixed upon , he caused difficult and scrupulous retrospective researches to be made . 
He owed gratitude in various quarters ; he owed it on his father 's account , he owed it on his own . 
There was Thenardier ; there was the unknown man who had brought him , Marius , back to M. Gillenormand . 
Marius endeavored to find these two men , not intending to marry , to be happy , and to forget them , and fearing that , were these debts of gratitude not discharged , they would leave a shadow on his life , which promised so brightly for the future . 
It was impossible for him to leave all these arrears of suffering behind him , and he wished , before entering joyously into the future , to obtain a quittance from the past . 
That Thenardier was a villain detracted nothing from the fact that he had saved Colonel Pontmercy . 
Thenardier was a ruffian in the eyes of all the world except Marius . 
And Marius , ignorant of the real scene in the battle field of Waterloo , was not aware of the peculiar detail , that his father , so far as Thenardier was concerned was in the strange position of being indebted to the latter for his life , without being indebted to him for any gratitude . 
None of the various agents whom Marius employed succeeded in discovering any trace of Thenardier . 
Obliteration appeared to be complete in that quarter . 
Madame Thenardier had died in prison pending the trial . 
Thenardier and his daughter Azelma , the only two remaining of that lamentable group , had plunged back into the gloom . 
The gulf of the social unknown had silently closed above those beings . 
On the surface there was not visible so much as that quiver , that trembling , those obscure concentric circles which announce that something has fallen in , and that the plummet may be dropped . 
Madame Thenardier being dead , Boulatruelle being eliminated from the case , Claquesous having disappeared , the principal persons accused having escaped from prison , the trial connected with the ambush in the Gorbeau house had come to nothing . 
That affair had remained rather obscure . 
The bench of Assizes had been obliged to content themselves with two subordinates . 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , and Demi-Liard , alias Deux-Milliards , who had been inconsistently condemned , after a hearing of both sides of the case , to ten years in the galleys . 
Hard labor for life had been the sentence pronounced against the escaped and contumacious accomplices . 
Thenardier , the head and leader , had been , through contumacy , likewise condemned to death . 
This sentence was the only information remaining about Thenardier , casting upon that buried name its sinister light like a candle beside a bier . 
Moreover , by thrusting Thenardier back into the very remotest depths , through a fear of being re-captured , this sentence added to the density of the shadows which enveloped this man . 
As for the other person , as for the unknown man who had saved Marius , the researches were at first to some extent successful , then came to an abrupt conclusion . 
They succeeded in finding the carriage which had brought Marius to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire on the evening of the 6th of June . 
The coachman declared that , on the 6th of June , in obedience to the commands of a police-agent , he had stood from three o'clock in the afternoon until nightfall on the Quai des Champs-Elysees , above the outlet of the Grand Sewer ; that , towards nine o'clock in the evening , the grating of the sewer , which abuts on the bank of the river , had opened ; that a man had emerged therefrom , bearing on his shoulders another man , who seemed to be dead ; that the agent , who was on the watch at that point , had arrested the living man and had seized the dead man ; that , at the order of the police-agent , he , the coachman , had taken `` all those folks '' into his carriage ; that they had first driven to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire ; that they had there deposited the dead man ; that the dead man was Monsieur Marius , and that he , the coachman , recognized him perfectly , although he was alive `` this time '' ; that afterwards , they had entered the vehicle again , that he had whipped up his horses ; a few paces from the gate of the Archives , they had called to him to halt ; that there , in the street , they had paid him and left him , and that the police-agent had led the other man away ; that he knew nothing more ; that the night had been very dark . 
Marius , as we have said , recalled nothing . 
He only remembered that he had been seized from behind by an energetic hand at the moment when he was falling backwards into the barricade ; then , everything vanished so far as he was concerned . 
He had only regained consciousness at M. Gillenormand 's . 
He was lost in conjectures . 
He could not doubt his own identity . 
