For if they had had another neighbor who was less chimerical and more attentive , any ordinary and charitable man , evidently their indigence would have been noticed , their signals of distress would have been perceived , and they would have been taken hold of and rescued ! 
They appeared very corrupt and very depraved , no doubt , very vile , very odious even ; but those who fall without becoming degraded are rare ; besides , there is a point where the unfortunate and the infamous unite and are confounded in a single word , a fatal word , the miserable ; whose fault is this ? 
And then should not the charity be all the more profound , in proportion as the fall is great ? 
While reading himself this moral lesson , for there were occasions on which Marius , like all truly honest hearts , was his own pedagogue and scolded himself more than he deserved , he stared at the wall which separated him from the Jondrettes , as though he were able to make his gaze , full of pity , penetrate that partition and warm these wretched people . 
The wall was a thin layer of plaster upheld by lathes and beams , and , as the reader had just learned , it allowed the sound of voices and words to be clearly distinguished . 
Only a man as dreamy as Marius could have failed to perceive this long before . 
There was no paper pasted on the wall , either on the side of the Jondrettes or on that of Marius ; the coarse construction was visible in its nakedness . 
Marius examined the partition , almost unconsciously ; sometimes revery examines , observes , and scrutinizes as thought would . 
All at once he sprang up ; he had just perceived , near the top , close to the ceiling , a triangular hole , which resulted from the space between three lathes . 
The plaster which should have filled this cavity was missing , and by mounting on the commode , a view could be had through this aperture into the Jondrettes ' attic . 
Commiseration has , and should have , its curiosity . 
This aperture formed a sort of peep-hole . 
It is permissible to gaze at misfortune like a traitor in order to succor it . 
-LSB- 27 -RSB- -LSB- 27 -RSB- The peep-hole is a Judas in French . 
Hence the half-punning allusion . 
`` Let us get some little idea of what these people are like , '' thought Marius , `` and in what condition they are . '' 
He climbed upon the commode , put his eye to the crevice , and looked . 
THE WILD MAN IN HIS LAIR Cities , like forests , have their caverns in which all the most wicked and formidable creatures which they contain conceal themselves . 
Only , in cities , that which thus conceals itself is ferocious , unclean , and petty , that is to say , ugly ; in forests , that which conceals itself is ferocious , savage , and grand , that is to say , beautiful . 
Taking one lair with another , the beast 's is preferable to the man 's . 
Caverns are better than hovels . 
What Marius now beheld was a hovel . 
Marius was poor , and his chamber was poverty-stricken , but as his poverty was noble , his garret was neat . 
The den upon which his eye now rested was abject , dirty , fetid , pestiferous , mean , sordid . 
The only furniture consisted of a straw chair , an infirm table , some old bits of crockery , and in two of the corners , two indescribable pallets ; all the light was furnishd by a dormer window of four panes , draped with spiders ' webs . 
Through this aperture there penetrated just enough light to make the face of a man appear like the face of a phantom . 
The walls had a leprous aspect , and were covered with seams and scars , like a visage disfigured by some horrible malady ; a repulsive moisture exuded from them . 
Obscene sketches roughly sketched with charcoal could be distinguished upon them . 
The chamber which Marius occupied had a dilapidated brick pavement ; this one was neither tiled nor planked ; its inhabitants stepped directly on the antique plaster of the hovel , which had grown black under the long-continued pressure of feet . 
Upon this uneven floor , where the dirt seemed to be fairly incrusted , and which possessed but one virginity , that of the broom , were capriciously grouped constellations of old shoes , socks , and repulsive rags ; however , this room had a fireplace , so it was let for forty francs a year . 
There was every sort of thing in that fireplace , a brazier , a pot , broken boards , rags suspended from nails , a bird-cage , ashes , and even a little fire . 
Two brands were smouldering there in a melancholy way . 
One thing which added still more to the horrors of this garret was , that it was large . 
It had projections and angles and black holes , the lower sides of roofs , bays , and promontories . 
Hence horrible , unfathomable nooks where it seemed as though spiders as big as one 's fist , wood-lice as large as one 's foot , and perhaps even -- who knows ? 
-- some monstrous human beings , must be hiding . 
One of the pallets was near the door , the other near the window . 
One end of each touched the fireplace and faced Marius . 
In a corner near the aperture through which Marius was gazing , a colored engraving in a black frame was suspended to a nail on the wall , and at its bottom , in large letters , was the inscription : THE DREAM . 
This represented a sleeping woman , and a child , also asleep , the child on the woman 's lap , an eagle in a cloud , with a crown in his beak , and the woman thrusting the crown away from the child 's head , without awaking the latter ; in the background , Napoleon in a glory , leaning on a very blue column with a yellow capital ornamented with this inscription : MARINGO AUSTERLITS IENA WAGRAMME ELOT Beneath this frame , a sort of wooden panel , which was no longer than it was broad , stood on the ground and rested in a sloping attitude against the wall . 
It had the appearance of a picture with its face turned to the wall , of a frame probably showing a daub on the other side , of some pier-glass detached from a wall and lying forgotten there while waiting to be rehung . 
Near the table , upon which Marius descried a pen , ink , and paper , sat a man about sixty years of age , small , thin , livid , haggard , with a cunning , cruel , and uneasy air ; a hideous scoundrel . 
If Lavater had studied this visage , he would have found the vulture mingled with the attorney there , the bird of prey and the pettifogger rendering each other mutually hideous and complementing each other ; the pettifogger making the bird of prey ignoble , the bird of prey making the pettifogger horrible . 
This man had a long gray beard . 
He was clad in a woman 's chemise , which allowed his hairy breast and his bare arms , bristling with gray hair , to be seen . 
Beneath this chemise , muddy trousers and boots through which his toes projected were visible . 
He had a pipe in his mouth and was smoking . 
There was no bread in the hovel , but there was still tobacco . 
He was writing probably some more letters like those which Marius had read . 
On the corner of the table lay an ancient , dilapidated , reddish volume , and the size , which was the antique 12mo of reading-rooms , betrayed a romance . 
On the cover sprawled the following title , printed in large capitals : GOD ; THE KING ; HONOR AND THE LADIES ; BY DUCRAY DUMINIL , 1814 . 
As the man wrote , he talked aloud , and Marius heard his words : -- `` The idea that there is no equality , even when you are dead ! 
Just look at Pere Lachaise ! 
The great , those who are rich , are up above , in the acacia alley , which is paved . 
They can reach it in a carriage . 
The little people , the poor , the unhappy , well , what of them ? 
they are put down below , where the mud is up to your knees , in the damp places . 
They are put there so that they will decay the sooner ! 
You can not go to see them without sinking into the earth . '' 
He paused , smote the table with his fist , and added , as he ground his teeth : -- `` Oh ! 
I could eat the whole world ! '' 
A big woman , who might be forty years of age , or a hundred , was crouching near the fireplace on her bare heels . 
She , too , was clad only in a chemise and a knitted petticoat patched with bits of old cloth . 
A coarse linen apron concealed the half of her petticoat . 
Although this woman was doubled up and bent together , it could be seen that she was of very lofty stature . 
She was a sort of giant , beside her husband . 
She had hideous hair , of a reddish blond which was turning gray , and which she thrust back from time to time , with her enormous shining hands , with their flat nails . 
Beside her , on the floor , wide open , lay a book of the same form as the other , and probably a volume of the same romance . 
On one of the pallets , Marius caught a glimpse of a sort of tall pale young girl , who sat there half naked and with pendant feet , and who did not seem to be listening or seeing or living . 
No doubt the younger sister of the one who had come to his room . 
She seemed to be eleven or twelve years of age . 
On closer scrutiny it was evident that she really was fourteen . 
She was the child who had said , on the boulevard the evening before : `` I bolted , bolted , bolted ! '' 
She was of that puny sort which remains backward for a long time , then suddenly starts up rapidly . 
It is indigence which produces these melancholy human plants . 
These creatures have neither childhood nor youth . 
At fifteen years of age they appear to be twelve , at sixteen they seem twenty . 
To-day a little girl , to-morrow a woman . 
One might say that they stride through life , in order to get through with it the more speedily . 
At this moment , this being had the air of a child . 
Moreover , no trace of work was revealed in that dwelling ; no handicraft , no spinning-wheel , not a tool . 
In one corner lay some ironmongery of dubious aspect . 
It was the dull listlessness which follows despair and precedes the death agony . 
Marius gazed for a while at this gloomy interior , more terrifying than the interior of a tomb , for the human soul could be felt fluttering there , and life was palpitating there . 
The garret , the cellar , the lowly ditch where certain indigent wretches crawl at the very bottom of the social edifice , is not exactly the sepulchre , but only its antechamber ; but , as the wealthy display their greatest magnificence at the entrance of their palaces , it seems that death , which stands directly side by side with them , places its greatest miseries in that vestibule . 
The man held his peace , the woman spoke no word , the young girl did not even seem to breathe . 
The scratching of the pen on the paper was audible . 
The man grumbled , without pausing in his writing . 
`` Canaille ! 
canaille ! 
everybody is canaille ! '' 
This variation to Solomon 's exclamation elicited a sigh from the woman . 
`` Calm yourself , my little friend , '' she said . 
`` Do n't hurt yourself , my dear . 
You are too good to write to all those people , husband . '' 
Bodies press close to each other in misery , as in cold , but hearts draw apart . 
This woman must have loved this man , to all appearance , judging from the amount of love within her ; but probably , in the daily and reciprocal reproaches of the horrible distress which weighed on the whole group , this had become extinct . 
There no longer existed in her anything more than the ashes of affection for her husband . 
Nevertheless , caressing appellations had survived , as is often the case . 
She called him : My dear , my little friend , my good man , etc. , with her mouth while her heart was silent . 
The man resumed his writing . 
STRATEGY AND TACTICS Marius , with a load upon his breast , was on the point of descending from the species of observatory which he had improvised , when a sound attracted his attention and caused him to remain at his post . 
The door of the attic had just burst open abruptly . 
The eldest girl made her appearance on the threshold . 
On her feet , she had large , coarse , men 's shoes , bespattered with mud , which had splashed even to her red ankles , and she was wrapped in an old mantle which hung in tatters . 
Marius had not seen it on her an hour previously , but she had probably deposited it at his door , in order that she might inspire the more pity , and had picked it up again on emerging . 
She entered , pushed the door to behind her , paused to take breath , for she was completely breathless , then exclaimed with an expression of triumph and joy : -- `` He is coming ! '' 
The father turned his eyes towards her , the woman turned her head , the little sister did not stir . 
`` Who ? '' 
demanded her father . 
`` The gentleman ! '' 
`` The philanthropist ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` From the church of Saint-Jacques ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` That old fellow ? '' 
`` Yes . '' 
`` And he is coming ? '' 
`` He is following me . '' 
`` You are sure ? '' 
`` I am sure . '' 
`` There , truly , he is coming ? '' 
`` He is coming in a fiacre . '' 
`` In a fiacre . 
He is Rothschild . '' 
The father rose . 
`` How are you sure ? 
If he is coming in a fiacre , how is it that you arrive before him ? 
You gave him our address at least ? 
Did you tell him that it was the last door at the end of the corridor , on the right ? 
If he only does not make a mistake ! 
So you found him at the church ? 
Did he read my letter ? 
What did he say to you ? '' 
`` Ta , ta , ta , '' said the girl , `` how you do gallop on , my good man ! 
See here : I entered the church , he was in his usual place , I made him a reverence , and I handed him the letter ; he read it and said to me : ` Where do you live , my child ? ' 
I said : ` Monsieur , I will show you . ' 
He said to me : ` No , give me your address , my daughter has some purchases to make , I will take a carriage and reach your house at the same time that you do . ' 
I gave him the address . 
When I mentioned the house , he seemed surprised and hesitated for an instant , then he said : ` Never mind , I will come . ' 
When the mass was finished , I watched him leave the church with his daughter , and I saw them enter a carriage . 
I certainly did tell him the last door in the corridor , on the right . '' 
`` And what makes you think that he will come ? '' 
`` I have just seen the fiacre turn into the Rue Petit-Banquier . 
That is what made me run so . '' 
`` How do you know that it was the same fiacre ? '' 
`` Because I took notice of the number , so there ! '' 
`` What was the number ? '' 
`` 440 . '' 
`` Good , you are a clever girl . '' 
The girl stared boldly at her father , and showing the shoes which she had on her feet : -- `` A clever girl , possibly ; but I tell you I wo n't put these shoes on again , and that I wo n't , for the sake of my health , in the first place , and for the sake of cleanliness , in the next . 
I do n't know anything more irritating than shoes that squelch , and go ghi , ghi , ghi , the whole time . 
I prefer to go barefoot . '' 
`` You are right , '' said her father , in a sweet tone which contrasted with the young girl 's rudeness , `` but then , you will not be allowed to enter churches , for poor people must have shoes to do that . 
One can not go barefoot to the good God , '' he added bitterly . 
Then , returning to the subject which absorbed him : -- `` So you are sure that he will come ? '' 
`` He is following on my heels , '' said she . 
The man started up . 
A sort of illumination appeared on his countenance . 
`` Wife ! '' 
he exclaimed , `` you hear . 
Here is the philanthropist . 
Extinguish the fire . '' 
The stupefied mother did not stir . 
The father , with the agility of an acrobat , seized a broken-nosed jug which stood on the chimney , and flung the water on the brands . 
Then , addressing his eldest daughter : -- `` Here you ! 
Pull the straw off that chair ! '' 
His daughter did not understand . 
He seized the chair , and with one kick he rendered it seatless . 
His leg passed through it . 
As he withdrew his leg , he asked his daughter : -- `` Is it cold ? '' 
`` Very cold . 
It is snowing . '' 
The father turned towards the younger girl who sat on the bed near the window , and shouted to her in a thundering voice : -- `` Quick ! 
get off that bed , you lazy thing ! 
will you never do anything ? 
Break a pane of glass ! '' 
The little girl jumped off the bed with a shiver . 
`` Break a pane ! '' 
he repeated . 
The child stood still in bewilderment . 
`` Do you hear me ? '' 
repeated her father , `` I tell you to break a pane ! '' 
The child , with a sort of terrified obedience , rose on tiptoe , and struck a pane with her fist . 
The glass broke and fell with a loud clatter . 
`` Good , '' said the father . 
He was grave and abrupt . 
His glance swept rapidly over all the crannies of the garret . 
One would have said that he was a general making the final preparation at the moment when the battle is on the point of beginning . 
The mother , who had not said a word so far , now rose and demanded in a dull , slow , languid voice , whence her words seemed to emerge in a congealed state : -- `` What do you mean to do , my dear ? '' 
`` Get into bed , '' replied the man . 
His intonation admitted of no deliberation . 
The mother obeyed , and threw herself heavily on one of the pallets . 
In the meantime , a sob became audible in one corner . 
`` What 's that ? '' 
cried the father . 
The younger daughter exhibited her bleeding fist , without quitting the corner in which she was cowering . 
She had wounded herself while breaking the window ; she went off , near her mother 's pallet and wept silently . 
It was now the mother 's turn to start up and exclaim : -- `` Just see there ! 
What follies you commit ! 
She has cut herself breaking that pane for you ! '' 
`` So much the better ! '' 
said the man . 
`` I foresaw that . '' 
`` What ? 
So much the better ? '' 
retorted his wife . 
`` Peace ! '' 
replied the father , `` I suppress the liberty of the press . '' 
Then tearing the woman 's chemise which he was wearing , he made a strip of cloth with which he hastily swathed the little girl 's bleeding wrist . 
That done , his eye fell with a satisfied expression on his torn chemise . 
`` And the chemise too , '' said he , `` this has a good appearance . '' 
An icy breeze whistled through the window and entered the room . 
The outer mist penetrated thither and diffused itself like a whitish sheet of wadding vaguely spread by invisible fingers . 
Through the broken pane the snow could be seen falling . 
The snow promised by the Candlemas sun of the preceding day had actually come . 
The father cast a glance about him as though to make sure that he had forgotten nothing . 
He seized an old shovel and spread ashes over the wet brands in such a manner as to entirely conceal them . 
Then drawing himself up and leaning against the chimney-piece : -- `` Now , '' said he , `` we can receive the philanthropist . '' 
THE RAY OF LIGHT IN THE HOVEL The big girl approached and laid her hand in her father 's . 
`` Feel how cold I am , '' said she . 
`` Bah ! '' 
replied the father , `` I am much colder than that . '' 
The mother exclaimed impetuously : -- `` You always have something better than any one else , so you do ! 
even bad things . '' 
`` Down with you ! '' 
said the man . 
The mother , being eyed after a certain fashion , held her tongue . 
Silence reigned for a moment in the hovel . 
The elder girl was removing the mud from the bottom of her mantle , with a careless air ; her younger sister continued to sob ; the mother had taken the latter 's head between her hands , and was covering it with kisses , whispering to her the while : -- `` My treasure , I entreat you , it is nothing of consequence , do n't cry , you will anger your father . '' 
`` No ! '' 
exclaimed the father , `` quite the contrary ! 
sob ! 
sob ! 
that 's right . '' 
Then turning to the elder : -- `` There now ! 
He is not coming ! 
What if he were not to come ! 
I shall have extinguished my fire , wrecked my chair , torn my shirt , and broken my pane all for nothing . '' 
`` And wounded the child ! '' 
murmured the mother . 
`` Do you know , '' went on the father , `` that it 's beastly cold in this devil 's garret ! 
What if that man should not come ! 
Oh ! 
See there , you ! 
He makes us wait ! 
He says to himself : ` Well ! 
they will wait for me ! 
That 's what they 're there for . ' 
Oh ! 
how I hate them , and with what joy , jubilation , enthusiasm , and satisfaction I could strangle all those rich folks ! 
all those rich folks ! 
These men who pretend to be charitable , who put on airs , who go to mass , who make presents to the priesthood , preachy , preachy , in their skullcaps , and who think themselves above us , and who come for the purpose of humiliating us , and to bring us ` clothes , ' as they say ! 
old duds that are not worth four sous ! 
And bread ! 
That 's not what I want , pack of rascals that they are , it 's money ! 
Ah ! 
money ! 
Never ! 
Because they say that we would go off and drink it up , and that we are drunkards and idlers ! 
And they ! 
What are they , then , and what have they been in their time ! 
Thieves ! 
They never could have become rich otherwise ! 
Oh ! 
Society ought to be grasped by the four corners of the cloth and tossed into the air , all of it ! 
It would all be smashed , very likely , but at least , no one would have anything , and there would be that much gained ! 
But what is that blockhead of a benevolent gentleman doing ? 
Will he come ? 
Perhaps the animal has forgotten the address ! 
I 'll bet that that old beast -- '' At that moment there came a light tap at the door , the man rushed to it and opened it , exclaiming , amid profound bows and smiles of adoration : -- `` Enter , sir ! 
Deign to enter , most respected benefactor , and your charming young lady , also . '' 
A man of ripe age and a young girl made their appearance on the threshold of the attic . 
Marius had not quitted his post . 
His feelings for the moment surpassed the powers of the human tongue . 
It was She ! 
Whoever has loved knows all the radiant meanings contained in those three letters of that word : She . 
It was certainly she . 
Marius could hardly distinguish her through the luminous vapor which had suddenly spread before his eyes . 
It was that sweet , absent being , that star which had beamed upon him for six months ; it was those eyes , that brow , that mouth , that lovely vanished face which had created night by its departure . 
The vision had been eclipsed , now it reappeared . 
It reappeared in that gloom , in that garret , in that misshapen attic , in all that horror . 
Marius shuddered in dismay . 
What ! 
It was she ! 
The palpitations of his heart troubled his sight . 
He felt that he was on the brink of bursting into tears ! 
What ! 
He beheld her again at last , after having sought her so long ! 
It seemed to him that he had lost his soul , and that he had just found it again . 
She was the same as ever , only a little pale ; her delicate face was framed in a bonnet of violet velvet , her figure was concealed beneath a pelisse of black satin . 
Beneath her long dress , a glimpse could be caught of her tiny foot shod in a silken boot . 
She was still accompanied by M. Leblanc . 
She had taken a few steps into the room , and had deposited a tolerably bulky parcel on the table . 
The eldest Jondrette girl had retired behind the door , and was staring with sombre eyes at that velvet bonnet , that silk mantle , and that charming , happy face . 
JONDRETTE COMES NEAR WEEPING The hovel was so dark , that people coming from without felt on entering it the effect produced on entering a cellar . 
The two new-comers advanced , therefore , with a certain hesitation , being hardly able to distinguish the vague forms surrounding them , while they could be clearly seen and scrutinized by the eyes of the inhabitants of the garret , who were accustomed to this twilight . 
M. Leblanc approached , with his sad but kindly look , and said to Jondrette the father : -- `` Monsieur , in this package you will find some new clothes and some woollen stockings and blankets . '' 
`` Our angelic benefactor overwhelms us , '' said Jondrette , bowing to the very earth . 
Then , bending down to the ear of his eldest daughter , while the two visitors were engaged in examining this lamentable interior , he added in a low and rapid voice : -- `` Hey ? 
What did I say ? 
Duds ! 
No money ! 
They are all alike ! 
By the way , how was the letter to that old blockhead signed ? '' 
`` Fabantou , '' replied the girl . 
`` The dramatic artist , good ! '' 
It was lucky for Jondrette , that this had occurred to him , for at the very moment , M. Leblanc turned to him , and said to him with the air of a person who is seeking to recall a name : -- `` I see that you are greatly to be pitied , Monsieur -- '' `` Fabantou , '' replied Jondrette quickly . 
`` Monsieur Fabantou , yes , that is it . 
I remember . '' 
`` Dramatic artist , sir , and one who has had some success . '' 
Here Jondrette evidently judged the moment propitious for capturing the `` philanthropist . '' 
He exclaimed with an accent which smacked at the same time of the vainglory of the mountebank at fairs , and the humility of the mendicant on the highway : -- `` A pupil of Talma ! 
Sir ! 
I am a pupil of Talma ! 
Fortune formerly smiled on me -- Alas ! 
Now it is misfortune 's turn . 
You see , my benefactor , no bread , no fire . 
My poor babes have no fire ! 
My only chair has no seat ! 
A broken pane ! 
And in such weather ! 
My spouse in bed ! 
Ill ! '' 
`` Poor woman ! '' 
said M. Leblanc . 
`` My child wounded ! '' 
added Jondrette . 
The child , diverted by the arrival of the strangers , had fallen to contemplating `` the young lady , '' and had ceased to sob . 
`` Cry ! 
bawl ! '' 
said Jondrette to her in a low voice . 
At the same time he pinched her sore hand . 
All this was done with the talent of a juggler . 
The little girl gave vent to loud shrieks . 
The adorable young girl , whom Marius , in his heart , called `` his Ursule , '' approached her hastily . 
`` Poor , dear child ! '' 
said she . 
`` You see , my beautiful young lady , '' pursued Jondrette `` her bleeding wrist ! 
It came through an accident while working at a machine to earn six sous a day . 
It may be necessary to cut off her arm . '' 
`` Really ? '' 
said the old gentleman , in alarm . 
The little girl , taking this seriously , fell to sobbing more violently than ever . 
`` Alas ! 
yes , my benefactor ! '' 
replied the father . 
For several minutes , Jondrette had been scrutinizing `` the benefactor '' in a singular fashion . 
As he spoke , he seemed to be examining the other attentively , as though seeking to summon up his recollections . 
All at once , profiting by a moment when the new-comers were questioning the child with interest as to her injured hand , he passed near his wife , who lay in her bed with a stupid and dejected air , and said to her in a rapid but very low tone : -- `` Take a look at that man ! '' 
Then , turning to M. Leblanc , and continuing his lamentations : -- `` You see , sir ! 
All the clothing that I have is my wife 's chemise ! 
And all torn at that ! 
In the depths of winter ! 
I ca n't go out for lack of a coat . 
If I had a coat of any sort , I would go and see Mademoiselle Mars , who knows me and is very fond of me . 
Does she not still reside in the Rue de la Tour-des-Dames ? 
Do you know , sir ? 
We played together in the provinces . 
I shared her laurels . 
Celimene would come to my succor , sir ! 
Elmire would bestow alms on Belisaire ! 
But no , nothing ! 
And not a sou in the house ! 
My wife ill , and not a sou ! 
My daughter dangerously injured , not a sou ! 
My wife suffers from fits of suffocation . 
It comes from her age , and besides , her nervous system is affected . 
She ought to have assistance , and my daughter also ! 
But the doctor ! 
But the apothecary ! 
How am I to pay them ? 
I would kneel to a penny , sir ! 
Such is the condition to which the arts are reduced . 
And do you know , my charming young lady , and you , my generous protector , do you know , you who breathe forth virtue and goodness , and who perfume that church where my daughter sees you every day when she says her prayers ? 
-- For I have brought up my children religiously , sir . 
I did not want them to take to the theatre . 
Ah ! 
the hussies ! 
If I catch them tripping ! 
I do not jest , that I do n't ! 
I read them lessons on honor , on morality , on virtue ! 
Ask them ! 
They have got to walk straight . 
They are none of your unhappy wretches who begin by having no family , and end by espousing the public . 
One is Mamselle Nobody , and one becomes Madame Everybody . 
Deuce take it ! 
None of that in the Fabantou family ! 
I mean to bring them up virtuously , and they shall be honest , and nice , and believe in God , by the sacred name ! 
Well , sir , my worthy sir , do you know what is going to happen to-morrow ? 
To-morrow is the fourth day of February , the fatal day , the last day of grace allowed me by my landlord ; if by this evening I have not paid my rent , to-morrow my oldest daughter , my spouse with her fever , my child with her wound , -- we shall all four be turned out of here and thrown into the street , on the boulevard , without shelter , in the rain , in the snow . 
There , sir . 
I owe for four quarters -- a whole year ! 
that is to say , sixty francs . '' 
Jondrette lied . 
Four quarters would have amounted to only forty francs , and he could not owe four , because six months had not elapsed since Marius had paid for two . 
M. Leblanc drew five francs from his pocket and threw them on the table . 
Jondrette found time to mutter in the ear of his eldest daughter : -- `` The scoundrel ! 
What does he think I can do with his five francs ? 
That wo n't pay me for my chair and pane of glass ! 
That 's what comes of incurring expenses ! '' 
In the meanwhile , M. Leblanc had removed the large brown great-coat which he wore over his blue coat , and had thrown it over the back of the chair . 
`` Monsieur Fabantou , '' he said , `` these five francs are all that I have about me , but I shall now take my daughter home , and I will return this evening , -- it is this evening that you must pay , is it not ? '' 
Jondrette 's face lighted up with a strange expression . 
He replied vivaciously : -- `` Yes , respected sir . 
At eight o'clock , I must be at my landlord 's . '' 
`` I will be here at six , and I will fetch you the sixty francs . '' 
`` My benefactor ! '' 
exclaimed Jondrette , overwhelmed . 
And he added , in a low tone : `` Take a good look at him , wife ! '' 
M. Leblanc had taken the arm of the young girl , once more , and had turned towards the door . 
`` Farewell until this evening , my friends ! '' 
said he . 
`` Six o'clock ? '' 
said Jondrette . 
`` Six o'clock precisely . '' 
At that moment , the overcoat lying on the chair caught the eye of the elder Jondrette girl . 
`` You are forgetting your coat , sir , '' said she . 
Jondrette darted an annihilating look at his daughter , accompanied by a formidable shrug of the shoulders . 
M. Leblanc turned back and said , with a smile : -- `` I have not forgotten it , I am leaving it . '' 
`` O my protector ! '' 
said Jondrette , `` my august benefactor , I melt into tears ! 
Permit me to accompany you to your carriage . '' 
`` If you come out , '' answered M. Leblanc , `` put on this coat . 
It really is very cold . '' 
Jondrette did not need to be told twice . 
He hastily donned the brown great-coat . 
And all three went out , Jondrette preceding the two strangers . 
TARIFF OF LICENSED CABS : TWO FRANCS AN HOUR Marius had lost nothing of this entire scene , and yet , in reality , had seen nothing . 
His eyes had remained fixed on the young girl , his heart had , so to speak , seized her and wholly enveloped her from the moment of her very first step in that garret . 
During her entire stay there , he had lived that life of ecstasy which suspends material perceptions and precipitates the whole soul on a single point . 
He contemplated , not that girl , but that light which wore a satin pelisse and a velvet bonnet . 
The star Sirius might have entered the room , and he would not have been any more dazzled . 
While the young girl was engaged in opening the package , unfolding the clothing and the blankets , questioning the sick mother kindly , and the little injured girl tenderly , he watched her every movement , he sought to catch her words . 
He knew her eyes , her brow , her beauty , her form , her walk , he did not know the sound of her voice . 
He had once fancied that he had caught a few words at the Luxembourg , but he was not absolutely sure of the fact . 
He would have given ten years of his life to hear it , in order that he might bear away in his soul a little of that music . 
But everything was drowned in the lamentable exclamations and trumpet bursts of Jondrette . 
This added a touch of genuine wrath to Marius ' ecstasy . 
He devoured her with his eyes . 
He could not believe that it really was that divine creature whom he saw in the midst of those vile creatures in that monstrous lair . 
It seemed to him that he beheld a humming-bird in the midst of toads . 
When she took her departure , he had but one thought , to follow her , to cling to her trace , not to quit her until he learned where she lived , not to lose her again , at least , after having so miraculously re-discovered her . 
He leaped down from the commode and seized his hat . 
As he laid his hand on the lock of the door , and was on the point of opening it , a sudden reflection caused him to pause . 
The corridor was long , the staircase steep , Jondrette was talkative , M. Leblanc had , no doubt , not yet regained his carriage ; if , on turning round in the corridor , or on the staircase , he were to catch sight of him , Marius , in that house , he would , evidently , take the alarm , and find means to escape from him again , and this time it would be final . 
What was he to do ? 
Should he wait a little ? 
But while he was waiting , the carriage might drive off . 
Marius was perplexed . 
At last he accepted the risk and quitted his room . 
There was no one in the corridor . 
He hastened to the stairs . 
There was no one on the staircase . 
He descended in all haste , and reached the boulevard in time to see a fiacre turning the corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier , on its way back to Paris . 
Marius rushed headlong in that direction . 
On arriving at the angle of the boulevard , he caught sight of the fiacre again , rapidly descending the Rue Mouffetard ; the carriage was already a long way off , and there was no means of overtaking it ; what ! 
run after it ? 
Impossible ; and besides , the people in the carriage would assuredly notice an individual running at full speed in pursuit of a fiacre , and the father would recognize him . 
At that moment , wonderful and unprecedented good luck , Marius perceived an empty cab passing along the boulevard . 
There was but one thing to be done , to jump into this cab and follow the fiacre . 
That was sure , efficacious , and free from danger . 
Marius made the driver a sign to halt , and called to him : -- `` By the hour ? '' 
Marius wore no cravat , he had on his working-coat , which was destitute of buttons , his shirt was torn along one of the plaits on the bosom . 
The driver halted , winked , and held out his left hand to Marius , rubbing his forefinger gently with his thumb . 
`` What is it ? '' 
said Marius . 
`` Pay in advance , '' said the coachman . 
Marius recollected that he had but sixteen sous about him . 
`` How much ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` Forty sous . '' 
`` I will pay on my return . '' 
The driver 's only reply was to whistle the air of La Palisse and to whip up his horse . 
Marius stared at the retreating cabriolet with a bewildered air . 
For the lack of four and twenty sous , he was losing his joy , his happiness , his love ! 
He had seen , and he was becoming blind again . 
He reflected bitterly , and it must be confessed , with profound regret , on the five francs which he had bestowed , that very morning , on that miserable girl . 
If he had had those five francs , he would have been saved , he would have been born again , he would have emerged from the limbo and darkness , he would have made his escape from isolation and spleen , from his widowed state ; he might have re-knotted the black thread of his destiny to that beautiful golden thread , which had just floated before his eyes and had broken at the same instant , once more ! 
He returned to his hovel in despair . 
He might have told himself that M. Leblanc had promised to return in the evening , and that all he had to do was to set about the matter more skilfully , so that he might follow him on that occasion ; but , in his contemplation , it is doubtful whether he had heard this . 
As he was on the point of mounting the staircase , he perceived , on the other side of the boulevard , near the deserted wall skirting the Rue De la Barriere-des-Gobelins , Jondrette , wrapped in the `` philanthropist 's '' great-coat , engaged in conversation with one of those men of disquieting aspect who have been dubbed by common consent , prowlers of the barriers ; people of equivocal face , of suspicious monologues , who present the air of having evil minds , and who generally sleep in the daytime , which suggests the supposition that they work by night . 
These two men , standing there motionless and in conversation , in the snow which was falling in whirlwinds , formed a group that a policeman would surely have observed , but which Marius hardly noticed . 
Still , in spite of his mournful preoccupation , he could not refrain from saying to himself that this prowler of the barriers with whom Jondrette was talking resembled a certain Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , whom Courfeyrac had once pointed out to him as a very dangerous nocturnal roamer . 
This man 's name the reader has learned in the preceding book . 
This Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , figured later on in many criminal trials , and became a notorious rascal . 
He was at that time only a famous rascal . 
To-day he exists in the state of tradition among ruffians and assassins . 
He was at the head of a school towards the end of the last reign . 
And in the evening , at nightfall , at the hour when groups form and talk in whispers , he was discussed at La Force in the Fosse-aux-Lions . 
One might even , in that prison , precisely at the spot where the sewer which served the unprecedented escape , in broad daylight , of thirty prisoners , in 1843 , passes under the culvert , read his name , PANCHAUD , audaciously carved by his own hand on the wall of the sewer , during one of his attempts at flight . 
In 1832 , the police already had their eye on him , but he had not as yet made a serious beginning . 
OFFERS OF SERVICE FROM MISERY TO WRETCHEDNESS Marius ascended the stairs of the hovel with slow steps ; at the moment when he was about to re-enter his cell , he caught sight of the elder Jondrette girl following him through the corridor . 
The very sight of this girl was odious to him ; it was she who had his five francs , it was too late to demand them back , the cab was no longer there , the fiacre was far away . 
Moreover , she would not have given them back . 
As for questioning her about the residence of the persons who had just been there , that was useless ; it was evident that she did not know , since the letter signed Fabantou had been addressed `` to the benevolent gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas . '' 
Marius entered his room and pushed the door to after him . 
It did not close ; he turned round and beheld a hand which held the door half open . 
`` What is it ? '' 
he asked , `` who is there ? '' 
