Nevertheless , it would be a good thing to know how to make use of them . 
When the nettle is young , the leaf makes an excellent vegetable ; when it is older , it has filaments and fibres like hemp and flax . 
Nettle cloth is as good as linen cloth . 
Chopped up , nettles are good for poultry ; pounded , they are good for horned cattle . 
The seed of the nettle , mixed with fodder , gives gloss to the hair of animals ; the root , mixed with salt , produces a beautiful yellow coloring-matter . 
Moreover , it is an excellent hay , which can be cut twice . 
And what is required for the nettle ? 
A little soil , no care , no culture . 
Only the seed falls as it is ripe , and it is difficult to collect it . 
That is all . 
With the exercise of a little care , the nettle could be made useful ; it is neglected and it becomes hurtful . 
It is exterminated . 
How many men resemble the nettle ! '' 
He added , after a pause : `` Remember this , my friends : there are no such things as bad plants or bad men . 
There are only bad cultivators . '' 
The children loved him because he knew how to make charming little trifles of straw and cocoanuts . 
When he saw the door of a church hung in black , he entered : he sought out funerals as other men seek christenings . 
Widowhood and the grief of others attracted him , because of his great gentleness ; he mingled with the friends clad in mourning , with families dressed in black , with the priests groaning around a coffin . 
He seemed to like to give to his thoughts for text these funereal psalmodies filled with the vision of the other world . 
With his eyes fixed on heaven , he listened with a sort of aspiration towards all the mysteries of the infinite , those sad voices which sing on the verge of the obscure abyss of death . 
He performed a multitude of good actions , concealing his agency in them as a man conceals himself because of evil actions . 
He penetrated houses privately , at night ; he ascended staircases furtively . 
A poor wretch on returning to his attic would find that his door had been opened , sometimes even forced , during his absence . 
The poor man made a clamor over it : some malefactor had been there ! 
He entered , and the first thing he beheld was a piece of gold lying forgotten on some piece of furniture . 
The `` malefactor '' who had been there was Father Madeleine . 
He was affable and sad . 
The people said : `` There is a rich man who has not a haughty air . 
There is a happy man who has not a contented air . '' 
Some people maintained that he was a mysterious person , and that no one ever entered his chamber , which was a regular anchorite 's cell , furnished with winged hour-glasses and enlivened by cross-bones and skulls of dead men ! 
This was much talked of , so that one of the elegant and malicious young women of M. sur M. came to him one day , and asked : `` Monsieur le Maire , pray show us your chamber . 
It is said to be a grotto . '' 
He smiled , and introduced them instantly into this `` grotto . '' 
They were well punished for their curiosity . 
The room was very simply furnished in mahogany , which was rather ugly , like all furniture of that sort , and hung with paper worth twelve sous . 
They could see nothing remarkable about it , except two candlesticks of antique pattern which stood on the chimney-piece and appeared to be silver , `` for they were hall-marked , '' an observation full of the type of wit of petty towns . 
Nevertheless , people continued to say that no one ever got into the room , and that it was a hermit 's cave , a mysterious retreat , a hole , a tomb . 
It was also whispered about that he had `` immense '' sums deposited with Laffitte , with this peculiar feature , that they were always at his immediate disposal , so that , it was added , M. Madeleine could make his appearance at Laffitte 's any morning , sign a receipt , and carry off his two or three millions in ten minutes . 
In reality , `` these two or three millions '' were reducible , as we have said , to six hundred and thirty or forty thousand francs . 
M. MADELEINE IN MOURNING At the beginning of 1820 the newspapers announced the death of M. Myriel , Bishop of D -- , surnamed `` Monseigneur Bienvenu , '' who had died in the odor of sanctity at the age of eighty-two . 
The Bishop of D -- -- to supply here a detail which the papers omitted -- had been blind for many years before his death , and content to be blind , as his sister was beside him . 
Let us remark by the way , that to be blind and to be loved , is , in fact , one of the most strangely exquisite forms of happiness upon this earth , where nothing is complete . 
To have continually at one 's side a woman , a daughter , a sister , a charming being , who is there because you need her and because she can not do without you ; to know that we are indispensable to a person who is necessary to us ; to be able to incessantly measure one 's affection by the amount of her presence which she bestows on us , and to say to ourselves , `` Since she consecrates the whole of her time to me , it is because I possess the whole of her heart '' ; to behold her thought in lieu of her face ; to be able to verify the fidelity of one being amid the eclipse of the world ; to regard the rustle of a gown as the sound of wings ; to hear her come and go , retire , speak , return , sing , and to think that one is the centre of these steps , of this speech ; to manifest at each instant one 's personal attraction ; to feel one 's self all the more powerful because of one 's infirmity ; to become in one 's obscurity , and through one 's obscurity , the star around which this angel gravitates , -- few felicities equal this . 
The supreme happiness of life consists in the conviction that one is loved ; loved for one 's own sake -- let us say rather , loved in spite of one 's self ; this conviction the blind man possesses . 
To be served in distress is to be caressed . 
Does he lack anything ? 
No . 
One does not lose the sight when one has love . 
And what love ! 
A love wholly constituted of virtue ! 
There is no blindness where there is certainty . 
Soul seeks soul , gropingly , and finds it . 
And this soul , found and tested , is a woman . 
A hand sustains you ; it is hers : a mouth lightly touches your brow ; it is her mouth : you hear a breath very near you ; it is hers . 
To have everything of her , from her worship to her pity , never to be left , to have that sweet weakness aiding you , to lean upon that immovable reed , to touch Providence with one 's hands , and to be able to take it in one 's arms , -- God made tangible , -- what bliss ! 
The heart , that obscure , celestial flower , undergoes a mysterious blossoming . 
One would not exchange that shadow for all brightness ! 
The angel soul is there , uninterruptedly there ; if she departs , it is but to return again ; she vanishes like a dream , and reappears like reality . 
One feels warmth approaching , and behold ! 
she is there . 
One overflows with serenity , with gayety , with ecstasy ; one is a radiance amid the night . 
And there are a thousand little cares . 
Nothings , which are enormous in that void . 
The most ineffable accents of the feminine voice employed to lull you , and supplying the vanished universe to you . 
One is caressed with the soul . 
One sees nothing , but one feels that one is adored . 
It is a paradise of shadows . 
It was from this paradise that Monseigneur Welcome had passed to the other . 
The announcement of his death was reprinted by the local journal of M. sur M. On the following day , M. Madeleine appeared clad wholly in black , and with crape on his hat . 
This mourning was noticed in the town , and commented on . 
It seemed to throw a light on M. Madeleine 's origin . 
It was concluded that some relationship existed between him and the venerable Bishop . 
`` He has gone into mourning for the Bishop of D -- '' said the drawing-rooms ; this raised M. Madeleine 's credit greatly , and procured for him , instantly and at one blow , a certain consideration in the noble world of M. sur M . 
The microscopic Faubourg Saint-Germain of the place meditated raising the quarantine against M. Madeleine , the probable relative of a bishop . 
M. Madeleine perceived the advancement which he had obtained , by the more numerous courtesies of the old women and the more plentiful smiles of the young ones . 
One evening , a ruler in that petty great world , who was curious by right of seniority , ventured to ask him , `` M. le Maire is doubtless a cousin of the late Bishop of D -- ? '' 
He said , `` No , Madame . '' 
`` But , '' resumed the dowager , `` you are wearing mourning for him . '' 
He replied , `` It is because I was a servant in his family in my youth . '' 
Another thing which was remarked , was , that every time that he encountered in the town a young Savoyard who was roaming about the country and seeking chimneys to sweep , the mayor had him summoned , inquired his name , and gave him money . 
The little Savoyards told each other about it : a great many of them passed that way . 
VAGUE FLASHES ON THE HORIZON Little by little , and in the course of time , all this opposition subsided . 
There had at first been exercised against M. Madeleine , in virtue of a sort of law which all those who rise must submit to , blackening and calumnies ; then they grew to be nothing more than ill-nature , then merely malicious remarks , then even this entirely disappeared ; respect became complete , unanimous , cordial , and towards 1821 the moment arrived when the word `` Monsieur le Maire '' was pronounced at M. sur M. with almost the same accent as `` Monseigneur the Bishop '' had been pronounced in D -- in 1815 . 
People came from a distance of ten leagues around to consult M. Madeleine . 
He put an end to differences , he prevented lawsuits , he reconciled enemies . 
Every one took him for the judge , and with good reason . 
It seemed as though he had for a soul the book of the natural law . 
It was like an epidemic of veneration , which in the course of six or seven years gradually took possession of the whole district . 
One single man in the town , in the arrondissement , absolutely escaped this contagion , and , whatever Father Madeleine did , remained his opponent as though a sort of incorruptible and imperturbable instinct kept him on the alert and uneasy . 
It seems , in fact , as though there existed in certain men a veritable bestial instinct , though pure and upright , like all instincts , which creates antipathies and sympathies , which fatally separates one nature from another nature , which does not hesitate , which feels no disquiet , which does not hold its peace , and which never belies itself , clear in its obscurity , infallible , imperious , intractable , stubborn to all counsels of the intelligence and to all the dissolvents of reason , and which , in whatever manner destinies are arranged , secretly warns the man-dog of the presence of the man-cat , and the man-fox of the presence of the man-lion . 
It frequently happened that when M. Madeleine was passing along a street , calm , affectionate , surrounded by the blessings of all , a man of lofty stature , clad in an iron-gray frock-coat , armed with a heavy cane , and wearing a battered hat , turned round abruptly behind him , and followed him with his eyes until he disappeared , with folded arms and a slow shake of the head , and his upper lip raised in company with his lower to his nose , a sort of significant grimace which might be translated by : `` What is that man , after all ? 
I certainly have seen him somewhere . 
In any case , I am not his dupe . '' 
This person , grave with a gravity which was almost menacing , was one of those men who , even when only seen by a rapid glimpse , arrest the spectator 's attention . 
His name was Javert , and he belonged to the police . 
At M. sur M. he exercised the unpleasant but useful functions of an inspector . 
He had not seen Madeleine 's beginnings . 
Javert owed the post which he occupied to the protection of M. Chabouillet , the secretary of the Minister of State , Comte Angeles , then prefect of police at Paris . 
When Javert arrived at M. sur M. the fortune of the great manufacturer was already made , and Father Madeleine had become Monsieur Madeleine . 
Certain police officers have a peculiar physiognomy , which is complicated with an air of baseness mingled with an air of authority . 
Javert possessed this physiognomy minus the baseness . 
It is our conviction that if souls were visible to the eyes , we should be able to see distinctly that strange thing that each one individual of the human race corresponds to some one of the species of the animal creation ; and we could easily recognize this truth , hardly perceived by the thinker , that from the oyster to the eagle , from the pig to the tiger , all animals exist in man , and that each one of them is in a man . 
Sometimes even several of them at a time . 
Animals are nothing else than the figures of our virtues and our vices , straying before our eyes , the visible phantoms of our souls . 
God shows them to us in order to induce us to reflect . 
Only since animals are mere shadows , God has not made them capable of education in the full sense of the word ; what is the use ? 
On the contrary , our souls being realities and having a goal which is appropriate to them , God has bestowed on them intelligence ; that is to say , the possibility of education . 
Social education , when well done , can always draw from a soul , of whatever sort it may be , the utility which it contains . 
This , be it said , is of course from the restricted point of view of the terrestrial life which is apparent , and without prejudging the profound question of the anterior or ulterior personality of the beings which are not man . 
The visible I in nowise authorizes the thinker to deny the latent I. Having made this reservation , let us pass on . 
Now , if the reader will admit , for a moment , with us , that in every man there is one of the animal species of creation , it will be easy for us to say what there was in Police Officer Javert . 
The peasants of Asturias are convinced that in every litter of wolves there is one dog , which is killed by the mother because , otherwise , as he grew up , he would devour the other little ones . 
Give to this dog-son of a wolf a human face , and the result will be Javert . 
Javert had been born in prison , of a fortune-teller , whose husband was in the galleys . 
As he grew up , he thought that he was outside the pale of society , and he despaired of ever re-entering it . 
He observed that society unpardoningly excludes two classes of men , -- those who attack it and those who guard it ; he had no choice except between these two classes ; at the same time , he was conscious of an indescribable foundation of rigidity , regularity , and probity , complicated with an inexpressible hatred for the race of bohemians whence he was sprung . 
He entered the police ; he succeeded there . 
At forty years of age he was an inspector . 
During his youth he had been employed in the convict establishments of the South . 
Before proceeding further , let us come to an understanding as to the words , `` human face , '' which we have just applied to Javert . 
The human face of Javert consisted of a flat nose , with two deep nostrils , towards which enormous whiskers ascended on his cheeks . 
One felt ill at ease when he saw these two forests and these two caverns for the first time . 
When Javert laughed , -- and his laugh was rare and terrible , -- his thin lips parted and revealed to view not only his teeth , but his gums , and around his nose there formed a flattened and savage fold , as on the muzzle of a wild beast . 
Javert , serious , was a watchdog ; when he laughed , he was a tiger . 
As for the rest , he had very little skull and a great deal of jaw ; his hair concealed his forehead and fell over his eyebrows ; between his eyes there was a permanent , central frown , like an imprint of wrath ; his gaze was obscure ; his mouth pursed up and terrible ; his air that of ferocious command . 
This man was composed of two very simple and two very good sentiments , comparatively ; but he rendered them almost bad , by dint of exaggerating them , -- respect for authority , hatred of rebellion ; and in his eyes , murder , robbery , all crimes , are only forms of rebellion . 
He enveloped in a blind and profound faith every one who had a function in the state , from the prime minister to the rural policeman . 
He covered with scorn , aversion , and disgust every one who had once crossed the legal threshold of evil . 
He was absolute , and admitted no exceptions . 
On the one hand , he said , `` The functionary can make no mistake ; the magistrate is never the wrong . '' 
On the other hand , he said , `` These men are irremediably lost . 
Nothing good can come from them . '' 
He fully shared the opinion of those extreme minds which attribute to human law I know not what power of making , or , if the reader will have it so , of authenticating , demons , and who place a Styx at the base of society . 
He was stoical , serious , austere ; a melancholy dreamer , humble and haughty , like fanatics . 
His glance was like a gimlet , cold and piercing . 
His whole life hung on these two words : watchfulness and supervision . 
He had introduced a straight line into what is the most crooked thing in the world ; he possessed the conscience of his usefulness , the religion of his functions , and he was a spy as other men are priests . 
Woe to the man who fell into his hands ! 
He would have arrested his own father , if the latter had escaped from the galleys , and would have denounced his mother , if she had broken her ban . 
And he would have done it with that sort of inward satisfaction which is conferred by virtue . 
And , withal , a life of privation , isolation , abnegation , chastity , with never a diversion . 
It was implacable duty ; the police understood , as the Spartans understood Sparta , a pitiless lying in wait , a ferocious honesty , a marble informer , Brutus in Vidocq . 
Javert 's whole person was expressive of the man who spies and who withdraws himself from observation . 
The mystical school of Joseph de Maistre , which at that epoch seasoned with lofty cosmogony those things which were called the ultra newspapers , would not have failed to declare that Javert was a symbol . 
His brow was not visible ; it disappeared beneath his hat : his eyes were not visible , since they were lost under his eyebrows : his chin was not visible , for it was plunged in his cravat : his hands were not visible ; they were drawn up in his sleeves : and his cane was not visible ; he carried it under his coat . 
But when the occasion presented itself , there was suddenly seen to emerge from all this shadow , as from an ambuscade , a narrow and angular forehead , a baleful glance , a threatening chin , enormous hands , and a monstrous cudgel . 
In his leisure moments , which were far from frequent , he read , although he hated books ; this caused him to be not wholly illiterate . 
This could be recognized by some emphasis in his speech . 
As we have said , he had no vices . 
When he was pleased with himself , he permitted himself a pinch of snuff . 
Therein lay his connection with humanity . 
The reader will have no difficulty in understanding that Javert was the terror of that whole class which the annual statistics of the Ministry of Justice designates under the rubric , Vagrants . 
The name of Javert routed them by its mere utterance ; the face of Javert petrified them at sight . 
Such was this formidable man . 
Javert was like an eye constantly fixed on M. Madeleine . 
An eye full of suspicion and conjecture . 
M. Madeleine had finally perceived the fact ; but it seemed to be of no importance to him . 
He did not even put a question to Javert ; he neither sought nor avoided him ; he bore that embarrassing and almost oppressive gaze without appearing to notice it . 
He treated Javert with ease and courtesy , as he did all the rest of the world . 
It was divined , from some words which escaped Javert , that he had secretly investigated , with that curiosity which belongs to the race , and into which there enters as much instinct as will , all the anterior traces which Father Madeleine might have left elsewhere . 
He seemed to know , and he sometimes said in covert words , that some one had gleaned certain information in a certain district about a family which had disappeared . 
Once he chanced to say , as he was talking to himself , `` I think I have him ! '' 
Then he remained pensive for three days , and uttered not a word . 
It seemed that the thread which he thought he held had broken . 
Moreover , and this furnishes the necessary corrective for the too absolute sense which certain words might present , there can be nothing really infallible in a human creature , and the peculiarity of instinct is that it can become confused , thrown off the track , and defeated . 
Otherwise , it would be superior to intelligence , and the beast would be found to be provided with a better light than man . 
Javert was evidently somewhat disconcerted by the perfect naturalness and tranquillity of M. Madeleine . 
One day , nevertheless , his strange manner appeared to produce an impression on M. Madeleine . 
It was on the following occasion . 
FATHER FAUCHELEVENT One morning M. Madeleine was passing through an unpaved alley of M. sur M. ; he heard a noise , and saw a group some distance away . 
He approached . 
An old man named Father Fauchelevent had just fallen beneath his cart , his horse having tumbled down . 
This Fauchelevent was one of the few enemies whom M. Madeleine had at that time . 
When Madeleine arrived in the neighborhood , Fauchelevent , an ex-notary and a peasant who was almost educated , had a business which was beginning to be in a bad way . 
Fauchelevent had seen this simple workman grow rich , while he , a lawyer , was being ruined . 
This had filled him with jealousy , and he had done all he could , on every occasion , to injure Madeleine . 
Then bankruptcy had come ; and as the old man had nothing left but a cart and a horse , and neither family nor children , he had turned carter . 
The horse had two broken legs and could not rise . 
The old man was caught in the wheels . 
The fall had been so unlucky that the whole weight of the vehicle rested on his breast . 
The cart was quite heavily laden . 
Father Fauchelevent was rattling in the throat in the most lamentable manner . 
They had tried , but in vain , to drag him out . 
An unmethodical effort , aid awkwardly given , a wrong shake , might kill him . 
It was impossible to disengage him otherwise than by lifting the vehicle off of him . 
Javert , who had come up at the moment of the accident , had sent for a jack-screw . 
M. Madeleine arrived . 
People stood aside respectfully . 
`` Help ! '' 
cried old Fauchelevent . 
`` Who will be good and save the old man ? '' 
M.Madeleine turned towards those present : -- `` Is there a jack-screw to be had ? '' 
`` One has been sent for , '' answered the peasant . 
`` How long will it take to get it ? '' 
`` They have gone for the nearest , to Flachot 's place , where there is a farrier ; but it makes no difference ; it will take a good quarter of an hour . '' 
`` A quarter of an hour ! '' 
exclaimed Madeleine . 
It had rained on the preceding night ; the soil was soaked . 
The cart was sinking deeper into the earth every moment , and crushing the old carter 's breast more and more . 
It was evident that his ribs would be broken in five minutes more . 
`` It is impossible to wait another quarter of an hour , '' said Madeleine to the peasants , who were staring at him . 
`` We must ! '' 
`` But it will be too late then ! 
Do n't you see that the cart is sinking ? '' 
`` Well ! '' 
`` Listen , '' resumed Madeleine ; `` there is still room enough under the cart to allow a man to crawl beneath it and raise it with his back . 
Only half a minute , and the poor man can be taken out . 
Is there any one here who has stout loins and heart ? 
There are five louis d'or to be earned ! '' 
Not a man in the group stirred . 
`` Ten louis , '' said Madeleine . 
The persons present dropped their eyes . 
One of them muttered : `` A man would need to be devilish strong . 
And then he runs the risk of getting crushed ! '' 
`` Come , '' began Madeleine again , `` twenty louis . '' 
The same silence . 
`` It is not the will which is lacking , '' said a voice . 
M. Madeleine turned round , and recognized Javert . 
He had not noticed him on his arrival . 
Javert went on : -- `` It is strength . 
One would have to be a terrible man to do such a thing as lift a cart like that on his back . '' 
Then , gazing fixedly at M. Madeleine , he went on , emphasizing every word that he uttered : -- `` Monsieur Madeleine , I have never known but one man capable of doing what you ask . '' 
Madeleine shuddered . 
Javert added , with an air of indifference , but without removing his eyes from Madeleine : -- `` He was a convict . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
said Madeleine . 
`` In the galleys at Toulon . '' 
Madeleine turned pale . 
Meanwhile , the cart continued to sink slowly . 
Father Fauchelevent rattled in the throat , and shrieked : -- `` I am strangling ! 
My ribs are breaking ! 
a screw ! 
something ! 
Ah ! '' 
Madeleine glanced about him . 
`` Is there , then , no one who wishes to earn twenty louis and save the life of this poor old man ? '' 
No one stirred . 
Javert resumed : -- `` I have never known but one man who could take the place of a screw , and he was that convict . '' 
`` Ah ! 
It is crushing me ! '' 
cried the old man . 
Madeleine raised his head , met Javert 's falcon eye still fixed upon him , looked at the motionless peasants , and smiled sadly . 
Then , without saying a word , he fell on his knees , and before the crowd had even had time to utter a cry , he was underneath the vehicle . 
A terrible moment of expectation and silence ensued . 
They beheld Madeleine , almost flat on his stomach beneath that terrible weight , make two vain efforts to bring his knees and his elbows together . 
They shouted to him , `` Father Madeleine , come out ! '' 
Old Fauchelevent himself said to him , `` Monsieur Madeleine , go away ! 
You see that I am fated to die ! 
Leave me ! 
You will get yourself crushed also ! '' 
Madeleine made no reply . 
All the spectators were panting . 
The wheels had continued to sink , and it had become almost impossible for Madeleine to make his way from under the vehicle . 
Suddenly the enormous mass was seen to quiver , the cart rose slowly , the wheels half emerged from the ruts . 
They heard a stifled voice crying , `` Make haste ! 
Help ! '' 
It was Madeleine , who had just made a final effort . 
They rushed forwards . 
The devotion of a single man had given force and courage to all . 
The cart was raised by twenty arms . 
Old Fauchelevent was saved . 
Madeleine rose . 
He was pale , though dripping with perspiration . 
His clothes were torn and covered with mud . 
All wept . 
The old man kissed his knees and called him the good God . 
As for him , he bore upon his countenance an indescribable expression of happy and celestial suffering , and he fixed his tranquil eye on Javert , who was still staring at him . 
FAUCHELEVENT BECOMES A GARDENER IN PARIS Fauchelevent had dislocated his kneepan in his fall . 
Father Madeleine had him conveyed to an infirmary which he had established for his workmen in the factory building itself , and which was served by two sisters of charity . 
On the following morning the old man found a thousand-franc bank-note on his night-stand , with these words in Father Madeleine 's writing : `` I purchase your horse and cart . '' 
The cart was broken , and the horse was dead . 
Fauchelevent recovered , but his knee remained stiff . 
M. Madeleine , on the recommendation of the sisters of charity and of his priest , got the good man a place as gardener in a female convent in the Rue Saint-Antoine in Paris . 
Some time afterwards , M. Madeleine was appointed mayor . 
The first time that Javert beheld M. Madeleine clothed in the scarf which gave him authority over the town , he felt the sort of shudder which a watch-dog might experience on smelling a wolf in his master 's clothes . 
From that time forth he avoided him as much as he possibly could . 
When the requirements of the service imperatively demanded it , and he could not do otherwise than meet the mayor , he addressed him with profound respect . 
This prosperity created at M. sur M. by Father Madeleine had , besides the visible signs which we have mentioned , another symptom which was none the less significant for not being visible . 
This never deceives . 
When the population suffers , when work is lacking , when there is no commerce , the tax-payer resists imposts through penury , he exhausts and oversteps his respite , and the state expends a great deal of money in the charges for compelling and collection . 
When work is abundant , when the country is rich and happy , the taxes are paid easily and cost the state nothing . 
It may be said , that there is one infallible thermometer of the public misery and riches , -- the cost of collecting the taxes . 
In the course of seven years the expense of collecting the taxes had diminished three-fourths in the arrondissement of M. sur M. , and this led to this arrondissement being frequently cited from all the rest by M. de Villele , then Minister of Finance . 
Such was the condition of the country when Fantine returned thither . 
No one remembered her . 
Fortunately , the door of M. Madeleine 's factory was like the face of a friend . 
She presented herself there , and was admitted to the women 's workroom . 
The trade was entirely new to Fantine ; she could not be very skilful at it , and she therefore earned but little by her day 's work ; but it was sufficient ; the problem was solved ; she was earning her living . 
MADAME VICTURNIEN EXPENDS THIRTY FRANCS ON MORALITY When Fantine saw that she was making her living , she felt joyful for a moment . 
To live honestly by her own labor , what mercy from heaven ! 
The taste for work had really returned to her . 
She bought a looking-glass , took pleasure in surveying in it her youth , her beautiful hair , her fine teeth ; she forgot many things ; she thought only of Cosette and of the possible future , and was almost happy . 
She hired a little room and furnished on credit on the strength of her future work -- a lingering trace of her improvident ways . 
As she was not able to say that she was married she took good care , as we have seen , not to mention her little girl . 
At first , as the reader has seen , she paid the Thenardiers promptly . 
As she only knew how to sign her name , she was obliged to write through a public letter-writer . 
She wrote often , and this was noticed . 
It began to be said in an undertone , in the women 's workroom , that Fantine `` wrote letters '' and that `` she had ways about her . '' 
There is no one for spying on people 's actions like those who are not concerned in them . 
Why does that gentleman never come except at nightfall ? 
Why does Mr. So-and-So never hang his key on its nail on Tuesday ? 
Why does he always take the narrow streets ? 
Why does Madame always descend from her hackney-coach before reaching her house ? 
Why does she send out to purchase six sheets of note paper , when she has a `` whole stationer 's shop full of it ? '' 
etc. . 
There exist beings who , for the sake of obtaining the key to these enigmas , which are , moreover , of no consequence whatever to them , spend more money , waste more time , take more trouble , than would be required for ten good actions , and that gratuitously , for their own pleasure , without receiving any other payment for their curiosity than curiosity . 
They will follow up such and such a man or woman for whole days ; they will do sentry duty for hours at a time on the corners of the streets , under alley-way doors at night , in cold and rain ; they will bribe errand-porters , they will make the drivers of hackney-coaches and lackeys tipsy , buy a waiting-maid , suborn a porter . 
Why ? 
For no reason . 
A pure passion for seeing , knowing , and penetrating into things . 
A pure itch for talking . 
And often these secrets once known , these mysteries made public , these enigmas illuminated by the light of day , bring on catastrophies , duels , failures , the ruin of families , and broken lives , to the great joy of those who have `` found out everything , '' without any interest in the matter , and by pure instinct . 
A sad thing . 
Certain persons are malicious solely through a necessity for talking . 
Their conversation , the chat of the drawing-room , gossip of the anteroom , is like those chimneys which consume wood rapidly ; they need a great amount of combustibles ; and their combustibles are furnished by their neighbors . 
So Fantine was watched . 
In addition , many a one was jealous of her golden hair and of her white teeth . 
It was remarked that in the workroom she often turned aside , in the midst of the rest , to wipe away a tear . 
These were the moments when she was thinking of her child ; perhaps , also , of the man whom she had loved . 
Breaking the gloomy bonds of the past is a mournful task . 
It was observed that she wrote twice a month at least , and that she paid the carriage on the letter . 
They managed to obtain the address : Monsieur , Monsieur Thenardier , inn-keeper at Montfermeil . 
The public writer , a good old man who could not fill his stomach with red wine without emptying his pocket of secrets , was made to talk in the wine-shop . 
In short , it was discovered that Fantine had a child . 
`` She must be a pretty sort of a woman . '' 
An old gossip was found , who made the trip to Montfermeil , talked to the Thenardiers , and said on her return : `` For my five and thirty francs I have freed my mind . 
I have seen the child . '' 
The gossip who did this thing was a gorgon named Madame Victurnien , the guardian and door-keeper of every one 's virtue . 
Madame Victurnien was fifty-six , and re-enforced the mask of ugliness with the mask of age . 
A quavering voice , a whimsical mind . 
This old dame had once been young -- astonishing fact ! 
In her youth , in ' 93 , she had married a monk who had fled from his cloister in a red cap , and passed from the Bernardines to the Jacobins . 
She was dry , rough , peevish , sharp , captious , almost venomous ; all this in memory of her monk , whose widow she was , and who had ruled over her masterfully and bent her to his will . 
She was a nettle in which the rustle of the cassock was visible . 
At the Restoration she had turned bigot , and that with so much energy that the priests had forgiven her her monk . 
She had a small property , which she bequeathed with much ostentation to a religious community . 
She was in high favor at the episcopal palace of Arras . 
So this Madame Victurnien went to Montfermeil , and returned with the remark , `` I have seen the child . '' 
All this took time . 
Fantine had been at the factory for more than a year , when , one morning , the superintendent of the workroom handed her fifty francs from the mayor , told her that she was no longer employed in the shop , and requested her , in the mayor 's name , to leave the neighborhood . 
This was the very month when the Thenardiers , after having demanded twelve francs instead of six , had just exacted fifteen francs instead of twelve . 
Fantine was overwhelmed . 
She could not leave the neighborhood ; she was in debt for her rent and furniture . 
Fifty francs was not sufficient to cancel this debt . 
She stammered a few supplicating words . 
The superintendent ordered her to leave the shop on the instant . 
Besides , Fantine was only a moderately good workwoman . 
Overcome with shame , even more than with despair , she quitted the shop , and returned to her room . 
So her fault was now known to every one . 
She no longer felt strong enough to say a word . 
She was advised to see the mayor ; she did not dare . 
The mayor had given her fifty francs because he was good , and had dismissed her because he was just . 
She bowed before the decision . 
MADAME VICTURNIEN 'S SUCCESS So the monk 's widow was good for something . 
But M. Madeleine had heard nothing of all this . 
Life is full of just such combinations of events . 
M. Madeleine was in the habit of almost never entering the women 's workroom . 
At the head of this room he had placed an elderly spinster , whom the priest had provided for him , and he had full confidence in this superintendent , -- a truly respectable person , firm , equitable , upright , full of the charity which consists in giving , but not having in the same degree that charity which consists in understanding and in forgiving . 
M. Madeleine relied wholly on her . 
The best men are often obliged to delegate their authority . 
It was with this full power , and the conviction that she was doing right , that the superintendent had instituted the suit , judged , condemned , and executed Fantine . 
As regards the fifty francs , she had given them from a fund which M. Madeleine had intrusted to her for charitable purposes , and for giving assistance to the workwomen , and of which she rendered no account . 
Fantine tried to obtain a situation as a servant in the neighborhood ; she went from house to house . 
No one would have her . 
She could not leave town . 
The second-hand dealer , to whom she was in debt for her furniture -- and what furniture ! 
-- said to her , `` If you leave , I will have you arrested as a thief . '' 
The householder , whom she owed for her rent , said to her , `` You are young and pretty ; you can pay . '' 
She divided the fifty francs between the landlord and the furniture-dealer , returned to the latter three-quarters of his goods , kept only necessaries , and found herself without work , without a trade , with nothing but her bed , and still about fifty francs in debt . 
She began to make coarse shirts for soldiers of the garrison , and earned twelve sous a day . 
Her daughter cost her ten . 
It was at this point that she began to pay the Thenardiers irregularly . 
However , the old woman who lighted her candle for her when she returned at night , taught her the art of living in misery . 
Back of living on little , there is the living on nothing . 
These are the two chambers ; the first is dark , the second is black . 
Fantine learned how to live without fire entirely in the winter ; how to give up a bird which eats a half a farthing 's worth of millet every two days ; how to make a coverlet of one 's petticoat , and a petticoat of one 's coverlet ; how to save one 's candle , by taking one 's meals by the light of the opposite window . 
No one knows all that certain feeble creatures , who have grown old in privation and honesty , can get out of a sou . 
It ends by being a talent . 
Fantine acquired this sublime talent , and regained a little courage . 
At this epoch she said to a neighbor , `` Bah ! 
I say to myself , by only sleeping five hours , and working all the rest of the time at my sewing , I shall always manage to nearly earn my bread . 
And , then , when one is sad , one eats less . 
Well , sufferings , uneasiness , a little bread on one hand , trouble on the other , -- all this will support me . '' 
It would have been a great happiness to have her little girl with her in this distress . 
She thought of having her come . 
But what then ! 
Make her share her own destitution ! 
And then , she was in debt to the Thenardiers ! 
How could she pay them ? 
And the journey ! 
How pay for that ? 
The old woman who had given her lessons in what may be called the life of indigence , was a sainted spinster named Marguerite , who was pious with a true piety , poor and charitable towards the poor , and even towards the rich , knowing how to write just sufficiently to sign herself Marguerite , and believing in God , which is science . 
There are many such virtuous people in this lower world ; some day they will be in the world above . 
This life has a morrow . 
At first , Fantine had been so ashamed that she had not dared to go out . 
When she was in the street , she divined that people turned round behind her , and pointed at her ; every one stared at her and no one greeted her ; the cold and bitter scorn of the passers-by penetrated her very flesh and soul like a north wind . 
It seems as though an unfortunate woman were utterly bare beneath the sarcasm and the curiosity of all in small towns . 
In Paris , at least , no one knows you , and this obscurity is a garment . 
Oh ! 
how she would have liked to betake herself to Paris ! 
Impossible ! 
She was obliged to accustom herself to disrepute , as she had accustomed herself to indigence . 
Gradually she decided on her course . 
At the expiration of two or three months she shook off her shame , and began to go about as though there were nothing the matter . 
`` It is all the same to me , '' she said . 
She went and came , bearing her head well up , with a bitter smile , and was conscious that she was becoming brazen-faced . 
Madame Victurnien sometimes saw her passing , from her window , noticed the distress of `` that creature '' who , `` thanks to her , '' had been `` put back in her proper place , '' and congratulated herself . 
The happiness of the evil-minded is black . 
Excess of toil wore out Fantine , and the little dry cough which troubled her increased . 
She sometimes said to her neighbor , Marguerite , `` Just feel how hot my hands are ! '' 
Nevertheless , when she combed her beautiful hair in the morning with an old broken comb , and it flowed about her like floss silk , she experienced a moment of happy coquetry . 
RESULT OF THE SUCCESS She had been dismissed towards the end of the winter ; the summer passed , but winter came again . 
Short days , less work . 
Winter : no warmth , no light , no noonday , the evening joining on to the morning , fogs , twilight ; the window is gray ; it is impossible to see clearly at it . 
The sky is but a vent-hole . 
The whole day is a cavern . 
The sun has the air of a beggar . 
A frightful season ! 
Winter changes the water of heaven and the heart of man into a stone . 
Her creditors harrassed her . 
Fantine earned too little . 
Her debts had increased . 
The Thenardiers , who were not promptly paid , wrote to her constantly letters whose contents drove her to despair , and whose carriage ruined her . 
One day they wrote to her that her little Cosette was entirely naked in that cold weather , that she needed a woollen skirt , and that her mother must send at least ten francs for this . 
She received the letter , and crushed it in her hands all day long . 
That evening she went into a barber 's shop at the corner of the street , and pulled out her comb . 
Her admirable golden hair fell to her knees . 
`` What splendid hair ! '' 
exclaimed the barber . 
`` How much will you give me for it ? '' 
said she . 
`` Ten francs . '' 
`` Cut it off . '' 
She purchased a knitted petticoat and sent it to the Thenardiers . 
This petticoat made the Thenardiers furious . 
It was the money that they wanted . 
They gave the petticoat to Eponine . 
The poor Lark continued to shiver . 
Fantine thought : `` My child is no longer cold . 
I have clothed her with my hair . '' 
She put on little round caps which concealed her shorn head , and in which she was still pretty . 
Dark thoughts held possession of Fantine 's heart . 
When she saw that she could no longer dress her hair , she began to hate every one about her . 
She had long shared the universal veneration for Father Madeleine ; yet , by dint of repeating to herself that it was he who had discharged her , that he was the cause of her unhappiness , she came to hate him also , and most of all . 
When she passed the factory in working hours , when the workpeople were at the door , she affected to laugh and sing . 
An old workwoman who once saw her laughing and singing in this fashion said , `` There 's a girl who will come to a bad end . 
She took a lover , the first who offered , a man whom she did not love , out of bravado and with rage in her heart . 
He was a miserable scamp , a sort of mendicant musician , a lazy beggar , who beat her , and who abandoned her as she had taken him , in disgust . 
She adored her child . 
The lower she descended , the darker everything grew about her , the more radiant shone that little angel at the bottom of her heart . 
She said , `` When I get rich , I will have my Cosette with me ; '' and she laughed . 
Her cough did not leave her , and she had sweats on her back . 
One day she received from the Thenardiers a letter couched in the following terms : `` Cosette is ill with a malady which is going the rounds of the neighborhood . 
A miliary fever , they call it . 
Expensive drugs are required . 
This is ruining us , and we can no longer pay for them . 
If you do not send us forty francs before the week is out , the little one will be dead . '' 
She burst out laughing , and said to her old neighbor : `` Ah ! 
they are good ! 
Forty francs ! 
the idea ! 
That makes two napoleons ! 
Where do they think I am to get them ? 
These peasants are stupid , truly . '' 
Nevertheless she went to a dormer window in the staircase and read the letter once more . 
Then she descended the stairs and emerged , running and leaping and still laughing . 
Some one met her and said to her , `` What makes you so gay ? '' 
She replied : `` A fine piece of stupidity that some country people have written to me . 
They demand forty francs of me . 
So much for you , you peasants ! '' 
As she crossed the square , she saw a great many people collected around a carriage of eccentric shape , upon the top of which stood a man dressed in red , who was holding forth . 
He was a quack dentist on his rounds , who was offering to the public full sets of teeth , opiates , powders and elixirs . 
Fantine mingled in the group , and began to laugh with the rest at the harangue , which contained slang for the populace and jargon for respectable people . 
The tooth-puller espied the lovely , laughing girl , and suddenly exclaimed : `` You have beautiful teeth , you girl there , who are laughing ; if you want to sell me your palettes , I will give you a gold napoleon apiece for them . '' 
`` What are my palettes ? '' 
asked Fantine . 
`` The palettes , '' replied the dental professor , `` are the front teeth , the two upper ones . '' 
`` How horrible ! '' 
exclaimed Fantine . 
`` Two napoleons ! '' 
grumbled a toothless old woman who was present . 
`` Here 's a lucky girl ! '' 
Fantine fled and stopped her ears that she might not hear the hoarse voice of the man shouting to her : `` Reflect , my beauty ! 
two napoleons ; they may prove of service . 
If your heart bids you , come this evening to the inn of the Tillac d'Argent ; you will find me there . '' 
Fantine returned home . 
She was furious , and related the occurrence to her good neighbor Marguerite : `` Can you understand such a thing ? 
Is he not an abominable man ? 
How can they allow such people to go about the country ! 
Pull out my two front teeth ! 
Why , I should be horrible ! 
My hair will grow again , but my teeth ! 
Ah ! 
what a monster of a man ! 
I should prefer to throw myself head first on the pavement from the fifth story ! 
He told me that he should be at the Tillac d'Argent this evening . '' 
`` And what did he offer ? '' 
asked Marguerite . 
`` Two napoleons . '' 
`` That makes forty francs . '' 
