There is no insurrection except in a forward direction . 
Any other sort of rising is bad ; every violent step towards the rear is a revolt ; to retreat is to commit a deed of violence against the human race . 
Insurrection is a fit of rage on the part of truth ; the pavements which the uprising disturbs give forth the spark of right . 
These pavements bequeath to the uprising only their mud . 
Danton against Louis XIV . 
is insurrection ; Hebert against Danton is revolt . 
Hence it results that if insurrection in given cases may be , as Lafayette says , the most holy of duties , an uprising may be the most fatal of crimes . 
There is also a difference in the intensity of heat ; insurrection is often a volcano , revolt is often only a fire of straw . 
Revolt , as we have said , is sometimes found among those in power . 
Polignac is a rioter ; Camille Desmoulins is one of the governing powers . 
Insurrection is sometimes resurrection . 
The solution of everything by universal suffrage being an absolutely modern fact , and all history anterior to this fact being , for the space of four thousand years , filled with violated right , and the suffering of peoples , each epoch of history brings with it that protest of which it is capable . 
Under the Caesars , there was no insurrection , but there was Juvenal . 
The facit indignatio replaces the Gracchi . 
Under the Caesars , there is the exile to Syene ; there is also the man of the Annales . 
We do not speak of the immense exile of Patmos who , on his part also , overwhelms the real world with a protest in the name of the ideal world , who makes of his vision an enormous satire and casts on Rome-Nineveh , on Rome-Babylon , on Rome-Sodom , the flaming reflection of the Apocalypse . 
John on his rock is the sphinx on its pedestal ; we may understand him , he is a Jew , and it is Hebrew ; but the man who writes the Annales is of the Latin race , let us rather say he is a Roman . 
As the Neros reign in a black way , they should be painted to match . 
The work of the graving-tool alone would be too pale ; there must be poured into the channel a concentrated prose which bites . 
Despots count for something in the question of philosophers . 
A word that is chained is a terrible word . 
The writer doubles and trebles his style when silence is imposed on a nation by its master . 
From this silence there arises a certain mysterious plenitude which filters into thought and there congeals into bronze . 
The compression of history produces conciseness in the historian . 
The granite solidity of such and such a celebrated prose is nothing but the accumulation effected by the tyrant . 
Tyranny constrains the writer to conditions of diameter which are augmentations of force . 
The Ciceronian period , which hardly sufficed for Verres , would be blunted on Caligula . 
The less spread of sail in the phrase , the more intensity in the blow . 
Tacitus thinks with all his might . 
The honesty of a great heart , condensed in justice and truth , overwhelms as with lightning . 
Be it remarked , in passing , that Tacitus is not historically superposed upon Caesar . 
The Tiberii were reserved for him . 
Caesar and Tacitus are two successive phenomena , a meeting between whom seems to be mysteriously avoided , by the One who , when He sets the centuries on the stage , regulates the entrances and the exits . 
Caesar is great , Tacitus is great ; God spares these two greatnesses by not allowing them to clash with one another . 
The guardian of justice , in striking Caesar , might strike too hard and be unjust . 
God does not will it . 
The great wars of Africa and Spain , the pirates of Sicily destroyed , civilization introduced into Gaul , into Britanny , into Germany , -- all this glory covers the Rubicon . 
There is here a sort of delicacy of the divine justice , hesitating to let loose upon the illustrious usurper the formidable historian , sparing Caesar Tacitus , and according extenuating circumstances to genius . 
Certainly , despotism remains despotism , even under the despot of genius . 
There is corruption under all illustrious tyrants , but the moral pest is still more hideous under infamous tyrants . 
In such reigns , nothing veils the shame ; and those who make examples , Tacitus as well as Juvenal , slap this ignominy which can not reply , in the face , more usefully in the presence of all humanity . 
Rome smells worse under Vitellius than under Sylla . 
Under Claudius and under Domitian , there is a deformity of baseness corresponding to the repulsiveness of the tyrant . 
The villainy of slaves is a direct product of the despot ; a miasma exhales from these cowering consciences wherein the master is reflected ; public powers are unclean ; hearts are small ; consciences are dull , souls are like vermin ; thus it is under Caracalla , thus it is under Commodus , thus it is under Heliogabalus , while , from the Roman Senate , under Caesar , there comes nothing but the odor of the dung which is peculiar to the eyries of the eagles . 
Hence the advent , apparently tardy , of the Tacituses and the Juvenals ; it is in the hour for evidence , that the demonstrator makes his appearance . 
But Juvenal and Tacitus , like Isaiah in Biblical times , like Dante in the Middle Ages , is man ; riot and insurrection are the multitude , which is sometimes right and sometimes wrong . 
In the majority of cases , riot proceeds from a material fact ; insurrection is always a moral phenomenon . 
Riot is Masaniello ; insurrection , Spartacus . 
Insurrection borders on mind , riot on the stomach ; Gaster grows irritated ; but Gaster , assuredly , is not always in the wrong . 
In questions of famine , riot , Buzancais , for example , holds a true , pathetic , and just point of departure . 
Nevertheless , it remains a riot . 
Why ? 
It is because , right at bottom , it was wrong in form . 
Shy although in the right , violent although strong , it struck at random ; it walked like a blind elephant ; it left behind it the corpses of old men , of women , and of children ; it wished the blood of inoffensive and innocent persons without knowing why . 
The nourishment of the people is a good object ; to massacre them is a bad means . 
All armed protests , even the most legitimate , even that of the 10th of August , even that of July 14th , begin with the same troubles . 
Before the right gets set free , there is foam and tumult . 
In the beginning , the insurrection is a riot , just as a river is a torrent . 
Ordinarily it ends in that ocean : revolution . 
Sometimes , however , coming from those lofty mountains which dominate the moral horizon , justice , wisdom , reason , right , formed of the pure snow of the ideal , after a long fall from rock to rock , after having reflected the sky in its transparency and increased by a hundred affluents in the majestic mien of triumph , insurrection is suddenly lost in some quagmire , as the Rhine is in a swamp . 
All this is of the past , the future is another thing . 
Universal suffrage has this admirable property , that it dissolves riot in its inception , and , by giving the vote to insurrection , it deprives it of its arms . 
The disappearance of wars , of street wars as well as of wars on the frontiers , such is the inevitable progression . 
Whatever To-day may be , To-morrow will be peace . 
However , insurrection , riot , and points of difference between the former and the latter , -- the bourgeois , properly speaking , knows nothing of such shades . 
In his mind , all is sedition , rebellion pure and simple , the revolt of the dog against his master , an attempt to bite whom must be punished by the chain and the kennel , barking , snapping , until such day as the head of the dog , suddenly enlarged , is outlined vaguely in the gloom face to face with the lion . 
Then the bourgeois shouts : `` Long live the people ! '' 
This explanation given , what does the movement of June , 1832 , signify , so far as history is concerned ? 
Is it a revolt ? 
Is it an insurrection ? 
It may happen to us , in placing this formidable event on the stage , to say revolt now and then , but merely to distinguish superficial facts , and always preserving the distinction between revolt , the form , and insurrection , the foundation . 
This movement of 1832 had , in its rapid outbreak and in its melancholy extinction , so much grandeur , that even those who see in it only an uprising , never refer to it otherwise than with respect . 
For them , it is like a relic of 1830 . 
Excited imaginations , say they , are not to be calmed in a day . 
A revolution can not be cut off short . 
It must needs undergo some undulations before it returns to a state of rest , like a mountain sinking into the plain . 
There are no Alps without their Jura , nor Pyrenees without the Asturias . 
This pathetic crisis of contemporary history which the memory of Parisians calls `` the epoch of the riots , '' is certainly a characteristic hour amid the stormy hours of this century . 
A last word , before we enter on the recital . 
The facts which we are about to relate belong to that dramatic and living reality , which the historian sometimes neglects for lack of time and space . 
There , nevertheless , we insist upon it , is life , palpitation , human tremor . 
Petty details , as we think we have already said , are , so to speak , the foliage of great events , and are lost in the distance of history . 
The epoch , surnamed `` of the riots , '' abounds in details of this nature . 
Judicial inquiries have not revealed , and perhaps have not sounded the depths , for another reason than history . 
We shall therefore bring to light , among the known and published peculiarities , things which have not heretofore been known , about facts over which have passed the forgetfulness of some , and the death of others . 
The majority of the actors in these gigantic scenes have disappeared ; beginning with the very next day they held their peace ; but of what we shall relate , we shall be able to say : `` We have seen this . '' 
We alter a few names , for history relates and does not inform against , but the deed which we shall paint will be genuine . 
In accordance with the conditions of the book which we are now writing , we shall show only one side and one episode , and certainly , the least known at that , of the two days , the 5th and the 6th of June , 1832 , but we shall do it in such wise that the reader may catch a glimpse , beneath the gloomy veil which we are about to lift , of the real form of this frightful public adventure . 
A BURIAL ; AN OCCASION TO BE BORN AGAIN In the spring of 1832 , although the cholera had been chilling all minds for the last three months and had cast over their agitation an indescribable and gloomy pacification , Paris had already long been ripe for commotion . 
As we have said , the great city resembles a piece of artillery ; when it is loaded , it suffices for a spark to fall , and the shot is discharged . 
In June , 1832 , the spark was the death of General Lamarque . 
Lamarque was a man of renown and of action . 
He had had in succession , under the Empire and under the Restoration , the sorts of bravery requisite for the two epochs , the bravery of the battle-field and the bravery of the tribune . 
He was as eloquent as he had been valiant ; a sword was discernible in his speech . 
Like Foy , his predecessor , after upholding the command , he upheld liberty ; he sat between the left and the extreme left , beloved of the people because he accepted the chances of the future , beloved of the populace because he had served the Emperor well ; he was , in company with Comtes Gerard and Drouet , one of Napoleon 's marshals in petto . 
The treaties of 1815 removed him as a personal offence . 
He hated Wellington with a downright hatred which pleased the multitude ; and , for seventeen years , he majestically preserved the sadness of Waterloo , paying hardly any attention to intervening events . 
In his death agony , at his last hour , he clasped to his breast a sword which had been presented to him by the officers of the Hundred Days . 
Napoleon had died uttering the word army , Lamarque uttering the word country . 
His death , which was expected , was dreaded by the people as a loss , and by the government as an occasion . 
This death was an affliction . 
Like everything that is bitter , affliction may turn to revolt . 
This is what took place . 
On the preceding evening , and on the morning of the 5th of June , the day appointed for Lamarque 's burial , the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , which the procession was to touch at , assumed a formidable aspect . 
This tumultuous network of streets was filled with rumors . 
They armed themselves as best they might . 
Joiners carried off door-weights of their establishment `` to break down doors . '' 
One of them had made himself a dagger of a stocking-weaver 's hook by breaking off the hook and sharpening the stump . 
Another , who was in a fever `` to attack , '' slept wholly dressed for three days . 
A carpenter named Lombier met a comrade , who asked him : `` Whither are you going ? '' 
`` Eh ! 
well , I have no weapons . '' 
`` What then ? '' 
`` I 'm going to my timber-yard to get my compasses . '' 
`` What for ? '' 
`` I do n't know , '' said Lombier . 
A certain Jacqueline , an expeditious man , accosted some passing artisans : `` Come here , you ! '' 
He treated them to ten sous ' worth of wine and said : `` Have you work ? '' 
`` No . '' 
`` Go to Filspierre , between the Barriere Charonne and the Barriere Montreuil , and you will find work . '' 
At Filspierre 's they found cartridges and arms . 
Certain well-known leaders were going the rounds , that is to say , running from one house to another , to collect their men . 
At Barthelemy 's , near the Barriere du Trone , at Capel 's , near the Petit-Chapeau , the drinkers accosted each other with a grave air . 
They were heard to say : `` Have you your pistol ? '' 
`` Under my blouse . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
`` Under my shirt . '' 
In the Rue Traversiere , in front of the Bland workshop , and in the yard of the Maison-Brulee , in front of tool-maker Bernier 's , groups whispered together . 
Among them was observed a certain Mavot , who never remained more than a week in one shop , as the masters always discharged him `` because they were obliged to dispute with him every day . '' 
Mavot was killed on the following day at the barricade of the Rue Menilmontant . 
Pretot , who was destined to perish also in the struggle , seconded Mavot , and to the question : `` What is your object ? '' 
he replied : `` Insurrection . '' 
Workmen assembled at the corner of the Rue de Bercy , waited for a certain Lemarin , the revolutionary agent for the Faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
Watchwords were exchanged almost publicly . 
On the 5th of June , accordingly , a day of mingled rain and sun , General Lamarque 's funeral procession traversed Paris with official military pomp , somewhat augmented through precaution . 
Two battalions , with draped drums and reversed arms , ten thousand National Guards , with their swords at their sides , escorted the coffin . 
The hearse was drawn by young men . 
The officers of the Invalides came immediately behind it , bearing laurel branches . 
Then came an innumerable , strange , agitated multitude , the sectionaries of the Friends of the People , the Law School , the Medical School , refugees of all nationalities , and Spanish , Italian , German , and Polish flags , tricolored horizontal banners , every possible sort of banner , children waving green boughs , stone-cutters and carpenters who were on strike at the moment , printers who were recognizable by their paper caps , marching two by two , three by three , uttering cries , nearly all of them brandishing sticks , some brandishing sabres , without order and yet with a single soul , now a tumultuous rout , again a column . 
Squads chose themselves leaders ; a man armed with a pair of pistols in full view , seemed to pass the host in review , and the files separated before him . 
On the side alleys of the boulevards , in the branches of the trees , on balconies , in windows , on the roofs , swarmed the heads of men , women , and children ; all eyes were filled with anxiety . 
An armed throng was passing , and a terrified throng looked on . 
The Government , on its side , was taking observations . 
It observed with its hand on its sword . 
Four squadrons of carabineers could be seen in the Place Louis XV . 
in their saddles , with their trumpets at their head , cartridge-boxes filled and muskets loaded , all in readiness to march ; in the Latin country and at the Jardin des Plantes , the Municipal Guard echelonned from street to street ; at the Halle-aux-Vins , a squadron of dragoons ; at the Greve half of the 12th Light Infantry , the other half being at the Bastille ; the 6th Dragoons at the Celestins ; and the courtyard of the Louvre full of artillery . 
The remainder of the troops were confined to their barracks , without reckoning the regiments of the environs of Paris . 
Power being uneasy , held suspended over the menacing multitude twenty-four thousand soldiers in the city and thirty thousand in the banlieue . 
Divers reports were in circulation in the cortege . 
Legitimist tricks were hinted at ; they spoke of the Duc de Reichstadt , whom God had marked out for death at that very moment when the populace were designating him for the Empire . 
One personage , whose name has remained unknown , announced that at a given hour two overseers who had been won over , would throw open the doors of a factory of arms to the people . 
That which predominated on the uncovered brows of the majority of those present was enthusiasm mingled with dejection . 
Here and there , also , in that multitude given over to such violent but noble emotions , there were visible genuine visages of criminals and ignoble mouths which said : `` Let us plunder ! '' 
There are certain agitations which stir up the bottoms of marshes and make clouds of mud rise through the water . 
A phenomenon to which `` well drilled '' policemen are no strangers . 
The procession proceeded , with feverish slowness , from the house of the deceased , by way of the boulevards as far as the Bastille . 
It rained from time to time ; the rain mattered nothing to that throng . 
Many incidents , the coffin borne round the Vendome column , stones thrown at the Duc de Fitz-James , who was seen on a balcony with his hat on his head , the Gallic cock torn from a popular flag and dragged in the mire , a policeman wounded with a blow from a sword at the Porte Saint-Martin , an officer of the 12th Light Infantry saying aloud : `` I am a Republican , '' the Polytechnic School coming up unexpectedly against orders to remain at home , the shouts of : `` Long live the Polytechnique ! 
Long live the Republic ! '' 
marked the passage of the funeral train . 
At the Bastille , long files of curious and formidable people who descended from the Faubourg Saint-Antoine , effected a junction with the procession , and a certain terrible seething began to agitate the throng . 
One man was heard to say to another : `` Do you see that fellow with a red beard , he 's the one who will give the word when we are to fire . '' 
It appears that this red beard was present , at another riot , the Quenisset affair , entrusted with this same function . 
The hearse passed the Bastille , traversed the small bridge , and reached the esplanade of the bridge of Austerlitz . 
There it halted . 
The crowd , surveyed at that moment with a bird ` seye view , would have presented the aspect of a comet whose head was on the esplanade and whose tail spread out over the Quai Bourdon , covered the Bastille , and was prolonged on the boulevard as far as the Porte Saint-Martin . 
A circle was traced around the hearse . 
The vast rout held their peace . 
Lafayette spoke and bade Lamarque farewell . 
This was a touching and august instant , all heads uncovered , all hearts beat high . 
All at once , a man on horseback , clad in black , made his appearance in the middle of the group with a red flag , others say , with a pike surmounted with a red liberty-cap . 
Lafayette turned aside his head . 
Exelmans quitted the procession . 
This red flag raised a storm , and disappeared in the midst of it . 
From the Boulevard Bourdon to the bridge of Austerlitz one of those clamors which resemble billows stirred the multitude . 
Two prodigious shouts went up : `` Lamarque to the Pantheon ! 
-- Lafayette to the Town-hall ! '' 
Some young men , amid the declamations of the throng , harnessed themselves and began to drag Lamarque in the hearse across the bridge of Austerlitz and Lafayette in a hackney-coach along the Quai Morland . 
In the crowd which surrounded and cheered Lafayette , it was noticed that a German showed himself named Ludwig Snyder , who died a centenarian afterwards , who had also been in the war of 1776 , and who had fought at Trenton under Washington , and at Brandywine under Lafayette . 
In the meantime , the municipal cavalry on the left bank had been set in motion , and came to bar the bridge , on the right bank the dragoons emerged from the Celestins and deployed along the Quai Morland . 
The men who were dragging Lafayette suddenly caught sight of them at the corner of the quay and shouted : `` The dragoons ! '' 
The dragoons advanced at a walk , in silence , with their pistols in their holsters , their swords in their scabbards , their guns slung in their leather sockets , with an air of gloomy expectation . 
They halted two hundred paces from the little bridge . 
The carriage in which sat Lafayette advanced to them , their ranks opened and allowed it to pass , and then closed behind it . 
At that moment the dragoons and the crowd touched . 
The women fled in terror . 
What took place during that fatal minute ? 
No one can say . 
It is the dark moment when two clouds come together . 
Some declare that a blast of trumpets sounding the charge was heard in the direction of the Arsenal others that a blow from a dagger was given by a child to a dragoon . 
The fact is , that three shots were suddenly discharged : the first killed Cholet , chief of the squadron , the second killed an old deaf woman who was in the act of closing her window , the third singed the shoulder of an officer ; a woman screamed : `` They are beginning too soon ! '' 
and all at once , a squadron of dragoons which had remained in the barracks up to this time , was seen to debouch at a gallop with bared swords , through the Rue Bassompierre and the Boulevard Bourdon , sweeping all before them . 
Then all is said , the tempest is loosed , stones rain down , a fusillade breaks forth , many precipitate themselves to the bottom of the bank , and pass the small arm of the Seine , now filled in , the timber-yards of the Isle Louviers , that vast citadel ready to hand , bristle with combatants , stakes are torn up , pistol-shots fired , a barricade begun , the young men who are thrust back pass the Austerlitz bridge with the hearse at a run , and the municipal guard , the carabineers rush up , the dragoons ply their swords , the crowd disperses in all directions , a rumor of war flies to all four quarters of Paris , men shout : `` To arms ! '' 
they run , tumble down , flee , resist . 
Wrath spreads abroad the riot as wind spreads a fire . 
THE EBULLITIONS OF FORMER DAYS Nothing is more extraordinary than the first breaking out of a riot . 
Everything bursts forth everywhere at once . 
Was it foreseen ? 
Yes . 
Was it prepared ? 
No . 
Whence comes it ? 
From the pavements . 
Whence falls it ? 
From the clouds . 
Here insurrection assumes the character of a plot ; there of an improvisation . 
The first comer seizes a current of the throng and leads it whither he wills . 
A beginning full of terror , in which is mingled a sort of formidable gayety . 
First come clamors , the shops are closed , the displays of the merchants disappear ; then come isolated shots ; people flee ; blows from gun-stocks beat against portes cocheres , servants can be heard laughing in the courtyards of houses and saying : `` There 's going to be a row ! '' 
A quarter of an hour had not elapsed when this is what was taking place at twenty different spots in Paris at once . 
In the Rue Sainte-Croix-de-la-Bretonnerie , twenty young men , bearded and with long hair , entered a dram-shop and emerged a moment later , carrying a horizontal tricolored flag covered with crape , and having at their head three men armed , one with a sword , one with a gun , and the third with a pike . 
In the Rue des Nonaindieres , a very well-dressed bourgeois , who had a prominent belly , a sonorous voice , a bald head , a lofty brow , a black beard , and one of these stiff mustaches which will not lie flat , offered cartridges publicly to passers-by . 
In the Rue Saint-Pierre-Montmartre , men with bare arms carried about a black flag , on which could be read in white letters this inscription : `` Republic or Death ! '' 
In the Rue des Jeuneurs , Rue du Cadran , Rue Montorgueil , Rue Mandar , groups appeared waving flags on which could be distinguished in gold letters , the word section with a number . 
One of these flags was red and blue with an almost imperceptible stripe of white between . 
They pillaged a factory of small-arms on the Boulevard Saint-Martin , and three armorers ' shops , the first in the Rue Beaubourg , the second in the Rue Michel-le-Comte , the other in the Rue du Temple . 
In a few minutes , the thousand hands of the crowd had seized and carried off two hundred and thirty guns , nearly all double-barrelled , sixty-four swords , and eighty-three pistols . 
In order to provide more arms , one man took the gun , the other the bayonet . 
Opposite the Quai de la Greve , young men armed with muskets installed themselves in the houses of some women for the purpose of firing . 
One of them had a flint-lock . 
They rang , entered , and set about making cartridges . 
One of these women relates : `` I did not know what cartridges were ; it was my husband who told me . '' 
One cluster broke into a curiosity shop in the Rue des Vielles Haudriettes , and seized yataghans and Turkish arms . 
The body of a mason who had been killed by a gun-shot lay in the Rue de la Perle . 
And then on the right bank , the left bank , on the quays , on the boulevards , in the Latin country , in the quarter of the Halles , panting men , artisans , students , members of sections read proclamations and shouted : `` To arms ! '' 
broke street lanterns , unharnessed carriages , unpaved the streets , broke in the doors of houses , uprooted trees , rummaged cellars , rolled out hogsheads , heaped up paving-stones , rough slabs , furniture and planks , and made barricades . 
They forced the bourgeois to assist them in this . 
They entered the dwellings of women , they forced them to hand over the swords and guns of their absent husbands , and they wrote on the door , with whiting : `` The arms have been delivered '' ; some signed `` their names '' to receipts for the guns and swords and said : `` Send for them to-morrow at the Mayor 's office . '' 
They disarmed isolated sentinels and National Guardsmen in the streets on their way to the Townhall . 
They tore the epaulets from officers . 
In the Rue du Cimitiere-Saint-Nicholas , an officer of the National Guard , on being pursued by a crowd armed with clubs and foils , took refuge with difficulty in a house , whence he was only able to emerge at nightfall and in disguise . 
In the Quartier Saint-Jacques , the students swarmed out of their hotels and ascended the Rue Saint-Hyacinthe to the Cafe du Progress , or descended to the Cafe des Sept-Billards , in the Rue des Mathurins . 
There , in front of the door , young men mounted on the stone corner-posts , distributed arms . 
They plundered the timber-yard in the Rue Transnonain in order to obtain material for barricades . 
On a single point the inhabitants resisted , at the corner of the Rue Sainte-Avoye and the Rue Simon-Le-Franc , where they destroyed the barricade with their own hands . 
At a single point the insurgents yielded ; they abandoned a barricade begun in the Rue de Temple after having fired on a detachment of the National Guard , and fled through the Rue de la Corderie . 
The detachment picked up in the barricade a red flag , a package of cartridges , and three hundred pistol-balls . 
The National Guardsmen tore up the flag , and carried off its tattered remains on the points of their bayonets . 
All that we are here relating slowly and successively took place simultaneously at all points of the city in the midst of a vast tumult , like a mass of tongues of lightning in one clap of thunder . 
In less than an hour , twenty-seven barricades sprang out of the earth in the quarter of the Halles alone . 
In the centre was that famous house No. 50 , which was the fortress of Jeanne and her six hundred companions , and which , flanked on the one hand by a barricade at Saint-Merry , and on the other by a barricade of the Rue Maubuee , commanded three streets , the Rue des Arcis , the Rue Saint-Martin , and the Rue Aubry-le-Boucher , which it faced . 
The barricades at right angles fell back , the one of the Rue Montorgueil on the Grande-Truanderie , the other of the Rue Geoffroy-Langevin on the Rue Sainte-Avoye . 
Without reckoning innumerable barricades in twenty other quarters of Paris , in the Marais , at Mont-Sainte-Genevieve ; one in the Rue Menilmontant , where was visible a porte cochere torn from its hinges ; another near the little bridge of the Hotel-Dieu made with an `` ecossais , '' which had been unharnessed and overthrown , three hundred paces from the Prefecture of Police . 
At the barricade of the Rue des Menetriers , a well-dressed man distributed money to the workmen . 
At the barricade of the Rue Grenetat , a horseman made his appearance and handed to the one who seemed to be the commander of the barricade what had the appearance of a roll of silver . 
`` Here , '' said he , `` this is to pay expenses , wine , et caetera . '' 
A light-haired young man , without a cravat , went from barricade to barricade , carrying pass-words . 
Another , with a naked sword , a blue police cap on his head , placed sentinels . 
In the interior , beyond the barricades , the wine-shops and porters ' lodges were converted into guard-houses . 
Otherwise the riot was conducted after the most scientific military tactics . 
The narrow , uneven , sinuous streets , full of angles and turns , were admirably chosen ; the neighborhood of the Halles , in particular , a network of streets more intricate than a forest . 
The Society of the Friends of the People had , it was said , undertaken to direct the insurrection in the Quartier Sainte-Avoye . 
A man killed in the Rue du Ponceau who was searched had on his person a plan of Paris . 
That which had really undertaken the direction of the uprising was a sort of strange impetuosity which was in the air . 
The insurrection had abruptly built barricades with one hand , and with the other seized nearly all the posts of the garrison . 
In less than three hours , like a train of powder catching fire , the insurgents had invaded and occupied , on the right bank , the Arsenal , the Mayoralty of the Place Royale , the whole of the Marais , the Popincourt arms manufactory , la Galiote , the Chateau-d'Eau , and all the streets near the Halles ; on the left bank , the barracks of the Veterans , Sainte-Pelagie , the Place Maubert , the powder magazine of the Deux-Moulins , and all the barriers . 
At five o'clock in the evening , they were masters of the Bastille , of the Lingerie , of the Blancs-Manteaux ; their scouts had reached the Place des Victoires , and menaced the Bank , the Petits-Peres barracks , and the Post-Office . 
A third of Paris was in the hands of the rioters . 
The conflict had been begun on a gigantic scale at all points ; and , as a result of the disarming domiciliary visits , and armorers ' shops hastily invaded , was , that the combat which had begun with the throwing of stones was continued with gun-shots . 
About six o'clock in the evening , the Passage du Saumon became the field of battle . 
The uprising was at one end , the troops were at the other . 
They fired from one gate to the other . 
An observer , a dreamer , the author of this book , who had gone to get a near view of this volcano , found himself in the passage between the two fires . 
All that he had to protect him from the bullets was the swell of the two half-columns which separate the shops ; he remained in this delicate situation for nearly half an hour . 
Meanwhile the call to arms was beaten , the National Guard armed in haste , the legions emerged from the Mayoralities , the regiments from their barracks . 
Opposite the passage de l'Ancre a drummer received a blow from a dagger . 
Another , in the Rue du Cygne , was assailed by thirty young men who broke his instrument , and took away his sword . 
Another was killed in the Rue Grenier-Saint-Lazare . 
In the Rue-Michelle-Comte , three officers fell dead one after the other . 
Many of the Municipal Guards , on being wounded , in the Rue des Lombards , retreated . 
In front of the Cour-Batave , a detachment of National Guards found a red flag bearing the following inscription : Republican revolution , No. 127 . 
Was this a revolution , in fact ? 
The insurrection had made of the centre of Paris a sort of inextricable , tortuous , colossal citadel . 
There was the hearth ; there , evidently , was the question . 
All the rest was nothing but skirmishes . 
The proof that all would be decided there lay in the fact that there was no fighting going on there as yet . 
In some regiments , the soldiers were uncertain , which added to the fearful uncertainty of the crisis . 
They recalled the popular ovation which had greeted the neutrality of the 53d of the Line in July , 1830 . 
Two intrepid men , tried in great wars , the Marshal Lobau and General Bugeaud , were in command , Bugeaud under Lobau . 
Enormous patrols , composed of battalions of the Line , enclosed in entire companies of the National Guard , and preceded by a commissary of police wearing his scarf of office , went to reconnoitre the streets in rebellion . 
The insurgents , on their side , placed videttes at the corners of all open spaces , and audaciously sent their patrols outside the barricades . 
Each side was watching the other . 
The Government , with an army in its hand , hesitated ; the night was almost upon them , and the Saint-Merry tocsin began to make itself heard . 
The Minister of War at that time , Marshal Soult , who had seen Austerlitz , regarded this with a gloomy air . 
These old sailors , accustomed to correct manoeuvres and having as resource and guide only tactics , that compass of battles , are utterly disconcerted in the presence of that immense foam which is called public wrath . 
The National Guards of the suburbs rushed up in haste and disorder . 
A battalion of the 12th Light came at a run from Saint-Denis , the 14th of the Line arrived from Courbevoie , the batteries of the Military School had taken up their position on the Carrousel ; cannons were descending from Vincennes . 
Solitude was formed around the Tuileries . 
Louis Philippe was perfectly serene . 
ORIGINALITY OF PARIS During the last two years , as we have said , Paris had witnessed more than one insurrection . 
Nothing is , generally , more singularly calm than the physiognomy of Paris during an uprising beyond the bounds of the rebellious quarters . 
Paris very speedily accustoms herself to anything , -- it is only a riot , -- and Paris has so many affairs on hand , that she does not put herself out for so small a matter . 
These colossal cities alone can offer such spectacles . 
These immense enclosures alone can contain at the same time civil war and an odd and indescribable tranquillity . 
Ordinarily , when an insurrection commences , when the shop-keeper hears the drum , the call to arms , the general alarm , he contents himself with the remark : -- `` There appears to be a squabble in the Rue Saint-Martin . '' 
Or : -- `` In the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . '' 
Often he adds carelessly : -- `` Or somewhere in that direction . '' 
Later on , when the heart-rending and mournful hubbub of musketry and firing by platoons becomes audible , the shopkeeper says : -- `` It 's getting hot ! 
Hullo , it 's getting hot ! '' 
A moment later , the riot approaches and gains in force , he shuts up his shop precipitately , hastily dons his uniform , that is to say , he places his merchandise in safety and risks his own person . 
Men fire in a square , in a passage , in a blind alley ; they take and re-take the barricade ; blood flows , the grape-shot riddles the fronts of the houses , the balls kill people in their beds , corpses encumber the streets . 
A few streets away , the shock of billiard-balls can be heard in the cafes . 
The theatres open their doors and present vaudevilles ; the curious laugh and chat a couple of paces distant from these streets filled with war . 
Hackney-carriages go their way ; passers-by are going to a dinner somewhere in town . 
Sometimes in the very quarter where the fighting is going on . 
In 1831 , a fusillade was stopped to allow a wedding party to pass . 
At the time of the insurrection of 1839 , in the Rue Saint-Martin a little , infirm old man , pushing a hand-cart surmounted by a tricolored rag , in which he had carafes filled with some sort of liquid , went and came from barricade to troops and from troops to the barricade , offering his glasses of cocoa impartially , -- now to the Government , now to anarchy . 
Nothing can be stranger ; and this is the peculiar character of uprisings in Paris , which can not be found in any other capital . 
To this end , two things are requisite , the size of Paris and its gayety . 
The city of Voltaire and Napoleon is necessary . 
On this occasion , however , in the resort to arms of June 25th , 1832 , the great city felt something which was , perhaps , stronger than itself . 
It was afraid . 
Closed doors , windows , and shutters were to be seen everywhere , in the most distant and most `` disinterested '' quarters . 
The courageous took to arms , the poltroons hid . 
The busy and heedless passer-by disappeared . 
Many streets were empty at four o'clock in the morning . 
Alarming details were hawked about , fatal news was disseminated , -- that they were masters of the Bank ; -- that there were six hundred of them in the Cloister of Saint-Merry alone , entrenched and embattled in the church ; that the line was not to be depended on ; that Armand Carrel had been to see Marshal Clausel and that the Marshal had said : `` Get a regiment first '' ; that Lafayette was ill , but that he had said to them , nevertheless : `` I am with you . 
I will follow you wherever there is room for a chair '' ; that one must be on one 's guard ; that at night there would be people pillaging isolated dwellings in the deserted corners of Paris -LRB- there the imagination of the police , that Anne Radcliffe mixed up with the Government was recognizable -RRB- ; that a battery had been established in the Rue Aubry le Boucher ; that Lobau and Bugeaud were putting their heads together , and that , at midnight , or at daybreak at latest , four columns would march simultaneously on the centre of the uprising , the first coming from the Bastille , the second from the Porte Saint-Martin , the third from the Greve , the fourth from the Halles ; that perhaps , also , the troops would evacuate Paris and withdraw to the Champ-de-Mars ; that no one knew what would happen , but that this time , it certainly was serious . 
People busied themselves over Marshal Soult 's hesitations . 
Why did not he attack at once ? 
It is certain that he was profoundly absorbed . 
The old lion seemed to scent an unknown monster in that gloom . 
Evening came , the theatres did not open ; the patrols circulated with an air of irritation ; passers-by were searched ; suspicious persons were arrested . 
By nine o'clock , more than eight hundred persons had been arrested , the Prefecture of Police was encumbered with them , so was the Conciergerie , so was La Force . 
At the Conciergerie in particular , the long vault which is called the Rue de Paris was littered with trusses of straw upon which lay a heap of prisoners , whom the man of Lyons , Lagrange , harangued valiantly . 
All that straw rustled by all these men , produced the sound of a heavy shower . 
Elsewhere prisoners slept in the open air in the meadows , piled on top of each other . 
Anxiety reigned everywhere , and a certain tremor which was not habitual with Paris . 
People barricaded themselves in their houses ; wives and mothers were uneasy ; nothing was to be heard but this : `` Ah ! 
my God ! 
He has not come home ! '' 
There was hardly even the distant rumble of a vehicle to be heard . 
People listened on their thresholds , to the rumors , the shouts , the tumult , the dull and indistinct sounds , to the things that were said : `` It is cavalry , '' or : `` Those are the caissons galloping , '' to the trumpets , the drums , the firing , and , above all , to that lamentable alarm peal from Saint-Merry . 
They waited for the first cannon-shot . 
Men sprang up at the corners of the streets and disappeared , shouting : `` Go home ! '' 
And people made haste to bolt their doors . 
They said : `` How will all this end ? '' 
From moment to moment , in proportion as the darkness descended , Paris seemed to take on a more mournful hue from the formidable flaming of the revolt . 
SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF GAVROCHE 'S POETRY . 
THE INFLUENCE OF AN ACADEMICIAN ON THIS POETRY At the instant when the insurrection , arising from the shock of the populace and the military in front of the Arsenal , started a movement in advance and towards the rear in the multitude which was following the hearse and which , through the whole length of the boulevards , weighed , so to speak , on the head of the procession , there arose a frightful ebb . 
The rout was shaken , their ranks were broken , all ran , fled , made their escape , some with shouts of attack , others with the pallor of flight . 
The great river which covered the boulevards divided in a twinkling , overflowed to right and left , and spread in torrents over two hundred streets at once with the roar of a sewer that has broken loose . 
At that moment , a ragged child who was coming down through the Rue Menilmontant , holding in his hand a branch of blossoming laburnum which he had just plucked on the heights of Belleville , caught sight of an old holster-pistol in the show-window of a bric-a-brac merchant 's shop . 
`` Mother What 's - your-name , I 'm going to borrow your machine . '' 
And off he ran with the pistol . 
Two minutes later , a flood of frightened bourgeois who were fleeing through the Rue Amelot and the Rue Basse , encountered the lad brandishing his pistol and singing : -- La nuit on ne voit rien , Le jour on voit tres bien , D'un ecrit apocrypha Le bourgeois s ` ebouriffe , Pratiquez la vertu , Tutu , chapeau pointu ! 
-LSB- 44 -RSB- -LSB- 44 -RSB- At night one sees nothing , by day one sees very well ; the bourgeois gets flurried over an apocryphal scrawl , practice virtue , tutu , pointed hat ! 
It was little Gavroche on his way to the wars . 
On the boulevard he noticed that the pistol had no trigger . 
Who was the author of that couplet which served to punctuate his march , and of all the other songs which he was fond of singing on occasion ? 
We know not . 
Who does know ? 
Himself , perhaps . 
However , Gavroche was well up in all the popular tunes in circulation , and he mingled with them his own chirpings . 
An observing urchin and a rogue , he made a potpourri of the voices of nature and the voices of Paris . 
He combined the repertory of the birds with the repertory of the workshops . 
He was acquainted with thieves , a tribe contiguous to his own . 
He had , it appears , been for three months apprenticed to a printer . 
He had one day executed a commission for M. Baour-Lormian , one of the Forty . 
Gavroche was a gamin of letters . 
Moreover , Gavroche had no suspicion of the fact that when he had offered the hospitality of his elephant to two brats on that villainously rainy night , it was to his own brothers that he had played the part of Providence . 
His brothers in the evening , his father in the morning ; that is what his night had been like . 
On quitting the Rue des Ballets at daybreak , he had returned in haste to the elephant , had artistically extracted from it the two brats , had shared with them some sort of breakfast which he had invented , and had then gone away , confiding them to that good mother , the street , who had brought him up , almost entirely . 
On leaving them , he had appointed to meet them at the same spot in the evening , and had left them this discourse by way of a farewell : `` I break a cane , otherwise expressed , I cut my stick , or , as they say at the court , I file off . 
If you do n't find papa and mamma , young ` uns , come back here this evening . 
I 'll scramble you up some supper , and I 'll give you a shakedown . '' 
The two children , picked up by some policeman and placed in the refuge , or stolen by some mountebank , or having simply strayed off in that immense Chinese puzzle of a Paris , did not return . 
The lowest depths of the actual social world are full of these lost traces . 
Gavroche did not see them again . 
Ten or twelve weeks had elapsed since that night . 
More than once he had scratched the back of his head and said : `` Where the devil are my two children ? '' 
In the meantime , he had arrived , pistol in hand , in the Rue du Pont-aux-Choux . 
He noticed that there was but one shop open in that street , and , a matter worthy of reflection , that was a pastry-cook 's shop . 
This presented a providential occasion to eat another apple-turnover before entering the unknown . 
Gavroche halted , fumbled in his fob , turned his pocket inside out , found nothing , not even a sou , and began to shout : `` Help ! '' 
It is hard to miss the last cake . 
Nevertheless , Gavroche pursued his way . 
Two minutes later he was in the Rue Saint-Louis . 
While traversing the Rue du Parc-Royal , he felt called upon to make good the loss of the apple-turnover which had been impossible , and he indulged himself in the immense delight of tearing down the theatre posters in broad daylight . 
A little further on , on catching sight of a group of comfortable-looking persons , who seemed to be landed proprietors , he shrugged his shoulders and spit out at random before him this mouthful of philosophical bile as they passed : `` How fat those moneyed men are ! 
They 're drunk ! 
They just wallow in good dinners . 
Ask 'em what they do with their money . 
They do n't know . 
They eat it , that 's what they do ! 
As much as their bellies will hold . '' 
GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH The brandishing of a triggerless pistol , grasped in one 's hand in the open street , is so much of a public function that Gavroche felt his fervor increasing with every moment . 
Amid the scraps of the Marseillaise which he was singing , he shouted : -- `` All goes well . 
I suffer a great deal in my left paw , I 'm all broken up with rheumatism , but I 'm satisfied , citizens . 
All that the bourgeois have to do is to bear themselves well , I 'll sneeze them out subversive couplets . 
What are the police spies ? 
Dogs . 
And I 'd just like to have one of them at the end of my pistol . 
I 'm just from the boulevard , my friends . 
It 's getting hot there , it 's getting into a little boil , it 's simmering . 
It 's time to skim the pot . 
Forward march , men ! 
Let an impure blood inundate the furrows ! 
I give my days to my country , I shall never see my concubine more , Nini , finished , yes , Nini ? 
But never mind ! 
Long live joy ! 
Let 's fight , crebleu ! 
I 've had enough of despotism . '' 
At that moment , the horse of a lancer of the National Guard having fallen , Gavroche laid his pistol on the pavement , and picked up the man , then he assisted in raising the horse . 
After which he picked up his pistol and resumed his way . 
In the Rue de Thorigny , all was peace and silence . 
This apathy , peculiar to the Marais , presented a contrast with the vast surrounding uproar . 
Four gossips were chatting in a doorway . 
Scotland has trios of witches , Paris has quartettes of old gossiping hags ; and the `` Thou shalt be King '' could be quite as mournfully hurled at Bonaparte in the Carrefour Baudoyer as at Macbeth on the heath of Armuyr . 
The croak would be almost identical . 
The gossips of the Rue de Thorigny busied themselves only with their own concerns . 
Three of them were portresses , and the fourth was a rag-picker with her basket on her back . 
All four of them seemed to be standing at the four corners of old age , which are decrepitude , decay , ruin , and sadness . 
The rag-picker was humble . 
In this open-air society , it is the rag-picker who salutes and the portress who patronizes . 
This is caused by the corner for refuse , which is fat or lean , according to the will of the portresses , and after the fancy of the one who makes the heap . 
There may be kindness in the broom . 
This rag-picker was a grateful creature , and she smiled , with what a smile ! 
on the three portresses . 
Things of this nature were said : -- `` Ah , by the way , is your cat still cross ? '' 
`` Good gracious , cats are naturally the enemies of dogs , you know . 
It 's the dogs who complain . '' 
`` And people also . '' 
`` But the fleas from a cat do n't go after people . '' 
`` That 's not the trouble , dogs are dangerous . 
I remember one year when there were so many dogs that it was necessary to put it in the newspapers . 
That was at the time when there were at the Tuileries great sheep that drew the little carriage of the King of Rome . 
Do you remember the King of Rome ? '' 
`` I liked the Duc de Bordeau better . '' 
`` I knew Louis XVIII . 
I prefer Louis XVIII . '' 
`` Meat is awfully dear , is n't it , Mother Patagon ? '' 
`` Ah ! 
do n't mention it , the butcher 's shop is a horror . 
A horrible horror -- one ca n't afford anything but the poor cuts nowadays . '' 
Here the rag-picker interposed : -- `` Ladies , business is dull . 
The refuse heaps are miserable . 
No one throws anything away any more . 
They eat everything . '' 
`` There are poorer people than you , la Vargouleme . '' 
`` Ah , that 's true , '' replied the rag-picker , with deference , `` I have a profession . '' 
A pause succeeded , and the rag-picker , yielding to that necessity for boasting which lies at the bottom of man , added : -- `` In the morning , on my return home , I pick over my basket , I sort my things . 
This makes heaps in my room . 
I put the rags in a basket , the cores and stalks in a bucket , the linen in my cupboard , the woollen stuff in my commode , the old papers in the corner of the window , the things that are good to eat in my bowl , the bits of glass in my fireplace , the old shoes behind my door , and the bones under my bed . '' 
Gavroche had stopped behind her and was listening . 
`` Old ladies , '' said he , `` what do you mean by talking politics ? '' 
He was assailed by a broadside , composed of a quadruple howl . 
`` Here 's another rascal . '' 
`` What 's that he 's got in his paddle ? 
A pistol ? '' 
`` Well , I 'd like to know what sort of a beggar 's brat this is ? '' 
`` That sort of animal is never easy unless he 's overturning the authorities . '' 
Gavroche disdainfully contented himself , by way of reprisal , with elevating the tip of his nose with his thumb and opening his hand wide . 
The rag-picker cried : -- `` You malicious , bare-pawed little wretch ! '' 
The one who answered to the name of Patagon clapped her hands together in horror . 
`` There 's going to be evil doings , that 's certain . 
The errand-boy next door has a little pointed beard , I have seen him pass every day with a young person in a pink bonnet on his arm ; to-day I saw him pass , and he had a gun on his arm . 
Mame Bacheux says , that last week there was a revolution at -- at -- at -- where 's the calf ! 
-- at Pontoise . 
And then , there you see him , that horrid scamp , with his pistol ! 
It seems that the Celestins are full of pistols . 
What do you suppose the Government can do with good-for-nothings who do n't know how to do anything but contrive ways of upsetting the world , when we had just begun to get a little quiet after all the misfortunes that have happened , good Lord ! 
to that poor queen whom I saw pass in the tumbril ! 
And all this is going to make tobacco dearer . 
It 's infamous ! 
And I shall certainly go to see him beheaded on the guillotine , the wretch ! '' 
`` You 've got the sniffles , old lady , '' said Gavroche . 
`` Blow your promontory . '' 
And he passed on . 
When he was in the Rue Pavee , the rag-picker occurred to his mind , and he indulged in this soliloquy : -- `` You 're in the wrong to insult the revolutionists , Mother Dust-Heap-Corner . 
This pistol is in your interests . 
It 's so that you may have more good things to eat in your basket . '' 
All at once , he heard a shout behind him ; it was the portress Patagon who had followed him , and who was shaking her fist at him in the distance and crying : -- `` You 're nothing but a bastard . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Come now , '' said Gavroche , `` I do n't care a brass farthing for that ! '' 
Shortly afterwards , he passed the Hotel Lamoignon . 
There he uttered this appeal : -- `` Forward march to the battle ! '' 
And he was seized with a fit of melancholy . 
He gazed at his pistol with an air of reproach which seemed an attempt to appease it : -- `` I 'm going off , '' said he , `` but you wo n't go off ! '' 
One dog may distract the attention from another dog . 
-LSB- 45 -RSB- A very gaunt poodle came along at the moment . 
Gavroche felt compassion for him . 
-LSB- 45 -RSB- Chien , dog , trigger . 
`` My poor doggy , '' said he , `` you must have gone and swallowed a cask , for all the hoops are visible . '' 
Then he directed his course towards l'Orme-Saint-Gervais . 
JUST INDIGNATION OF A HAIR-DRESSER The worthy hair-dresser who had chased from his shop the two little fellows to whom Gavroche had opened the paternal interior of the elephant was at that moment in his shop engaged in shaving an old soldier of the legion who had served under the Empire . 
They were talking . 
The hair-dresser had , naturally , spoken to the veteran of the riot , then of General Lamarque , and from Lamarque they had passed to the Emperor . 
Thence sprang up a conversation between barber and soldier which Prudhomme , had he been present , would have enriched with arabesques , and which he would have entitled : `` Dialogue between the razor and the sword . '' 
`` How did the Emperor ride , sir ? '' 
said the barber . 
`` Badly . 
He did not know how to fall -- so he never fell . '' 
`` Did he have fine horses ? 
He must have had fine horses ! '' 
`` On the day when he gave me my cross , I noticed his beast . 
It was a racing mare , perfectly white . 
Her ears were very wide apart , her saddle deep , a fine head marked with a black star , a very long neck , strongly articulated knees , prominent ribs , oblique shoulders and a powerful crupper . 
A little more than fifteen hands in height . '' 
`` A pretty horse , '' remarked the hair-dresser . 
