the best way to adore God is to love one 's wife . 
I love thee ! 
that 's my catechism . 
He who loves is orthodox . 
The oath of Henri IV . 
places sanctity somewhere between feasting and drunkenness . 
Ventre-saint-gris ! 
I do n't belong to the religion of that oath . 
Woman is forgotten in it . 
This astonishes me on the part of Henri IV . 
My friends , long live women ! 
I am old , they say ; it 's astonishing how much I feel in the mood to be young . 
I should like to go and listen to the bagpipes in the woods . 
Children who contrive to be beautiful and contented , -- that intoxicates me . 
I would like greatly to get married , if any one would have me . 
It is impossible to imagine that God could have made us for anything but this : to idolize , to coo , to preen ourselves , to be dove-like , to be dainty , to bill and coo our loves from morn to night , to gaze at one 's image in one 's little wife , to be proud , to be triumphant , to plume oneself ; that is the aim of life . 
There , let not that displease you which we used to think in our day , when we were young folks . 
Ah ! 
vertu-bamboche ! 
what charming women there were in those days , and what pretty little faces and what lovely lasses ! 
I committed my ravages among them . 
Then love each other . 
If people did not love each other , I really do not see what use there would be in having any springtime ; and for my own part , I should pray the good God to shut up all the beautiful things that he shows us , and to take away from us and put back in his box , the flowers , the birds , and the pretty maidens . 
My children , receive an old man 's blessing . 
The evening was gay , lively and agreeable . 
The grandfather 's sovereign good humor gave the key-note to the whole feast , and each person regulated his conduct on that almost centenarian cordiality . 
They danced a little , they laughed a great deal ; it was an amiable wedding . 
Goodman Days of Yore might have been invited to it . 
However , he was present in the person of Father Gillenormand . 
There was a tumult , then silence . 
The married pair disappeared . 
A little after midnight , the Gillenormand house became a temple . 
Here we pause . 
On the threshold of wedding nights stands a smiling angel with his finger on his lips . 
The soul enters into contemplation before that sanctuary where the celebration of love takes place . 
There should be flashes of light athwart such houses . 
The joy which they contain ought to make its escape through the stones of the walls in brilliancy , and vaguely illuminate the gloom . 
It is impossible that this sacred and fatal festival should not give off a celestial radiance to the infinite . 
Love is the sublime crucible wherein the fusion of the man and the woman takes place ; the being one , the being triple , the being final , the human trinity proceeds from it . 
This birth of two souls into one , ought to be an emotion for the gloom . 
The lover is the priest ; the ravished virgin is terrified . 
Something of that joy ascends to God . 
Where true marriage is , that is to say , where there is love , the ideal enters in . 
A nuptial bed makes a nook of dawn amid the shadows . 
If it were given to the eye of the flesh to scan the formidable and charming visions of the upper life , it is probable that we should behold the forms of night , the winged unknowns , the blue passers of the invisible , bend down , a throng of sombre heads , around the luminous house , satisfied , showering benedictions , pointing out to each other the virgin wife gently alarmed , sweetly terrified , and bearing the reflection of human bliss upon their divine countenances . 
If at that supreme hour , the wedded pair , dazzled with voluptuousness and believing themselves alone , were to listen , they would hear in their chamber a confused rustling of wings . 
Perfect happiness implies a mutual understanding with the angels . 
That dark little chamber has all heaven for its ceiling . 
When two mouths , rendered sacred by love , approach to create , it is impossible that there should not be , above that ineffable kiss , a quivering throughout the immense mystery of stars . 
These felicities are the true ones . 
There is no joy outside of these joys . 
Love is the only ecstasy . 
All the rest weeps . 
To love , or to have loved , -- this suffices . 
Demand nothing more . 
There is no other pearl to be found in the shadowy folds of life . 
To love is a fulfilment . 
THE INSEPARABLE What had become of Jean Valjean ? 
Immediately after having laughed , at Cosette 's graceful command , when no one was paying any heed to him , Jean Valjean had risen and had gained the antechamber unperceived . 
This was the very room which , eight months before , he had entered black with mud , with blood and powder , bringing back the grandson to the grandfather . 
The old wainscoting was garlanded with foliage and flowers ; the musicians were seated on the sofa on which they had laid Marius down . 
Basque , in a black coat , knee-breeches , white stockings and white gloves , was arranging roses round all of the dishes that were to be served . 
Jean Valjean pointed to his arm in its sling , charged Basque to explain his absence , and went away . 
The long windows of the dining-room opened on the street . 
Jean Valjean stood for several minutes , erect and motionless in the darkness , beneath those radiant windows . 
He listened . 
The confused sounds of the banquet reached his ear . 
He heard the loud , commanding tones of the grandfather , the violins , the clatter of the plates , the bursts of laughter , and through all that merry uproar , he distinguished Cosette 's sweet and joyous voice . 
He quitted the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , and returned to the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
In order to return thither , he took the Rue Saint-Louis , the Rue Culture-Sainte-Catherine , and the Blancs-Manteaux ; it was a little longer , but it was the road through which , for the last three months , he had become accustomed to pass every day on his way from the Rue de l'Homme Arme to the Rue des Filles-du-Calvaire , in order to avoid the obstructions and the mud in the Rue Vielle-du-Temple . 
This road , through which Cosette had passed , excluded for him all possibility of any other itinerary . 
Jean Valjean entered his lodgings . 
He lighted his candle and mounted the stairs . 
The apartment was empty . 
Even Toussaint was no longer there . 
Jean Valjean 's step made more noise than usual in the chambers . 
All the cupboards stood open . 
He penetrated to Cosette 's bedroom . 
There were no sheets on the bed . 
The pillow , covered with ticking , and without a case or lace , was laid on the blankets folded up on the foot of the mattress , whose covering was visible , and on which no one was ever to sleep again . 
All the little feminine objects which Cosette was attached to had been carried away ; nothing remained except the heavy furniture and the four walls . 
Toussaint 's bed was despoiled in like manner . 
One bed only was made up , and seemed to be waiting some one , and this was Jean Valjean 's bed . 
Jean Valjean looked at the walls , closed some of the cupboard doors , and went and came from one room to another . 
Then he sought his own chamber once more , and set his candle on a table . 
He had disengaged his arm from the sling , and he used his right hand as though it did not hurt him . 
He approached his bed , and his eyes rested , was it by chance ? 
was it intentionally ? 
on the inseparable of which Cosette had been jealous , on the little portmanteau which never left him . 
On his arrival in the Rue de l'Homme Arme , on the 4th of June , he had deposited it on a round table near the head of his bed . 
He went to this table with a sort of vivacity , took a key from his pocket , and opened the valise . 
From it he slowly drew forth the garments in which , ten years before , Cosette had quitted Montfermeil ; first the little gown , then the black fichu , then the stout , coarse child 's shoes which Cosette might almost have worn still , so tiny were her feet , then the fustian bodice , which was very thick , then the knitted petticoat , next the apron with pockets , then the woollen stockings . 
These stockings , which still preserved the graceful form of a tiny leg , were no longer than Jean Valjean 's hand . 
All this was black of hue . 
It was he who had brought those garments to Montfermeil for her . 
As he removed them from the valise , he laid them on the bed . 
He fell to thinking . 
He called up memories . 
It was in winter , in a very cold month of December , she was shivering , half-naked , in rags , her poor little feet were all red in their wooden shoes . 
He , Jean Valjean , had made her abandon those rags to clothe herself in these mourning habiliments . 
The mother must have felt pleased in her grave , to see her daughter wearing mourning for her , and , above all , to see that she was properly clothed , and that she was warm . 
He thought of that forest of Montfermeil ; they had traversed it together , Cosette and he ; he thought of what the weather had been , of the leafless trees , of the wood destitute of birds , of the sunless sky ; it mattered not , it was charming . 
He arranged the tiny garments on the bed , the fichu next to the petticoat , the stockings beside the shoes , and he looked at them , one after the other . 
She was no taller than that , she had her big doll in her arms , she had put her louis d'or in the pocket of that apron , she had laughed , they walked hand in hand , she had no one in the world but him . 
Then his venerable , white head fell forward on the bed , that stoical old heart broke , his face was engulfed , so to speak , in Cosette 's garments , and if any one had passed up the stairs at that moment , he would have heard frightful sobs . 
THE IMMORTAL LIVER -LSB- 68 -RSB- -LSB- 68 -RSB- In allusion to the story of Prometheus . 
The old and formidable struggle , of which we have already witnessed so many phases , began once more . 
Jacob struggled with the angel but one night . 
Alas ! 
how many times have we beheld Jean Valjean seized bodily by his conscience , in the darkness , and struggling desperately against it ! 
Unheard-of conflict ! 
At certain moments the foot slips ; at other moments the ground crumbles away underfoot . 
How many times had that conscience , mad for the good , clasped and overthrown him ! 
How many times had the truth set her knee inexorably upon his breast ! 
How many times , hurled to earth by the light , had he begged for mercy ! 
How many times had that implacable spark , lighted within him , and upon him by the Bishop , dazzled him by force when he had wished to be blind ! 
How many times had he risen to his feet in the combat , held fast to the rock , leaning against sophism , dragged in the dust , now getting the upper hand of his conscience , again overthrown by it ! 
How many times , after an equivoque , after the specious and treacherous reasoning of egotism , had he heard his irritated conscience cry in his ear : `` A trip ! 
you wretch ! '' 
How many times had his refractory thoughts rattled convulsively in his throat , under the evidence of duty ! 
Resistance to God . 
Funereal sweats . 
What secret wounds which he alone felt bleed ! 
What excoriations in his lamentable existence ! 
How many times he had risen bleeding , bruised , broken , enlightened , despair in his heart , serenity in his soul ! 
and , vanquished , he had felt himself the conqueror . 
And , after having dislocated , broken , and rent his conscience with red-hot pincers , it had said to him , as it stood over him , formidable , luminous , and tranquil : `` Now , go in peace ! '' 
But on emerging from so melancholy a conflict , what a lugubrious peace , alas ! 
Nevertheless , that night Jean Valjean felt that he was passing through his final combat . 
A heart-rending question presented itself . 
Predestinations are not all direct ; they do not open out in a straight avenue before the predestined man ; they have blind courts , impassable alleys , obscure turns , disturbing crossroads offering the choice of many ways . 
Jean Valjean had halted at that moment at the most perilous of these crossroads . 
He had come to the supreme crossing of good and evil . 
He had that gloomy intersection beneath his eyes . 
On this occasion once more , as had happened to him already in other sad vicissitudes , two roads opened out before him , the one tempting , the other alarming . 
Which was he to take ? 
He was counselled to the one which alarmed him whenever we fix our eyes on the darkness . 
Once more , Jean Valjean had the choice between Is it then true ? 
the soul may recover ; but not fate . 
This is the problem which presented itself to him : by that mysterious index finger which we all perceive the terrible port and the smiling ambush . 
Frightful thing ! 
an incurable destiny ! 
In what manner was Jean Valjean to behave in relation to the happiness of Cosette and Marius ? 
It was he who had willed that happiness , it was he who had brought it about ; he had , himself , buried it in his entrails , and at that moment , when he reflected on it , he was able to enjoy the sort of satisfaction which an armorer would experience on recognizing his factory mark on a knife , on withdrawing it , all smoking , from his own breast . 
Cosette had Marius , Marius possessed Cosette . 
They had everything , even riches . 
And this was his doing . 
But what was he , Jean Valjean , to do with this happiness , now that it existed , now that it was there ? 
Should he force himself on this happiness ? 
Should he treat it as belonging to him ? 
No doubt , Cosette did belong to another ; but should he , Jean Valjean , retain of Cosette all that he could retain ? 
Should he remain the sort of father , half seen but respected , which he had hitherto been ? 
Should he , without saying a word , bring his past to that future ? 
Should he present himself there , as though he had a right , and should he seat himself , veiled , at that luminous fireside ? 
Should he take those innocent hands into his tragic hands , with a smile ? 
Should he place upon the peaceful fender of the Gillenormand drawing-room those feet of his , which dragged behind them the disgraceful shadow of the law ? 
Should he enter into participation in the fair fortunes of Cosette and Marius ? 
Should he render the obscurity on his brow and the cloud upon theirs still more dense ? 
Should he place his catastrophe as a third associate in their felicity ? 
Should he continue to hold his peace ? 
In a word , should he be the sinister mute of destiny beside these two happy beings ? 
We must have become habituated to fatality and to encounters with it , in order to have the daring to raise our eyes when certain questions appear to us in all their horrible nakedness . 
Good or evil stands behind this severe interrogation point . 
What are you going to do ? 
demands the sphinx . 
This habit of trial Jean Valjean possessed . 
He gazed intently at the sphinx . 
He examined the pitiless problem under all its aspects . 
Cosette , that charming existence , was the raft of this shipwreck . 
What was he to do ? 
To cling fast to it , or to let go his hold ? 
If he clung to it , he should emerge from disaster , he should ascend again into the sunlight , he should let the bitter water drip from his garments and his hair , he was saved , he should live . 
And if he let go his hold ? 
Then the abyss . 
Thus he took sad council with his thoughts . 
Or , to speak more correctly , he fought ; he kicked furiously internally , now against his will , now against his conviction . 
Happily for Jean Valjean that he had been able to weep . 
That relieved him , possibly . 
But the beginning was savage . 
A tempest , more furious than the one which had formerly driven him to Arras , broke loose within him . 
The past surged up before him facing the present ; he compared them and sobbed . 
The silence of tears once opened , the despairing man writhed . 
He felt that he had been stopped short . 
Alas ! 
in this fight to the death between our egotism and our duty , when we thus retreat step by step before our immutable ideal , bewildered , furious , exasperated at having to yield , disputing the ground , hoping for a possible flight , seeking an escape , what an abrupt and sinister resistance does the foot of the wall offer in our rear ! 
To feel the sacred shadow which forms an obstacle ! 
The invisible inexorable , what an obsession ! 
Then , one is never done with conscience . 
Make your choice , Brutus ; make your choice , Cato . 
It is fathomless , since it is God . 
One flings into that well the labor of one 's whole life , one flings in one 's fortune , one flings in one 's riches , one flings in one 's success , one flings in one 's liberty or fatherland , one flings in one 's well-being , one flings in one 's repose , one flings in one 's joy ! 
More ! 
more ! 
more ! 
Empty the vase ! 
tip the urn ! 
One must finish by flinging in one 's heart . 
Somewhere in the fog of the ancient hells , there is a tun like that . 
Is not one pardonable , if one at last refuses ! 
Can the inexhaustible have any right ? 
Are not chains which are endless above human strength ? 
Who would blame Sisyphus and Jean Valjean for saying : `` It is enough ! '' 
The obedience of matter is limited by friction ; is there no limit to the obedience of the soul ? 
If perpetual motion is impossible , can perpetual self-sacrifice be exacted ? 
The first step is nothing , it is the last which is difficult . 
What was the Champmathieu affair in comparison with Cosette 's marriage and of that which it entailed ? 
What is a re-entrance into the galleys , compared to entrance into the void ? 
Oh , first step that must be descended , how sombre art thou ! 
Oh , second step , how black art thou ! 
How could he refrain from turning aside his head this time ? 
Martyrdom is sublimation , corrosive sublimation . 
It is a torture which consecrates . 
One can consent to it for the first hour ; one seats oneself on the throne of glowing iron , one places on one 's head the crown of hot iron , one accepts the globe of red hot iron , one takes the sceptre of red hot iron , but the mantle of flame still remains to be donned , and comes there not a moment when the miserable flesh revolts and when one abdicates from suffering ? 
At length , Jean Valjean entered into the peace of exhaustion . 
He weighed , he reflected , he considered the alternatives , the mysterious balance of light and darkness . 
Should he impose his galleys on those two dazzling children , or should he consummate his irremediable engulfment by himself ? 
On one side lay the sacrifice of Cosette , on the other that of himself . 
At what solution should he arrive ? 
What decision did he come to ? 
What resolution did he take ? 
What was his own inward definitive response to the unbribable interrogatory of fatality ? 
What door did he decide to open ? 
Which side of his life did he resolve upon closing and condemning ? 
Among all the unfathomable precipices which surrounded him , which was his choice ? 
What extremity did he accept ? 
To which of the gulfs did he nod his head ? 
His dizzy revery lasted all night long . 
He remained there until daylight , in the same attitude , bent double over that bed , prostrate beneath the enormity of fate , crushed , perchance , alas ! 
with clenched fists , with arms outspread at right angles , like a man crucified who has been un-nailed , and flung face down on the earth . 
There he remained for twelve hours , the twelve long hours of a long winter 's night , ice-cold , without once raising his head , and without uttering a word . 
He was as motionless as a corpse , while his thoughts wallowed on the earth and soared , now like the hydra , now like the eagle . 
Any one to behold him thus motionless would have pronounced him dead ; all at once he shuddered convulsively , and his mouth , glued to Cosette 's garments , kissed them ; then it could be seen that he was alive . 
Who could see ? 
Since Jean Valjean was alone , and there was no one there . 
The One who is in the shadows . 
THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN The days that follow weddings are solitary . 
People respect the meditations of the happy pair . 
And also , their tardy slumbers , to some degree . 
The tumult of visits and congratulations only begins later on . 
On the morning of the 17th of February , it was a little past midday when Basque , with napkin and feather-duster under his arm , busy in setting his antechamber to rights , heard a light tap at the door . 
There had been no ring , which was discreet on such a day . 
Basque opened the door , and beheld M. Fauchelevent . 
He introduced him into the drawing-room , still encumbered and topsy-turvy , and which bore the air of a field of battle after the joys of the preceding evening . 
`` Dame , sir , '' remarked Basque , `` we all woke up late . '' 
`` Is your master up ? '' 
asked Jean Valjean . 
`` How is Monsieur 's arm ? '' 
replied Basque . 
`` Better . 
Is your master up ? '' 
`` Which one ? 
the old one or the new one ? '' 
`` Monsieur Pontmercy . '' 
`` Monsieur le Baron , '' said Basque , drawing himself up . 
A man is a Baron most of all to his servants . 
He counts for something with them ; they are what a philosopher would call , bespattered with the title , and that flatters them . 
Marius , be it said in passing , a militant republican as he had proved , was now a Baron in spite of himself . 
A small revolution had taken place in the family in connection with this title . 
It was now M. Gillenormand who clung to it , and Marius who detached himself from it . 
But Colonel Pontmercy had written : `` My son will bear my title . '' 
Marius obeyed . 
And then , Cosette , in whom the woman was beginning to dawn , was delighted to be a Baroness . 
`` Monsieur le Baron ? '' 
repeated Basque . 
`` I will go and see . 
I will tell him that M. Fauchelevent is here . '' 
`` No . 
Do not tell him that it is I. Tell him that some one wishes to speak to him in private , and mention no name . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque . 
`` I wish to surprise him . '' 
`` Ah ! '' 
ejaculated Basque once more , emitting his second `` ah ! '' 
as an explanation of the first . 
And he left the room . 
Jean Valjean remained alone . 
The drawing-room , as we have just said , was in great disorder . 
It seemed as though , by lending an air , one might still hear the vague noise of the wedding . 
On the polished floor lay all sorts of flowers which had fallen from garlands and head-dresses . 
The wax candles , burned to stumps , added stalactites of wax to the crystal drops of the chandeliers . 
Not a single piece of furniture was in its place . 
In the corners , three or four arm-chairs , drawn close together in a circle , had the appearance of continuing a conversation . 
The whole effect was cheerful . 
A certain grace still lingers round a dead feast . 
It has been a happy thing . 
On the chairs in disarray , among those fading flowers , beneath those extinct lights , people have thought of joy . 
The sun had succeeded to the chandelier , and made its way gayly into the drawing-room . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
Jean Valjean stood motionless on the spot where Basque had left him . 
He was very pale . 
His eyes were hollow , and so sunken in his head by sleeplessness that they nearly disappeared in their orbits . 
His black coat bore the weary folds of a garment that has been up all night . 
The elbows were whitened with the down which the friction of cloth against linen leaves behind it . 
Jean Valjean stared at the window outlined on the polished floor at his feet by the sun . 
There came a sound at the door , and he raised his eyes . 
Marius entered , his head well up , his mouth smiling , an indescribable light on his countenance , his brow expanded , his eyes triumphant . 
He had not slept either . 
`` It is you , father ! '' 
he exclaimed , on catching sight of Jean Valjean ; `` that idiot of a Basque had such a mysterious air ! 
But you have come too early . 
It is only half past twelve . 
Cosette is asleep . '' 
That word : `` Father , '' said to M. Fauchelevent by Marius , signified : supreme felicity . 
There had always existed , as the reader knows , a lofty wall , a coldness and a constraint between them ; ice which must be broken or melted . 
Marius had reached that point of intoxication when the wall was lowered , when the ice dissolved , and when M. Fauchelevent was to him , as to Cosette , a father . 
He continued : his words poured forth , as is the peculiarity of divine paroxysms of joy . 
`` How glad I am to see you ! 
If you only knew how we missed you yesterday ! 
Good morning , father . 
How is your hand ? 
Better , is it not ? '' 
And , satisfied with the favorable reply which he had made to himself , he pursued : `` We have both been talking about you . 
Cosette loves you so dearly ! 
You must not forget that you have a chamber here , We want nothing more to do with the Rue de l'Homme Arme . 
We will have no more of it at all . 
How could you go to live in a street like that , which is sickly , which is disagreeable , which is ugly , which has a barrier at one end , where one is cold , and into which one can not enter ? 
You are to come and install yourself here . 
And this very day . 
Or you will have to deal with Cosette . 
She means to lead us all by the nose , I warn you . 
You have your own chamber here , it is close to ours , it opens on the garden ; the trouble with the clock has been attended to , the bed is made , it is all ready , you have only to take possession of it . 
Near your bed Cosette has placed a huge , old , easy-chair covered with Utrecht velvet and she has said to it : ` Stretch out your arms to him . ' 
A nightingale comes to the clump of acacias opposite your windows , every spring . 
In two months more you will have it . 
You will have its nest on your left and ours on your right . 
By night it will sing , and by day Cosette will prattle . 
Your chamber faces due South . 
Cosette will arrange your books for you , your Voyages of Captain Cook and the other , -- Vancouver 's and all your affairs . 
I believe that there is a little valise to which you are attached , I have fixed upon a corner of honor for that . 
You have conquered my grandfather , you suit him . 
We will live together . 
Do you play whist ? 
you will overwhelm my grandfather with delight if you play whist . 
It is you who shall take Cosette to walk on the days when I am at the courts , you shall give her your arm , you know , as you used to , in the Luxembourg . 
We are absolutely resolved to be happy . 
And you shall be included in it , in our happiness , do you hear , father ? 
Come , will you breakfast with us to-day ? '' 
`` Sir , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I have something to say to you . 
I am an ex-convict . '' 
The limit of shrill sounds perceptible can be overleaped , as well in the case of the mind as in that of the ear . 
These words : `` I am an ex-convict , '' proceeding from the mouth of M. Fauchelevent and entering the ear of Marius overshot the possible . 
It seemed to him that something had just been said to him ; but he did not know what . 
He stood with his mouth wide open . 
Then he perceived that the man who was addressing him was frightful . 
Wholly absorbed in his own dazzled state , he had not , up to that moment , observed the other man 's terrible pallor . 
Jean Valjean untied the black cravat which supported his right arm , unrolled the linen from around his hand , bared his thumb and showed it to Marius . 
`` There is nothing the matter with my hand , '' said he . 
Marius looked at the thumb . 
`` There has not been anything the matter with it , '' went on Jean Valjean . 
There was , in fact , no trace of any injury . 
Jean Valjean continued : `` It was fitting that I should be absent from your marriage . 
I absented myself as much as was in my power . 
So I invented this injury in order that I might not commit a forgery , that I might not introduce a flaw into the marriage documents , in order that I might escape from signing . '' 
Marius stammered . 
`` What is the meaning of this ? '' 
`` The meaning of it is , '' replied Jean Valjean , `` that I have been in the galleys . '' 
`` You are driving me mad ! '' 
exclaimed Marius in terror . 
`` Monsieur Pontmercy , '' said Jean Valjean , `` I was nineteen years in the galleys . 
For theft . 
Then , I was condemned for life for theft , for a second offence . 
At the present moment , I have broken my ban . '' 
In vain did Marius recoil before the reality , refuse the fact , resist the evidence , he was forced to give way . 
He began to understand , and , as always happens in such cases , he understood too much . 
An inward shudder of hideous enlightenment flashed through him ; an idea which made him quiver traversed his mind . 
He caught a glimpse of a wretched destiny for himself in the future . 
`` Say all , say all ! '' 
he cried . 
`` You are Cosette 's father ! '' 
And he retreated a couple of paces with a movement of indescribable horror . 
Jean Valjean elevated his head with so much majesty of attitude that he seemed to grow even to the ceiling . 
`` It is necessary that you should believe me here , sir ; although our oath to others may not be received in law ... '' Here he paused , then , with a sort of sovereign and sepulchral authority , he added , articulating slowly , and emphasizing the syllables : '' ... You will believe me . 
I the father of Cosette ! 
before God , no . 
Monsieur le Baron Pontmercy , I am a peasant of Faverolles . 
I earned my living by pruning trees . 
My name is not Fauchelevent , but Jean Valjean . 
I am not related to Cosette . 
Reassure yourself . '' 
Marius stammered : `` Who will prove that to me ? '' 
`` I . 
Since I tell you so . '' 
Marius looked at the man . 
He was melancholy yet tranquil . 
No lie could proceed from such a calm . 
That which is icy is sincere . 
The truth could be felt in that chill of the tomb . 
`` I believe you , '' said Marius . 
Jean Valjean bent his head , as though taking note of this , and continued : `` What am I to Cosette ? 
A passer-by . 
Ten years ago , I did not know that she was in existence . 
I love her , it is true . 
One loves a child whom one has seen when very young , being old oneself . 
When one is old , one feels oneself a grandfather towards all little children . 
You may , it seems to me , suppose that I have something which resembles a heart . 
She was an orphan . 
Without either father or mother . 
She needed me . 
That is why I began to love her . 
Children are so weak that the first comer , even a man like me , can become their protector . 
I have fulfilled this duty towards Cosette . 
I do not think that so slight a thing can be called a good action ; but if it be a good action , well , say that I have done it . 
Register this attenuating circumstance . 
To-day , Cosette passes out of my life ; our two roads part . 
Henceforth , I can do nothing for her . 
She is Madame Pontmercy . 
Her providence has changed . 
And Cosette gains by the change . 
All is well . 
As for the six hundred thousand francs , you do not mention them to me , but I forestall your thought , they are a deposit . 
How did that deposit come into my hands ? 
What does that matter ? 
I restore the deposit . 
Nothing more can be demanded of me . 
I complete the restitution by announcing my true name . 
That concerns me . 
I have a reason for desiring that you should know who I am . '' 
And Jean Valjean looked Marius full in the face . 
All that Marius experienced was tumultuous and incoherent . 
Certain gusts of destiny produce these billows in our souls . 
We have all undergone moments of trouble in which everything within us is dispersed ; we say the first things that occur to us , which are not always precisely those which should be said . 
There are sudden revelations which one can not bear , and which intoxicate like baleful wine . 
Marius was stupefied by the novel situation which presented itself to him , to the point of addressing that man almost like a person who was angry with him for this avowal . 
`` But why , '' he exclaimed , `` do you tell me all this ? 
Who forces you to do so ? 
You could have kept your secret to yourself . 
You are neither denounced , nor tracked nor pursued . 
You have a reason for wantonly making such a revelation . 
Conclude . 
There is something more . 
In what connection do you make this confession ? 
What is your motive ? '' 
`` My motive ? '' 
replied Jean Valjean in a voice so low and dull that one would have said that he was talking to himself rather than to Marius . 
`` From what motive , in fact , has this convict just said ` I am a convict ' ? 
Well , yes ! 
the motive is strange . 
It is out of honesty . 
Stay , the unfortunate point is that I have a thread in my heart , which keeps me fast . 
It is when one is old that that sort of thread is particularly solid . 
All life falls in ruin around one ; one resists . 
Had I been able to tear out that thread , to break it , to undo the knot or to cut it , to go far away , I should have been safe . 
I had only to go away ; there are diligences in the Rue Bouloy ; you are happy ; I am going . 
I have tried to break that thread , I have jerked at it , it would not break , I tore my heart with it . 
Then I said : ` I can not live anywhere else than here . ' 
I must stay . 
Well , yes , you are right , I am a fool , why not simply remain here ? 
You offer me a chamber in this house , Madame Pontmercy is sincerely attached to me , she said to the arm-chair : ` Stretch out your arms to him , ' your grandfather demands nothing better than to have me , I suit him , we shall live together , and take our meals in common , I shall give Cosette my arm ... Madame Pontmercy , excuse me , it is a habit , we shall have but one roof , one table , one fire , the same chimney-corner in winter , the same promenade in summer , that is joy , that is happiness , that is everything . 
We shall live as one family . 
One family ! '' 
At that word , Jean Valjean became wild . 
He folded his arms , glared at the floor beneath his feet as though he would have excavated an abyss therein , and his voice suddenly rose in thundering tones : `` As one family ! 
No . 
I belong to no family . 
I do not belong to yours . 
I do not belong to any family of men . 
In houses where people are among themselves , I am superfluous . 
There are families , but there is nothing of the sort for me . 
I am an unlucky wretch ; I am left outside . 
Did I have a father and mother ? 
I almost doubt it . 
On the day when I gave that child in marriage , all came to an end . 
I have seen her happy , and that she is with a man whom she loves , and that there exists here a kind old man , a household of two angels , and all joys in that house , and that it was well , I said to myself : ` Enter thou not . ' 
I could have lied , it is true , have deceived you all , and remained Monsieur Fauchelevent . 
So long as it was for her , I could lie ; but now it would be for myself , and I must not . 
It was sufficient for me to hold my peace , it is true , and all would go on . 
You ask me what has forced me to speak ? 
a very odd thing ; my conscience . 
To hold my peace was very easy , however . 
I passed the night in trying to persuade myself to it ; you questioned me , and what I have just said to you is so extraordinary that you have the right to do it ; well , yes , I have passed the night in alleging reasons to myself , and I gave myself very good reasons , I have done what I could . 
But there are two things in which I have not succeeded ; in breaking the thread that holds me fixed , riveted and sealed here by the heart , or in silencing some one who speaks softly to me when I am alone . 
That is why I have come hither to tell you everything this morning . 
Everything or nearly everything . 
It is useless to tell you that which concerns only myself ; I keep that to myself . 
You know the essential points . 
So I have taken my mystery and have brought it to you . 
And I have disembowelled my secret before your eyes . 
It was not a resolution that was easy to take . 
I struggled all night long . 
Ah ! 
you think that I did not tell myself that this was no Champmathieu affair , that by concealing my name I was doing no one any injury , that the name of Fauchelevent had been given to me by Fauchelevent himself , out of gratitude for a service rendered to him , and that I might assuredly keep it , and that I should be happy in that chamber which you offer me , that I should not be in any one 's way , that I should be in my own little corner , and that , while you would have Cosette , I should have the idea that I was in the same house with her . 
Each one of us would have had his share of happiness . 
If I continued to be Monsieur Fauchelevent , that would arrange everything . 
Yes , with the exception of my soul . 
There was joy everywhere upon my surface , but the bottom of my soul remained black . 
It is not enough to be happy , one must be content . 
Thus I should have remained Monsieur Fauchelevent , thus I should have concealed my true visage , thus , in the presence of your expansion , I should have had an enigma , thus , in the midst of your full noonday , I should have had shadows , thus , without crying ` ` ware , ' I should have simply introduced the galleys to your fireside , I should have taken my seat at your table with the thought that if you knew who I was , you would drive me from it , I should have allowed myself to be served by domestics who , had they known , would have said : ` How horrible ! ' 
I should have touched you with my elbow , which you have a right to dislike , I should have filched your clasps of the hand ! 
There would have existed in your house a division of respect between venerable white locks and tainted white locks ; at your most intimate hours , when all hearts thought themselves open to the very bottom to all the rest , when we four were together , your grandfather , you two and myself , a stranger would have been present ! 
I should have been side by side with you in your existence , having for my only care not to disarrange the cover of my dreadful pit . 
Thus , I , a dead man , should have thrust myself upon you who are living beings . 
I should have condemned her to myself forever . 
You and Cosette and I would have had all three of our heads in the green cap ! 
Does it not make you shudder ? 
I am only the most crushed of men ; I should have been the most monstrous of men . 
And I should have committed that crime every day ! 
And I should have had that face of night upon my visage every day ! 
every day ! 
And I should have communicated to you a share in my taint every day ! 
every day ! 
