said Madame Thenardier , `` if the beast has not been watered , it must be . '' 
Then glancing about her : -- `` Well , now ! 
Where 's that other beast ? '' 
She bent down and discovered Cosette cowering at the other end of the table , almost under the drinkers ' feet . 
`` Are you coming ? '' 
shrieked Madame Thenardier . 
Cosette crawled out of the sort of hole in which she had hidden herself . 
The Thenardier resumed : -- `` Mademoiselle Dog-lack-name , go and water that horse . '' 
`` But , Madame , '' said Cosette , feebly , `` there is no water . '' 
The Thenardier threw the street door wide open : -- `` Well , go and get some , then ! '' 
Cosette dropped her head , and went for an empty bucket which stood near the chimney-corner . 
This bucket was bigger than she was , and the child could have set down in it at her ease . 
The Thenardier returned to her stove , and tasted what was in the stewpan , with a wooden spoon , grumbling the while : -- `` There 's plenty in the spring . 
There never was such a malicious creature as that . 
I think I should have done better to strain my onions . '' 
Then she rummaged in a drawer which contained sous , pepper , and shallots . 
`` See here , Mam ` selle Toad , '' she added , `` on your way back , you will get a big loaf from the baker . 
Here 's a fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette had a little pocket on one side of her apron ; she took the coin without saying a word , and put it in that pocket . 
Then she stood motionless , bucket in hand , the open door before her . 
She seemed to be waiting for some one to come to her rescue . 
`` Get along with you ! '' 
screamed the Thenardier . 
Cosette went out . 
The door closed behind her . 
ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL The line of open-air booths starting at the church , extended , as the reader will remember , as far as the hostelry of the Thenardiers . 
These booths were all illuminated , because the citizens would soon pass on their way to the midnight mass , with candles burning in paper funnels , which , as the schoolmaster , then seated at the table at the Thenardiers ' observed , produced `` a magical effect . '' 
In compensation , not a star was visible in the sky . 
The last of these stalls , established precisely opposite the Thenardiers ' door , was a toy-shop all glittering with tinsel , glass , and magnificent objects of tin . 
In the first row , and far forwards , the merchant had placed on a background of white napkins , an immense doll , nearly two feet high , who was dressed in a robe of pink crepe , with gold wheat-ears on her head , which had real hair and enamel eyes . 
All that day , this marvel had been displayed to the wonderment of all passers-by under ten years of age , without a mother being found in Montfermeil sufficiently rich or sufficiently extravagant to give it to her child . 
Eponine and Azelma had passed hours in contemplating it , and Cosette herself had ventured to cast a glance at it , on the sly , it is true . 
At the moment when Cosette emerged , bucket in hand , melancholy and overcome as she was , she could not refrain from lifting her eyes to that wonderful doll , towards the lady , as she called it . 
The poor child paused in amazement . 
She had not yet beheld that doll close to . 
The whole shop seemed a palace to her : the doll was not a doll ; it was a vision . 
It was joy , splendor , riches , happiness , which appeared in a sort of chimerical halo to that unhappy little being so profoundly engulfed in gloomy and chilly misery . 
With the sad and innocent sagacity of childhood , Cosette measured the abyss which separated her from that doll . 
She said to herself that one must be a queen , or at least a princess , to have a `` thing '' like that . 
She gazed at that beautiful pink dress , that beautiful smooth hair , and she thought , `` How happy that doll must be ! '' 
She could not take her eyes from that fantastic stall . 
The more she looked , the more dazzled she grew . 
She thought she was gazing at paradise . 
There were other dolls behind the large one , which seemed to her to be fairies and genii . 
The merchant , who was pacing back and forth in front of his shop , produced on her somewhat the effect of being the Eternal Father . 
In this adoration she forgot everything , even the errand with which she was charged . 
All at once the Thenardier 's coarse voice recalled her to reality : `` What , you silly jade ! 
you have not gone ? 
Wait ! 
I 'll give it to you ! 
I want to know what you are doing there ! 
Get along , you little monster ! '' 
The Thenardier had cast a glance into the street , and had caught sight of Cosette in her ecstasy . 
Cosette fled , dragging her pail , and taking the longest strides of which she was capable . 
THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE As the Thenardier hostelry was in that part of the village which is near the church , it was to the spring in the forest in the direction of Chelles that Cosette was obliged to go for her water . 
She did not glance at the display of a single other merchant . 
So long as she was in Boulanger Lane and in the neighborhood of the church , the lighted stalls illuminated the road ; but soon the last light from the last stall vanished . 
The poor child found herself in the dark . 
She plunged into it . 
Only , as a certain emotion overcame her , she made as much motion as possible with the handle of the bucket as she walked along . 
This made a noise which afforded her company . 
The further she went , the denser the darkness became . 
There was no one in the streets . 
However , she did encounter a woman , who turned around on seeing her , and stood still , muttering between her teeth : `` Where can that child be going ? 
Is it a werewolf child ? '' 
Then the woman recognized Cosette . 
`` Well , '' said she , `` it 's the Lark ! '' 
In this manner Cosette traversed the labyrinth of tortuous and deserted streets which terminate in the village of Montfermeil on the side of Chelles . 
So long as she had the houses or even the walls only on both sides of her path , she proceeded with tolerable boldness . 
From time to time she caught the flicker of a candle through the crack of a shutter -- this was light and life ; there were people there , and it reassured her . 
But in proportion as she advanced , her pace slackened mechanically , as it were . 
When she had passed the corner of the last house , Cosette paused . 
It had been hard to advance further than the last stall ; it became impossible to proceed further than the last house . 
She set her bucket on the ground , thrust her hand into her hair , and began slowly to scratch her head , -- a gesture peculiar to children when terrified and undecided what to do . 
It was no longer Montfermeil ; it was the open fields . 
Black and desert space was before her . 
She gazed in despair at that darkness , where there was no longer any one , where there were beasts , where there were spectres , possibly . 
She took a good look , and heard the beasts walking on the grass , and she distinctly saw spectres moving in the trees . 
Then she seized her bucket again ; fear had lent her audacity . 
`` Bah ! '' 
said she ; `` I will tell him that there was no more water ! '' 
And she resolutely re-entered Montfermeil . 
Hardly had she gone a hundred paces when she paused and began to scratch her head again . 
Now it was the Thenardier who appeared to her , with her hideous , hyena mouth , and wrath flashing in her eyes . 
The child cast a melancholy glance before her and behind her . 
What was she to do ? 
What was to become of her ? 
Where was she to go ? 
In front of her was the spectre of the Thenardier ; behind her all the phantoms of the night and of the forest . 
It was before the Thenardier that she recoiled . 
She resumed her path to the spring , and began to run . 
She emerged from the village , she entered the forest at a run , no longer looking at or listening to anything . 
She only paused in her course when her breath failed her ; but she did not halt in her advance . 
She went straight before her in desperation . 
As she ran she felt like crying . 
The nocturnal quivering of the forest surrounded her completely . 
She no longer thought , she no longer saw . 
The immensity of night was facing this tiny creature . 
On the one hand , all shadow ; on the other , an atom . 
It was only seven or eight minutes ' walk from the edge of the woods to the spring . 
Cosette knew the way , through having gone over it many times in daylight . 
Strange to say , she did not get lost . 
A remnant of instinct guided her vaguely . 
But she did not turn her eyes either to right or to left , for fear of seeing things in the branches and in the brushwood . 
In this manner she reached the spring . 
It was a narrow , natural basin , hollowed out by the water in a clayey soil , about two feet deep , surrounded with moss and with those tall , crimped grasses which are called Henry IV . 
's frills , and paved with several large stones . 
A brook ran out of it , with a tranquil little noise . 
Cosette did not take time to breathe . 
It was very dark , but she was in the habit of coming to this spring . 
She felt with her left hand in the dark for a young oak which leaned over the spring , and which usually served to support her , found one of its branches , clung to it , bent down , and plunged the bucket in the water . 
She was in a state of such violent excitement that her strength was trebled . 
While thus bent over , she did not notice that the pocket of her apron had emptied itself into the spring . 
The fifteen-sou piece fell into the water . 
Cosette neither saw nor heard it fall . 
She drew out the bucket nearly full , and set it on the grass . 
That done , she perceived that she was worn out with fatigue . 
She would have liked to set out again at once , but the effort required to fill the bucket had been such that she found it impossible to take a step . 
She was forced to sit down . 
She dropped on the grass , and remained crouching there . 
She shut her eyes ; then she opened them again , without knowing why , but because she could not do otherwise . 
The agitated water in the bucket beside her was describing circles which resembled tin serpents . 
Overhead the sky was covered with vast black clouds , which were like masses of smoke . 
The tragic mask of shadow seemed to bend vaguely over the child . 
Jupiter was setting in the depths . 
The child stared with bewildered eyes at this great star , with which she was unfamiliar , and which terrified her . 
The planet was , in fact , very near the horizon and was traversing a dense layer of mist which imparted to it a horrible ruddy hue . 
The mist , gloomily empurpled , magnified the star . 
One would have called it a luminous wound . 
A cold wind was blowing from the plain . 
The forest was dark , not a leaf was moving ; there were none of the vague , fresh gleams of summertide . 
Great boughs uplifted themselves in frightful wise . 
Slender and misshapen bushes whistled in the clearings . 
The tall grasses undulated like eels under the north wind . 
The nettles seemed to twist long arms furnished with claws in search of prey . 
Some bits of dry heather , tossed by the breeze , flew rapidly by , and had the air of fleeing in terror before something which was coming after . 
On all sides there were lugubrious stretches . 
The darkness was bewildering . 
Man requires light . 
Whoever buries himself in the opposite of day feels his heart contract . 
When the eye sees black , the heart sees trouble . 
In an eclipse in the night , in the sooty opacity , there is anxiety even for the stoutest of hearts . 
No one walks alone in the forest at night without trembling . 
Shadows and trees -- two formidable densities . 
A chimerical reality appears in the indistinct depths . 
The inconceivable is outlined a few paces distant from you with a spectral clearness . 
One beholds floating , either in space or in one 's own brain , one knows not what vague and intangible thing , like the dreams of sleeping flowers . 
There are fierce attitudes on the horizon . 
One inhales the effluvia of the great black void . 
One is afraid to glance behind him , yet desirous of doing so . 
The cavities of night , things grown haggard , taciturn profiles which vanish when one advances , obscure dishevelments , irritated tufts , livid pools , the lugubrious reflected in the funereal , the sepulchral immensity of silence , unknown but possible beings , bendings of mysterious branches , alarming torsos of trees , long handfuls of quivering plants , -- against all this one has no protection . 
There is no hardihood which does not shudder and which does not feel the vicinity of anguish . 
One is conscious of something hideous , as though one 's soul were becoming amalgamated with the darkness . 
This penetration of the shadows is indescribably sinister in the case of a child . 
Forests are apocalypses , and the beating of the wings of a tiny soul produces a sound of agony beneath their monstrous vault . 
Without understanding her sensations , Cosette was conscious that she was seized upon by that black enormity of nature ; it was no longer terror alone which was gaining possession of her ; it was something more terrible even than terror ; she shivered . 
There are no words to express the strangeness of that shiver which chilled her to the very bottom of her heart ; her eye grew wild ; she thought she felt that she should not be able to refrain from returning there at the same hour on the morrow . 
Then , by a sort of instinct , she began to count aloud , one , two , three , four , and so on up to ten , in order to escape from that singular state which she did not understand , but which terrified her , and , when she had finished , she began again ; this restored her to a true perception of the things about her . 
Her hands , which she had wet in drawing the water , felt cold ; she rose ; her terror , a natural and unconquerable terror , had returned : she had but one thought now , -- to flee at full speed through the forest , across the fields to the houses , to the windows , to the lighted candles . 
Her glance fell upon the water which stood before her ; such was the fright which the Thenardier inspired in her , that she dared not flee without that bucket of water : she seized the handle with both hands ; she could hardly lift the pail . 
In this manner she advanced a dozen paces , but the bucket was full ; it was heavy ; she was forced to set it on the ground once more . 
She took breath for an instant , then lifted the handle of the bucket again , and resumed her march , proceeding a little further this time , but again she was obliged to pause . 
After some seconds of repose she set out again . 
She walked bent forward , with drooping head , like an old woman ; the weight of the bucket strained and stiffened her thin arms . 
The iron handle completed the benumbing and freezing of her wet and tiny hands ; she was forced to halt from time to time , and each time that she did so , the cold water which splashed from the pail fell on her bare legs . 
This took place in the depths of a forest , at night , in winter , far from all human sight ; she was a child of eight : no one but God saw that sad thing at the moment . 
And her mother , no doubt , alas ! 
For there are things that make the dead open their eyes in their graves . 
She panted with a sort of painful rattle ; sobs contracted her throat , but she dared not weep , so afraid was she of the Thenardier , even at a distance : it was her custom to imagine the Thenardier always present . 
However , she could not make much headway in that manner , and she went on very slowly . 
In spite of diminishing the length of her stops , and of walking as long as possible between them , she reflected with anguish that it would take her more than an hour to return to Montfermeil in this manner , and that the Thenardier would beat her . 
This anguish was mingled with her terror at being alone in the woods at night ; she was worn out with fatigue , and had not yet emerged from the forest . 
On arriving near an old chestnut-tree with which she was acquainted , made a last halt , longer than the rest , in order that she might get well rested ; then she summoned up all her strength , picked up her bucket again , and courageously resumed her march , but the poor little desperate creature could not refrain from crying , `` O my God ! 
my God ! '' 
At that moment she suddenly became conscious that her bucket no longer weighed anything at all : a hand , which seemed to her enormous , had just seized the handle , and lifted it vigorously . 
She raised her head . 
A large black form , straight and erect , was walking beside her through the darkness ; it was a man who had come up behind her , and whose approach she had not heard . 
This man , without uttering a word , had seized the handle of the bucket which she was carrying . 
There are instincts for all the encounters of life . 
The child was not afraid . 
WHICH POSSIBLY PROVES BOULATRUELLE 'S INTELLIGENCE On the afternoon of that same Christmas Day , 1823 , a man had walked for rather a long time in the most deserted part of the Boulevard de l'Hopital in Paris . 
This man had the air of a person who is seeking lodgings , and he seemed to halt , by preference , at the most modest houses on that dilapidated border of the faubourg Saint-Marceau . 
We shall see further on that this man had , in fact , hired a chamber in that isolated quarter . 
This man , in his attire , as in all his person , realized the type of what may be called the well-bred mendicant , -- extreme wretchedness combined with extreme cleanliness . 
This is a very rare mixture which inspires intelligent hearts with that double respect which one feels for the man who is very poor , and for the man who is very worthy . 
He wore a very old and very well brushed round hat ; a coarse coat , worn perfectly threadbare , of an ochre yellow , a color that was not in the least eccentric at that epoch ; a large waistcoat with pockets of a venerable cut ; black breeches , worn gray at the knee , stockings of black worsted ; and thick shoes with copper buckles . 
He would have been pronounced a preceptor in some good family , returned from the emigration . 
He would have been taken for more than sixty years of age , from his perfectly white hair , his wrinkled brow , his livid lips , and his countenance , where everything breathed depression and weariness of life . 
Judging from his firm tread , from the singular vigor which stamped all his movements , he would have hardly been thought fifty . 
The wrinkles on his brow were well placed , and would have disposed in his favor any one who observed him attentively . 
His lip contracted with a strange fold which seemed severe , and which was humble . 
There was in the depth of his glance an indescribable melancholy serenity . 
In his left hand he carried a little bundle tied up in a handkerchief ; in his right he leaned on a sort of a cudgel , cut from some hedge . 
This stick had been carefully trimmed , and had an air that was not too threatening ; the most had been made of its knots , and it had received a coral-like head , made from red wax : it was a cudgel , and it seemed to be a cane . 
There are but few passers-by on that boulevard , particularly in the winter . 
The man seemed to avoid them rather than to seek them , but this without any affectation . 
At that epoch , King Louis XVIII . 
went nearly every day to Choisy-le-Roi : it was one of his favorite excursions . 
Towards two o'clock , almost invariably , the royal carriage and cavalcade was seen to pass at full speed along the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
This served in lieu of a watch or clock to the poor women of the quarter who said , `` It is two o'clock ; there he is returning to the Tuileries . '' 
And some rushed forward , and others drew up in line , for a passing king always creates a tumult ; besides , the appearance and disappearance of Louis XVIII . 
produced a certain effect in the streets of Paris . 
It was rapid but majestic . 
This impotent king had a taste for a fast gallop ; as he was not able to walk , he wished to run : that cripple would gladly have had himself drawn by the lightning . 
He passed , pacific and severe , in the midst of naked swords . 
His massive couch , all covered with gilding , with great branches of lilies painted on the panels , thundered noisily along . 
There was hardly time to cast a glance upon it . 
In the rear angle on the right there was visible on tufted cushions of white satin a large , firm , and ruddy face , a brow freshly powdered a l'oiseau royal , a proud , hard , crafty eye , the smile of an educated man , two great epaulets with bullion fringe floating over a bourgeois coat , the Golden Fleece , the cross of Saint Louis , the cross of the Legion of Honor , the silver plaque of the Saint-Esprit , a huge belly , and a wide blue ribbon : it was the king . 
Outside of Paris , he held his hat decked with white ostrich plumes on his knees enwrapped in high English gaiters ; when he re-entered the city , he put on his hat and saluted rarely ; he stared coldly at the people , and they returned it in kind . 
When he appeared for the first time in the Saint-Marceau quarter , the whole success which he produced is contained in this remark of an inhabitant of the faubourg to his comrade , `` That big fellow yonder is the government . '' 
This infallible passage of the king at the same hour was , therefore , the daily event of the Boulevard de l'Hopital . 
The promenader in the yellow coat evidently did not belong in the quarter , and probably did not belong in Paris , for he was ignorant as to this detail . 
When , at two o'clock , the royal carriage , surrounded by a squadron of the body-guard all covered with silver lace , debouched on the boulevard , after having made the turn of the Salpetriere , he appeared surprised and almost alarmed . 
There was no one but himself in this cross-lane . 
He drew up hastily behind the corner of the wall of an enclosure , though this did not prevent M. le Duc de Havre from spying him out . 
M. le Duc de Havre , as captain of the guard on duty that day , was seated in the carriage , opposite the king . 
He said to his Majesty , `` Yonder is an evil-looking man . '' 
Members of the police , who were clearing the king 's route , took equal note of him : one of them received an order to follow him . 
But the man plunged into the deserted little streets of the faubourg , and as twilight was beginning to fall , the agent lost trace of him , as is stated in a report addressed that same evening to M. le Comte d'Angles , Minister of State , Prefect of Police . 
When the man in the yellow coat had thrown the agent off his track , he redoubled his pace , not without turning round many a time to assure himself that he was not being followed . 
At a quarter-past four , that is to say , when night was fully come , he passed in front of the theatre of the Porte Saint-Martin , where The Two Convicts was being played that day . 
This poster , illuminated by the theatre lanterns , struck him ; for , although he was walking rapidly , he halted to read it . 
An instant later he was in the blind alley of La Planchette , and he entered the Plat d'Etain -LSB- the Pewter Platter -RSB- , where the office of the coach for Lagny was then situated . 
This coach set out at half-past four . 
The horses were harnessed , and the travellers , summoned by the coachman , were hastily climbing the lofty iron ladder of the vehicle . 
The man inquired : -- `` Have you a place ? '' 
`` Only one -- beside me on the box , '' said the coachman . 
`` I will take it . '' 
`` Climb up . '' 
Nevertheless , before setting out , the coachman cast a glance at the traveller 's shabby dress , at the diminutive size of his bundle , and made him pay his fare . 
`` Are you going as far as Lagny ? '' 
demanded the coachman . 
`` Yes , '' said the man . 
The traveller paid to Lagny . 
They started . 
When they had passed the barrier , the coachman tried to enter into conversation , but the traveller only replied in monosyllables . 
The coachman took to whistling and swearing at his horses . 
The coachman wrapped himself up in his cloak . 
It was cold . 
The man did not appear to be thinking of that . 
Thus they passed Gournay and Neuilly-sur-Marne . 
Towards six o'clock in the evening they reached Chelles . 
The coachman drew up in front of the carters ' inn installed in the ancient buildings of the Royal Abbey , to give his horses a breathing spell . 
`` I get down here , '' said the man . 
He took his bundle and his cudgel and jumped down from the vehicle . 
An instant later he had disappeared . 
He did not enter the inn . 
When the coach set out for Lagny a few minutes later , it did not encounter him in the principal street of Chelles . 
The coachman turned to the inside travellers . 
`` There , '' said he , `` is a man who does not belong here , for I do not know him . 
He had not the air of owning a sou , but he does not consider money ; he pays to Lagny , and he goes only as far as Chelles . 
It is night ; all the houses are shut ; he does not enter the inn , and he is not to be found . 
So he has dived through the earth . '' 
The man had not plunged into the earth , but he had gone with great strides through the dark , down the principal street of Chelles , then he had turned to the right before reaching the church , into the cross-road leading to Montfermeil , like a person who was acquainted with the country and had been there before . 
He followed this road rapidly . 
At the spot where it is intersected by the ancient tree-bordered road which runs from Gagny to Lagny , he heard people coming . 
He concealed himself precipitately in a ditch , and there waited until the passers-by were at a distance . 
The precaution was nearly superfluous , however ; for , as we have already said , it was a very dark December night . 
Not more than two or three stars were visible in the sky . 
It is at this point that the ascent of the hill begins . 
The man did not return to the road to Montfermeil ; he struck across the fields to the right , and entered the forest with long strides . 
Once in the forest he slackened his pace , and began a careful examination of all the trees , advancing , step by step , as though seeking and following a mysterious road known to himself alone . 
There came a moment when he appeared to lose himself , and he paused in indecision . 
At last he arrived , by dint of feeling his way inch by inch , at a clearing where there was a great heap of whitish stones . 
He stepped up briskly to these stones , and examined them attentively through the mists of night , as though he were passing them in review . 
A large tree , covered with those excrescences which are the warts of vegetation , stood a few paces distant from the pile of stones . 
He went up to this tree and passed his hand over the bark of the trunk , as though seeking to recognize and count all the warts . 
Opposite this tree , which was an ash , there was a chestnut-tree , suffering from a peeling of the bark , to which a band of zinc had been nailed by way of dressing . 
He raised himself on tiptoe and touched this band of zinc . 
Then he trod about for awhile on the ground comprised in the space between the tree and the heap of stones , like a person who is trying to assure himself that the soil has not recently been disturbed . 
That done , he took his bearings , and resumed his march through the forest . 
It was the man who had just met Cosette . 
As he walked through the thicket in the direction of Montfermeil , he had espied that tiny shadow moving with a groan , depositing a burden on the ground , then taking it up and setting out again . 
He drew near , and perceived that it was a very young child , laden with an enormous bucket of water . 
Then he approached the child , and silently grasped the handle of the bucket . 
COSETTE SIDE BY SIDE WITH THE STRANGER IN THE DARK Cosette , as we have said , was not frightened . 
The man accosted her . 
He spoke in a voice that was grave and almost bass . 
`` My child , what you are carrying is very heavy for you . '' 
Cosette raised her head and replied : -- `` Yes , sir . '' 
`` Give it to me , '' said the man ; `` I will carry it for you . '' 
Cosette let go of the bucket-handle . 
The man walked along beside her . 
`` It really is very heavy , '' he muttered between his teeth . 
Then he added : -- `` How old are you , little one ? '' 
`` Eight , sir . '' 
`` And have you come from far like this ? '' 
`` From the spring in the forest . '' 
`` Are you going far ? '' 
`` A good quarter of an hour 's walk from here . '' 
The man said nothing for a moment ; then he remarked abruptly : -- `` So you have no mother . '' 
`` I do n't know , '' answered the child . 
Before the man had time to speak again , she added : -- `` I do n't think so . 
Other people have mothers . 
I have none . '' 
And after a silence she went on : -- `` I think that I never had any . '' 
The man halted ; he set the bucket on the ground , bent down and placed both hands on the child 's shoulders , making an effort to look at her and to see her face in the dark . 
Cosette 's thin and sickly face was vaguely outlined by the livid light in the sky . 
`` What is your name ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Cosette . '' 
The man seemed to have received an electric shock . 
He looked at her once more ; then he removed his hands from Cosette 's shoulders , seized the bucket , and set out again . 
After a moment he inquired : -- `` Where do you live , little one ? '' 
`` At Montfermeil , if you know where that is . '' 
`` That is where we are going ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
He paused ; then began again : -- `` Who sent you at such an hour to get water in the forest ? '' 
`` It was Madame Thenardier . '' 
The man resumed , in a voice which he strove to render indifferent , but in which there was , nevertheless , a singular tremor : -- `` What does your Madame Thenardier do ? '' 
`` She is my mistress , '' said the child . 
`` She keeps the inn . '' 
`` The inn ? '' 
said the man . 
`` Well , I am going to lodge there to-night . 
Show me the way . '' 
`` We are on the way there , '' said the child . 
The man walked tolerably fast . 
Cosette followed him without difficulty . 
She no longer felt any fatigue . 
From time to time she raised her eyes towards the man , with a sort of tranquillity and an indescribable confidence . 
She had never been taught to turn to Providence and to pray ; nevertheless , she felt within her something which resembled hope and joy , and which mounted towards heaven . 
Several minutes elapsed . 
The man resumed : -- `` Is there no servant in Madame Thenardier 's house ? '' 
`` No , sir . '' 
`` Are you alone there ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
Another pause ensued . 
Cosette lifted up her voice : -- `` That is to say , there are two little girls . '' 
`` What little girls ? '' 
`` Ponine and Zelma . '' 
This was the way the child simplified the romantic names so dear to the female Thenardier . 
`` Who are Ponine and Zelma ? '' 
`` They are Madame Thenardier 's young ladies ; her daughters , as you would say . '' 
`` And what do those girls do ? '' 
`` Oh ! '' 
said the child , `` they have beautiful dolls ; things with gold in them , all full of affairs . 
They play ; they amuse themselves . '' 
`` All day long ? '' 
`` Yes , sir . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
`` I ? 
I work . '' 
`` All day long ? '' 
The child raised her great eyes , in which hung a tear , which was not visible because of the darkness , and replied gently : -- `` Yes , sir . '' 
After an interval of silence she went on : -- `` Sometimes , when I have finished my work and they let me , I amuse myself , too . '' 
`` How do you amuse yourself ? '' 
`` In the best way I can . 
They let me alone ; but I have not many playthings . 
Ponine and Zelma will not let me play with their dolls . 
I have only a little lead sword , no longer than that . '' 
The child held up her tiny finger . 
`` And it will not cut ? '' 
`` Yes , sir , '' said the child ; `` it cuts salad and the heads of flies . '' 
They reached the village . 
Cosette guided the stranger through the streets . 
They passed the bakeshop , but Cosette did not think of the bread which she had been ordered to fetch . 
The man had ceased to ply her with questions , and now preserved a gloomy silence . 
When they had left the church behind them , the man , on perceiving all the open-air booths , asked Cosette : -- `` So there is a fair going on here ? '' 
`` No , sir ; it is Christmas . '' 
As they approached the tavern , Cosette timidly touched his arm : -- `` Monsieur ? '' 
`` What , my child ? '' 
`` We are quite near the house . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` Will you let me take my bucket now ? '' 
`` Why ? '' 
`` If Madame sees that some one has carried it for me , she will beat me . '' 
The man handed her the bucket . 
An instant later they were at the tavern door . 
THE UNPLEASANTNESS OF RECEIVING INTO ONE 'S HOUSE A POOR MAN WHO MAY BE A RICH MAN Cosette could not refrain from casting a sidelong glance at the big doll , which was still displayed at the toy-merchant 's ; then she knocked . 
The door opened . 
The Thenardier appeared with a candle in her hand . 
`` Ah ! 
so it 's you , you little wretch ! 
good mercy , but you 've taken your time ! 
The hussy has been amusing herself ! '' 
`` Madame , '' said Cosette , trembling all over , `` here 's a gentleman who wants a lodging . '' 
The Thenardier speedily replaced her gruff air by her amiable grimace , a change of aspect common to tavern-keepers , and eagerly sought the new-comer with her eyes . 
`` This is the gentleman ? '' 
said she . 
`` Yes , Madame , '' replied the man , raising his hand to his hat . 
Wealthy travellers are not so polite . 
This gesture , and an inspection of the stranger 's costume and baggage , which the Thenardier passed in review with one glance , caused the amiable grimace to vanish , and the gruff mien to reappear . 
She resumed dryly : -- `` Enter , my good man . '' 
The `` good man '' entered . 
The Thenardier cast a second glance at him , paid particular attention to his frock-coat , which was absolutely threadbare , and to his hat , which was a little battered , and , tossing her head , wrinkling her nose , and screwing up her eyes , she consulted her husband , who was still drinking with the carters . 
The husband replied by that imperceptible movement of the forefinger , which , backed up by an inflation of the lips , signifies in such cases : A regular beggar . 
Thereupon , the Thenardier exclaimed : -- `` Ah ! 
see here , my good man ; I am very sorry , but I have no room left . '' 
`` Put me where you like , '' said the man ; `` in the attic , in the stable . 
I will pay as though I occupied a room . '' 
`` Forty sous . '' 
`` Forty sous ; agreed . '' 
`` Very well , then ! '' 
`` Forty sous ! '' 
said a carter , in a low tone , to the Thenardier woman ; `` why , the charge is only twenty sous ! '' 
`` It is forty in his case , '' retorted the Thenardier , in the same tone . 
`` I do n't lodge poor folks for less . '' 
`` That 's true , '' added her husband , gently ; `` it ruins a house to have such people in it . '' 
In the meantime , the man , laying his bundle and his cudgel on a bench , had seated himself at a table , on which Cosette made haste to place a bottle of wine and a glass . 
The merchant who had demanded the bucket of water took it to his horse himself . 
Cosette resumed her place under the kitchen table , and her knitting . 
The man , who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had poured out for himself , observed the child with peculiar attention . 
Cosette was ugly . 
If she had been happy , she might have been pretty . 
We have already given a sketch of that sombre little figure . 
Cosette was thin and pale ; she was nearly eight years old , but she seemed to be hardly six . 
Her large eyes , sunken in a sort of shadow , were almost put out with weeping . 
The corners of her mouth had that curve of habitual anguish which is seen in condemned persons and desperately sick people . 
Her hands were , as her mother had divined , `` ruined with chilblains . '' 
The fire which illuminated her at that moment brought into relief all the angles of her bones , and rendered her thinness frightfully apparent . 
As she was always shivering , she had acquired the habit of pressing her knees one against the other . 
Her entire clothing was but a rag which would have inspired pity in summer , and which inspired horror in winter . 
All she had on was hole-ridden linen , not a scrap of woollen . 
Her skin was visible here and there and everywhere black and blue spots could be descried , which marked the places where the Thenardier woman had touched her . 
Her naked legs were thin and red . 
The hollows in her neck were enough to make one weep . 
This child 's whole person , her mien , her attitude , the sound of her voice , the intervals which she allowed to elapse between one word and the next , her glance , her silence , her slightest gesture , expressed and betrayed one sole idea , -- fear . 
Fear was diffused all over her ; she was covered with it , so to speak ; fear drew her elbows close to her hips , withdrew her heels under her petticoat , made her occupy as little space as possible , allowed her only the breath that was absolutely necessary , and had become what might be called the habit of her body , admitting of no possible variation except an increase . 
In the depths of her eyes there was an astonished nook where terror lurked . 
Her fear was such , that on her arrival , wet as she was , Cosette did not dare to approach the fire and dry herself , but sat silently down to her work again . 
The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was habitually so gloomy , and at times so tragic , that it seemed at certain moments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a demon . 
As we have stated , she had never known what it is to pray ; she had never set foot in a church . 
`` Have I the time ? '' 
said the Thenardier . 
The man in the yellow coat never took his eyes from Cosette . 
All at once , the Thenardier exclaimed : -- `` By the way , where 's that bread ? '' 
Cosette , according to her custom whenever the Thenardier uplifted her voice , emerged with great haste from beneath the table . 
She had completely forgotten the bread . 
She had recourse to the expedient of children who live in a constant state of fear . 
She lied . 
`` Madame , the baker 's shop was shut . '' 
`` You should have knocked . '' 
`` I did knock , Madame . '' 
`` Well ? '' 
`` He did not open the door . '' 
`` I 'll find out to-morrow whether that is true , '' said the Thenardier ; `` and if you are telling me a lie , I 'll lead you a pretty dance . 
In the meantime , give me back my fifteen-sou piece . '' 
Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron , and turned green . 
The fifteen-sou piece was not there . 
`` Ah , come now , '' said Madame Thenardier , `` did you hear me ? '' 
Cosette turned her pocket inside out ; there was nothing in it . 
What could have become of that money ? 
The unhappy little creature could not find a word to say . 
She was petrified . 
`` Have you lost that fifteen-sou piece ? '' 
screamed the Thenardier , hoarsely , `` or do you want to rob me of it ? '' 
At the same time , she stretched out her arm towards the cat-o ' - nine-tails which hung on a nail in the chimney-corner . 
This formidable gesture restored to Cosette sufficient strength to shriek : -- `` Mercy , Madame , Madame ! 
I will not do so any more ! '' 
The Thenardier took down the whip . 
In the meantime , the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in the fob of his waistcoat , without any one having noticed his movements . 
Besides , the other travellers were drinking or playing cards , and were not paying attention to anything . 
Cosette contracted herself into a ball , with anguish , within the angle of the chimney , endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nude limbs . 
The Thenardier raised her arm . 
`` Pardon me , Madame , '' said the man , `` but just now I caught sight of something which had fallen from this little one 's apron pocket , and rolled aside . 
Perhaps this is it . '' 
At the same time he bent down and seemed to be searching on the floor for a moment . 
`` Exactly ; here it is , '' he went on , straightening himself up . 
And he held out a silver coin to the Thenardier . 
`` Yes , that 's it , '' said she . 
It was not it , for it was a twenty-sou piece ; but the Thenardier found it to her advantage . 
She put the coin in her pocket , and confined herself to casting a fierce glance at the child , accompanied with the remark , `` Do n't let this ever happen again ! '' 
Cosette returned to what the Thenardier called `` her kennel , '' and her large eyes , which were riveted on the traveller , began to take on an expression such as they had never worn before . 
Thus far it was only an innocent amazement , but a sort of stupefied confidence was mingled with it . 
`` By the way , would you like some supper ? '' 
the Thenardier inquired of the traveller . 
He made no reply . 
He appeared to be absorbed in thought . 
`` What sort of a man is that ? '' 
she muttered between her teeth . 
`` He 's some frightfully poor wretch . 
He has n't a sou to pay for a supper . 
Will he even pay me for his lodging ? 
It 's very lucky , all the same , that it did not occur to him to steal the money that was on the floor . '' 
In the meantime , a door had opened , and Eponine and Azelma entered . 
They were two really pretty little girls , more bourgeois than peasant in looks , and very charming ; the one with shining chestnut tresses , the other with long black braids hanging down her back , both vivacious , neat , plump , rosy , and healthy , and a delight to the eye . 
They were warmly clad , but with so much maternal art that the thickness of the stuffs did not detract from the coquetry of arrangement . 
There was a hint of winter , though the springtime was not wholly effaced . 
Light emanated from these two little beings . 
Besides this , they were on the throne . 
In their toilettes , in their gayety , in the noise which they made , there was sovereignty . 
When they entered , the Thenardier said to them in a grumbling tone which was full of adoration , `` Ah ! 
there you are , you children ! '' 
Then drawing them , one after the other to her knees , smoothing their hair , tying their ribbons afresh , and then releasing them with that gentle manner of shaking off which is peculiar to mothers , she exclaimed , `` What frights they are ! '' 
They went and seated themselves in the chimney-corner . 
They had a doll , which they turned over and over on their knees with all sorts of joyous chatter . 
From time to time Cosette raised her eyes from her knitting , and watched their play with a melancholy air . 
Eponine and Azelma did not look at Cosette . 
She was the same as a dog to them . 
These three little girls did not yet reckon up four and twenty years between them , but they already represented the whole society of man ; envy on the one side , disdain on the other . 
The doll of the Thenardier sisters was very much faded , very old , and much broken ; but it seemed none the less admirable to Cosette , who had never had a doll in her life , a real doll , to make use of the expression which all children will understand . 
All at once , the Thenardier , who had been going back and forth in the room , perceived that Cosette 's mind was distracted , and that , instead of working , she was paying attention to the little ones at their play . 
`` Ah ! 
I 've caught you at it ! '' 
she cried . 
`` So that 's the way you work ! 
I 'll make you work to the tune of the whip ; that I will . '' 
The stranger turned to the Thenardier , without quitting his chair . 
`` Bah , Madame , '' he said , with an almost timid air , `` let her play ! '' 
