At this word `` villain , '' the female Thenardier sprang from the bed , Thenardier grasped his chair as though he were about to crush it in his hands . 
`` Do n't you stir ! '' 
he shouted to his wife ; and , turning to M. Leblanc : -- `` Villain ! 
Yes , I know that you call us that , you rich gentlemen ! 
Stop ! 
it 's true that I became bankrupt , that I am in hiding , that I have no bread , that I have not a single sou , that I am a villain ! 
It 's three days since I have had anything to eat , so I 'm a villain ! 
Ah ! 
you folks warm your feet , you have Sakoski boots , you have wadded great-coats , like archbishops , you lodge on the first floor in houses that have porters , you eat truffles , you eat asparagus at forty francs the bunch in the month of January , and green peas , you gorge yourselves , and when you want to know whether it is cold , you look in the papers to see what the engineer Chevalier 's thermometer says about it . 
We , it is we who are thermometers . 
We do n't need to go out and look on the quay at the corner of the Tour de l'Horologe , to find out the number of degrees of cold ; we feel our blood congealing in our veins , and the ice forming round our hearts , and we say : ` There is no God ! ' 
And you come to our caverns , yes our caverns , for the purpose of calling us villains ! 
But we 'll devour you ! 
But we 'll devour you , poor little things ! 
Just see here , Mister millionnaire : I have been a solid man , I have held a license , I have been an elector , I am a bourgeois , that I am ! 
And it 's quite possible that you are not ! '' 
Here Thenardier took a step towards the men who stood near the door , and added with a shudder : -- `` When I think that he has dared to come here and talk to me like a cobbler ! '' 
Then addressing M. Leblanc with a fresh outburst of frenzy : -- `` And listen to this also , Mister philanthropist ! 
I 'm not a suspicious character , not a bit of it ! 
I 'm not a man whose name nobody knows , and who comes and abducts children from houses ! 
I 'm an old French soldier , I ought to have been decorated ! 
I was at Waterloo , so I was ! 
And in the battle I saved a general called the Comte of I do n't know what . 
He told me his name , but his beastly voice was so weak that I did n't hear . 
All I caught was Merci -LSB- thanks -RSB- . 
I 'd rather have had his name than his thanks . 
That would have helped me to find him again . 
The picture that you see here , and which was painted by David at Bruqueselles , -- do you know what it represents ? 
It represents me . 
David wished to immortalize that feat of prowess . 
I have that general on my back , and I am carrying him through the grape-shot . 
There 's the history of it ! 
That general never did a single thing for me ; he was no better than the rest ! 
But none the less , I saved his life at the risk of my own , and I have the certificate of the fact in my pocket ! 
I am a soldier of Waterloo , by all the furies ! 
And now that I have had the goodness to tell you all this , let 's have an end of it . 
I want money , I want a deal of money , I must have an enormous lot of money , or I 'll exterminate you , by the thunder of the good God ! '' 
Marius had regained some measure of control over his anguish , and was listening . 
The last possibility of doubt had just vanished . 
It certainly was the Thenardier of the will . 
Marius shuddered at that reproach of ingratitude directed against his father , and which he was on the point of so fatally justifying . 
His perplexity was redoubled . 
Moreover , there was in all these words of Thenardier , in his accent , in his gesture , in his glance which darted flames at every word , there was , in this explosion of an evil nature disclosing everything , in that mixture of braggadocio and abjectness , of pride and pettiness , of rage and folly , in that chaos of real griefs and false sentiments , in that immodesty of a malicious man tasting the voluptuous delights of violence , in that shameless nudity of a repulsive soul , in that conflagration of all sufferings combined with all hatreds , something which was as hideous as evil , and as heart-rending as the truth . 
The picture of the master , the painting by David which he had proposed that M. Leblanc should purchase , was nothing else , as the reader has divined , than the sign of his tavern painted , as it will be remembered , by himself , the only relic which he had preserved from his shipwreck at Montfermeil . 
As he had ceased to intercept Marius ' visual ray , Marius could examine this thing , and in the daub , he actually did recognize a battle , a background of smoke , and a man carrying another man . 
It was the group composed of Pontmercy and Thenardier ; the sergeant the rescuer , the colonel rescued . 
Marius was like a drunken man ; this picture restored his father to life in some sort ; it was no longer the signboard of the wine-shop at Montfermeil , it was a resurrection ; a tomb had yawned , a phantom had risen there . 
Marius heard his heart beating in his temples , he had the cannon of Waterloo in his ears , his bleeding father , vaguely depicted on that sinister panel terrified him , and it seemed to him that the misshapen spectre was gazing intently at him . 
When Thenardier had recovered his breath , he turned his bloodshot eyes on M. Leblanc , and said to him in a low , curt voice : -- `` What have you to say before we put the handcuffs on you ? '' 
M. Leblanc held his peace . 
In the midst of this silence , a cracked voice launched this lugubrious sarcasm from the corridor : -- `` If there 's any wood to be split , I 'm there ! '' 
It was the man with the axe , who was growing merry . 
At the same moment , an enormous , bristling , and clayey face made its appearance at the door , with a hideous laugh which exhibited not teeth , but fangs . 
It was the face of the man with the butcher 's axe . 
`` Why have you taken off your mask ? '' 
cried Thenardier in a rage . 
`` For fun , '' retorted the man . 
For the last few minutes M. Leblanc had appeared to be watching and following all the movements of Thenardier , who , blinded and dazzled by his own rage , was stalking to and fro in the den with full confidence that the door was guarded , and of holding an unarmed man fast , he being armed himself , of being nine against one , supposing that the female Thenardier counted for but one man . 
During his address to the man with the pole-axe , he had turned his back to M. Leblanc . 
M. Leblanc seized this moment , overturned the chair with his foot and the table with his fist , and with one bound , with prodigious agility , before Thenardier had time to turn round , he had reached the window . 
To open it , to scale the frame , to bestride it , was the work of a second only . 
He was half out when six robust fists seized him and dragged him back energetically into the hovel . 
These were the three `` chimney-builders , '' who had flung themselves upon him . 
At the same time the Thenardier woman had wound her hands in his hair . 
At the trampling which ensued , the other ruffians rushed up from the corridor . 
The old man on the bed , who seemed under the influence of wine , descended from the pallet and came reeling up , with a stone-breaker 's hammer in his hand . 
One of the `` chimney-builders , '' whose smirched face was lighted up by the candle , and in whom Marius recognized , in spite of his daubing , Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , lifted above M. Leblanc 's head a sort of bludgeon made of two balls of lead , at the two ends of a bar of iron . 
Marius could not resist this sight . 
`` My father , '' he thought , `` forgive me ! '' 
And his finger sought the trigger of his pistol . 
The shot was on the point of being discharged when Thenardier 's voice shouted : -- `` Do n't harm him ! '' 
This desperate attempt of the victim , far from exasperating Thenardier , had calmed him . 
There existed in him two men , the ferocious man and the adroit man . 
Up to that moment , in the excess of his triumph in the presence of the prey which had been brought down , and which did not stir , the ferocious man had prevailed ; when the victim struggled and tried to resist , the adroit man reappeared and took the upper hand . 
`` Do n't hurt him ! '' 
he repeated , and without suspecting it , his first success was to arrest the pistol in the act of being discharged , and to paralyze Marius , in whose opinion the urgency of the case disappeared , and who , in the face of this new phase , saw no inconvenience in waiting a while longer . 
Who knows whether some chance would not arise which would deliver him from the horrible alternative of allowing Ursule 's father to perish , or of destroying the colonel 's saviour ? 
A herculean struggle had begun . 
With one blow full in the chest , M. Leblanc had sent the old man tumbling , rolling in the middle of the room , then with two backward sweeps of his hand he had overthrown two more assailants , and he held one under each of his knees ; the wretches were rattling in the throat beneath this pressure as under a granite millstone ; but the other four had seized the formidable old man by both arms and the back of his neck , and were holding him doubled up over the two `` chimney-builders '' on the floor . 
Thus , the master of some and mastered by the rest , crushing those beneath him and stifling under those on top of him , endeavoring in vain to shake off all the efforts which were heaped upon him , M. Leblanc disappeared under the horrible group of ruffians like the wild boar beneath a howling pile of dogs and hounds . 
They succeeded in overthrowing him upon the bed nearest the window , and there they held him in awe . 
The Thenardier woman had not released her clutch on his hair . 
`` Do n't you mix yourself up in this affair , '' said Thenardier . 
`` You 'll tear your shawl . '' 
The Thenardier obeyed , as the female wolf obeys the male wolf , with a growl . 
`` Now , '' said Thenardier , `` search him , you other fellows ! '' 
M. Leblanc seemed to have renounced the idea of resistance . 
They searched him . 
He had nothing on his person except a leather purse containing six francs , and his handkerchief . 
Thenardier put the handkerchief into his own pocket . 
`` What ! 
No pocket-book ? '' 
he demanded . 
`` No , nor watch , '' replied one of the `` chimney-builders . '' 
`` Never mind , '' murmured the masked man who carried the big key , in the voice of a ventriloquist , `` he 's a tough old fellow . '' 
Thenardier went to the corner near the door , picked up a bundle of ropes and threw them at the men . 
`` Tie him to the leg of the bed , '' said he . 
And , catching sight of the old man who had been stretched across the room by the blow from M. Leblanc 's fist , and who made no movement , he added : -- `` Is Boulatruelle dead ? '' 
`` No , '' replied Bigrenaille , `` he 's drunk . '' 
`` Sweep him into a corner , '' said Thenardier . 
Two of the `` chimney-builders '' pushed the drunken man into the corner near the heap of old iron with their feet . 
`` Babet , '' said Thenardier in a low tone to the man with the cudgel , `` why did you bring so many ; they were not needed . '' 
`` What can you do ? '' 
replied the man with the cudgel , `` they all wanted to be in it . 
This is a bad season . 
There 's no business going on . '' 
The pallet on which M. Leblanc had been thrown was a sort of hospital bed , elevated on four coarse wooden legs , roughly hewn . 
M. Leblanc let them take their own course . 
The ruffians bound him securely , in an upright attitude , with his feet on the ground at the head of the bed , the end which was most remote from the window , and nearest to the fireplace . 
When the last knot had been tied , Thenardier took a chair and seated himself almost facing M. Leblanc . 
Thenardier no longer looked like himself ; in the course of a few moments his face had passed from unbridled violence to tranquil and cunning sweetness . 
Marius found it difficult to recognize in that polished smile of a man in official life the almost bestial mouth which had been foaming but a moment before ; he gazed with amazement on that fantastic and alarming metamorphosis , and he felt as a man might feel who should behold a tiger converted into a lawyer . 
`` Monsieur -- '' said Thenardier . 
And dismissing with a gesture the ruffians who still kept their hands on M. Leblanc : -- `` Stand off a little , and let me have a talk with the gentleman . '' 
All retired towards the door . 
He went on : -- `` Monsieur , you did wrong to try to jump out of the window . 
You might have broken your leg . 
Now , if you will permit me , we will converse quietly . 
In the first place , I must communicate to you an observation which I have made which is , that you have not uttered the faintest cry . '' 
Thenardier was right , this detail was correct , although it had escaped Marius in his agitation . 
M. Leblanc had barely pronounced a few words , without raising his voice , and even during his struggle with the six ruffians near the window he had preserved the most profound and singular silence . 
Thenardier continued : -- `` Mon Dieu ! 
You might have shouted ` stop thief ' a bit , and I should not have thought it improper . 
` Murder ! ' 
That , too , is said occasionally , and , so far as I am concerned , I should not have taken it in bad part . 
It is very natural that you should make a little row when you find yourself with persons who do n't inspire you with sufficient confidence . 
You might have done that , and no one would have troubled you on that account . 
You would not even have been gagged . 
And I will tell you why . 
This room is very private . 
That 's its only recommendation , but it has that in its favor . 
You might fire off a mortar and it would produce about as much noise at the nearest police station as the snores of a drunken man . 
Here a cannon would make a boum , and the thunder would make a pouf . 
It 's a handy lodging . 
But , in short , you did not shout , and it is better so . 
I present you my compliments , and I will tell you the conclusion that I draw from that fact : My dear sir , when a man shouts , who comes ? 
The police . 
And after the police ? 
Justice . 
Well ! 
You have not made an outcry ; that is because you do n't care to have the police and the courts come in any more than we do . 
It is because , -- I have long suspected it , -- you have some interest in hiding something . 
On our side we have the same interest . 
So we can come to an understanding . '' 
As he spoke thus , it seemed as though Thenardier , who kept his eyes fixed on M. Leblanc , were trying to plunge the sharp points which darted from the pupils into the very conscience of his prisoner . 
Moreover , his language , which was stamped with a sort of moderated , subdued insolence and crafty insolence , was reserved and almost choice , and in that rascal , who had been nothing but a robber a short time previously , one now felt `` the man who had studied for the priesthood . '' 
The silence preserved by the prisoner , that precaution which had been carried to the point of forgetting all anxiety for his own life , that resistance opposed to the first impulse of nature , which is to utter a cry , all this , it must be confessed , now that his attention had been called to it , troubled Marius , and affected him with painful astonishment . 
Thenardier 's well-grounded observation still further obscured for Marius the dense mystery which enveloped that grave and singular person on whom Courfeyrac had bestowed the sobriquet of Monsieur Leblanc . 
But whoever he was , bound with ropes , surrounded with executioners , half plunged , so to speak , in a grave which was closing in upon him to the extent of a degree with every moment that passed , in the presence of Thenardier 's wrath , as in the presence of his sweetness , this man remained impassive ; and Marius could not refrain from admiring at such a moment the superbly melancholy visage . 
Here , evidently , was a soul which was inaccessible to terror , and which did not know the meaning of despair . 
Here was one of those men who command amazement in desperate circumstances . 
Extreme as was the crisis , inevitable as was the catastrophe , there was nothing here of the agony of the drowning man , who opens his horror-filled eyes under the water . 
Thenardier rose in an unpretending manner , went to the fireplace , shoved aside the screen , which he leaned against the neighboring pallet , and thus unmasked the brazier full of glowing coals , in which the prisoner could plainly see the chisel white-hot and spotted here and there with tiny scarlet stars . 
Then Thenardier returned to his seat beside M. Leblanc . 
`` I continue , '' said he . 
`` We can come to an understanding . 
Let us arrange this matter in an amicable way . 
I was wrong to lose my temper just now , I do n't know what I was thinking of , I went a great deal too far , I said extravagant things . 
For example , because you are a millionnaire , I told you that I exacted money , a lot of money , a deal of money . 
That would not be reasonable . 
Mon Dieu , in spite of your riches , you have expenses of your own -- who has not ? 
I do n't want to ruin you , I am not a greedy fellow , after all . 
I am not one of those people who , because they have the advantage of the position , profit by the fact to make themselves ridiculous . 
Why , I 'm taking things into consideration and making a sacrifice on my side . 
I only want two hundred thousand francs . '' 
M. Leblanc uttered not a word . 
Thenardier went on : -- `` You see that I put not a little water in my wine ; I 'm very moderate . 
I do n't know the state of your fortune , but I do know that you do n't stick at money , and a benevolent man like yourself can certainly give two hundred thousand francs to the father of a family who is out of luck . 
Certainly , you are reasonable , too ; you have n't imagined that I should take all the trouble I have to-day and organized this affair this evening , which has been labor well bestowed , in the opinion of these gentlemen , merely to wind up by asking you for enough to go and drink red wine at fifteen sous and eat veal at Desnoyer 's . 
Two hundred thousand francs -- it 's surely worth all that . 
This trifle once out of your pocket , I guarantee you that that 's the end of the matter , and that you have no further demands to fear . 
You will say to me : ` But I have n't two hundred thousand francs about me . ' 
Oh ! 
I 'm not extortionate . 
I do n't demand that . 
I only ask one thing of you . 
Have the goodness to write what I am about to dictate to you . '' 
Here Thenardier paused ; then he added , emphasizing his words , and casting a smile in the direction of the brazier : -- `` I warn you that I shall not admit that you do n't know how to write . '' 
A grand inquisitor might have envied that smile . 
Thenardier pushed the table close to M. Leblanc , and took an inkstand , a pen , and a sheet of paper from the drawer which he left half open , and in which gleamed the long blade of the knife . 
He placed the sheet of paper before M. Leblanc . 
`` Write , '' said he . 
The prisoner spoke at last . 
`` How do you expect me to write ? 
I am bound . '' 
`` That 's true , excuse me ! '' 
ejaculated Thenardier , `` you are quite right . '' 
And turning to Bigrenaille : -- `` Untie the gentleman 's right arm . '' 
Panchaud , alias Printanier , alias Bigrenaille , executed Thenardier 's order . 
When the prisoner 's right arm was free , Thenardier dipped the pen in the ink and presented it to him . 
`` Understand thoroughly , sir , that you are in our power , at our discretion , that no human power can get you out of this , and that we shall be really grieved if we are forced to proceed to disagreeable extremities . 
I know neither your name , nor your address , but I warn you , that you will remain bound until the person charged with carrying the letter which you are about to write shall have returned . 
Now , be so good as to write . '' 
`` What ? '' 
demanded the prisoner . 
`` I will dictate . '' 
M. Leblanc took the pen . 
Thenardier began to dictate : -- `` My daughter -- '' The prisoner shuddered , and raised his eyes to Thenardier . 
`` Put down ` My dear daughter ' -- '' said Thenardier . 
M. Leblanc obeyed . 
Thenardier continued : -- `` Come instantly -- '' He paused : -- `` You address her as thou , do you not ? '' 
`` Who ? '' 
asked M. Leblanc . 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
cried Thenardier , `` the little one , the Lark . '' 
M. Leblanc replied without the slightest apparent emotion : -- `` I do not know what you mean . '' 
`` Go on , nevertheless , '' ejaculated Thenardier , and he continued to dictate : -- `` Come immediately , I am in absolute need of thee . 
The person who will deliver this note to thee is instructed to conduct thee to me . 
I am waiting for thee . 
Come with confidence . '' 
M. Leblanc had written the whole of this . 
Thenardier resumed : -- `` Ah ! 
erase ` come with confidence ' ; that might lead her to suppose that everything was not as it should be , and that distrust is possible . '' 
M. Leblanc erased the three words . 
`` Now , '' pursued Thenardier , `` sign it . 
What 's your name ? '' 
The prisoner laid down the pen and demanded : -- `` For whom is this letter ? '' 
`` You know well , '' retorted Thenardier , `` for the little one I just told you so . '' 
It was evident that Thenardier avoided naming the young girl in question . 
He said `` the Lark , '' he said `` the little one , '' but he did not pronounce her name -- the precaution of a clever man guarding his secret from his accomplices . 
To mention the name was to deliver the whole `` affair '' into their hands , and to tell them more about it than there was any need of their knowing . 
He went on : -- `` Sign . 
What is your name ? '' 
`` Urbain Fabre , '' said the prisoner . 
Thenardier , with the movement of a cat , dashed his hand into his pocket and drew out the handkerchief which had been seized on M. Leblanc . 
He looked for the mark on it , and held it close to the candle . 
`` U. F. That 's it . 
Urbain Fabre . 
Well , sign it U. F. '' The prisoner signed . 
`` As two hands are required to fold the letter , give it to me , I will fold it . '' 
That done , Thenardier resumed : -- `` Address it , ` Mademoiselle Fabre , ' at your house . 
I know that you live a long distance from here , near Saint-Jacquesdu-Haut-Pas , because you go to mass there every day , but I do n't know in what street . 
I see that you understand your situation . 
As you have not lied about your name , you will not lie about your address . 
Write it yourself . '' 
The prisoner paused thoughtfully for a moment , then he took the pen and wrote : -- `` Mademoiselle Fabre , at M. Urbain Fabre 's , Rue Saint-Dominique-D'Enfer , No. 17 . '' 
Thenardier seized the letter with a sort of feverish convulsion . 
`` Wife ! '' 
he cried . 
The Thenardier woman hastened to him . 
`` Here 's the letter . 
You know what you have to do . 
There is a carriage at the door . 
Set out at once , and return ditto . '' 
And addressing the man with the meat-axe : -- `` Since you have taken off your nose-screen , accompany the mistress . 
You will get up behind the fiacre . 
You know where you left the team ? '' 
`` Yes , '' said the man . 
And depositing his axe in a corner , he followed Madame Thenardier . 
As they set off , Thenardier thrust his head through the half-open door , and shouted into the corridor : -- `` Above all things , do n't lose the letter ! 
remember that you carry two hundred thousand francs with you ! '' 
The Thenardier 's hoarse voice replied : -- `` Be easy . 
I have it in my bosom . '' 
A minute had not elapsed , when the sound of the cracking of a whip was heard , which rapidly retreated and died away . 
`` Good ! '' 
growled Thenardier . 
`` They 're going at a fine pace . 
At such a gallop , the bourgeoise will be back inside three-quarters of an hour . '' 
He drew a chair close to the fireplace , folding his arms , and presenting his muddy boots to the brazier . 
`` My feet are cold ! '' 
said he . 
Only five ruffians now remained in the den with Thenardier and the prisoner . 
These men , through the black masks or paste which covered their faces , and made of them , at fear 's pleasure , charcoal-burners , negroes , or demons , had a stupid and gloomy air , and it could be felt that they perpetrated a crime like a bit of work , tranquilly , without either wrath or mercy , with a sort of ennui . 
They were crowded together in one corner like brutes , and remained silent . 
Thenardier warmed his feet . 
The prisoner had relapsed into his taciturnity . 
A sombre calm had succeeded to the wild uproar which had filled the garret but a few moments before . 
The candle , on which a large `` stranger '' had formed , cast but a dim light in the immense hovel , the brazier had grown dull , and all those monstrous heads cast misshapen shadows on the walls and ceiling . 
No sound was audible except the quiet breathing of the old drunken man , who was fast asleep . 
Marius waited in a state of anxiety that was augmented by every trifle . 
The enigma was more impenetrable than ever . 
Who was this `` little one '' whom Thenardier had called the Lark ? 
Was she his `` Ursule '' ? 
The prisoner had not seemed to be affected by that word , `` the Lark , '' and had replied in the most natural manner in the world : `` I do not know what you mean . '' 
On the other hand , the two letters U. F. were explained ; they meant Urbain Fabre ; and Ursule was no longer named Ursule . 
This was what Marius perceived most clearly of all . 
A sort of horrible fascination held him nailed to his post , from which he was observing and commanding this whole scene . 
There he stood , almost incapable of movement or reflection , as though annihilated by the abominable things viewed at such close quarters . 
He waited , in the hope of some incident , no matter of what nature , since he could not collect his thoughts and did not know upon what course to decide . 
`` In any case , '' he said , `` if she is the Lark , I shall see her , for the Thenardier woman is to bring her hither . 
That will be the end , and then I will give my life and my blood if necessary , but I will deliver her ! 
Nothing shall stop me . '' 
Nearly half an hour passed in this manner . 
Thenardier seemed to be absorbed in gloomy reflections , the prisoner did not stir . 
Still , Marius fancied that at intervals , and for the last few moments , he had heard a faint , dull noise in the direction of the prisoner . 
All at once , Thenardier addressed the prisoner : `` By the way , Monsieur Fabre , I might as well say it to you at once . '' 
These few words appeared to be the beginning of an explanation . 
Marius strained his ears . 
`` My wife will be back shortly , do n't get impatient . 
I think that the Lark really is your daughter , and it seems to me quite natural that you should keep her . 
Only , listen to me a bit . 
My wife will go and hunt her up with your letter . 
I told my wife to dress herself in the way she did , so that your young lady might make no difficulty about following her . 
They will both enter the carriage with my comrade behind . 
Somewhere , outside the barrier , there is a trap harnessed to two very good horses . 
Your young lady will be taken to it . 
She will alight from the fiacre . 
My comrade will enter the other vehicle with her , and my wife will come back here to tell us : ` It 's done . ' 
As for the young lady , no harm will be done to her ; the trap will conduct her to a place where she will be quiet , and just as soon as you have handed over to me those little two hundred thousand francs , she will be returned to you . 
If you have me arrested , my comrade will give a turn of his thumb to the Lark , that 's all . '' 
The prisoner uttered not a syllable . 
After a pause , Thenardier continued : -- `` It 's very simple , as you see . 
There 'll be no harm done unless you wish that there should be harm done . 
I 'm telling you how things stand . 
I warn you so that you may be prepared . '' 
He paused : the prisoner did not break the silence , and Thenardier resumed : -- `` As soon as my wife returns and says to me : ` The Lark is on the way , ' we will release you , and you will be free to go and sleep at home . 
You see that our intentions are not evil . '' 
Terrible images passed through Marius ' mind . 
What ! 
That young girl whom they were abducting was not to be brought back ? 
One of those monsters was to bear her off into the darkness ? 
Whither ? 
And what if it were she ! 
It was clear that it was she . 
Marius felt his heart stop beating . 
What was he to do ? 
Discharge the pistol ? 
Place all those scoundrels in the hands of justice ? 
But the horrible man with the meat-axe would , none the less , be out of reach with the young girl , and Marius reflected on Thenardier 's words , of which he perceived the bloody significance : `` If you have me arrested , my comrade will give a turn of his thumb to the Lark . '' 
Now , it was not alone by the colonel 's testament , it was by his own love , it was by the peril of the one he loved , that he felt himself restrained . 
This frightful situation , which had already lasted above half an hour , was changing its aspect every moment . 
Marius had sufficient strength of mind to review in succession all the most heart-breaking conjectures , seeking hope and finding none . 
The tumult of his thoughts contrasted with the funereal silence of the den . 
In the midst of this silence , the door at the bottom of the staircase was heard to open and shut again . 
The prisoner made a movement in his bonds . 
`` Here 's the bourgeoise , '' said Thenardier . 
He had hardly uttered the words , when the Thenardier woman did in fact rush hastily into the room , red , panting , breathless , with flaming eyes , and cried , as she smote her huge hands on her thighs simultaneously : -- `` False address ! '' 
The ruffian who had gone with her made his appearance behind her and picked up his axe again . 
She resumed : -- `` Nobody there ! 
Rue Saint-Dominique , No. 17 , no Monsieur Urbain Fabre ! 
They know not what it means ! '' 
She paused , choking , then went on : -- `` Monsieur Thenardier ! 
That old fellow has duped you ! 
You are too good , you see ! 
If it had been me , I 'd have chopped the beast in four quarters to begin with ! 
And if he had acted ugly , I 'd have boiled him alive ! 
He would have been obliged to speak , and say where the girl is , and where he keeps his shiners ! 
That 's the way I should have managed matters ! 
People are perfectly right when they say that men are a deal stupider than women ! 
Nobody at No. 17 . 
It 's nothing but a big carriage gate ! 
No Monsieur Fabre in the Rue Saint-Dominique ! 
And after all that racing and fee to the coachman and all ! 
I spoke to both the porter and the portress , a fine , stout woman , and they know nothing about him ! '' 
Marius breathed freely once more . 
She , Ursule or the Lark , he no longer knew what to call her , was safe . 
While his exasperated wife vociferated , Thenardier had seated himself on the table . 
For several minutes he uttered not a word , but swung his right foot , which hung down , and stared at the brazier with an air of savage revery . 
Finally , he said to the prisoner , with a slow and singularly ferocious tone : `` A false address ? 
What did you expect to gain by that ? '' 
`` To gain time ! '' 
cried the prisoner in a thundering voice , and at the same instant he shook off his bonds ; they were cut . 
The prisoner was only attached to the bed now by one leg . 
Before the seven men had time to collect their senses and dash forward , he had bent down into the fireplace , had stretched out his hand to the brazier , and had then straightened himself up again , and now Thenardier , the female Thenardier , and the ruffians , huddled in amazement at the extremity of the hovel , stared at him in stupefaction , as almost free and in a formidable attitude , he brandished above his head the red-hot chisel , which emitted a threatening glow . 
The judicial examination to which the ambush in the Gorbeau house eventually gave rise , established the fact that a large sou piece , cut and worked in a peculiar fashion , was found in the garret , when the police made their descent on it . 
This sou piece was one of those marvels of industry , which are engendered by the patience of the galleys in the shadows and for the shadows , marvels which are nothing else than instruments of escape . 
These hideous and delicate products of wonderful art are to jewellers ' work what the metaphors of slang are to poetry . 
There are Benvenuto Cellinis in the galleys , just as there are Villons in language . 
The unhappy wretch who aspires to deliverance finds means sometimes without tools , sometimes with a common wooden-handled knife , to saw a sou into two thin plates , to hollow out these plates without affecting the coinage stamp , and to make a furrow on the edge of the sou in such a manner that the plates will adhere again . 
This can be screwed together and unscrewed at will ; it is a box . 
In this box he hides a watch-spring , and this watch-spring , properly handled , cuts good-sized chains and bars of iron . 
The unfortunate convict is supposed to possess merely a sou ; not at all , he possesses liberty . 
It was a large sou of this sort which , during the subsequent search of the police , was found under the bed near the window . 
They also found a tiny saw of blue steel which would fit the sou . 
It is probable that the prisoner had this sou piece on his person at the moment when the ruffians searched him , that he contrived to conceal it in his hand , and that afterward , having his right hand free , he unscrewed it , and used it as a saw to cut the cords which fastened him , which would explain the faint noise and almost imperceptible movements which Marius had observed . 
As he had not been able to bend down , for fear of betraying himself , he had not cut the bonds of his left leg . 
The ruffians had recovered from their first surprise . 
`` Be easy , '' said Bigrenaille to Thenardier . 
`` He still holds by one leg , and he ca n't get away . 
I 'll answer for that . 
I tied that paw for him . '' 
In the meanwhile , the prisoner had begun to speak : -- `` You are wretches , but my life is not worth the trouble of defending it . 
When you think that you can make me speak , that you can make me write what I do not choose to write , that you can make me say what I do not choose to say -- '' He stripped up his left sleeve , and added : -- `` See here . '' 
At the same moment he extended his arm , and laid the glowing chisel which he held in his left hand by its wooden handle on his bare flesh . 
The crackling of the burning flesh became audible , and the odor peculiar to chambers of torture filled the hovel . 
Marius reeled in utter horror , the very ruffians shuddered , hardly a muscle of the old man 's face contracted , and while the red-hot iron sank into the smoking wound , impassive and almost august , he fixed on Thenardier his beautiful glance , in which there was no hatred , and where suffering vanished in serene majesty . 
With grand and lofty natures , the revolts of the flesh and the senses when subjected to physical suffering cause the soul to spring forth , and make it appear on the brow , just as rebellions among the soldiery force the captain to show himself . 
`` Wretches ! '' 
said he , `` have no more fear of me than I have for you ! '' 
And , tearing the chisel from the wound , he hurled it through the window , which had been left open ; the horrible , glowing tool disappeared into the night , whirling as it flew , and fell far away on the snow . 
The prisoner resumed : -- `` Do what you please with me . '' 
He was disarmed . 
`` Seize him ! '' 
said Thenardier . 
Two of the ruffians laid their hands on his shoulder , and the masked man with the ventriloquist 's voice took up his station in front of him , ready to smash his skull at the slightest movement . 
At the same time , Marius heard below him , at the base of the partition , but so near that he could not see who was speaking , this colloquy conducted in a low tone : -- `` There is only one thing left to do . '' 
`` Cut his throat . '' 
`` That 's it . '' 
It was the husband and wife taking counsel together . 
Thenardier walked slowly towards the table , opened the drawer , and took out the knife . 
Marius fretted with the handle of his pistol . 
Unprecedented perplexity ! 
For the last hour he had had two voices in his conscience , the one enjoining him to respect his father 's testament , the other crying to him to rescue the prisoner . 
These two voices continued uninterruptedly that struggle which tormented him to agony . 
Up to that moment he had cherished a vague hope that he should find some means of reconciling these two duties , but nothing within the limits of possibility had presented itself . 
However , the peril was urgent , the last bounds of delay had been reached ; Thenardier was standing thoughtfully a few paces distant from the prisoner . 
Marius cast a wild glance about him , the last mechanical resource of despair . 
All at once a shudder ran through him . 
At his feet , on the table , a bright ray of light from the full moon illuminated and seemed to point out to him a sheet of paper . 
On this paper he read the following line written that very morning , in large letters , by the eldest of the Thenardier girls : -- `` THE BOBBIES ARE HERE . '' 
An idea , a flash , crossed Marius ' mind ; this was the expedient of which he was in search , the solution of that frightful problem which was torturing him , of sparing the assassin and saving the victim . 
He knelt down on his commode , stretched out his arm , seized the sheet of paper , softly detached a bit of plaster from the wall , wrapped the paper round it , and tossed the whole through the crevice into the middle of the den . 
It was high time . 
Thenardier had conquered his last fears or his last scruples , and was advancing on the prisoner . 
`` Something is falling ! '' 
cried the Thenardier woman . 
`` What is it ? '' 
asked her husband . 
The woman darted forward and picked up the bit of plaster . 
She handed it to her husband . 
`` Where did this come from ? '' 
demanded Thenardier . 
`` Pardie ! '' 
ejaculated his wife , `` where do you suppose it came from ? 
Through the window , of course . '' 
`` I saw it pass , '' said Bigrenaille . 
Thenardier rapidly unfolded the paper and held it close to the candle . 
`` It 's in Eponine 's handwriting . 
The devil ! '' 
He made a sign to his wife , who hastily drew near , and showed her the line written on the sheet of paper , then he added in a subdued voice : -- `` Quick ! 
The ladder ! 
Let 's leave the bacon in the mousetrap and decamp ! '' 
`` Without cutting that man 's throat ? '' 
asked , the Thenardier woman . 
`` We have n't the time . '' 
`` Through what ? '' 
resumed Bigrenaille . 
`` Through the window , '' replied Thenardier . 
`` Since Ponine has thrown the stone through the window , it indicates that the house is not watched on that side . '' 
The mask with the ventriloquist 's voice deposited his huge key on the floor , raised both arms in the air , and opened and clenched his fists , three times rapidly without uttering a word . 
This was the signal like the signal for clearing the decks for action on board ship . 
The ruffians who were holding the prisoner released him ; in the twinkling of an eye the rope ladder was unrolled outside the window , and solidly fastened to the sill by the two iron hooks . 
The prisoner paid no attention to what was going on around him . 
He seemed to be dreaming or praying . 
As soon as the ladder was arranged , Thenardier cried : `` Come ! 
the bourgeoise first ! '' 
And he rushed headlong to the window . 
But just as he was about to throw his leg over , Bigrenaille seized him roughly by the collar . 
`` Not much , come now , you old dog , after us ! '' 
`` After us ! '' 
yelled the ruffians . 
`` You are children , '' said Thenardier , `` we are losing time . 
The police are on our heels . '' 
`` Well , said the ruffians , `` let 's draw lots to see who shall go down first . '' 
Thenardier exclaimed : -- `` Are you mad ! 
Are you crazy ! 
What a pack of boobies ! 
You want to waste time , do you ? 
Draw lots , do you ? 
By a wet finger , by a short straw ! 
With written names ! 
Thrown into a hat ! 
-- '' `` Would you like my hat ? '' 
cried a voice on the threshold . 
All wheeled round . 
It was Javert . 
He had his hat in his hand , and was holding it out to them with a smile . 
ONE SHOULD ALWAYS BEGIN BY ARRESTING THE VICTIMS At nightfall , Javert had posted his men and had gone into ambush himself between the trees of the Rue de la Barrieredes-Gobelins which faced the Gorbeau house , on the other side of the boulevard . 
He had begun operations by opening `` his pockets , '' and dropping into it the two young girls who were charged with keeping a watch on the approaches to the den . 
But he had only `` caged '' Azelma . 
As for Eponine , she was not at her post , she had disappeared , and he had not been able to seize her . 
Then Javert had made a point and had bent his ear to waiting for the signal agreed upon . 
The comings and goings of the fiacres had greatly agitated him . 
At last , he had grown impatient , and , sure that there was a nest there , sure of being in `` luck , '' having recognized many of the ruffians who had entered , he had finally decided to go upstairs without waiting for the pistol-shot . 
It will be remembered that he had Marius ' pass-key . 
He had arrived just in the nick of time . 
The terrified ruffians flung themselves on the arms which they had abandoned in all the corners at the moment of flight . 
In less than a second , these seven men , horrible to behold , had grouped themselves in an attitude of defence , one with his meat-axe , another with his key , another with his bludgeon , the rest with shears , pincers , and hammers . 
Thenardier had his knife in his fist . 
The Thenardier woman snatched up an enormous paving-stone which lay in the angle of the window and served her daughters as an ottoman . 
Javert put on his hat again , and advanced a couple of paces into the room , with arms folded , his cane under one arm , his sword in its sheath . 
`` Halt there , '' said he . 
`` You shall not go out by the window , you shall go through the door . 
It 's less unhealthy . 
There are seven of you , there are fifteen of us . 
Do n't let 's fall to collaring each other like men of Auvergne . '' 
Bigrenaille drew out a pistol which he had kept concealed under his blouse , and put it in Thenardier 's hand , whispering in the latter 's ear : -- `` It 's Javert . 
I do n't dare fire at that man . 
Do you dare ? '' 
`` Parbleu ! '' 
replied Thenardier . 
`` Well , then , fire . '' 
Thenardier took the pistol and aimed at Javert . 
Javert , who was only three paces from him , stared intently at him and contented himself with saying : -- `` Come now , do n't fire . 
You 'll miss fire . '' 
Thenardier pulled the trigger . 
The pistol missed fire . 
`` Did n't I tell you so ! '' 
ejaculated Javert . 
Bigrenaille flung his bludgeon at Javert 's feet . 
`` You 're the emperor of the fiends ! 
I surrender . '' 
`` And you ? '' 
Javert asked the rest of the ruffians . 
They replied : -- `` So do we . '' 
Javert began again calmly : -- `` That 's right , that 's good , I said so , you are nice fellows . 
`` I only ask one thing , '' said Bigrenaille , `` and that is , that I may not be denied tobacco while I am in confinement . '' 
`` Granted , '' said Javert . 
And turning round and calling behind him : -- `` Come in now ! '' 
A squad of policemen , sword in hand , and agents armed with bludgeons and cudgels , rushed in at Javert 's summons . 
