There one could hear the termination in anche of the old Thuneurs . 
Boyanches-tu -LRB- bois-tu -RRB- , do you drink ? 
But perpetual movement remains its law , nevertheless . 
If the philosopher succeeds in fixing , for a moment , for purposes of observation , this language which is incessantly evaporating , he falls into doleful and useful meditation . 
No study is more efficacious and more fecund in instruction . 
There is not a metaphor , not an analogy , in slang , which does not contain a lesson . 
Among these men , to beat means to feign ; one beats a malady ; ruse is their strength . 
For them , the idea of the man is not separated from the idea of darkness . 
The night is called la sorgue ; man , l'orgue . 
Man is a derivative of the night . 
They have taken up the practice of considering society in the light of an atmosphere which kills them , of a fatal force , and they speak of their liberty as one would speak of his health . 
A man under arrest is a sick man ; one who is condemned is a dead man . 
The most terrible thing for the prisoner within the four walls in which he is buried , is a sort of glacial chastity , and he calls the dungeon the castus . 
In that funereal place , life outside always presents itself under its most smiling aspect . 
The prisoner has irons on his feet ; you think , perhaps , that his thought is that it is with the feet that one walks ? 
No ; he is thinking that it is with the feet that one dances ; so , when he has succeeded in severing his fetters , his first idea is that now he can dance , and he calls the saw the bastringue -LRB- public-house ball -RRB- . 
-- A name is a centre ; profound assimilation . 
-- The ruffian has two heads , one of which reasons out his actions and leads him all his life long , and the other which he has upon his shoulders on the day of his death ; he calls the head which counsels him in crime la sorbonne , and the head which expiates it la tronche . 
-- When a man has no longer anything but rags upon his body and vices in his heart , when he has arrived at that double moral and material degradation which the word blackguard characterizes in its two acceptations , he is ripe for crime ; he is like a well-whetted knife ; he has two cutting edges , his distress and his malice ; so slang does not say a blackguard , it says un reguise . 
-- What are the galleys ? 
A brazier of damnation , a hell . 
The convict calls himself a fagot . 
-- And finally , what name do malefactors give to their prison ? 
The college . 
A whole penitentiary system can be evolved from that word . 
Does the reader wish to know where the majority of the songs of the galleys , those refrains called in the special vocabulary lirlonfa , have had their birth ? 
Let him listen to what follows : -- There existed at the Chatelet in Paris a large and long cellar . 
This cellar was eight feet below the level of the Seine . 
It had neither windows nor air-holes , its only aperture was the door ; men could enter there , air could not . 
This vault had for ceiling a vault of stone , and for floor ten inches of mud . 
It was flagged ; but the pavement had rotted and cracked under the oozing of the water . 
Eight feet above the floor , a long and massive beam traversed this subterranean excavation from side to side ; from this beam hung , at short distances apart , chains three feet long , and at the end of these chains there were rings for the neck . 
In this vault , men who had been condemned to the galleys were incarcerated until the day of their departure for Toulon . 
They were thrust under this beam , where each one found his fetters swinging in the darkness and waiting for him . 
The chains , those pendant arms , and the necklets , those open hands , caught the unhappy wretches by the throat . 
They were rivetted and left there . 
As the chain was too short , they could not lie down . 
They remained motionless in that cavern , in that night , beneath that beam , almost hanging , forced to unheard-of efforts to reach their bread , jug , or their vault overhead , mud even to mid-leg , filth flowing to their very calves , broken asunder with fatigue , with thighs and knees giving way , clinging fast to the chain with their hands in order to obtain some rest , unable to sleep except when standing erect , and awakened every moment by the strangling of the collar ; some woke no more . 
In order to eat , they pushed the bread , which was flung to them in the mud , along their leg with their heel until it reached their hand . 
How long did they remain thus ? 
One month , two months , six months sometimes ; one stayed a year . 
It was the antechamber of the galleys . 
Men were put there for stealing a hare from the king . 
In this sepulchre-hell , what did they do ? 
What man can do in a sepulchre , they went through the agonies of death , and what can man do in hell , they sang ; for song lingers where there is no longer any hope . 
In the waters of Malta , when a galley was approaching , the song could be heard before the sound of the oars . 
Poor Survincent , the poacher , who had gone through the prison-cellar of the Chatelet , said : `` It was the rhymes that kept me up . '' 
Uselessness of poetry . 
What is the good of rhyme ? 
It is in this cellar that nearly all the slang songs had their birth . 
It is from the dungeon of the Grand-Chatelet of Paris that comes the melancholy refrain of the Montgomery galley : `` Timaloumisaine , timaloumison . '' 
The majority of these Icicaille est la theatre Here is the theatre Du petit dardant . 
Of the little archer -LRB- Cupid -RRB- . 
Do what you will , you can not annihilate that eternal relic in the heart of man , love . 
In this world of dismal deeds , people keep their secrets . 
The secret is the thing above all others . 
The secret , in the eyes of these wretches , is unity which serves as a base of union . 
To betray a secret is to tear from each member of this fierce community something of his own personality . 
To inform against , in the energetic slang dialect , is called : `` to eat the bit . '' 
As though the informer drew to himself a little of the substance of all and nourished himself on a bit of each one 's flesh . 
What does it signify to receive a box on the ear ? 
Commonplace metaphor replies : `` It is to see thirty-six candles . '' 
Here slang intervenes and takes it up : Candle , camoufle . 
Thereupon , the ordinary tongue gives camouflet -LSB- 42 -RSB- as the synonym for soufflet . 
Thus , by a sort of infiltration from below upwards , with the aid of metaphor , that incalculable , trajectory slang mounts from the cavern to the Academy ; and Poulailler saying : `` I light my camoufle , '' causes Voltaire to write : `` Langleviel La Beaumelle deserves a hundred camouflets . '' 
-LSB- 42 -RSB- Smoke puffed in the face of a person asleep . 
Researches in slang mean discoveries at every step . 
Study and investigation of this strange idiom lead to the mysterious point of intersection of regular society with society which is accursed . 
The thief also has his food for cannon , stealable matter , you , I , whoever passes by ; le pantre . 
-LRB- Pan , everybody . -RRB- 
Slang is language turned convict . 
That the thinking principle of man be thrust down ever so low , that it can be dragged and pinioned there by obscure tyrannies of fatality , that it can be bound by no one knows what fetters in that abyss , is sufficient to create consternation . 
Oh , poor thought of miserable wretches ! 
Alas ! 
will no one come to the succor of the human soul in that darkness ? 
Is it her destiny there to await forever the mind , the liberator , the immense rider of Pegasi and hippo-griffs , the combatant of heroes of the dawn who shall descend from the azure between two wings , the radiant knight of the future ? 
Will she forever summon in vain to her assistance the lance of light of the ideal ? 
Is she condemned to hear the fearful approach of Evil through the density of the gulf , and to catch glimpses , nearer and nearer at hand , beneath the hideous water of that dragon 's head , that maw streaked with foam , and that writhing undulation of claws , swellings , and rings ? 
Must it remain there , without a gleam of light , without hope , given over to that terrible approach , vaguely scented out by the monster , shuddering , dishevelled , wringing its arms , forever chained to the rock of night , a sombre Andromeda white and naked amid the shadows ! 
SLANG WHICH WEEPS AND SLANG WHICH LAUGHS As the reader perceives , slang in its entirety , slang of four hundred years ago , like the slang of to-day , is permeated with that sombre , symbolical spirit which gives to all words a mien which is now mournful , now menacing . 
One feels in it the wild and ancient sadness of those vagrants of the Court of Miracles who played at cards with packs of their own , some of which have come down to us . 
The eight of clubs , for instance , represented a huge tree bearing eight enormous trefoil leaves , a sort of fantastic personification of the forest . 
At the foot of this tree a fire was burning , over which three hares were roasting a huntsman on a spit , and behind him , on another fire , hung a steaming pot , whence emerged the head of a dog . 
Nothing can be more melancholy than these reprisals in painting , by a pack of cards , in the presence of stakes for the roasting of smugglers and of the cauldron for the boiling of counterfeiters . 
The diverse forms assumed by thought in the realm of slang , even song , even raillery , even menace , all partook of this powerless and dejected character . 
All the songs , the melodies of some of which have been collected , were humble and lamentable to the point of evoking tears . 
The pegre is always the poor pegre , and he is always the hare in hiding , the fugitive mouse , the flying bird . 
He hardly complains , he contents himself with sighing ; one of his moans has come down to us : `` I do not understand how God , the father of men , can torture his children and his grandchildren and hear them cry , without himself suffering torture . '' 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- The wretch , whenever he has time to think , makes himself small before the low , and frail in the presence of society ; he lies down flat on his face , he entreats , he appeals to the side of compassion ; we feel that he is conscious of his guilt . 
-LSB- 43 -RSB- Je n'entrave que le dail comment meck , le daron des orgues , peut atiger ses momes et ses momignards et les locher criblant sans etre agite lui-meme . 
Towards the middle of the last century a change took place , prison songs and thieves ' ritournelles assumed , so to speak , an insolent and jovial mien . 
The plaintive malure was replaced by the larifla . 
We find in the eighteenth century , in nearly all the songs of the galleys and prisons , a diabolical and enigmatical gayety . 
We hear this strident and lilting refrain which we should say had been lighted up by a phosphorescent gleam , and which seems to have been flung into the forest by a will-o ' - the-wisp playing the fife : -- Miralabi suslababo Mirliton ribonribette Surlababi mirlababo Mirliton ribonribo . 
This was sung in a cellar or in a nook of the forest while cutting a man 's throat . 
A serious symptom . 
In the eighteenth century , the ancient melancholy of the dejected classes vanishes . 
They began to laugh . 
They rally the grand meg and the grand dab . 
Given Louis XV . 
they call the King of France `` le Marquis de Pantin . '' 
And behold , they are almost gay . 
A sort of gleam proceeds from these miserable wretches , as though their consciences were not heavy within them any more . 
These lamentable tribes of darkness have no longer merely the desperate audacity of actions , they possess the heedless audacity of mind . 
A sign that they are losing the sense of their criminality , and that they feel , even among thinkers and dreamers , some indefinable support which the latter themselves know not of . 
A sign that theft and pillage are beginning to filter into doctrines and sophisms , in such a way as to lose somewhat of their ugliness , while communicating much of it to sophisms and doctrines . 
A sign , in short , of some outbreak which is prodigious and near unless some diversion shall arise . 
Let us pause a moment . 
Whom are we accusing here ? 
Is it the eighteenth century ? 
Is it philosophy ? 
Certainly not . 
The work of the eighteenth century is healthy and good and wholesome . 
The encyclopedists , Diderot at their head ; the physiocrates , Turgot at their head ; the philosophers , Voltaire at their head ; the Utopians , Rousseau at their head , -- these are four sacred legions . 
Humanity 's immense advance towards the light is due to them . 
They are the four vanguards of the human race , marching towards the four cardinal points of progress . 
Diderot towards the beautiful , Turgot towards the useful , Voltaire towards the true , Rousseau towards the just . 
But by the side of and above the philosophers , there were the sophists , a venomous vegetation mingled with a healthy growth , hemlock in the virgin forest . 
While the executioner was burning the great books of the liberators of the century on the grand staircase of the court-house , writers now forgotten were publishing , with the King 's sanction , no one knows what strangely disorganizing writings , which were eagerly read by the unfortunate . 
Some of these publications , odd to say , which were patronized by a prince , are to be found in the Secret Library . 
These facts , significant but unknown , were imperceptible on the surface . 
Sometimes , in the very obscurity of a fact lurks its danger . 
It is obscure because it is underhand . 
Of all these writers , the one who probably then excavated in the masses the most unhealthy gallery was Restif de La Bretonne . 
This work , peculiar to the whole of Europe , effected more ravages in Germany than anywhere else . 
In Germany , during a given period , summed up by Schiller in his famous drama The Robbers , theft and pillage rose up in protest against property and labor , assimilated certain specious and false elementary ideas , which , though just in appearance , were absurd in reality , enveloped themselves in these ideas , disappeared within them , after a fashion , assumed an abstract name , passed into the state of theory , and in that shape circulated among the laborious , suffering , and honest masses , unknown even to the imprudent chemists who had prepared the mixture , unknown even to the masses who accepted it . 
Whenever a fact of this sort presents itself , the case is grave . 
Suffering engenders wrath ; and while the prosperous classes blind themselves or fall asleep , which is the same thing as shutting one 's eyes , the hatred of the unfortunate classes lights its torch at some aggrieved or ill-made spirit which dreams in a corner , and sets itself to the scrutiny of society . 
The scrutiny of hatred is a terrible thing . 
Hence , if the ill-fortune of the times so wills it , those fearful commotions which were formerly called jacqueries , beside which purely political agitations are the merest child 's play , which are no longer the conflict of the oppressed and the oppressor , but the revolt of discomfort against comfort . 
Then everything crumbles . 
Jacqueries are earthquakes of the people . 
It is this peril , possibly imminent towards the close of the eighteenth century , which the French Revolution , that immense act of probity , cut short . 
The French Revolution , which is nothing else than the idea armed with the sword , rose erect , and , with the same abrupt movement , closed the door of ill and opened the door of good . 
It put a stop to torture , promulgated the truth , expelled miasma , rendered the century healthy , crowned the populace . 
It may be said of it that it created man a second time , by giving him a second soul , the right . 
The nineteenth century has inherited and profited by its work , and to-day , the social catastrophe to which we lately alluded is simply impossible . 
Blind is he who announces it ! 
Foolish is he who fears it ! 
Revolution is the vaccine of Jacquerie . 
Thanks to the Revolution , social conditions have changed . 
Feudal and monarchical maladies no longer run in our blood . 
There is no more of the Middle Ages in our constitution . 
We no longer live in the days when terrible swarms within made irruptions , when one heard beneath his feet the obscure course of a dull rumble , when indescribable elevations from mole-like tunnels appeared on the surface of civilization , where the soil cracked open , where the roofs of caverns yawned , and where one suddenly beheld monstrous heads emerging from the earth . 
The revolutionary sense is a moral sense . 
The sentiment of right , once developed , develops the sentiment of duty . 
The law of all is liberty , which ends where the liberty of others begins , according to Robespierre 's admirable definition . 
Since ' 89 , the whole people has been dilating into a sublime individual ; there is not a poor man , who , possessing his right , has not his ray of sun ; the die-of-hunger feels within him the honesty of France ; the dignity of the citizen is an internal armor ; he who is free is scrupulous ; he who votes reigns . 
Hence incorruptibility ; hence the miscarriage of unhealthy lusts ; hence eyes heroically lowered before temptations . 
The revolutionary wholesomeness is such , that on a day of deliverance , a 14th of July , a 10th of August , there is no longer any populace . 
The first cry of the enlightened and increasing throngs is : death to thieves ! 
Progress is an honest man ; the ideal and the absolute do not filch pocket-handkerchiefs . 
By whom were the wagons containing the wealth of the Tuileries escorted in 1848 ? 
By the rag-pickers of the Faubourg Saint-Antoine . 
Rags mounted guard over the treasure . 
Virtue rendered these tatterdemalions resplendent . 
In those wagons in chests , hardly closed , and some , even , half-open , amid a hundred dazzling caskets , was that ancient crown of France , studded with diamonds , surmounted by the carbuncle of royalty , by the Regent diamond , which was worth thirty millions . 
Barefooted , they guarded that crown . 
Hence , no more Jacquerie . 
I regret it for the sake of the skilful . 
The old fear has produced its last effects in that quarter ; and henceforth it can no longer be employed in politics . 
The principal spring of the red spectre is broken . 
Every one knows it now . 
The scare-crow scares no longer . 
The birds take liberties with the mannikin , foul creatures alight upon it , the bourgeois laugh at it . 
THE TWO DUTIES : TO WATCH AND TO HOPE This being the case , is all social danger dispelled ? 
Certainly not . 
There is no Jacquerie ; society may rest assured on that point ; blood will no longer rush to its head . 
But let society take heed to the manner in which it breathes . 
Apoplexy is no longer to be feared , but phthisis is there . 
Social phthisis is called misery . 
One can perish from being undermined as well as from being struck by lightning . 
Let us not weary of repeating , and sympathetic souls must not forget that this is the first of fraternal obligations , and selfish hearts must understand that the first of political necessities consists in thinking first of all of the disinherited and sorrowing throngs , in solacing , airing , enlightening , loving them , in enlarging their horizon to a magnificent extent , in lavishing upon them education in every form , in offering them the example of labor , never the example of idleness , in diminishing the individual burden by enlarging the notion of the universal aim , in setting a limit to poverty without setting a limit to wealth , in creating vast fields of public and popular activity , in having , like Briareus , a hundred hands to extend in all directions to the oppressed and the feeble , in employing the collective power for that grand duty of opening workshops for all arms , schools for all aptitudes , and laboratories for all degrees of intelligence , in augmenting salaries , diminishing trouble , balancing what should be and what is , that is to say , in proportioning enjoyment to effort and a glut to need ; in a word , in evolving from the social apparatus more light and more comfort for the benefit of those who suffer and those who are ignorant . 
And , let us say it , all this is but the beginning . 
The true question is this : labor can not be a law without being a right . 
We will not insist upon this point ; this is not the proper place for that . 
If nature calls itself Providence , society should call itself foresight . 
Intellectual and moral growth is no less indispensable than material improvement . 
To know is a sacrament , to think is the prime necessity , truth is nourishment as well as grain . 
A reason which fasts from science and wisdom grows thin . 
Let us enter equal complaint against stomachs and minds which do not eat . 
If there is anything more heart-breaking than a body perishing for lack of bread , it is a soul which is dying from hunger for the light . 
The whole of progress tends in the direction of solution . 
Some day we shall be amazed . 
As the human race mounts upward , the deep layers emerge naturally from the zone of distress . 
The obliteration of misery will be accomplished by a simple elevation of level . 
We should do wrong were we to doubt this blessed consummation . 
The past is very strong , it is true , at the present moment . 
It censures . 
This rejuvenation of a corpse is surprising . 
Behold , it is walking and advancing . 
It seems a victor ; this dead body is a conqueror . 
He arrives with his legions , superstitions , with his sword , despotism , with his banner , ignorance ; a while ago , he won ten battles . 
He advances , he threatens , he laughs , he is at our doors . 
Let us not despair , on our side . 
Let us sell the field on which Hannibal is encamped . 
What have we to fear , we who believe ? 
No such thing as a back-flow of ideas exists any more than there exists a return of a river on its course . 
But let those who do not desire a future reflect on this matter . 
When they say `` no '' to progress , it is not the future but themselves that they are condemning . 
They are giving themselves a sad malady ; they are inoculating themselves with the past . 
There is but one way of rejecting To-morrow , and that is to die . 
Now , no death , that of the body as late as possible , that of the soul never , -- this is what we desire . 
Yes , the enigma will utter its word , the sphinx will speak , the problem will be solved . 
Yes , the people , sketched out by the eighteenth century , will be finished by the nineteenth . 
He who doubts this is an idiot ! 
The future blossoming , the near blossoming forth of universal well-being , is a divinely fatal phenomenon . 
Immense combined propulsions direct human affairs and conduct them within a given time to a logical state , that is to say , to a state of equilibrium ; that is to say , to equity . 
A force composed of earth and heaven results from humanity and governs it ; this force is a worker of miracles ; marvellous issues are no more difficult to it than extraordinary vicissitudes . 
Aided by science , which comes from one man , and by the event , which comes from another , it is not greatly alarmed by these contradictions in the attitude of problems , which seem impossibilities to the vulgar herd . 
It is no less skilful at causing a solution to spring forth from the reconciliation of ideas , than a lesson from the reconciliation of facts , and we may expect anything from that mysterious power of progress , which brought the Orient and the Occident face to face one fine day , in the depths of a sepulchre , and made the imaums converse with Bonaparte in the interior of the Great Pyramid . 
In the meantime , let there be no halt , no hesitation , no pause in the grandiose onward march of minds . 
Social philosophy consists essentially in science and peace . 
Its object is , and its result must be , to dissolve wrath by the study of antagonisms . 
It examines , it scrutinizes , it analyzes ; then it puts together once more , it proceeds by means of reduction , discarding all hatred . 
More than once , a society has been seen to give way before the wind which is let loose upon mankind ; history is full of the shipwrecks of nations and empires ; manners , customs , laws , religions , -- and some fine day that unknown force , the hurricane , passes by and bears them all away . 
The civilizations of India , of Chaldea , of Persia , of Syria , of Egypt , have disappeared one after the other . 
Why ? 
We know not . 
What are the causes of these disasters ? 
We do not know . 
Could these societies have been saved ? 
Was it their fault ? 
Did they persist in the fatal vice which destroyed them ? 
What is the amount of suicide in these terrible deaths of a nation and a race ? 
Questions to which there exists no reply . 
Darkness enwraps condemned civilizations . 
They sprung a leak , then they sank . 
We have nothing more to say ; and it is with a sort of terror that we look on , at the bottom of that sea which is called the past , behind those colossal waves , at the shipwreck of those immense vessels , Babylon , Nineveh , Tarsus , Thebes , Rome , beneath the fearful gusts which emerge from all the mouths of the shadows . 
But shadows are there , and light is here . 
We are not acquainted with the maladies of these ancient civilizations , we do not know the infirmities of our own . 
Everywhere upon it we have the right of light , we contemplate its beauties , we lay bare its defects . 
Where it is ill , we probe ; and the sickness once diagnosed , the study of the cause leads to the discovery of the remedy . 
Our civilization , the work of twenty centuries , is its law and its prodigy ; it is worth the trouble of saving . 
It will be saved . 
It is already much to have solaced it ; its enlightenment is yet another point . 
All the labors of modern social philosophies must converge towards this point . 
The thinker of to-day has a great duty -- to auscultate civilization . 
We repeat , that this auscultation brings encouragement ; it is by this persistence in encouragement that we wish to conclude these pages , an austere interlude in a mournful drama . 
Beneath the social mortality , we feel human imperishableness . 
The globe does not perish , because it has these wounds , craters , eruptions , sulphur pits , here and there , nor because of a volcano which ejects its pus . 
The maladies of the people do not kill man . 
And yet , any one who follows the course of social clinics shakes his head at times . 
The strongest , the tenderest , the most logical have their hours of weakness . 
Will the future arrive ? 
It seems as though we might almost put this question , when we behold so much terrible darkness . 
Melancholy face-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched . 
On the part of the selfish , the prejudices , shadows of costly education , appetite increasing through intoxication , a giddiness of prosperity which dulls , a fear of suffering which , in some , goes as far as an aversion for the suffering , an implacable satisfaction , the I so swollen that it bars the soul ; on the side of the wretched covetousness , envy , hatred of seeing others enjoy , the profound impulses of the human beast towards assuaging its desires , hearts full of mist , sadness , need , fatality , impure and simple ignorance . 
Shall we continue to raise our eyes to heaven ? 
is the luminous point which we distinguish there one of those which vanish ? 
The ideal is frightful to behold , thus lost in the depths , small , isolated , imperceptible , brilliant , but surrounded by those great , black menaces , monstrously heaped around it ; yet no more in danger than a star in the maw of the clouds . 
FULL LIGHT The reader has probably understood that Eponine , having recognized through the gate , the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon had sent her , had begun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet , and had then conducted Marius thither , and that , after many days spent in ecstasy before that gate , Marius , drawn on by that force which draws the iron to the magnet and a lover towards the stones of which is built the house of her whom he loves , had finally entered Cosette 's garden as Romeo entered the garden of Juliet . 
This had even proved easier for him than for Romeo ; Romeo was obliged to scale a wall , Marius had only to use a little force on one of the bars of the decrepit gate which vacillated in its rusty recess , after the fashion of old people 's teeth . 
Marius was slender and readily passed through . 
As there was never any one in the street , and as Marius never entered the garden except at night , he ran no risk of being seen . 
Beginning with that blessed and holy hour when a kiss betrothed these two souls , Marius was there every evening . 
If , at that period of her existence , Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the least unscrupulous or debauched , she would have been lost ; for there are generous natures which yield themselves , and Cosette was one of them . 
One of woman 's magnanimities is to yield . 
Love , at the height where it is absolute , is complicated with some indescribably celestial blindness of modesty . 
But what dangers you run , O noble souls ! 
Often you give the heart , and we take the body . 
Your heart remains with you , you gaze upon it in the gloom with a shudder . 
Love has no middle course ; it either ruins or it saves . 
All human destiny lies in this dilemma . 
This dilemma , ruin , or safety , is set forth no more inexorably by any fatality than by love . 
Love is life , if it is not death . 
Cradle ; also coffin . 
The same sentiment says `` yes '' and `` no '' in the human heart . 
Of all the things that God has made , the human heart is the one which sheds the most light , alas ! 
and the most darkness . 
God willed that Cosette 's love should encounter one of the loves which save . 
Throughout the whole of the month of May of that year 1832 , there were there , in every night , in that poor , neglected garden , beneath that thicket which grew thicker and more fragrant day by day , two beings composed of all chastity , all innocence , overflowing with all the felicity of heaven , nearer to the archangels than to mankind , pure , honest , intoxicated , radiant , who shone for each other amid the shadows . 
It seemed to Cosette that Marius had a crown , and to Marius that Cosette had a nimbus . 
They touched each other , they gazed at each other , they clasped each other 's hands , they pressed close to each other ; but there was a distance which they did not pass . 
Not that they respected it ; they did not know of its existence . 
Marius was conscious of a barrier , Cosette 's innocence ; and Cosette of a support , Marius ' loyalty . 
The first kiss had also been the last . 
Marius , since that time , had not gone further than to touch Cosette 's hand , or her kerchief , or a lock of her hair , with his lips . 
For him , Cosette was a perfume and not a woman . 
He inhaled her . 
She refused nothing , and he asked nothing . 
Cosette was happy , and Marius was satisfied . 
They lived in this ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of one soul by another soul . 
It was the ineffable first embrace of two maiden souls in the ideal . 
Two swans meeting on the Jungfrau . 
At that hour of love , an hour when voluptuousness is absolutely mute , beneath the omnipotence of ecstasy , Marius , the pure and seraphic Marius , would rather have gone to a woman of the town than have raised Cosette 's robe to the height of her ankle . 
Once , in the moonlight , Cosette stooped to pick up something on the ground , her bodice fell apart and permitted a glimpse of the beginning of her throat . 
Marius turned away his eyes . 
What took place between these two beings ? 
Nothing . 
They adored each other . 
At night , when they were there , that garden seemed a living and a sacred spot . 
All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense ; and they opened their souls and scattered them over the flowers . 
The wanton and vigorous vegetation quivered , full of strength and intoxication , around these two innocents , and they uttered words of love which set the trees to trembling . 
What words were these ? 
Breaths . 
Nothing more . 
These breaths sufficed to trouble and to touch all nature round about . 
Magic power which we should find it difficult to understand were we to read in a book these conversations which are made to be borne away and dispersed like smoke wreaths by the breeze beneath the leaves . 
Take from those murmurs of two lovers that melody which proceeds from the soul and which accompanies them like a lyre , and what remains is nothing more than a shade ; you say : `` What ! 
is that all ! '' 
eh ! 
yes , childish prattle , repetitions , laughter at nothing , nonsense , everything that is deepest and most sublime in the world ! 
The only things which are worth the trouble of saying and hearing ! 
The man who has never heard , the man who has never uttered these absurdities , these paltry remarks , is an imbecile and a malicious fellow . 
Cosette said to Marius : -- `` Dost thou know ? 
-- '' -LSB- In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness , and without either of them being able to say how it had come about , they had begun to call each other thou . -RSB- 
`` Dost thou know ? 
My name is Euphrasie . '' 
`` Euphrasie ? 
Why , no , thy name is Cosette . '' 
`` Oh ! 
Cosette is a very ugly name that was given to me when I was a little thing . 
But my real name is Euphrasie . 
Dost thou like that name -- Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Yes . 
But Cosette is not ugly . '' 
`` Do you like it better than Euphrasie ? '' 
`` Why , yes . '' 
`` Then I like it better too . 
Truly , it is pretty , Cosette . 
Call me Cosette . '' 
And the smile that she added made of this dialogue an idyl worthy of a grove situated in heaven . 
On another occasion she gazed intently at him and exclaimed : -- `` Monsieur , you are handsome , you are good-looking , you are witty , you are not at all stupid , you are much more learned than I am , but I bid you defiance with this word : I love you ! '' 
And Marius , in the very heavens , thought he heard a strain sung by a star . 
Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed , and she said to him : -- `` Do n't cough , sir ; I will not have people cough on my domain without my permission . 
It 's very naughty to cough and to disturb me . 
I want you to be well , because , in the first place , if you were not well , I should be very unhappy . 
What should I do then ? '' 
And this was simply divine . 
Once Marius said to Cosette : -- `` Just imagine , I thought at one time that your name was Ursule . '' 
This made both of them laugh the whole evening . 
In the middle of another conversation , he chanced to exclaim : -- `` Oh ! 
One day , at the Luxembourg , I had a good mind to finish breaking up a veteran ! '' 
But he stopped short , and went no further . 
He would have been obliged to speak to Cosette of her garter , and that was impossible . 
This bordered on a strange theme , the flesh , before which that immense and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright . 
Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this , without anything else ; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet , to displace the old and accommodating bar of the chief-justice 's gate , to sit elbow to elbow on that bench , to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of the on-coming night , to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into the ample fall of Cosette 's gown , to caress her thumb-nail , to call her thou , to smell of the same flower , one after the other , forever , indefinitely . 
During this time , clouds passed above their heads . 
Every time that the wind blows it bears with it more of the dreams of men than of the clouds of heaven . 
This chaste , almost shy love was not devoid of gallantry , by any means . 
To pay compliments to the woman whom a man loves is the first method of bestowing caresses , and he is half audacious who tries it . 
A compliment is something like a kiss through a veil . 
Voluptuousness mingles there with its sweet tiny point , while it hides itself . 
The heart draws back before voluptuousness only to love the more . 
Marius ' blandishments , all saturated with fancy , were , so to speak , of azure hue . 
The birds when they fly up yonder , in the direction of the angels , must hear such words . 
There were mingled with them , nevertheless , life , humanity , all the positiveness of which Marius was capable . 
It was what is said in the bower , a prelude to what will be said in the chamber ; a lyrical effusion , strophe and sonnet intermingled , pleasing hyperboles of cooing , all the refinements of adoration arranged in a bouquet and exhaling a celestial perfume , an ineffable twitter of heart to heart . 
`` Oh ! '' 
murmured Marius , `` how beautiful you are ! 
I dare not look at you . 
It is all over with me when I contemplate you . 
You are a grace . 
I know not what is the matter with me . 
The hem of your gown , when the tip of your shoe peeps from beneath , upsets me . 
And then , what an enchanted gleam when you open your thought even but a little ! 
You talk astonishingly good sense . 
It seems to me at times that you are a dream . 
Speak , I listen , I admire . 
Oh Cosette ! 
how strange it is and how charming ! 
I am really beside myself . 
You are adorable , Mademoiselle . 
I study your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope . '' 
And Cosette answered : -- `` I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed since this morning . '' 
Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue , which always turned with mutual consent upon love , as the little pith figures always turn on their peg . 
Cosette 's whole person was ingenuousness , ingenuity , transparency , whiteness , candor , radiance . 
It might have been said of Cosette that she was clear . 
She produced on those who saw her the sensation of April and dawn . 
There was dew in her eyes . 
Cosette was a condensation of the auroral light in the form of a woman . 
It was quite simple that Marius should admire her , since he adored her . 
But the truth is , that this little school-girl , fresh from the convent , talked with exquisite penetration and uttered , at times , all sorts of true and delicate sayings . 
Her prattle was conversation . 
She never made a mistake about anything , and she saw things justly . 
The woman feels and speaks with the tender instinct of the heart , which is infallible . 
No one understands so well as a woman , how to say things that are , at once , both sweet and deep . 
Sweetness and depth , they are the whole of woman ; in them lies the whole of heaven . 
In this full felicity , tears welled up to their eyes every instant . 
A crushed lady-bug , a feather fallen from a nest , a branch of hawthorn broken , aroused their pity , and their ecstasy , sweetly mingled with melancholy , seemed to ask nothing better than to weep . 
The most sovereign symptom of love is a tenderness that is , at times , almost unbearable . 
And , in addition to this , -- all these contradictions are the lightning play of love , -- they were fond of laughing , they laughed readily and with a delicious freedom , and so familiarly that they sometimes presented the air of two boys . 
Still , though unknown to hearts intoxicated with purity , nature is always present and will not be forgotten . 
She is there with her brutal and sublime object ; and however great may be the innocence of souls , one feels in the most modest private interview , the adorable and mysterious shade which separates a couple of lovers from a pair of friends . 
They idolized each other . 
The permanent and the immutable are persistent . 
People live , they smile , they laugh , they make little grimaces with the tips of their lips , they interlace their fingers , they call each other thou , and that does not prevent eternity . 
Two lovers hide themselves in the evening , in the twilight , in the invisible , with the birds , with the roses ; they fascinate each other in the darkness with their hearts which they throw into their eyes , they murmur , they whisper , and in the meantime , immense librations of the planets fill the infinite universe . 
THE BEWILDERMENT OF PERFECT HAPPINESS They existed vaguely , frightened at their happiness . 
They did not notice the cholera which decimated Paris precisely during that very month . 
They had confided in each other as far as possible , but this had not extended much further than their names . 
Marius had told Cosette that he was an orphan , that his name was Marius Pontmercy , that he was a lawyer , that he lived by writing things for publishers , that his father had been a colonel , that the latter had been a hero , and that he , Marius , was on bad terms with his grandfather who was rich . 
He had also hinted at being a baron , but this had produced no effect on Cosette . 
She did not know the meaning of the word . 
Marius was Marius . 
On her side , she had confided to him that she had been brought up at the Petit-Picpus convent , that her mother , like his own , was dead , that her father 's name was M. Fauchelevent , that he was very good , that he gave a great deal to the poor , but that he was poor himself , and that he denied himself everything though he denied her nothing . 
Strange to say , in the sort of symphony which Marius had lived since he had been in the habit of seeing Cosette , the past , even the most recent past , had become so confused and distant to him , that what Cosette told him satisfied him completely . 
It did not even occur to him to tell her about the nocturnal adventure in the hovel , about Thenardier , about the burn , and about the strange attitude and singular flight of her father . 
Marius had momentarily forgotten all this ; in the evening he did not even know that there had been a morning , what he had done , where he had breakfasted , nor who had spoken to him ; he had songs in his ears which rendered him deaf to every other thought ; he only existed at the hours when he saw Cosette . 
Then , as he was in heaven , it was quite natural that he should forget earth . 
Both bore languidly the indefinable burden of immaterial pleasures . 
Thus lived these somnambulists who are called lovers . 
Alas ! 
Who is there who has not felt all these things ? 
Why does there come an hour when one emerges from this azure , and why does life go on afterwards ? 
Loving almost takes the place of thinking . 
Love is an ardent forgetfulness of all the rest . 
Then ask logic of passion if you will . 
There is no more absolute logical sequence in the human heart than there is a perfect geometrical figure in the celestial mechanism . 
For Cosette and Marius nothing existed except Marius and Cosette . 
The universe around them had fallen into a hole . 
They lived in a golden minute . 
There was nothing before them , nothing behind . 
It hardly occurred to Marius that Cosette had a father . 
His brain was dazzled and obliterated . 
Of what did these lovers talk then ? 
We have seen , of the flowers , and the swallows , the setting sun and the rising moon , and all sorts of important things . 
They had told each other everything except everything . 
The everything of lovers is nothing . 
But the father , the realities , that lair , the ruffians , that adventure , to what purpose ? 
And was he very sure that this nightmare had actually existed ? 
They were two , and they adored each other , and beyond that there was nothing . 
Nothing else existed . 
It is probable that this vanishing of hell in our rear is inherent to the arrival of paradise . 
Have we beheld demons ? 
Are there any ? 
Have we trembled ? 
Have we suffered ? 
We no longer know . 
A rosy cloud hangs over it . 
So these two beings lived in this manner , high aloft , with all that improbability which is in nature ; neither at the nadir nor at the zenith , between man and seraphim , above the mire , below the ether , in the clouds ; hardly flesh and blood , soul and ecstasy from head to foot ; already too sublime to walk the earth , still too heavily charged with humanity to disappear in the blue , suspended like atoms which are waiting to be precipitated ; apparently beyond the bounds of destiny ; ignorant of that rut ; yesterday , to-day , to-morrow ; amazed , rapturous , floating , soaring ; at times so light that they could take their flight out into the infinite ; almost prepared to soar away to all eternity . 
They slept wide-awake , thus sweetly lulled . 
Oh ! 
splendid lethargy of the real overwhelmed by the ideal . 
Sometimes , beautiful as Cosette was , Marius shut his eyes in her presence . 
The best way to look at the soul is through closed eyes . 
Marius and Cosette never asked themselves whither this was to lead them . 
They considered that they had already arrived . 
It is a strange claim on man 's part to wish that love should lead to something . 
THE BEGINNING OF SHADOW Jean Valjean suspected nothing . 
Cosette , who was rather less dreamy than Marius , was gay , and that sufficed for Jean Valjean 's happiness . 
The thoughts which Cosette cherished , her tender preoccupations , Marius ' image which filled her heart , took away nothing from the incomparable purity of her beautiful , chaste , and smiling brow . 
She was at the age when the virgin bears her love as the angel his lily . 
So Jean Valjean was at ease . 
And then , when two lovers have come to an understanding , things always go well ; the third party who might disturb their love is kept in a state of perfect blindness by a restricted number of precautions which are always the same in the case of all lovers . 
Thus , Cosette never objected to any of Jean Valjean 's proposals . 
Did she want to take a walk ? 
`` Yes , dear little father . '' 
Did she want to stay at home ? 
Very good . 
Did he wish to pass the evening with Cosette ? 
She was delighted . 
As he always went to bed at ten o'clock , Marius did not come to the garden on such occasions until after that hour , when , from the street , he heard Cosette open the long glass door on the veranda . 
Of course , no one ever met Marius in the daytime . 
Jean Valjean never even dreamed any longer that Marius was in existence . 
Only once , one morning , he chanced to say to Cosette : `` Why , you have whitewash on your back ! '' 
On the previous evening , Marius , in a transport , had pushed Cosette against the wall . 
Old Toussaint , who retired early , thought of nothing but her sleep , and was as ignorant of the whole matter as Jean Valjean . 
Marius never set foot in the house . 
When he was with Cosette , they hid themselves in a recess near the steps , in order that they might neither be seen nor heard from the street , and there they sat , frequently contenting themselves , by way of conversation , with pressing each other 's hands twenty times a minute as they gazed at the branches of the trees . 
At such times , a thunderbolt might have fallen thirty paces from them , and they would not have noticed it , so deeply was the revery of the one absorbed and sunk in the revery of the other . 
Limpid purity . 
Hours wholly white ; almost all alike . 
This sort of love is a recollection of lily petals and the plumage of the dove . 
The whole extent of the garden lay between them and the street . 
Every time that Marius entered and left , he carefully adjusted the bar of the gate in such a manner that no displacement was visible . 
He usually went away about midnight , and returned to Courfeyrac 's lodgings . 
Courfeyrac said to Bahorel : -- `` Would you believe it ? 
Marius comes home nowadays at one o'clock in the morning . '' 
Bahorel replied : -- `` What do you expect ? 
There 's always a petard in a seminary fellow . '' 
At times , Courfeyrac folded his arms , assumed a serious air , and said to Marius : -- `` You are getting irregular in your habits , young man . '' 
Courfeyrac , being a practical man , did not take in good part this reflection of an invisible paradise upon Marius ; he was not much in the habit of concealed passions ; it made him impatient , and now and then he called upon Marius to come back to reality . 
One morning , he threw him this admonition : -- `` My dear fellow , you produce upon me the effect of being located in the moon , the realm of dreams , the province of illusions , capital , soap-bubble . 
Come , be a good boy , what 's her name ? '' 
But nothing could induce Marius `` to talk . '' 
They might have torn out his nails before one of the two sacred syllables of which that ineffable name , Cosette , was composed . 
True love is as luminous as the dawn and as silent as the tomb . 
Only , Courfeyrac saw this change in Marius , that his taciturnity was of the beaming order . 
During this sweet month of May , Marius and Cosette learned to know these immense delights . 
To dispute and to say you for thou , simply that they might say thou the better afterwards . 
To talk at great length with very minute details , of persons in whom they took not the slightest interest in the world ; another proof that in that ravishing opera called love , the libretto counts for almost nothing ; For Marius , to listen to Cosette discussing finery ; For Cosette , to listen to Marius talk in politics ; To listen , knee pressed to knee , to the carriages rolling along the Rue de Babylone ; To gaze upon the same planet in space , or at the same glowworm gleaming in the grass ; To hold their peace together ; a still greater delight than conversation ; Etc. , etc. . 
In the meantime , divers complications were approaching . 
One evening , Marius was on his way to the rendezvous , by way of the Boulevard des Invalides . 
He habitually walked with drooping head . 
As he was on the point of turning the corner of the Rue Plumet , he heard some one quite close to him say : -- `` Good evening , Monsieur Marius . '' 
He raised his head and recognized Eponine . 
This produced a singular effect upon him . 
He had not thought of that girl a single time since the day when she had conducted him to the Rue Plumet , he had not seen her again , and she had gone completely out of his mind . 
He had no reasons for anything but gratitude towards her , he owed her his happiness , and yet , it was embarrassing to him to meet her . 
It is an error to think that passion , when it is pure and happy , leads man to a state of perfection ; it simply leads him , as we have noted , to a state of oblivion . 
In this situation , man forgets to be bad , but he also forgets to be good . 
Gratitude , duty , matters essential and important to be remembered , vanish . 
At any other time , Marius would have behaved quite differently to Eponine . 
Absorbed in Cosette , he had not even clearly put it to himself that this Eponine was named Eponine Thenardier , and that she bore the name inscribed in his father 's will , that name , for which , but a few months before , he would have so ardently sacrificed himself . 
We show Marius as he was . 
His father himself was fading out of his soul to some extent , under the splendor of his love . 
He replied with some embarrassment : -- `` Ah ! 
so it 's you , Eponine ? '' 
